| AUM ॥ 


RIGVEDA 


ऋग्वेदः 


(With Original Sanskrit Text, Transliteration & 
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition 
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda) 


English translation by 
Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. (London, U.K.) 


(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer) 


Sanskrit Text as per publication of 


Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer 


© Dr. Tulsi Ram 


ISBN : 978-81-7077-155-0 


Publisher : 
Vijaykumar Govindram Hasanand 
Delhi. 


Edition : First, 2013 


Price : Rs. 700.00 


RIGVEDA Vol. I by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. 


P 


Dedication 


The Mother’s Gift 
For all her children 
SX. 


Your path is up and onwards, 
Never downwards 


S R 


( vii ) 


Homage, Thanks and Acknowledgements 


Homage to Jyeshtha Brahma, the Eternal Guru. 
Homage to Immanent Brahma and Will Divine 


Homage to Mother Trinity of Ida, Saraswati, Mahi 
with Barati. 


Homage to the Rshis from Brahma to Dayananda. 
Homage to Vedic scholars and teachers. 
Homage to parents for inspiration and blessings. 


Homage to the sacred memory of my wife Maya Jyoti 
who waited until the last word of this project was written. 


Thanks and best wishes to my son Gianendra Sharma 
for his long, continuous, relentless and indispensable 
dedication to the practical management of this project till 
the completion. 


Thanks and best wishes to my daughter Indira 
Sharma and son-in-law Gulab Sharma and my brother Ram 
Kishan Sharma, wishing, waiting and assuring, with 
Gianendra Sharma, the publication of this work. 


Thanks to Shri Ajay Kumar Arya, of Messrs Govind 
Ram Hasanand, Delhi, for the start of this publication project. 
Thanks to Shri Dharampal and Shri Rajvir Shastri of 

Arsh Sahitya Prachar Trust for this publication. 


Thanks to Sarvashri Amar Erry, Bhai Anand Roop 
Narain, Aditya Kumar, Amar Uma Das, Doody Ross, Ashwini 
Kumar, Dr. Ravi Prakash Arya, Pandit Satish Prakash, Sat 
Chopra and members of Arya Samaj Markham, Toronto and 
Shakti Nagar (Delhi), Dr. Dharma Vira, Secretary, 


( viii ) 
Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer, Acharya Gianeshwar of Darshan 
Yoga Vidyalaya, Roger (Gujrat), and Shri K.C. Garg Manager, 
Rukmini Devi Public School, Pitampura, New Delhi for their 
generous offers of practical help, assistance and cooperation 
toward publication of this work. 


Thanks to Shri Ramesh Gupta, President Arya Samaj 
North America for his supprot and good wishes. 


Thanks and homage of gratitude to the scholars and 
translators of the Vedas from Swami Dayananda to the 
present day: Shripad Damodara Satavalekara, Pandit Jaya 
Deva, Pt. Tulsi Ram Swami, Pt. Kshema Karana Das Trivedi, 
Prof. Vishwa Nath Vidyamartanda, Pt. Dharma Dev 
Vidyamartanda, Acharya Vaidyanath Shastri, Swami Satya 
Prakash, Pt. Devi Chand and a lot many others. 


I cannot forget Professor Vachaspati Upadhyaya, 
Vice-Chancellor, Lal Bahadur Shastri Vidyapeeth, New 
Delhi, who first read the manuscript of the “Voice of 
Yajurveda’” and enthusiastically encouraged me to go ahead 
with translation of all the four Vedas for lovers of the Rshis’ 
tradition. 


Thanks to all the schollars who read the manuscript 
and expressed their candid openions on this work. 


—Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma 


(ix ) 
CONTENTS 
S.No. Particulars 
From the Publishers Desk 


Homage, Thanks and 
Acknowledgements —Dr. Tulsi Ram 


1. About the Author 
2. Foreword —Prof. Dr. Subhash Vedalankar 


3. About Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma’s 
English translation of the 
Rigveda —Dr. Krishan Lal 


4. English Translation of Vedic 


Page 


XVi 


Hymns : An Opinion—Dr. Bhawanilal Bhartiya xvii 
5. Message —Dr. Balvir Acharya उषा 
6. Message —Prof. Mahavir XIX 
7. Appreciation —Dr. Baldev Singh XX 
8. Sadbhavana (Good wishes) 
—Dr. Umakant Upadhyaya Xxi 
9. To the Reader —Dr. TulsiRam xxii 
10. Introduction —Dr. Tulsi Ram XXX 
11. Diacritical Marks of Transliteration xliv 
12. RIGVEDA: 
MANDAL-1 1-852 
MANDAL-2 853-1057 
MANDAL-3 1058-1218 


(x) 


About the Author 
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma M.A. English (Delhi, 1949), 
Ph.D. (London, 1963) has been a university professor, 
academic administrator, researcher, and writer of long 
standing with prestigious assignments: 


Lecturer in English, Hans Raj College, Delhi 


Reader in the Department of English, Kurukshetra 
University, Kurukshetra (Haryana) 


Principal Shivaji College, Delhi 
Principal Swami Shraddhanand College, Delhi 


Visiting Ford Foundation Scholar, University of 
Leeds, Leeds (UK) 


Professor of English, Department of Languages, 
B.LT.S. Pilani (Rajasthan) 


Professor Head of the Department of English, 
Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (Haryana) 


Besides his professional studies of secular literature 
in English, Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu, Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma 
has devoted his life and time to the study and discipline of 
Sacred literature, specially Vedas, Upanishads, Darshan 
Philosophy, Puranas, Ramayana, Mahabharata with 
concentration on the Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian 
and English Epics, Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran, and 
the writings of Swami Dayananda, and Swami Vivekananda, 
in search of the essential values of Sanatan Vedic Dharma 
with reference to their realisation in life and literature through 
social attitudes, collective action, customs, traditions, rituals 
and religious variations across the fluctuations of history. 


(21 ) 
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma’s research and publications 
include: 


The Neo-Classical Epic: an Ethical Interpretation 
(Delhi, 1971) 


Trading in Language: The Story of English in India 
1781-1981 (Delhi, 1983) 


The Original Philosophy of Yoga: Commentary on 
the Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali (Gurukul Jhajjar, Haryana, 1989) 


Bharat Main Angrezi: Kya Khoya Kya Paya 
(Delhi, 1997) 


Swami Dayanand’s Vision of Truth (Delhi, 2002) 
Translation of Nine Upanishads (Delhi, 1992) 


Translation of Swami Dayanand’s Sanskar Vidhi 
(Delhi, 1995) 


Translation of Swami Dayananda’s short writings 
in Dayananda Granth Mala (Paropakarini Sabha, 


Ajmer, Rajasthan, 1999) 


Translation of Swami Satya Pati’s God Realisation 
through Simple Yoga (Delhi, 2000) 


And a number of articles such as: 


“Swami Vivekananda’s Vision of Man” (Prabuddha 
Bharat, 1979) 


“G.D.Birla: Gandhi’s child’, in Birla Felicitation 
Volume (BITS, Pilani, Rajasthan) 

“Search for a Medium of Instruction in India’, in 
Mitra Felicitation Volume (BITS, Pilani) 


“Shakespeare as a Creative Yogi” in Shakespeare: 
the Indian Icon, edited by Vikram Chopra for J.L.Halio 


( 11) 
And now translation of the Vedas, in the Arsha 


tradition of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda 
Saraswati. 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has spent the last ten years 
on this translation of the four Vedas, all the time saying: “T 
came for this”. While English has been the language of his 
professional communication, Sanskrit is the voice of his life 
and living. 


( xiii ) 


Foreword 


Veda Bhashya by Prof. Tulsiram — A step to make 
Vedas available to the English World 


I have had the privilege of going through some of the 
chapters of Yajurveda Bhashya written by Prof. Tulsiram, a 
well known Vedic scholar and author of English language 
and literature. I congratulate him because he has done this 
translation for an average English reader who is keen to know 
the Vedas. Knowledge of the Vedas is like the knowledge of 
science. Vedic language is a scientific language and nobody 
can understand that without the profound knowledge of 
Vedangas, especially Nirukta of Maharshi Yaska and the 
grammar of Panini and Patanjali. Nobody can interpret the 
Veda mantras without these two. This translation proves that 
Prof. Tulsiram has done this insightful translation after doing 
hard work in both Vedangas. 


In translating the Vedas, only literal meaning is just 
not sufficient, sometimes it may create confusion and 
contradiction. Prof. Tulsiram deeply merges himself into 
Vedic Mantras, thinking deeply about words, derivatives and 
analyzes the hidden nuances of meaning in their context. For 
example, ‘Sumitriya na aapa oshadhayah santu..... Yajur. 36, 
23’: If we take literal meaning in the ordinary sense, “may 
the waters, vital forces of life, and herbs be friendly to us 
and may they be enemies to those who hate us and whom we 
11216", it will not make acceptable sense. After raising some 
questions, he says, “How can we accept this?” So, after going 
deeply into the words and context he gives this meaning of 
the said mantra: May waters, tonics, pranic energies and 
medicinal herbs be good friends of our health system and 
immunity and let the same waters, tonics, pranic energies 
herbal medicines act against those ailments, diseases and 


( xiv ) 


negativities which injure us, which we hate to suffer and 
which we love to destroy, moreover let them have no side 
effects because side effects too help the negativities and 
injure us. 


After giving the actual sense of the Mantra he writes 
that this Mantra is a reasonable prayer for the health 
programme of an advanced society, and then, logically in 
the next Mantra, follows the prayer for a full hundred years 
and more of life and healthy living (Tacchakshurdevahitam 
purastat-Yajur.36, 24). 


The translation by Prof. Tulsiram is without any 
extraneous motive and without any extra-academic intention. 
The translation has been done purely as communication of 
the Vedic message for the welfare of mankind. 


While giving his opinion on the Vedas Prof. Tulsiram 
writes in his Introduction. ...Veda is the Voice of God revealed 
in scientific Vedic Sanskrit free from local color and historical 
facts, therefore Vedic language is to be interpreted and 
understood according to its own laws and structure, and the 
only key available for such interpretation is the Nirukta of 
Maharshi Yaska and the grammar of Panini & Patanjali. 
According to Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati, ‘without 
reference to these bases of Vedic interpretation certain words 
have been given a distorted meaning in the translations of 
Max Muller, Griffith, Whitney and even Sayana.’ Actually 
the torch light for proper translation today, as Aurobindo 
says, is the Arsha tradition followed by Maharshi 
Dayananda Saraswati. 


At the end I will say that this translation of Yajurveda, 
based on Nirukta and Grammar, follows the known ancient 
Indian tradition. It is factual, without prejudice or hidden 
motive. Prof. Tulsiram thinks deeply on every word of the 


(xv ) 


mantra, looks into the context and etymology according to 
Nirukta and then does the translation. I congratulate him on 
this one more pioneering step to make the knowledge of 
Vedas available to the western world and the average English 
knowing reader. May God give him long and healthy life so 
that he continues to do this kind of stupendous work. 


Prof. Dr. Subhash Vedalankar; 

Ex-Prof and Chairman of Sanskrit Department, 
Rajasthan University, Jaipur, India. 

Presently Chairman, Dept. of Sanskrit and Vedic 
Vangmaya, Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati University, 
Ajmer, Rajasthan, India. 


( xvi ) 


About Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma’s 
English translation of the Rgveda 


I feel myself fortunate and blest with the Grace of 
God that I received a few pages of the English translation by 
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma with introduction of the Yajurveda. 
The comparative views expressed by him about the Vedas 
are essential for every student of the Veda since it is a further 
pointer to scientific research in the field of Vedic 
interpretation. 


Its conclusion is true: “In short Veda is an eternal 
articulation of omniscience, the voice of God”. Each work 
of Prasthana Trayi i.e. Vedanta, Upanishads and Gita is not a 
take off from the Vedas but a continuation of Vedic studies 
in its own context of meditation, meditative teaching and a 
rousing call to action in a situation of karmic crisis. This 
English translation is a welcome addition to Vedic studies 
opening truly a new path establishing with ease the Vedas in 
the service of humanity. 


—Dr. Krishna Lal 
Former Professor and Head of Sanskrit Department, 
University of Delhi. Delhi. 


( xvii ) 
English Translation of Vedic Hymns: An Opinion 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has taken an uphill task of 
translating all the four Vedas in lucid and thought provoking 
English. Most of the translations of Vedas by European 
scholars depend on the ritualistic meaning given by the 
medieval commentators like Sayana and others. But Dr. 
Sharma has taken a new course of translation. He agrees with 
the idea that the Yajurveda basically propounds the theory of 
Karma which it explains as Yajna, which neither denotes 
sacrifice nor mere ritual (Agnihotra etc.). The term Yajna 
carries a threefold meaning: the worship of God, unification 
of diverse factors of human society, selfless charity and 
replenishment of nature and the environment. 


The hymns of the Yajurveda carry lofty ideas of 
spiritual and ethical significance. Most of these mantras are, 
however, complicated and tough. It is difficult to make out 
useful meaning and draw important conclusion out of the 
text. But Dr. Sharma has fully succeeded in drawing out the 
natural and meaningful content of these mantras. In brief I 
can say that the present translation of the Vedas will be 
appreciated by the scholars of this Vedic lore as well as by 
the lay man who wants to understand the deep meaning of 
the Vedic texts or at least the basic knowledge hidden in these 
ancient works. It is all the more satisfying that Dr. Sharma 
has followed the dicta laid down by Maharshi Yaska and 
Swami Dayananda Saraswati in translating and explaining 
the inner wisdom of the sacred mantras. 


—Bhawani Lal Bhartiya 

Ex. Chairman and Professor 
Dayananda Chair for Vedic Studies 
Punjab University; Chandigarh 


( Xviil ) 
AUM 


It has been gratifying to go through the English 
translation of the Vedas rendered by Dr Tulsi Ram Sharma 
in as much as it conveys to the English-knowing world 
effectively the profound meaning and transcendental secrets 
enshrined in the Vedas. The most salient feature of this 
translation is its simple and lucid English. The Vedic words 
have been expounded here following the yaugik method of 
the Arsh tradition set up by Yaska, Panini and Patanjali (as 
opposed to the rudhi method which takes only the historically 
fixed meanings of words caring little for the context and the 
subject). As per the Arsh tradition name words like Agni, 
Vayu, Indra, Marut, etc., are synonyms indicating the various 
attributive names of the One that is the greatest and the most 
comprehensive “Tattva’ of existence, the Cosmic Spirit. It 
was Maharshi Dayananda who for the first time after Yaska 
and Patanjali advocated and followed this principle of 
interpretation on the basis of ancient supporting material. 
Dr. Sharma has religiously stuck to this theory while 
unfolding the truths enshrined in the Vedas. Obviously Dr 
Sharma’s interpretation of Vedic hymns enjoys the 
authenticity of the Arsh tradition and challenges the western 
Vedic perspective and the medieval Indian interpretations of 
the Vedas which now need to be seriously reviewed in our 
present day context of science and inter-cultural 
communication. 


—Dr Balvir Acharya 

Professor & Head 

Department of Sanskrit, Pali & Prakrit 
Maharshi Dayananda University 
Rohtak - 124001, Haryana (India) 


( xix ) 


AUM 


MESSAGE 


Above the narrow boundaries of country, time, caste 
and creed, the Vedas have been a treasure house of eternal 
universal knowledge and spiritual wisdom. There have been 
numerous attempts by Indians and foreigners to make the 
knowledge of these Vedas available to the people at large. 
Among them the Vedic commentaries of the great social and 
spiritual leader, Maharshi Dayananda are the best works in 
this field. Inspired by Swami Dayananda, the translation of 
the Yajurveda into English by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma is a 
commendable work in this line. Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has 
been a great devotee of sacred literature, especially Vedas, 
Upanishads, and various philosophies. His life long study of 
the Vedas has given him deep insight into Vedic philosophy. 
His translation of the Yajurveda reveals it fully. Here he has 
translated the Yajurveda, the Veda of Karma, in such a way 
that even a common reader can grasp its essence. He has 
very effectively brought out how this Veda teaches us to apply 
spiritual knowledge in practical life. Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma 
deserves our congratulations and best wishes for having done 
translation of all the four Vedas in simple and clear English 
for the international community. 


—Prof. Mahavir 

Acharya & Pro-Vice Chancellor 
Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidyalaya 
Haridwar-249404, Uttarakhand, India 


(xx ) 
APPRECIATION 


I have gone through some chapters of the English 
translation of Yajurveda by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma. As he has 
stated at the very beginning of the Introduction, this 
translation of Yajurveda is meant for an average English- 
knowing reader who is keen to know: What is Veda? What is 
it about? Is it old or new? To achieve this object, he has 
followed the Arsh method of interpretation. Accordingly, for 
example, he has mostly followed the etymological method 
of literal translation. But whenever he finds that the literal is 
not helpful in achieving his intended objective, he adds the 
implied explanation so that the essence of the Vedic hymn is 
quite clear. For example, his translation of, ‘Yathemam 
Vacham Kalyanimavadani janebhyah’ is rendered as 
follows—‘Just as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word 
of the Veda for all people (without discrimination of high or 
low), so should you too communicate it to all people of the 
world, whosoever, whatsoever, where so ever they be’. That 
is the technique of Swami Dayananda also. 


I regard Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma as one in the 
commendable line of Pundit Damodar Satavalekara who 
studied Sanskrit at a mature age and did unique work in that 
language. Dr. Sharma has also mastered the Sanskrit language 
after his retirement and done full justice to the translation of 
the Veda. He richly deserves our gratefulness, our expression 
of gratification and our appreciation for succeeding in his 
sacred mission of presenting an understandable, logical and 
above all sensible English translation of Vedas which hitherto 
was unavailable. Thus a long felt need has been fulfilled. I 
am sure Dr Sharma’s method of translation will not only be 
widely approved but will also be followed by others while 
translating the Vedas in other languages. 


—Dr. Baldev Singh 
Formerly Professor of Sanskrit 
Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla (India) 


( Xx1 ) 


Sadbhavana (Good wishes) 


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma, is a profound scholar of English, 
Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu. But his heart felt devotion goes to sacred 
literature, especially Vedas, Upanishads, Darshan Philosophy, 
Puranas, Ramayana, and Mahabharata with concentration on the 
Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian and English Epics, 
Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran and the writings of Swami 
Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda, in search of the essential 
values of Veda and Sanatan Vedic Dharma. It seems his real spirit 
and scholarly interest lies in the interpretation of the Vedas. I 
have gone through some portions of his English translation of 
Yajurveda and on perusal of this translation, I have marked two 
characterizing features: 

1. His language is perfectly lucid and 

2. His translation is faithful to the word and spirit of the 

Mantras. 

Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has very correctly observed, “Veda 
is knowledge of existence, pure and simple, as Science is 
knowledge. Science is the knowledge of nature as nature is and 
as it works according to its own laws. In Science, there is no 
story, no history. Similarly, in the Vedas, there is no story, no 
history. And just as Science is knowledge in Scientific language, 
free from local colour and historical variations of form and 
meaning, so Veda too is knowledge in scientific language, free 
from local colour and historical variations.” 

Veda is ‘Knowledge’ and knowledge is eternal. The 
interpretation of the Vedas requires the knowledge of the Arsh 
technique as explained by the Rshis like Yaska, Panini, Patanjali, 
Dayananda and Aurobindo. 

As Veda is pure knowledge, so is this translation in theArsh 
tradition, free from myth and history with no local colour, no 
attitude, no motive, except pure communication of the Original 
for all. 


With best wishes to the author and specially to the readers, 
—Umakant Upadhyaya 


Formerly Professor of Economics, 
Calcutta University. 


( Xxii ) 
To the Reader 


This translation of the ‘Hymns of Yajurveda’ is an English 
Version of the Yajurveda for the common reader who wants to 
acquaint himself or herself with the content of this divine message 
of the dynamics of Karma, both human and divine, in the context 
of the nature, structure and purpose of the universe and the 
condition and position of the human being in it. While the opening 
mantra launches the human being on life with the exhortation: 
“Be vibrant as the winds’, the closing mantra seals the success of 
vibrant humanity in action with the final achievement of “Om 
Kham Brahma” with Grace Divine. 


Life according to the Yajurveda is a journey from the 
beginning-less beginning to the endless end with the message: 


Immortal child of Divinity, 

Your roots go deep to Eternity, 
Your reach is unto Infinity. 

And your path is up and onwards, 
Never never downwards. 


This version is a scientific translation of the text within 
the parameters of Yaska and Dayananda with rational 
understanding of Sayana at the one end and the western scholars 
at the other. Sayana’s translation is ritualistic especially with 
reference to yajna. It came at a time when the “Renaissance, Re- 
awakening of Learning” was far off, not yet just at the next door. 
Even communication between the East and the West was not as 
hectic as it became after the advent of the East India Company 
into India. Thus mutual criticism and appreciation too was silent 
rather than vocal. Hence Ritualism was just the thing acceptable 
to a society settled on the side of stagnation more than of 
fermentation. 


Ritual, of course, is sacred. It is the most meticulous 
programme of action in pursuit of a holistic plan of life and living 
which arises from a spiritual vision of Divinity. It is conducted 
with unreserved commitment of will in faultless action, and 
completed with total surrender in absolute faith. For this reason 


( Xxlil ) 

yajna in Veda and Upanishad, is described as the highest human 
action, “Shreshthatamam karma”. This view is accepted in this 
translation too. But in addition, an extended interpretation of the 
same view of yajna is incorporated and followed in the light of 
Swami Dayananda, and also as warranted by the exhortation in 
the opening mantra: “Apply yourself to the highest form of action, 
yajna, in the service of Indra, lord of the universe, for the glory of 
the human 18110117". The highest actions in the world of existence, 
the creative evolution of the universe under the immanent 
presiding presence of Divinity, and the total corporate action of 
humanity for progress, peace and freedom, all this is yajna. And 
this idea leads us to discover for ourselves and understand the 
science, art and technology of participative living for progress, 
from the individual level, through the social, to the cosmic, as 
universal Yajna, human, natural and divine. 


There may or may not be an escape from Sayana, but there 
is no possible escape from Dayananda, and even from westerners 
especially for the sake of caution and self correction. 


I respect the western translators for their clarity and their 
art of communication. In addition, I find that they did recognise 
that the ideal way to interpret and explain the Sanskrit words of 
Indian scriptures such as Vedas was to trace back every word to 
its root, deconstruct and reconstruct it with the addition of the 
affixes, and then structurally explain its meaning. That precisely 
was the approach of Yaska, Panini, Patanjali and Swami 
Dayananda. Monier Williams, author of the well known Sanskrit 
English Dictionary, himself admired the Indians for their scientific 
approach to language, specially Sanskrit: 


“TI draw attention at the very threshold to the fact that 
the Hindus are perhaps the only nation, except for the Greeks, 
who have investigated, independently and in a truly scientific 
manner, the general laws which govern the evolution of 
language.” (Introduction, p. xii) 


He continues in relation to Sanskrit: “The synthetical 
process which comes into operation in the working of those laws 
may be well called Samskarana, ‘putting together’, by which I 
mean that every single word in the highest type of language (called 


( Xxiv ) 


Sanskrita) is first evolved out of a primary ‘Dhatu’—a Sanskrit 
term usually translated as ‘Root’, but applicable to any primordial 
constituent substance, whether of words, or rocks, or living 
organisms, and then, being so evolved, goes through a process of 
‘putting together’ by the combination of other elementary 
constituents.” [Sanskrit, thus, becomes a language correspondence 
of the evolution, structure and dynamics of the world of reality, 
and Veda as articulation of the reality of existence. | 


“Furthermore, the process of ‘putting together’ implies, 
of course, the possibility of a converse process of vyakarana. by 
which I mean ‘undoing’ or decomposition (deconstruction), that 
is to say, the resolution of every root-evolved word into its 
component elements. So that in endeavouring to exhibit these 
processes of synthesis and analysis, we appear to be engaged, 
like a chemist, in combining elementary substances into solid 
forms, and again in resolving these forms into their constituent 
ingredients.” (p. xii). And in respect of this special character, 
Sanskrit, he says, is a different language from the Semitic 
languages (of which the Bible and the Quran are expressions). 


And yet, in spite of this clear understanding of Sanskrit, 
an Arsha dictionary remained with him only “a beautiful 
philological dream, a dream, however, which could not receive 
practical shape without raising the Lexicon to a level of scientific 
perfection unsuited to the needs of ordinary students.” (p. x1i1) 


Why unsuited? The answer lies in his mission and the 
main object of his mission. The scientific way of interpretation 
and explanation was counter to the purpose for which Monier 
Williams was appointed Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford where 
he occupied the Boden Chair after H.LH.Wilson who had been a 
member of the Committee of Public Instruction in India under 
Lord Macaulay as Chairman and Lord William Bentinck as 
Governor General of India. And then English had been accepted 
and introduced as the medium as well as the content of Education. 


Monier Williams says: “One consideration which led my 
predecessor (Professor H.H.Wilson) to pass on to me his project 
of a root-arranged Lexicon was that, on being elected to the Boden 
Chair, he felt that the elaboration of such a work would be 


( xxv ) 


incompatible with the practical objects for which the Boden 
Professorship was founded. . . The main object was really a 
missionary one, as I have shown in the Preface of this volume.” 
(p. Xi) 

The object, Professor Williams explains in the Preface to 
his Dictionary (p. 1x): “I must draw attention to the fact that I am 
only the second occupant of the Boden Chair, and that its founder, 
Colonel Boden, stated most explicitly in his will (dated August 
15, 1811) that the special object of his munificent bequest was to 
promote the translation of the Scriptures (that is, the Bible) into 
Sanskrit, so as ‘to enable his countrymen to proceed in the 
conversion of the natives of India to the Christian Religion’. 


“Surely then it need not be thought surprising, if 
following in the footsteps of my venerated master, I have made 
it the chief aim of my professional life to provide facilities for 
the translation of our sacred Scriptures into Sanskrit, and 
for the promotion of a better knowledge of the religions and 
customs of India as the best way to a knowledge of the religious 
needs of our great Eastern Dependency (India). My very first 
public lecture delivered after my election (to the Boden Chair) 
in 1860 was on ‘The Study of Sanskrit in Relation to 
Missionary Work in India’ (published in 1861)’’. (pp. xxi) 


For any student of Veda, specially in India, in fact 
anywhere, it is difficult to overlook the words of Monier Williams 
in the Preface and Introduction to his Dictionary of Sanskrit, for 
the reason that from translation of Christian Scriptures into 
Sanskrit with a missionary motive, the translation of Sanskrit 
Scriptures into English was but the next and ‘logical’ step 
with that same missionary motive of conversion, one to extol, 
the other to denigrate: 


One example, of extolment, is the following translation 
of the Bible, “The Gospel according to John’: 


Yohana-likhitah Susamvadah; 
Ishvarasya vakyam Yishor mahatvam avatara katha ca. 


Jesus here is presented as an Avatara, someone a very God 
for the traditional Hindu, although the Gospel does not mention 
the incarnation at all. (The translation of The Bible in Sanskrit by 


( 1) 
J.Wenger is available on the internet.) 


The other example, of denigration, is given here below 
from W.D. Whitney’s translation of the Atharvaveda (7, 107, 1) 
edited and revised by K.L. Joshi, published by Parimal 
Publications, Delhi, 2004: 


Namaskrtya dyavaprthivibhyamantariksaya mrtyave. 
Meksamyurdhvastisthan ma ma hinsishurisvarah. 


“Having paid homage to heaven and earth, to the 
atmosphere, to Death, I will urinate standing erect; let not the 
Lords (Ishvara) harm me.” 


I give below an English rendering of the same mantra 
translated by Pundit Satavalekara in Hindi: 


“Having done homage to heaven and earth and to the 
middle regions and Death (Yama), I stand high and watch (the 
world of life). Let not my masters hurt me.” 


An English rendering of the same mantra translated by 
Pundit Jai Dev Sharma in Hindi is the following: 


“Having done homage to heaven and earth (i.e. father and 
mother) and to the immanent God and Yama (all Dissolver), 
standing high and alert, I move forward in life. These masters of 
mine, pray, may not hurt me.” 


I would like to quote my own translation of the mantra 
now under print: 


“Having done homage to heaven and earth, and to the 
middle regions, and having acknowledged the fact of death as 
inevitable counterpart of life under God’s dispensation, now 
standing high, I watch the world and go forward with showers of 
the cloud. Let no powers of earthly nature hurt and violate me.” 


‘Showers of the cloud’ is a metaphor, as in Shelley’s poem 
‘the Cloud’: “I bring fresh showers for the thirsting flowers”, 
which suggests a lovely rendering. 


The problem here arises from the verb ‘mekshami’ from 
the root ‘mih’ which means ‘to shower’ (sechane). It depends on 
the translator’s sense and attitude to sacred writing how the 
message is received and communicated in an interfaith context 


( 3311 ) 
with no strings attached (or unattached). 


This extolment and denigration was happening around 
the time when the English language, English education and 
missionary work had been introduced into India and was raging 
on top. Swami Dayananda faced this challenge with boldness and 
caution, still with an open mind, all prepared even for correction. 
He based his interpretation of the Vedas on Nirukta and the 
etymological principles of word interpretation, and interpretation 
of the word in the context, both local and total, because the local 
is an integral part of the total whole. 


We are living in an age of science and reason, democracy 
and freedom, globalism and global communication, and we feel 
the need for a free and frank interfaith dialogue. In such an age, 
ritualism and mythology is not enough. If we want to understand 
and present Veda as a body of universal knowledge and articulation 
of divine awareness of existence, there is no escape from Yaska, 
Panini, Patanjali, Dayananda and Aurobindo, because they provide 
the key principles and practice of scientific interpretation of an 
ancient scientific language such as Vedic Sanskrit which has no 
historical parallel for comparison. The language of science tells 
no stories, no myths. It states the truth pure and simple. Hence 
the resort to Swami Dayananda, either before or after Sayana and 
the western scholars, is indispensable. 


There is one observation I must make on Swami 
Dayananda. Swami Dayananda has given a socio-economic 
orientation to the Vedic mantras because he underscores the 
relevance of the Vedas to the social, economic and political 
situation of humanity, especially in India, which was necessary 
and highly meaningful. For example, the Ashwins, in general, 
are the complementary powers of nature and humanity working 
as twin forces like the positive and negative currents of electricity, 
or like the theoretician and the laboratory man, or the curative 
and recuperative powers of medicine and nature’s powers of 
rejuvenation. Swami Dayananda often explains such powers in 
the interest of practical understanding: he defines them as teacher 
and preacher, or father and mother, sun and moon, fire and water, 
prana and Apana energy, ruler and council, scientist and engineer, 
and so on, depending on the mantra context. Sometimes it appears 


( XXVlii ) 

as if he is delimiting the open-ended general meaning of the Veda. 
But we should be careful before we say so, and realise that the 
definiteness of his meaning is illustrative and in no way 
exhaustive. In this translation such situations have been 
appreciated and the meaning has been kept open ended, inclusive 
of the meanings given by Swami Dayananda, as suggested by 
Yaska and the etymology of the terms. In short, this translation 
has been done with cautious reference to Sayana, under the 
guidance of Swami Dayananda, with respect for Pundit 
Satavalekara and with very careful observance of the western 
anglers. 


Pundit Satavalekara comes in between Sayana and swami 
Dayananda for his excellent syntactic structures of mantra 
meanings in continuous Hindi. But he explains words such as 
Indra, Agni, Ashwins, Vrtra, Trita, Bhujyu, Kashyapa, Jamadagni, 
etc. as proper names so that the mantra appears to be a mythical 
or historical statement of either fact or fiction. But Swami 
Dayananda interprets these terms in the yaugic manner and 
explains them as scientific terms of the forms, functions, orders 
and attributes of the powers of existence representing the 
manifestive diversity of one Divinity and one Prakrti in the state 
of objective existence. These words are not historical names, 
because the time context of the creation of the Vedas remains 
unknown beyond history and imagination as even Max Muller 
confessed in his Gifford lectures in 1890. 


This translation respects the entire tradition of Vedic 
interpretation, and under the guidance of this tradition takes Vedic 
interpretation to the original level of scientific rationality in the 
context of modern consciousness, modern language and global 
culture, a message both sanatan and, at the same time, modern 
(ref. Atharva, 10,8,23). 


Take just one example of the problem I have faced, with 
the solution I have suggested: Yajurveda (36, 23) says, if we take 
the literal meaning in the ordinary sense: “May the waters, pranic 
energies and herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to 
those who hate us and whom we hate.” How can we accept this? 
How can the same waters, tonics and herbs be good friends to us 
and enemies to those we hate or those who hate us? Medicine 1s 


( XXIV ) 


medicine after all. This is excellent stuff for a translator who 
believes that Vedic poetry is nothing but the voice of a tribal society 
in the barbaric, not civilized, state of social evolution. But let us 
think deeply. What is the context? Who are our enemies in that 
context? Who or what are those that injure us? What are those 
we hate or want to injure and destroy? The context is health. In 
the context of health, they are the ailments, diseases, germs and 
bacteria, viruses, negativities and side effects of medicines in our 
system. So the correct and scientific interpretation in the context 
of health would be: “May waters, tonics, pranic energies and 
medicinal herbs be good friends of our health and immunity 
system and let the waters, tonics, pranic energies and herbal 
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities 
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to 
destroy. Moreover let them have no side effects because side 
effects too aggravate the negativities and injure us.” This is the 
reasonable prayer and health programme of an advanced society. 
And then, logically in the next mantra, follows the prayer for a 
full hundred years and more of life and healthy living (Yajurveda, 
36, 24). Veda thus is food for thought. 


In human terms: If a legendary celebrity can admire 
another human figure as “inscrutable, apocalyptic, a mysterious 
poem written in flesh and blood”, how much more — infinitely 
more— mysterious, inscrutable, apocalyptic would be the Cosmic 
Poem (Devasya Kavyah) created in the language of the Ultimate 
Vision? 

Veda is a Cosmic Poem: the more we know, the more we 


know the Veda, and the more we know the Veda, the more we 
know. 


Indeed, every reader should stand before the Veda, every 
verse of It in fact, as Arjuna stood before the Cosmic Krishna, 
waiting and watching intently, for the burst of a thousand suns, 
for the Dawn on top of the Earth, for the Revelation. 


May the light burst forth, I pray. 


—Tulsi Ram 


( Xxx ) 


Introduction to Rgveda 


This translation of Rgveda is meant for an average 
English knowing reader who is keen to know: 


What is Veda? What is it all about? Is it old or new? 


If it’s old, what is its relevance today? And if it is 
relevant, is it relevant to me also? Or is it relevant only to 
some particular community in some particular country at 
some particular time? 


These are relevant questions especially in an age of 
science, democracy and globalism. 


Veda is Knowledge. The very word ‘Veda’ means 
knowledge. It is derived from the root ‘vid’, which means: 
‘to be, to know, to think, and to benefit from’. 


So whatever is is Veda, the very world of existence 
is Veda. The knowledge of the world of existence is Veda. 
The extension of knowledge through thought and research 
further is Veda. And to use that knowledge for the benefit of 
mankind with the protection and preservation of nature and 
the environment, without hurting any form of life, that is 
Veda. 


Veda is knowledge, pure and simple, as science is 
knowledge. Science is knowledge of nature as nature is and 
as it works according to its own laws. In science, there is no 
story no history. Similarly in the Veda, there is no story, no 
history. And just as science is knowledge in scientific 
language free from local colour and historical variations of 
form and meaning, so Veda too is knowledge in scientific 
language free from local colour and historical variations. 
Therefore Vedic language has to be interpreted and 
understood according to the laws and technique of its own 
structure as stated by seers such as Yaska, Panini and Patanjali 


( XxXxi ) 


and as explained by Swami Dayananda in his grammatical 
works and his notes on Vedic words in his commentary on 
the Vedas. 


But there is a difference between scientific 
knowledge and Vedic knowledge: While science is 
knowledge of nature to the extent that man has been able to 
discover it, Veda is the quintessential knowledge of all that 
is, including nature, all that happens, all that we are, all that 
we do, and all that we reap in consequence of our action. It 
is the Original and Universal knowledge of the Reality of 
Existence and the Ideality of our aspirations, covering the 
facts and processes of existence, their interaction and the 
laws that operate in the interaction. In short, Veda is an eternal 
articulation of Omniscience, The Voice of God. 


Vedic knowledge is classified thematically into three: 
Stuti, Prarthana and Upasana. Stuti, praise, is solemn 
reverential remembrance and description of the attributes, 
nature, character and function of divine powers. Prarthana, 
prayer, is an autosuggestive resolution to realise our 
limitations and rise above those limitations by calling on 
Divinity for aid and blessings when we have exhausted our 
effort and potential. Upasana is meditation, the surrender of 
our limited identity to participate in the Divine Presence. 
Stuti implies knowledge (Janana), Prarthana implies humility 
and action (Karma), and Upasana implies total love and 
surrender (Bhakti). In consequence, formally, Vedic 
knowledge is divided into four: 

Rgveda is the Veda of Knowledge, Yajurveda is the 
Veda of Karma, Samaveda is the Veda of Bhakti, and Atharva- 
veda is Brahma Veda, an umbrella, celebrating the Divine 
Presence as in Book 10, hymns 7 and 8. 

Rgveda is the Veda of knowledge revealed by 
Parameshvara, Lord Supreme Himself. All the four Vedas 


( Xxxil ) 


were received by the primeval Rshis from That Supreme 
Divinity (Rgveda, 10, 90, 9). That Supreme power and 
presence is One and only one, wise sages call it by many 
names such as Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna and others. That 
one Lord creates this wonderful world of many forms and 
pervades it simultaneously (6, 47, 18). The creative evolution 
begins from that and when one cycle is complete, the 
involution ends up therein (10, 129, 7). The light of the sun 
radiates from there (10, 37, 3), the streams of life flow from 
there through the medium of five elements (1, 164, 3). We 
too come from there and retire unto That when the existential 
sojourn terminates (8, 44, 23), that is the covenant of man 
and God. The truth of Vedas is eternal (5, 25, 2). Law is 
eternal (4, 23, 8). 


Our life is a lovely sojourn of our active and 
intelligent choice (5, 1, 2; 6, 15, 9) in the fivefold body (5, 
47,5), or outside the body (1, 164, 30), in a homely paradise 
on earth (6, 120, 3), or in a fools paradise (9, 64, 20-1). 
Therefore the one basic commandment of Vedas is “Be man’, 
intelligent human being (10, 53, 6), be a visionary which 
you ought to be (1, 31, 6), in the category of Deva, godliness 
(1, 68, 2), remembering fully well that each one comes alone 
for a short time (10, 97, 5), to live in a house of clay (8, 44, 
23) which is not our ultimate destination. Therefore our self- 
fulfilment lies through breaking the threefold bonds of body, 
mind and spiritual ignorance (1, 24, 15), rise beyond the 
darkness and reach the light Divine (1, 50, 10). The Light is 
our real potential as children of Immortality, unhurt, 
imperishable (1, 148, 5). 

Rgveda begins with an invocation and prayer to 
Agni, Lord of light and energy, giver of life and light, the 
first, original and ultimate High-priest of the yajna of creative 
evolution and ends with a prayer to Agni for the gift of the 


( उशा) 

fragrance and nectar of yajnic life from the vedi of 
the earth. It exhorts humanity to live together in creative and 
cooperative unity, to act and move together, to speak together, 
and to think together for a united decision and common 
achievement, knowing each other’s mind in harmony in the 
same tradition as the ancient wise followed in the 
performance of Dharma. 


Rgveda gives a clear picture of the socio-political 
and economic organisation of humanity from the local to the 
international level. The Vedic word for a brilliant, 
enlightened, sovereign republic is Swarajya (3, 49, 2; 3, 46, 
1; 3, 45,5; 1, 36, 7). The word for such an organisation is 
Rashtra. For such a Rashtra, efforts have to be made (1, 80,9), 
there should be three assemblies: the Executive, Legislature, 
the Law and Order and Defence forces (3, 38, 6), and the 
Educational Authority. The ruler and the assemblies have to 
be elected by the people from amongst the educated and 
socially dedicated people (Atharva, 3, 4, 2). Yajurveda and 
Atharva- Veda provide further details. The Vedic ideal of any 
human organisation and its law is that the organisation, in 
order to be just, creative, productive and egalitarian, must be 
an organism, a living, intelligent, self-organising, autonomous 
sovereign system. 


The universe, the social system too, is a Purusha, a 
person (10, 90,2) of which the intellectual is the spokesman 
of values, of knowledge, rectitude and piety, the law and 
order and defence forces are the guards, the produces are 
providers, and the ancillary services are assistants, all 
governed by law which should be a human version of Rtam, 
the law of Nature and Divinity governing the universe. 


There are many other Themes as prayers to 
Parameshvara, divine attributes of the forces of Nature, 
attributes, potential and limitations of the individual soul, 


( Xxxiv ) 


life and death, individual freedom, marriage and family life, 
free social mobility under the Verna-Ashrama Dharma based 
on merit, precreation stage of existence (10, 129, 1-7) which 
was the Zero state which we can describe neither as existence 
nor as non-existence: There ‘was’ or, may be, there ‘was not’: 


It was the state of Zero Absolute, 
The Hour beyond the hour. 

No night, no day, no life nor death, 
No existence, nor no-existence, 
Darkness beyond the dark. 

Silence, mother of speech, 

Void, mother of space and time, 
THAT One beyond the name, 
Breathing alone without breath 
Ever awake. 

The flow consumed in the point of no dimensions 
Potential Infinity. 


This is Vision beyond the vision of mind, the mystery 
of Rgveda. 


Between this point of Potential Infinity for creation 
and the time of cosmic dissolution there is the evolutionary 
and involuntary interplay of natural forces Agni, Indra, Soma, 
Pusha, Vaishvanara, Ashvins, Savita, Maruts, Sarasvati, 
heaven and earth, and the social dynamics of humanity for 
four billion and three hundred and twenty million years, a 
drama of infinite variety, ultimately all sucked in into the 
mysterious Black Hole, and then the breath out, back again. 


So, says Rgveda, be good, do good, and make the 
world noble (Rg. 9, 63, 5). 


Samaveda is Bhaktiveda in song, a symphony of 


( ०१) 


Veda mantras chiefly from Rgveda in celebration of the Truth, 
Beauty and Goodness of life and the Power, Glory, Sublimity 
and Beatitude of Divinity. It begins with an invitation to Agni, 
Light and Life of the universe, moves to Indra, the Power 
and Glory of Divinity and then to Beatific Soma, divine Spirit 
of peace and universal joy, and ends with thanks and prayer 
to All-listening Indra, All-embracing Pusha, inviolable 
Tarkshya, and Brhaspati, Lord of Infinity, for the gifts of 
peace, progress, prosperity and total well being. 


Yajurveda is Karma Veda, knowledge of the 
application of knowledge in practical living in a positive, 
creative and constructive manner at both the individual and 
the collective level. This way of living and working is “Yajna”’ 
which, in simple words, means a selfless and participative 
way of living and thereby creating the maximum out of the 
minimum for all, including nature, humanity, the environment 
and the whole universe, with complete faith in the living, 
breathing, intelligent self-organising, self-conscious, 
Sovereign System. Living the yajnic way, we realise that 
Nature is an organisn, a tree, Ashwattha, and the entire cosmos 
including ourselves is a Purusha, and we as human beings 
are but cells in this Divine Purusha. Without living this way 
in a state of full awareness, we cannot realise that you and I, 
Mother Nature and the Supreme Brahma are all together, 
one in union and communion. 


Vedic knowledge then is the Divine knowledge of 
existence from the dimensionless point and particle unto 
Infinity. And prayerful living and communion in meditation 
and yoga means: Self-integration of the particle, Re- 
integration of the part with the whole, and Re-Union of the 
finite with the Infinite. 


This is the climactic close of Yajurveda: The light 
and life that shines in and beyond the sun is that Supreme 


( XXXvi ) 


Purusha. That is there, and that is here, in me too. 


Om is the saviour. Om is Bramha. Bramha is Infinite, 
Sublime! 


The message of Yajurveda begins with the rousing 
divine call to live: “Be vibrant as the winds!” But we must 
be gratefully vibrant: “O Lord we pray for and thank thee for 
the gift of food and energy for life, for the health and 
efficiency of body, mind and soul.” All of us must dedicate 
ourselves to Savita, giver of life and light, with devotion to 
the highest, yajnic, action, we must not hurt the ‘Cow’, and 
we must not allow a thief to boss over us and deprive us of 
our creative freedom of thought, word and deed. 


Atharva- Veda is Brahma Veda, umbrella knowledge 
of existence both Murtta and Amurtta, concrete and abstract. 
It is the knowledge of Prakrti, Mother Nature, as well as of 
Purusha, the Soul, the individual Jiva as well as the Cosmic 
Soul Brahma. It begins with a celebrative description of the 
thrice-seven variant evolutes of Prakrti and a prayer to 
Vachaspati, Lord of Nature and the Word of Knowledge, to 
bless us with strength, energy, intelligence and knowledge 
emanating from those thrice-seven forms of the world of 
Nature and Spirit. It covers the world of humanity from the 
individual to the total collective personality of humanity, 
including social structures from the family, community and 
the nation up to the international United Nations. It pays 
homage to Divinity, Jyeshtha Brahma, Supreme Presiding 
Spirit and Power, immanent and transcendent, which creates 
and sustains and winds up the world of existence in each 
cycle of creation, eternally (10, 7-8, and 19, 6). Towards the 
end Atharva-Veda pays homage to Brahma and Mother Veda 
with thanks for the gifts of good health and full age, vibrant 
pranic energy, noble progeny, ample wealth, fame, lasting 
achievement and divine lustre of life. These are the gifts of 


( XXXvil ) 


Vedic knowledge in life, and when one cycle of 
existence reaches the hour of completion, the Mother 
Knowledge returns to her eternal and Original abode, 
Jyeshtha Brahma Itself, the mighty, mysterious, awful Silence, 
impenetrable Darkness, Smaller than the smallest 
conceivable, yet Greater than the greatest imaginable, the 
Original and Ultimate Home of all that matter, energy, thought 
and Speech is, beyond time and space. 


As you open the text of Rg- Veda, you find the words: 
Agni, Madhucchanda Rshi. ‘Devata’ here means the subject 
which is dealt with in the mantra. ‘Devata’ as a Vedic term 
means a presence, a power, a force, which is brilliant, 
illuminative, and generous. The “Devata’ of a mantra may 
be God, the One Sacchidananda Brahma as in the closing 
mantra quoted above, or Savita, the same One self-refulgent 
God as in the opening mantra of Yajurveda, or it can be a 
generous divine power of Nature such as the sun, moon, earth; 
or it can be a noble person of brilliant quality of nature, 
character and performance as a ruler, leader, commander, 
teacher, etc. What the ‘Devata’ means in any particular mantra 
depends on the total context that emerges from the mantra in 
its thematic environment of the hymn. 


Madhucchanda is the Rshi of the opening mantra. 
The Rshi in the Arsha tradition is not the author of the mantra, 
Rshi is the exponent of the meaning of the mantra. As 
Maharshi Yaska says in the Nirukta, Rshis are the ‘seers of 
the mantras: they are the sages who went into deep meditation 
unto the universal frequency of the Cosmic Mind and 
experienced the voice of Divinity speaking in the mantra, 
the mantra, a semantic correspondence of the Divine Voice, 
the Divine Voice, a sound correspondence of Divine 
Awareness of the Reality of Existence in the modes of Being 
and Becoming. 


( XXXVili ) 

Who then is the poet of the Vedas? The answer is in 
Yajurveda 40, 8: That Cosmic Spirit which pervades and rules 
every moving particle in the moving universe is “the poet, 
thinker, all-comprehending, and self-existent”. That is the 
Lord who creates the world of existence, ordains the Laws 
of its dynamics, and reveals the poetry of its beauty and 
majesty, the Vedas. “From that Lord of universal yajna were 
born the Rks and Samans. From Him were born the Chhandas 
of Atharva-veda and from Him were born the Yajus”, 
(Yajurveda 31, 7). The Vedic lore comes in Pura-kalpa, the 
beginning of the world of humanity (Shvetashvataropanishad, 
6, 22) and when its function is over at the end of the kalpa, 
one cycle of existence, it retires into Brahma-loka (Atharva- 
veda 19, 71, 1). 


The Vedas were revealed by the Lord Omniscient to 
four primeval Rshis: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to Vayu, 
Samaveda to Aditya, and Atharva-veda to Angira, directly in 
their spiritual consciousness. The Sage Brahma received and 
collected the four from them and passed them on to other 
sages. 


When were the Vedas revealed? What is their age? 
How old are they? As old as the age of humanity on earth. 
The Lord who creates humanity leaves them not to nature 
like animals. He enlightens them with the knowledge of 
existence and their place in the world with the vision of their 
journey and its culmination. Swami Dayananda works out 
the age of the Vedas on the basis of Surya Siddhanta which 
in the year 2010 A.D. comes to 1,96,08,53,110 years. 


If someone does not accept it and insists on historical 
proof, let us listen to Max Muller from whom we learn of 
the problem of the date or dates but with no possibility of 
solution on scientific and historical grounds. 


Max Muller is known as a world renowned Vedic 


( XXX1x ) 


scholar and exegesist of the West. Max Muller once ventured 
to pronounce a purely arbitrary date based on unproven 
assumptions that around 1200 B.C. was the date of the 
Rgveda. Later, he himself warned his students that “Whether 
the Vedic Hymns were composed in 1000 or 1500 or 2000 
B.C., no power on earth could ever fix .... Whatever may be 
the date of the Vedic hymns... they have their own unique 
place and stand by themselves”. Such daring presumptions 
of western scholars about the date of the Vedas are exposed 
by Graham Hancock in his latest researches, in his explosive 
book: Underworld: The Mysterious Origins of Civilization 
(2002). 


Hancock first gives the range of dates accepted by 
Western scholars such as Max Muller and Dr. Mitchiner, a 
great authority on ancient Sanskrit texts: Vedas 1500-800 
BC, Brahmanas 900-600 BC, Aranyakas 700-500 BC, 
Upanishads 600-400 BC, Mahabharata 350 BC-50 AD, 
Ramayana 250 BC-200AD, Puranas AD 200-1500. 
“Amazing!” says he: “Whether starting in 1500 BC, 1400 
BC or 1200 BC, the timelines, suggested for the compilation 
and codification of the Vedas, all rest on the now thoroughly 
falsified and bankrupt (and rejected) idea of an Aryan 
invasion of India around 1500 BC”. He continues: “There 
was no such thing as an Aryan race that spoke Indo —European 
languages and authored the Vedas, there was no such event 
as an Aryan invasion of India. ‘Arya’ does not mean a race, 
it means a noble, educated and cultured person. So once the 
hypothesis of the Aryan invasion is rejected, the structure of 
the supposed dates of the Vedas and other texts crumbles 
like a house of cards.’ And then he sums up his view of the 
Western approach to the Vedas and Indian civilization: 
“Almost everything that was ever written about this literature 
and civilization before five years ago (i.e., before 1997) is 
wrong.” (See pp. 131, 116, 129) 


(xl) 


Max Muller himself in his Gifford Lectures in 1890 
had confessed that “no power on earth could ever fix” the 
date of the Vedas. Even Mitchiner himself concedes that “the 
dating of Sanskrit texts is a notoriously difficult problem” 
(Quoted Ibid p. 131). 


Who could then possibly speak the truth about 
ancient Indian civilisation and the Vedic literature? Says 
Hancock (p. 105): “Perhaps we are coming to a time when 
ancient India will speak for herself again after millennia of 
silence.” It was Swami Dayananda who spoke for India and 
the Vedas in the Rshis’ tradition after millennia of silence to 
correct the distortions of Indian history and redeem Vedic 
literature and the Vedic tradition. 


If no history, no Science, no human imagination can 
help, better follow the sages tradition, Surya Siddhanta, and 
the daily sankalpa of the dedicated Brahmanas. And lastly 
follow the internal evidence of the Vedas themselves: Vedas 
are the Original, Universal, Eternal articulation of Divinity, 
by Divinity, for humanity at the beginning of human creation. 
(Yajurveda, 26, 2; Shvetashvataropanishad, 6, 18) 


Since Vedas are the oldest recorded knowledge of 
the world, no one can guess how much time, even ages, might 
have passed between the Vedas and the next work in Sanskrit. 
If so, there is no other work in Sanskrit comparable to the 
Vedas. Consequently the language of any other work would 
not provide any clue for the interpretation of Veda mantras. 
Vedic language then has to be interpreted on its own, and the 
only key available for such independent interpretation is the 
Nirukta and Nighantu of Maharshi Yaska, the grammatical 
works of Panini and Patanjali, and Swami Dayananda’s notes 
in his commentary on Vedic verses explaining the structure 
and meaning of the words. Without reference to these bases 
of Vedic interpretation, certain words have been given a very 


( xli ) 


distorted meaning in other translations by Max 
Muller, Griffith, Whitney, and even Sayana. The torch light 
for proper translation today is the Arsha tradition followed 
by Swami Dayananda. 


The Arsha way is the only right way, the key, to 
discover the truth of the Vedas. According to Shri Aurobindo, 
Swami Dayananda alone, in modern times, possessed this 
key to the secret of the Vedas. Interpreted this way the Vedas 
shine in their essential scientific refulgence. As science is 
pure knowledge, no story, no history, no mythology, so are 
the Vedas, pure knowledge: knowledge of nature, mind, spirit, 
human society, Dharma, the dynamics of existence and the 
right way of living as individuals and as members of 
organised society upto the international level. Even Max 
Muller, though he was once committed to uprooting the 
religion of India by his arbitrary translation of Rgveda, had 
to admit in his Biographical Essays that: “To Swami 
Dayananda, everything contained in the Vedas was not only 
perfect truth, but he went one step further and, by their 
interpretation, succeeded in persuading others that everything 
worth knowing, even the most recent inventions of modern 
science, were alluded to in the Vedas. Steam Engines, 
Electricity, Telegraphy and Wireless Marconogram were 
shown to have been at least in the germ known to the poets 
of the Vedas”. In fact Shri Aurobindo in his essay on 
“Dayananda and the Veda” goes even further: “There is 
nothing fantastic in Dayananda’s idea that Veda contains truth 
of science as well as truth of religion (i.e., Dharma). I will 
even add my own conviction that Veda contains other truths 
of a Science the modern world does not at all possess, and in 
that case, Dayananda has rather understated than overstated 
the depth and range of the Vedic wisdom (see ‘Bankim, Tilak, 
Dayananda’, p. 57). 


(>) 

The basic requirement of scriptural interpretation for 
us is faith and intellingetial solemnity, not doubt and cynicism. 
This way, if we want to confirm our faith in the scientific 
vision of the Veda, refer to Rgveda 1, 34, 7 and 9 for three- 
stage rocket chariot of the Ashwins, to 1, 36, 18 for Agni 
missile, to 1, 37, 3 for winds and communication, to 1, 46, 
10 for concentration of light, to 1, 52, 1 and 1, 36, 1 for the 
science of missile defence and space-craft, to 6, 46, 11 for 
missiles and war heads, and so on. The position of the solar 
system with planets and satellites, earth’s and sun’s 
gravitation, solar healing, parliamentary democracy, 
organisational structure of the nation and the international 
world, water and electric energy, and so many other subjects 
are hinted at in Vedic verses. We need serious research to 
work out the details. Had even Einstein read the Purusha 
Sukta of the Vedas, Brahma Sutras and Sankhya Vaisheshika 
philosophy, probably he would have found clues to his search 
for Unified Field theory of the universe. 


Beyond faith and intelligential solemnity we need 
vision, potential Darshan of the Vedic Rshis. Once you have 
had the vision of truth, doubts disappear and questions recede 
into silence because, then, nothing shines but the Truth, and 
Divinity Itself reveals It’s Reality with showers of Grace. In 
this mood and in this spirit, I suggest, you start your search 
for Vedic Truth and the Mystery of Existence. 


Lastly, if the Vedic lore is as old as humanity itself, 
what is its relevance today in the modern world? Ask yourself 
other questions: What is the relevance of Galileo or Newton 
or the Theory of Relativity, two plus two makes four, Swaraj, 
the Vedic word for freedom and self-discipline? Truth is truth, 
when the statement was or is made is irrelevant. Vedic truth, 
if you find it convincing and acceptable, is relevant not only 
for today but also for all time, to every person, everywhere. 


( 31111 ) 
Yajurveda itself says (26, 2): 
“Yathemam vacham kalyanim avadani janebhyah”: 


Just as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word of 
the Veda for all people (without any discrimination of high 
or low), so should you too communicate it to all people of 
the world whoever, whatever, wherever they be. 


—Tulsi Ram 


( xliv ) 
DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION 


Vowels 
अ आ ड्‌ 1 ई 7 
उ प्र ऊ प्र ऋ r ऋ 7 
a de aq r 
ए € tw ai ओ 0 ओ au 
अनुस्वार (` ) 1 विसर्ग (:) h 
() fi 
Consonants 


Guttural 

ek ख्‌ kh Tg घ्‌ gh = a 
Palatal 

te छ heODj इ 1 BA 7 
Lingual 

zt ठ्‌ th ड्‌ ५ द्‌ त ण्‌ —o 


Dental 

at थ्‌ th @d धू dh न्‌ 1 
Labial 

Tp र्‌ ph न्‌ bB न्‌ bh म्‌ m 


others 


= # ~ 1 1 व्‌ ४ 
श्‌ § ष्‌ $ Hs ह्‌ hb 
cs)° 2S a 


AUM 
RGVEDA 


sBiae: 
MANDALA-1 


Mandala 1/Sukta 1 
Agni Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi 
whine पुरोहितं are देवमृत्विजम्‌ | 
होतारं रल्नधात॑मम्‌॥ 2 
| Agnimile purohitam yajnasya devamrtvijam. 
Hotaram ratnadhatamam. 

I invoke and worship Agni light of life, self- 
refulgent lord of the universe, foremost leader and 
inspirer, blazing light of yajnic creation, high-priest of 
cosmic dynamics, controller of natural evolution, and 
most generous giver of the treasures of life. 


अभिः पूर्वेथिऋषिधिरीडयो नूत॑नैरुत। 
स देवां एह व॑क्षति ॥ २॥ 


2. Agnih purvebhirrsibhiridyo nutanairuta. 
Sa devan eha vaksati. 


Agni, lord of light and power, is ever adorable 
by the saints and scholars of old and modern times. May 


2 RGVEDA 


He bless us with divine vision, knowledge and power 
in this world. 


stir रयिमश्रवत्‌ पोष॑मेव दिवेदिवे। 
यशसं वीरव॑त्तमम्‌॥ ३॥ 


a Agnina rayimasnavat posameva divedive. 
YaSasam viravattamam. 


By virtue of Agni, light and energy of the 
universe, one advances in health and wealth day by day, 
blest with honour and fame of the highest order of 
heroes. 


अग्रे यं यज्ञम॑ध्वरं fagad: परिभूरसि । 
स इदेवेषुं गच्छति ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Agne yam yajnamadhvaram visvatah paribhu- 
rasi. Sa iddevesu gacchati. 
Agni, lord pervasive of yajna, you are all round 
protector and promoter of all yajnic acts of love, 
compassion and creation. May the yajna advance and 


expand among the noblest powers of nature and 
humanity. 


stfrefal कविक्रतुः सत्यश्चित्रश्र॑वस्तमः। 
देवो देवेधिरा ग॑मत्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

5: Agnirhota kavikratuh satyascitrasravastamah. 
Devo devebhira gamat. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord of the universe, high- 
priest of nature, poetic creator of cosmic yajna, 
wondrous and most resounding, come and bless us with 
the noblest gifts of life. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 1 3 


यदङ्क दाशुषे wana भ्रं करिष्यसि | 
तवेत्तत्‌ BAS: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yadanga dasuse tvamagne bhadram karisyasi. 
Tavet tat satyamangirah. 


Agni, life of life, surely you would do good to 
the person who is generous and giving. Dear as the 
breath of life, this is ever true of your divine nature. 


उप॑ त्वागे दिवेदिवे दोषावस्तर्धिया वयम्‌ । 
नमो भर॑न्त॒ एम॑सि ॥ ७॥ 


ve Upa tvagne divedive dosavastardhiya vayam. 
Namo bharanta emasi. 


Agni, lord omniscient, day by day, night and 
day, with all our heart and soul we come to you bearing 
gifts of homage in faith and humility. 


राज॑न्तमध्वराणां गोपामृतस्य दीदिविम्‌। 
वर्धमानं स्वे दमे॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Rajantamadhvaranam gopamrtasya didivim. 
Vardhamanam sve dame. 


Bearing gifts of homage with faith and humility, 
we come to Agni, self-refulgent ruling lord of yajnic 
acts of love and compassion, protector of the earth and 
the environment and illuminator of the Divine Word 
and the universal law, immanently growing with the 
expansive universe of His own creation. 


aa: faded qaasa सूपायनो भ॑व । 
सच॑स्वा नः स्वस्तये 12 


4 RGVEDA 


9, Sa nah piteva sunave’gne supayano bhava. 
Sacasva nah svastaye. 


As a father is ever one with his child in love, so 
may Agni, lord of life and light and father guardian of 
His creation, be ever close to us in love and benediction. 
Father of us all, give us the grace of life divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 2 
Devata: Vayu (1), Indra- Vayu (4-6), Mitra-Varunau (7- 

9), Madhucchanda Rshi 

वायवा याहि दश्तिमे सोमा अरंकृताः | 

तेषां पाहि श्रुधी हव॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 

ie Vayava yahi darsateme soma aramkrtah. 
Tesam pahi Srudhi havam. 
Vayu, lord of grace and majesty, come, listen to 


our prayer, and protect and promote these somas 
vitalized as nectar and adorned in beauty. 


वाय॑ saatush-a त्वामच्छा जरितारं: | 
सुतसोमा अहर्विदः ॥ २॥ 
Vaya ukthebhirjarante tvamaccha jaritarah. 


Sutasoma aharvidah. 


Vayu, lord of life and majesty, the celebrants 
who know the time and season of yajnic ecstasy, having 
distilled the soma nectar of life, sing songs of joy in 
praise of your glory. 


वायो तवं प्रपृद्ती धेनां जिगाति दाशुषे । 
उरूची सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 2 5 


a Vayo tava praprncati dhena jigati dasuse. 
Uruci somapitaye. 


Vayu, breath of life and love, your voice of 
omniscience resounding across heaven and earth 
overflows like the mother cow for the generous yajnic 
soul and gives him a surfeit of soma, drink of 
immortality. 


इन्द्र॑वायू इमे सुता उप प्रयोभिरा ग॑तम्‌ । 
इन्द॑वो वामुशन्ति हि ॥ ४॥ 


4. Indravayu ime suta upa prayobhira gatam. 
Indavo vamusanti hi. 


Indra, lord of light, and Vayu, breath of life and 
energy, distilled are these vital essences with joyous 
experiments of yajna. They manifest and glorify your 
divine light and power. Come and bless us. 


वायविन्द्रश्च चेतथः सुतानां asta | 
तावा यांतमुपं द्रवत्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 

5, Vayavindrasca cetathah sutanam vajinivasu. 
Tava yatamupa dravat. 


Vayu and Indra, Lord’s powers of breath and light, 
you vitalise and illuminate the objects of creation with 
strength, energy and intelligence. Divinities of creation, 
come and inspire life and nature farther at the fastest. 


वायविन्द्र॑श्च सुन्वत आ यांतमुप॑ Prepay | 
मद्धिविवत्था धिया न॑रा॥ ६॥ 


6. Vayavindrasca sunvata a yatamupa niskrtam. 
Maksvittha dhiya nara. 


6 RGVEDA 


Vayu and Indra, divine breath of life and divine 
light of intelligence, both divinities of nature, inspire 
the objects of creation with the sap of life. So do they 
invest the human being with spirit and intelligence and 
thus accomplish their creative yajna of evolution. 


मित्रं ga पूतद॑श्चं वरुणं च रिशाद॑सम्‌। 
धियं घृताचीं साधन्ता ॥ ७ ॥ 


a: Mitram huve putadaksam varunam ca risadasam. 
Dhiyam ghrtacim sadhanta. 


I invoke, with dedication, Mitra the sun, pure, 
generous and sanctifying, and Varuna, pranic energy of 
nature, nourishing and immunizing, both divine agents 
of cosmic intelligence and natural powers of human 
evolution (in science and art). 


seat मित्रावरुणावृतावृधावृतस्पशा | 
क्रतुं बृहन्तमाशाथे Ut ८ ॥ 

8. Rtena mitravarunavrtavrdhavrtasprsa. 
Kratum brhantamasathe. 

By virtue of the divine law, Mitra and Varuna, 
sun and pranic energy, both extend the operation of the 
natural law of cosmic evolution and inspire the human 
intelligence to reach unto divine realisation. They both 
pervade and energize the mighty yajna of the expanding 
universe. 

कवी नों पित्रावरुणा तुविजाता Se arat | 
दक्षं दधाते अपसर॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 


9, Kavi no mitravaruna tuvijata uruksaya. 
Daksam dadhate apasam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 3 7 


Creative, illuminative and inspiring, Mitra and 
Varuna, sun and pranic energy, like the breath of life, 
are universally pervasive and mighty potent, and both 
wield the divine power of versatile action. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 3 


Devata: Ashvinau (1-3), Indra (4-6), Vishvedevah (7-9), 
Sarasvati (10-12), Madhucchanda Rshi 


अश्विना asda xacaront शुभ॑स्पती । 
पुरुभुजा चनस्यतम्‌ 2 


I, Asvina yajvaririso dravatpani subhaspati. 
Purubhuja canasyatam. 


Ashvins, fire and water, are powers of the Divine 
for quick motion through yajnic science. They are 
sources of splendour, food and energy, comfort and joy. 
Men of learning and science, let the two be developed 
in a spirit of delight and dedication. 


अश्विना पुरुदंससा नरा शवीरया धिया। 
धिष्ण्या add गिर॑ः ॥ २॥ 

2 Asvina purudamsasa nara saviraya dhiya. 
Dhisnya vanatam girah. 

Ashvins, divine powers of creative energy 
working through fire and water, are wondrous heroic 
achievers of mighty deeds with relentless acts of 
scientific study and research. Rich and generous, may 
they respond to our invocations and grant our voice of 
hope and prayer. 

cel युवाकवः सुता नास॑त्या वृक्तवंर्हिषः। 
आ यातं रुद्रवर्तनी ॥ ३॥ 


8 RGVEDA 


Di Dasra yuvakavah suta nasatya vrktabarhisah. 
A yatam rudravartani. 


Scholars of distinction dedicated to divine 
science, experts of natural metabolism, seated on the 
sacred vedi of scientific yajna, working on the 
marvellous powers of the Ashvins, fire and water, eternal 
media of divine power, for the elimination of suffering, 
let the gifts of divinity come (for the benefit of 
humanity). 


इन्द्रा यांहि चित्रभानो सुता इमे त्वायवः | 
अण्वीभिस्तना Gara: ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Indra yahi citrabhano suta ime tvayavah. 
Anvibhistana putasah. 


Indra, Lord Supreme of wondrous light and 
power, come and bless us. All these sacred objects in 
existence, created, energised and extended over spaces 
from the subtlest causes by you are sustained in your 
divine power. 


इन्द्रा याहि धियेषितो विप्र॑जूतः सुताव॑तः। 
उप ब्रह्माणि वाघतः ॥ ५॥ 

a: Indra yahi dhiyesito viprajutah sutavatah. 
Upa brahmani vaghatah. 

Indra, Lord Supreme of light and life, meditated 
by the pure at heart, realised by the enlightened, distilled 
from the Veda and the world of existence by the visiona- 
ries, come and inspire the chant of the dedicated yajakas. 

इन्द्रा याहि dds उप ब्रह्माणि हरिवः। 
सुते द॑धिष्व नश्चनः ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 3 9 


6. Indra yahi tutujana upa brahmani harivah. 
Sute dadhisva nascanah. 


Indra, lord and breath of life, energy and speech, 
come fast at the speed of light, vitalise our songs of 
praise in yajna and bless us with food for the body, mind 
and soul. 


ओमासश्चर्षणीधृतो विश्वे देवास आ ग॑त । 
दाश्वांसो दाशुषः सुतम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

ae Omasascarsanidhrto visve devasa a gata. 
Dasvamso dasusah sutam. 


Come ye, lovers of Om, lord creator and 
protector of the universe, masters of light and lovers of 
humanity, noblest visionaries of the world, generous 
givers and benefactors of all, come and give us the 
essence and wisdom distilled from life and literature. 


विश्वे carat stat: सुतमा aa quit: 1 
उस्त्राइव स्वस॑राणि ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Visve devaso apturah sutama ganta turnayah. 
Usra iva svasarani. 


Visionaries of the world, generous givers, wise 
scholars of life and literature, fast as winds and eager 
as dawn for the day and mother-cow for the calf in the 
stall, come to your own and bring us the essences of 
knowledge and wisdom. 


विश्वे देवासो! अस्रिध एहिमायासो sige: । 
मेधं जुषन्त वह्वयः ॥ ९ ॥ 


तरः Visve devaso asridha ehimayaso adruhah. 
Medham jusanta vahnayah. 


10 RGVEDA 


Divinities of the world, unerring and unfouling 
lovers of Omniscience, free from hate and fear, come at 
the fastest and join the ecstasies of the brilliant fires of 
the yajna of love, compassion and knowledge. 


पावका नः सर॑स्वती वाजेंभिरर्वाजिनींवती । 
यज्ञं व॑ष्टु धियावंसुः॥ १९०॥ 


10. Pavaka nah sarasvati vajebhirvajinivati. 
Yajnam vastu dhiyavasuh. 


May Sarasvati, goddess of divine speech, 
mother knowledge of arts, science and divinity, come 
with gifts of food for the mind and intellect and purify 
us with the light of knowledge. May the mother grace 
our yajna of arts and sciences and bless us with the light 
divine. 
चोदयित्री सूनृतानां चेत॑न्ती सुमतीनाम्‌ । 
यज्ञं द॑धे सर॑स्वती ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Codayitri sunrtanam cetanti sumatinam. 
Yajnam dadhe sarasvati. 


Sarasvati, mother stream of eternal knowledge 
and divine speech, inspires the seekers of universal truth 
and cosmic law and enlightens the admirers of noble 
wisdom and understanding. The divine flow of light 
and knowledge carries on the universal yajna of nature 
and humanity. 


महो अर्णाः सर॑स्वती प्र चेतयति cat । 
धियो विश्वा वि रांजति।॥ ९२॥ 


12. = Maho arnah sarasvati pra cetayati ketund. 
Dhiyo visva vi rajati. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 4 11 


Sarasvati, mighty ocean flow of mother 
knowledge and divine speech, shines with her radiance 
of omniscience and illuminates the universal mind and 
the minds of humanity across the worlds of existence. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 4 
Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi 


सु रूपकृलुमूतये सुदुघामिव wee | 
जुहूमसि द्यविद्यवि ne 

ik Surupakrtnumiutaye sudughamiva godhuhe. 
Juhumasi dyavidyavi. 


Just as the generous mother cow is milked for 
the person in need of nourishment, so every day for the 
sake of light and knowledge we invoke and worship 
Indra, lord omnipotent of light and life, maker of beautiful 
forms of existence and giver of protection and progress. 


उप॑ नः सवना ग॑हि सोम॑स्य सोमपाः fas । 
गोदा इद्रेवतो मद॑: ॥ २॥ 

2. Upa nah savana gahi somasya somapah piba. 
Goda id revato madah. 


Indra, lord of light, protector of yajnic joy, 
promoter of sense and mind, come to our yajna, accept 
our homage of soma and give us the light and ecstasy 
of the soul. 


अथा ते अन्त॑मानां faerd aad 
मानो अति ख्य आ ग॑ंहि।॥३॥ 


Di Atha te antamanam vidyama sumatinam. 
Ma no ati khya ठ gahi. 


12 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of light and knowledge, come, so 
that we know you at the closest of those who are 
established in you and hold you in their heart and vision. 
Come, lord of life, come close, forsake us not. 


we विग्रमस्तुतमिन्द्रं पृच्छा विपण्चितंम्‌। 
यस्ते सखिभ्य आ वर॑म्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Parehi vigramastrtamindram prccha vipascitam. 
Yaste sakhibhya a varam. 


Keep off the malicious maligner. Go even far, 
farthest to Indra, lord of divine knowledge, love and 
kindness, light and vision, experience and wisdom, who 
is good and the best choice for you and me and your 
friends. Go, ask, and pray. 


उत dard नो निदो निरन्यतं॑श्चिदारत। 
दधाना इन्द्र इद्‌ aa: ॥ ५९ ॥। 

Uta bruvantu no nido niranyatascidarata. 
Dadhana indra id duvah. 


Indra, lord of light and bliss, may the wise and 
visionaries who cherish the divine in their heart speak 
to us. Let the others, ignorant, malicious and maligners 
be off from here. 


उत नः Geant अरिर्वोचियुंर्दस्म qed: | 
स्यामेदिन्द्रस्य शर्म॑णि।॥ ६॥ 

6. Uta nah subhagam arirvoceyurdasma krstayah. 
Syamedindrasya Sarmani. 


Let us pray and seek the protection of Indra, 
lord of might unchallengeable, so that men of knowledge 
and wisdom bring us the voice of divinity and even those 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 4 13 
who oppose appreciate and speak well of us. 


एमाशुमाशवे भर यज्ञश्रियं TATA TA | 
पतयन्म॑न्दयत्‌ AW ७ ॥ 


a. Emasumasave bhara yajnasriyam nrmadanam. 
Patayanmandayatsakham. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, give us the 
secret of the speed of motion for the giant leap forward 
in progress. Bless us with the wealth of the nation’s 
yajna exciting for the people and joyous for our friends. 


अस्य पीत्वा श॑तक्रतो घनो वृत्राणामभवः | 
प्रावो वाजेषु वाजिन॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asya pitva Satakrato ghano vrtranamabhavah. 
Pravo vajesu vajinam. 


Hero of a hundred yajnic projects, having 
accomplished the programme and having drunk the 
soma of success, concentrate and consolidate as the light 
of the sun and be the breaker of the clouds of rain, and 
then advance and promote the wealth and defence of 
the nation through the battles of progress. 


तं त्वा वाजेषु वाजिनं arses: शतक्रतो | 
धनानामिन्द्र सातये ॥ ९ ॥ 
व Tam tva vajesu vajinam vajayamah satakrato. 
Dhananamindra sdataye. 
Indra, lord of light and power, hero of a hundred 
yajnic creations, we celebrate your glory of speed and 


success in the battles of humanity for the achievement 
of the wealth of life and prosperity of the people. 


14 RGVEDA 


यो रायो ३ वनिर्महान्त्सुपारः सुन्वतः सखा । 
तस्मा इन्द्राय गायत ।॥ ९०॥ 

10. Yo rayo’ vanirmahantsuparah sunvatah sakha. 
Tasma indraya gayata. 


People of the land and children of Indra, sing 
and celebrate the glories of Indra, lord supreme of life 
and light, great and glorious, creator and protector of 
wealth, saviour pilot across the seas, and friend of the 
makers of soma. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 5 
Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi 


आ त्वेता नि षीदतेन्द्रमभि प्र गांयत। 
ala: स्तोम॑वाहसः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. A tveta ni sidatendramabhi pra gayata. 
Sakhayah stomavahasah. 


Friends and celebrants of song divine, come, 
sit together and join to meditate (on life, divinity, 
humanity, science and spirituality, and freedom), and 
sing in thankful praise of Indra, lord of life and energy. 


पुरूतमं पुरूणामीशानं वा्यीणाम्‌। 
इन्द्र सोमे सचां सुते ॥ २॥ 
2: Purutamam purunamisanam varyanam. 
Indram some saca sute. 
Friends and comrades in study and meditation, 
when you have distilled the essence of soma, life and 


spirit present at the heart of things, then sing in praise 
of Indra, closest at hand of things in heaven and earth, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 5 15 
and ruler dispenser of the fruits of love and desire. 


a at at योग आ भुवत्स राये स पुरन्ध्याम्‌। 
गमद्‌ वाजे थिरा स a: ३॥ 


= Sa gha no yoga a bhuvatsa raye sa urandhyam. 
Gamad vajebhira sa nah. 


Indra, life and energy of the universe, is at the 
heart of our meditation. That is the spirit and secret of 
the wealth of the world. That is the inspiration at the 
centre of our thought and intelligence. May that lord of 
life and energy come and bless us with gifts of 
knowledge and power in our joint endevours. 


यस्य॑ संस्थे न वृण्वते हरी! समत्सु VAG: | 
तस्मा इन्द्राय गायत ।॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yasya samsthe na vrnvate hari samatsu Satravah. 
Tasma indraya gayata. 


Sing in honour of that Indra in the field of whose 
power and force no enemies can have the courage to 
stand in opposition and sustain themselves. 


सु तपान्नै सुता इमे शुच॑यो यन्ति वीतये । 
सोमांसो दध्याशिरः ॥ ५॥ 


Sutapavne suta ime Sucayo yanti vitaye. 
Somaso dadhyasirah. 


All these bright and pure creations of the soma- 
yajna of science and meditation, sweet and vitalising as 
nectar-sweet delicacies of milk and curds (are created 
by Indra through His light and wind energy) and flow 
for the beneficiary, humanity, for their pleasure, 


16 RGVEDA 
protection and promotion. 


त्वं सुतस्य॑ पीतये सद्यो gest अजायथाः | 
इन्द्र VSM सुक्रतो ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam sutasya [714८ sadyo vrddho ajayathah. 
Indra jyaisthyaya sukrato. 


Indra, noble soul of purity and yajnic meditation, 
hero of a hundred acts of goodness, for a drink of the 
soma of Lord Indra’s creation, rising to new honour and 
grandeur every day, take a new birth into higher 
knowledge every moment. 


आ त्वां विशन्त्वाशवः सोमांस इन्द्र गिर्वणः | 
शं तै सन्तु प्रचेतसे ॥ ७॥ 


des A tva visantvasavah somasa indra girvanah. 
Sam te santu pracetase. 


Indra, noble soul, high-priest of yajna and the 
divine voice, may all these brilliant creations of lightning 
speed be good and beneficial to you and humanity. May 
they bring bliss and peace to you, prince of knowledge 
and grandeur. 


त्वां स्तोमां अवीवृधन्‌ त्वामुक्था शतक्रतो | 
त्वां वर्धन्तु नो गिरः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam stoma avivrdhan tvamuktha satakrato. 
Tvam vardhantu no girah. 


Indra, supreme lord of omnipotence and majesty, 
the Stoma hymns of the Veda celebrate your glory. Lord 
infinite of countless acts of creation, the Uktha hymns 
sing of your power and action. So may all our songs of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 6 17 


devotion and homage light up your presence and 
grandeur all round. 
अश्चिंतोतिः सनेदिमं वाजमिन्द्रः सहस्रिणम्‌ । 
यस्मिन्‌ विश्वानि dren ॥ ९॥ 
५ Aksitotih sanedimam vajamindrah sahasrinam. 
Yasmin visvani paumsya. 


Indra, whose omnipotence and protection is 
infinite and imperishable, may, we pray, bless us with 
this thousand-fold knowledge and power of science in 
which are contained all the secrets of nature’s vitality. 


मानो मती अभि seq तनूनापिन्द्र गिर्बणः। 
ईशानो यवया वधम्‌ ॥ ९० ॥ 

10... Ma no marta abhi druhan tanunamindra girva- 
nah. Isano yavaya vadham. 


Indra, lord adorable in sacred song, let no mortal 
hate or injure our body and mind from anywhere. Keep 
off hate, violence and murder far away from us. You 
are the ruler, ordainer and dispenser of justice and 
punishment. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 6 
Devata: Indra (1-3, 10), Maruts (4, 6, 8, 9), Indra and 
Maruts (5, 7), Madhucchanda Rshi 
Qed ब्रध्नम॑रुषं चर॑न्तं परि तस्थुषं: | 
रोच॑न्ते रोचना दिवि॥ ९॥ 


if Yunjanti bradhnamarusam carantam pari tasthu- 
sah. Rocante rocana divi. 


Pious souls in meditation commune with the 


18 RGVEDA 


great and gracious lord of existence immanent in the 
steady universe and transcendent beyond. Brilliant are 
they with the lord of light and they shine in the heaven 
of bliss. 


युञ्जन्त्यस्य काम्या हरी विपंश्चसा रथे । 
शोणा धृष्णू TATSAT ॥ २ ॥ 


De Yunjantyasya kamya hari vipaksasa rathe. 


Sona 41115110 nrvahasa. 

Scholars of science dedicated to Indra study and 
meditate on the lord’s omnipotence of light, fire and 
wind, and harness the energy like two horses to a chariot, 
both beautiful, equal and complementary as positive- 
negative currents, fiery red, powerful and carriers of 
people. 


केतुं कृण्वन्न॑केतवे पेशो wat अपेशसे । 
समुषद्धिंरजायथाः ॥ ३ ॥ 

Ketum krnvannaketave peso marya apeSase. 
Samusadbhirajayathah. 


Children of the earth, know That who creates 
light and knowledge for the ignorant in darkness and 
gives form and beauty to the formless and chaotic, and 
regenerate yourselves by virtue of the men of knowledge 
and passion for action. 


आदहं स्वधामनु पुनंग रभत्वमेरिरे । 
दधाना नामं यज्ञिय॑म्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Adaha svadhamanu punargarbhatvamerire. 
Dadhana nama yajniyam. 


Bearing the sacred vapours of yajna as is their 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 6 19 


wont and nature, the winds rise to the sky, hold the 
clouds in their womb, and after the rain carry on the 
cycle with the sun-rays and yajna-fire. 
dite चिंदारुजलुभिर्गृहां चिदिन्द्र afetes: 
अविन्द उस्तरिया अनु ॥ ५॥ 
१ Vilu cidarujatnubhirguha cidindra vahnibhih. 
Avinda usriya anu. 
The mighty sun with its piercing rays breaks 
down things in the sky, and the wind with its currents 
after the sunbeams reconstructs and replaces new forms 
of things in the sky. 
देवयन्तो यथा॑ मतिमच्छा विदद्व॑सुं गिर॑: । 
महामनूषत श्रुतम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Devayanto yatha matimacchda vidadvasum girah. 
Mahamanisata srutam. 


Just as noble scholars develop and brighten up 
their generous mind and intelligence after the principles 
of Vedic revelation, so do the Maruts, currents of energy, 
intensify, magnify and adorn the sound that is produced 
and heard. 


sau सं हि cata सञ्जग्मानो अबिभ्युषा । 
मन्दू समानवर्चसा ॥ ७॥ 

1 Indrena sam hi drksase samjagamano abibhyusa. 
Mandi samanavarcasa. 


Marut, wind energy, is seen while moving 
alongwith the indomitable sun, both beautiful and 
joyous, divinities coexistent, equal in splendour by 


20 RGVEDA 
virtue of omnipresent Indra, Lord Supreme. 


अनवद्यरभिद्युभिर्मरः सहंस्वदर्चति। 
गणैरिन्द्रस्य काम्यैः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Anavadyairabhidyubhirmakhah sahasvadarcati. 
Ganairindrasya kamyaih. 


The yajnic dynamics of nature’s currents of 
energy, Maruts, so potent and effective, illuminates the 
world and does homage to the Lord of creation with the 
immaculate blazing radiations of glorious sun light. 


aid: परिज्मन्ना ग॑हि दिवो at रोचनादधिं। 
समस्मिन्नृञ्जते गिरः ॥ ९ ॥ 


wa Atah parijmanna gahi divo va rocandadadhi. 
Samasminnrnyjate girah. 


The currents of energy, Maruts, travel up from 
here, the earth, to the region of the sun, and from up 
there down to the earth. And in this space they sustain 
all the objects of the world and all the voices divine 
and human. 


इतो at सातिमीमहे दिवो वा पार्थिंवादधिं। 
इन्द्रं महो वा रज॑सः Qo Ul 


10. Ito va satimimahe divo va parthivadadhi. 
Indram maho va rajasah. 


From here we rise to the sun, and to Indra, lord 
omnipotent blazing in the sun, with prayers, with 
homage and oblations, Indra who is greater and higher 
than the earth, the skies and the heavens and rules over 
all these. 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 7 21 


Mandala 1/Sukta 7 
Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi 


इन्द्रमिद्‌ गाथिनो! बृहदिन्द्र॑मरकेभिर्‌ किंण।ः | 
इन्द्रं वाणीरनूषत ॥ ९॥ 


i, Indramidgathino brhadindramarkebhirakinah. 
Indram vaniranusata. 


The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra, 
infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the sun, 
lord of light, Indra, vayu, maruts, currents of energy, 
and Indra, the universal divine voice, with prayers, 
mantras, actions and scientific research. 


इन्द्र Seal: सचा aeige आ dara । 
इन्द्रो ast हिर॒ण्यय॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Indra iddharyoh saca sammisla ठ vacoyuja. 
Indro vajri hiranyayah. 


Indra, the omnipresent Spirit, Indra, the universal 
energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy, 
the bond of unity and sustenance in things, co-existent 
synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of 
positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the 
thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year. 


इन्द्रो दीर्घाय aeta आ सूर्य' रोहयद्‌ दिवि । 
वि गोधिरद्धिभैरयत्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Indro dirghaya caksasa a suryam rohayad divi. 
Vi gobhiradrimairayat. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, raised the sun high up 
in the heavens for expansive light and vision. With the 


ee) RGVEDA 
rays of the sun, He forms and moves the cloud for rain. 


इन्द्र वाजेषु नोऽव सहस्त्र॑प्रधनेषु च । 
उग्र उग्राभि॑रूतिभिंः।॥४॥ 

4. Indra vajesu no’va sahasrapradhanesu ca. 
Ugra ugrabhirutibhih. 


Indra, lord of light and omnipotence, in a 
thousand battles of life and prize contests, protect us 
with bright blazing ways of protection and advancement. 


इन्द्रं वयं महाधन इन्द्रमर्भे हवामहे । 
युजं वृत्रेषु arta ५ ॥ 

J Indram vayam mahadhana indramarbhe hava- 
mahe. Yujam vrtresu vajrinam. 


In battles great and small, we invoke Indra, lord 
omnipotent, we call upon sun and wind, mighty breaker 
of the clouds, friend in darkness, wielder of the 
thunderbolt. 


स नो वृषन्नमुं चरुं सत्रादावन्नपा afer 
अस्मभ्यमप्र॑तिष्कुतः॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Sano vrsannamum carum satradavannapa vrdhi. 


Asmabhyam apratiskutah. 


Indra, lord of the universe, light of the world, 
generous lord of wealth, irresistible wielder of power, 
generous giver of showers, grant us the yajnic prosperity 
of life and open the doors of freedom and salvation at 
the end. 


Tass य sat स्तोमा इन्द्र॑स्य विण: | 
न विन्धे अस्य सुष्टुतिम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 7 23 
५. Tunjetunje ya uttare stoma indrasya vajrinah. 
Na vindhe asya sustutim. 
On success in battle after battle, follow songs 
of celebration in honour of Indra, lord wielder of the 
thunderbolt, and I love to go on and on with the song 
without end. 
am यूथेव वंसंगः कृष्टीरिर्त्योजंसा | 
ईशानो अप्र॑तिष्कुतः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Vrsa yutheva vamsagah krstiriyartyojasa. 
Isano apratiskutah. 
As the virile bull leads the herd it rules, so does 
Indra, generous lord indomitable and ruler of the world, 
inspire and lead His children to joy and freedom. 
य एकश्चर्षणीनां वसूनामिरज्यति | 
इन्द्रः Use क्षितीनाम्‌ ९ ॥ 

् Ya ekaScarsaninam vasunamirajyati. 
Indrah panca ksitinam. 


One and only one without a second is Indra, lord 
supreme of the universe, the lord who rules and guides 
humanity, showers treasures of wealth, and sustains and 
ultimately disposes the five orders of the universe. 


इन्द्रं at विश्वतस्परि हवामहे Sle: | 
अस्माकमस्तु hae: Qo ll 


10. Indram vo visvataspari havamahe janebhyah. 
Asmakamastu kevalah. 


For the sake of you all of humanity, we invoke 
and worship Indra, the one lord ruler over the universe, 


24 RGVEDA 


and we pray He may be with us in vision in a state of 
absolute bliss. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 8 
Indra Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi 


एन्द्र॑ सानसिं रयिं सजित्वानं सदासर्ह॑म्‌। 
वर्षं मूतयें भर।॥ VU 


ib Endra sanasim rayim sajitvanam sadasaham. 
Varsisthamutaye bhara. 


Indra, lord supreme of power and glory, bless 
us with the wealth of life and well-being that gives us 
the superiority of action over sufferance, delight and 
victory, courage and endurance, excellence and 
generosity, and leads us on way to progress under divine 
protection. 


नि येनं मुष्टिहत्यया नि gar रुणधामहे। 
त्वोतांसो न्यर्वता ॥ २॥ 


2. Ni yena mustihatyaya ni vrtra runadhamahai. 
Tvotaso nyarvata. 

Indra, lord of power and glory, give us that 
strength of life and character whereby, under your 
blessed protection, we may hold back the enemy, evil 
and darkness with less than a blow of the fist and less 
than a dart of the lance. 


इन्द्र ala आ वयं ast घना द॑दीमदहि। 
जयेम सं युधि स्पृध॑ः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Indra tvotasa a4 vayam vajram ghana dadimahi. 
Jayema sam yudhi sprdhah. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 8 25 


Indra, lord of might and splendour, under your 
divine protection, may we develop, we pray, strong and 
sophisticated weapons of defence so that fighting battles 
of mutual contest we may win the prize of victory. 


वयं ye Red भिरिन्दर carat युजा वयम्‌। 
सासह्याम पृतन्यतः ॥ ४॥ 
4. Vayam surebhirastrbhirindra tvaya yuja vayam. 
Sasahyama prtanyatah. 
Indra, lord of might, protection and progress, 
joined as we are with you in spirit, may we, with our 


heroes, shotsmen and missiles, challenge, fight out and 
win over our contestants in battle. 


et इन्द्रः परश्च नु महित्वमस्तु विणे । 
द्यौर्न प्रथिना शवं: ॥ ५॥ 


a. Maham indrah parasca nu mahitvamastu vajrine. 
Dyaurna prathina savah. 


Indra is great, supreme and transcendent, self- 
refulgent like the sun, extensive like space and more. 
May all the power and grandeur be for the lord of justice 
and the thunderbolt. May all be dedicated to Him. 


समोहे वा य आश॑त नरस्तोकस्य सनितौ । 
विप्रासो वा धियायवः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Samohe va ya aSsata narastokasya sanitau. 
Vipraso va dhiyayavah. 


Men of valour and heroism engage in battles, 
men of knowledge and piety in learned gatherings and 
in the training of youth. 


26 RGVEDA 


यः कुश्चिः सोमपातमः समुद्र इव पिन्व॑ते। 
उर्वीरापो न काकुदः ॥ ७॥ 


Ts Yah kuksih somapatamah samudra iva pinvate. 
Urvirapo na kakudah. 


Indra, the sun, is the womb of life, it feeds and 
promotes the life-giving vegetation. Just as the sea and 
the space-ocean of vapours augment the waters, the wide 
earth generates and promotes life, the throat cavity 
sustains prana, and prana promotes speech, so does the 
sun nourish and promote life, soma and joy. 


एवा ह्य॑स्य सूनृतां विर ्शी गोम॑ती मही । 
पक्वा शाखा न दाशुषे ॥। ८ ॥ 


8. Eva hyasya sunrta virapst gomati mahi. 
Pakva sakha na dasuse. 


Verily the divine voice of Indra, Supreme Lord 
of Omniscience, is the richest treasure of eternal truth, 
generous mother of the language of existence and great. 
It is an abundant branch of the divine tree laden with 
ripe fruit for the faithful devotee and yajnic giver. 


एवा fe a fayaa ऊतय इन्द्र माव॑ते | 
सद्यश्चित सन्ति दाशुषे i ९॥ 


0. Eva hi te vibhitaya utaya indra mavate. 
Sadyascit santi dasuse. 


Indra, lord omnipresent, omniscient and 
omnipotent, such are your wondrous works and 
attributes, such are your powers, protections and 
promotions, of life, knowledge and happiness for a 
person like me. They are ever abundant for the faithful 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 9 27 
and generous devotee dedicated to love and service. 


एवा ह्य॑स्य काम्या स्तोमं उक्थं च vie । 
इन्द्राय सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Eva hyasya kamya stoma uktham ca Samsya. 
Indraya somapitaye. 

Such are the songs of praise, adoration and 
celebration of this lord of life, light and power, sweet, 
enchanting and elevating, offered in honour of Indra, 
creator, protector and promoter of life and its joy. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 9 
Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi 


इन्द्रेहि मत्स्यन्ध॑सो विश्वेभिः सोमपर्वभिः 1 
मर्दों अभथिष्टिरोज॑सा ॥ ९॥ 


i Indrehi matsyandhaso visvebhih somaparvabhih. 
Maham abhistirojasa. 


Indra, lord of light and life, come with all the 
soma-celebrations of food, energy and joy, great as you 
are with majesty, power and splendour omnipresent, and 
give us the ecstasy of living with enlightenment. 


एमेनं सृजता सुते मन्दिमिन्द्राय मन्दिने । 
चक्रिं विश्वानि चक्रये ॥ २॥ 


2: Emenam srjata sute mandimindraya mandine. 
Cakrim visvani cakraye. 

Scholars of eminence, in this world of Indra’s 
yajnic creation, come up for the sake of joyous humanity 
and accomplish all those works of creation and 
construction which are needed for its prosperity and 


28 RGVEDA 


well-being. 
मत्स्वा सुशिप्र मन्दिभिः स्तोमेभिर्विंङ्वचर्षणे | 
सचैषु सव॑नेष्वा ॥ ३॥ 
De Matsva susipra mandibhih stomebhirvisvacar- 


sane. Sacaisu savanesva. 


Indra, Lord omniscient of universal presence, 
light and vision, with joyous songs of praise and 
celebration we invoke you and dedicate ourselves to 
you as our constant friend and guide. Come lord, and 
give us the bliss of existence in our yajnic acts of 
creation. 


असृग्रमिन्द्र ते गिरः प्रति त्वामुद॑ंहासत। 
अजोषा वृषभं पतिम्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. Asrgramindra te girah prati tvamudahasata. 
Ajosa vrsabham patim. 


Indra, lord of light and splendour, the songs of 
divinity reveal and manifest you in your glory, protector 
of the universe and generous rain-giver of favours and 
kindness. And I too, in response, celebrate your 
magnificence and magnanimity without satiety. 


सं चोदय चित्रमवग्राधं इन्द्र वरेण्यम्‌ । 
असदित्ते विभु प्रभु ॥५५॥ 
5: Sam codaya citramarvagradha indra varenyam. 


Asaditte vibhu prabhu. 


Indra, lord of light and glory, creator giver of 
wondrous beauty, wealth and joy, infinite, mighty and 
supreme, whatever is worthy of choice in the world of 
your creation, grant us here and now. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 9 29 


अस्मान्त्सु तत्र Seas राये रभ॑स्वतः। 
तुविद्युम्न य्टस्वतः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Asmantsu tatra codayendra raye rabhasvatah. 
Tuvidyumna yasasvatah. 


Indra, lord of light and infinite power, guide and 
inspire us on way to the wealth of life and divinity, zealous 
seekers of love, honour and excellence as we are. 


सं गोमदिन्द्र वाज॑वदस्मे पृथु श्रवों ged! 
विश्वायुर्धेह्यक्षिंतम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

a Sam gomadindra vajavadasme prthu Sravo brhat. 
Visvayurdhehyaksitam. 


Indra, infinite lord of life and light, wealth and 
honour, grant us a full life of knowledge and divine 
speech, wealth of food and energy, great reputation, high 
and inexhaustible honour, and the vision of infinity. 


अस्मे धेहि श्रवो! बृहद द्युम्नं संहस््रसात॑मम्‌। 
इन्द्र ता रथिनीरिषः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Asme dhehi Sravo brhad dyumnam sahasrasata- 


mam. Indra ta rathinirisah. 


Indra, lord of honour, wealth and power, grant 
us great honour and knowledge, wealth and happiness 
of a thousand sort, a strong economy and a mighty force 
of chariots (moving on land and sea and in the air). 


वसोरिन्द्रं वसुपतिं गीर्भिर्गुणन्तं ऋग्मियम्‌ | 
होम गन्तारमूतये ॥। ९ ॥ 


a Vasorindram vasupatim girbhirgrnanta rgmiyam. 
Homa gantaramutaye. 


30 RGVEDA 


For our defence, protection and advancement, 
we invoke and celebrate in song with homage, Indra, 
lord protector of wealth, ruler of the earth, fire, breath 
and other sustainers of life, self-revealed and honoured 
in the Rks and immanent ruler and mover of everything. 


aida न्योकसे बृहद्‌ लुं हत wah: | 
इन्द्राय शूषमर्चति ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sutesute nyokase brhad brhata edarih. 
Indraya susamarcati. 


Even if a person is opposed to faith in Indra and 
is an enemy of the pious, but (on repentance) offers 
sincere homage to Him, Great Lord and universal home 
and haven of everything of the world, worshipped in 
every act of piety, he is saved. 


(11) The pious, and even the impious, if he 
offers homage to Him, Great Lord who is the haven 


and home of everything in the world, worshipped in 
every act of piety, he is saved. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 10 
Indra Devata, Madhucchanda Rshi 
गाय॑न्ति त्वा गायत्रिणोऽर्चन्त्यकंमर्किणंः। 
ब्रह्माणस्त्वा शतक्रत उद्वंशमिव येमिरे ॥ ९॥ 


Ly Gayanti tva gayatrino’rcantyarkamarkinah. 
Brahmanastva Satakrata udvamsamiva yemire. 


The singers of Gayatri celebrate you, Indra, lord 
of song and joy, with the hymns of Sama-Veda. The 
devotees of Rgveda worship Indra, lord of light, with 
Rks. And the sage scholars of all the Vedas, O lord of a 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 10 31 


hundred noble acts of cosmic yajna, maintain the line 
of divine worship as the centre-string of the human 
family. 


यत्सानोः सानुमारुहद्‌ भूर्यस्॑ष्ट arly 
तदिन्द्रो seh चेतति यूथेन वृष्णिरेजति ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Yatsanoh sanumaruhad bhuryaspasta kartvam. 
Tadindro artham cetati yuthena vrsnirejati. 


As the sun-beams radiate with waves of energy 
from one peak to another of a mountain illuminating 
each in succession, similarly when a person rises from 
one peak of action to another, accomplishing one after 
another as holy duty, then Indra, lord of light, illuminates 
one meaning of life and mystery after another for him. 


युक्ष्वा हि केशिना हरी वृष॑णा कक्ष्यप्रा । 
अथा न इन्द्र सोमपा गिरामुपश्रुतिं चर ॥ ३ ॥ 


Yuksva hi kesina hari vrsana kaksyapra. 
Atha na indra somapa giramupasrutim cara. 


Indra, lord of light blazing in the sun, protector 
and promoter of the soma of life and joy, yoke your team 
of sunbeams like chariot-horses, equal, opposite and 
complementary as the positive-negative currents of 
energy-circuit, beautiful in their operative field, generous, 
pervasive in the skies all round, listen to our prayer and 
advance the yajna of knowledge and action on earth. 


एहि स्तोमो अभि स्व॑राऽभि गंणीह्या रुव। 
ब्रह्मं च नो वसो सचेन्द्र॑ यज्ञं च॑ वर्धय ॥ ४॥ 


Ehi stomam abhi svara’bhi grnihyaruva. 
Brahma ca no vaso sacendra yajnam ca vardhaya. 


32 RGVEDA 


Indra, omnipresent omniscient lord sustainer of 
the universe and support of all, come in response to our 
prayer, reveal the secrets of knowledge, let the light 
shine in our heart, inspire us to proclaim, let the sacred 
science of life and nature prevail, and promote the yajna 
of creation at the human level for the earth and her 
children. 


उक्थमिन्द्राय शंस्यं वर्धनं पुरुनिष्षिधे | 
शक्रो यथा| सुतेषु णो रारणत्‌ सख्येषु च ॥५॥ 


2. Ukthamindraya samsyam vardhanam purunissi- 
dhe. Sakro yatha sutesu no raranat sakhyesu ca. 


Just as a man rejoices with his children and 
friends and bestows lots of knowledge and wealth on 
them, so does Shakra, omnipotent Indra, lord of wealth 
and knowledge, rejoice to bestow admirable mantras 
of elevating light of Vedic lore on the generous soul for 
its advancement. 


तमित्‌ dha ईमहे तं राये तं सुवीर्ये । 
स शक्र उत न॑ः शकदिन्द्रो वसु दय॑मानः ॥ ६॥ 
6. Tamit sakhitva imahe tam raye tam suvirye. 


Sa Sakra uta nah §akadindro vasu dayamanah. 


We invoke Indra and pray to Him for friendship, 
wealth and wisdom, courage and heroism, that Lord 
Omnipotent, Indra, lord of power and honour, strength 
and support of all, who has the power to give, to protect, 
and to destroy sin and evil, He alone. 


सुविवृतं सुनिरजमिन्द्र त्वादांतमिद्‌ यश॑: । 
गवामप ast वृधि कृणुष्व राधो अद्रिवः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 10 33 


7. Suvivrtam sunirajamindra tvadatamidyasah. 
Gavamapa vrajam vrdhi krnusva radho adrivah. 


Indra, lord of light and honour blazing as the 
sun, lord of magnanimity as the clouds of rain, the 
honour and fame given by you is open and brilliant, 
transparent and free, even from a speck of dust. Lord of 
generosity, open the doors of knowledge, augment the 
wealth of the world, and illuminate the honour of 
humanity. 


नदि त्वा रोद॑सी उभे ऋघायमांणपिन्व॑तः । 
जेषः स्वर्वतीरपः सं गा अस्मभ्यं धूनुहि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nahi tva rodasi ubhe rghayamanaminvatah. 
Jesah svarvatirapah sam ga asmabhyam dhunuhi. 


Lord omnipotent and infinite, transcending the 
expanse of space, the heaven and earth contain you not. 
Dominant over the holy waters of the universe, ruling 
over the noblest actions of humanity, liberate our mind, 
thought and speech, electrify our sense and will, and 
give us a shower of knowledge and wealth of life divine. 


आश्रुत्कर्ण श्रुधी हवं नू चिंदधिष्व मे गिर॑: । 
इन्द्र स्तोम॑मिमं ममं कृष्वा युजश्चिदन्त॑रम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Asrutkarna srudhi havam nu ciddadhisva me 
girah. Indra stomamimam mama krsva yujasci- 
dantaram. 


Lord of instant and universal ear, listen to my 
voice. Hold my prayer in your heart. Indra, it is the song 
of a dear friend. Take me in along with it, cleanse and 
sanctify my heart and soul. 


34 RGVEDA 


विदा हि त्वा वृष॑न्तपं वाजेषु हवनश्रुतम्‌ । 
वृष॑न्तमस्य हूमह ऊतिं संहस््रसात॑माम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vidma hi tva vrsantamam vajesu havanasrutam. 
Vrsantamasya humaha utim sahasrasatamam. 


Indra, lord of love and power, we know you as 
the most generous giver of the showers of blessings, 
instant listener to our call in the battles of life. We pray 
for the divine protection of the most generous guardian 
and giver of victory, best and highest of a thousand other 
modes of protection and redemption. 


आ तू न॑ इन्द्र कौशिक मन्दसानः सुतं पिब | 
नव्यमायुः प्रसू तिर कृधी संहस््रसामृषिंम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. A tana indra kausika mandasanah sutam piba. 
Navyamayuh pra su tira krdhi sahasrasamrsim. 


Indra, lord giver of infinite joy, universal teacher 
of humanity, come and taste the sweets of our divine 
celebrations. Create a new and higher life for us, and 
let a new seer and prophet of a thousand visions and 
sciences arise among us. 


परि त्वा गिर्वणो गिरं इमा भ॑वन्तु favad: । 
वृद्धायुमनु Feat जुष्टा भवन्तु जुष्ट॑यः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Pari tva girvano gira ima bhavantu visvatah. 
Vrddhayumanu vrddhayo justa bhavantu justa- 
yah. 


May all these holy songs of the divine singers 
from all sides celebrate you, sole object of the sacred 
voice of eternity. May all the songs of love and worship 
glorify the lord of eternal existence. May all these songs 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 11 35 


be acceptable to the Lord and delightful and elevating 
for us. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 11 
Indra Devata, Jeta Madhucchanda Rshi 


इन्द्रं विश्वां अवीवृधन्त्समुद्रव्य॑चसं गिर॑: | 
र॒थीत॑मं रथीनां वाजानां सत्प॑तिं पतिम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1; Indram visva avivrdhantsamudravyacasam girah. 
Rathitamam rathinam vajanam satpatim patim. 


May all the songs of divine love and worship 
celebrate and glorify Indra, lord infinite and glorious like 
the expansive oceans of space, highest redeemer, higher 
than all other saviours, sole true lord victorious of the 
battles of life between good and evil, ultimate protector 
and promoter of humanity and ruler of existence. 


सख्ये त॑ इन्द्र वाजिनो मा भैम शवसस्पते | 
त्वामभि प्र णोनुमो जेतारमपराजितम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Sakhye ta indra vajino ma bhema Ssavasaspate. 
Tvamabhi pra nonumo jetaramaparajitam. 


We are the friends of Indra, we are the fighters 
of life and humanity. Indra, lord of might, never shall 
we succumb to fear while we are under the cover of 
your protective friendship. We offer homage and 
worship to you, supreme victor, unbeaten since eternity. 


पूर्वीरिन्द्र॑स्य रातयो न वि cerca: । 
यदी वाज॑स्य गोम॑तः स्तोतृभ्यो मंह॑ते मघम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


Purvirindrasya ratayo na vi dasyantyutayah. 
Yadi vajasya gomatah stotrbhyo mamhate magham. 


36 RGVEDA 


The eternal gifts of Indra, lord magnificent, 
never fail, His favours and protections never fade, nor 
exhaust, because the munificence of the lord of earth 
and His bounties of wealth and honour always flow in 
abundance more and ever more for the devotees. 


पुरां furgdat कविरमितौजा अजायत | 
इन्द्रो विश्व॑स्य कर्मणो eat वज्री पुरुष्टुतः us 


4. Puram bhinduryuva kaviramitauja ajayata. 
Indro visvasya karmano dharta vajri purustutah. 


Breaker of the enemy forts, youthful, creative 
and imaginative, hero of boundless strength, sustainer 
of the acts of the world and disposer, wielder of the 
thunderbolt, universally acclaimed and celebrated is 
risen into prominence. 


त्वं वलस्य गोमतोऽपावरद्रिवो fae । 
त्वां देवा अविंभ्युषस्तुज्यमानास आविषुः ॥५॥ 

3, Tvam valasya gomato’pavaradrivo bilam. 
Tvam deva abibhyusastujyamanasa avisuh. 


Indra, blazing as the sun, wielder of the clouds, 
you break open the water-hold of the clouds. The devas, 
planets, seekers of the lord of light and centre-home, 
moved round in orbit, hold on to their place in the solar 
family. 

तवाहं शुर रातिभिः wate faretarads । 
उपातिष्ठन्त गिर्वणो विदुष्टे तस्य॑ कारवः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Tavaham Sura ratibhih pratyayam sindhumava- 
dan. Upatisthanta girvano viduste tasya karavah. 


Hero of generosity, drawn by your gifts of light 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 12 31 


and grace, I come to you as to the sea, singing songs of 
praise. Lord and lover of the voice of celebration, they, 
all your servants, know you and they abide by you in 
adoration. 

मायाभिरिन्द्र मायिनं त्वं शुष्णमवातिरः । 

विदुष्टे तस्य पेधिरास्तेषां श्रवांस्युत्तिर ॥ ७॥ 
4, Mayabhirindra mayinam tvam susnamavatirah. 

Viduste tasya medhirastesam Sravamsyuttira. 

Indra, lord of supernal powers, with your vision 

and extraordinary intelligence ward off the artful 
opponent and exploiter. Your friends and admirers know 
you. Listen to their voice and overthrow the enemies. 

इन्द्र मीशानमोजसाभि स्तोमां अनूषत । 

सहस्रं यस्य॑ रातय॑ उत वा सन्ति भूय॑सीः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Indramisanamojasabhi stoma anusata. 

Sahasram yasya rataya uta va santi bhuyasth. 

All the hymns of praise celebrate Indra, lord 
ruler over the universe with His power and splendour. 
Thousands, uncountable, are His gifts and benedictions, 
infinitely more indeed. 
Mandala 1/Sukta 12 
Agni Devata, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


sit दूतं quire होतारं विश्ववेदसम्‌ | 
अस्य UAE सुक्रतुम्‌ Ug 


1; Agnim dutam vrnimahe hotaram visvavedasam. 
Asya yajnasya sukratum. 


We choose Agni, the fire, as prime power of 


38 RGVEDA 


social yajna, which carries the fragrance of yajna 
universally across the earth, the sky and even to the 
heavens, and which is the chief creator of prosperity 
and maker of beautiful forms. 


staf हवीं मथः wel हवन्त विश्पतिम्‌ । 
हव्यवाहं पुरुप्रियम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

2 Agnimagnim havimabhih sada havanta vispatim. 
Havyavaham purupriyam. 


We choose Agni visible and invisible, and 
invoke it with faith and holy action, Agni which is the 
protector of the people, carrier of yajnic fragrance, and 
favourite of the wise. 


अगर dat इहा व॑ह जज्ञानो वृक्तबर्हिषे । 
असि होतां न ईड्य॑ः ॥ ३ ॥ 

3: Agne devam iha vaha jajnano vrktabarhise. 
Asi hota na idyah. 


Agni, omniscient and omnipresent power, bring 
us here the brilliant divine gifts of yajna for the pure at 
heart. You alone are the chief priest and performer of 
the yajna of creation. You alone are adorable. 


at उशतो वि बोधय यदग्रे यासि दूत्य॑म्‌। 
देवैरा स॑त्सि बर्हिषि ui ४ ॥ 
4. Tam uSato vi bodhaya yadagne yasi dutyam. 
Devaira satsi barhisi. 
Agni, purify and activate the libations lighted 


by the fire which you have carried to the skies, and bring 
them back home to the seat of yajna with gifts divine. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 12 39 


घृताहवन दीदिवः प्रतिं ष्प रिष॑तो दह । 
ञे त्वं tartar: ॥ ५॥ 


a Ghrtahavana didivah prati sma risato daha. 
Agne tvam raksasvinah. 


Agni, brilliant and resplendent, fed on ghee and 
blazing, burn up the jealous, the negative and the wicked 
who destroy. 


अग्निनाग्निः after कविर्गृहप॑ति्यवां। 
FAAS WANE: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Agninagnih samidhyate kavirgrhapatiryuva. 
Havyavad juhvasyah. 


Agni is lighted, generated and raised by agni, 
universal energy. It is the creator of new things, protector 
and promoter of the home, and ever young—powerful 
catalytic agent carrying holy materials to the sky and to 
the heavens across space, and a voracious consumer 
(and creator) with its mouth ever open to devour (and 
convert) holy offerings (to divine gifts of joy and 
prosperity). 


कविमयिमुपं स्तुहि सत्यधर्माणमध्वरे | 
देवम॑मीवचात॑नम्‌॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Kavimagnimupa stuhi satyadharmanamadhvare. 
Devamamivacatanam. 


In the holy acts of yajna, light, serve and adore 
Agni, brilliant creator of new things of beauty, prosperity 
and joy, illuminator and observer of the eternal laws, 
generous giver, and destroyer of evil and disease. 


40 RGVEDA 


यस्त्वाम॑ग्ने हविष्प॑तिर्दूतं दैव सपर्यति | 
तस्य॑ स्म प्राविता भ॑व।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yastvamagne havispatirdutam deva saparyati. 
Tasya sma pravita bhava. 


Lord omniscient and resplendent, protector and 
harbinger of the holy gifts and blessings of life, 
whosoever be the yajnapati of service with holy offering 
unto you, save, protect and promote. 


यो sft देववीतये हविष्य snfearata 
तस्मै पावक FST ९॥ 

9. Yo agnim devavitaye havismam avivasati. 
Tasmai pavaka mrlaya. 


Whosoever offers yajna with holy materials in 
honour and service to Agni for the gifts of the divine, to 
him, brilliant power, be kind and gracious with blessings. 


स न॑: पावक dfeatsa देवां इहा व॑ह। 
उप॑ यज्ञं हविश्च नः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Sanah pavaka didivo’gne devam iha vaha. 
Upa yajnam havisca nah. 


That holy purifying brilliant power and presence 
may, we pray, bring us the finest gifts of divinity and 
humanity, and endow our yajna with holy riches and 
offerings for the fire. 


स नः स्तवान आ भ॑र गाय॒त्रेण नवींयसा। 
रयिं वीरव॑तीमिष॑म्‌॥ 22 u 


11. Sanah stavana a bhara gayatrena naviyasa. 
Rayim viravatimisam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 13 41 


May Agni, omnipresent and self-refulgent Lord, 
adored again and ever again with Gayatri hymns and 
new versions of prayer, bless us with wealth, food and 
energy and heroic progeny. 


अग्रै शुक्रेण॑ शोचिषा विश्वांभिर्देवर्हूतिभिः। 
इमं स्तोमं जुषस्व नः ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Agne Sukrena Socisa visvabhirdevahutibhih. 
Imam stomam jusasva nah. 
Agni, self-refulgent Lord, be gracious to accept 
this adoration of ours with the pure and purifying radiance 


of yours, this prayer and service offered with all our 
sincere invocations to the generous powers of divinity. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 13 
Agni and others Devata, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


सुस॑मिद्धो न आ de ear अग्रे हविष्मते । 
होत॑ः पावक यधि च।॥ ९॥ 
i Susamiddho na a vaha devam agne havismate. 
Hotah pavaka yaksi ca. 
Agni, invoked, lighted and blazing refulgent, 
creator and chief agent of cosmic yajna, universal 
purifier, bring the divine gifts for us and for the yajamana 


offering holy materials to the fire, and carry on the yajna 
for ever. 


मधुमन्तं तनूनपाद्‌ यज्ञं ae न: Ha 
अद्या कुणुहि वीतये i २॥ 


2. Madhumantam tanunapdd yajnam devesu nah 
kave. Adya krnuhi vitaye. 


42 RGVEDA 


Agni, self-refulgent omniscience, lord self- 
existent and preserver of the body, poetic power of 
creation and illumination, let the yajna rise to the heights 
of joy among the divinities of nature and bring the 
honey-sweets of bliss to the dedicated people of 
brilliance among us. 


dhe प्रियमस्मिन्‌ यज्ञ उप॑ हये । 
velit हविष्कृत॑म्‌॥ ३ ॥ 

a, Narasamsamiha priyamasmin yajna upa hvaye. 
Madhujihvam haviskrtam. 
I invoke Agni, universally adorable lord of light 
and life, in my heart, and kindle the fire in this dear 
auspicious yajna with offerings of holy materials to be 
tasted and consumed by the honey flames of fire for the 
good of the people. 
at Gada रथे cat ईव्ठित आ वंह। 
असि होता मनुर्हितः ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Agne sukhatame rathe devan ilita a vaha. 
Asi hota manurhitah. 


Agni, invoked, lighted and honoured by all, you 
are the lord and agent of yajna for the benefit of 
humanity. Come and bring the best powers and divinities 
of nature in the most comfortable chariot. 
स्तृणीत बर्हिरानुषग FATS मनीषिणः | 
यत्रामृत॑स्य चक्ष॑णम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

= Strnita barhiranusag ghrtaprstham manisinah. 
Yatramrtasya caksanam. 


Men of science and wisdom, cover the sacred 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 13 43 


grass of yajna sprinkled with holy water, reach the skies 
pregnant with the waters of space, and there you will 
have a vision of nectar. 


वि श्रयन्तामृतावृधो ert देवीरसश्चतः । 
अद्या नूनं च यष्ट॑वे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vi Srayantamrtavrdho dvaro devirasascatah. 
Adya nunam ca yastave. 


Scholars of science, servants of eternal truth who 
extend the bounds of knowledge, open the holy doors 
of inexhaustible light, the yajna must be performed to- 
day. 


नक्तोषासां सुपेश॑साऽस्मिन्‌ यज्ञ उप॑ हये I 
इदं नो! बर्हिरासदे ।॥। ७॥ 


cr Naktosasa supesasa’smin yajna upa hvaye. 
Idam no barhirasade. 


I invoke the glorious dawn and the deep- 
soothing night, both beautiful and elevating, and invite 
them to come and grace this holy seat of yajna. 


ता afar sa ह्ये होतारा दैव्या कवी । 
यज्ञं नों यक्षतापिमम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ta sujihva upa hvaye hotara daivya kavi. 
Yajnam no yaksatamimam. 


I invoke and kindle two divine and visionary 
priestly powers of yajna, fire visible and invisible, 
energy physical and grace divine, both of beautiful 
flames of light, so that they accomplish this socio- 
scientific yajna of ours. 


44 RGVEDA 


sar सर॑स्वती मही तिस्त्रो देवीर्मयोभुवंः। 
बर्हिः सीदन्त्वस्रिधः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Ila sarasvati mahi tisro devirmayobhuvah. 
Barhih sidantvasridhah. 


I invoke three divine graces, brilliant and 
blissful, Hla, eternal speech of divine omniscience, 
Sarasvati, universal speech of divine revelation, and 
Mahi, realised speech of earthly communication. May 
the three come and sanctify the holy seats of our yajna 
here and now without delay, without fail. 


इह त्वष्टारमग्रियं विर्वरूपमुप॑ हये । 
अस्माकमस्तु HAG: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. 1/८ tvastaramagriyam visvarupamupa hvaye. 
Asmakamastu kevalah. 


Here to this house of yajna, from the core of my 
heart, I invoke and invite Tvashta, first pioneer of all, 
omnipresent lord of cosmic dynamics and maker of 
beautiful forms of existence. May He be the sole object 
of our worship. 


अव॑ सृजा वनस्पते देवं देवेभ्यो हविः | 
प्र दातुरस्तु चेत॑नम्‌ LM 


11. Ava srja vanaspate deva devebhyo havih. 
Pra daturastu cetanam. 


Vanaspati, generous lord of love, light and 
beauty, nature and the forests, create, produce and 
provide the food for the divinities of yajna. And may 
that creation, production and provision initiate extension 
of the study, knowledge and awareness of the generous 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 14 45 
yajnics who offer the libations. 


स्वाहां यज्ञं कुणोतनेन्द्रांय यज्व॑नो Te | 
तत्र car उप॑ हये ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Svaha yajnam krnotanendraya yajvano grhe. 
Tatra devan upa hvaye. 

In the house of the devotee of yajna where the 
scholars and artists perform yajna and offer libations of 
creation in truth of word and deed with the divine voice, 
I invoke and invite brilliant and dedicated scholars for 
the performance and the extension of power and glory 
for Indra on earth. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 14 
Vishvedeva Devata, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


एेभिरग्रे दुवो गिरो faves: सोम॑पीतये । 
देवेभिर्याहि afat च ॥ ९॥ 

tl. Aibhiragne duvo giro visvebhih somapitaye. 
Devebhiryahi yaksi ca. 


Agni, lord of light and life, listen to our words 
of reverence and prayer, come with all these generous 
powers and gifts of nature for the protection and 
promotion of the soma-joy of our yajna, and inspire us 
to carry on with the performance. 


आ त्वा HUA अहूषत गृणन्ति विप्र ते धिय॑ः। 
देवेभिरग्न आ af २॥ 


2. A tva kanva ahusata grnanti vipra te dhiyah. 
Devebhiragna a gahi. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, the wise and 


46 RGVEDA 


intelligent invoke you. Power of vision and inspiration, 
they sing and celebrate your will and omniscience. Come 
lord, we pray, with the gifts of the universal powers of 
generosity. 


इन्द्रवायू ब॒ हस्पतिं front पूषणं ai 
आदित्यान्‌ मारुतं गणम्‌ 3 ॥ 

Sf Indravayu brhaspatim mitragnim pusanam 
bhagam. Adityan marutam ganam. 

Scholars of science and men of wisdom, study 
and celebrate the nature and powers of Indra, universal 
energy, Vayu, air, Brhaspati, nourishing and protective 
light of the sun, Mitra, pranic energy, Agni, heat and 
light, Pushan, moonlight, Bhaga, socio-economic power 


and prosperity, Adityas, zodiacs of the sun vis-a-vis the 
earth and other planets, and Maruts, the currents of wind. 


प्र al fara इन्द॑वो मत्सरा मांदयिष्णवंः। 
दरप्सा मध्वश्चमूषदः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Pra vo bhriyanta indavo matsara madayisnavah. 
Drapsa madhvascamusadah. 


All of you maintain these assets, soothing, 
inspiring, exhilarating, energising, honey-sweet and 
highly strengthening of growth and protection. 
sad Maa: Hvala वृक्तबर्हिषः | 
Badan अर ङ्कृत॑ः ॥ ५५ ॥ 

Ilate tvamavasyavah kanvaso vrktabarhisah. 
Havismanto arankrtah. 


The intelligent and the wise, pure at heart and 
ready for yajna, endowed with holy-materials, cultural 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 14 47 


and graceful, keen to have divine protection, adore and 
glorify you, Lord Supreme. 


घृतपुं्ठा मनोयुजो ये त्वा वहन्ति Aaw: | 
आ देवान्त्सोम॑पीतये ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ghrtaprstha manoyujo ye tva vahanti vahnayah. 
A devantsomapitaye. 


Holy yajna, the flames of fire laden with waters 
and currents of energy rise from the vedi and carry your 
purpose to the skies and space. They are friends of the 
wind to be raised and used by the intelligent and the 
wise. They invoke the divine powers of nature and bring 
their blessings to the desire of humanity for protection 
and progress of joy and prosperity. 
तान्‌ यज॑त्रा ऋतावृधोऽग्ने पल्लीं वतस्कृधि। 
मध्व॑ः सुजिह पायय ॥ ७ ॥ 

ह Tan yajatran rtavrdho’gne patnivataskrdhi. 
Madhvah sujihva payaya. 

Agni, lord of yajna with the flaming fire and 
power, advance the scholars of yajna who extend the 
bounds of truth and knowledge, give them a protective 
home of comfort, and give us all a honey taste of life. 

ये asar य ईड्यास्ते ते पिबन्तु जिह्वया । 
मधोरगे वष॑ट्कृति ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Ye yajatra ya idyaste te pibantu jihvaya. 
Madhoragne vasatkrti. 
Those who conduct the yajna, those who are 


worthy of reverence and adoration, they taste the honey- 
sweets of yajna with flames of fire. 


48 RGVEDA 
stent सूर्यस्य रोचनाद्‌ विश्वान्‌ ear Safe: | 
विप्रो होतेह dafa neu 


9. Akim suryasya rocanad visvan devan usarbu- 
dhah. Vipro hoteha vaksati. 


When the sun is on the rise and nature wakes 
up with the dawn, the holy man of yajna who offers 
libations into the fire receives all the blessings of 
divinities from the light of the sun there and then (and 
communes with nature). 


विश्वेभिः सोम्यं मध्वऽग्र इन्द्रेण art | 
पिला पित्रस्य धाम॑भिः॥ ९०॥ 

10. Visvebhih somyam madhva’ gna indrena vayuna. 
Piba mitrasya dhamabhih. 


The Holy fire of yajna alongwith the wind and 
currents of energy collects the soothing sweets of vitality 
from all the quarters of universal prana and the light of 
the sun for the benefit of humanity. 


त्वं होता पनुर्हितोऽगरे यज्ञेषु सीदसि । 
सेमं नो अध्वरं य॑ज।॥ ९९॥ 

11. 3 Tvam hota manurhito’gne yajnesu sidasi. 
Semam no adhvaram yaja. 


Universal fire, lover and sustainer of humanity, 
you are the prime agent of the cosmic dynamics of life, 
and you preside over all the yajnas of nature and mankind. 
Pray grace this yajna of ours and help it rise to success. 


युक्ष्वा ह्यरुषी wal हरितो देव Thad: । 
ताभिरर्दवों इहा व॑ह ।॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 15 49 


12. Yuksva hyarusi rathe harito deva rohitah. 
Tabhirdevan tha vaha. 

General power of brilliance, fire of yajna, 
brilliant scholar of the science and power of heat and 
energy, yoke the blazing red flames of fire like horses 
to the chariot, and with the currents of energy bring the 
noble divinities of power here. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 15 
Rtavah, Indra, Marutah, Tvashta, Agni, Indra, Mitra- 
Varuna, Dravinoda, Ashvinau, Agni, Devatah, 
Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


इन्द्र सोमं पिब॑ ऋतुनाऽऽ त्वां विशस्त्विन्द॑वः। 
मत्सरासस्तदोकसः ॥ ९॥ 


i. Indra somam piba rtuna’’ tva visantvindavah. 
Matsarasastadokasah. 


Indra, power divine blazing in the sun, drink up 
the soma juices of nature according to the seasons, and 
let these essences, inspiring and exhilarating, abide 
there, their home, according to the seasons. 


मरुतः पिब॑त ऋतुना पोत्राद्‌ यज्ञं पुनीतन । 
यूयं हि छा सुदानवः ॥ २॥ 


2. Marutah pibata rtuna potrad yajnam punitana. 
Yuyam hi stha sudanavah. 


Maruts, pure and purifying powers of the winds, 
drink the sap of nature according to the seasons, purify 
the yajna of nature according to the seasons by your 
powers of purity. Stay you all in your element, noble 
generous givers. 


50 RGVEDA 


अभि यज्ञं गणीहि नो ग्रावो नेष्टः पिब॑ ऋतुना । 
त्वं हि teen असिं ।॥। ३॥ 

Abhi yajnam grnihi no gnavo nestah piba rtuna. 
Tvam hi ratnadha asi. 
Electricity, purifier of everything, generous 
giver of things, receive and appraise the fragrance of 
our yajna, drink the sweets of it according to the seasons 
and give us the jewels, treasure of jewels as you are. 
अगं eat इहा व॑ह सादया योनिषु तरिषु । 
परिं भूष पिब॑ ऋतुना ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Agne devam iha vaha sadaya yonisu trisu. 
Pari bhusa piba rtuna. 


Agni, universal energy of fire, bring here the 
divine powers of nature, convert and fix them in three 
orders at three levels, physical, mental and spiritual. 
Beautify, beatify and sanctify, and drink the fragrance 
according to the seasons. 


ब्राह्मणादिन्द्र राध॑सः fra सोम॑मृरतूरनु। 
तवेद्धि सख्यमस्तुतम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 

3: Brahmanadindra radhasah piba somamrtumranu. 
Taveddhi sakhyamastrtam. 


Indra, pranic energy of air, according to the seasons 
drink the soma juices of nature from the earthly treasuries 
created by the Supreme Lord of the universe. The vital 
relation of life with you is universal and inviolable. 


युवं cat धृतव्रत मित्रावरुण gor | 
ऋतुना यज्ञमाशाथे ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 15 51 


6. Yuvam daksam dhrtavrata mitravaruna 
diulabham. Rtund yajnamasathe. 


Mitra and Varuna, vital energies of prana and 
udana, both versatile, formidable and committed to life, 
pervade and endow yajna with power and vitality 
according to the seasons. 


द्रविणोदा द्रविणसो ग्राव॑हस्तासो अध्वरे | 
यज्ञेषुं देवमींव्ठते ।॥ ७॥ 


a Dravinoda dravinaso gravahastaso adhvare. 
Yajnesu devamilate. 


Priests of yajna, keen to have the wealth of life 
and spirit and soma, and holding the stone-press in hand 
for the purpose in the yajna of love and non-violence, 
worship the generous lord giver of wealth with hymns 
of praise in yajnas of piety, science and technology. 


द्रविणोदा द॑दातु नो ag यानि शुण्विरे। 
देवेषु ता व॑नामहे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Dravinoda dadatu no vasuni yani Srnvire. 
Devesu ta vanamahe. 

May the lord creator and giver of wealth bless 
us with treasures of wealth which we have heard of, 
which we love, and which abound in the generous stores 
of nature, in yajna, and in the products of science and 
technology. 


द्रविणोदाः पिपीषति जुहोत प्र च॑ तिष्ठत | 
नेष््रादृतुभिरिष्यत ॥ ९ ॥ 


a. Dravinodah pipisati juhota pra ca tisthata. 
Nestradrtubhirisyata. 


52 RGVEDA 


The generous devotee of yajna thirsts for a drink 
of soma, the wealth and joy of life. Listen ye all, perform 
the yajna and be steadfast therein. Know the art and 
secrets of yajna and create wealth from yajnic studies 
of natural energy such as electricity, in accordance with 
the seasons. 


यत्त्वां तुरीयंमृतुभिर्द्रविंणोदौो यजामहे | 
अधं स्मा नो ददिर्भव i ९०॥ 


10. = Yattva turtyamrtubhirdravinodo yajamahe. 
Adha sma no dadirbhava. 


Lord creator and giver of the wealth of the 
universe, we worship you, lord transcendent of the 
fourth estate of spirit and existence, in yajna in tune 
with the seasons of nature. Your devotees as we are, 
bless us with the gift of wealth and joy which is on top 
of heaven beyond paradise. 


अश्विना पिब॑तं मधु दीद्य॑मरी शुचिव्रता | 
ऋतुना यज्ञवाहसा ॥ ९९ ॥ 

11. Asvina pibatam madhu didyagni Sucivrata. 
Rtuna yajnavahasa. 


Ashvins, twin powers of sun and moon, earth 
and heaven, night and day, vested with light and fire, 
committed to purification, carriers of the fragrance of 
yajna, create and receive the honey-sweets of yajna 
according to the seasons. 


गार्हपत्येन सन्त्य aT यज्ञनीर॑सि। 
देवान्‌ देवयते AAU ९२॥ 


12. Garhapatyena santya rtuna yajnanirasi. 
Devan devayate yaja. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 16 53 


Agni, as bountiful master-power of home life, 
you are the leader of yajna according to the seasons. 
Carry on the yajna of the divine powers for the yajamana 
dedicated to holy development of power and energy in 
honour of the Divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 16 
Indra Devata, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


आ त्वां वहन्तु Rat वृष॑णं सोम॑पीतये । 
इन्द्रं त्वा सूर॑चक्षसः ॥ ९॥ 


is A tva vahantu harayo vrsanam somapitaye. 
Indra tva suracaksasah. 


Indra, light and power blazing as the sun, may 
the rays of light, brightest and fastest waves of energy, 
transmit your power, generous harbinger of light and 
rain, to the earth for a drink of soma as well as the 
protection of the joyous gifts of life. May the specialist 
scholars of light and solar energy develop the light and 
energy for the protection and prosperity of humanity 
and the environment. 


इमा धाना घुंतस्त्ुवो हरीं seta aera: | 
इन्द्र सुखत॑मे THU २॥ 


2, Ima dhana ghrtasnuvo hart ihopa vaksatah. 
Indram sukhatame rathe. 


These rays of light, laden with waters and 
fertility, day and night, in the dark and bright fortnight 
of the moon, and in the equinoctial and solstitial courses 
of the sun, bring Indra, solar energy, in the most 
comfortable chariot to the earth and her environment. 


54 RGVEDA 
इन्द्र प्रातर्हवामह इन्द्रं प्रयत्यध्वरे । इन्द्रं सोम॑स्य पीतये 13 


६ Indram pratarhavamaha indram prayatyadhvare. 
Indram somasya pitaye. 


Every morning, in every yajnic programme of 
body, mind and soul, we invoke, awake and develop 
Indra, lord omnipotent of light and honour, Indra, solar 
and electric energy, and Indra, energy of wind and prana 
for the protection, promotion and enjoyment of soma, 
spiritual bliss, pleasure and joy, and power and 
prosperity. 


sa नः सुतमा ग॑हि हरिभिरिन्द्र केशिभिः 1 
सुते हि त्वा हवामहे ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Upa nah sutama gahi haribhirindra kesibhih. 
Sute hi tva havamahe. 


Indra, lord of light and honour, universal energy, 
come to our yajna with the sun, wind and electricity, 
with the rays of light and currents of energy. In all our 
yajnic programmes we feel the joy of your presence and 
offer worship, pray awake and promote your power and 
purpose on earth. 


सेमं नः स्तोममा गद्यु पेदं सव॑नं सुतम्‌। 
गौरो न तुषितः पिब ॥ ५॥ 


Semam nah stomama gahyupedam savanam 
sutam. Gauro na trsitah piba. 


May Indra, rays of the sun and currents of 
energy, come to this celebration and yajna of ours and 
drink of the sweets of this creative programme of ours 
as a thirsty golden stag drinks of the water of a stream. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 16 55 


इमे ana इन्द॑वः सुतासो अधिं बर्हिषि । 
at इन्द्र सह॑से पिब ।॥ ६ ॥ 


Di Ime somasa indavah sutaso adhi barhisi. 
Tan indra sahase piba. 


Indra, lord of sun and wind, these streams of 
soma are distilled on the holy seats of grass around the 
vedi, and their sweets and fragrance rise into the skies. 
These, O Lord, protect, promote and accept for the sake 
of strength and courage of constancy for the devotees. 


अयं ते etal अग्रियो ह॑दिस्पृग॑स्तु शन्त॑मः। 
अथा सोमं सुतं पिंब ॥ ७॥ 


7. Ayam te stomo agriyo hrdisprgastu santamah. 
Atha somam sutam piba. 


Indra, this song of celebration and yajna in your 
honour, first and foremost programme of creativity, may 
be, we pray, a pleasure to the heart and a source of peace 
and solace. And now, therefore, protect and promote 
the soma distilled, and drink of it freely with the gift of 
grace. 


विश्वमित्सवनं सुतमिन्द्रो मदाय गच्छति | 
वृत्रहा सोम॑पीतये ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Visvamitsavanam sutamindro madaya gacchati. 
Vrtraha somapitaye. 


Indra, lord of creative energy that breaks up the 
clouds of darkness and releases the locked up rain for 
growth, moves to the universal yajna of evolution for 
the pleasure of created humanity, and for the protection, 
promotion and enjoyment of the beauties of His own 


56 RGVEDA 
creation. 


सेमं नः काममा dor गोभिरश्वैः शतक्रतो । 
स्तवांम त्वा स्वाध्यः ॥ ९॥ 
9. Semam nah kamama prna gobhirasvaih Ssata- 
krato. Stavama tva svadhyah. 
Indra, Lord of infinite acts of creative yajna and 
joyous fulfilment, fulfil our noble desires and ambitions 
with cows and horses, health of mind and senses and 


the fastest modes of motion and attainment. Pious, 
thoughtful and meditative, we worship you alone. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 17 
Indra, Varuna Devata, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 
इन्द्रावरुणयोरहं सम्राजोरव आ Ur 
ता at मृव्ठात Fast ९॥ 
il, Indravarunayoraham samrajorava व vrne. 
Ta no mrlata tdrse. 


I pray for the gifts and protection of the glorious 
and brilliant Indra and Varuna, sun and moon. May they 
be good and gracious to bless us with a similar state of 
brilliance in our life. 


गन्तारा हि स्थोऽव॑से हवं विप्र॑स्य area: | 
धतरा चर्षणीनाम्‌ २॥ 

2 Gantara hi stho’vase havam viprasya mavatah. 
Dhartara carsaninam. 


I pray to Indra and Varuna, lords of fire and 
water, both sustainers of mankind, to listen to the prayer 
of devotees like me, come to our yajnic projects of life 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 17 57 
and abide by us for our protection and progress. 


अनुकामं त॑र्पयेथामिन्द्रांवरुण राय आ। 
ता वां नेदिष्ठमीमहे ॥ ३ ॥ 

3 Anukamam tarpayethamindravaruna raya a. 
Ta vam nedisthamimahe. 


Both Indra and Varuna, we pray, stay closest 
with us and bless us with the wealth of life according to 
our desire, intention and performance. 


युवाकु हि wrest युवाकु सुमतीनाम्‌ | 
भूयाम वाजदान्ना॑म्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 

4. Yuvaku hi Sacinam yuvaku sumatinam. 
Bhuyama vajadavnam. 


And it is our prayer and earnest desire that we 
be ever close and abide by the words of the sages, advice 
of the wise and gifts of the generous. 


इन्द्र॑ः सहस््रदान्नां वरुणः शंस्यानाम्‌ । 
क्रतुर्भवत्युक्थ्यं : ॥। ५५ ॥ 
9, Indrah sahasradavnam varunah samsyanam. 


Kraturbhavatyukthyah. 


Indra (fire, sun and electric energy) is one of 
the givers of a thousand gifts. Varuna (water, air and 
moon) is one of the adorable celebrities. May our yajnic 
projects of science and technology be successful and 
worthy of praise. 


aaRedar वयं खनेम नि च॑ धीमहि। 
स्यादुत प्ररेच॑नम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


58 RGVEDA 


6. Tayoridavasa vayam sanema ni ca dhimahi. 
Syaduta prarecanam. 


By the gifts and protection of these two, Indra 
and Varuna, may we succeed and prosper with treasures 
of wealth and fulfilment, and may we ever enjoy an 
economy of abundance and excellence. 
इन्द्रावरुण वामहं ga चित्राय राध॑से | 
अस्मान्त्सु जिग्युषस्कृतम्‌ ७ ॥ 

Te Indravaruna vamaham huve citraya radhase. 
Asmantsu jigyusaskrtam. 


We invoke and adore Indra and Varuna, and we 
enact yajnic projects to develop solar, fire, air and water 
energy for the realisation of various and wondrous 
attainments of progress. May the two divinities grant 
us success in our desire and ambition for victory. 
इन्द्रावरुण नू नु वां सिषासन्तीषु धीष्वा | 
अस्मभ्यं शर्म यच्छतम्‌ ८ ॥ 

8. Indravaruna nit nu vam sisasantisu dhisva. 
Asmabhyam sarma yacchatam. 


May Indra and Varuna, we pray, establish us in 
the state of noble mind and action and bless us with 
peace, comfort and security. 


प्र वामश्नोतु सुष्टुतिरिन्द्रा॑वरुणा यां हुवे। 
यामृधाथे सधस्तुतिम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Pra vamasnotu sustutirindravaruna yam huve. 
Yamrdhathe sadhastutim. 


Indra and Varuna, self-refulgent in the sun and 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 18 59 


moon, and lords of nature and energy, may the holy song 
of praise which I sing, and the joint yajna of science 
and technology you both advance and bless, may that 
song and yajna come out successful and reach you as a 
mark of thanks and hope for grace. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 18 


Brahmanaspati, Brahmanaspati-Indra-Soma, Brhaspati- 
Dakshina, Sadasaspati, Sadasaspati-Narashansa 
Devatah, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


सोमानं स्वर॑णं कृणुहि ब्रह्मणस्पते। 
कश्चीवंन्तं य ओंशिजः॥ ९॥ 


ll. Somanam svaranam krnuhi brahmanaspate. 
Kaksivantam ya auSijah. 


Brahmanaspati, brilliant lord of Vedic 
knowledge, zealous for learning I am, born of learned 
parents, kindly take me up as a disciple, train me as an 
expert of soma-yajna, a scholar of language and 
communication with a vision of the Word and meaning, 
and as an artist and craftsman of eminence. 


यो रेवान्‌ यो अमीवहा व॑सुवित्‌ पुंष्टिवर्धनः। 
स न॑: सिषक्तु यस्तुरः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Yo revan yo amivaha vasuvit pustivardhanah. 
Sa nah sisaktu yasturah. 


The Lord Supreme that is lord of universal 
wealth and knowledge, destroyer of evil and disease, 
absolute master of the Vasus, prime cause of creation 
and evolution, power of instant action and beneficence, 
may He, we pray, bless us with the knowledge and 


60 RGVEDA 
wealth of the world. 


मानः शंसो अर॑रुषो धूर्तिः wore मर्त्यस्य | 
रक्षां णो ब्रह्मणस्पते ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Manah samso araruso dhurtih pranan martyasya. 
Raksa no brahmanaspate. 


Lord omniscient of the universe, may our 
honour and fame never die. Save us from the miser and 
the graceless man. Let there be no wickedness in or 
around us, no violence anywhere. 


स घां वीरो न रिष्यति यमिन्द्रो ब्रह्मणस्पतिः 1 
सोमो हिनोति मर्त्यभ्‌॥ i 


4. Sa gha viro na risyati yamindro brahmanaspatih. 
Somo hinoti martyam. 


Surely that brave man never suffers any hurt or 
injury whom Indra, lord giver of honour, Brahmanaspati, 
lord omniscient of the universe, and Soma, lord of peace, 
beauty and joy initiate and call on the way to action and 
honour. 


त्वं तं ब्रह्मणस्पते सोम इन्द्रश्च मर्त्यम्‌ । 
दश्िंणा पात्वंहसः ॥ ५॥ 


2: Tvam tam brahmanaspate soma indrasca 
martyam. Daksina patvamhasah. 


Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient of the universe, 
you, Soma, lord of herbs and health, Indra, lord of wind 
and energy, and Dakshina, yajnic generosity, save and 
protect that heroic man from sin who is on way to action 
and piety on call of the divine. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 18 61 


सद॑सस्पतिमद्धंतं प्रियमिन्द्रस्य काम्य॑म्‌ । 
सनिं मेधामयासिषम्‌ ६ ॥ 


6. Sadasaspatimadbhutam priyamindrasya kamyam. 
Sanim medhamayasisam. 


May I realise, I pray, and attain to the direct 
presence of the Lord of the Universe, wondrous darling 
love of the soul, with gifts of the divine and 
discriminative vision of meditative intelligence. 


यस्मांदूते न सिध्य॑ति यज्ञो विपश्चितश्चन | 
स धीनां योग॑मिन्वति ।॥ ७॥ 


Ts Yasmadrte na sidhyati yajno vipascitascana. 
Sa dhinam yogaminvati. 


The Lord omniscient and omnipresent is the One 
without whom no yajna, not even the yajna of creation, 
can be accomplished, and He manifests His presence 
directly in the meditative intelligence of the dedicated 
soul. 


आदुध्नोति हविष्कृतिं प्राञ्चं कृणोत्यध्वरम्‌। 
होत्रां देवेषु गच्छति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Adrdhnoti haviskrtim praicam krnotyadhvaram. 
Hotra devesu gacchati. 


Sadasaspati, lord of the universe, then, 
accelerates the offer of holy materials of nature into the 
creative process and expands the holy yajna further with 
self-generative libations till it reaches the noble 
humanity and the divine presence emerges in the 
meditative intelligence. 


62 RGVEDA 
नराशंसं सुधृष्टममपश्यं सप्रथ॑स्तमम्‌। 
दिवो न सद्य॑मर्रसम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Narasamsam sudhrstamamapasyam sapratha- 
stamam. Divo na sadmamakhasam. 


I see like the light of the sun the holy presence 
of Divinity, adored of humanity, most resolute wielder 
of the universe, of infinite expanse and prime yajamana 
as well as the home of the yajna of creation. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 19 
Agni Marutah Devatah, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


प्रति त्यं चारुमध्वरं गोपीथाय प्र हूयसे । 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ गंहि।॥ ९॥ 


1. Prati tyam carumadhvaram gopithaya pra 
huyase. Marudbhiragna ठ gahi. 


Agni, fire energy of nature, come with the winds, 
you are invoked and kindled for the preservation and 
promotion of the beautiful holy yajna (of the earth for 
her children). 


नहि देवो न मर्त्यो महस्तव क्रतुं परः। 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ fn २॥ 


2. Nahi devo na martyo mahastava kratum parah. 
Marudbhiragna a gahi. 


Lord self-refulgent and omniscient, come with 
pranic energy and manifest into the meditative 
intelligence. Neither human nor divine can comprehend 
your refulgence and glory or your action which is 
supreme. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 19 63 


ये पहो रज॑सो विदुर्विश्वे देवासो! arse: । 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ गंहि।॥ ३॥ 
a. Ye maho rajaso vidurvisve devaso adruhah. 


Marudbhiragna a gahi. 


Those who are visionaries of the world inspired 
by Agni and free from jealousy and malignity, only they 
know the great worlds of the Lord’s creation. Agni, light 
of Divinity, come with the vibrations of pranic energy 
in meditation. 
य उग्रा अक॑मांनुचुरनांधृष्टास ओजसा । 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ गंहि।॥ ४॥ 

4. Ya ugra arkamanrcuranadhrstasa ojasa. 
Marudbhiragna ठ gahi. 
Light and fire, Agni, come with the winds and 
waves of energy, Maruts which are awful and undaunted, 
and which blaze and light up the sun with splendour. 
ये शुभ्रा घोरवर्पसः सुक्षत्रासो रिशाद॑सः। 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ गंहि।॥ ५॥ 

a, Ye Subhra ghoravarpasah suksatraso risadasah. 
Marudbhiragna a gahi. 


Those are the winds blessed and beautiful, awful 
and catalytic, dominating rulers of nature’s metabolism, 
destroyers of evil and disease. Agni, come with the winds. 


ये नाकस्याधि रोचने दिवि देवास आसंते। 
मरुद्धिरय्र आ wes ॥ 


6. Ye nakasyadhi rocane divi devasa asate. 
Marudbhiragna a gahi. 


64 RGVEDA 


The brilliant powers are Maruts which abide and 
preside over the regions of bliss in the light of the solar 
region, and which hold, sustain and light the earth, moon 
and others. Agni, come with those divine Maruts of light 
and power. Agni, come and bless. 


य ईङ्खयन्ति पर्वतान्‌ तिरः संमुद्रम॑र्णवम्‌। 
Tete आ गंहि।॥। ७॥ 

Ye inkhayanti parvatan tirah samudramarnavam. 
Marudbhiragna a gahi. 


The winds which scatter the clouds and shatter 
the mountains, agitate the seas and shake the oceans of 
space, with those winds, Agni, come to us and bless. 


आ ये dated रश्मिभिस्तिरः संमुद्रमोजंसा | 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ गंहि।॥ ८ ॥ 
8. A ye tanvanti rasmibhistirah samudramojasa. 
Marudbhiragna a gahi. 
The winds which, with their power, churn the 
seas, and with their waves of splendour light the sun 


and expand the space, with those winds, Agni, come 
and bless. 


अभि cat पूर्वपीतये सृजामि सोम्यं मधुं । 
मरुद्धिरग्र आ fue nu 

9. Abhi tva purvapitaye srjami somyam madhu. 
Marudbhiragna a gahi. 


I create and concentrate from all sides the honey 
sweets of life with yajna for you as your first and only 
drink of ecstasy. Come, Agni, with all the power and 
splendour of the winds and bless us one and all. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 20 65 


Mandala 1/Sukta 20 
Rbhavah Devatah, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


अयं देवाय जन्म॑ने स्तोमो facie | 
अकारि रत्नधातमः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ayam devaya janmane 5101110 viprebhirasaya. 
Akari ratnadhatamah. 


This song of celebrity full of divine treasure of 
joy sung by sagely poets in their own voice leads to a 
new birth full of divine happiness. 


य इन्द्राय वचोयुजा caesar हरीं । 
शमीभिर्यज्ञमाशत ॥ २॥ 


De Ya indraya vacoyuja tataksurmanasa hari. 
Samibhiryajiiamdsata. 

Those sagely scholars who study and analyse 
the subtleties of motion and gravitation with their mind 
and speech, and with scientific apparatuses actualise 
the power for use, in fact, extend the creative yajna for 
God and humanity toward its fulfilment. 


तक्चन्नासंत्याभ्यां परिज्मानं सुखं रथ॑म्‌। 
तक्षन्धेनुं GACT ३॥ 


3 Taksannasatyabhyam parijmanam sukham 
ratham. Taksandhenum sabardugham. 


Those scholars and scientists who create a 
comfortable chariot of universal motion with fire and 
water power create a language of immense possibilities 
of knowledge, indeed a mother cow for universal 
prosperity. 


66 RGVEDA 


युवाना पितरा पुन॑ः सत्यमन्त्रा ऋजूयवः | 
ऋभवो fasted ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yuvana pitara punah satyamantra rjuyavah. 
Rbhavo vistyakrata. 


Sagely scholars, simple men of rectitude 
dedicated to the secrets of nature and service of humanity, 
searching, researching, joining, disjoining again and again 
in experiments ultimately achieve speed and success. 


सं वो Halal अग्मतेन्द्रैण च म॒रुत्व॑ता | 
आदित्येभिश्च राजभिः ।॥ ५॥ 

9 Sam vo madaso agmatendrena ca marutvata. 
Adityebhisca rajabhih. 


Ye sagely scholars of science and divinity, 
dedicated and rejoicing together, march on with the 
winds, with the speed of lightning, and with the power 
and splendour of sun-beams. 


उत त्यं चमसं नवं त्वष्टुर्दवस्य Prepay 
अक्तं चतुरः पुन॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Uta tyam camasam navam tvasturdevasya niskr- 


tam. Akarta caturah punah. 


When the scholars see a new work of discovery 
or invention created by Tvashta, a brilliant sophisticated 
creator of new forms, they advance the work further to 
fourfold dimensions with the energy of earth, water, fire 
and wind. 


ते नो tal धत्तन त्रिरा साप्तानि Grae | 
एकमेकं सुशस्तिभिः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 21 67 


8. Te no ratnani dhattana trira saptani sunvate. 
Ekamekam susastibhih. 


May the sagely scholars create and provide gems 
of wealth for us. Indeed they create the means of seven 
kinds of joyful service for us, each with care and 
laudable work, three ways in thought, word and deed, 
that is, three kinds of yajnic activity of reverence to the 
seniors, social cooperation and charity to be performed 
by all the four classes of society at each one of the four 
stages of life. 


अधारयन्त वह्वयोऽभ॑जन्त THT | 
भागं देवेषु यज्ञिय॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Adharayanta vahnayo’bhajanta sukrtyaya. 
Bhagam devesu yajhiyam. 


Brilliant and generous people, who bear the 
burdens of humanity, who undertake and carry out their 
part of yajnic duty with honesty and expertise enjoy 
their share of happiness and rejoice among the divinities. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 21 
Indragni Devate, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 
इदेन्द्राम्री उप॑ हये तयोरित्स्तोम॑मुश्मसि। 
ता सोमं सोमपात॑मा।॥ ९॥ 
i. Thendragni upa hvaye tayoritstomamusmasi. 
Ta somam somapatama. 


I invoke Indra and Agni, air and fire. We love to 
study and appraise their properties. They are the most 
joyous protectors and promoters of soma, peace, 
pleasure and prosperity of life. 


68 RGVEDA 


ता यज्ञेषु प्र MASI शुम्भता AT: | 
ता गायत्रेषु गायत ।॥ २॥ 


pA Ta yajnesu pra Samsatendragni Sumbhata narah. 
Ta gayatresu gayata. 


All ye men and women, sing and celebrate the 
qualities of fire and air in yajna, develop and illuminate 
them in use, and glorify them in Gayatri music of the 
Veda. 


ता पित्रस्य प्रश॑स्तय इन्द्राग्री ता ह॑वामहे । 
सोमपा सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Ta mitrasya prasastaya indragni ta havamahe. 
Somapa somapitaye. 


We invoke and honour Indra and Agni, air and 
fire energy, in the yajnic projects of humanity for the 
delight and comfort of noble friends and for the 
protection and promotion of the wealth and joy of the 
world. Indeed, they are the protectors and promoters of 
soma, pleasure, peace and prosperity for all. 


उग्रा Ged हवामह उपेदं सव॑नं सुतम्‌। 
इन्द्राग्री एह ग॑च्छताम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ugra santa havamaha upedam savanam sutam. 
Indragni eha gacchatam. 


We invoke and honour Indra and Agni, powers 
of air and fire, both powerful and brilliant, to come and 
join this yajnic project of ours for the creation of wealth 
and joy. May they come here, promote the yajna and 
bless us. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 69 


ता महान्ता सदस्पती इन्द्रां गरी tet उब्जतम्‌ | 
अप्र॑जाः सन्त्वत्रिणः ॥ ५ ॥ 

Ta mahanta sadaspati indragni raksa ubjatam. 
Aprajah santvatrinah. 


Indra and Agni, air and fire, both are great, both 
protect and illuminate halls and assemblies and destroy 
sin and evil and the wicked people. Enemies do not last 
till the next generation if they be friends. 


तेन॑ सत्येन॑ जागृतमधि wert पदे । 
इन्द्रा मी शर्म॑ यच्छतम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tena satyena jagrtamadhi pracetune pade. 


Indragni Sarma yacchatam. 


Indra and Agni, pranic energy and vital heat 
energy, are ever awake in their state of real and constant 
qualities with their blissful and beatific virtues. May 
these two provide us with peace and comfort in a safe 
and happy home. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 22 
Ashvinau (1-4), Savita (5-8), Agni (9-10), Devyah (11), 
Indrani- Varunani-Agnayya (12), Dyava Prthivi (13-14), 
Prthivi (15), Vishnu or Devah (16), Vishnu (17-21), 
Devatah, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 
wrest वि बोधयाश्विनावेह ग॑च्छताम्‌ । 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये 1 ९॥ 
a Prataryuja vi bodhayasvinaveha gacchatam. 
Asya somasya pitaye. 


Ashvins, twin masters of the science of motion, 


70 RGVEDA 


come early morning to this yajna of ours and enlighten 
us (on knowledge and application, fire and earth, power 
and gravitation, and acceleration and retardation). Come 
for the enjoyment, protection and promotion of our 
yajnic creations. 


या arent र थीत॑मोभा देवा दिविस्पृशा | 
अश्विना ता ह॑वामहे।। २॥ 
2. Ya suratha rathitamobha deva divisprsa. 


Asvina ta havamahe. 


We invoke the Ashvins, divine master makers 
of the chariot, most powerful energies of motion, water 
and fire, fire and earth, who can touch the skies. 


यावां कशा Aenea सूनृतां वती | 
तया यज्ञं मिमिक्षतम्‌ 3 ॥ 


3: Ya vam kasa madhumatyasvina sunrtavati. 
Taya yajnam mimiksatam. 
Ashvins, masters of the science of motion, with 
your words of knowledge, power, energy and velocity 


in nature, so sweet and so true, come and accomplish 
our yajna of creation and technology. 


नहि arated दूरके यत्रा रथेन गच्छ॑थः। 
अश्विना सोमिनो गृहम्‌ ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Nahi vamasti durake yatra rathena gacchathah. 
Asvina somino grham. 


Ashvins, masters of the celestial chariot, 
wherever you reach by the chariot, even farthest to the 
house of the lord of soma wealth, nothing is too far for 
you. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 71 


दिर॑ंण्यपाणिमूतयें सवितार मुप॑ हये | 
स चेत्तां देवतां पदम्‌॥ ५॥ 


a Hiranyapanimutaye savitaramupa hvaye. 
Sa cetta devata padam. 


For protection, love and progress, we invoke 
the golden-handed Savita, creator, energiser, omniscient 
giver of knowledge and awareness, light of the universe 
and the supreme destination. 


अपां नपातमवसे सवितारमुप cafe 
तस्यं व्रतान्युश्मसि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Apam napatamavase savitaramupa stuhi. 
Tasya vratanyusmasi. 


For the sake of protection, knowledge and 
progress, invoke and worship Savita, creator of the 
universe, imperishable lord pervasive of spaces and the 
waters of life, since we all abide by the laws ordained 
by Him. 


विभक्तारं हवामहे वसोश्चित्रस्य राध॑सः। 
सवितारं नृचक्षसम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

a Vibhaktaram havamahe vasoScitrasya radhasah. 
Savitaram nrcaksasam. 


We invoke and worship Savita, creator and 
sustainer of the universe, giver of the wonderful wealth 
of the world, and dispenser of the fruits of human action 
and endeavour and to all. He watches from within and 
without. All, everything, He watches. 


सखाय आ नि षीदत सविता स्तोम्यो नु a: 
दाता राधांसि शुम्भति ।॥ ८ ॥ 


72 RGVEDA 


8. Sakhaya ठ ni sidata savita stomyo nu nah. 
Data radhamsi sumbhati. 
Friends, come and sit together, Savita alone is 


our lord for worship and adoration. Universal giver, He 
beautifies and beatifies His gifts of wealth and light. 


अग्ने पत्नीरिहा व॑ह देवानामुशतीरुप | 
त्वष्टारं सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९॥ 


8 Agne patniriha vaha devanamusSatirupa. 
Tvastaram somapitaye. 


Agni, lord of light and life and evolution, bring 
home to us here those generous energies of heat and 
light which warmly and profusely feed and promote the 
life and joy of the earth and other sustaining powers of 
nature, and bring Tvashta, that divine artificer, who 
creates beautiful new forms of existence and promotes 
life. 
आ ग्रा अग्र sada होत्रां यविष्ठ॒ andi 
वरूत्रीं धिषणां az ९०॥ 

10. A gna agna ihavase hotram yavistha bharatim. 
Varutrim dhisanam vaha. 


Agni, lord of light, life and learning, youngest 
and most brilliant creative power, bring home to us here 
the beauties of the earth, fragrance of oblations, life- 
giving sunlight and language of learning, soothing 
nights and days, and the fiery speech of heaven and 
earth for our protection and progress. 


अभि नो देवीरवसा महः शर्म॑णा नृपत्नीः । 
अच्छिन्नपत्राः सचन्ताम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 73 


12. Abhi no deviravasa mahah sarmana nrpatnih. 
Acchinnapatrah sacantam. 


May noble and generous women of brilliance, 
supporters and sustainers of their men, bless us with 
great and comfortable happy homes and the wealth of 
security, peace and progress. 


इदेन्द्राणीमुप॑ हये वरुणानीं स्वस्तये | 
अग्नायीं सोम॑पीतये ।॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. _[hendranimupa hvaye varunanim svastaye. 
Agnayim somapitaye. 


I invoke Indrani, light of the sun, Varunani, 
coolness of water and soothing softness of air, and 
Agnayi, heat of fire and warmth to bless our homes and 
women with peace and progress, protection and 
prosperity for the sake of happiness and well-being. 


मही द्यौः पुंथिवी च॑ न इमं ast मिंमिश्चताम्‌। 
पिपृतां नो भरीमभिः॥ ९३॥ 

13. Mahi dyauh prthivi cana imam yajnam mimiksa- 
tam. Piprtam no bharimabhih. 


May the high heavens with their light and 
energy, and the dark green earths with their sustenance 
and gravitation feed and accomplish this holy scientific 
yajna of ours and, with their support and nourishment, 
bless us with fulfilment. 


तयोरिद्‌ घृतवत्पयो विप्रां रिहन्ति धीतिभिः | 
गन्धर्वस्य qa पदे ॥ ९२४ ॥ 


14. Tayoridghrtavatpayo vipra rihanti dhitibhih. 
Gandharvasya dhruve pade. 


74 RGVEDA 


By the force of attraction and repulsion of those 
two, sun and earth, do eminent men of knowledge 
receive liquid life on earth and move around in the 
steady space of the universal hold of the sustainer of 
the stars. 


स्योना diate warrant निवेशंनी । 
यच्छं नः शर्म स॒प्रथ॑ः ॥ २५॥ 
15. Syona prthivi bhavanrksara nivesani. 


Yaccha nah Sarma saprathah. 


Dear green earth, beautiful, free from thorns of 
sufferance, wide expansive happy haven for all, give 
us a happy home of pleasure and delight. 


अतो देवा अवन्तु नो यतो विष्णुर्विचक्रमे । 
पृथिव्याः Ga धाम॑भिः ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. Ato deva avantu no yato visnurvicakrame. 
Prthivyah sapta dhamabhih. 


May the scholars of light and vision favour and 
protect us with knowledge of the seven stages of creation 
from earth to Prakrti through which Vishnu, lord 
omnipresent, created the universe (of five elements, 
Virat and Prakriti). 


इदं विष्णुर्वि च॑क्रमे त्रेधा नि द॑धे पदम्‌। 
समूव्न्टमस्य पांसुरे ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Idam visnurvi cakrame tredha ni dadhe padam. 
Samulhamasya pamsure. 


Vishnu created this threefold universe of matter, 
motion and mind in three steps of evolution through 
Prakriti, subtle elements and gross elements, shaped the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 75 


atoms into form and fixed the form in eternal space and 
time. 


त्रीणि पदा वि च॑क्रमे विष्णुर्गोपा अदाभ्यः। 
अतो ध्मौणि धारय॑न्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 
18. Trini pada vi cakrame visnurgopa adabhyah. 
Ato dharmani dharayan. 
Vishnu, universal sustainer and unchallengeable 
protector, fixed the order of the threefold universe of 
forms, comprehensible, apprehensible and spiritually 
attainable, and hence the forms abide in and observe 
the laws of their existence and function. 
विष्णोः कर्मणि पश्यत्‌ यतं व्रतानि पस्यञो । 
इन्द्र॑स्य युज्यः सरां ॥ ९९॥ 
19. Visnoh karmani paSsyata yato vratani paspase. 
Indrasya yujyah sakha. 
Watch the creation and actions of Vishnu. 
Thence the souls know and observe the law and 
discipline of their existence. Vishnu is the friend and 
constant companion of the soul. 
तद्विष्णोः पर मं पदं सदा पश्यन्ति सूरय॑ः। 
दिवीव चक्षुराततम्‌ ॥ २०॥ 

20. Tadvisnoh paramam padam sada pasyanti sura- 
yah. Diviva caksuratatam. 

Heroic souls of vision realise the supreme 


presence of Vishnu in their soul as they see the light of 
the sun in heaven. 


76 RGVEDA 


तद्विप्रासो विपन्यवो जागृवांसः समिन्धते | 
विष्णोर्यत्प॑र मं पदम्‌ ॥ २९॥ 

21.  Tadvipraso vipanyavo jagrvamsah samindhate. 
Visnoryat paramam padam. 


Visionary souls, celebrants of Vishnu, ever 
awake, invoke, kindle and light up the spirit within and 
realise that supreme light of Divinity in the soul. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 23 
Vayu, Indra- Vayu, Mitra-Varunau, Indra-Marutvan 
Vishvedeva, Pusha, Apah, Agni Devatah, 
Kanva Medhatithi Rshi 


तीव्राः ara आ tenet a: सुता इमे। 
वायो तान्प्रस्थिंतान्पिब।॥ ९॥ 


iM Tivrah somasa व gahyasirvantah suta ime. 
Vayo tan prasthitan piba. 


Sharp and lovely tonics are these somas, distilled 
essences of herbs. Vayu, vitality of the winds, take them 
on as they flow and energise them as food for the mind 
and soul. 


उभा देवा दिविस्पृशेन््रवायू ह॑वामहे | 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥ २॥ 


2. Ubha deva divisprsendravayu havamahe. 
Asya somasya pitaye. 


We invoke Indra and Vayu, divine powers of 
fire and wind which touch the skies, for the protection 
and promotion of soma, the beauty and joy of life in the 
world, which we have been able to create. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 77 


इन्द्रवायू म॑नोजुवा विप्रां हवन्त Heal । 
Geeta धियस्पती ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Indravayu manojuva vipra havanta utaye. 
Sahasraksa dhiyaspati. 


For the protection and progress of the world in 
a State of peace and happiness, scholars of vision and 
piety invoke Indra and Vayu, divine energies of wind 
and electricity, which move at the speed of the mind, 
and which are givers of a thousand powers of sensitivity 
and promoters of human intelligence and its creations. 


fast वयं ह॑वामहे वरुणं arate । 
जज्ञाना पूतदक्षसा ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Mitram vayam havamahe varunam somapitaye. 
Jajnana putadaksasa. 


For the creation, preservation and promotion of 
soma, peace and joy of life, we invoke Mitra and Varuna, 
life energies of prana and udana in systemic circulation, 
which are purifying, vitalising and enlightening for the 
body, mind and soul. 


ऋतेन यावृतावृधावृतस्य ज्योतिषस्पती । 
ता मित्रावरुणा हुवे ॥ ५ ॥ 


0 Rtena yavrtavrdhavrtasya jyotisaspati. 
Ta mitravaruna huve. 


For our enlightenment and spiritual advance- 
ment, we invoke Mitra and Varuna, light of the sun and 
motive energy of the wind, both guardians of the light 
of truth and natural laws of Divinity, which, by that very 
light of truth, extend the operation of that law in the 
Lord’s creation upto the mind and soul of humanity. 


18 RGVEDA 


वरुणः प्राविता data विश्वाभिरूतिभिः 1 
कर॑तां नः सुराधसः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Varunah pravita bhuvan mitro visvabhirutibhih. 


Karatam nah suradhasah. 


Varuna is breath of air, and Mitra, light of the 
sun, with energies and all the vitalities and immunities 
of human life and prosperity. May they both help us 
rise to the noblest wealth of body, mind and soul. 


मरुत्व॑न्तं हवामह इन्द्रमा सोम॑पीतये | 
सजुर्गणेनं garg ॥ ७॥ 

५ Marutvantam havamaha indrama somapitaye. 
Sajurganena trmpatu. 


We invoke Indra, electric energy of nature which 
carries the energy of the Maruts, tempestuous winds of 
higher skies. May the electric energy, omnipresent in 
nature and co-operative with the winds, bless us with 
comfort and happiness in life. 


इन्द्र॑ज्येष्ठा मरुूद्रणा देवासः पूष॑रातयः | 
विश्वे मम॑ श्रुता हव॑म्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Indrajyestha marudgana devasah pusardatayah. 
Visve mama Ssruta havam. 

May all the divine powers of nature, of which 
the sun is the chief, especially the winds blissfully 
working in unison with sun-rays, listen to our invocation 
and bless us with power and prosperity. 

हत वृत्रं सुदानव इन्द्र॑णा सह॑सा FST | 
मानों दुःशंसं ईशत ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 79 


9. Hata vrtram sudanava indrena sahasa yuja. 
Ma no duhsamsa ‘Sata. 


Working with tremendous force in unison with 


the sun, the winds break up the clouds and bless us with 
rain. 


Indra, Lord of universal power and honour, we 
pray, let no man of evil mind and dishonour exploit their 
power and rule over us. 


faval-cardame मरूतः सोम॑पीतये | 
sar fe पृश्निंमातरः॥ ९०॥ 

10. Visvan devan havamahe marutah somapitaye. 
Ugra hi prsnimatarah. 


We invoke all the divinities of nature and 
humanity, and we invoke the Maruts, fierce children of 
mother skies, all for a drink of soma — to celebrate our 
creation of power by yajna and join our prayer for 
protection by Grace. 


जय॑तामिव तन्यतुर्मरुतामेति धृष्णुया | 
यच्छुभं याथना नरः ULV 


11. Jayatamiva tanyaturmarutameti dhrsnuya. 
Yacchubham yathana narah. 


Whatever good a person achieves in life is 
achieved by courage and daring such as the force of 
winds, or the thunder of lightning or the power of a 
king’s victorious army. 


हस्काराद्धिद्यु तस्पर्यऽतो जाता अवन्तु नः। 
मरुतो मृव्छयन्तु नः UV 


80 RGVEDA 


12. Haskarad vidyutasparya’to jata avantu nah. 
Maruto mrlayantu nah. 


May the lights born of flashes of lightning spare 
and protect and help us advance. May the Maruts give 
us peace and comfort. 


आ पुंषञ्ित्रबर्हिषमाघयुंणे धरुणं fea: 1 
आजा नष्टं यथां पशुम्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


॥ 2; 4 pusan citrabarhisamaghrne dharunam divah. 
Aja nastam yatha pasum. 


Just as a shepherd shows a once lost but later 
found animal, so the sun, lord of brilliant rays and 
supporter of life with nourishment, lights up and reveals 
the wondrous skies and spaces and lights up and moves 
around the stars and planets such as the earth. 


पूषा राजांनमाघुंणिरप॑गृष्हं गुहां fers 
अविन्दच्ित्रबर्हिषम्‌॥। ९४ ॥ 


14. Pusa rajanamaghrnirapagulham guha hitam. 
Avindaccitrabarhisam. 


Pusha, lord creator and supporter of life, and 
lord of light of the universe creates, manifests and 
illuminates the wondrous universe of light and beauty 
which was hidden deep but safe and secure in the cave 
of the night of annihilation. 


(The mantra also applies to the creation of the 
earth and other planets of the solar system, in 
continuation of mantra 13 above. It also applies to the 
revelation of the light of the soul hidden in the cave of 
the heart.) 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 81 


उतो स मह्यमिन्दुभिः षड्युक्ताँ अनुसेषिधत्‌ | 
गोधिर्यवं न Aha ९५॥ 

15. Utosamahyamindubhih sadyuktan anusesi-dhat. 
Gobhiryavam na carkrsat. 


And then, just as a farmer tills the land and 
produces food, so does He, Lord Creator, again create 
for me — humanity — the earth with sweets of green 
and the cycle of six seasons, cows and barley food. 


star यन्त्यध्व॑भिजामयों अध्वरीयताम्‌ । 
पृञ्चतीर्मधुना पय॑ः ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Ambayo yantyadhvabhirjamayo adhvariyatam. 


Pracatirmadhuna payah. 


May the motherly waters, protectors of 
humanity, flow by the same paths, the flow mixing with 
honey-sweets of the earth, performing part of the 
creative yajna for us. 


अमूर्या उप सूर्ये याभिर्वा सूर्यः सह। 
ता नों हिन्वन्त्वध्वरम्‌ ।॥ ९७॥ 
17. Amurya upa surye yabhirva suryah saha. 
Ta no hinavantvadhvaram. 
And those distant waters which are close to the 
sun, or which are in the sun itself, or with which the 


sun nourishes life, may all those come, accomplish and 
advance our yajna. 


अपो edited हये यत्र गावः पिब॑न्ति नः। 
सिन्धुभ्यः कर्त्व" हृविः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


82 RGVEDA 


18. Apo devirupa hvaye yatra gavah pibanti nah. 
Sindhubhyah kartvam havih. 


I invoke the celestial waters whereby the rays 
of the sun suck up the vapours in order to create holy 
materials for our yajna. 
see aaa AEST प्रश॑स्तये | 
देवा भव॑त वाजिनं: ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Apsvantaramrtamapsu bhesajamapamuta prasa- 
staye. Deva bhavata vajinah. 


There is nectar in the waters. There is health 
and medicinal efficacy in the waters. General scholars 
of eminence, rise and act fast for special studies and 
appraisal of waters. 


अप्सु मे सोमो अब्रवीदन्तर्विंश्वानि भेषजा । 
sift च॑ विश्व भुवमापश्च विरुवभंषजीः ॥ २०॥ 

20. Apsu me somo abravidantarvisvani bhesaja. 
Agnim ca visvasambhuvamapasca visvabhe-sajth. 


Soma, the moon and the herbs, creates and 
shows there 18 universal medicine 11 the waters for me. 
And the waters, universal medicine, create the vital heat 
of life which is the universal sustainer of us all. 


आप॑ः पृणीत भेषजं वरूथं तन्वे ३ Aa 
ज्योक्‌ च सूर्य" दृशो ॥ २९॥ 

21.  Apah prnita bhesajam varutham tanve mama. 
Jyok ca suryam drse. 


Waters create the best medicine for my body 
for a long life time for me to have a sight of the sun, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 83 
universal light, everyday. 


इदमापः प्र dea यत्किं च॑ दुरितं मयि॑। 
यद्वाहमभिदुद्रोह यद्वां शेप उतानूंतम्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


22. Idamapah pra vahata yatkim ca duritam mayi. 
Yadvahamabhidudroha yadva Sepa utanrtam. 


May these holy waters wash off and carry away 
whatever evil there be in me, whatever I hate, or 
whatever I curse, or whatever false there be in me. 


आपो अद्यान्व॑चारिषं रसेन सम॑गस्महि । 
wary आ ग॑हि तं मा सं संज वर्चसा ॥ २३॥ 


23. Apo adyanvacarisam rasena samagasmahi. 
Payasvangana a gahi tam ma sam srja varcasa. 


Let us to-day taste of the holy waters mixed with 
vital juices. And whatever I have drunk, whatever I have 
performed in action as my Karma, Agni, come to me 
and recreate me with the power and splendour I deserve 
accordingly. 


सं मागे वर्चसा सृज सं प्रजया समायुषा । 
विद्युर्मे अस्य देवा इन्द्रो विद्यात्सह ऋषिभिः ॥ २४॥ 


24. Sam 1677८ varcasa srja sam prajaya samayusa. 
Vidyurme asya deva indro vidyatsaha rsibhih. 


Agni, Lord omniscient and omnipotent, recreate 
me with power and splendour, with family, with good 
health and age. May the divinities know me as [ am. 
May Indra, lord of splendour and honour, know me, 
along with all the seers of the universal eye. They know. 


84 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 24 
Prajapati, Agni, Savita or Bhaga, Varuna Devatah, 
Ajigarti Shunahshepa Krtrima Vaishvamitra 
Devarata Rshi 


कस्य॑ नूनं कतमस्यामृतानां मनामहे चार देवस्य नामं । 
को नो मह्या अदितये पुनर्दात्पितरं च दुशोयं मातरं च ॥ ९ ॥ 


if Kasya nunam katamasyamrtanam manamahe 
caru devasya nama. Ko no mahya aditaye punar- 
dat pitaram ca drseyam mataram ca. 


Who, which one, is that supreme lord of the 
many immortals whose auspicious name we adore and 
worship? Who is that for sure who sends us back to the 
great earth so that we may again behold and be with 
our father and mother? 


sida प्र॑थमस्यामृतानां मनामहे चारु देवस्य AT । 
स नो! मह्या अदितये पुनर्दात्पितरं च दशेयं मातरं च ॥ २॥ 
2. Agnervayam prathamasyamrtanam manamahe 


caru devasya nama. Sa no mahya aditaye punar- 
dat pitaram ca drseyam mataram ca. 
We adore and worship the auspicious name of 
Agni, lord of light and life, first of the immortals and 
the highest. He it is who sends us back to this great 


world of Prakrti so that we may behold and be with our 
father and mother again. 


अभि त्वां देव सवितरीशानं वार्यीणाम्‌। 
सदावन्भागमीमहे tt 3 ॥ 


2: Abhi tva deva savitarisanam varyanam. 
Sadavanbhagamimahe. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 24 85 


Of all the immortals, we worship you alone, 
Savita, glorious lord of light and life, ruler of the regions 
and favourite things of our choice, eternal protector and 
adorable dispenser of universal justice. 


यश्चिद्धि त॑ इत्था भग॑ः शशमानः पुरा निदः। 
अद्वेषो हस्तयोर्दधे tt ४॥ 


4. Yasciddhi ta ittha bhagah sasamanah pura nidah. 
Adveso hastayordadhe. 


Whatever your gifts of dispensation thus, 
whether admirable wealth as a result of former adoration 
and worship, or otherwise as a result of blame and 
censure, I deliver into your hands without hate or anger. 


भग॑भक्तस्य ते qaqa तवाव॑सा। 
मूर्धानं राय आरभ ॥ ५॥ 

a. Bhagabhaktasya te vayamudasema tavavasa. 
Murdhanam raya arabhe. 


Lord of glory, we pray, let us receive our share 
of divine dispensation with your protection and grace 
in order to rise to the top in wealth and reach the glory 
of your presence. 


नहि तें क्षत्रं न सहो न मन्युं Gavan Gaels आपुः। 
नेमा आपो अनिमिषं चरन्तीर्न ये वात॑स्य 
प्रमिनन्त्यभ्वम्‌ ne 


6. Nahi te ksatram na saho na manyum vayascanami 
patayanta apuh. Nema apo animisam carantirna 
ye vatasya praminantyabhvam. 


All those that move in space comprehend not 


86 RGVEDA 


your order and dominion, nor violate your power or 
force or constancy. Nor do these waters and currents of 
universal energy ever on the move surpass your 
presence. Nor even the velocities of the wind can ever 
violate the immensity of your power which is eternal 
and immortal. 


अबुध्ने राजा वरुणो ace स्तूपं ददते Yaar: | 
नीचीनाः स्थुरुपरि बुध्न एषामस्मे अन्तर्निहिताः केतवः 
स्युः॥ ७॥ 


४ Abudhne raja varuno vanasyordhvam stupam 
dadate putadaksah. Nicinah sthurupari budhna 
esamasme antarnihitah ketavah syuh. 


The ruling lord Varuna, the brilliant sun, pure 
and generous, radiates a flood of light in the bottomless 
astral sphere over the atmosphere, flowing down, the 
rays of light stop over the atmosphere and filter down 
to the clouds and impregnate them over the earth. May 
the rays of the sun, the clouds and the vapours absorbed 
in the clouds be for our good. 


उरु हि राजा वरुणश्चकार wile पन्थामन्वेतवा उ । 
अपदे पादा प्रतिंधातवेऽ करुताप॑वक्ता ह्दयाविध॑श्चित्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Urum hi raja varunascakara suryaya pantha- 
man-vetava u. Apade pada pratidhatave’- 
karutapavakta hrdayavidhascit. 


Varuna, ruling lord of the universe, carved out 
a wide path for the sun to move and thus created an 
orbit-path in the pathless space for His deputy wielder 
and sustainer of the sub-system, meticulously averting, 
as if, a pinhole in the heart of the cosmic system, like a 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 24 87 
surgeon. 


शतं ते राजन्भिषजः सहस्रमुर्वी ग॑भीरा datas अस्तु | 
बाधस्व दूरे निऋतिं पराचैः कृतं चिदेनः प्र मुमुग्ध्यस्मत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. इवाव te rajan bhisajah sahasramurvi gabhira 
sumatiste astu. Badhasva dure nirrtim paracaih 
krtam cidenah pra mumugdhyasmat. 


Glorious ruler, hundred are your healing balms 
and medicaments, thousands your wide earths, and deep 
is your noble intelligence. Drive off adversity far away. 
And whatever sin is committed by the wicked, keep 
away, and liberate us. 


अमी य seen निहितास Ser नक्तं ददृश्रे Hd चिद्दिवेयुः । 
अदब्धानि वरुणस्य व्रतानि विचाकशच्यन्द्रमा नक्तं 
मेति i Qo 


10. Ami ya rksa nihitasa ucca naktam dadrsre kuha 
ciddiveyuh. Adabdhani varunasya vratani vicaka- 
Saccandrama naktameti. 


Those constellations of stars such as the Great 
Bear set in motion high and far, which are seen at night 
— where do they go in the day? 


Fixed, inviolable are the laws and rules of 
Varuna, rules of the stars. So the moon shines at night 
and moves on in its orbit. 


तत्त्वां यापि ब्रह्मणा वन्दमानस्तदा शास्ते यज॑मानो 
हविर्भिः | saan वरुणेह बोध्युरुशंस मा न आयुः प्र 
मोंषीः॥ ९९॥ 


88 RGVEDA 


11. Tattvayami brahmanad vandamdanastadasaste 
yajamano havirbhih. Ahelmano varuneha bodh- 
yurusamsa ma na ayuh pra 11104741. 


Varuna, lord ruler of the stars, praised and 
celebrated by many, I come to you singing in worship 
the hymns of divinity, offering holy fragrances in yajna 
with faith and reverence. Lord kind and gracious, give 
us the light of life here itself. Let not our life waste 
away. 


तदिन्नक्तं तद्दिवा मह्य॑माहुस्तदयं केतो हृद आ वि ABI 
शुनःशेपो यमहं द्‌ गृभीतः सो अस्मान्‌ राजा वरुणो 
मुमोक्तु ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tadinnaktam taddiva mahyamahustadayam keto 
hrda a vi caste. Sunahsepo yamahvadgrbhi-tah 
so asman raja varuno mumoktu. 


Of that the wise men nightly speak to me. Day 
in and day out they sing of that for me. And the same 
presence this voice of the heart reveals to me. The sagely 
scholar, inspired and possessed, proclaims His honour 
and dominion. May the same ruling lord of glory, 
Varuna, deliver us from sin and slavery unto light and 
freedom. 


शुनःशेपो Wad गृभी तस्तिष्वांदित्यं द्रं पदेषुं sea: | अवैनं 
राजा वरुणः ससृज्याद्विदवां अदब्धो वि मुमोक्तु पाशान्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 

| Sunahsepo hyahvadgrbhitastrisvadityam drupa- 
desu baddhah. Avainam raja varunah sasrjya- 
dvidvan adabdho vi mumoktu pasan. 


Shunah-shepa, man of knowledge dedicated to 
light and happiness, inspired and possessed by ambition, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 24 89 


bound within the yajnic pillars of knowledge, action 
and meditation, should invoke and develop Aditya, 
power of sun and wind. May Varuna, lord omniscient 
ruler of the world, shape him (as a maker and saviour 
of humanity). May He, inviolable lord omnipotent, 
deliver us from bonds of sin, ignorance and poverty. 


अवं ते zal वरुण amid यज्ञेभिरीमहे हविर्भिः । क्षय॑न्न- 
स्मभ्य॑मसुर प्रचेता राजन्नेनांसि शिश्रथः कृतानि ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Avate helo varuna namobhirava yajnebhi-rimahe 
havirbhih. Ksayannasmabhyamasura praceta 
rajannenamsi Sisrathah krtani. 


Varuna, self-refulgent lord of omniscience, giver 
of knowledge, life of our breath, we pray for the gift of 
your light and favour with acts of homage, yajnas and 
holy offerings. Reducing and destroying our sins as you 
are, we pray, be kind and gracious to loosen the bonds 
of our actions performed. 


उदुत्तमं व॑रुण पाश्ट॑ंमस्मदवांधमं वि म॑ध्यमं श्र॑थाय । 
अथां वयमादित्य व्रते तवानागसो अदितये स्याम ॥ ९५ ॥ 


Uduttamam varuna pasamasmadavadhamam vi 
madhyamam Srathaya. Atha vayamdaditya vrate 
tavanagaso aditaye syama. 


Varuna, dearest lord of our choice, we pray, 
loosen the highest, middling and the lowest bonds of 
our sin and slavery so that, O Lord Supreme of light, 
free from sin and slavery and living within the rules of 
your law, we may be fit for the attainment of the ultimate 
freedom of Moksha. 


90 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 25 


Varuna Devata, Ajigarti Shunahshepa Krtrima 
Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 


यच्यिद्धि a विशो यथा प्र da वरुण व्रतम्‌। 
मिनीमसि द्यविद्यवि eu 


1 Yacciddhi te viso yatha pra deva varuna vratam. 
Minimasi dyavidyavi. 


Varuna, brilliant and generous lord of creation, 
since after all we are your children, and we do (out of 
ignorance) violate your rules of discipline and conduct 
day by day, we pray for your compassion as our father. 


मा नो वधाय॑ gad जिहीव्छानस्य॑ रीरधः 1 
मा ह॑णानस्य॑ मन्यवे ॥ २॥ 


ps, Ma no vadhaya hatnave jihilanasya riradhah. 
Ma hrnanasya manyave. 


Lord of compassion, let us not feel excited to 
take up a deadly weapon against the person who offends 
us and excites our passion for revenge, and save us from 
the wrath against the person who feels ashamed of his 
action against us. 


fa मृ॑व्टीकायं ते wal रथीरश्वं न सन्दितम्‌। 
गीर्भिर्वरुण dae ३॥ 


Sf Vi mrlikaya te mano rathirasvam na samditam. 
Girbhirvaruna simahi. 


Like a driver who has yoked the horse to his 
chariot, we control and concentrate our mind on you 
with thought and prayers for the gift of your compassion 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 25 91 
and grace. 


परा हि मे fan-aa: पत॑न्ति वस्य॑इष्टये | 
वयो न व॑स॒तीरुप॑ ॥ x ॥ 


4. Para hi me vimanyavah patanti vasya-istaye. 
Vayo na vasatirupa. 


For the sake of my domestic good and well- 
being, I pray, may those who are ill-disposed and 
impassioned against me go off far away just as birds 
leave their nests and fly away. 


कदा atatera नरमा वरुणं करामहे। 
मृव्टीकायोंरुचक्ष॑सम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


Kada ksatrasriyam narama varunam karamahe. 
Mrlikayorucaksasam. 


How shall we adore and pray to Varuna, lord of 
universal eye and guide of humanity, for His favour and 
grace, and when shall we realise the beauty and 
prosperity of the social order. 


तदित्समानमाशाते वेन॑न्ता न प्र Pes: | 
धृतव्र॑ताय दाशुषे ।। ६ ॥ 


=== 


6. Taditsamanamasate venanta na pra yucchatah. 
Dhrtavrataya dasuse. 


Both Mitra and Varuna yearning with love for 
the man of the vows of Dharma and yajnic generosity 
forsake him not, they abide by him constantly and bless 
him with fulfilment. 


वेदा यो वीनां पदमन्तरिक्षेण पत॑ताम्‌ । 
वेदं नावः Basa: ॥ ७॥ 


92 RGVEDA 


4 Veda yo vinam padamantariksena patatam. 
Veda navah samudriyah. 


The specialist of the sea and the sky is the man 
who knows the science and paths of the birds and planes 
flying across the skies, and he knows the science and 
routes of the ships sailing across the seas. 


वेद॑ मासो धृतव्र॑तो द्वाद॑श प्रजाव॑तः। 
वेदा य उपजायते ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Veda maso dhrtavrato dvadasa prajavatah. 
Veda ya upajayate. 


The man of the discipline of science and Dharma 
who knows the twelve months of the year and the 
thirteenth which is supplementary every third year, and 
also knows how they raise the produce of the earth like 
a father, is the specialist of time, seasons, fertility and 
production. 


वेद्‌ वात॑स्य वर्तनिमुरोऋष्वस्यं ged: | 
वेदा ये अध्यासते ॥ ९॥ 


9. Veda vatasya vartanimurorrsvasya brhatah. 
Veda ye adhyasate. 


One who knows the course of the winds, vast, 
abundant and stormy, and knows those that are sustained 
by it, and also knows those that control it, is a specialist 
of the earth and the skies. 


नि ष॑साद धृतव्रतो वरुणः पस्त्या ईस्वा। 
साम्राज्याय सुक्रतुः ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Ni sasada dhrtavrato varunah pastya3 sva. 
Samrajyaya sukratuh. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 25 93 


Varuna, man of brilliance and leadership, 
dedicated to holy vows, yajna and Dharma, hero of noble 
watchful action, would sit among the people with power 
and grace and rise to the heights of governance and 
world order. 


अतो favarega चिकित्वाँ अभि deate 
कृतानि या च Heat ॥ Ve i 

11. Ato visvanyadbhuta cikitvan abhi pasyati. 
Krtani ya ca kartva. 


And hence wide awake and all aware, he 
watches and oversees all the wonderful things which 
have been done and which have yet to be done. 


स al favaral सुक्रतुरादित्यः quent करत्‌। 
प्रण आयू[षि तारिषत्‌॥ 22 

12. Sano visvaha sukraturadityah supatha karat. 
Pra na ayumsi tarisat. 


And may He, Aditya, imperishable lord of light 
and omniscience, sun and life’s energy, lord of noble 
and watchful action, keep us on the right path all days 
and nights and thus bless us across a full life of total 
fulfilment. 


fave द्रापिं हिरण्ययं वरुणो वस्त निर्णिजंम्‌। 
परि स्यो नि षेदिरे ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Bibhrad drapim hiranyayam varuno vasta nirni- 
jam. Pari spaso ni sedire. 


Varuna, self-refulgent lord of the universe, 
wearing a golden mantle (as the sun) shines pure and 


94 RGVEDA 


shines all (covering them with the golden light of His 

purity). All the tangible objects of the world abide in Him. 
न यं दिप्स॑न्ति दिप्सवो न selon जनानाम्‌। 
न देवमभिमातयः ॥ ९४॥ 

14. Na yam dipsanti dipsavo na druhvano jananam. 
Na devamabhimatayah. 


The enemies of humanity dare challenge Him 
not, the jealous affect Him not, the proud can touch Him 
not, Lord of light and universe since He is. 


उत यो मानुषेष्वा यशश्चक्रे stare | 
अस्माकमुदरेष्वा ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Uta yo manusesva yasascakre asamya. 
Asmakamudaresva. 


It is He who bestows perfect honour on 
humanity and creates food and water for us. It is He 
who shines in glory over humanity and others in and 
out everywhere. 


परां मे यन्ति धीतयो गावो न rete 
इच्छन्तीरुरु चक्ष सम्‌॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. (वात 11८ yanti dhitayo gavo na vagyutiranu. 


Icchantirurucaksasam. 


As cows run to their stall yearning for home, so 
do my thoughts rise and travel far and high yearning 
for Varuna, Lord Supreme of universal vision, watching 
over all, and my haven and home. 


संनु वोचावहै gaat मे मध्वाभुंतम्‌। 
ada क्षद॑से प्रियम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 25 95 


17. Samnu vocavahai punaryato me madhvabhr-tam. 
Hoteva ksadase priyam. 


Let us speak together again and again since you 
give me dear sweet food for knowledge collected from 
versatile sources just as a priest gives honey-sweets to 
the yajamana for dispelling his ignorance with 
knowledge. 


दर्शं नु विर्वद॑ंतं दर्शं रथमधि क्षमि । 
एता जुंषत मे गिर॑ः ॥ १८ ॥ 

18. Darsam nu visvadarsatam darsam rathamadhi 
ksami. Eta jusata me girah. 


For a vision of the Lord omniscient of the 
universal eye who is also an object of world vision, and 
for a model of the chariot over earth, air and sea, listen 
carefully to these words of mine in a mood of patience 
and forbearance. 


इमं मे वरूण श्रुधी हव॑मद्या च॑ मृव्य । 
त्वामवस्युरा च॑के ।॥ ९९॥ 

19. Imam me varuna srudhi havamadya ca mrlaya. 
Tvamavasyura cake. 
Varuna, Lord Supreme of our highest choice, 
listen to my prayer to-day, be kind and gracious. In search 
of love and protection, I come and praise and pray. 
त्वं विश्व॑स्य मेधिर दिवश्च Tava राजसि । 
स याम॑नि प्रतिं श्रुधि॥ २०॥ 

20. Tvam visvasya medhira divasca gmasca rajasi. 
Sa yamani prati $rudhi. 


96 RGVEDA 


Varuna, Lord of cosmic intelligence, light of the 
universe who illuminate the heaven and earth over time, 
we pray, listen to our prayer and respond. 

उदुत्तमं मुमुग्धि नो वि पाशं मध्यमं da 
अवाधमानि जीवसे 1 २९॥ 


21. Uduttamam mumugdhi no vi pasam madhya-mam 
crta. Avadhamani jivase. 


Varuna, Lord of Law and Light, snap our highest 
bonds of the mind and loosen the middle bond of the 
senses and the lowest bond of the body for real life of 
spiritual fulfilment. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 26 
Agni Devata, Ajigarati Shunahshepa Krtrima 
Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 
after हि ater वस्त्राण्यूर्जां पते। 
सेमं नो अध्वरं य॑ज।॥ ९॥ 
| Vasisva hi miyedhya vastranyurjam pate. 
Semam no adhvaram yaja. 
High-priest of yajna, yajamana, disseminator of 
yajna fragrances into the skies, preserver of energy, put 


on the holy clothes and perform this sacred non-violent 
yajna for us. 


निनो होता वरेण्यः सदां यविष्ठ मन्म॑भिः 1 
अग्न दिवित्म॑ता वच॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


3 Ni no hota varenyah sada yavistha manmabhih. 
Agne divitmata vacah. 


Agni, ever most youthful power of yajna, may 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 26 97 


the chosen high-priest with noble thoughts and hymns 
always help us realise the words of our prayer with your 
gifts of heavenly light and joy. 


आ fe ष्मां सूनवे पितापिर्यजंत्यापये | 
सखा सख्ये वरेण्यः ॥ ३॥ 


5: A hi smd sinave pitapiryajatyapaye. 
Sakha sakhye varenyah. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord of light, dearest yajnic 
power of our choice, just as a father for the son, a 
benefactor for the beneficiary, a friend for a friend 
performs the yajna, so may you, we pray, bless us. (So 
may we too perform yajna for one another.) 


आ al बर्ही fierear वरुणो पित्रो stefar 
सीद॑न्तु मनुंषो यथा ॥  ॥ 


4. A no barhi risadaso varuno mitro aryama. 
Sidantu manuso yatha. 


May Varuna, lord of knowledge, Mitra, 
universal friend, and Aryama, lord of justice, all 
destroyers of sin, enemies and disease, grace the seats 
of our yajna with their blissful divine presence, as may 
the sagely scholar, our friends, and our dispensers of 
justice, all fighters against sin, enmity and negativity, 
come and take their seats on the vedi, sanctify and 
accomplish our yajna. 


पूर्व्य' होतरस्य नो मन्द॑स्व Cereal च। 
इमा उ षु श्रुधी गिरः ॥ ५॥ 


a Purvya hotarasya no mandasva sakhyasya ca. 
Ima u su Srudhi girah. 


98 RGVEDA 


Agni, self-refulgent eternal power of yajna, 
friend of our forefathers and high-priest of our noble 
creative acts of yajna, exhilarate, enjoy and brighten up 
this friendly yajna of ours and listen to these holy chants 
and prayers. 


यच्चिद्धि शश्व॑ता तनां देवंदेवं यजांमहे। 
त्वे इच्यते हविः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yacciddhi sSasvata tana devamdevam yajamahe. 
Tve iddhuyate havih. 


By whichever eternal and extended holy powers 
of cosmic yajna were the brilliant and generous powers 
of nature created, to the same divine powers we offer 
yajna, to one and all. And to the same powers is the 
holy material of yajna offered for all time. 


प्रियो नो अस्तु favafeetat मन्द्रो वरेण्यः | 
प्रियाः स्वग्रयो वयम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

भ Priyo no astu vispatirhota mandro varenyah. 
Priyah svagnayo vayam. 


May the happy, charming and venerable ruler 
of the people, worthy of choice, be dear to us. May the 
venerable people who offer yajna in honour of Agni, 
eternal lord of cosmic yajna, and the leader of the people, 
be dear to us. 


स्वग्रयो हि वार्य' देवासो दधिरे च॑ नः । स्वय्रयों मनामहे ।। ८ ॥ 


8. Svagnayo hi varyam devaso dadhire ca nah. 
Svagnayo manamahe. 


Noble people dedicated to the fire and 
performance of yajna, brilliant and generous, as also 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 27 99 


the motherly powers of nature such as the earth and 
showers of rain, bear and bring for us the blessings of 
our choice. We know them, and we honour and meditate 
on these yajnic powers. 


अथा न उभयेषाममरंत मत्यीनाम्‌। 
मिथः स॑न्तु प्रश॑स्तयः ॥ ९॥ 
7, Atha na ubhayesamamrta martyanam. 


Mithah santu prasastayah. 


Lord eternal and immortal, by your kindness and 
grace, may the mutual praise and appreciation of both 
kinds of people—all subject to mortality, both average 
and exceptional of knowledge and achievement—be for 
our good. 


विश्वेभिरये अथिभिरिमं यज्ञमिदं aa: 1 
चनो धाः सहसो यहो ॥ १० ॥ 

10. Visvebhiragne agnibhirimam yajnamidam vacah. 
Cano dhah sahaso yaho. 

Agni, lord of knowledge, mighty of strength and 
power, kind and gracious, with all these forms of heat 
and energy, take on this yajnic programme of ours, 
fructify our words of prayer, and bless us with the delight 
of well-being. 

Mandala 1/Sukta 27 
Agni & Vishvedevah Devatah, Ajigarti Shunahshepa 
Krtrima Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 
अश्वं न त्वा वारवन्तं वन्दध्या अगिं नमोधिः। 
सम्राज॑न्तमध्वराणाम्‌।॥। ९॥ 


100 RGVEDA 


1; Asvam na tva varavantam vandadhya agnim 
namobhih. Samrajantamadhvaranam. 

Agni, brilliant and illuminating power and 
presence of yajnas from the homely agnihotra to the 
highest programmes of humanity, like a tempestuous 
horse of flying hair, we praise you and celebrate you 
with homage and offerings of food and oblations. 


wal a: सूनुः शव॑सा पृथुप्र॑गामा सुशोव॑ः। 
Heat अस्माकं बभूयात्‌ २॥ 

2 Sa gha nah sunuh savasa prthupragama susevah. 
Midhvan asmakam babhiyat. 
May our children and successors, travelling far 
and wide with power and knowledge, be good and kind 
to us and give us showers of wealth and prosperity. 
स नों दूराच्यासाच्य नि मर्त्यादघायोः | 
पाहि सदमिद्विश्वायुः ॥ ३॥ 

Sano duraccasacca ni martyadaghayoh. 
Pahi sadamidvisvayuh. 
May he, lord of light and knowledge, giver of 
all joys of life, protect our life, home and industry from 
far and near against any and every sinful person. 
Bay षु. त्वमस्माकं सनिं mast Tear 
अग्रै देवेषु प्र ata: ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Imamu su tvamasmakam sanim gayatram 
navyamsam. Agne devesu pra vocah. 


Agni, eternal lord omniscient, this divine 
knowledge, blissful, sweet and musical in Gayatri and 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 27 101 


other musical metres, ever new and giver of new ideas, 
pray reveal it to the sages and whisper it into our soul. 


आ नो भज परमेष्वा वाजेषु मध्यमेषु | 
शिशा वस्वो अन्त॑मस्य ॥ ५॥ 


a. A no bhaja paramesva vajesu madhyamesu. 
Siksa vasvo antamasya. 


Lord of knowledge and power, in the highest, 
medium and closest battles and businesses of life, 
enlighten us and give us the joy and wealth of life both 
material and spiritual. 


विभक्तासि चित्रभानो सिन्धोरूर्मा sare आ। 
सद्यो दाशुषे क्षरसि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vibhaktasi citrabhano sindhorurma upaka 4. 
Sadyo dasuse ksarasi. 


Versatile lord of wide and various knowledge 
such as analysis of sea waves and water particles, come 
soon, you always give a shower of knowledge to the 
man of faith, reverence and generosity. 


aad पृत्सु मर्त्यमवा वाजेषु यं AAT: | 
स यन्ता शश्वतीरिषः ॥ ७॥ 


ep Yamagne prtsu martyamava vajesu yam junah. 
Sa yanta Sasvatirisah. 


Lord of light and power, let the man you protect 
in fighting armies, whom you inspire to join battles for 
knowledge and development, who protects these people 
who have lived free since time immemorial, let him be 
the leader, ruler and protector of the people and their 


102 RGVEDA 
wealth and power. 


नकिरस्य सहन्त्य पर्येता कय॑स्य Fert 
वाजो अस्ति stare: ie ॥ 


8. Nakirasya sahantya paryeta kayasya cit. 
Vajo asti Sravayyah. 
No one is his challenger, no vanquisher of the 


hero whose battle for life and humanity is worthy of 
praise. 


स वाजं विश्वचर्षणिरर्वद्धिरस्तु तरता | 
विप्रेभिरस्तु सनिता ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sa vajam visvacarsanirarvadbhirastu taruta. 
Viprebhirastu sanita. 


May he, protector of humanity, be the winner 
of battle for progress with the horses that run fast and 
reach the goal. With the scholars and sages, may he be 
the generous benefactor and saviour of the people. 


wate afgfats विशोकिंशो यज्ञियांय। 
स्तोमं रुद्राय दुशींकम्‌॥ ९०॥ 

10. Jarabodha tadvividdhi visevise yajniyaya. 
Stomam rudraya drsikam. 

Hero of high knowledge and wide fame, create 
and provide for every people and offer to adorable yajnic 
Rudra, brilliant lord of justice and power, that wealth, 
honour and celebration which is magnificent and worthy 
of praise. 

स नो wet अनिमानो धूमकेतुः पुरुश्चन्द्रः | 
धिये वाजांय हिन्वतु ।॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 27 103 


11. Sano mahan animano dhimaketuh puruscandrah. 
Dhiye vajaya hinvatu. 


May the yajnic science of fire, great, immeasura- 
ble, universal delight with banners of smoke and flame, 
call up and inspire us for the achievement of intellige- 
ntial technology and creative power and progress. 


स targa fasufaded: केतुः otra नः। 
उक्थेर MASH: ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sa revan iva vispatirdaivyah ketuh srnotu nah. 
Ukthairagnirbrhadbhanuh. 


That Agni, divine protector and sustainer of 
humanity, destroyer of disease with rays of light, mighty 
brilliant, may listen to our prayers and hymns of praise 
like a generous man of wealth and prosperity. 


नमो महद्भ्यो नमो अर्भकेभ्यो नमो युवभ्यो नम॑ आशि- 
नेभ्य॑:। यजाम देवान्यदि श॒क्रवांम मा ज्यायसः शंसमा 
वृक्षि देवाः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Namo mahadbhyo namo arbhakebhyo namo 
yuvabhyo nama asinebhyah. Yajama devan yadi 
Saknavama ma jyayasah samsama vrksi devah. 


Brilliant scholars of eminence, saints and sages, 
we offer homage and hospitality to great scholars, love 
and hospitality to beginners, reverence and hospitality 
to youthful scholars, homage and hospitality to veterans 
of knowledge and wisdom. We do homage, reverence 
and service to the noble and brilliant people and to the 
divinities of nature as far as we can make it possible. 
You must not, no one should, malign or uproot the 
honour and reputation of the great and generous power 


104 RGVEDA 
and people. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 28 


Indra-Yajna-Soma Devatah, Ajigarti Shunahshepa 
Krtrima Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 


यत्र ग्रावां पृथुलुंध्न Heat भव॑ति सोत॑वे । 
उत्गृरव॑लसुतानामवेद्धिन्द्र VATS: ॥ ९॥ 
I, Yatra grava prthubudhna urdhvo bhavati sotave. 


Ulukhalasutanamavedvindra jalgulah. 


Indra, organiser of the yajna for development, 
where the broad-based stone is upraised for extraction 
and straining of the refined soma essences, there, for 
specific treatment, take the materials ground in the 
mortar, test them and proclaim your judgement. 


wa द्वाविव जघनाधिषवण्या कृता | 

उत्यृरव॑लसुतानामवेद्धिन्द्र जल्गुलः ॥ २॥ 
2: Yatra dvaviva jaghanadhisavanya krta. 

Ulukhalasutanamavedvindra jalgulah. 


Indra, where the two stones of the soma press 
are intensely juxtaposed like the two gear meshes, there 
take the materials fine ground in the mortar for straining 
and refinement for the special purpose, take out for 
testing and say whether it is of the right quality. 


यत्र नार्य'पच्यवमुपच्यवं च शिक्ष॑ते । 
उत्यृरव॑लसुतानामवेद्धिन्द्र जल्गुलः ॥ ३॥ 


3; Yatra naryapacyavamupacyavam ca Siksate. 
Ulukhalasutanamavedvindra jalgulah. 


Where the house-wife teaches the methods of 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 28 105 


sifting and mixing of the soma materials, there take the 
materials ground in the mortar for the special purpose, 
test and judge the quality and control. 


यत्र मन्थां विबध्नते रश्मीन्यमिंतवाडइव । 
उत्यृरव॑लसुतानामवेद्धिन्द्र जल्गुलः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yatra mantham vibadhnate rasmin yamitava iva. 
Ulukhalasutanamavedvindra jalgulah. 


Where they fix the churner and the cords for 
working control as does a driver, there, Indra, take the 
materials ground in the mortar for the specific purpose, 
try and test and judge the product. 


यच्िद्ि त्वं गृहेगुंह SRE TA । 
इह द्युमत्त॑मं वद्‌ जय॑तामिव दुन्दुभिः ॥ ५॥ 


a. Yacciddhi tvam grhegrha ulukhalaka yujyase. 
Tha dyumattamam vada jayatamiva dundubhih. 


Pharmacist of the soma refinery, whatever the 
knowledge, technique and process that you use in 
operation in every home, announce here itself the 
brilliant results of that loudly as if with the drum of a 
victor. 


उत स्म॑ ते वनस्पते वातो वि वात्यग्रमित्‌ । 
अथो इन्द्राय पात॑वे सुनु areas ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Uta sma te vanaspate vato vi vatyagramit. 
Atho indraya patave sunu somamulikhala. 


Lord of herbs and trees, the wind of your 
achievement blows ahead far and wide, so then, for the 
health and joy of humanity, refine and prepare tonics 
and medications in the refinery for Indra. 


106 RGVEDA 


आयजी वाजसातमा ता ह्यु¶च्या विंजर्भतः। 
हरीइवान्धांसि बप्स॑ता ॥ ७॥ 


as Ayaji vajasatama ta hyucca vijarbhrtah. 
Hart ivandhamsi bapsata. 


Worshipful men and women, heroes of the 
creative battles of life, holding up their own yajnic 
achievements high, enjoy the delicacies of life and good 
health as the sun rays drink up the juices of herbs. 


ता नो! अद्य व॑नस्पती ऋष्वावृष्वेभिः सोतृभिः 1 
इन्द्राय मधुमत्सुतम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Ta no adya vanaspati rsvavrsvebhih sotrbhih. 
Indraya madhumatsutam. 
Men and women who are dynamic with yajnic 
ambition, and experts of herbs and forests may provide 
for us to-day refined essences of soma replete with 


honey-sweets distilled by brilliant specialists of the 
science. 


उच्छिष्टं oralsic सोमं पवित्र आ dst 
नि धेहि गोरधि त्वचि ॥ ९॥ 


Ucchistam camvorbhara somam pavitra @ srja. 
Ni dhehi goradhi tvaci. 


High-priest of soma-yajna, come and create the 
purest soma as prescribed by experts, hold it on in 
special containers for vitalisation and place it on the 
floor of the earth for Indra. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 29 107 


Mandala 1/Sukta 29 


Indra Devatah, Ajigarti Shunahshepa Krtrima 
Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 


areas संत्य सोमपा अनाशस्ताइव स्मसि । आत्‌ नं 
इन्द्र शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yacciddhi satya somapa andaSasta iva smasi. A tu 
na indra Samsaya gosvasvesu Subhrisu sahasresu 
tuvimagha. 


Indra, lord of glory, eternal and imperishable, 
protector and promoter of soma, beauty and prosperity 
of life, if ever we are found wanting (for our acts of 
omission or commission), graciously help us repair, 
rehabilitate and re-establish in a splendid world of a 
thousand cows and horses (in a state of good health and 
a sound economy of plenty and progress). 


शिप्रिन्वाजानां पते शचीं वस्तव॑ cast । आ तू न॑ इन्द्र 
शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ॥ २ ॥ 


2, Siprinvajanam pate Sacivastava damsana. 
A tuna indra Samsaya gosvasvesu Subhrisu saha- 
sresu tuvimagha. 


Indra, lord of glory, giver of secular and sacred 
wealth and well-being, protector and supporter of our 
struggle for progress and prosperity, master of man- 
power and great action, by virtue of the divine voice 
and under your presence and protection, bless us to rise 
to a splendid state of thousand-fold good health of sound 
sense and knowledge and speedy progress in prosperity, 
transport and communication. 


108 RGVEDA 


नि ष्वापया मिथूदृशा सस्तामवुध्यमाने । आ तू नं इन्द्र 
शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ॥ ३ ॥ 


oO: Ni svapaya mithudrsa sastamabudhyamane. 
A tuna indra Samsaya gosvasvesu Subhrisu saha- 
sresu tuvimagha. 


Indra, glorious lord of vitality, vision and will 
to live, eliminate the phantom of illusion and sloth of 
body and mind which mislead and depress, and let us 
awake and rise to a splendid state of a thousand-fold 
brilliance of knowledge, generous prosperity and fast 
advancement. 


ससन्तु त्या अरातयो बोध॑न्तु शूर Uda: । आ तू न॑ इन्द्र 
शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ux i 


4. Sasantu tya aratayo bodhantu Sura ratayah. 
A tuna indra Samsaya gosvasvesu Subhrisu saha- 
sresu tuvimagha. 


Indra, lord of glory, heroic strength and courage, 
let adversities go to sleep and breathe out, let good 
fortunes awake and prosper, and let us advance and 
establish in an admirable state of thousand-fold wealth 
and generosity, cows and horses. 


as गर्दभं मरण नुवन्तं पापयामुया । आ तू न॑ इन्द्र 
शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ॥ ५ ॥ 

2: Samindra gardabham myrna nuvantam papaya- 
muya. A tuna indra Samsaya gosvasvesu Subhrisu 
sahasresu tuvimagha. 


Indra, glorious lord of justice and power, 
upholder of truth and Dharma, discriminate and throw 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 29 109 


out that brayer shouting his praises with that vile 
intention of his and help us establish ourselves in a 
splendid state of thousand-fold purity and truth with 
wealth of cows and horses. 


पताति Huguet दूरं वातो वनादधि । आ तू न॑ इन्द्र 
शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Patati kundrnacya duram vato vanadadhi. 
A tu na indra Samsaya gosvasvesu subhrisu 
sahasresu tuvimagha. 


The wind blows over the forest and clusters of 
lotus, over and across the world and soars high with the 
rays of light in waves up and down. Indra, lord of light 
and winds, commanding the wealth of the worlds, 
inspire and establish us in a splendid state of thousand 
beauties, generosities of the cow and mother earth and 
the speed of winds. 


ad! परिक्रोशं ज॑हि जम्भया कृकदारव॑म्‌ । आ तू न॑ इन्द्र 
शंसय गोष्वश्वेषु शुभ्रिषु सहस्त्र॑षु तुवीमघ ॥ ७ ॥ 


८ Sarvam parikrosam jahi jambhaya krkadasvam. 
A tu na indra Samsaya gosvasvesu subhrisu 
sahasresu tuvimagha. 


Indra, lord of the world’s wealth and glory, 
silence the wail of lamentations, crush the spirit of evil, 
and inspire and establish us in a splendid state of 
thousand-fold purity of conduct, free dominion over the 
earth and meteoric speed of progress and attainment. 


110 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 30 


Indra-Ashvinau-Usha Devatah, Ajigarti Shunahshepah 
Krtrima Vaishvamitra Devarata Rshi 


आ a इन्द्रं क्रिविं यथा वाजयन्तः शतक्रतुम्‌ । 
Hes सिञ्च इन्दुभिः ॥ ९॥ 


le A va indram krivim yatha vajayantah Sata-kratum. 
Mamhistham sinca indubhih. 


Just as strong winds carry the cloud for rain on 
the earth, just as men dig the well for irrigating the field, 
so you serve Indra, most generous and powerful hero 
of a hundred acts of creation and growth, with each 
drop of your powers and energies. 


श॒तं वा यः शुचीनां weet वा aT RT 
ud निम्नं न रीयते ॥ २॥ 

2 Satarn एत yah Sucinam sahasram va samasiram. 
Edu nimnam na riyate. 
Indra, controller of fire, water and electric 
energy, raises the pure ones to power hundred, and the 
mixed and synthesised ones to power thousand. Never 
does He or His power or the efficacy of His creations 
go down. 
सं यन्मदाय शुष्पिण war ह्य॑स्योदरे | 
समुद्रो न व्यचो दधे ॥ ३॥ 

3. Sam yanmadaya susmina ena hyasyodare. 
Samudro na vyaco dadhe. 


For the creation of life’s joy and for the 
development of food and energy for life, I take on these 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 30 111 


hundreds of powers of Indra implicit in the potentials 
of fire, water and electricity just like the jewels hidden 
in the depths of the wide wide sea. 


stad ते सम॑तसि कपोतंडइव गर्भधिम्‌ 
वचस्तच्िंन्न ओहसे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayamu te samatasi kapota iva garbhadhim. 
Vacastaccinna ohase. 


Indra, light and power of existence, this creation 
is yours for sure. Just as a pigeon flies into the nest to 
meet its mate so do you pervade and impregnate nature 
to create the world of forms, and listen to our words of 
praise and prayer. 


स्तोत्रं Cena पते firetat बीर यस्य॑ ते। 
विभूतिरस्तु सूनृता ॥ ५ ॥ 

a. Stotram radhanam pate girvaho vira yasya te. 
Vibhutirastu sunrta. 
Indra, celebrated in the divine voice of 
revelation, creator and guardian of the world and its 
wealth, mighty lord of omnipotence, great and true is 
your glory, and may our praise and prayer to you be 
truly realised for our strength and joy of life. 
ऊर्ध्वस्तिंा न ऊतयेऽस्मिन्वाजे शतक्रतो | 
समन्येषु ब्रवावहे ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Urdhvastistha na itaye’sminvdje Satakrato. 
Samanyesu bravavahai. 


Indra, hero of a hundred great acts of yajnic 
creation, rise and stay high for our defence and 


112 RGVEDA 


protection in this battle of life. And we would sing your 
praises in prayer with joy in other battles too together 
with you. 


योगेयोगे तवस्त॑रं वाजेवाजे Sarge | 
सखाय इन्द्रमूतये ॥ ७॥ 


भ Yogeyoge tavastaram vajevaje havamahe. 
Sakhaya indramutaye. 


Friends together and friends of Indra ever 
stronger and mightier, in every act of production and 
progress and in every battle for protection and 
preservation, we call upon Indra for defence and victory 
for well-being. 
आ घां गमद्यदि srdccefeuiifiratata: | 
anifited नो हव॑म्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. A gha gamadyadi Sravatsahasrinibhirutibhih. 
Vajebhirupa no havam. 
If Indra hears our call, let Him come, we pray, 
with a thousand ways of protection and progress of 
prosperity and well-being. 
अनु प्रलस्योकसो हुवे तुविप्रतिं नर॑म्‌ । 
यंते पूर्व पिता gare 

9. Anu pratnasyaukaso huve tuvipratim naram. 
Yam te purvam pita huve. 


I invoke and call upon the Primeval Man, eternal 
father, who creates this multitudinous existence from 
the eternal womb of nature, the same whom our original 
forefathers invoked and worshipped. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 30 113 


तं त्वां वयं विंश्ववाराऽऽ शास्महे Weed | 
सखे वसो जरितुभ्यंः ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Tam tva vayam visvara’’ sasmahe puruhuta. 
Sakhe vaso jaritrbhyah. 
Lord of universal love and choice, all benefactor, 
invoked and worshipped by all, friend, immanent and 


universal home, we invoke and worship you and pray 
for light from the celebrants of Divinity. 


अस्माकं शिप्रिणीनां सोम॑पाः सोमपाब्नाम्‌। 
सरवे वचिन्त्सखीनाम्‌॥ ९९॥ 
11. Asmakam Siprininam somapah somapavnam. 
Sakhe vajrintsakhinam. 
Friend of friends, benign protector of the 
protectors of soma, life’s joy, lord of the thunderbolt of 


light and lightning, supreme deity of us all and of all 
noble women, we love and pray for light and life divine. 


तथा तद॑स्तु सोमपाः सखे वचिन्तथां कृणु । 
यथां त उश्मसीष्टये 1 ९२॥ 
12. Tatha tadastu somapah sakhe vajrintatha krnu. 
Yatha ta usmasistaye. 
Protector of soma, peace and happiness, friend, 
lord of light and destroyer of suffering, as we love and 


pray to you for our good, so may you be and so may 
you do for us. 


रे वतीं्नः सधमाद्‌ इन्द्रे सन्तु तुविवाजाः | 
क्षुमन्तो याभिमदेम ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Revatirnah sadhamdada indre santu tuvivajah. 
Ksumanto yabhirmadema. 


114 RGVEDA 


May our people, wives and children be rich in 
wealth, knowledge and grace of culture, so that we, 
abundant and prosperous, may rejoice with them and live 
with them in happy homes in a state of honour and glory. 


आ घ॒ त्वावान्त्मनाप्ः स्तोतृभ्यो धृष्णवियानः। 
ऋणोरद्चं न चक्रयोः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. A gha tvavantmanaptah stotrbhyo dhrsnaviyanah. 
Rnorkasam na cakryoh. 


Lord of inviolable might, yourself your own 
definition, omniscient, instantly comprehending all that 
moves, you manifest your presence to the vision of your 
celebrants just as the one axle of two chariot wheels 
(moving, caring yet unmoved). 


आ aga: शतक्रतवा कामं जरितृणाम्‌। 
ऋणोरश्चं न शचीभिः ।॥ ९५॥ 
15. A yadduvah satakratava kamam jaritrnam. 
Rnoraksam na Sacibhih. 
Lord of a hundred blissful acts of the yajna of 
creation, who by the prayers and pious actions of the 
celebrants come into their vision and experience like 


the axis of a wheel, you fulfill their love and desire 
wholly and entirely. 


शश्वदिन्द्रः पोप्रंधद्धिर्जिंगाय नानदद्भिः शाश्व॑ंसद्धिर्ध्नानि। 
स नो' हिरण्यरथं दंसनावान्त्स 4: सनिता सनये स 
नोऽदात्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16.  Sasvadindrah popruthadbhirjigaya nanadadbhih 


sasvasadbhirdhanani. Sa no hiranyaratham 
damsanavantsa nah sanita sanaye sa no’dat. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 30 115 


Indra, the eternal creator, with roaring, moving, 
non-moving and animate things and materials, creates 
the wealth of existence such as earth, gold and 
knowledge and rises in glory. May He, lord of generosity 
and dispensation of justice, give us golden chariots and 
bless us with wealth of the world for happiness and well- 
being. 


आणश्विंनावश्वां वत्येषा यातं शवीरया | 
Trager हिर॑ण्यवत्‌ il ९७॥ 

17. ASvinavaSsvavatyesa yatam Saviraya. 
Gomadasra hiranyavat. 


Ashvins, scientist and technologist of eminence, 
president and commander, moving like the earth and 
light, create the chariot with golden materials and earthly 
comfortable provisions and take us to distant places at 
the wanted speed with chosen acceleration and reach 
distant places for our goals. 


समानयोजनो हि at रथों दस्रावमर्त्यः | 
समुद्रे अंश्विनेय॑ते ।॥ ९८ i 


18. Samanayojano hi van ratho dasravamartyah. 
Samudre aSvineyate. 


Ashvins, generous and imaginative experts, 
indestructible is your chariot of balanced technology 
of velocity. It goes over the sea and soars into the sky, 
at the wanted speed and acceleration, for the wanted 
destination. 


न्यषैष्न्यस्यं Welt चक्रं रथ॑स्य येमथुः | 
परि द्यामन्यदीयते ।॥। ९९ ॥ 


116 RGVEDA 


19. Nyaghnyasya murdhani cakram rathasya yema- 
thuh. Paridyamanyadiyate. 


Ashvins, on top of your indestructible chariot 
fix a rotating machine, chakra, which will take it over 
the sea and the sky. Fix another below, and this other 
will take it over the sky into space, the region of light. 


कस्त॑ उषः कधप्रिये भुजे मर्तो अमर्त्ये । 
ch न॑क्षसे विभावरि।॥ २०॥ 


20. Kasta usah kadhapriye bhuje marto amartye. 
Kam naksase vibhavari. 


O Dawn, immortal light of the divine sun, lover 
of divine songs and stories, darling of the singers and 
celebrants, which mortal man is able to comprehend 
your beauty and bliss? Lady of Light, who do you see 
as such? 


वयं हि ते अम॑न्पह्याऽऽन्तादा प॑राकात्‌। 
अश्वे न चित्रे अरुषि।॥ २९॥ 


21. Vayam hi te amanmahya’ ’ntada parakat. 
ASve na citre arusi. 


Golden lady of Light Divine, refulgent, riding 
as if on a wondrous flying horse, we pray we may know 
and attain to you wholly from within and from far off 
above. 


त्वं त्येभिरा ग॑हि वाजेभिर्ुहितर्दिवः। 
अस्मे रयिंनि धांरय।॥ २२॥ 


22. Tvam tyebhira gahi vajebhirduhitardivah. 
Asme rayim ni dharaya. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 31 117 


Come, daughter of the light of Heaven, with all 
the light and speed and message of time and space. Bear 
all the wealth and knowledge and bring us the blessings 
of the Divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 31 
Agni Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi 


wana प्रथमो अद्धिरा ऋषिर्देवो देवानामभवः शिवः 
सरां । तवं व्रते कवयो विदानापसोऽजांयन्त मरुतो भ्राजं- 
दुष्टयः॥९॥ 


iP Tvamagne prathamo angira rsirdevo devanam- 
abhavah Ssivah sakha. Tava vrate kavayo vidma- 
napaso’jayanta maruto bhrajadrstayah. 


Agni, Lord Supreme of the universe, you are 
the first of existence and pre-existence, life and spirit 
of the worlds, seer and teacher, light and light-giver of 
nature for scholars of humanity. Friend and lord of bliss, 
the scholars, saints and poets, and the fastest geniuses 
of the world abiding in your laws of Dharma and Karma, 
with full consciousness and responsibility rise to a state 
of glorious light and vision. 


त्वम॑ग्ने प्रथमो अद्धिरस्तमः कविर्दवानां परिं भूषसि aq 
विभुर्विश्वस्मै भुव॑नाय मेधिरो द्विमाता शयुः कतिधा 
चिंदायवें।॥। २॥ 

2 Tvamagne prathamo angirastamah kavirdeva- 


nam pari bhusasi vratam. Vibhurvisvasmai bhu- 
vanaya medhiro dvimata sayuh katidha cidayave. 


Agni, lord of light, eternal and ever first 
existence and prime cause of creation, life of life, 


118 RGVEDA 


omniscient, you create the laws of the lights of nature 
and humanity and invest them with beauty and grace. 
Immanent, omnipresent and infinite, for all the worlds 
of the universe you are the mother maker and mover of 
the world of light and dark, subtle and gross, all. You 
send them to sleep in pralaya (annihilation) and wake 
them up into the light of existence for a life-time in so 
many ways. 


त्वमग्ने प्रथमो मातरिश्वन आविर्भव सुक्रतूया विवस्व॑ते | 
अरेजेतां रोद॑सी होतृवूर्ये ऽसंध्नोभारिमयंजो महो व॑सो ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Tvamagne prathamo matarisvana davirbhava 
sukratuya vivasvate. Arejetam rodast hotrvurye’- 
saghnorbharamayajo maho vaso. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, you are the 
first of existence and eternal wakeful presence. By your 
yajnic vibration of divine intention you manifest for the 
creation of Matarishva, universal energy of nature, and 
Vivasvan, the refulgent sun. By the same cause, the all- 
containing heaven and the generous earth, all 
productive, come into existence, move and shine. Haven 
and home of all, immanent power, bear the burden and 
create the mighty and subtle knowledge of the super- 
power for us. 


त्वमग्रे मन॑वे द्याम॑वाशयः Tarde सुकृते THAT: | 
श्वात्रेण यत्यित्रोर्मुच्य॑से पर्याऽऽ त्वा पूर्व मनयन्नाप॑रं 
पुन॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvamagne manave dyama vasayah pururavase 


sukrte sukrttarah. Svatrena yatpitrormucyase 
parya’’ tva purvamanayannaparam punah. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 31 119 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, greater 
creator of beneficence than anyone else, you create the 
light and heaven for the man of knowledge, divine 
speech and noble action. O soul, jiva, who are freed of 
the obligation and causal link of father and mother by 
virtue of knowledge and action, the same lord who led 
you to the previous birth takes you to the next, after 
this and even after moksha. 


त्वमग्रे वृषभः पुष्टिवर्धन उद्य॑तस्रुचे भवसि श्रवाय्यः var आहुतिं 
परि वेदा वष॑ट्कृतिमेका।युरगरे विशं आविवाससि ॥ ५॥ 


Tvamagne vrsabhah pustivardhana udyatasruce 
bhavasi Sravayyah. Ya ahutim pari veda vasatkrti- 
mekayuragre visa avivasasi. 


Agni, lord giver of the showers of blessings, 
promoter of growth and progress, you listen to the praise 
and prayer of the yajakas holding up the ladle of offering 
for the fire, now as before and after. Lord eternal, 
constant and imperishable existence, you wholly know 
the offers of libations and accept all yajnic actions of 
the performers, and all the people of the world abide in 
you and serve you. 


त्वमग्रे वृजिनवर्तनिं at waauatt विदथे विचर्षणे । 
यः शूस्साता परितक्म्ये धने दभ्र भिंश्चित्समृता हंसि 
भूय॑सः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tvamagne vrjinavartanim naram sakmanpi-parsi 
vidathe vicarsane. Yah surasata paritakm-ye 
dhane dabhrebhiscitsamrta hamsi bhuyasah. 


Agni, friend and associate lord of comprehen- 
Sive vision, you support the man who goes with the man 


120 RGVEDA 


of strength in yajna, and resist and defeat the man who 
supports a man of crooked ways of power. And in battle 
of the brave for the creation of wealth and joy, you 
destroy many evils with limited men and means 
dedicated to righteousness. 


त्वं aaa अमृतत्व उत्तमे ud’ दधासि saa featea 
यस्तातृषाण SIMA जन्म॑ने मय॑ः कृणोषि wa आ चं 
सूरये ॥ ७॥ 


vA Tvam tamagne amrtatva uttame martam dadhasi 
Sravase divedive. Yastatrsana ubhayaya janmane 
mayah krnosi praya a ca suraye. 


Agni, into the best state of moksha you place 
that intelligent person who is keen to hear the divine 
voice day in and day out and longs for freedom. And 
then for the man of wisdom who loves both the previous 
state and the next human birth, you do good and create 
the best of desired happiness and comfort in life. 


त्वं al अग्रे सनये eT यशसं कारुकुणुहि Sars: 1 
ऋध्याम कर्मापसा नवेन देवैदद्यीवापृथिवी प्राव॑तं नः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam no agne sanaye dhananam yasasam karum 
krnuhi stavanah. Rdhyama karmapasa navena 
devairdyavaprthivi pravatam nah. 


Agni, lord giver of honour, sung and celebrated 
in hymns, for the management and growth of our wealth, 
give us a reputed expert of economy so that we may 
advance and prosper with new enterprises, and both 
heaven and earth may promote us with the blessings of 
nature and the environment. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 31 121 


त्वं नो अग्ने पित्रोरुपस्थ आ देवो देवेष्वनवद्य wife: 1 
wid बोधि प्रम॑तिश्च कारवे त्वं कल्याणा वसु विश्व- 
मोपिंषे॥ ९॥ 


0. Tvam no agne pitrorupastha a devo devesva- 
navadya jagrvih. Tanukrdbodhi pramatisca 
karave tvam kalyana vasu visvamopise. 


Agni, light of the world and giver of knowledge 
and progress, keep us close in the presence of father 
and mother under the care and protection of heaven and 
earth. Brilliant and generous, lord immaculate beyond 
words of evil and calumny, you are ever awake and 
active in the lights of nature and hearts of pious 
humanity. Lord creator and maker of the finest forms 
of existence, give us the knowledge, give us the 
protection and expertise for the worker specialist 
entrepreneur. You are the peace, you are the bliss. You 
are the wealth, you are the Home. Let the world awake, 
arise and reach where they belong. 


wad प्रमतिस्त्वं पितासि नस्त्वं वयस्कृत्तव जामयो वयम्‌ | 
सं त्वा रायः शतिनः सं सहस्रिणः सु वीरं यन्ति व्रतपामं- 
दाभ्य॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvamagne pramatistvam pitasi nastvamvaya- 
skrttava jamayo vayam. Sam tva rayah satinah 
sam sahasrinah suviram yanti vratapamadabhya. 


Agni, light of the world, you are the power of 
exalted knowledge. You are our father and protector. 
You are the giver of life for us, life ever new. We are 
your children of enlightenment. The wealths of the world 
in hundred forms in a thousand streams flow unto you, 
lord inviolable, bravest of the brave, observer and 


9 RGVEDA 
protector of the laws of life and nature. 


त्वामंगे प्रथममायुमायवे देवा अकृण्वन्नहुषस्य विर्पतिंम्‌। 
इव्ठांमकृण्वन्मनुषस्य शासनीं पितुर्यत्पुत्रो ममकस्य 
जायंते ॥ ९९॥ 


11.  Tvamagne prathamamayumayave deva akrnva- 
nnahusasya vispatim. Ilamakrnvan manusasya 
Sasanim pituryatputro mamakasya jayate. 


Agni, lord of light and life, ruler, sustainer and 
protector of the people, brilliant powers of nature 
manifest you, brilliant men of knowledge and generosity 
elect and kindle you, first power, leading light and 
protector of the people for their life, enlightenment and 
advancement. They envision, proclaim and disseminate 
the divine voice, eternal truth and ruling law of the world 
and humanity. And, as in my case, the son is born of the 
father, so is light and knowledge born of parental light 
and knowledge. 


त्वं नों अग्रे तव॑ देव पायुभिर्मघोनो! tat तन्वश्च वन्द्य । 
त्राता तोकस्य तन॑ये गवामस्यनिमेषं रक्षमाणस्तव 
ad ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tvamno agne tava deva payubhirmaghono raksa 
tanvasca vandya. Trata tokasya tanaye gavama- 
syanimesam raksamanastava vrate. 


Agni, universal protector and sustainer of life, 
generous and brilliant lord, adorable power, blest are 
we with wealth and prosperity. Protect and promote us 
and our health and age with all your powers of protection 
and sustenance. You are the saviour and vigilant 
guardian of our children, our land and cows, and our 
sense and mind for the sake of our posterity. And we 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 31 123 


are steady and dedicated to the rules and discipline of 
your law. 


त्वमग्रे यज्य॑वे पायुरन्त॑रोऽनिषङ्काय चतुरक्ष इध्यसे । यो 
रातहव्योऽवृकाय धाय॑से कीरेश्चिन्मन्त्रं मन॑सा वनोषि 
तम्‌।॥ ९२३॥ 


13. Tvamagne yajyave payurantaro’nisangaya catu- 
raksa idhyase. Yo ratahavyo’vrkaya dhayase 
kirescinmantram manasa vanosi tam. 


Agni, ruling lord, you are the protector and 
promoter of the man of yajna who creates wealth and 
contributes to prosperity. Lord of all round vision and 
power, you shine within for the man of objective wisdom 
and judgement. You are the creator and giver of wealth 
and prosperity for the non-violent man of action and 
generosity, and you listen with love and accept that 
prayer and mantra of the celebrant which springs from 
the heart. 


त्वम॑ग्र उरुशंसाय वाघते CATE यद्रेक्ण॑: पर मं वनोषि तत्‌। 
sera चित्म्रम॑तिरुच्यसे पिता प्र पाकं शास्सि प्रदिशो 
विदुष्टरः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. = Tvamagna urusamsaya vaghate sparham yadre- 
knah paramam vanosi tat. Adhrasya citpramatiru- 
cyase pita pra pakam Sassi pra diso vidustarah. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, ruler of the 
world, for the man of celebrated eminence and for the 
man of yajna and divine speech, you create and give 
that wealth of life which is the best and most wanted of 
all. Lord of vision and wisdom, you are called the father 
of the world you hold in sway, and you superintend the 


124 RGVEDA 


rule of law, and you rise as redeemer of the world in all 
quarters of space. 


त्वमग्ने प्रय॑तदक्षिणं नरं वर्मेव स्यूतं परिं पासि favad: | 
स्वादुक्षद्या यो व॑सतौ स्योनकृज्जीवयाजं यज॑ते सोपमा 
दिवः॥ ९५॥ 


15. Tvamagne prayatadaksinam naram varmeva 
syutam pari pasi visvatah. Svaduksadma yo 
vasatau syonakrjjivayajam yajate sopama divah. 


Agni, lord of light and law, guardian of all, like 
a strongly fabricated armour you protect from all sides 
the man initiated and consecrated who abides in the 
home with delicious foods, doing noble deeds with yajna 
and dharma and serves life as an example of the saving 
light of heaven. 


इमामग्ने शरणिं मीमृषो न इममध्वानं यमगाम दूरात्‌ । आपिः 
पिता प्रम॑तिः सोम्यानां भृमिरस्य॒षिकृन्मत्यीनाम्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Imamagne saranim mimrso na imamadhvanam 
yamagama durat. Apih pita pramatih somya-nam 
bhrmirasyrsikrnmartyanam. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, remove this 
destructive ignorance of ours so that we come back to 
the right path from afar. Lord of vision and wisdom, 
giver of the light divine, omnipresent, ever on the move, 
immanent and accessible to the people of peace and 
piety, father, save us, redeem us, bless us. 


मनुष्वदगरे अद्धिर स्वदद्धिरो ययातिवत्सदने पूर्ववच्छ्चे । 
अच्छ याद्या dat दैव्यं जनमा सादय बर्हिषि यकि च 
प्रियम्‌ ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 125 


17. Manusvadagne angirasvadangiro yaydativat 
sadane purvavacchuce. Accha yahya vaha 
daivyam janama sadaya barhisi yaksi ca priyam. 


Agni, lord of the world, Angira, life-breath of 
existence, the very light of purity, come well beautifully, 
come like a human presence, come like the breath of 
freshness, come like the effort and achievement of life, 
come as ever before. Come to the dear holy man of 
divinity, bear him on to knowledge and Dharma, seat 
him on the sacred grass of the vedi in the house of yajna, 
and conduct the yajna for us unto the light of heaven. 


एतेना ब्रह्म॑णा वावृधस्व शक्ती वा यत्ते चकृमा विदा 
ali उत प्र णेष्यभि वस्यो अस्मान्त्सं न॑: सृज सुमत्या 
वाज॑वत्या ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18.  Etanagne brahmana vavrdhasva sakti va yatte 
cakrma vida va. Uta pra nesyabhi vasyo asma- 
ntsam nah srja sumatya vajavatya. 

Agni, lord of light and fire of yajna, grow and 
let us grow by this divine voice of Veda, and by whatever 
we may do and achieve with our spiritual and physical 
strength or with our knowledge and action for the 
Divine. And bring us all-round wealth, and in-vest and 
exalt us with holy, creative and dynamic intelligence of 
a positive and victorious order. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi 


इन्द्रस्य नु वीर्याणि प्र ale at चकार प्रथमानि वज्री । 
अहन्नहिमन्वपस्त॑तर्द प्र वक्षणा! अभिनत्पर्वतानाम्‌ ९॥ 


126 RGVEDA 


1. Indrasya nu viryani pra vocam yani cakara 
prathamani vajri. Ahannahimanvapastatarda 
pra vaksana abhinat parvatanam. 


I recite and celebrate the first and highest 
exploits of Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, refulgent ruler, 
which he, like the sun, performs with the shooting rays 
of His light. He breaks down the cloud like an enemy, 
releases the waters and opens the paths of mountain 
streams. (The ruler too, similarly, breaks down the 
enemies holding up the powers of the nation for 
movement, releases the energies and resources of the 
nation, and carves out the paths of progress.) 


अहन्नहिं पर्वते शिभियाणं त्वष्टास्मै वचं स्वर्यः ततश्च । 
वाश्राइव धेनवः स्यन्द॑माना अञ्ज॑ः समुद्रमव जग्मुरापः ॥ २॥ 


en Ahannahim parvate sisriyanam tavastasmai 
vajram svaryam tataksa. Vasra iva dhenavah 
syandamana anjah samudramava jagmurapah. 


Indra, lord of shooting rays of light, breaks the 
cloud resting on the mountain. Tvashta, creative power 
of the Divine, making fine forms and subtle energies, 
creates the catalytic power for Him and His shooting 
rays against the cloud. And, like cows eager for the 
calves, rushing to the stalls, the waters instantly rush 
down to the sea. 


वृषायमाणोऽवृणीत सोमं त्रिक॑द्रुकेष्वपिलत्सुतस्य | 
आ साय॑कं मघवादत्त वज्रमहत्ेनं प्रथमजामहीनाम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 
Vrsayamano’vrnita somam trikadrukeSvapibat- 


sutasya. A sayakam maghavadatta vajramaha- 
nnenam prathamajamahinam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 127 


Indra, generous lord of showers of light and rain, 
receives and drinks up the vital essences present in 
heaven, earth and sky, three regions of the created world. 
The sun, glorious possessor of heat and water, takes up 
the thunderbolt of electric energy and strikes and breaks 
up the first born of the dense clouds of vapours. 

(So does the ruler hold and rule and enjoy the 
rule over his dominion. He takes up his forces and 
deploys them to destroy the worst of the nation’s 
enemies. And just as the sun is mighty and generous for 
the earth, so should the ruler be for his subjects and 
dominions.) 


यदिन्द्राहन्प्रथपजामहीनामान्पायिनाममिंनाः प्रोत मायाः। 
आत्सूर्य' जनयन्द्यामुषासं तादीत्ना शत्रं न किल्ां विवित्से ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yadindrahan prathamajam ahinamanm ayinam 
aminah prota mayah. At suryam janayan dyamu- 
sasam taditna satrum na kila vivitse. 


Indra, since you break up the first born of the 
clouds of dark vapours and also disperse the powerful 
forces of these wonder demons, creating and revealing 
thereby the sun and the dawn and the heavens, you will 
not, for sure, encounter any enemy. 

(So should the ruler too eliminate the enemies 
of the land and ensure peace and security for his people.) 


अहन्वृत्रं वृत्रतरं व्यंसमिन्द्रो वरेण महता aa । 
स्कन्धांसीव कुलिरोना विवृक्णाऽर्हिः शयत उपपृक्पुं- 
यिव्याः॥ ५ ॥ 

9 Ahanvrtram vrtrataram vyamsamindro vajrena 


mahata vadhena. Skandhamsiva kulisena vivr- 
kna@’hih Sayata upaprkprthivyah. 


128 RGVEDA 


Indra, sun and vayu energy, breaks up Vrtra, the 
dark thick cloud, denser than demonic, with the fatal 
blow of the thunderbolt of lightning. Its shoulders 
chopped off by the shooting sharpness of the sword- 
like waves of sun-rays, the cloud lies flat on the floor 
of the earth (its body turned to rain water). 


sited दुर्मद आ हि We म॑हावीरं तुविवाधमुंजी- 
षम्‌। नातारीदस्य waft वधानां सं रुजानाः पिपिष 
इन्द्र॑शत्रुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ayoddheva durmada ठ hi juhve mahaviram tuvi- 
badham rjisam. Nataridasya samrtim vadha-nam 
sam rujanah pipisa indraSsatruh. 


Like a naive warrior gone mad, Vrtra, the cloud 
dared and challenged the sun, great and valiant Indra, 
vanquisher of many, reducing them to juice. But he could 
not take the force of the blows of Indra, failed and lay 
crushed. The streams flow over hills breaking down 
mounds of earth. 


अपादहस्तो अंपृतन्यदिन्द्रमास्य वज्रमधि सानौ जघान । 
वृष्णो af: प्रतिमानं बुभंषन्पुरुत्रा वृत्रो अशयद्धय॑ 
स्तः॥ ७॥ 


7. 44414510 aprtanyadindramasya vajramadhi 
sanau jaghana. Vrsno vadhrih pratimanam bu- 
bhusan purutra vrtro asayad vyastah. 


Legs now lost, arms lost, Vrtra had challenged 
Indra. Impotent fool he was, desiring equal rivalry with 
the mighty hero. Indra struck the lightning thunderbolt 
on his shoulder. Beaten and broken all over, Vrtra lies 
flat on the earth. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 129 


नदं न भिन्नम॑मुया शयानं मनो रुहाणा अति acer: | 
aide वृत्रो महिना पर्यति्ठत्तासामर्हिः पत्सुतःशीर्ब- 
भूव ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nadam na bhinnamamuya Sayanam mano ruhana 
ati yantyapah. Yascid vrtro mahina paryatistha- 
ttasamahih patsutah Sirbabhuva. 


Like a flood let loose, the showers of rain, so 
soothing and beautiful to the mind, defy Vrtra, the cloud, 
which is now lying shattered on the ground — waters 
which, earlier, the cloud had held up with its own might. 
Their master now lies trampled under feet on the ground. 
(This is the fate of a presumptuous man who proudly 
and foolishly challenges the Almighty.) 


नीचाक॑या अभवद्‌ वृच्रपुत्रन्द्रो अस्या अव वधर्जभार । 
उत्त॑रा सूरधरः पुत्र आसीदानुंः शये सहवत्सा न धेनुः ॥ ९ ॥ 


7, Nicavaya abhavad vrtraputrendro asya ava 
vadharjabhara. Uttara suradharah putra asid 
danuh Saye sahavatsa na dhenuh. 


The earth is the mother of the cloud, below. The 
other is the sky up on high. Indra, the sun, strikes Vrtra, 
the cloud, with its thunderbolt in the sky and the cloud 
comes down with the showers. The earth lies with the 
cloud like a cow sleeping with its calf. 

(The presumptuous ruler who, thrown up by his 
forces, challenges the world ruler meets a fate like the 
cloud’s with his forces.) 


अतिष्टन्तीनामनिवेशानानां काष्ठानां मध्ये निहितं erie 
वृत्रस्य॑ निण्यं वि च॑र॒ न्त्यापो! दीर्घं तम आशंयदिन्द्र- 
BA: ॥ ९०॥ 


130 RGVEDA 


10. Atisthantinam anivesananam kasthanam madhye 
nihitam Sariram. Vrtrasya ninyam vi carantyapo 
dirgham tama asayad indrasatruh. 


In the non-stop ever flowing streams of the 
tracks of the sky is diffused the mysterious body of Vrtra, 
the cloud, in the deepest dark. The same rival of Indra 
which covered the sun now lies flat on earth and the 
water-streams flow (open and beautiful). 


(Indra, the ruler, should strike the hidden forces 
which cover the light of the order, condense them and 
make them flow out openly for the good of the nation.) 


aradeainfénrar अतिष्ठन्निरुब्दा sid: पणिनेव ara: 1 
अपां वितलमपिंहितं यदासींद्‌ वृत्रं ज॑घन्वां अप तद्व॑वार ॥ १९॥ 


11. Dasapatnirahigopa atisthanniruddha apah 
panineva gavah. Apam bilamapihitam yadasid- 
vrtram jaghanvan apa tadvavara. 


Like women supported by their husbands, the 
waters stay supported by the cloud, hidden in its 
darkness like cows in the stall guarded by the cowherd 
or the trader. The water-hold that was hidden and closed 
was opened and released through the door by the slayer 
of Vrtra, Indra, the sun. 


अश्व्यो ani अभवस्तदिन्द्र सृके यत्त्वां प्रत्यहंन्देव एकः | 
अज॑यो गा अज॑यः शूर सोममवासृजः सर्त॑वे aa 
सिन्धून्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Asvyo varo abhavastadindra srke yattva pratya- 
handeva ekah. Ajayo ga ajayah Sura soma- 
mavasrjah sartave sapta sindhun. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 131 


Tempestuous of speed and power of defence and 
offence and as the choice lord and hero do you arise, 
Indra, then when the one unique rival, Vrtra, throws its 
darkness over your rays of light and catalysis. Arising 
then you conquer the earth, you win and collect the vital 
soma of life, and you release the seven streams of nectar 
to enrich the seven seas of existence as they flow. 


नास्मै विद्युन्न तन्यतुः fatter न यां पिहमकिरद्ध्रादुनिं 
च। इन्द्र॑श्च यद्युयुधाते अर्िश्चोतापरीभ्यों मघवा वि 
जिग्ये ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Nasmai vidyunna tanyatuh sisedha na yam 
mihamakiraddhradunim ca. Indrasca yadyuyu- 
dhate ahiscotaparibhyo maghava vi jigye. 


Neither lightning nor thunder, nor storm and 
shower, nor the roar and rumble which Vrtra produces 
does resist and stop Indra. When Indra and Vrtra both 
battke—Vrtra with inadequate forces—then Indra, 
powerful and glorious, comes out victorious. 


अहेर्यातारं कम॑पश्य इन्द्र हृदि यत्ते जघ्नुषो भीरग॑च्छत्‌ । 
नव॑ च यन्नवतिं च स्रव॑न्तीः श्येनो न भीतो अतरो 
रजांसि ॥ १४ ॥ 


14. Aheryataram kamapasya indra hrdi yatte 
Jaghnuso bhiragacchat. Nava ca yannavatim ca 
sravantth syeno na bhito ataro rajamsi. 


Indra, who ever sees anyone else other than you 
as the killer of Vrtra, since in every heart it is your fear, 
the victor’s fear, that prevails? And like a victorious 
hawk not-afraid you shine and rule over regions of the 
world and feed nine and ninety streams of water that 


132 RGVEDA 
flow and sustain life. 


इन्द्रो यातोऽ व॑सितस्य राजा शम॑स्य च शुङ्धिणो वज्रं बाहुः | 
सेदु राजा| श्चयति चर्षणीनामरान्न नेमिः परि ता ब॑भूव ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15.  Indro yato’vasitasya raja Samasya ca 5117110 
vajrabahuh. Sedu raja ksayati carsaninamaranna 
nemih pari ta babhuva. 


Indra, lord of thunder force of arms, is the ruler 
and illuminator of the moving world, settled and 
peaceful humanity and the animals. The same ruler holds 
and sustains the order of humanity and the world 
together and keeps it going. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 33 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi 


एतायामोपं गव्यन्त इन्द्रमस्माकं सु प्रम॑तिं वावृधाति। 
अनामृणः कुविदादस्य रायो गवां कतं परमावर्जते नः ॥ ९॥ 


bs Etayamopa gavyanta indramasmakam su pra- 
matim vavrdhati. Anamrnah kuvidadasya rayo 
gavam ketam paramavarjate nah. 


Come ye, come all, seekers of health and 
brilliance of mind and sense, let us approach Indra, lord 
supreme of light and knowledge, who feeds, increases 
and refines our intelligence along the right lines. 
Undying, unborn and eternal, great is He. He increases 
the beauty and grandeur of the wealth and grace of this 
earth in many ways and then He bestows on us supreme 
knowledge and the possession of it. 


उपेदहं ध॑नदामप्र॑तीतं जुष्टां न श्येनो व॑सतिं प॑तामि । इन्द्र 
नमस्यन्नुपमेभिररकर्यः स्तोतृभ्यो हव्यो अस्ति याम॑न्‌॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 33 133 


2. Upedaham dhanadamapratitam justam na Syeno 
vasatim patami. Indram namasyannupame- 
bhirarkairyah stotrbhyo havyo asti yaman. 


Just as a falcon flies to its favourite haunt and 
home, so bowing and praying with exemplary songs 
and offerings I yearn to reach Indra, lord of honour and 
splendour, giver of wealth, but invisible and 
incomprehensible, who alone is adorable for the 
worshippers in the world of time. 


नि सर्वसेन इषुधींर॑सक्त समर्यो गा अजति यस्य वष्टि । 
चोष्कूयमाण इन्द्र भूरिं वामं मा पणिर्भूरस्मदधि Wag ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Ni sarvasena isudhinrasakta samaryo ga ajati 
yasya vasti. Coskuyamana indra bhuri vamam 
ma panirbhurasmadadhi pravrddha. 


Indra, lord of hosts and battle, take up the bow 
and quiver, shine as you will and win. The victor carries 
the prize. Generous and profusely rewarding to the noble 
and the splendid, be not ungenerous to us, lofty and 
great overlord as you are over us. 


वधीर्हि दस्युं धनिनं घनेनँ एकश्चर॑न्ुपशाकेभिरिन्द्र | 
धनोरधि विषुणक्ते व्यांयन्नय॑ज्वानः सनकाः प्रेतिमीयुः ॥ ठ i 


4. Vadhirhi dasyum dhaninam dhanenan ekascara- 
nnupasakebhirindra. Dhanoradhi visunakte 
vyayannayajvanah sanakah pretimiyuh. 


Indra, lord of power and justice, marching ahead 
by yourself, strike down the wicked affluent hoarder 
alongwith his supporters with a single blow of the 
thunderbolt. Eliminator of smugglers and infiltrators, 
fix the selfish fun-lovers on the point of your arrow and 


134 RGVEDA 
let them meet their end. 


परा' चिच्छीषां व॑वृजुस्त इन्द्राऽय॑ज्वानो यज्व॑भिः 
स्पर्धमानाः । प्र यद्दिवो ह॑रिवः स्थातरुग्र निरव्रताँ अधमो 
रोद॑स्योः ॥ ५॥ 


a: Para cicchirsa vavrjusta indra’yajvano yajva- 
bhih spardhamanah. Pra yaddivo harivah 
sthatarugra niravratan adhamo rodasyoh. 


Indra, lord of light and justice, firm and 
steadfast, mighty strong, commander of horse power 
and armoured force, just as the sun, blazing lord of light 
and sustainer of earth, heaven and the middle skies, 
breaks up and scatters the cloud, so do you blow off 
and scatter the top-notch selfish, uncreative and lawless 
elements who rival and stall the yajnic creative, 
constructive and productive powers of your dominion. 


अयुंयुत्सन्ननवद्यस्य सेनामयातयन्त क्षितयो नव॑ग्वाः 1 
वृषायुधो न वध्च॑यो निरष्टाः प्रवद्धिरिन्द्राच्यितय॑न्त 
आयन्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ayuyutsannanavadyasya senamayatayanta 
ksitayo navagvah. Vrsayudho na vadhrayo nira- 
stah pravadbhirindraccitayanta ayan. 


Settled heroes of the nation, brave fighters, 
trained in the latest arms and tactics, experts of offence 
and defence, strengthening and elevating the striking 
power of the admirable commander of the ruler and 
supreme commander, try to fight and fight on so that 
the enemies, defeated and demoralised, flee away from 
Indra down hill by the swiftest course, like emasculated 
cowards. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 33 135 


त्वमेतान्‌ रुदतो जक्षतश्चायोधयो रज॑स इन्द्र पारे। अवादहो 
दिव आ दस्युमुच्चा प्र सुन्वतः स्तुवतः शंस॑मावः ॥ ७॥ 


a Tvametan rudato jaksatascayodhayo rajasa indra 
pare. Avadaho diva a dasyumucca pra sunvatah 
stuvatah Samsamavah. 


Indra, ruler and commander, fight out these 
ogres and those, weeping and wailing, away from the 
middle regions of the dominion. Throw off the wicked 
from the higher regions, and from higher positions. 
Raise those who are creators of soma, peace and joy. 
Protect those who appreciate and raise the honour of 
the world and humanity. 


चक्राणासंः परीणहं पृथिव्या हिर॑ण्येन मणिना शुम्भ॑मानाः | 
न हिन्वानासंस्तितिरुस्त इन्द्रं परि स्पशो अदधात्सूर्येण i ८ ॥ 


8. Cakranasah parinaham prthivya hiranyena 
manina sumbhamanah. Na hinvanasastitirusta 
indram pari spaso adadhat suryena. 


The fighting forces of the sun, beautified by 
golden jewels of light by the sun, messengers of peace 
and joy of the earth, do not break the protective cover 
of the earth, nor do they violate the purpose of the sun, 
and by virtue of the same sun they serve and glorify 
Indra, lord ruler of the earth and her children. 


(Similarly, the dynamic forces of the earth’s 
dominion, invested with the golden jewels of royal 
robes, dedicated to service and well-being, do not violate 
the bounds of the earth’s protective laws and, as 
messengers and agents of the universal lord of light, 
they uphold the ruler and the rule of law.) 


136 RGVEDA 


परि यदिन्द्र रोद॑सी उभे अबुभोजीर्महिना favad: सीम्‌। 
अम॑न्यमानाँ अभि मन्य॑मानैर्नर्ब्हयभि॑रधमो दस्युमिन्द्र ॥ ९ ॥ 


2. Pari yadindra rodasi ubhe abubhojirmahina 
visvatah sim. Amanyamanan abhi manyamanair 
nirbrahmabhiradhamo dasyumindra. 


Just as Indra, the sun, with its own power and 
glory, holds both earth and heaven in orbit all round in 
a State of equilibrium by the force of its gravitation and 
throws off the unwanted forces by its own laudable 
forces of heat and light, so you, Indra, lord ruler of the 
earth, with your power and glory, hold and sustain the 
earth and the people and, with the assistance of 
responsible and respectable people of knowledge and 
divine wisdom, control and correct the unruly elements, 
and throw off the selfish and the wicked. 


न ये fea: पुंथिव्या अन्तमापुर्न मायाभिर्धनदां पर्यभुंवन्‌। 
युजं वचं वृषभश्चक्र इन्द्रो निर्ज्योतिषा तम॑सो गा 
अदुक्षत्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Na ye divah prthivya antamapurna mayabhir- 
dhanadam paryabhuvan. Yujam vajram vrsabha- 
scakra indro nirjyotisa tamaso ga aduksat. 


There are those who do not understand the end 
and purpose of the earth and heaven, nor can they, with 
all their magic and power, conquer or insult the mother 
giver earth. Indra, virile and generous lord ruler of earth 
and heaven, uses his ready weapon of the thunderbolt 
of light and force, kindles the sense and mind of the 
people and delivers the earth from the darkness of 
ignorance and evil. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 33 137 


अनुं स्वधामक्षरन्नापो अस्याऽवंर्धत मध्य आ नाव्यांनाम्‌। 
सध्रीचीनेन मन॑सा तमिन्द्र ओजिष्ठेन हन्मनाहन्नभि 
द्यून्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Anu svadhamaksarannapo asya’vardhata 
madhya a navyanam. Sadhricinena manasa 
tamindra ojisthena hanmanahannabhi dyun. 


The waters of this cloud flow according to their 
nature, in response to this Indra’s power after the yajnic 
offers of holy havi, and they collect in the navigable 
lakes, rivers and seas. Indra, lord of lightning power, 
strike that cloud of darkness pregnant with waters with 
your own essential and most lustrous fatal weapon fast 
as mind, break the darkness, and release the light and 
waters to flow to the earth. 


न्यांविध्यदित्ीविषंस्य goa वि शुङ्कणंमभिनच्छुष्ण- 
ford: | यावत्तरो मघवन्यावदोजो वज्रेण शात्नमवधीः 
प॒तन्युम्‌॥ ९२॥ 

12. Nyavidhyadilibisasya drdha vi srnginamabhin- 
acchusnamindrah. Yavattaro maghavan yava- 
dojo vajrena satrum avadhih prtanyum. 


Just as Indra, the sun, lord of light and power, 
breaks and scatters the dense cloud into rain water lying 
in the depressions of the earth such as lakes and oceans, 
and scatters and condenses the mountainous cloud in 
the sky which has sucked up the waters from the earth, 
similarly, O lord ruler of the earth’s wealth and glory, 
strike the underground enemy forces with thunder and 
destroy them. Don’t give up while your strength lasts 
and your lustre and morale sustains. 


138 RGVEDA 


अभि सिध्मो अजिगादस्य शत्रून्वि fara वृषभेणा 
पुरोऽभत्‌। सं asus वृत्रमिन्द्रः प्र स्वां मतिम॑तिर च्छ- 
दानः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Abhi sidhmo ajigadasya Satrunvi tigmena vrsa- 
bhena puro’ bhet. Sam vajrenasrjadvrtramin-drah 
pra svam matimatiracchasadanah. 


Just as the never-failing triumphant light of this 
sun goes straight and takes on the cloud like an enemy 
and, with penetrating but generous force, breaks up the 
cloud like enemy fort, just as Indra, solar energy, with 
its lightning force, scatters the clouds proclaiming its 
distinguished power to the world, so should the ruler 
take on and destroy the enemies of the dominion and 
proclaim the generous power of his sovereignty. 


आवः कुत्समिन्द्र यस्मिञ्चाकन्प्रावो युध्यन्तं वृषभं 
दशंद्युम्‌। शफच्युतो रेणुर्नक्षत द्यामुच्छैत्रेयो नृषाह्याय 
तस्थौ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Avah kutsamindra yasmincakanpravo yudhyan- 
tam vrsabham dasadyum. Saphacyuto renurna- 
ksata dyamucchvaitreyo nrsahyaya tasthau. 


Indra, as the sun desirous of protecting the earth 
takes to the thunderbolt in the battle and engages the 
roaring fighting cloud full of showers of rain filling all 
the directions, and as the dust raised by the hoofs of the 
cows and horses rises to the sky, so may the ruler, son 
and protector of the earth, stand firm for the protection 
and promotion of humanity. 


आवः शमं वृषभं तुम्रया॑सु क्षेत्रजेषे म॑घवच्छिव्यं गाम्‌। ज्योक्‌ 
चिदत्र तस्थिवांसो अक्रज्छ्त्रूयतापमध॑रा वेद॑नाकः ॥ eu ul 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 34 139 


15. Avah samam vrsabham tugrydsu ksetrajese 
maghavancvitryam gam. Jyok cidatra tasthi- 
vamso akrancchatruyatamadhara vedanakah. 


Indra, Maghavan, lord of power and glory, just 
as in matters of the prosperity of the various fields of 
the earth the sun directs its catalytic rays of energy to 
engage the cloud in battles of precipitation to rain down 
the soothing life sustaining showers, so may you, like 
the sun and showers, help the people settled here in 
peace so that they may for long carry on their earthly 
chores. Like the sun, bring the hostile elements of the 
dominion to book and keep them down to suffer as they 
deserve. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 34 
Ashvins Devata, Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi 


त्रिश्चिन्नो अद्या भ॑वतं नवेदसा विभुर्वां याम॑ उत राति- 
रश्विना । युवोर्हि यन्त्रं हिम्येव वासंसोऽभ्यायंसेन्यां भवतं 
मनीषिभिः ।॥ ९॥ 


ll, Triscinno adya bhavatam navedasa vibhurvam 
yama uta ratirasvina. Yuvorhi yantram himyeva 
vasaso’bhyayam senya bhavatam manisibhih. 


Ashvins, brilliant experts of eminence like the 
sun and moon, working together complementarily, be 
three ways good to us today: May your chariot be 
universal in movement. May your gifts of wealth, too, 
be of universal value. May your machine too be of 
universal purpose in design, structure and performance. 
Carry on together with the scholars and thinkers as a 
team like the night and day of winter or like the cold 


140 RGVEDA 
and warm cover. 


त्रय॑ः पवयो! मधुवाहने रथे Ges वेनामनु विश्व इद्विदुः | 
त्रय॑ः स्कम्भासः स्कभितास आरभे त्रिर्नक्तं याथस्तरिर्वश्विना 
दिवां॥ २॥ 


६ Trayah pavayo madhuvahane rathe somasya 
venamanu visva idviduh. Trayah skambhasah 
skabhitasa arabhe trirnaktam yathastrirvasvina 
diva. 

Ashvins, scientists and engineers of eminence, 
three are the thunderous wheels and dynamos in the 
chariot which brings you honey-sweets of wealth and 
comfort. The scholars of eminence know the pleasure 
of soma and beauty of the moon. Three are the sustaining 
beams and pillars fixed in its motive system. By this 
you can reach your destination thrice in the day and 
thrice in the night. 


समाने stefsraerten त्रिरद्य यज्ञं मधुना मिपिक्षतम्‌। 
त्रिर्वाजवतीरिषो अश्विना युवं दोषा अस्मभ्य॑मुषसंश्च 
पिन्वतम्‌ 3 ॥ 


3: Samane ahan triravadyagohana triradya yajnam 
madhuna mimiksatam. Trirvajavatiriso asvina 
yuvam dosa asmabhyamusasasca pinvatam. 


Ashvins, scholars of science and locomotion, 
covering your gaps and weaknesses, in one day complete 
the threefold yajna of science (in food, energy and speed 
of locomotion with fire and water). Both of you develop 
for us thrice powerful food and energy, and let the days 
and nights abound in food, energy, speed and progress. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 34 141 


त्रिर्वर्तियीतं त्रिरनुव्रते जने त्रिः सुप्राव्ये aera Perera 
त्रिर्नान्द्यं वहतमश्विना युवं fr: gat अस्मे अक्षरेव 
पिन्वतम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Trirvartiryatam triranuvrate jane trih supravye 
tredheve Siksatam. Trirnandyam vahatamasvina 
yuvam trih prkso asme aksareva pinvatam. 


Asvins, scholars of knowledge and practice, 
come our way thrice to guide us. Follow thrice in the 
way of an easily accessible man of noble discipline and 
dedication and lead us too, teaching us three ways the 
art of defence, industry and automation. Conduct the 
programmes of joy and celebration three ways for body, 
mind and soul. And like the flowing waters augmented 
by showers of rain, develop the knowledge of mixing, 
compounds and mutual contact threefold. 


त्रिर्नो रयिं वहतमश्विना युवं fadaatar त्रिरुतावतं धिय॑ः | 
त्रिः सौभगत्वं त्रिरुत श्रवांसि afers वां at दुहिता 
रुहद्रथम्‌ UG UI 


>, Trirno rayim vahatamasvina yuvam trirdevatata 
trirutavatam dhiyah. Trih saubhagatvam trituta 
Sravamsi nastristham vam sure duhita ruha- 
dratham. 


Ashvins, generous as earth and heaven, bring 
us, develop and sustain threefold wealth of knowledge, 
power and protection. Brilliant and godly scholars of 
science, technology and yajna, three-way benefactors 
by inspiration, action and achievement, give us threefold 
enlightenment, protection and sustenance of body, mind 
and soul. Give us threefold beauty, honour, and grace 


142 RGVEDA 


of prosperity, well-being and noble family. Give us the 
threefold capacity of listening, reflecting and meditating 
on Vedas, Shastras and the economics and polity of 
practical living. And lo! by virtue of your inspiration, 
action and achievement, the dawn, daughter of the sun, 
would ride your chariot of glory and in-fuse strength 
and peace and joy into our body, mind and soul. 


त्रिर्नो satan दिव्यानि भेषजा त्रिः पार्थिवानि fe 
adage: । ओमानं शं योर्मम॑काय सूनवे त्रिधातु शर्म वहतं 
शुभस्पती ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Trirno asvina divyani bhesaja trih parthivani triru 
dattamadbhyah. Omanam samyormama-kaya 
sunave tridhatu Sarma vahatam subhaspati. 


Ashvins, scholars of knowledge, light and 
progressive expansion, protectors of all that is good and 
blissful, create for us and give us threefold heavenly 
essences such as soma, three earthly ones and three from 
waters. For my child create something soothing and all- 
round protective, a three-metal tonic panacea for a 
healthy and comfortable state of health in which the 
three humors of vitality are balanced in peace, without 
agitation, anywhere. 


त्रिर्नो अश्विना यजता दिवेदिवे परि frend पृथिवी- 
म॑शायतम्‌। तिस्रो नांसत्या रथ्या परावतं आत्मेव वातः 
स्वस॑राणि गच्छतम्‌ ७ ॥ 

vin Trirno asvina yajata divedive pari tridhatu 
prthivimasayatam. Tisro nasatya rathya paravata 
atmeva vatah svasarani gacchatam. 


Ashvins, expert powers of science and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 34 143 


technology, truthful, devoted to yajna and working 
together like fire and water, and masters of the three- 
metal chariot, day by day go round the earth and sky 
thrice for us and then come to sleep on the earth. Just as 
the soul goes from one body to another, as winds blow 
from one place to another, so by the threefold, three 
way, three speed chariot, move from one chariot to 
another and go to the destinations of your choice. 


तरिर॑ज्विना सिन्धुभिः सप्तमातृभिस्त्रय आहावास्त्रेधा 
हविष्करृतम्‌। तिस्रः पुथिवीरुपरिं प्रवा दिवो नाक॑ रश्चेथे 
द्युभिर क्तभिर्हितम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Trirasvina sindhubhih saptamatrbhistraya 
ahavastredha haviskrtam. Tisrah prthivirupari 
prava divo nakam raksethe dyubhiraktubhirhitam. 


Ashvins, scientists of yajna, brilliant and fast 
as sun and wind, with the materials collected, refined 
and sanctified thrice with the rivers and seas which are 
distilled by mother nature from seven sources (earth, 
waters, fire, wind, space, sun and electric energy) by 
days and nights, sent up by three paths of solid, subtle 
and atomised forms, to three (the earth, the region of 
joy and the region of light), you serve and replenish 
three, earth, sky and heaven. 


aa} त्री चक्रा त्रिवृतो रथ॑स्य क्व त्रयो वन्धुरो ये सनींव्ठाः। 
कदा योगो वाजिनो रास॑भस्य येनं यज्ञं नांसत्योपयाथः । ९ ॥ 


ध Kva tri cakra trivrto rathasya kva trayo bandhuro 
ye sanilah. Kada yogo vajino rasabhasya 
yena yajnam nasatyopayathah. 


Ashvins, truthful and dedicated scientists, where 


144 RGVEDA 


are the threefold three wheels of the chariot’s design, 
structure and speed? Where are the three bonds of the 
structure strong and fixed? When and where the ignition 
and start of the roaring hawk by which you fly to your 
destination? 


आ नासत्या गच्छ॑तं हूयते हविर्मध्वः पिबतं मधुपेभिरासभिः | 
युवोर्हि पूर्वः सवितोषसो रथ॑मृतायं चित्रं घूतवंन्त- 
मिष्य॑ति।॥ ९०॥ 


10. A nasatya gacchatam hiyate havirmadhvah 
pibatam madhupebhirasabhih. Yuvorhi purvam 
savitosaso rathamrtaya citram ghrtavanta- 
misyati. 


Ashvins, high-priests of truth and nature, come, 
the input oblations are offered. Taste the honey sweets 
of your achievement with your honeyed lips. The sun 
itself before the dawn energises your wondrous paradisal 
chariot for the pursuit of truth and right. 


आ नासत्या त्रिभिरेकादशैरिह देवेभिर्यातं मधुपेयं मश्विना | 
प्रायुस्तारिष्टं नी रपांसि मृक्षतं Geld द्वेषो भव॑तं 
सचाभुवा ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. A ndasatya tribhirekadasairiha devebhiryatam 
madhupeyamasvina. Prayustaristam ni rapamsi 
mrksatam sedhatam dveso bhavatam sacabhuva. 


Ashvins, high-priests of nature, truth and yajna, 
come with three-eleven divinities of nature and the 
universe, having crossed the seas in three days and the 
globe in eleven, come for a drink of honey-sweets. Sail 
across life, triumphant. Destroy evils. Drive off jealous 
hostiles. Be friends, unifiers. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 35 145 


आ नो अश्विना त्रिवृता रथेंनाऽर्वाञ्चं र यिं dad gaa 
शृण्वन्तां वामव॑से जोहवीमि वृधे च॑ नो भवतं वाजं- 
सातौ ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. A no aSvina trivrta rathena’rvancam rayim 
vahatam suviram. Srnvanta vamavase johavimi 
vrdhe ca no bhavatam vajasatau. 


Ashvins, high-priests of nature, science and 
technology, come by the multipurpose chariot across 
the land, over the sea and through the skies, and bring 
us wealth and honour worthy of the brave this side of 
the horizon. Listeners as you are, I call upon you for 
protection and promotion. Be favourable to us for 
advancement and victory in the battles of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 35 


Agni-Mitra-Varuna-Night-Savita, Savita Devata, 
Angirasa Hiranyastupa Rshi 


हयांम्ययिं प्र॑थमं स्वस्तये gate पित्रावरुणाविहाव॑से। 
हयापि रात्रीं जग॑तो निवेशनीं हयामि देवं संवितारं- 
मूतये ॥ ९॥ 


1. Hvayamyagnim prathamam svastaye hvayami 
mitravarunavihavase. Hvayami ratrim jagato 
nivesanim hvayami devam savitaramutaye. 


I invoke Agni, vital heat, first basic sustainer of 
life, for physical well-being. I invoke Mitra-and-Varuna, 
pranic energies of the breath of life, for protection and 
immunity. I invoke the night which envelops the world 
in restful sleep. And I invoke Savita, the sun, lord of 
light, refreshment and inspiration for the sake of 
protection, promotion and advancement here upon the 


146 RGVEDA 
earth. 


आ pw we वर्त॑मानो निवेशयन्नमृतं मर्त्य च। 
हिरण्ययेन सविता रथेनाऽऽ देवो याति भुव॑नानि 
पश्य॑न्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2s A krsnena rajasa vartamano nivesayannamrtam 
martyam ca. Hiranyayena savita rathena’’ devo 
yati bhuvanani pasyan. 


Savita, lord of life and light, existing and abiding 
with the regions of the universe, sustaining them with 
his centripetal force of gravitation, enveloping the 
mortals and the immortals, goes on and on in self- 
refulgent glory in his golden chariot, watching and 
illuminating the worlds of existence. 


(The mantra is applicable to both Ishvara, Lord 
creator, and the sun, sustainer and illuminator of the 
solar world.) 


यातिं देवः प्रवता यात्युद्धता यातिं शुभ्राभ्यां यजतो 
हरिंभ्याम्‌। आ देवो यांति सविता प॑रावतोऽ प विश्वा दुरिता 
लाधंमानः।॥ ३॥ 


Yati devah pravata yatyudvata yati subhra-bhyam 
yajato haribhyam. A devo yati savita paravato’pa 
visva durita badhamanah. 


The lord of light, adorable and in company, goes 
on by lower and higher paths, descending and ascending, 
by beautiful horses, white and glossy (1.e., day and night, 
bright and dark fortnights). Savita, lord effulgent, goes 
on travelling hitherward and far off away dispelling the 
darkness and evil of the world. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 35 147 


अभीवृतं कृशनैर्विश्वरूपं दिरंण्यशम्यं यजतो ged 
आस्थाद्रथं सविता चित्रभानुः कृष्णा रजांसि तविषीं 
दधांनः॥ ४॥ 


4. Abhivrtam krSanairvisvarupam hiranyaSamyam 
yajato brhantam. Asthadratham savita citrabha- 
nuh krsna rajamsi tavisim dadhanah. 


Savita, adorable and companionable lord of 
wondrous light, commanding enormous power, holding 
the world regions by his subtle waves of gravitation, 
rides the vast, beautiful and autonomous world of 
infinite forms brighter than gold. 


वि जनाञ्छ्यावाः शितिपादो अख्यत्रथं हिरण्यप्रउगं aged: | 
शश्वद्विशः सवितुर्देव्य॑स्योपस्थे विश्वा भुव॑नानि तस्थुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


9 Vi janancchyavah 5717440 akhyan ratham 
hiranyapra ugam vahantah. SaSvad visah 
saviturdaivyasyopasthe visva bhuvanani tasthuh. 


In the lap of Divine Savita, eternal Lord of the 
universe, reside all the worlds of existence and the 
children of the divine. So in the gravitational field of 
the sun, heavenly light, are held all the regions of the 
solar system alongwith the living beings ever abiding 
therein. And the rays of the sun, white and brilliant, 
bearing the world-chariot of the golden yoke, shine and 
proclaim the glory of the lord to the people. 


frat द्याव॑ः afaagt उपस्थो एका। यमस्य भुव॑ने विराषाट्‌। 
आणि न रथ्य॑ममृताधि। तस्थुरि ह ब्र॑वीतु य उ तच्यिकेतत्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tisro dyavah saviturdva upastham eka yamasya 
bhuvane virasat. Anim na rathyamamrtadhi 
tasthuriha bravitu ya u tacciketat. 


148 RGVEDA 


Three are the lights: sunlight, fire and universal 
electric energy. Two of these, sun-light and fire (which 
is of the earthly sphere) are in the sun’s field of power 
and gravitation. The third, universal energy which holds 
the spirit and soul of the brave resides in antariksha, 
the middle region of yama, the vital wind (which 
overtakes and carries the soul after death of the body). 
Like the pin of a chariot wheel axle in battle, all these, 
fixed in their place with their role, abide by the Immortal 
Supreme Savita. Whoever here really knows the secret, 
may speak. 

वि dauif अन्तरिश्चाण्यख्यद्‌ गभीरवेपा stat: सुनी थः। 
क्वे ३दानी सूर्यः कश्चिकेत कतमां द्यां रश्मिरस्या 
त॑तान ॥ ७ ॥ 

Vi suparno antariksanyakhyad gabhiravepa 
asurah sunithah. Kve danim suryah kasciketa 
katamam dyam rasmirasya tatana. 

The sun is mighty brilliant, illuminates the 
middle regions, awfully vibrating with fusion, gives 
pranic life to nature and humanity, holding and guiding 
things in orbit. And then, where is the sun now, (when 


itis no more there)? In what heaven does its light shine 
now? Who knows? 


Kah knows. The Lord Supreme only knows. 
अष्टो व्यख्यत्ककुभः पथिव्यास्त्री धन्व योज॑ना aa सिन्धून्‌ । 
हिरण्याक्षः सविता देव आगादधद्रलां दाशुषे वायीणि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Astau vyakhyat kakubhah prthivyas tri dhanva 
yojana sapta sindhun. Hiranyaksah savita deva 
agaddadhadratna dasuse varyani. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 35 149 


Savita, generous lord of golden light, comes 
illuminating the eight directions and sub-directions of 
the earth, the three sustaining regions of earth, heaven 
and the middle skies, and the seven seas of space, 
holding and bringing choicest gifts for the man of charity 
and yajna. 


हिर॑ण्यपाणिः सविता विचर्षणिरुभे द्यावापृथिवी अन्त- 
Gad अपामीवां बाध॑ते वेति सूर्यमभि कृष्णेन रज॑सा 
द्याम्रंणोति॥ ९ ॥ 


Hiranyapanih savita vicarsanirubhe dyava- 
prthivi antartyate. Apamivam badhate veti 
suryamabhi krsnena rajasa dyamrnoti. 


Savita, the sun, lord of the golden hand of 
generosity, creator of the sap of life, shines across the 
regions of heaven and earth. It destroys and eliminates 
disease and dirt, spreads its light all over, blazes in the 
heavens and over-reaches the regions of darkness. 


दिर॑ण्यहस्तो stat: सुनीथः duet: स्ववां यात्वर्वाङ्‌। 
अपसेधंत्रक्षसो यातुधानानस्था देवः प्रतिदोषं गंणानः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Hiranyahasto asurah sunithah sumrlikah svavan 
yatvarvan. Apasedhan raksaso yatudhananasthad 
devah pratidosam grnanah. 


Savita, generous and self-refulgent lord, giving 
and blessing, with a golden hand, breath and inspiration 
of life, universal guide, creator giver of peace and well- 
being, lord of universal wealth, may come to us in direct 
experience and bless us all ways and every way, warding 
off the wicked, the evil and the violent destroyers, and 
stay with us in the heart day and night, praised and 


150 RGVEDA 


celebrated as we ought to praise and celebrate the Divine 
Lord. 


ये ते wet: सवितः पूर्व्यासोऽरेणवः सुकरता अन्तरिक्षे | 
तेभिंनो अद्य पथिभिः सुगेभी vert च नो अधिं च ब्रूहि 
देव ॥ ९१॥ 


11. Ye te panthah savitah purvyaso’renavah sukrta 
antarikse. Tebhirno adya pathibhih sugebhi 
raksa ca no adhi ca bruhi deva. 


Savita, self-refulgent lord creator and giver of 
light, by those paths of divinity set out by you which 
are ancient and eternal, free from dust and smoke, well 
laid out on high in heaven, by those very paths simple, 
straight and pleasant, come to-day, guide and protect 
us, and reveal into our soul the Voice Divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 36 
Agni Devata, Ghaura Kanva Rshi 


प्रवो यहं पुरूणां विशां देवयतीनाम्‌ । 
at सूक्तेभिर्वचोभिरीमहे यं सीमिदन्य gad ॥ ९॥ 


le Pra vo yahvam purunam visam devayatinam. 
Agnim suktebhirvacobhirimahe yam simidanya 
tate. 


With songs of praise and words of worship we 
adore Agni, Lord and light of the universe, whom other 
devotees too adore in many ways, and we pray to the 
lord of light and power and instant action, worthy of 
the love and devotion of many people far and wide 
who are seekers of divine knowledge and bliss for 
themselves. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 36 151 


जनांसो अगिं द॑धिरे सहोवृधं हविष्म॑न्तो विधेम ते। 
स त्वं नो अद्य सुमनां इहाविता भवा वाजेषु सन्त्य ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Janaso agnim dadhire sahovrdham havismanto 
vidhema te. Sa tvam no adya sumana thavita 
bhava vajesu santya. 


The ancient people of vision and wisdom hold 
on to Agni, Lord of light and knowledge. We have the 
will and devotion, and we have the offerings, with these 
we worship you, lord giver of strength and courage more 
and ever more. Lord of wealth and generosity, we pray, 
be good and kind to us here and now, be our saviour 
and protector in the battles of life. 


प्र त्वां दूतं Quine हो तारं विश्ववेदसम्‌। 
Teed सतो वि चरन्त्यर्चयो दिवि स्पुरन्ति भानवः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Pra tva dutam vrnimahe hotaram visvavedasam. 
Mahaste sato vi carantyarcayo divi sprsanti bha- 
navah. 


Agni, light and fire of yajna, harbinger of 
blessings Divine and carrier of the fragrance of yajna, 
we opt for you, we kindle you. You are the yajaka, you 
reach the world over and over. Great and true you are, 
the flames and lights of your power reach the heavens 
and, like the rays of the sun, bless everything with a 
touch of new life and inspiration. 


caren वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा सं दूतं प्रलमिंन्धते | 
विश्वं सो अग्रे जयति त्वया धनं यस्ते ददाश मर्त्यः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Devasastva varuno mitro aryama sam dutam 
pratnamindhate. Visvam so agne jayati tvaya 
dhanam yaste dadasa martyah. 


152 RGVEDA 


Agni, brilliant power of heat and light of yajna, 
harbinger of joy and inspiration, the noblest of the wise 
and generous people of the world and powers of nature, 
Varuna the high, Mitra the friendly, and Aryama the fair 
and just, all kindle and raise you high for the world’s 
yajna of growth and progress. The man who offers you 
the holy materials of yajna wins wealth of the world by 
virtue of your yajnic action. 


मन्द्रो होता गृहपतिरग्ने दूतो विशामसि | 
त्वे विश्वा संग॑तानि व्रता श्चुवा यानि देवा अकुण्वत ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Mandro hota grhapatiragne duto visamasi. Tve 
visva samgatani vrata dhruva yani deva akrnvata. 


Agni, deep and grave and joyous, giver of peace 
and prosperity, protector and promoter of home and 
family, you are the fighter and ambassador of the people. 
In you abide all those steady laws and discipline which 
go with the observance of Dharma and good conduct 
and which the noblest in nature and humanity observe 
and have observed. 


त्वे इदग्ने सुभगे यविष्ठ्य favaar gad हविः। 
स त्वं नो अद्य सुमनां उतापरं afer देवान्त्सुवी्यी ui ६ ॥ 


6. 117८ idagne subhage yavisthya visvama hiuyate 
havih. Sa tvam no adya sumana utaparam yaksi 
devantsuvirya. 


Agni, fire and power of yajna, strongest 
catalyser and noblest creative and constructive agent, 
to you alone are offered all the inputs of yajna (for the 
sustenance and advancement of life). Right to-day and 
to-morrow and all through future, be good and kind to 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 36 153 


us, act with the generous powers of yajna and help us 
grow as brave and noble people. 


तं घेमित्था नमस्विन उप॑ स्वराजमासते | 
Safari मनुषः समिन्धते तितिवसि अति स्रिध॑ः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Tam ghemittha namasvina upa svarajamasate. 


Hotrabhiragnim manusah samindhate titirvamso 
ati sridhah. 


Surely men of faith and reverence wielding 
power and weapons sit and abide by the brilliant 
sovereign ruler. They kindle the fire and do homage to 
Agni with sacrificial offers and, wishing to get over the 
violent and destructive forces, win the battles of life. 


घ्नन्तों वृत्रम॑तरत्रोद॑सी अप उरू atala चक्रिरे । 
भुवत्कण्वे वृषां द्युम्न्याहुतः क्रन्ददश्वो गविष्टिषु ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ghnanto vrtramataranrodasi apa uruksayaya 
cakrire. Bhuvat kanve vrsa dyumnyahutah kran- 
dadasSvo gavistisu. 


Just as Indra, the sun, with its rays, strikes the 
cloud and fills the earth and heaven with light and 
waters, so does Agni, brilliant ruler and commander, 
with his forces, break through evil and darkness, filling 
heaven and earth with the light and fame of his actions. 
He works for the settlement of his people in spacious 
homes and, invited and celebrated among the intelligent, 
he shines as generous and prosperous, while his fame 
resounds like the roar of the victor in battle. 


सं सीदस्व vet असि शोच॑स्व देववीत॑मः। 
वि धूममग्ने अरुषं मियेध्य सुज प्र॑शस्त दरशंतम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


154 RGVEDA 


9. Sam sidasva mahan asi Socasvadevavitamah. Vi 
dhumamagne arusam miyedhya srja prasasta 
darsatam. 


Agni, Lord of light and power, brilliant, 
admirable, adorable, divinely superb, you are great. 
Come be seated, wipe out evil, shine and create the light 
without smoke, and beauty most sublime. 


यं त्वां देवासो मन॑वे दधुरिह यजिष्ठं हव्यवाहन | 
यं कण्वो मेध्यातिधिर्धनस्पृतं यं वृषा यमुपस्तुतः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yam tva devaso manave dadhuriha yajistham 
havyavahana. Yam kanvo medhyatithirdhanaspr- 
tam yam vrsa yamupastutah. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, most dedicated to 
yajna, loved and honoured, creator and harbinger of the 
noblest wealth of life, you — whom the brilliant, 
intelligent and generous people accepted for enlightened 
rule, whom the scholars and teachers with their disciples 
and yajnic friends accepted as the man of wealth and 
knowledge, whom the generous pious people accepted, 
whom the popular and respected people accepted — 
such as you are, we accept, elect, appoint and consecrate 
you as the ruler and commander of the nation. 


aah मेध्यांतिथिः कण्व॑ ईध ऋतादधि । 
तस्य प्रेषो दीदियुस्तमिमा ऋचस्तमभिं वर्धयामसि ॥ ९९॥ 
11.  Yamagnim medhyatithih kanva idha rtadadhi. 


Tasya preso didiyustamima rcastamagnim var- 
dhayamasi. 


The fire and energy which kanva, expert scholar 
of science and practical work, karma kanda, in company 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 36 155 


with his disciples of technical yajna, captured and 
lighted from the waves and waters over the sky, and 
whose flames reach beyond the sky over the clouds, 
these hymns of celebration illumine and the same we 
develop and augment. 


रायस्पूर्धि स्वधावोऽस्ति हि तेऽ ग देवेष्वाप्यम्‌ । 
त्वं वाजस्य श्रुत्य॑स्य राजसि स नो aes महाँ असि ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Rayaspurdhi svadhavo’sti hi te’ gne devesvapyam. 
Tvam vajasya $rutyasya rajasi sano mrla mahan 
asi. 


Agni, lord of power and wealth in your own 
right, fulfil our life with honour and prosperity, so 
friendly and accessible you are among the noble and 
the generous. You shine in battles and your fame 
resounds. Be good to us for our well-being. Great and 
glorious you are indeed. 


ऊर्ध्वं ऊ षु णं ऊतये तिष्ठा देवो न स॑विता। ऊर्ध्वो वाज॑स्य 
सनिता यदज्िभिव॑र्वाघिद्धिर्विह्यांमहे ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Urdhvaitsunaiutaye tistha devo na savita. Urdhvo 
vajasya sanita yadanjibhirvaghadbhirvihvaya- 
mahe. 


Agni, lord of light and life, brilliant as the sun, 
stay high with grace in glory for our protection and 
progress. Rise high as the hero of life’s battles of honour 
and prosperity. It is for the reason of your glory and 
generosity that we invoke and pray to you alongwith 
the scholars with holy offers of yajna and celebration. 


ऊर्ध्वो न॑: पाद्यंह॑सो नि केतुना विश्वं समत्रिणं दह । 
कृधी न॑ ऊर्ध्वाञ्चरथांय जीवसे विदा देवेषु नो दुव॑ः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


156 RGVEDA 


14. Urdhvo nah pahyamhaso ni ketuna visvam 
samatrinam daha. Krdhi na urdhvancarathaya 
jivase vida devesu no duvah. 


Agni, high and great, save us from sin and evil 
with the gift of intelligence and knowledge. Burn up all 
grabbing and robbing of other’s food and freedom. Help 
us rise to the heights of knowledge, comfort and 
happiness for a full life. Accept our prayer that we may 
rise to our place among the noble and the brilliant. 


पाहि नो अरे रक्षसः पाहि धूर्तेरराव्णः । पाहि रीष॑त उत वा 
जिघांसतो बृहद्भानो यविष्ठ्य ॥ १५॥ 


15. Pahi no agne raksasah pahi dhurteraravnah. 
Pahi risata uta va jighamsato brhadbhano 
yavisthya. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, youthful and blazing 
with mighty glory, save us from the destroyers. Protect 
us from the wicked and the ungenerous. Protect us from 
the cruel and the violent. Protect us from the killers. 
(Let these negative and destructive elements be 
eliminated.) 


घनेव विष्वग्वि जह्यराव्णस्तपुं्जम्भ यो stare | 

यो मर्त्यः शिशीते अत्यक्तुथिर्मा नः स रिपुरीशत ॥ ९६॥ 
16.  Ghaneva visvagvi jahyaravna stapurjambha yo 

asmadhruk. Yo martyah SiSsite atyaktubhirma nah 

Sa ripurisata. 


Agni, lord of fire and justice, whosoever is 
jealous and destructive toward us, whosoever is 
ungenerous and an exploiter, destroy wholly with the 
blow of the thunderbolt. Whosoever bleeds humanity 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 36 157 


with instruments of torture and death, such an enemy 
must not rule over us. 


sifrda सुवीर्यभिः कण्वाय सौभ॑गम्‌। अभिः प्राव॑सित्रोत 
मेध्यातिथिमिः साता उपस्तुतम्‌ Mt ९५७॥ 


17. Agnirvavne suviryamagnih kanvaya saubha-gam. 
Agnih pravanmitrota medhyatithimagnih sata 
upastutam. 


Agni is mighty power for one who cares and 
prays for it. It is great good fortune for the man of 
knowledge. It is a great friend and protector in battle, 
and provides all help and encouragement to the man 
who is loved and admired by his colleagues and 
disciples. 


अभिनां तुर्वशं यदुं परावतं sured हवामहे | 
अभिर्न॑यन्नव॑वास्त्वं gest तुर्वीतिं दस्य॑वे ae: ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Agnina turvasam yadum paravata ugradevam 
havamahe. Agnirnayannavavastvam brhadra- 
tham turvitim dasyave sahah. 


By the might and splendour of Agni, we 
challenge from afar the fast invader, robber, ferocious 
warrior who hides in new hideouts and suddenly 
emerges in a big chariot with the intention of instant 
kill. May Agni, great and blazing, destroyer of the 
wicked, take on such demons and throw them off. 


नि त्वामग्रे मनुर्दधे ज्योतिर्जनाय viva deer कण्वं 
ऋतजात उक्षितो यं नमस्यन्ति Hea: ॥ ९९॥ 
19. Ni tvamagne manurdadhe jyotirjanaya Ssasvate. 


Didetha kanva rtajata uksito yam namasyanti 
krstayah. 


158 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of universal light and power, I, Manu, 
man of thought and intelligence, enlightened in truth 
and divine Law, consecrated in the joy of piety, hold on 
to you in the heart. Shine, eternal light, in the heart of 
Kanva, man of knowledge, for the sake of humanity. 
The devotees bow to you in obedience and obeisance. 


त्वेषासो! अगेरम॑वन्तो अर्चयो भीमासो न प्रतीतये । 
र क्चस्विनः सदमिद्यां तुमाव॑तो विश्वं समत्रिणं दह ॥ २०॥ 
20. = {11८5650 agneramavanto arcayo bhimaso na 


pratitaye. Raksasvinah sadmid yatumavato 
visvam samatrinam daha. 


Agni, lord of light and power, like blazing and 
fearful flames of fire, burn all the ailments and destroy 
all the thieves and demons of the world and, for the 
knowledge and enlightenment of people like us, protect 
us and the world. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 37 
Maruts Devata, Ghaura Kanva Rshi 
waite a: शर्धो मारुतमनर्वाणं रथेशुभ॑म्‌। 
कण्वां अभिप्र गांयत।॥ ९॥ 


i Krilam vah sardho marutamanarvanam rathe- 
subham. Kanva abhi pra gayata. 


Men of science and knowledge, sing and 
celebrate the playful, superior and irresistible power of 
the wind harnessed in the chariot without the horse. 


ये पृष॑तीभिऋष्टिभिः साकं वाशीभिर ज्िभिः। 
अजायन्त स्वभानवः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 37 159 


2. Ye prsatibhirrstibhih sakam vasibhiranyibhih. 
Ajayanta svabhanavah. 


Those men who, like the winds, with liquid 
thrusts of motion in smooth, refined, chiselled and 
lubricated language and style, express themselves and 
their ideas, rise with their own brilliance like the rays 
of the sun. 


इहेव शृण्व एषां कशा हस्तेषु यददान्‌। 
नि याम॑ज्चित्रमूंञ्जते॥ ३॥ 


a Theva Srnva esam kasa hastesu yad vadan. 
Ni yamancitramrnyjate. 

Whatever I hear here wherever I am, whatever 
the stimulation of the nerves and motions of the muscles 
in the hands, whatever people speak, whatever varied 
and wonderful they straighten, realise or obtain in the 
business of life, all that is by the motion of these winds. 


(Research into the energy, power and uses of 
the winds.) 
प्र वः शधीय घृष्व॑ये त्वेषद्युम्नाय शुष्मिणे । 
देवत्तं ब्रह्य गायत ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Pra vah sardhaya ghrsvaye tvesadyumnaya 
Susmine. Devattam brahma gayata. 


For your strength, for your refinements, for light 
and prosperity, for health, food and plenty, study the 
divine gift of the winds and sing in thanks and praise of 
the sacred hymns of the Veda. 


प्रशंसा गोष्वघ्न्यं shies यच्छर्धो मारुतम्‌। 
जम्भे रस॑स्य वावृधे ॥ ५॥ 


160 RGVEDA 


5. Pra samsa gosvaghnyam krilam yacchardho 
marutam. Jambhe rasasya vavrdhe. 


Study and celebrate that refreshing and 
inviolable strength and power of the winds which 
operates in the earths and cows and in the wind and 
senses and which issues forth in the juices pressed out 
by the jaws in the mouth and soma press and which 
increases the strength and vitality of the body. 


को at afe's ar न॑रो दिवश्च ग्मश्च॑ धूतयः | 
यत्सीमन्तं न धूनुथ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ko vo varsistha त naro divasca gmasca dhitayah. 
Yatstmantam na dhunutha. 


Ye men, energetic as the winds, movers and 
shakers of earth and heavens, who is the mightiest so 
great of you that you shake the world around you to the 
very end like the leaves of a tree or the hem of a gown? 


नि at यामाय मानुषो दश्च sare मन्यवें। 
जिहीत पर्वतो गिरिः ॥ ७॥ 
Ni vo yamaya manuso dadhra ugraya manyave. 
Jihita parvato girih. 
The mightiest great man among you sustains 
your passionate morale and directs your might and main 


for the onward march of life. Shake the clouds. Cross 
the mountains. 


येषामन्मेषु पृथिवी जुंजुवींड॑व विश्पतिः 1 

भिया यामेषु रेज॑ते ॥ ८ ॥ 

Yesamajmesu prthivi jujurvan iva vispatih. 
Bhiya yamesu rejate. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 37 161 


Just as on the stormy movements of a heroic 
leader’s armies the decrepit ruler of a broken nation 
shakes with fear and flees, so under the force of the 
motions of the winds, electric energy of the lord of the 
universe, the earth moves and goes whirling round and 
round in orbit. 


fer हि जानमेषां वयो मातुर्निरेतवे। 
यत्सीमनु द्विता शव॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Sthiram hi janamesam vayo maturniretave. 
Yat stmanu dvita Savah. 


Still is the cause of these winds, 1.e., space 
(akasha) whence they have their birth. By virtue of their 
mother source, their power is two-fold: Sound, which 
is the property of space which the winds carry, and 
motion which is their specific property, so that things 
such as birds may move in space by the force of the 
winds. 


उदु त्ये सूनवो गिरः काष्ठा अच््ष्वल्रत। 
वाश्रा अंधिज्ञु यात॑वे।॥ ९०॥ 

10. Udu tye sunavo girah kastha ajmesvatnata. 
Vasra abhijnu yatave. 


Those children of space, the winds, in their 
motions, carry and expand the waves of sound and the 
currents of waters and other energies across the spaces 
so that they reach their destinations like the mother cows 
hastening on their legs to their stalls. 


त्यं fea घा दीर्घं पृथुं मिहो नपांतममुध्रम्‌। 
प्र च्यावयन्ति याम॑भिः॥ ९९॥ 


162 RGVEDA 


11. Tyam cid gha dirgham prthum miho napdatama- 
mrdhram. Pra cyavayanti yamabhih. 
The winds, by their motions of mighty currents, 


drive the dark and deep and heavy clouds holding the 
waters and make them rain down in incessant showers. 


मरुतो ae वो ae st अचुच्यवीतन । 
गिरीरंचुच्यवीतन ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Maruto yaddha vo balam janan acucyavitana. 
Girinracucyavitana. 


Maruts, warriors of the nation, just as the powers 
of the winds shake up the clouds, so may your power 
and force inspire the people to do great deeds in the 
world. 


weg afd मरुतः सं हं ब्रुवतेऽध्वन्ना | 
शृणोति कश्चिदेषाम्‌ 83 

13. Yaddha yanti marutah sam ha bruvate’dhvanna. 
Srnoti kaScidesam. 


The Maruts, wind powers of nature, like the 
dynamic heroes of humanity, go together, and as they 
go by the paths of their movement, they speak together 
and proclaim their presence and their work. But only 
some exceptionally perceptive people listen to their 
voice. 


प्रयात sities: सन्ति कण्वेषु वो a: । 
तत्रो षु मांदयाध्वै।॥ OU 


14. Pra ककव stbhamasubhih santi kanvesu vo duvah. 
Tatro su madayadhvai. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 38 163 


Maruts, dynamic heroes of the nation, go fast 
by the straightest paths set out for you. Your honour 
and achievement lies in the heart of the learned and the 
wise. And there, with the learned and the wise, we’ll 
celebrate. 


अस्ति fe ष्पा मदांय वः cafe ष्मा वयमेषाम्‌। 

विश्वं चिदायुं्जी वसे 11 १५॥ 
15. Asti hi sma madaya vah smasi sma vayamesam. 

Visvam cidayurjivase. 

Surely life is for the joy of living for all of you. 
May we too enjoy and be happy. Indeed life is for the 
joy of living for all living beings of the world. 
Mandala 1/Sukta 38 
Maruts Devata, Ghaura Kanva Rshi 
are नूनं कधप्रियः पिता पुत्रं न eda: | 
दधिध्वे वृक्तबर्हिषः ॥ ९ ॥ 


tt. Kaddha nunam kadhapriyah pita putram na 
hastayoh. Dadhidhve vrktabarhisah. 


Heroes of yajna, lovers of the stories of life and 
nature, you have collected the sacred grass for the yajna 
vedi. When for sure are you going to take the work of 
the nation in hand like a father taking up the child in 
arms for its nurture and nourishment? 


क्व॑ नूनं कद्वो अर्थ गन्तां दिवो न पुंथिव्याः। 
ad at गावो न र॑ण्यन्ति।॥ २॥ 


2. Kva nunam kad vo artham ganta divo na prthi- 
vyah. Kva vo gavo na ranyanti. 


164 RGVEDA 


Heroes on the move, Maruts incarnate, where 
for sure is the end and purpose of your march, when are 
you going to reach it like the end and purpose of heaven 
and earth? Where is the place of destination whence 
the purpose calls you like cows lowing for their calves? 
Where do your mind and senses and spirits direct you? 


ad a: सुम्ना नव्यांसि मरुतः क्व॑ सुविता । 
क्वो विश्वांनि सौभ॑गा ।॥। ३॥ 


Kva vah sumna navyamsi marutah kva suvita. 
Kvo visvani saubhaga. 


Maruts, heroes of the nation of humanity, where 
are your latest dream loves? Where your ideals? Where 
all your good fortunes to which you all move? 
यद्यूयं पुंश्निमातरो मतीसः स्यात॑न । 
स्तोता वो अमृतः स्यात्‌॥ ४॥ 

4. Yadyuyam prsnimataro martasah syatana. 
Stota vo amrtah sydt. 


Maruts, children of mother-space, heroes of the 
nation and children of the colourful mother earth doing 
good work, though you are mortal, the Immortal is your 
protector. 


मावो मृगो न यव॑से जरिता भूदजोष्यः | 
पथा यमस्य गादुप ।॥ ५॥ 
a Ma vo mrgo na yavase jarita bhudajosyah. 
Patha yamasya gadupa. 
As the deer takes delight in the grass, so should 
you take delight in learning. May your teacher never be 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 38 165 


unwelcome to you. May he have full life before he goes 
by the divine path. May he never go close to the path of 
the wind prematurely, early in life. 


मो षु णः परापरा निऋतिरुर्हणां वधीत्‌। 
पदीष्ट तृष्ण॑या सह ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Mo su nah parapara nrrtirdurhana vadhit. 
Padista trsnaya saha. 


May the fatal adversity of life far or near never 
strike us. Instead, O Winds, powers of the Immortals, 
let it fly away from us alongwith the thirst and 
deprivation of life. 
सत्यं त्वेषा अम॑वन्तो धन्व॑ज्चिदा रुद्धियांसः। 
मिहं कृण्वन्त्यवाताम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

(0 Satyam tvesa amavanto dhanvancida rudriyasah. 
Miham krnvantyavatam. 

The bright and blazing lightning winds, strong 
and impetuous in the sky, sustained benefactors of living 
life, cause ceaseless showers of rain on the thirsty earth. 


And that is truly the divine work of nature (which the 
human beings should emulate). 


asd विद्युन्मिमाति वत्सं न माता सिंषक्ति। 
यदेषां वृष्टिरसर्जि ।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Vasreva vidyunmimati vatsam na mata sisakti. 
Yadesam vrstirasarji. 


Just as the mother cow hastens to the calf, 
overflowing with milk, just as the mother suckles her 
baby, so does the bright blazing lightning, roaring and 
raining powers of the winds, bless the living beings 


166 RGVEDA 


when the showers released by them fall upon the thirsty 
earth. 
दिवां fad: कृण्वन्ति पर्जन्येनोदवाहेन | 
यत्पुधिवीं व्युन्दन्ति ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Diva cittamah krnvanti parjanyenodavahena. 
Yat prthivim vyundanti. 


When the winds overflood the earth with 
showers of rain from the dense clouds overladen with 
vapours of water, they overcast even the bright day with 
darkness deep as that of the night. 
अधं स्वनान्मरुतां विश्वमा war पार्थिवम्‌ | 
रेजन्त प्र मानुषाः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. = Adha svananmarutam visvama sadma parthivam. 
Arejanta pra manusah. 


And then by the roar of lightning winds the 
whole earth and the entire human world shake and 
tremble like a house built of clay. 

मरुतो वीव्छुपाणिभिश्चित्रा रोध॑स्वतीरनु। 
यातेमखिंद्रयामभिः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Maruto vilupanibhis citra rodhasvatiranu. 
Yatema khidrayamabhih. 


Maruts, lightning powers of the winds, 
wondrous forces of the nation, resistant and inviolable, 
march on with invincible arms by the irresistible paths 
(to your goal in sight). 


स्थिरा a: सन्तु नेमयो रथा अश्वांस एषाम्‌। 
सुसंस्कृता अभीशवः ॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 38 167 


12. Sthira vah santu nemayo ratha asvasa esam. 
Susamskrta abhisavah. 
Let the wheels of your chariots be strong and 
steady. May your chariots of horse and fire be strong by 


wind and electric energy. Let the reins and steering be 
very sensitive and sophisticated. 


अच्छ वदा तना गिरा जरायै ब्रह्मणस्पतिम्‌ । 
अगिं मित्रं न eet 23 1 

13. Accha vada tana gira jarayai brahmanaspatim. 
Agnim mitram na darsatam. 


Speak well with expansive words in detail for 
full understanding of power and energy to the brilliant 
scholar of the Vedas like a very very dear friend worth 
visiting again and again. 
पिमीहि श्लोकमास्ये पर्जन्यंइव ततनः। 
गायं गायत्रमुक्थ्यम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. 14771777 slokamasye parjanya iva tatanah. 
Gaya gayatramukthyam. 


Receive the sacred words, fix them in your 
speech and mind, specify the sense, expand the 
knowledge, language and communication further as the 
cloud holds and expands the vapours of water. Sing and 
speak of the sacred knowledge extensively. 


वन्द॑स्व मारुतं गणं त्वेषं पनस्युमर्किणम्‌ । 
अस्मे Geet अंसच्चिह।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Vandasva marutam ganam tvesam panasyu- 
markinam. Asme vrddha asanniha. 


168 RGVEDA 


Honour the powers of the winds and Marut- 
group of nature and prana, brilliant, admirable and awful 
source of light and energy. Reverence the brilliant, 
dynamic scholars of light and energy rich in possibilities 
of growth and nourishment. Honour and respect power 
and these people so that great men may arise among us 
here. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 39 
Maruts Devata, Ghaura Kanva Rshi 


प्र यदित्था परावतं: शोचिर्न मानमस्यथ । 
कस्य HM मरुतः कस्य वर्प॑सा कं यांथ कं हं धूतयः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Pra yadittha paravatah Socirna manamasyatha. 
Kasya kratva marutah kasya varpasa kam yatha 
kam ha dhutayah. 


Maruts, heroes of light and power, movers and 
shakers, just as the sun radiates its rays of light from 
afar, so by whose idea and purpose is it that you thus 
strike your light and weapons far off? By whose thought 
and action? By whose energy, strength and power? Who 
do you wish to reach? Who do you want to shake? 


स्थिरा व॑: सन्त्वायुधा पराणुदे dite उत प्रतिष्कभे । 
युष्माकमस्तु तविषी पनीयसी मा मर्त्य॑स्य मायिनं: ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Sthira vah santvayudha paranude vilu uta prati- 
skabhe. Yusmakamastu tavist paniyast ma mar- 
tyasya mayinah. 


May your weapons be strong and steady to drive 
off the enemy, and strong and firm to stem the onslaught. 
May your forces be admirably intelligent and 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 39 169 


resourceful. Let the cunning and wicked people have 
nothing such. 


परां ह यस्स्थिरं हथ नरो adden गुरु । वि याथन वनिन॑ः 
पथिव्या व्याशाः पर्वतानाम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


3: Para ha yatsthiram hatha naro vartayatha guru. 
Vi yathana vaninah prthivya vyasah parvatanam. 


Men of heroic character as the winds, whatever 
stands unmoved and inflexible against you, move and 
throw off. Whatever is dense and impenetrable, break 
through and scatter. Like rays of light and currents of 
winds, go round the earth in all directions, reach the 
clouds and cross over the mountains unto the skies. 


नहि a: शतरर्विविदे अधि द्यवि न भूम्यां रिशादसः | 
युष्माकमस्तु तविंषी तनां युजा रुद्रासो नू चिदाधृषे ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Nahi vah satrurvivide adhi dyavi na bhumyam 
risadasah. Yusmakamastu tavisi tana yuja 
rudraso nu cidadhrse. 


Scourge of wrong and enemies of injustice, no 
enemy will stand against you on earth or on high in the 
light of your justice and rectitude. May your forces be 
blazing brilliant, wide and expansive, expert and well- 
provided with weapons and equipment for your struggle 
and battles for life and humanity. 


प्र वेपयन्ति पर्वतान्वि विञ्चन्ति वनस्पतीन्‌ । 
प्रो आरत मरुतो दुर्मदाइव cata: सर्वया विशा ॥ ५॥ 


9; Pra vepayanti parvatanvi vincanti vanaspatin. 
Pro arata maruto durmada iva devasah sarvaya 
1744. 


170 RGVEDA 


Just as Maruts, the winds, shake up the 
mountains, scatter the clouds and uproot the trees, so 
you, brave heroes, intelligent, brilliant and creative, 
together with all the people, throw off the evil and the 
wicked like drunkards lost in intoxication. 


उपो रथेषु पृषतीरयुग्ध्वं प्रष्टिर्वहति tea: | आ वो यामाय 
परथिवी चिदश्रोदबीभयन्त मानुंषाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. (0 rathesu prsatirayugdhvam prastirvahati 
rohitah. A vo yamaya prthivi cidasrodabibha- 
yanta manusah. 


For your travel on earth and in the sky, yoke to 
your chariot horses fast as winds. Let the red fire with the 
mist be the leader in front as motive power of the carrier. 
Let the earth hear the boom and people feel fear and awe. 


आ वों Hay तनाय कं रुद्रा Stal वृणीमहे । at नूनं नोऽ 
व॑सा यथां पुरेत्था कण्वांय बिभ्युषे ॥ ७॥ 


7; A vo maksu tanaya kam rudra avo vrnimahe. 
Ganta nunam no’vasa yatha purettha kanvaya 
bibhyuse. 


O Rudras, heroes of might and rectitude, we 
choose comfort and well-being for you and for posterity. 
We choose freedom and security for ourselves and for 
the man of knowledge and wisdom. And we call upon 
you for safety, security and well-being. Come soon with 
protection and freedom for us all as you came ever 
before post-haste for the protection and progress of the 
wise suppressed in fear. 


युष्मेषितो मरुतो मर्त्येषित आ यो नो अभ्व ईष॑ते । 
वितं युयोत शव॑सा व्योज॑सा वि युष्माकाभिरूतिभिः ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 39 171 


8. Yusmesito maruto martyesita a yo no abhva sate. 
Vi tam yuyota Savasa vyojasa vi yusmakabhi- 
rutibhih. 

Maruts, veterans of knowledge and heroes of 
might and right, if the monstrous enemy whom you 
would wish to subdue and whom the people wish to 
suppress attacks us, then with your valour and splendour 
and with your means of protection and promotion for 
us, ward him off. 


असापि हि प्र॑यज्यव॒ः कण्वं द॒द प्र॑चेतसः। 
असामिभिर्मरुत आ न॑ ऊतिभिर्गन्ता वृष्टं न विद्युतः ॥ ९ ॥ 


a Asami hi prayajyavah kanvam dada pracetasah. 
Asamibhirmaruta a na utibhirganta vrstim na 
vidyutah. 


Heroic yajakas, brilliant men of knowledge and 
wisdom, mighty heroes of the speed of winds, just as 
flashes of lightning bring showers of rain for us, so with 
spontaneous, unqualified and unreserved powers and 
protections give us peace, freedom and comfort, whole, 
complete and undisturbed. And to suppress the evil and 
the wicked, go to the man of wisdom and vision for 
light and guidance. 


असाम्योजो बिभृथा सुदानवोऽ alfa धूतयः शव॑ः । 
ऋषिद्विषे मरुतः परिमन्यव इषुं न daa द्विष॑म्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 

10.  Asamyojo bibhrtha sudanavo’sami dhutayah 
Savah. Rsidvise marutah parimanyava isum na 
srjata dvisam. 


Heroes of the world powerful as the winds, 
movers and shakers of evil, overflowing with love and 


172 RGVEDA 


charity, wield power and splendour whole and complete, 
undisturbed strength and valour, and just as men of 
righteous passion shoot the arrows at the enemy, so shoot 
at the enemy of the seer and his vision of knowledge 
and reality. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 40 
Brhaspati Devata, Ghaura Kanva Rshi 


उत्तिष्ठ ब्रह्मणस्पते देवयन्तस्त्वेमहे | 
उप प्र य॑न्तु मरुत॑ः Gara इन्द्र प्राशर्भ॑वा सचा। ॥ ९॥ 


ly Uttistha brahmanaspate devayantastvemahe. Upa 
pra yantu marutah sudanava indra prasurbhava 
sacd. 


Arise Brahmanaspati, Master of Divinity, seer 
blest and lord of universal knowledge. Lovers of Divinity, 
we approach you and pray. Let the Maruts, heroes of 
valour and splendour fast as winds and liberal men of 
yajnic charity come and march ahead. May Indra, lord of 
knowledge and power bless them with light and success. 


त्वामिद्धि सहसस्पुत्र मर्त्य॑ sagt धने हिते । 
सुवीर्यं मरुत्‌ आ स्वश्व्यं दधीत यो व॑ आचके ॥ २ ॥ 


De Tvamiddhi sahasasputra martya upabrute dhane 
hite. Suviryam maruta a svasvyam dadhita yo va 
acake. 


Child of valour and victory, courage incarnate, 
tolerance and endurance, in the interest of wealth and 
well-being, people invoke and call upon you. Maruts, 
heroes of knowledge and divinity, whoever may 
sincerely invoke and call upon you to your satisfaction, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 40 173 


for him you bear the gift of heroic manliness and 
effective battle power and achievement. 


Wa ब्रह्मणस्पतिः प्र देव्येतु Gaal | अच्छ॑ वीरं नर्य'पद्धिः 
रांधसं देवा यज्ञं न॑यन्तु नः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Praitu brahmanaspatih pra devyetu sunrta. Accha 
viram naryam panktiradhasam deva yajnam 
nayantu nah. 


May the lord of divine knowledge move forward. 
May the lady scholar of divine truth and law move 
forward. May the generous and brilliant men of yajna 
carry and conduct our yajnas of the achievement of manly 
heroes for five-fold gifts of wealth and well-being. 


यो वाघते ददाति सूनरं वसु स ध॑त्ते अक्षिति sre: | 
तस्मा sat सुवीरामा य॑जामहे सुप्रतूर्तिमनेहस्र॑म्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yo vaghate dadati sunaram vasu sa dhatte aksiti 
Sravah. Tasma ilam suvirama yajamahe supratur- 
timanehasam. 

The man who gives to the scholar of divinity 
and the high-priest of yajna wealth by which noble 
people arise commands imperishable honour and fame. 
For him we pray and work for the gift of divine speech 
and sacred earth, inviolable, holy and instantly 
productive, which creates and raises noble heroes. 


प्र नूनं ब्रह्म॑णस्पतिर्मन्त्रं वदत्युक्थ्यम्‌ । यस्मिचिन्द्रौ वरुणो 
पित्रो अर्यमा ear ओकांसि चक्रिरे ॥ ५॥ 
Pra nunam brahmanaspatirmantram vadatyu- 


kthyam. Yasminnindro varuno mitro aryama deva 
okamsi cakrire. 


174 RGVEDA 


Surely the master of divinity and high-priest of 
yajna and Vedic speech chants the celebrated hymns of 
the Lord of the Universe in whose infinite presence Indra 
(electric energy), Varuna (sun, moon and oceans, etc.), 
Mitra (prana energy), Aryama (winds) and other divine 
powers of nature such as earth find their abode and 
sustenance. 


तपिद्धोचेमा विदथेषु शम्भुवं मन्त्रं देवा अनेहसम्‌ । 
इमां च वाचं प्रतिहर्यथा नरो विश्वेद्धामा वों अश्नवत्‌ ६ ॥ 


6. Tamidvocema vidathesu sambhuvam mantram 
deva anehasam. Imam ca vacam pratiharyatha 
naro visvedvama vo asnavat. 


Noble and generous people, in yajnas and holy 
congregations, if we chant that sacred blissful and 
imperishable mantra of science and divine mystery of 
Veda, and you, O men and women, if you receive, realise 
and follow this holy speech in action, it would bring 
you all the splendid wealth of the world. 


को दे वयन्त॑मश्नवज्ननं को वृक्तबर्हिषम्‌ | 
प्रप्र॑ दा्वान्पस्त्यांभिरस्थिताऽन्तर्वावत््यं दधे ॥ ७॥ 


a Ko devayantamasnavajjanam ko vrktabarhisam. 
Pra pra dasvan pastyabhirasthita’ntarvavat 
ksayam dadhe. 


Who would reach the man of divine love? Who 
would go to the man of yajna who has collected the 
holy grass for the vedi? Who is the generous giver that 
finds a settled home with noble presences on open airy 
land and holds the fort? (Answer: Brahmanaspati). 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 41 175 


उपं at dseita हन्ति राजभिर्भये चिंत्सु्चितिं द॑धे । 
नास्य॑ वर्ता न deat dearest नार्भे अस्ति विण: ॥ ८ ॥ 


Bi Upa ksatram prncita hanti rajabhirbhaye citsu- 
ksitim dadhe. Nasya varta na taruta mahadhane 
narbhe asti vajrinah. 


Brahmanaspati consolidates the ruling power. 
With warriors and statesmen he eliminates the enemies. 
In a state of fear and challenge he maintains his cool 
constancy. Wielder of the thunderbolt as he is, none can 
turn him, none can defeat even in the greatest battle. In 
little skirmishes? No question. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 41 
Varuna, Mitra, Aryama, Adityah, Devata, 
Ghaura Kanva Rshi 
यं tata प्रचेतसो वरुणो पित्रो अर्यमा। 
नू चित्स द॑भ्यते जनं: ॥ ९॥ 
॥ Yam raksanti pracetaso varuno mitro aryama. 


Nu citsa dabhyate janah. 


The man whom Prachetas, men of knowledge 
and wisdom, Varuna, distinguished and meritorious 
man, Mitra, friend of all, Aryama, man of justice, all 
these protect and advance (is really strong). Can he ever 
be hurt, bullied or suppressed? No! 


यं बाहुतेव पिप्र॑ति पान्ति मर्त्य रिषः। 
sis: wef एधते ॥ २॥ 


2 Yam bahuteva piprati panti martyam risah. 
Aristah sarva edhate. 


176 RGVEDA 


Those men whom Varuna and others support and 
protect against the violent as if with the force of their 
own arms advance and grow in life safe and secure. 


fa दुर्गां वि द्विष॑ः पुरो ध्नन्ति राजांन wary 
नय॑न्ति दुरिता faz: ३॥ 


Vi durga vi dvisah puro ghnanti rajana esam. 
Nayanti durita tirah. 


Brilliant rulers and others who shine, rout the 
forts and cities of these enemies and cast off all evil 
and suffering far away. 


सुगः पन्थां staat आदित्यास ऋतं यते। 
नात्रावखादो अस्ति वः॥ ४॥ 


4. Sugah pantha anrksara adityasa rtam yate. 
Natravakhado asti vah. 


Adityas, men of divine brilliance, the path of 
those who go by truth and divine law is straight and 
simple. For you too (who are dedicated to Divinity and 
universal truth) there is no fear or danger. 


यं यज्ञं नय॑था नर आदित्या ऋजुना पथा । 
प्र वः स धीतये नशत्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


a: Yam yajnam nayatha nara aditya rjuna patha. 
Pra vah sa dhitaye naSsat. 


Adityas, heroes of light and the law, people of 
the land, the yajna of creation and development which 
you carry forward by the path of truth and piety for 
knowledge, science and art must not disappear from 
the scene. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 41 177 


स रल्नं मर्त्यो वसु विश्वं तोकमुत et । 
अच्छं गच्छत्यस्तुंतः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sa ratnam martyo vasu visvam tokamuta tmanda. 
Accha gacchatyastrtah. 


The man of invincible love and non-violence 
by his very mind and soul gets the wealth and jewels of 
the world and very dear lovely children. 


कथा राधाम सखायः स्तोमं पित्रस्यार्यम्णः। 
महि प्सरो वरुणस्य ।॥ ७॥ 


4 Katha radhama sakhayah stomam mitrasyar- 
yamnah. Mahi psaro varunasya. 


Friends, how shall we realise in truth of fact the 
great celebration we offered for the power and glory of 
Mitra, friend of the people, Aryama, lord of justice, and 
Varuna, highest leader of our choice, and how shall we 
achieve the high standard of our comfort and well- 
being? 

मा वो घ्नन्तं मा शप॑न्तं प्रति वोचे देवयन्तम्‌ । 
सुम्नैरिद्व आ विंवासे॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Ma vo ghnantam ma Sapantam prati voce deva- 


yantam. Sumnairidva ठ vivase. 


Friends, I must not even speak to the man who 
hurts or curses you. In stead, I must love and serve the 
man who feels divine love for you and wishes you well 
all comfort and joy. 


umfecurifgetarer Prenat: | 
न दुंरुक्तायं स्पृहयेत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


178 RGVEDA 


9, Caturascid dadamanad bibhiyada nidhatoh. 
Na duruktaya sprhayet. 


Trust not, fear the man who gives you four: hurt, 
curse, pain and depression. Off with the thief, the 
encroacher and misappropriator. Love not one who 
speaks evil. 


Feel reverence and awe, without fear, for the 
man who gives you four: Dharma, Artha (wealth), Kama 
(fulfilment), Moksha (ultimate freedom). Respect the 
parent. Love not the man of evil tongue. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 42 
Pusha Devata, Ghaura Kanva Rshi 
सं पूषन्नध्वनस्तिर व्यंहो विमुचो sare 
सक्ष्वा देव प्र णस्पुरः ॥ ९॥ 
1. Sam pusannadhvanastira vyamho vimuco napat. 
Saksva deva pra naspurah. 


Pusha, lord giver of nourishment and growth, 
lord imperishable, brilliant and generous, cross over 
through the paths of life and help us cross. Free us from 
sin and evil, join us and guide us to move forward. 


यो न॑: पूषन्नघो gent दुःशोव॑ आदिदेशति । 
अपं स्म तं पथो Se २॥ 


2: Yo nah pusannagho vrko duhseva adideSati. 
Apa sma tam patho jahi. 


Pusha, lord of physical, moral, spiritual and 
intellectual nourishment, whoever be the sinner, the 
thief, the malignant enemy that orders us to be off from 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 42 179 
the right path, remove him from the path. 


अप त्यं परिपन्थिनं मुषीवाणं हुरश्चित॑म्‌। 
दूरमधि स्तुतेरंज ॥ ३ ॥ 

3. Apa tyam paripanthinam musivanam hurascitam. 
Duramadhi sruteraja. 
Pusha, saviour and protector lord, remove and 
throw off far from our path that highway man, that 
robber, who lies in ambush waiting to rob us. 
त्वं तस्य॑ दवयाविनोऽ घशंसस्य कस्य॑ चित्‌। 
पदाभि तिष्ट तपुंषिम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvam tasya dvayavino’ ghasamsasya kasya Cit. 
Padabhi tistha tapusim. 
Pusha, whosoever the sinner, thief or robber, 
overt or covert, suppress, and keep his oppressive force 
under foot. 
आ तत्ते दस्र मन्तुमः पूषन्नवो वणीमहे। 
येन॑ पितृनचोदयः ॥ ५ ॥ 

9, A tat te dasra mantumah pisannavo vrnimahe. 
Yena pitrnacodayah. 


Pusha, wondrous destroyer of evil, generous 
saviour and protector, lord of knowledge, we pray for 
your love, grace and protection by which you inspire 
and enlighten our parents and seniors (to follow the right 
path). 


अधां नो विश्वसौभग हिर॑ण्यवाशीमत्तम | 
धनानि सुषणा। कृधि ॥ ६ ॥ 


180 RGVEDA 
6. Adha no visvasaubhaga hiranyavasimattama. 
Dhanani susana krdhi. 
Pusha, lord of universal good fortune, generous 
giver of the light of knowledge and golden lustre of 
honour, create for us and bless us with liberal gifts of 
wealth of knowledge, prosperity and well-being. 
अतिं नः सश्चतो! नय सुगा न॑ः TIM कृणु | 
पूष॑ज्चिह क्रतुं विदः ॥ ७॥ 

Te Ati nah sascato naya suga nah supatha krnu. 
Pusanniha kratum vidah. 


Pusha, lord of light and enlightenment, save us 
from the enemy, take us far on way to knowledge by 
the simplest noble path. Let us have the light and vision 
of good yajnic action. 
अभि सूयव॑सं नय न tava sted | 
पूष॑ज्चिह क्रतुं विदः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Abhi suyavasam naya na navajvaro adhvane. 
Pusanniha kratum vidah. 


Pusha, lord of growth and advancement, take 
us to the land of manna, beauty and joy. No new 
obstacles, no sufferance on the way. And then know the 
noble acts (we do in the new land). 
शग्धि पूर्धि प्र यंसि च शिशीहि प्रास्युदर॑म्‌। 
पूष॑ज्चिह क्रतुं विदः ॥ ९॥ 

9. Sagdhi purdhi pra yamsi ca Sisthi prasyudaram. 
Pusanniha kratum vidah. 


Pusha, you are the power and the glory. Give us 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 43 181 


strength and power. Give us fulfilment. Give us the 
wealth of life. You are the light and peace. Give us peace 
and lustre. Give us plenty of food to our satisfaction 
and delight. Know our battles of action. 


न पूषणं मेथामसि सूक्तैरभि गणीमसि। 
वसूनि दस्ममीमहे ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Na pusanam methamasi suktairabhi grnimasi. 
Vasuni dasmamimahe. 


We don’t fight Pusha, generous lord giver, 
sustainer and ruler of the world. We celebrate him in 
sacred songs. We pray to the generous lord for the 
wealths of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 43 


Rudra, Mitra, Varuna, Soma, Devatah, 
Ghaura Kanva Rshi 


कद्‌ Gare प्रचेतसे मीव््हु्ट॑पाय तव्य॑से | 
वोचेम शन्तमं हृदे ॥ ९॥ 


il, Kad rudraya pracetase mil hustamaya tavyase. 
Vocema santamam hrde. 


When shall we sing hymns of peace and bliss 
most soothing in celebration of the glory of Rudra, lord 
of justice and mercy, omniscient, most generous, 
omnipotent and dearest ever present in the heart? 


(With a little modification of meaning, the 
mantra applies to the soul and to Vayu, universal energy 
as well as prana energy of life. Rudra stands for Isvara, 
jiva and vayu/prana. ) 


182 RGVEDA 


यथां नो अदितिः करत्पश्वे नृभ्यो यथा We । 
यथां तोकायं रुद्रियम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Yatha no aditih karat pasve nrbhyo yatha gave. 
Yatha tokaya rudriyam. 


Just as Aditi, mother, does good to the child, 
the shepherd to his animals, the ruler to his people, the 
master to the cows, so, we pray, may Rudra, lord of life 
and energy, grant us kindness and grace. 


यथां नो मित्रो वरूणो यथां रुद्रश्चिकेतति। 
यथा विश्वे स॒जोष॑सः ।॥ ३॥ 


3. Yatha no mitro varuno yatha rudrasciketati. 
Yatha visve sajosasah. 


Just as Mitra, universal friend and breath of life, 
Varuna, lord omniscient and the teacher, Rudra, lord of 
love and justice, and all friends of life and common 
humanity energise and enlighten us, so may all the 
teachers of the earth give us the light and energy of life. 


mada मेधपतिं रुद्रं जलांषभेषजम्‌। 
तच्छंयोः सुम्नमीमहे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Gathapatim medhapatim rudram jalasabhe- 
sajam. Tacchamyoh sumnamimahe. 


We pray to gathapati, lord protector of hymns 
and celebrants, medhapati, lord protector and promoter 
of yajnas, jalashabheshajam, universal balm of life, and 
Rudra, lord of life, love and justice for the bliss of peace 
and ultimate freedom. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 43 183 


यः शुक्रडव सूर्यो हिर॑ण्यमिव trea । 
श्रेष्ठो देवानां वसु: ॥ ५५ ॥ 


Yah sukra iva suryo hiranyamiva rocate. 
Srestho devanam vasuh. 


Rudra, lord of love and justice and the ruling 
power of humanity, who shines like the refulgence of 
pure light, who blazes like the sun and pleases like the 
beauty of gold, is the highest of the generous and 
brilliant, and he is the haven and abode of the living 
beings on earth. 


शं न॑ः करत्यर्वते सुगं मेषाय मेष्ये । 
eat नारिभ्यो गवे ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sam nah karatyarvate sugam mesdya mesye. 
Nrbhyo naribhyo gave. 


Rudra, lord of the world, ruler, healer and 
teacher may, we pray, bring good health, peace and well- 
being to our horses, sheep and goats, men and women, 
cows and our mind and sense and to the earth and the 
environment. 


अस्मे सोम श्रियमधि नि धेहि greet FOL 
महि श्रव॑स्तुविनूम्णम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


iF Asme soma Sriyamadhi ni dhehi Satasya nrnam. 
Mahi Sravastuvinrmnam. 


Rudra, lord ruler of the world, Soma, joyous, 
kind and beatific, bring us and establish over the earth 
wealth and beauty, honour and fame, dignity and 
grandeur of a high exciting kind and quality for all the 
hundred orders of humanity. 


184 RGVEDA 


मा न॑: सोमपरिबाधो मारांतयो जुहुरन्त | 
आ न॑ इन्दो वाजे भज ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ma nah somaparibadho maratayo juhuranta. 
A na indo vaje bhaja. 


Lord of beauty and dignity, may the enemies of 
peace and prosperity and the agents of poverty and 
adversity never be able to challenge us. Help us and 
strengthen us in the struggle for peace, prosperity and 
dignity. 

यास्ते प्रजा अमृतस्य परस्मिन्धामंन्नृतस्यं | 
मूर्धा नाभा सोम वेन आभूषन्तीः सोम वेदः ॥ ९॥ 
0. Yaste praja amrtasya parasmin dhamannrtasya. 


Murdha nabha soma vena abhusantih soma 
vedah. 


Soma, lord of peace and prosperity, Vena, 
blessed presence of beauty and grace, these are your 
people trying to reach the prime centre of immortal truth 
and law. Know these, love these, and help them reach 
and abide in the highest heaven of joy. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 44 
Agni Devata, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 
अग्रे विवंस्वदुषसश्चित्रं weil अमर्त्यं । 
आ दाशुष जातवेदो वहा त्वमद्या देवां उषर्बुधः ॥ ९॥ 


le Agne vivasvadusasascitram radho amartya. A da- 
Suse jatavedo vaha tvamadya devan usarbudhah. 


Agni, lord of life, blazing as the sun, immortal, 
omniscient of things born, for the man of charity who 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 44 185 


has surrendered himself to you, you bring today 
wonderful wealth of the dawn, and let the yogis and 
blessings of nature awake at the dawn. 


जुष्टो हि दूतो असिं हव्यवाहनोऽ गर रथीरध्वराणाम्‌ | 
सजूर श्विभ्यांमुषस। सुवीर्यं मस्मे धेहि श्रवों बृहत्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Justo hi duto asi havyavahano’ gne rathiradhva- 
ranam. Sajurasvibhyamusasa suviryamasme 
dhehi sravo brhat. 


Agni, ruling lord of light and the world, invoked 
and lighted, you are the blazing catalyst and carrier of 
yajnic materials offered and fragrances received. You 
are the leading chariot hero of the world’s yajnic acts of 
love and creation. Friend of the Ashvins, sun and moon, 
water and air, working with the complementary powers 
of nature, friend and companion of ours too, bring us 
noble strength and valour, bless us with universal honour 
and fame. 


अद्या दूतं quite aquhi पुंरुप्रियम्‌। 
धूमकेतुं भाऋजीकं व्युष्टिषु यज्ञानांमध्वर्‌ श्रिय॑म्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Adya dutam vrnimahe vasumagnim purupriyam. 
Dhumaketum bharjikam vyustisu yajnanam adh- 
varasriyam. 


Today we choose to invoke, invite and light up 
Agni, lord of light and life and knowledge, leader of 
the dynamics of existence, homely sustainer of all and 
giver of wealth, darling of everybody, moving with the 
flag of smoke in dazzling flames of light, and giving us 
brilliant success and glory in the holy yajnas of our 
heart’s desire. 


186 RGVEDA 


ss यविष्ठमतिथिं cated जुष्टं जनाय दाशुषे । 
देवां अच्छ यात॑वे जातवेदसपथिमींक्ठे व्युष्टिषु us 


4. Srestham yavisthamatithim svahutam justam 
jJanaya dasuse. Devan accha yatave jataveda-sam 
agnimile vyustisu. 


In the lights of the dawn of desire and to reach 
the holy splendours of Divinity, I invoke, worship and 
serve Agni, lord of light and life and universal 
knowledge, best and youngest holy light, loving, 
burning and ever on the move as a blessing for the man 
of faith and charity with surrender to the Lord. 


स्तविष्यायि त्वामहं विश्व॑स्यामृत भोजन। 
अगे ्रातारंपमतं मियेध्य यजिष्ठं हव्यवाहन ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Stavisyami tvamaham visvasyamrta bhojana. 
Agne trataram amrtam miyedhya yajistham 
havyavahan. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord of creation, eternal and 
imperishable, sustainer of the universe, holiest of the 
holy and giver of highest gifts of yajna, I shall ever 
sing in celebration of your glory as the eternal saviour 
and protector of the world and the worthiest object of 
worship in yajna. 


Geral बोधि गृणते afersa मधुजिह्वः स्वाहुतः | 
प्रस्कण्वस्य प्रतिरन्नायुं्जीवसें नपस्या दैव्यं जन॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Susamso bodhi grnate yavisthya madhujihvah 
svahutah. Praskanvasya pratirannayurjivase 
namasya daivyam janam. 


Agni, lord of light and universal knowledge, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 44 187 


youngest ever young, universally celebrated you are, 
honey tongued, invoked and deeply honoured, 
protecting the life of the wise for the joy of living, 
worthy of obedience and obeisance, save the man of 
divinity and bless the celebrant with enlightenment. 


होतारं विश्ववेदसं सं fe wat fast इन्धते। 
स a0 व॑ह पुरुहूत weaatsd ear इह द्रवत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ध Hotaram visvavedasam sam hi tva visa indhate. 
Sa ठ vaha puruhita pracetaso’gne devan iha dravat. 


Agni, lord of light and life, ruler of the world, 
the people invoke, kindle and honour you, lord 
omniscient and high-priest of cosmic yajna. Lord 
universally celebrated, let the brilliancies of nature and 
humanity come and bless us here straight at the earliest 
and fastest. Let the wise scholars come and bless us. 


सवितार॑मुषसंमण्विना भग॑मथिं व्युष्टिषु ard: । 
कण्वांसस्त्वा सुतसोमास इन्धते हव्य॒वाहं स्वध्वर ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Savitaram usasam asvina bhagamagnim vyustisu 
ksapah. Kanvasastva sutasomasa indhate hav- 
yavaham svadhvara. 


Agni, lord of light, high-priest of great yajnas, 
wise scholars, and those who have distilled the soma 
essence of life in their visions of light and life’s joy, 
invoke, study and develop the powers and blessings of 
Savita, inspiring light of the sun, the dawn, the Ashvins, 
water and air, Bhaga, universal vitality and majesty of 
divine nature, Agni, energy of heat, light and electricity, 
the nights and showers of peace, and yajna which is the 
harbinger of all the blessings of life and its wealth. 


188 RGVEDA 


पतिर््यध्वराणामगे' दूतो विशामसि । 
उषर्बुध आ वंह सोम॑पीतये देवाँ अद्य स्वदुः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Patirhyadhvaranamagne duto visamasi. 
Usarbudha a vaha somapitaye devan svardrsah. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, protector and 
promoter of the noblest yajnic acts of humanity, you 
are the conscience of the people and harbinger of joy 
for them. Bring here the brilliancies of nature and 
humanity who wake up with the dawn. They have the 
vision of light and heaven. Let them come for partici- 
pation in the celebration of soma-success of the yajna. 


अगन पूर्वां अनूषसो विभावसो दीदेथ favadyta: | 
असि ग्रामेष्वविता पुरोहितोऽ सिं यज्ञेषु मानुंषः॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Agne purva anusaso vibhavaso didetha visva- 
darsatah. Asi gramesvavita purohito’si yajnesu 
manusah. 


Agni, blazing lord of light and knowledge, you 
are the leading light of the world. You shine before, 
with, and after the dawns. You are the protector of life 
in human habitations. You are the image and life of the 
people and the leader and high-priest in their yajnas 
from the family yajna upto the world programmes of 
creation, so human, sacred and divine. 


नि त्वां यज्ञस्य area होतारमृत्विजम्‌ । 
मनुष्वद्देव धीमहि प्रचेतसं जीरं दूतममर्त्यम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


Ni tva yajnasya sadhanamagne hotaramrtvijam. 
Manusvad deva dhimahi pracetasam jiram 
dutamamartyam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 44 189 


Agni, lord of light and life, you are the ultimate 
cause, means and end of universal yajna, the high-priest 
and the yajaka. Lord of brilliance, we constantly 
perceive, reflect, and meditate on you, worship and 
internalise you as a very human presence, inspiring, 
dynamic, illuminating and imperishable. 


यद्देवानां मित्रमहः पुरोहितोऽन्तरो यासि दूत्य॑म्‌ । 
सिन्धोरिव प्रस्व॑नितास ऊर्मयोऽ गरेभ्रीजन्ते अर्चयः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yad devanam mitramahah purohito’ntaro yasi 
dutyam. Sindhoriva prasvanitasa urmayo’gner- 
bhrajante arcayah. 


Lord of light, you are the greatest friend of the 
brilliant men of knowledge and vision, morning call of 
the high-priest in the mind, leading light of the voice 
divine, and the invitation to live by the yajna fire. And 
the flames of fire blaze like the rolling waves of the sea 
(at the dawn). 


श्रुधि श्रुत्कर्णं afaRidera सयावभिः । आ aq afera 
पित्रो अर्यमा प्रातर्यावाणो अध्वरम्‌।॥ ९३॥ 


13. Srudhi Srutkarna vahnibhirdevairagne saya- 
vabhih. A sidantu barhisi mitro aryama pratar- 
yavano adhvaram. 


Listen lord, you have the ear, listen to the 
constant crackle of the blazing flames of fire within. 
Come Mitra, friends of humanity, come Aryama, powers 
of justice, come moving travellers to the house of yajna, 
join the sacred cause of love and non-violence and sit 
on the holy grass around the vedi-fire. 


190 RGVEDA 


शृण्वन्तु स्तोमं मरुत॑ः सुदान॑वोऽ भरिजिह्या ऋतावृधः । 
पिबंतु सोमं वरूणो धूृतव्र॑तोऽ श्विभ्यांमुषसां सजूः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Sranvantu stomam marutah sudanavo’gnijihva 
rtavrdhah. Pibatu somam varuno dhrtavrato’- 
Svibhyamusasa sajuh. 


Listen to the songs of celebration, Maruts, 
heroes of the human nation moving at the speed of 
winds, generous, brilliant as flames of fire and rising in 
the realms of universal yajna of the divine laws of life 
and truth. Let Varuna, highest powers of nature and 
humanity, committed to universal laws, come with the 
lovely dawn and the Ashvins, complementary currents 
of life’s energy, and participate in the joys of yajna. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 45 
Agni, Devah Devatah, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 


wang वसूरिह eat आदित्यां उत । 
यजां स्वध्वरं जनं मनुजातं घुतप्रुष॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


lL Tvamagne vasunriha rudran adityan uta. 
Yaja svadhvaram janam manujatam ghrtaprusam. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, sagely 
scholar of wisdom and piety, bring together into this 
yajna of love and non-violence the people, children of 
reflective humanity, who sprinkle the vedi with holy 
water and offer ghee into the fire. Bring together the 
celibate scholars of twenty four, thirty six and forty eight 
years discipline and perform yajna in honour of the 
Vasus, eight abodes of life in nature, Rudras, eleven 
vitalities of life, and Adityas, twelve phases of the yearly 
round of the sun. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 45 191 


श्रुष्टीवानो हि दाशुष देवा अंगने विचेतसः । 
तान्‌ रोहिदश्व गिर्वणस्त्रय॑स्तरिंशतमा व॑ह ॥ २॥ 
2. Srustivano hi dasuse deva agne vicetasah. 


Tan rohidasva girvanastrayastrimsatama vaha. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power of the 
world, moving at lightning speed of the red flames of 
fire, bring here for the generous man of charity and 
brilliant piety the thirty-three divinities of the universe 
such as earth and vital airs which are givers of light and 
intelligence and which instantly bring up the blessings 
of life. 

प्रियमेधवदत्रिवज्जात॑वेदो विरूपवत्‌ । 
अद्धिर स्वन्महिन्रत प्रस्कण्वस्य श्रुधी हव॑म्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Priyamedhavad atrivaj jatavedo virupavat. 
Angirasvanmahivrata praskanvasya srudhi 
havam. 


Agni, lord of existential knowledge, committed 
to the great laws of eternity, listen to the invocation and 
prayer of the man of intelligence and reason like a lord 
of beauteous wisdom, above ignorance, injustice and 
poverty, and free from physical, mental and spiritual 
want, a power of versatile form and present within as 
the breath of life. 


महिकेरव ऊतये' प्रियमेधा अहूषत । 
राज॑न्तमध्वराणाम्िं शुक्रेण शोचिषा ॥ ४॥ 


4. Mahikerava utaye priyamedha ahusata. 
Rajantam adhvaranam agnim sukrena Socisa. 


Great artists and men, who love intelligence, 


192 RGVEDA 


industry and research for the sake of progress and 
protection, invoke, study and explain agni, fire and 
electricity, brilliant power of creative and constructive 
yajnic programmes blazing with instant energy. 


घृताहवन सन्त्येमा उ षु श्रुधी गिरः 1 
याभिः कण्व॑स्य सूनवो हवन्तेऽ AS त्वा ॥५॥ 


>, Ghrtahavana santyema u su Srudhi girah. 
Yabhih kanvasya sunavo havante’vase tva. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, generous, 
receiving libations of ghee and waters, listen well to 
these voices of prayer with which the disciples of the 
distinguished genius of science invoke and serve you 
for the sake of protection. 


त्वां चित्रश्रवस्तम हवन्ते विक्षु wera: । 
शोचिष्केशं पुरुप्रियाऽग हव्याय वोक््ह॑वे ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tvam citrasravastama havante viksu jantavah. 


Sociskesam purupriya’gne havyaya volhave. 


Agni, lordly power of light and knowledge, most 
wondrous in fame and prosperity, flaming with flashes 
of lightning, widely loved and pursued, earnest men 
among people invoke, study and serve you for generous 
gifts of knowledge and power. 


नि त्वा होतारमृत्विजं दधिरे व॑सुवित्त॑मम्‌ । 
श्रुत्कर्ण सप्रथ॑स्तमं विप्रा अग्रे दिविष्टिषु wen 
Ti Ni tva hotaram rtvijam dadhire vasuvittamam. 


Srutkarnam saprathastamam vipra agne divistisu. 


Agni, power of light and knowledge, men of 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 46 193 


genius invoke, install and kindle you in the holiest acts 
of yajna as the yajaka and high-priest, richest in gifts of 
prosperity, easy listener ever in readiness and widest in 
fame and possibility. 


आ त्वा विप्रां अचुच्यवुः सुतसोमा अभि प्रय॑ः । 
geet बिभ्र॑तो हविरग्ने मतौय दाशुष ॥ ८॥ 


oo A tva vipra acucyavuh sutasoma abhi prayah. 
Brhad bha bibhrato haviragne martaya dasuse. 


Agni, lord of blazing brilliance and treasure of 
wealth and knowledge, men of genius who have distilled 
soma, spirit of joy and meaning of life, from nature, 
bearing offers of yajna come to you for the sake of food 
and delight of living for the man of yajnic generosity. 


प्रातयव्णिः सहस्कृत सोमपेयाय सन्त्य । 
इहाद्य दैव्यं जनं बर्हिरा सदया वसो ॥ ९॥ 


6 Prataryavnah sahaskrta somapeyaya santya. 
Thadya daivyam janam barhira sadaya vaso. 


Noble genius of light and knowledge, Agni, 
generous creator of strength, courage and endurance, 
holy shelter for the seekers, here and now institute the 
yajna and seat the lovers of divinity and morning 
pilgrims of yajna on the sacred grass to join the yajna 
for a drink of soma. 


staisa दैव्यं waa यक्ष्व सहूतिभिः । 
अयं सोम॑ः सुदानवस्तं पांत तिरोअंह्यम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Arvancam daivyam janamagne yaksva sahuti- 


bhih. Ayam somah sudanavastam pata tiroahn- 
yam. 


194 RGVEDA 


Agni, fiery genius of yajna, welcome the lovers 
of divinity come up for the yajaka and conduct the yajna 
with joint invocations and libations into the holy fire. 
Generous creators of wealth and honour, this is the soma 
of delight and beauty earlier distilled in the day. Protect 
it, promote it and enjoy it. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 46 

Ashvinau Devate, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 

एषो उषा अपूर्व्या व्युच्छति प्रिया fea: | 
स्तुषे वामश्विना बृहत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 

1. Eso usa apurvya vyucchati priya divah. 
Stuse vamasvina brhat. 

This glorious dawn, darling of the sun, shines 
forth from heaven and proclaims the day. Ashvins, 
harbingers of this glory, I admire you immensely — 
infinitely. 

या wen सिन्धुमातरा water? रयीणाम्‌। 
धिया देवा व॑सुविदां ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Ya dasra sindhumatara manotara rayinam. 
Dhiya deva vasuvida. 


Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, wonder- 
workers are they. Born of the oceans of space, they create 
the seas of morning mist. Faster than the mind, they 
bring wealths of the world. With intelligence and 
inspiration, they reveal the treasures of the Vasus, they 
are brilliant, generous, divine. 


वच्यन्ते वां ककुहासो जूर्णायामधि विष्टपि | 
यद्वां रथो विभिष्पतात्‌ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 46 195 


4. Vacyante vam kakuhaso jurnayamadhi vistapi. 
Yad vam ratho vibhispatat. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light, knowledge and 
wealth across the Vasus, scientists and technologists, 
veterans of vision and wisdom celebrate your 
achievement when your chariot flies like a bird into the 
ancient sky over the heavens. 


हविषां जारो अपां पिपर्ति पपुरिर्नरा । 
पिता कुट॑स्य चर्षणिः ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Havisa jaro apam piparti papurirnara. 
Pita kutasya carsanih. 
Ye men and women of the world, the sun, lover 
of the dawn, father, protector and illuminator of the 
tortuous paths and human habitations nourishes and 
promotes life with the consumption and creation of 
waters across the heavens over the earth. 
आदारो वां मतीनां नास॑त्या मतवचसा | 
पातं सोम॑स्य TOTS ॥ ५ ॥ 

Adaro vam matinam ndastya matavacasa. 
Patam somasya dhrsnuya. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and destroyers of 
enemy forces, dedicated to truth and holy speech, defend 
your people and protect their peace and prosperity with 
confidence and daring courage. 


या नः पीपरदश्विना ज्योतिष्मती तमस्तिरः | 
तामस्मे रांसाथामिष॑म्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ya nah piparadasvina jyotismati tamastirah . 
Tamasme rasathamisam. 


196 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and inspiration, like 
the dawn give us that light of heaven which may help 
us cross over beyond the night and darkness of life and 
bring us total fulfilment. 


आ नों नावा म॑तीनां यातं पाराय गन्त॑वे। 
युञ्जाथामश्विना रथ॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

Te A no nava matinam yatam paraya gantave. 
Yunjathamasvina ratham. 
Ashvins, harbingers of light, knowledge and 
power, design and prepare and bring us the chariot for 
the people to cross over land and sea and sky and reach 
their destination. 
अरित्रं वां दिवस्पृथु तीर्थे सिन्धूनां रथ॑ः | 
धिया युयुज्र इन्द॑वः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Aritram vam divasprthu tirthe sindhunam rathah. 
Dhiya yuyujra indavah. 


Ashvins, scientists and engineers, for crossing 
of the seas and skies to your destination, let your chariot 
and propulsion be elaborate and powerful by design and 
structure using water and fire power and electric and 
solar energy. 


दिवस्कण्वास इन्द॑वो वसु सिन्धूनां पदे। 
स्वं वव्रिं कुहं धित्सथः ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Divaskanvasa indavo vasu sindhunam pade. 


Svam vavrim kuha dhitsathah. 


Ashvins, eminent scholars, in the depths of the 
seas and over the rolling waves, in the rays of light and 
in the mists of waters, there is wealth and energy. And 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 46 197 


where do you place the value of your own intelligence 
(in the design and structure of the chariot of your own 
choice)? 


अभूदु भा ॐ अंशवे हिरण्यं प्रति सूर्यः । 
व्य॑ख्यजिह्यासिंतः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Abhudu bha u amsave hiranyam prati suryah. 
Vyakhyajjihvayasitah. 


The light is for collection in focus. Sunlight so 
collected is an image of gold. And so collected and 
focussed, the light, otherwise free, uncontrolled and 
undirected, burns like a tongue of fire (as power). 


अभूदु पारमेतवे Uren ऋतस्य साधुया । 
अदंश वि स्तुतिर्दिवः।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Abhudu parametave pantha rtasya sadhuya. 
Adarsi vi srutirdivah. 


The path of the laws of science and nature, as 
the path of Truth, is for simple and sure travel across 
the seas of existence to the cherished goal. See the flow 
of light divine from the doors of heaven. 


तत्तदिदश्विनोरवो! जरिता प्रतिं safe 
मदे सोम॑स्य पिप्र॑तोः॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tattadidasvinoravo jarita prati bhusati. 
Made somasya pipratoh. 


Every worshipful seeker of knowledge, wisdom 
and power explores and supplements the paths of 
protection and progress in the business of life’s joy 
created by the Ashvins (divinities of nature and 
humanity who are harbingers of light and inspiration). 


198 RGVEDA 


वावसाना faaafa सोम॑स्य पीत्या गिरा। 
मनुष्वच्छंभू आ ग॑तम्‌॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Vavasana vivasvati somasya pitya gird. 
Manusvacchambhu a gatam. 


Ashvins, blissful powers of nature and 
humanity, living and working in the light of the sun, 
come to us like our own men, bringing with you the 
love and protection of Soma, lord of happiness and 
glory, alongwith the voice of the Divine. 


युवोरुषा अनु श्रियं परिज्मनोरु पाच॑रत्‌। 
ऋता व॑नथो अक्तुभिः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. = Yuvorusa anu Sriyam parijmanorupacarat. 
Rta vanatho aktubhih. 


Ashvins, inspiring and protective powers of 
nature and humanity, ever on the move like the sun and 
moon, let the dawn of light and joy follow upon your 
beauty and glory. High-priests of truth and universal 
law, shine, illuminate and create the joy of life by nights 
and days. 


उभा पिबतमश्विनोभा नः शर्म' यच्छतम्‌ । 
अविद्धियाभिंरूतिभिंः ।॥ ९५॥ 


15. Ubha pibatamasvinobha nah sarma yacchatam. 
Avidriyabhirutibhih. 

Ashvins, powers of protection and inspiration, 
both of you drink the delight of life and protect its 
sanctity, and, with relentless actions and modes of 
defence, give us the peace and well-being of happy 
settlement. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 47 199 


Mandala 1/Sukta 47 
Ashvinau Devate, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 


अयं वां मधुमत्तमः सुतः सोम॑ ऋतावृधा । 
तम॑श्विना पिबतं तिरोअंहययं धत्तं रलानि दाशुषे ॥ ९॥ 


| Ayam vam madhumattamah sutah soma rtavrdha. 
Tamasvina pibatam tiroahnyam dhattam ratnani 
dasuse. 

Ashvins, brilliant powers like the sun and moon, 
promoters of light and truth, science and industry, this 
is the sweetest soma distilled for you so far till yesterday. 
Taste it and enjoy it and bring the jewels for the generous 
man of yajnic charity. 


त्रिवन्धुरेण त्रिवृतां सुपेशसा रथेना यातमश्विना । 
कण्वांसो वां ब्रह्म॑ कृण्वन्त्यध्वरे तेषां सु शुणु तं हव॑म्‌ 2 
2 Tribandhurena trivrta supesasa rathena yatama- 


51.114. Kanvaso vam brahma krnvantya-dhvare 
tesam su Srnutam havam. 

Ashvins, brilliant scholars of science and 
technology, come by three-stage, three armoured, 
beautifully structured chariot. The geniuses study and 
advance universal knowledge for you in scientific yajna. 
Listen to their prayers, accept their holy call. 


अश्विना मधुमत्तमं पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा। 
अथाद्य द॑स्रा वसु बिभ्र॑ता रथं दाश्वां समुप गच्छतम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


ध Asvina madhumattamam patam somamrtav-rdha. 
Athadya dasra vasu bibhrata rathe dasvamsa- 
mupa gacchatam. 


Ashvins, powerful like the sun and wind, 


200 RGVEDA 


extenders of the bounds of natural knowledge, taste and 
protect the sweetest soma of yajnic joy and prosperity 
of humanity. And, O destroyers of enemies, come to 
the generous man of charity, to-day, bearing in your 
charity the wealth of the world. 


त्रिषधस्थे लर्हिषिं विश्ववेदसा मध्वा यज्ञं मिमिक्षतम्‌ । 
कण्वासो वां सुतसोमा अभिद्यवो युवां ह॑वन्ते अश्विना ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Trisadhasthe barhisi visvavedasa madhva yajnam 
mimiksatam. Kanvaso vam sutasoma abhidyavo 
yuvam havante asvina. 


Ashvins, masters of universal knowledge and 
creators of the world’s wealth, in the three-stage yajnic 
house of space—on the earth, across the skies and over 
the heavens—try to conduct and enrich the yajna with 
honeyed fragrances. Brilliant sages who have distilled 
the soma for you call you up to the heavens. 


af: कण्वमभिष्टिभिः प्राव॑तं ganar | 
af: tar स्मो अवतं शुभस्पती पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा ॥ ५॥ 

3; Yabhih kanvam abhistibhih pravatam yuvama- 
svina. Tabhih svasman avatam subhaspati patam 
somam rtavrdha. 

Ashvins, universal harbingers of light and 
knowledge, defenders of good and promoters of Truth 
and Law, by the cherished plans and noble desires by 
which you protect and promote the sagely scholar, protect 
us too and promote the beauty and glory of the world. 

सुदासे cen ag बिभ्र॑ता रथे पृक्षो वहतमश्विना | 
रयिं समुद्रादुत वां दिवस्पर्यस्मे ध॑त्तं पुरुस्पृहम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 47 201 


6. Sudase dasra vasu bibhrata rathe prkso vahata- 
masvina. Rayim samudraduta va divasparyasme 
dhattam purusprham. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and prosperity, 
destroyers of enemies, who ride the well-piloted chariot 
and bring wealth and abundance for the man of 
generosity, come bearing universally desired honour and 
excellence of wealth from the sea and sky and also from 
the heavens. 


यन्नासत्या परावति यद्वा स्थो अधिं तुर्वशे । 
अतो रथेन सुवृतां न आ ग॑तं साकं सूर्य॑स्य रश्मिभिः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Yannasatya paravati yadva stho adhi turvase. 
Ato rathena suvrta na a gatam sakam suryasya 
rasmibhih. 


Ashvins, friends of truth and humanity, whether 
you live and operate far off in a distant place or you 
rule close by over noble people of dedication, all the 
same come by the beautiful flying chariot alongwith 
the rays of the sun. 


अर्वाञ्चा वां सप्त॑योऽध्वर श्रियो aed cared । 
इषं पृञ्चन्ता सुकृते Gara आ बर्हिः सीदतं नरा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Arvanca vam saptayo dhvarasriyo vahantu sava- 
nedupa. Isam prncanta sukrte sudanava a barhih 
sidatam nara. 


Ashvins, brilliant creative powers of humanity 
and nature, may your horses of the speed of the dawn 
bring you hither close to the beauties and glories of yajna 
in the sessions. Bearing food, energy and excellence 
for the generous people of noble yajnic action, come by 


202 RGVEDA 
the chariot and grace the yajna on earth and in space. 


तेन॑ नासत्या ग॑तं रथेन सूर्य॑त्वचा । येन शश्व॑दूथं्दाशुषे 
वसु मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये ॥ ९ ॥ 


ध Tena nasatya gatam rathena suryatvaca. Yena 
sasvaduhathurdasuse vasu madhvah somasya 
pitaye. 

Ashvins, ever true and dedicated to the light of 
truth, come by that very chariot of sunbeams by which 
you always bear and bring the wealth of life for the 
man of charity, for the taste and protection of the 
honeyed soma of yajnic glory. 


उक्थेभिरर्वागवसे qaad अर्कैश्च नि ह्वयामहे । 
शश्वत्कण्वानां सद॑सि प्रिये हि कं सोमं पपथुरश्विना ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ukthebhirarvagavase puruvasu arkaisca ni 
hvayamahe. Sasvat kanvanam sadasi priye hi kam 
somam papathurasvina. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and power like the 
sun and wind, lords of abundant wealth among the wise, 
with songs of praise and sacred words of prayer we 
invoke and invite you to the distinguished house of 
eminent scholars and leaders, in faith and love, for our 
protection and advancement here. Come, and then enjoy 
the comfort and have a taste of somaic ecstasy for ever 
without satiety. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 48 
Usha Devata, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 
सह वामेन॑ न उषो व्युच्छ ofeatda: 1 
सह द्युम्नेन gem विभावरि राया देवि दास्व॑ती ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 48 203 


im Saha vamena na uso vyuccha duhitardivah. 
Saha dyumnena brhata vibhavari raya devi 
dasvati. 


Glorious dawn, daughter of heaven, come with 
splendour, come with majesty. Lady of light, generous 
giver, come with infinite wealth, shine forth and inspire 
us with fresh lease of life and joy. 


अश्वांवतीर्गोमं तीर्विंश्वसुविदो भूरिं च्यवन्त वस्त॑वे | 
उदीरय प्रतिं मा सूनृतां उषश्चोद राधो मघोनाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. ASvavatirgomatirvisvasuvido bhuri cyavanta 
vastave. Udiraya pratima sunrta usascoda radho 
maghonam. 


The abundant lights of the dawn, blest with sun- 
rays and the speed of divine energy, move to the earth 
to usher in the morning and stir their cows and horses 
to start their day, as the sunrays illuminate the world. O 
dawn, bring me the blessed voice of truth. Inspire the 
munificence of the rich to charity and social creativity. 


उवासोषा उच्छच्य नु देवी जीरा Taare । 
ये अंस्या आचरणेषु दधिरे समुद्रे न श्रवस्यवः ॥ ३॥ 


>: Uvasosa ucchacca nu devi jira rathanam. Ye asya 
acaranesu dadhrire samudre na $ravasyavah. 


As the brilliant dawn arrives and shines in 
splendour, it sets the wheels of life’s chariots in motion. 
On its arrival the yogis concentrate their minds in 
meditation as rich merchants send their ships over the 
sea. (As the sea is vast for the ships, so is the Divine 
presence vast for the yogi’s mind.) 


204 RGVEDA 


उषो ये ते प्र यामेषु युञ्जते मनो! दानाय सूरयः | 
अत्राह तत्कण्व एषां कण्व॑तमो नामं गृणाति नणाम्‌ Ul ¥ ॥ 


4. Uso ye te pra yamesu yunjate mano danaya 
surayah, Atraha tat kanva esam kanvatamo 
nama grnati nrnam. 


Usha, O lady of divinity, blessed are those brave 
and brilliant spirits who, during your revelations of the 
light, concentrate their mind in meditation on the divine 
presence to surrender it back to mother Prakrti in the 
state of Kaivalya here itself in this life. And surely here 
itself in this life, of all these men, that is the wisest sage 
of the wise sages who chants and realises the sacred 
Name OM which is the direct sound symbol of the Lord. 


आ घा ada सूनर्युषा यांति प्रभुञ्जती । 
जरय॑न्ती वृज॑नं ugdlaa उत्ांतयति पक्षिणः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a A gha yoseva sunaryusa yati prabhunjati. 
Jarayanti vrjanam padvadiyata utpatayati 
paksinah. 


Like a beautiful young maiden walks the dawn 
majestically (across the skies and over the earth), 
energising, exciting, exhorting, filling the sky with new 
light and life, calling out the humans and animals to 
move and the birds to fly away. 


वि या सृजति सम॑नं cay fea: पदं न वेत्योदती । 
वयो नकिष्टे uftara आसते व्युष्टौ वाजिनीवति ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Vi ya srjati samanam vyarthinah padam na 


vetyodati. Vayo nakiste paptivamsa asate vyustau 
vajinivati. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 48 205 


The silent and brilliant dawn replete with energy 
stirs up and inaugurates the battles of existence. 
Refreshing, and sprinkling, as if, the paths of the seekers 
with holy waters, it guides them to their goals. The birds 
that fly soar in the splendour of its light. 


एषायुक्त परावतः सूर्यस्योदयंनादधिं। 
शतं रथेभिः सुभगोषा इयं वि यात्यभि मानुषान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Esayukta paravatah suryasyodayanadadhi. 
Satam rathebhih subhagosa iyam vi yatyabhi 
manusan. 


This dawn, clad in wealth and splendour, saddles 
her horses long before sunrise and, by a hundred 
chariots, comes and joins the world of humanity and 
engages them in their activity. 


विश्व॑मस्या नानाम चक्ष॑से जगचज्न्योतिष्कृणोति GAT | 
अप देषो मघोनीं दुहिता दिव उषा उच्छदप स्रिधः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Visvamasya nanama caksase jagaj jyotiskrnoti 
sunart. Apa dveso maghoni duhita diva usa 
ucchadapa sridhah. 


The whole world bows in homage to this dawn. 
Noble guide and leader, it brings the light of the world 
for all so that they may see the glory of the universe. 
Daughter of light Divine, Queen of wealth and 
splendour, it lights up and life drives out the darkness 
of jealousy and throws off the violence of enmity. 


उष॒ आ भाहि भानुना चन्द्रेण afeatda: 1 
आवहन्ती भूर्यस्मभ्यं सोभ॑गं व्युच्छन्ती दिविष्टिषु ॥ ९॥ 


206 RGVEDA 


9, Usa a bhahi bhanuna candrena duhitardivah. 
Avahanti bhuryasmabhyam saubhagam vyu- 
cchanti divistisu. 


O Dawn, daughter of the light of heaven, come 
and shine with the beauty of the moon and splendour of 
the sun, bearing for us all plenty of good fortune and 
brilliant success in our sacred programmes. 


विश्व॑स्य हि प्राणनं जीव॑नं त्वे वि यदुच्छसि सूनरि | 
सानो रथन बहता विभावरि श्रुधि चित्रामघे हव॑म्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Visvasya hi prananam jivanam tve vi yaducchasi 
sunari. Sa no rathena brhata vibhavari srudhi 
citramaghe havam. 


O Dawn, leading light of humanity, when you 
shine in splendour, you hold the breath and life of the 
world in you. The same, lady of light, harbinger of 
wondrous wealth and good fortune, come by your 
magnificent chariot and listen to our prayer. 


उषो वाजं हि वंस्व यश्चित्रो मानुषे जनें। 
तेना व॑ह सुकृतो अध्वराँ उप ये त्वां गृणन्ति बह्वयः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Uso vajam hi vamsva yaScitro manuse jane. Tena 
vaha sukrto adhvaran upa ye tva grnanti 
vahnayah. 


O Dawn, Light Divine, accept and enlighten 
whatever best and noblest food, energy and wealth is in 
the world of humanity and, by that, lead our fires and 
performers of yajna, who sing in praise of your glory, 
close to the sacred acts of love and piety in non-violent 
yajnas. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 48 207 


विश्वान्देर्वो आ व॑ह सोप॑पीतयेऽ न्तरिश्चादुषस्त्वम्‌ । 
सास्मासु धा गोमदश्वांवदुक्थ्य१ मुषो वाजं सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. Visvan devan a vaha somapitaye’ntariksadusa- 
stvam. Sasmasu dha gomadasvavadukthyamuso 
vajam suviryam. 


Light of Divinity, you bring us from the skies 
all the divine powers and energies of the world to partake 
of the soma of our yajna and vest in us the best of food, 
energy and virility of the early morning which may give 
us admirable wealth of sense and mind, speed and 
agility, and plenty of cows and horses. 


यस्या रुश॑न्तो अर्चयः प्रति भद्रा अदृक्षत । 
सा नोर यिं विश्ववारं सुपेशंसमुषा द॑दातु सुग्म्य॑म्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. = Yasya rusanto arcayah pratibhadra adraksata. 
Sa no rayim visvavaram supesasamusa dadatu 
sugmyam. 


That light of Divinity whose bright and blazing 
lights of bliss shine for us to see and which dispel the 
darkness of the night and ignorance, may that dawn of 
light give us the wealth of life, universal, beautiful and 
auspicious. 


ये fake त्वामृषयः पूर्व aad ages व॑से महि । 

सा नः स्तोर्मो। अभि गंणीहि राधसोषः शुक्रेण। शोचिषा ॥ ९४॥ 
14. Ye ciddhi tvamrsayah purva utaye juhure’vase 

mahi. Sa nah stoman abhi grnihi radhasosah 

Sukrena Socisa. 


Great and Blessed Light of Divinity, whom the 
saints and seers of ancient and eternal vision and wisdom 


208 RGVEDA 


invoked and invoke for the sake of protection and 
advancement, may you, the same lady of light, listen 
and approve our songs of praise and prayer with gifts 
of light, action and wealth of success and prosperity. 


उषो यदद्य भानुना fa srtaurat दिवः । 
प्र नो यच्छतादवृकं पृथु च्छर्दिः प्र देवि गोम॑तीरिष॑ः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Uso yadadya bhanuna vi dvaravrnavo divah. 
Pra no yacchatadavrkam prthu cchardih pra 
devi gomatirisah. 


Light of Divinity, since you have opened the 
doors of the light of heaven at the dawn today, bless us 
now with a spacious home of love and peace free from 
violence and the gift of food and energy, mind and sense 
of the Divine, and plenty of land and cows. 


संनो wer dea विश्वपेशसा fafaear समिव्ांधिरा। 
agen विश्वतुरोषो महि सं वाजैर्वाजिनीवति ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. Sam no raya brhata visvapesasa mimiksva 
samilabhira. Sam dyumnena visvaturoso mahi 
sam vajairvajinivati. 

Light of Divinity, great mistress of the dawn of 
power and energy, bless us with the wealth of life, great, 
beautiful and universal, food and energy, dynamic 
knowledge, action and splendour, and vision of the 
Divine Word and beauty of the earth. 

Mandala 1/Sukta 49 
Usha Devata, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 


sal भद्रेभिरा ग॑हि दिवश्चिंद्रोचनादधिं। 
वहन्त्वरुणप्सव Sa त्वा सोमिनो गृहम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 49 209 


im Uso bhadrebhira gahi divascid rocanadadhi. 
Vahantvarunapsava upa tva somino grham. 


O Divine light of the Dawn, come with 
auspicious living energy from the top of refulgent 
heaven, and may the red beams of splendour, we pray, 
carry the creative energy to the yajnic home of the lover 
of Soma. 


gad सुखं रथं यमध्यस्था उषस्त्वम्‌ । 
तेनां asada जनं प्रावाद्य दुहितर्दिवः ॥ २॥ 
2: Supesasam sukham ratham yamadhyastha 


usastvam. Tena susravasam janam pravadya 
duhitardivah. 


Daughter of Heaven, blessed dawn, by the 
refulgent beautiful and luxurious comfortable chariot 
you ride, protect and promote this morning the man 
dedicated to the Word Divine who loves to eat the holy 
food of yajna. 


वय॑श्चित्ते caro द्विपच्यतुंष्पदर्जुनि । 
उषः प्रासन तूरनु दिवो अन्तेभ्यस्परि ॥२३॥ 


3. Vayascitte patatrino dvipaccatuspadarjuni. 
Usah prarannrtunranu divo antebhyaspari. 


Blessed Dawn, fiery messenger of light and life, 
may humans and animals as the birds of flight, we pray, 
rise and reach unto the bounds of heaven in pursuance 
of the time and seasons of your arrival. 


व्युच्छन्ती हि र श्मिभिर्विश्व॑मा भासि रोचनम्‌। 
तां त्वामुषर्वसूयवो! गीर्भिः कण्वां sad ॥ ४॥ 


210 RGVEDA 


4. Vyucchanti hi rasmibhirvisvamabhasi rocanam. 
Tam tvamusarvasuyavo girbhih kanva ahusata. 

Illuminating and revealing this world of beauty 
with the rays of light, you shine in glory and divine 
majesty. Lady of light, daughter of heaven, O Dawn, 
saints and sages of vision and wisdom devoted to life 
of the earth and her children celebrate you in songs of 
adoration and dedication. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 50 
Surya Devata, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 
उदु त्यं जातवेदसं देवं व॑हन्ति केतवः | 
दृशो विश्वाय सूर्यम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
ls Udu tyam jatavedasam devam vahanti ketavah. 
Drse visvaya suryam. 


The rays of the sun (like the banners of a mighty 
monarch) carry the brilliance of light revealing the 
omnipresence of the omniscient Lord Supreme of the 
universe. 


अप त्ये areal यथा नक्षत्रा यन्त्यक्तुभिः 1 
सूराय विश्वचक्षसे ॥ २ ॥ 

pa Apa tye tayavo yatha naksatra yantyaktubhih. 
Suraya visvacaksase. 


And, as thieves of the night steal away at dawn, 
so do all those stars steal away alongwith the darkness 
of the night so that the world may see only the sun, lord 
supreme of the heavens. 


अदुश्रमस्य केतवो वि रश्मयो जनों अनु । 
भ्राज॑न्तो saat यथा॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 50 211 


a Adrsramasya ketavo vi rasmayo janan anu. 
Bhrajanto agnayo yatha. 


O that I could see the banners of the Lord of 
sunbeams, the rays of the sun, alongwith the other 
people, blazing like the explosions of fire in heaven. 


mivifivadstat ज्योतिष्कृद॑सि we । 
विश्वमा भांसि रोचनम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Taranirvisvadarsato jyotiskrdasi surya. 
Visvama bhasi rocanam. 


O Sun, light of the world, creator of light and 
Light Itself, it is you alone who light the lights of the 
universe and reveal the wondrous worlds of beauty and 
glory. You are the saviour, you are the redeemer, taking 
us across the seas of existence. 


प्रत्यङ्‌ देवानां विश॑ः प्रत्यङ्ङुदेषि मानुषान्‌ | 
प्रत्यङ्‌ विश्वं tase ॥ ५॥ 

9 Pratyandevanam visah pratyannudesi manusan. 
Pratyan visvam svardrse. 
Lord Light of the world, to the noblest powers 
of nature and humanity, to the people in the business of 
life, to the people in general, you rise directly and reveal 
your presence directly in their heart and soul so that the 
world may see the light divine directly through their 
experience. 
al पावक चक्षसा भुरण्यन्तं जनां अनु। 
त्वं व॑रुण पश्य॑सि ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yena pavaka caksasa bhuranyantam janan anu. 
Tvam varuna pdaSsyasi. 


212 RGVEDA 


Lord purifier and sanctifier, with the eye with 
which you watch the mighty world of dynamic activity 
and humanity holding everything in equipoise, with the 
same kind and benign eye watch and bless us. 


वि द्यामेषि रज॑स्पृथ्वहा मिमानो अक्तुभिः | 
पश्यञ्जन्मानि सूर्य ॥ ७॥ 


५ Vi dyamesi rajasprthvaha mimano aktubhih. 
Pasyanjanmani surya. 


O sun, watching the species of various forms 
and traversing and measuring the wide worlds of 
existence by days and nights, you move to the regions 
of light and heaven. So may the Lord of Light Supreme, 
we pray, watch us, guard us and sustain in measure our 
life and actions through successive lives and births. 


aa cal हरितो रथे वह॑न्ति देव सूर्य । 
शोचिष्केशं विचक्षण ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sapta tva harito rathe vahanti deva surya. 
Sociskesam vicaksana. 


O sun, self-refulgent lord of blazing flames and 
universal illumination, seven are the colourful lights of 
glory which like seven horses draw your chariot of time 
across the spaces. In the same way, seven are the 
chhandas, metres, which reveal the light of Divinity in 
the sacred voice of the Veda. 


अयुक्त सस शुन्ध्युवः सूरो रथ॑स्य Ac: | 
ताभिर्याति स्वयुक्तिभिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Ayukta sapta Sundhyuvah suro rathasya naptyah. 
Tabhiryati svayuktibhih. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 50 213 


The sun, bright and illuminant, yokes the seven 
pure, immaculate, purifying and infallible sunbeams like 
horses to his chariot of motion, and with these self-yoked 
powers moves on across the spaces to the regions of 
light. 


So does the Lord of the Universe with His laws 
and powers of Prakrti move the world like His own 
chariot of creative manifestation. 
sg तम॑सस्परि ज्योतिष्पश्यन्त उत्त॑रम्‌ । 
देवं देवत्रा सूर्यमगन्म ज्योतिरुत्तमम्‌ ९०॥ 

10. Udvayam tamasaspari jyotispasyanta uttaram. 
Devam devatra suryamaganma jyotiruttamam. 


Let us rise beyond the dark seeing the light 
higher and still higher and reach the sun, the highest 
light and Lord Supreme of the divinities of the universe. 
उद्यन्नद्य मित्रमह आरोहन्चुत्त॑रां fear 
हृद्रोगं मम॑ सूर्यं हरिमाणं च नाशय ।॥ 22 1 

11. Udyannadya mitramaha arohannuttaram divam. 
Hrdrogam mama surya harimanam ca nasaya. 


O sun, greatest friend for the health of life, risen 
to day and rising higher to the regions of light, destroy 
my heart’s ailment and consumptive disease of the body. 


Behe मे हरिमाणं रोपणाकासु cents । 
अथो हारिद्रवेषु मे हरिमाणं नि द॑ध्मसि nee 


12. Sukesu me harimanam ropanakasu dadhmasi. 
Atho haridravesu me harimanam ni dadhmasi. 


Our consumptive and bilious diseases we 


214 RGVEDA 


attribute to abuse, fear, infatuation, schizophrenia, infect 
any severe mental disturbance, and for cure we assign 
these to green and yellow birds, and green and yellow 
fluids, soma, sandal, acasia sirissa and turmeric, and 
close it with cicatrix. 


उदगादयमादित्यो विश्वेन सह॑सा ae 
द्विषन्तं मह्यं रन्धयन्मो अहं दविषते र॑धम्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Udagdadayamadityo visvena sahasa saha. 
Dvisantam mahyam randhayanmo aham dvisate 
radham. 


There arises this sun with all the light and power 
and glory of the world, scorching and burning off 
whatever is negative and injurious to me. O Lord of 
Light and Glory of power, I pray I may never be 
subjected to the jealous and the destructive forces of 
life. 

Mandala 1/Sukta 51 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 
अभि त्यं मेषं पुरुहूतमृग्मियमिन्द्रं गीर्भिर्मदता aril 
अर्णवम्‌ । यस्य द्यावो न विचरन्ति मानुषा भुजे महिं मभि 
विप्र॑मर्चत ॥ ९॥ 
ls Abhi tyam mesam puruhutam rgmiyam indram 
girbhirmadata vasvo arnavam. Yasya dyavo na 


vicaranti manusa bhuje mamhistham abhi vipram 
arcata. 


Worship Indra, lord of power and glory, 
destroyer of enemies. Celebrate and exhilarate Him who 
is generous and virile, universally invoked and 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 51 215 


honoured, master of the Rks, wielder of wealth, deep as 
ocean, greatest of the great, and lord of knowledge and 
wisdom. People roam around Him, approach and 
meditate on His presence for a vision and experience of 
the presence as the rays of the sun do homage to their 
source and master. 


अभीम॑वन्वन्त्स्वभिष्टि yaa saat तविंषीभिरावुंतम्‌। 
इनदरं tale ऋभवो मदच्युतं शतक्रतुं जव॑नी सूनृतारुहत्‌ | । २॥ 


2. Abhimavanvantsvabhistimutayo ‘ntariksapram 
tavistbhiravrtam. Indram daksasa rbhavo mada- 
cyutam Satakratum javani sunrtaruhat. 


Powers of protection, expertise and excellence 
shower love and honour on Indra, lord of power and 
glory, giver of desire, pervasive and blazing in the skies, 
clad in his own might and splendour, giver of showers 
of joy and hero of a hundred noble acts of creation. 
And may the youthful and inspiring voice of Eternal 
Truth see him rise to the heights. 


त्वं गोत्रमद्धिरोभ्योऽ वृणोरपोतात्र॑ये शतदुरेषु गातुवित्‌ | 
ससेन॑ चिद्विमदायावहो वस्वाजावद्रिं वावसानस्य न॒र्तय॑न्‌ 3 ॥ 


Tvam gotramangirobhyo’vrnorapotdatraye sata- 
duresu gatuvit. Sasena cidvimadayavaho vasva- 
jJavadrim vavasanasya nartayan. 


Indra, you open up the cloud-showers for the 
sake of pranic energies. Lord of the earth and master of 
motion and dominions of the earth, you open up a 
hundred outlets into wealth for the alleviation of want 
and threefold suffering of body, mind and soul. You bear 
wealth and comfort with food and energy for joy of the 


216 RGVEDA 


people in a state of sobriety. And reeling the dense forces 
of the overwhelming enemy into confusion, you throw 
off the adversaries in battle. 


त्वमपाम॑पिधानावृणोरपाऽधारयः पर्व॑ते दानुं मद्वसु | at 
यदिन्द्र शवसाव॑धीरहिमादित्सूर्य' दिव्यारोहयो Sst ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tvamapamabhidhanavrnorapa ’dharayah parvate 
danumad vasu. Vrtram yadindra Savasavadhira- 
him adit suryam divyarohayo drse. 


The vapours hold up the wealth of waters in the 
cloud. Indra, you open up the cloud-hold of waters when 
you break up the cloud with the thunderbolt. And then 
you raise up the divine and brilliant sun high up in space 
for the world to see. 


त्वं मायाथिरपं मायिनोऽधमः स्वधाभिर्ये अधि शपसा- 
ated त्वं पिप्रोर्नृमणः प्रारुजः पुरः प्र ऋजिश्वानं 
दस्युहत्येष्वा-विथ ॥ ५ ॥ 


3, Tvam mayabhirapa mayino’dhamah svadha- 
bhirye adhi suptavajuhvata. Tvam piprornrmanah 
prarujah purah pra rjisvanam dasyuhatyesva- 
vitha. 


With your intelligence and tactics, blow off the 
cunning fellows of wicked designs, who cheat the 
sleeping unwary people and who offer the oblations into 
their own mouth. Admirable hero, pride of all, break down 
the forts of the demons, and in the conflicts of good and 
evil, protect those who follow the paths of rectitude. 


त्वं कुत्सं शुष्णाहत्येंष्वाविथार॑न्धयोऽ तिथिग्वाय शम्ब॑रम्‌ । 
महान्तं चिद्ुंदं नि क्रमीः पदा सनादेव दस्युहत्याय 
जज्िषे ॥ & ॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 51 217 


6. Tvam kutsam Susnahatyesvavitharandhayo’- 
tithigvaya sambaram. Mahantam cidarbudam ni 
kramth pada sanddeva dasyuhatyaya jajnise. 


In the battles against exploiters and destroyers, 
protect the men and materials of defence. Destroy the 
demon and the highway man for the safety of travellers. 
Crush with your feet the great serpentine bubbles of 
poison. You always rise and stand for the destruction of 
the wicked enemies. 


त्वे विश्वा तविषी सध्य॑ग्धिता तव राध॑ः सोमपीथायं ee । 
तव वच्रश्चिकिते aelfedt वृश्चा शत्रोरव विश्वानि 
वृष्ण्या ॥ ७ ॥ 


L Tve visva tavist sadhrayagghita tava radhah 
somapithaya harsate. Tava vajrascikite bahvor- 
hito vrsca Satrorava visvani vrsnya. 


In you is concentrated all the force and power 
together with your love of service. Your wealth, power 
and success exhilarates the lover of soma-yajna. Your 
thunderbolt in hand is held for the enlightened. Protect 
all the powers of generosity, as you destroy all the 
inimical negativities. 
वि जानीद्या्यान्यि च दस्य॑वो बर्हिष्मते रन्धया शासंदव्रतान्‌। 
शाकी भव यज॑मानस्य चोदिता विश्वेत्ता ते सधमादेषु 
चाकन WS I 

8. Vi janthyaryanye ca dasyavo barhismate ran- 
dhaya sasadavratan. Saki bhava yajamanasya 
codita visvetta te sadhamadesu cakana. 


Know the good, know the evil too, eliminate 
the wicked, for the sake of the man of yajnic action. 


218 RGVEDA 


Ruling over and controlling the lawless, be a source of 
strength and inspiration for the yajamana. May all your 
actions in yajnas and pious homes be for success of the 
good. This is my prayer and earnest desire. 


अनुव्रताय रन्धयन्नपंत्रतानाभूधिरिन्द्रः श्नथयन्ननाभुवः | 
qed चिद्वर्धतो द्यामिनक्षतः स्तवानो वम्रो वि ज॑घान 
सन्दिहः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Anuvrataya randhayannapavratanabhubhiri- 
ndrah snathayannanabhuvah. Vrddhasya cid 
vardhato dyaminaksatah stavano vamro vi 
jJaghana sandihah. 


Subduing the lawless for the law-abiding, fixing 
the traitors by proper acts of the patriots, appreciating 
and honouring the seniors, the progressive, and the 
growing and rising ones to the heights of knowledge 
and light of heaven, rejecting the scoffers and 
eliminating the skeptics, Indra, ruler, fighter and saviour 
marches on. 


तश्चद्यत्तं उशना सह॑सा सहो वि रोद॑सी मज्मना! बाधते शव॑ः | 
आ त्वा वात॑स्य नृमणो मनोयुज आ पूर्यभाणमवहन्नभि 
श्रव॑ः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Taksad yat ta usana sahasa saho vi rodast 
majmana badhate savah. A tvad vatasya nrmano 
manoyuja व puryamanam avahannabhi Sravah. 


Ushana, power of love and honour, with courage 
and dignity tempered and sharpened, your valour and 
grandeur, and your valour and splendour with its speed 
and sharpness bounds the heaven and earth. Indra, 
admirable hero of humanity, may the currents of wind 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 51 219 


fast as mind elevate you, lord of fulfilment, and amply 
fulfilled, may they carry your fame to the heavens. 


मन्दिष्ट यदुशने काव्ये wat इन्द्रो og वङ्कुतराधि fasta | 
उग्रो ययिं निरपः स््रोत॑सास्जद्वि शुष्ण॑स्य दुहिता एर 
यत्पुरं: ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Mandista yadusane kavye sacan indro vanku 
vankutaradhi tisthati. Ugro yayim nirapah 
srotasasrjadvi susnasya drnhita airayat purah. 


Indra, most rejoicing and specially delighting 
in the exciting exhortations of the poets, with his own 
essential force and versatile perception of the crooked, 
rules over the crooked and the wicked. And, just as the 
sun breaks the cloud and drains out the vapours in floods 
of rain, so does he, bright and blazing with passion, 
advance upon the strongholds of the social suckers, 
breaks open their dens and marches ahead with his noble 
exploits great as the sun’s. 


आ स्मा रथं वृषपाणेषु तिष्ठसि शार्यातस्य wat येषु 
मन्द॑से । इन्द्र यथा सुतसोमेषु चाकनोऽनर्वाणं श्लोकमा 
Vea दिवि ॥ ९२॥ 


12. A sma ratham vrsapanesu tisthasi Saryatasya 
prabhrta yesu mandase. Indra yatha sutasomesu 
cakano’narvanam slokam ठ rohase divi. 


Indra, in the soma-celebrations of humanity you 
ride the chariot of glory won by the brave and the 
intelligent and rejoice in the celebrations. And as you 
rejoice in the delightful celebrations of blessed 
achievements, you pilot the celestial car worthy of praise 
and ascend to the heights of heaven. 


220 RGVEDA 


अददा अभीं महते व॑चस्यवे कक्षीवते वृचयामिन्द्र सुन्वते | 
मेनाभवो वृषणश्वस्य सुक्रतो विश्वेत्ता ते सव॑नेषु 
Ware ९३॥ 


13. Adada arbham mahate vacasyave kaksivate 
vrceayamindra sunvate. Menabhavo vrsanasva- 
sya sukrato visvet ta te savanesu provacya. 


Indra, wondrous lord of science and vision, 
knowledge and power, you gave just a limited amount 
of new knowledge of analytical and creative technology 
in short indicative formulae to the distinguished and 
dexterous man of discipline keen to listen and create. 
And that word of yours, generous lord of noble yajnic 
action, became worthy of proclamation and celebration 
in world meets for eminent achievements. Generous lord 
of vision and wisdom, carry on the order of creation. 


Sal अश्रायि Geal निरे के पञ्चेषु स्तोमो दुर्यो न यूप॑ः । 
अश्वयुर्गव्यू रंथयुर्वसूयुरिन्दर इद्रायः क्ष॑यति प्रयन्ता ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. 14 वात) sudhyo nireke pajresu stomo duryo 
na yupah. Asvayurgavyu rathayurvasuyurindra 
idraya ksayati prayanta. 


Indra, lord of power and governance, who 
invites and maintains high intellectuals in the study and 
practical programmes of definite sciences has his 
reputation among people as sure and prominent as a 
column at the door or a sacrificial post in the yajna. 
Progressive and advancing, developing the wealth of 
cows, lands and intellectuals, horses and other modes 
of fast communication, chariots and other modes of 
travel and transport, he augments, manages and rules 
over all forms of national wealth and takes the country 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 271 
forward. 


इदं नमो quad स्वराजे सत्यशुष्माय तवसेऽवाचि । 
अस्मिन्निन्द्र वृजने सर्ववीराः स्मत्सूरिभिस्तव शर्मन्त्‌- 
स्याम॥ ९५॥ 


15. (ववा namo vrsabhaya svaraje satyasusmaya 
tavase’vaci. Asminnindra vrjane sarvavirah 
smat suribhistava Sarmantsyama. 


This salutation in words of homage is offered 
to Indra, lord virile of generosity, sovereign lord of 
indestructible power, universal protector, so that, O Lord 
Adorable, in this world we may live in happy homes, 
blest with brave children, in the company of high and 
sagely intellectuals. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 52 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 


त्यं सु मेषं म॑हया स्वर्विदं शतं यस्य॑ सुभ्वं: साकमीर॑ | 
अत्यं न वाजं हवनस्यदं रथमेन्द्रं ववृत्यामवसे सुवृक्तिभिः neu 


॥. Tyam su mesam mahaya svarvidam Satam yasya 
subhvah sakamirate. Atyam na vajam havana- 
syadam rathamendram vavrtyamavase suvrkti- 
bhih. 


Honour that Indra, lord of glory and virile 
generosity who takes us high to the skies. Hundreds of 
noble and creative craftsmen together with their expert 
performance work on and engineer his glorious chariot 
which can cover the spatial paths across the skies for 
the sake of protection and defence. I wish I too could 
fly by that chariot. 


222 RGVEDA 


स पर्वतो न धरुणेष्वच्युतः सहस््र॑मूतिस्तविंषीषु वावृधे । 
इन्द्रौ यद्‌ वृत्रमव॑धीन्नदी वृत॑मु्जन्नर्णींसि जर्हधाणो 
अन्ध॑सा ।॥ २॥ 


2. Sa parvato na dharunesvacyutah sahasramu- 
tistavisisu vavrdhe. Indro yad vrtramavadhinna- 
divrtamubjannarnamsi jarhrsano andhasa. 


Unshaken like a mountain within the bounds of 
its own hold, providing a thousand ways of protection 
and promotion for life, that Indra, sun/wind/ electric 
charge, waxes in strength and power when it kills Vritra, 
breaks the demon cloud holding up the streaming waters, 
when it releases the showers of rain, and rejoices with 
the food and energy that it creates through the showers. 
(So is the ruler for the demons and the people.) 


स हिद्रो gh aa ऊध॑नि चन्द्रबुध्नो मद॑वृद्धो aa: | 
इन्द्रं तमह स्वपस्यया धिया मंहिं्ठरातिं स हि पप्रिरन्ध॑सः॥ २३ ॥ 


3; Sa hi dvaro dvarisu vavra udhani candrabudhno 
madavrddho manisibhih. Indram tamahve svapa- 
syaya dhiya mamhistharatim sa hi paprirandhasah. 


Indra is deep and grave among the serious. In 
the light of the dawn, he is a cloud of generosity. He is 
brilliant and blissful as the moon in the firmament. Sober 
in joy, he is surrounded by sages and intellectuals. With 
the best of my intelligence and action I invoke and call 
upon this lord Indra, extremely generous and munificent 
of food and energy. 


आ यं पृणन्ति दिवि walaféa: was न Asay: स्वा 


अभिष्टयः । तं वृत्रहत्ये अनु तस्थुरूतयः शुष्मा इन्द्र॑मवाता 
BSAA: ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 223 


4. A yam prnanti divi sadmabarhisah samudram na 
subhvah sva abhistayah. Tam vrtrahatye anu 
tasthurutayah susma indramavata ahrutap-savah. 


Indra is in his heaven of light and justice. The 
high-priests sitting on seats of grass in his house of 
yajna, his own values, his own well-wishers, his own 
people assist, complete and promote him, Indra who is 
the ruler, guide and protector, in the same manner in 
which the lovely streams and mighty rivers join and fill 
the sea. In his battles against Vritra, clouds of darkness, 
hoarders of national wealth and natural resources, his 
fighting forces of defence, powerful, undisturbed and 
unopposed, straight and sincere in action stand by him 
and follow him steadfast in the battle. 


अभि स्ववृष्टिं ud अस्य युध्य॑तो रघ्वीरिव प्रवणे de- 
waa: | इन्द्रो यद्वुजी धृषमाणो अन्ध॑सा frre व॒लस्य॑ 
परिधीरिंव त्रितः॥ ५॥ 


Di Abhi svavrstim made asya yudhyato raghviriva 
pravane sasrurutayah. Indro yadvajri dhrsmano 
andhasa bhinad valasya paridhinriva tritah. 


Like streams rushing down to the sea, the 
defence forces of this warrior hero, Indra, rush to him 
to join in his celebration by soma, Indra, wielder of the 
thunderbolt, daring the enemy, who showers the enemy 
with a rain of arrows and breaks down the threefold 
defence lines of the enemy three ways, up, down and 
cross-wise. 


परी gor च॑रति तित्विषे शवोऽ पो वृत्वी रज॑सो qer- 
माशंयत्‌। वृत्रस्य यत्प्रवणे दुर्गृभिश्वनो निजघन्थ हन्वोरिन्द्र 
तन्यतुम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


224 RGVEDA 


6. Parim ghrna carati titvise Savo’po vrtvi rajaso 
budhnamasayat. Vrtrasya yatpravane durgr- 
bhisvano nijaghantha hanvorindra tanyatum. 


Vritra, the cloud that holds and confines the 
vapours of water sleeps in body in the sky. Indra, the 
sun, strikes the thunderbolt of lightning on the jaws of 
Vritra, a real formidable adversary for the release of the 
showers of rain. And then the splendour of Indra spreads 
around, glory of power blazes. 


हृदं न हि त्वा। न्यृषन्त्यूर्मयो ब्रह्माणीन्द्र तव यानि वर्धना । 
wast चित्ते युज्यं वावृधे शव॑स्ततक्ष वज्र॑ मभिभुत्यो- 
FRAT ७॥ 


ce Hradam na hi tva nyrsantyurmayo brahmanin- 
dra tava yani vardhana. Tvasta cit te yujyam 
vavrdhe savastataksa vajramabhibhityojasam. 


Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world, just 
as streams of water reach the sea augmenting it, so do 
all the wealths of the world and all the songs of divine 
celebration converge to you, centre as well as 
circumference of existence, and glorify your sublimity. 
Tvashta, maker of the forms of existence, designs and 
creates the thunderbolt of lightning to augment your 
force of arms to use in battle, and he provides that 
splendour of valour for you which breaks open the might 
of Vritra, hoarded wealth of nature, for the joy of 
humanity. 


जघन्वां उ हरिभिः संभृतक्रतविन्द्र वृत्रं HAN गातुयन्नपः। 
अय॑च्छथा बाह्योर्वच्र॑मायसमधांरयो दिव्या ge दशो ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 225 


0. Jaghanvam u haribhih sambhrtakratavindra 
vrtram manuse gatuyannapah. Ayacchatha bah- 
vorvajramayasamadharayo divya suryam drse. 


Indra, prosperous lord of noble actions, breaker 
of the clouds with currents of lightning energy to let 
the streams of rain showers flow on the earth for 
humanity, take up the thunderbolt of steel in arms and 
strike, and rise to the heavens so that all may see the 
sun in all its glory. 


बृहत्स्वश्च॑न्रमम॑वद्यदुक्थ्य श्मकूण्वत भियसा रोह॑णं faa: | 
यन्मानुषप्रधना इन्द्रमूतयः स्व॑नृषाचो मरूतोऽ ASAT UF ॥ 


10.  Brhat svascandram amavad yadukthyam akrnvata 
bhiyasa rohanam divah. Yanmanusapradhana 
indram utayah svarnrsaco maruto’madannanu. 


When humanity, stricken with fear of Vritra and 
drought, raises great, heavenly, beautiful, enlightened 
and powerful songs of praise and prayer rising to the 
heavens in honour of Indra, and when the protective 
forces of nature such as winds and pranic energy fighting 
for humanity move into action and bring showers of 
joy from heaven for humanity on earth, then all these 
forces and humanity rejoice with thanks and praise to 
Indra. 


दौश्चिंदस्याम॑वां st: स्वनादयोयवीद्धियसा aa इन्द्र ते। 
वृत्रस्य यद्द्रधानस्य॑ रोदसी मदेः सुतस्य शवसाभिन- 
fax: ॥ ९० ॥ ति 

10. Dyauscidasyamavan aheh svanad ayoyavid 
bhiyasa vajra indra te. Vrtrasya yad badbadha- 
nasya rodast made sutasya Savasabhina-cchirah. 


226 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world, when 
under the inspiration of soma your thunderbolt with 
terrible force breaks open the peak of Vritra, the cloud 
overcasting the earth and skies, then with thunder and 
lightning, the powerful heavens shaking in the operation 
catalyse and turn the vapours into rain showers. 


यदिच्रविन्द्र पृथिवी दशभुजिरहानि विश्वां acid ea: | 
अत्राहं ते मघवन्विश्रुः तं सहो द्यामनु शव॑सा बर्हणा 
भुवत्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yadinnvindra prthivi dasabhujirahani visva 
tatananta krstayah. Atraha te maghavan visrutam 
saho dyamanu savasa barhana bhuvat. 


Indra, lord of power, wealth and glory, if the 
earth, which is enjoyable with the ten senses, and all 
the people were to wax in peace and joy all days and 
nights by virtue of the light of your knowledge and 
justice and your power of protection and progress, then 
your fame and splendour on earth would touch the 
heights of heaven. 


त्वमस्य पारे रज॑सो व्योमनः स्वभूत्योजा अव॑से धृषन्मनः | 
चकृषे भूमिं प्रतिमानमोज॑ंसोऽ पः स्व॑ः परिभूरेष्या 
दिव॑म्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tvamasya pare rajaso vyomanah svabhityoja 
avase dhrsanmanah. Cakrse bhumim pratima- 
namojaso’pah_ svah paribhuresya divam. 


Lord of omnipotent force, master of your own 
essential splendour, you are beyond this world of earth 
and sky. You create the earth, a symbolic measure of 
your power, for the sake of life and protection. You 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 227 


pervade the earth, the waters, the regions of bliss and 
the heavens of light and you are transcendent even 
beyond. 


त्वं da: प्रतिमानं पृथिव्या ऋष्ववीरस्य बृहतः पतिर्भूः । 
विश्वमाप्रां अन्तरिश्चं महित्वा सत्यमन्दा नकिरन्यस्त्वा- 
वांन्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Tvam bhuvah pratimanam prthivya rsvavirasya 
brhatah patirbhuh. Visvamapra antariksam 
mahitva satyamaddha nakiranyastvavan. 


You are the ultimate measure of the earth and 
the skies. You are the highest lord and master of the 
wondrous world of heroes. Having pervaded the world, 
having measured the spaces and transcended, you are 
the ultimate truth of eternal reality. No one is like you, 
none in image, symbol or measure, none, nothing. 


न सस्य द्यावापृथिवी अनु व्यचो न सिन्ध॑वो रज॑सो 
अन्त॑मानशुः। नोत Lae SE मदे अस्य युध्य॑त॒ एको 
अन्यच्चकृषे विश्व॑मानुषक्‌ ॥ ९२४ ॥ 


14. Na yasya dyavaprthivi anu vyaco na sindhavo 
rajaso antamanasuh. Nota svavrstim made asya 
yudhyata eko anyaccakrse visvamanusSak. 


The heaven and earth approach not His infinite 
expanse. Nor do the oceans of waters and spaces find 
the end of His universe of glory. Nor can any one rival 
the power and passion of the generosity of this warrior 
against Vritra, the demon of darkness and drought, in 
matters of the joy of living. Nor has He Himself, sole 
Lord as He is, created any one else, or any other world, 
like Himself or like the world He has created. 


228 RGVEDA 


आर्चन्नत्र मरुतः सस्मिन्नाजौ विश्वे देवासो अमदन्ननु त्वा । 
वृत्रस्य यद्धष्टिमतां वधेन नि त्वमिन्द्र प्रत्यानं जघन्थ ॥ ९५५ ॥ 


15. Arcannatra marutah sasminnajau visve devaso 
amadannanu tva. Vrtrasya yad bhrstimata vadhe- 
na ni tvamindra pratyanam jaghantha. 


Indra, lord of universal power, when you strike 
on the jaws of Vritra with the fatal thunderbolt of 
dazzling force in all the battles against darkness and 
drought, then the Maruts, high-priests of nature and 
humanity, sing hymns of praise for you, and all the 
divinities of nature and humanity rejoice with you. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 53 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 


न्यू ङ षु वाचं प्र महे भ॑रामहे गिर इन्द्रीय सद॑ने विवस्व॑तः। 
नू fate va ससतापिवाविदन्न दुष्टुतिर्द्र॑विणोदेषुं 
स्यते ।॥ ९॥ 


il Nyu3 su vacam pra mahe bharamahe gira indraya 
sadane vivasvatah. Nu ciddhi ratnam sasatam 
ivavidan na dustutir dravinodesu Sasyate. 


In this great yajnic house of Vivasvan, lord of 
light, we raise our voice of celebrations in honour of 
Indra, lord of power and action, for the sake of honour 
and prosperity. Rarely is the jewel obtained by the lazy 
loons asleep. And slander finds no favour among the 
givers of wealth. 


दुरो अश्वस्य दुर इन्द्र गोर॑सि दुरो यव॑स्य वसुन इनस्पतिः | 
शिक्षानरः प्रदिवो अकामकर्शनः सखा सखिभ्यस्तमिदं 
गुंणीमसि॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 53 229 


2. Duro asvasya dura indra gorasi duro yavasya 
vasuna inaspatih. Siksanarah pradivo akama- 
karsanah sakha sakhibhyastamidam grnimasi. 


Indra, lord of knowledge, wealth and power, you 
are the gateway to speed and fast advancement. You 
are the giver of divine speech and wealth of cows, earth 
and prosperity of life. You are the treasure house of food 
and energy. You are the lord giver of wealth and 
splendour. You are the leading light of education and 
scholarship. You are the refulgent lord of light. You are 
the chastiser of the lazy, an inspiration for the ambitious. 
And you are the friend of friends. Such is Indra whom 
we praise and celebrate in song. 


शचीव इन्द्र पुरुकृद्‌ द्युमत्तम तवेदिदमभितंर्चेकिते aa । 
अत॑ः संगृभ्याभिभूत आ भ॑र मा त्वायतो Sa: काम॑- 
मूनयीः ॥ ३॥ 

a Saciva indra purukrd dyumattama tavedidam 


abhitascekite vasu. Atah samgrbhyabhibhuta a 
bhara ma tvayato jarituh kamamunayith. 
Indra, lord of power and glory, lord of wisdom, 
Word, and action, versatile giver of success and victory, 
most brilliant and omniscient, the wealth all round is 
yours, you know. Therefore, O lord of victory, take that 
up and bear it along to bless us. Neglect not the desire 
and ambition of your celebrant, discount him not. 


एभिर्द्युभिः gaa एभिरिन्दुभिर्निरुन्धानो अम॑तिं गोभिं- 
रश्विना।। इन्द्रेण दस्युं aad इन्दुंभिर्युतद्वैेषसः समिषा 
tafe usu 

4. Ebhirdyubhih sumana ebhirindubhirnirun-dhano 


amatim gobhirasvina. Indrena dasyum darayanta 
indubhiryutadvesasah samisa rabhemahi. 


230 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of power and glory, pleased at heart, 
with these lights of knowledge and these streams of 
soma, preventing our want and poverty of wealth and 
knowledge, bless us with cows and horses, gifts of 
divine speech, lands and wealth of mind and wisdom, 
and speedy movement in progress, so that, subduing 
the evil and wicked enemies, and free from the jealous 
and hateful, we may enjoy and live happily with plenty 
of food and energy and joyous drinks of soma in a state 
of power and prosperity. 


समिन्द्र राया सपिषा र॑भेमहि सं वाजेभिः qeya-3- 
रभिद्यभिः। सं देव्या प्रम॑त्या वीरशुष्मया गोअंग्रयाश्वांवत्या 
THATS ५ ॥ 


2: Samindra raya samisa rabhemahi Sam vajebhih 
puruscandrairabhidyubhih. Sam devya pramat- 
ya virasusmaya go agrayasvavatya rabhemahi. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, honour and 
prosperity, let us begin well, advance, succeed and 
celebrate with noble wealth and power, food and energy, 
knowledge and speed, universal beauty and joy and the 
light of brilliance. Let us advance and enjoy with divine 
wisdom, forceful arms of the brave, prime lands and 
cows and sophisticated intelligence, and all this at the 
top speed of advancement. 


cal मदां अमदन्तानि वृष्ण्या ते सोमासो वुत्रहत्येषु सत्पते | 
यत्कारवे ast वृत्राण्यप्रति बर्हिष्पते नि सहस्त्राणि 
लर्हय॑ः॥६॥ ` 

6. Te tva mada amadan tani vrsnya te 5011650 
vrtrahatyesu satpate. Yat karave dasa vrtranya- 
prati barhismate ni sahasrani barhayah. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 53 231 


Lord of truth and protector of the people of truth 
and piety, when in the battles against Vritra, demon of 
darkness and evil, for the defence of the hero of yajnic 
action you resolutely overthrow tens of thousands of 
the forces of darkness, then those joyous and generous 
fighters and lovers of soma celebrate the victories with 
you. 


युधा युधमुप घेदेषि धृष्णुया पुरा पुर समिदं हंस्योज॑सा । 
नम्या यदिन्द्र सख्या परावति निबर्हयो नमुचिं नाम॑ 
मायिनम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Yudha yudhamupa ghedesi dhrsnuya pura puram 
samidam hamsyojasa. Namya yadindra sakhya 
paravati nibarhayo namucim nama mayinam. 


With the courage and arms of a mighty warrior 
you go forward, engage the enemy and with your valour 
and splendour destroy the hostile fort yonder. With your 
friends and disciplined warriors, in the far off country, 
you uproot the guileful adversary who, otherwise is a 
constant challenge and terror to humanity. 


त्वं करञ्जमुत पर्णयं वधीस्तेजिं छ यातिथिग्स्य॑ वर्तनी । 
त्वं श॒ता वङ्गुंदस्याभिनत्पुरोंऽनानुदः परिषूता ऋलि- 
र्व॑ना ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tvam karanjamuta parnayam vadhistejistha- 
yatithigvasya vartani. Tvam sata vangrda- 
syabhinat pura’nanudah parisuta rjisvana. 

By your ardour and brilliance you destroy the 
man who troubles the pious, who steals others’ money 


and property, and who waylays the travellers and 
prevents hospitality. By your own strength you rout a 


232 RGVEDA 


hundred strongholds of the purveyors of poison and 
exploitation and you protect the good creations and 
productions of people by disciplined expert masters of 
management. 


त्वमेताञ्ज॑नराज्ञो द्विर्दशा।ऽबन्धुना सुश्रवसोपजग्मुषः । षष्टिं 
सहस्रां नवतिं नवं श्रुतो नि चक्रेण रथ्यां दुष्पदां वृणक्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tvam etanjanarajno dvirdasa’bandhuna susra- 
vasopajagmusah. Sastim sahasra navatim nava 
Sruto ni cakrena rathya duspadavrnak. 


Indra, mighty sovereign, far and wide is your 
fame. Twenty are these rulers of the republics in need 
of help and they too are of noble fame, come here for 
protection. Sixty thousand ninety-nine are their people. 
Save them from violence and loss of freedom with the 
strong chariot wheel of your sovereignty. 


त्वमाविथ सुश्रव॑सं तवोतिभिस्तव त्राम॑भिरिन्द्र तूर्व याणम्‌ | 
ranks कुत्संमतिधिग्वमायुं महे राज्ञे यूने अरन्धनायः ॥ Qo Nl 


10. Tvam avitha susravasam tavotibhistava tramabhi- 
rindra turvayanam. Tvamasmai kutsam atithig- 
vam ayum mahe rajne yune arandhanayah. 


Indra, lord of power and force of divinity, with 
your modes of protection and your modes of sustenance 
you cover and protect the man of noble fame and fast 
motion and, with your power of fulfilment and 
prosperity, you grant good health and full age, love of 
hospitality and the mighty thunderbolt of arms and 
justice to this great and youthful ruler commanding 
honour and brilliance. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 54 233 


य उदूचीन्द्र देवगोपाः सखायस्ते शिवत॑मा असाम । त्वां 
स्तोषाम त्वयां सुवीरा द्राघीय आयुः प्रतरं दधानाः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ya udrcindra devagopah sakhayaste Sivatama 
asama. Tvam stosama tvaya suvira draghiya ayuh 
prataram dadhanah. 

Indra, lord omnipotent of the world, dedicated 
as we are to the light of the Rks, we are protected by the 
divinities. All friends of yours, we pray, may we be at 
perfect peace in holy comfort and sing in praise of your 
glory. And by your grace, may we be blest with noble 
children and live a long, full and happy life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 54 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 


मा नों अस्मिन्म॑घवन्पृत्स्वंहंसि नहि ते अन्तः शव॑सः 
परीणशे | अक्रन्दयो नद्यो रोरूवहना। कथा न श्चोणीर्भियसा 
समारत ॥ ९॥ 


i, Mano asmin maghavan prtsvamhasi nahi te antah 
Savasah parinase. Akrandayo nadyo3 roruvad 
vana katha na ksonirbhiyasa samarata. 


Indra, lord of the universe and the wealth and 
grandeur of life, let us not be boggled in sin and conflicts 
of the world. You make the rivers roar, streams to flow 
and the springs to sing in praise. Shake us not with fear. 
Why shouldn’t the earth and her children, then, attain 
to you? 


अची शक्राय॑ शाकिने शचीवते शृण्वन्तमिन्द्रं weary 
gfe यो धृष्णुना शव॑सा रोदसी उभे वृषा वृषत्वा वृंषभो 
Sa ॥ २॥ 


234 RGVEDA 


2: Arca sakraya sakine Sacivate srnvantamindram 
mahayannabhi stuhi. Yo dhrsnuna Savasa rodasi 
ubhe vrsa vrsatva vrsabho nyrnjate. 


Offer homage to Indra, lord of strength, power, 
knowledge and wisdom. Sing songs of praise glorifying 
the Lord who, with His mighty strength and power of 
knowledge and wisdom, creates both heaven and earth 
and the sky, and with the same strength and generosity 
showers His blessings on us. 


अची दिवे बं हते शुष्य वचः स्वक्ष॑त्रं यस्यं धृषतो erat: | 
बृहद्वा असुरो बर्हणा! कृतः पुरो हरिभ्यां वृषभो रथो हि 
षः॥२३॥ 


a Arca dive brhate susyam vacah svaksatram yasya 
dhrsato dhrsanmanah. Brhacchrava asuro bar- 
hana krtah puro haribhyam vrsabho ratho hi sah. 


Offer resounding words of strength and creative 
imagination in honour of Indra, great lord of light and 
grandeur. Great is the sovereign republic of the lord of 
awful power, awful in his mind capable of wondrous 
acts of wisdom. The lord is a good listener and giver of 
vital energy and fresh life, and subduer of enemies. He 
rides and rushes forward in a chariot drawn by the winds 
and sunbeams. 


त्वं दिवो dea: सानु कोपयोऽ a त्मना धृषता शम्ब॑रं 
भिनत्‌। यन्मायिनो व्रस्दिनो। मन्दिना धृषच्छितां गभ॑स्ति- 
मानि पृतन्यसि ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvam divo brhatah sanu kopayo’va tmana dhrsata 
sambaram bhinat. Yanmayino vrandino mandina 
dhrsacchitam gabhastimasanim prtanyasi. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 54 235 


From the great regions of light, feeling 
passionate and indignant, you strike the top of the cloud 
and break it with the shattering thunderbolt of sun- 
beams. Similarly, righteously and conscientiously 
feeling passionate and indignant, with your formidable 
actions, subduing the forces of the wicked and guileful 
powers, you raise an army to fight for light and justice. 


नि यद्‌ वृणक्षि श्वसनस्य मूर्धनि शुष्ण॑स्य चिद्‌ व्रन्दिनो 
रोरुव दनां । प्राचीनेन मन॑सा बर्हणावता यदद्या चित्कृणवः 
कस्त्वा परिं॥ ५॥ 


9: Ni yadvrnaksi Svasanasya murdhani Ssusnasya cid 
vrandino roruvad vana. Pracinena manasa 
barhanavata yadadya cit krnavah kastva pari. 


Just as the sun strikes the thunderbolt of 
sunbeams on top of the cloud which holds the life-giving 
waters but deprives the earth of rain, so you, striking 
the thunderbolt on the head of the living rich but 
hoarding wicked powers of society, with your ancient 
and advancing powers of knowledge, make them cry 
even to-day. Since you were earlier, and now you are, 
the hero of action, who can be superior enough to act 
against you? No one. 


त्वमांविथ we तुर्वशं यदुं त्वं तुर्वीतिं वय्यं शतक्रतो | 
त्वं रथमेतशं कृत्व्ये धने त्वं पुरों नवतिं द॑म्भयो नव॑ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvamavitha naryam turvasam yadum tvam 
turvitim vayyam Satakrato. Tvam rathametasam 
krtvye dhane tvam puro navatim dambhayo 
nava. 


Indra, lord and hero of a hundred noble actions, 


236 RGVEDA 


you protect the good among humanity, the best of them, 
the industrious, who destroys the evil and who knows. 


Now that the battle is on and almost won for 
success and prosperity, protect the tempestuous chariot 
of advance and progress and break down the ninety nine 
forts of the enemies of humanity. 


स घा राजा सत्प॑तिः शृणुवज्ननों wader: प्रति यः 
शासमिन्वति । उक्था वा यो अभिगृणाति राध॑सा दानुरस्मा 
उप॑रा पिन्वते fea: ॥ ७॥ 


7. Sa gha raja satpatih susuvajjano ratahavyah prati 
yah sasaminvati. Uktha va yo abhigrnati radhasa 
danurasma upara pinvate divah. 


He surely is the king, the man, who protects the 
good and the true, who knows, enlightens and advances, 
who liberally offers in yajna and himself commands 
reverence, who advances every unit of the human order 
and himself advances in response, who chants the hymns 
in honour of Divinity, who is rich and liberal in 
prosperity and bright in law and justice, and a liberal 
giver over all else. For such a man as this, the higher 
powers from above shower rains of grace in generosity. 


असमं श्चत्रमसंमा मनीषा प्र सोमपा अप॑सा सन्तु नेमे । 
ये त॑ इन्द्र ददुषो वर्धय॑न्ति महिं क्षत्रं स्थविरं वृष्ण्यं च ।॥ ८ ॥ 
Asamam ksatram asama manisa pra somapa 


apasa santu neme. Ye ta indra daduso vardhayanti 
mahi ksatram sthaviram vrsnyam ca. 


Indra, unique is your order of governance. Your 
intelligence and imagination is unique. May all the 
citizens, lovers of soma as they are, prosper by their 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 54 237 


karma who, generous and giving, advance your great 
strength and system, stability and generosity. 


तुभ्येदेते dagen अद्विदुग्धाश्चमूषद॑श्चमसा इनद्रपानौः । 
व्य॑श्नुहि तर्पया काममेषामथा मनो वसुदेयाय कृष्व ॥ ९ ॥ 


o. Tubhyedete bahula adridugdhascamiusada- 
§camasa indrapanah. Vyasnuhi tarpaya kama- 
mesamatha mano vasudeyaya krsva. 


Indra, lord of power and governance, for your 
service are these many warrior heroes, overflowing with 
generosity like the clouds, strong as adamant, 
formidable in battle and embodiments of national genius 
fit for service and sacrifice for the honour and glory of 
the nation. Accept these, grant them the desire and 
ambition they have, and make up your mind and resolve 
for the growth of honour, prosperity and generosity. 


अपामंतिषठन्द्॒रुण॑ह्वर तमोऽ न्तर्वृत्रस्यं जठरेषु ula: | 
अभीमिन्द्रो नद्यं aferon हिता विश्वां अनुष्ठाः प्र॑वणेषु 
Rrra gol 


10. Apam atisthad dharunahvaram tamo’ntarvrtra- 
sya jatharesu parvatah. Abhimindro nadyo 
vavrina hita visva anusthah pravanesu jighnate. 

The darkest dark mountainous body of vapours 
stays enclosed in the depths of Vritra, the dense cloud. 

Indra, lord of light and lightning energy, releases the 

waters in the form of all the streams earlier withheld by 

Vritra and makes them flow in their usual course. 


स शेवृधमधि धा द्युम्नमस्मे महिं art ज॑नाषाच्िनद्र तव्य॑म्‌ | 
Tan च नो ae: पाहि सूरीत्राये च॑ नः स्वपत्या इषे 
en: ९९॥ 


238 RGVEDA 


11. Sa sevrdhamadhi dha dyumnamasme mahi ksa- 
tram janasalindra tavyam. Raksa ca no maghonah 
pahi surin raye ca nah svapatya ise dhah. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, friend and 
protector of the people, bring us the most felicitous 
honour, rule over the great republic, protect us, advance 
us to power and fame, support the wise, let us march to 
plenty of food and energy, and wealth and prosperity 
for our noble generations to follow. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 55 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 


दिवश्चिदस्य वरिमा fa due इन्द्रं न war पथिवी चन 
प्रति । भीमस्तुविष्पाञ्चर्षणिभ्य॑ आतपः शिशीते ast तेज॑से 
न वंस॑गः ॥ ९॥ 


i, Divascidasya varima vi papratha indram na 
mahna prthivi cana prati. Bhimastuvisman- 
carsanibhya atapah Sisite vajram tejase na 
vamsagah. 


The splendour of this Indra, lord of rule and 
light, extends to the lights of heaven. The earth too 
cannot rival his greatness with all its expanse. Lord of 
strength and power, he is fearsome for the enemies, 
warm for the good, and hot and blazing for others. He 
radiates light for the dark and strikes the thunderbolt 
into the hoarded waters of Vritra and walks around as 
the leader among people as leader of the flock. 


सो अर्णवो न wel: समुद्रियः प्रति गृभ्णाति विचिता 
वरीमभिः | इन्द्रः सोम॑स्य पीतये वृषायते सनात्स युध्म 
ओज॑सा पनस्यते ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 55 239 


2. So arnavo na nadyah samudriyah prati grbhnati 
visrita varimabhih. Indrah somasya pitaye 
vrsayate sanat sa yudhma ojasa panasyate. 


Just as the ocean with its bottomless depths 
receives and holds the streams of water flowing over 
the expansive lands and heading towards the sea, and 
just as the sun, with its expanse of heavens, receives 
and holds the streams of vapours flowing across the 
spaces of the skies and then, like the most generous 
lord of life, showers the rains for the earth to have a 
drink of the soma of joy, so does the ruler lord of light 
and power receive and hold the streams of incoming 
wealth heading to the vast expanse of the treasury, and 
then like a generous lord of fertility showers the rain of 
wealth upon the people for them to have a drink of the 
joy of life. This ocean, this sun, this ruler, mighty warrior 
and protector rises in strength with his glory since time 
immemorial. 


त्वं तमिन्द्र पर्व॑तं न भोज॑से महो नृम्णस्य धर्मणामिरज्यसि | 
प्र वीर्येण देवताति चेकिते विश्व॑स्मा उग्रः कर्मणे 
पुरोहिंतः॥ ३॥ 


ee Tvam tamindra parvatam na bhojase maho 
nrmnasya dharmanamirajyasi. Pra viryena 
devatati cekite visvasma ugrah karmane puro- 
hitah. 


Just like that cloud of rain, you rule and govern 
the great wealth and the rules and laws for the enjoyment 
and well-being of life on earth and shine. Thus mighty 
and blazing by your own power and splendour, leader 
in front of all noble action, you are celebrated as a very 


240 RGVEDA 
god among humanity. 


agen नपस्युभिर्वचस्यते are जनेषु प्रब्रुवाण इन्द्रियम्‌। 
तृषा छन्दुर्भवति हर्यतो वृषा क्षेमेण धेनां मघवा यदि- 
न्वंति॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa id vane manasyubhirvacasyate caru janesu 
prabruvana indriyam. Vrsa chandurbhavati 
haryato vrsa ksemena dhenam maghava yadin- 
vati. 


Celebrated is Indra, far and wide in town and 
forest and in distant lands, by his admirers in worship 
and reverence, lord and bold as he is, expressing his 
knowledge and power among people gracefully. 
Generous he is, joyous and free, full of blessings for 
those who are keen to learn and earn the wealth of life. 
And generous of knowledge, power and protection, 
glorious all round, he commands the voice of praise 
and appreciation everywhere. 


स इन्महानि ater uaa कृणोति युध्म ओज॑सा 
जनेभ्यः। अधां चन श्रद॑धति त्विषीमत इन्द्राय वचं 
निघनिंश्चते वधम्‌॥ ५॥ 


2: Sa inmahani samithani majmana krnoti yudhma 
ojasa janebhyah. Adha cana srad dadhati 
tvisimata indraya vajram nighanighnate vadham. 


Great warrior as he is, fighting with the 
brilliance of his knowledge, wealth and power against 
ignorance, injustice and poverty, he wins great battles 
for the people. He strikes the thunderbolt against evil, 
wickedness and hoarding for the glory of the order, and 
then the people vest full faith in him, lord of splendour 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 55 241 
and majesty as he is. 


स हि श्रवस्युः सदनानि कृत्रिमां क्ष्मया dens ओज॑सा 
विनाशय॑न्‌। ज्योतींषि कृण्वन्नवृकाणि यज्यवेऽ व॑ सुक्रतुः 
सर्तवा अपः सुंजत्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa hi Sravasyuh sadanani krtrima ksmaya vrdha- 
na ojasa vinasayan. Jyotimsi krnavannayvrkani 
yajyave’va sukratuh sartava apah srjat. 


He, ruling lord of power, hero of noble actions, 
keen to hear the Shastras for knowledge and food for 
the soul, developing projects of growth and progress, 
growing stronger and stronger by the earth, destroying 
evil and wickedness with his valour and splendour, 
creating the lights of art, science, beauty and culture, 
rendering the homes and highways free from danger 
and highway men, should set the wheels of humanity in 
motion and keep the waters flowing abundantly for the 
yajamana and the yajnic nation. 


दानाय मनं: सोमपावन्नस्तु तेऽ aise हरीं वन्दनश्रुदा le | 
यमिष्ठासः सार॑थयो य इन्द्र तेन त्वा केता आ द॑भ्नुवन्ति 
भूर्णीयः ॥ ७॥ 


a Danaya manah somapavannastu te’rvanca hari 
vandanasruda krdhi. Yamisthasah sarathayo ya 
indra te na tva keta a dabhnuvanti bhurnayah. 


Indra, lord creator of soma and lover of the drink 
of joy, may your heart and mind concentrate on giving. 
Lord of fame commanding admiration and reverence, 
direct your dynamic and magnetic forces this way for 
progress and stability. May your charioteers, leaders and 
guides of the nation, be experts on the steering wheel 


242 RGVEDA 


and in the direction of Dharma. Realise your noble and 
brilliant intentions. May no enemies be able to injure 
and suppress or terrorize you. 


अप्रक्षितं वसु faut हस्त॑योरषांव्ठहं सह॑स्तन्विं श्रुतो द॑धे । 
आवुंतासोऽ वतासो न adie ते क्रत॑व इन्द्र 
भूरयः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Apraksitam vasu bibharsi hastayorasal- 
ham sahastanvi Sruto dadhe. Avrtaso’vataso na 
kartrbhistanusu_te kratava indra bhurayah. 


Indra, indestructible wealths you hold in your 
hands, and informidable strength in your body. Lord of 
fame and good listening ear, innumerable yajnic actions 
of dedication are internalised by your admirers in their 
mind and body like precious jewels enveloped in beauty, 
the same I hold and cherish. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 56 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 


एष प्र पूर्वीरव तस्य॑ चभ्रिषोऽ त्यो न योषामुदयंस्त भुर्वणिः । 
दक्षं महे पाययते हिरण्ययं रथमावृत्या हरियोगमभ्व॑सम्‌॥ ९॥ 


Ly Esa pra purvirava tasya camriso’tyo na yosamu- 
dayamsta bhurvanih. Daksam mahe payayate 
hiranyayam rathamavrtya hariyogamrbhvasam. 


This Indra, lord protector of the land, advances 
to meet, guide and protect his people just as the smartest 
young man advances and wins the hand of his lady love. 
And, holding them as sacred libations in the ladle for 
offering into the yajna fire, he ascends the excellent, 
golden chariot prepared by experts and driven by the 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 56 243 


fastest fuel power, and advances to protect the glory of 
the Lord of humanity for them. 


तं गृर्तयो नेमन्निषः परीणसः समुद्रं न संचरणे area: | 
पतिं दश्च॑स्य विदथ॑स्य न सहो गिरिं न वेना अधिं रोह 
तेज॑सा ॥ २॥ 


2. Tam gurtayo nemannisah parinasah samudram 
na sancarane sanisyavah. Patim daksasya vida- 
thasya nu saho girim na vena adhi roha tejasa. 


Just as the streams flow to join the sea in 
common and waters glide round the mountain, so hosts 
of admirers, loving and loved and eager to join Indra, 
lord and protector of the mighty and versatile order of 
humanity, rise and, with their strength and splendour, 
augment his power and majesty deep as the ocean and 
high as a mountain peak. 


स तुर्वणिर्महाँ अरेणु पौस्ये गिरेर्भृष्टिर्न भ्राजते तुजा gra: 1 
येन शुष्णं मायिन॑मायसो मदे ea आभूषु रामयन्नि 
दाम॑नि।॥३॥ 


ee Sa turvanirmahan arenu paumsye girerbhrstirna 
bhrajate tuja Savah. Yena Susnam mayinamd-yaso 
made dudhra abhusu ramayanni damani. 


He, Indra, blessed and blissful, great, inviolable, 
shines in his bloom of youth like the peak of a mountain 
with the force and brilliance of his knowledge and 
power, by which he, formidable hero of the armour of 
steel, delights and rules a strong and enlightened nation 
in a state of joy and self-restraint in all situations of 
existence. 


244 RGVEDA 


देवी यदि तविषी त्वावृधोतय इन्द्रं सिषक्त्युषसं न सूर्यः | 
यो धृष्णुना शव॑सा बाधंते तम इयति tut gead- 
रिष्वणिः॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Devi yadi tavist tvavrdhotaya indram sisaktyu- 
sasam na suryah. Yo dhrsnuna savasa badhate 
tama iyarti renum brhadarharisvanih. 


If a generous and brilliant beauty were to come 
and join Indra, a brilliant young man of culture, 
education and universal values of Dharma, join him as 
life partner and inspire him to advance for the safety, 
security and progress of society, then, just as the sun 
having joined the wonderful dawn, dispels the world 
enveloping darkness with his blazing splendour so 
would Indra dispel the darkness and suffering of 
humanity with his power and splendour. 


वि यत्तिरो धरुणमच्युतं witstifeat दिव strata बर्हणा । 
स्व॑मी्ठहे यन्मद॑ इन्द्र हर्ष्याहन्वृत्रं निर पामौल्जो अर्ण - 
STNG 


2; Vi yat tiro dharunamacyutam rajo’tisthipo diva 
atasu barhana. Svarmilhe yanmada indra 
harsyahan vrtram nirapamaubjo arnavam. 


Mighty is Indra, blazing in splendour and 
rejoicing in the light of heaven. In the vast spaces of 
the universe, he wields and sustains indestructible life 
supports such as earths and skies. He catalyses the 
vapours of water held in the depths of space, breaks the 
clouds, and in the mood of power, glory and joy makes 
them shower the rains on the earth, thereby forming the 
ocean. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 57 245 


त्वं दिवो धरुणं धिष ओज॑सा पृथिव्या ईन्द्र सद॑नेषु माहिनः | 
त्वं सुतस्य मदे अरिणा अपो वि वृत्रस्य॑ समया पाष्यां- 
रुजः WE ॥ 


6. Tvam divo dharunam dhisa ojasa prthivya indra 
sadanesu m@hinah. Tvam sutasya made arina apo 
vi vrtrasya samaya pasyarujah. 


Indra, with your splendour of omnipotence you 
wield the sustaining powers of heaven and earth. You 
are all great and glorious in the halls and homes of the 
earth. With your power of catalysis you break the clouds 
and release the waters by the season, and then in 
celebrations of soma yajna you bless the devotees with 


JOY. 
Mandala 1/Sukta 57 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Savya Rshi 


प्र मंहिं्टाय ged बृहद्रये सत्यशुष्माय aaa मतिं at 
अपामिव प्रवणे यस्य॑ दुर्धरं राधो विश्वायु शव॑से अपां- 
वृतम्‌।॥। ९॥ 


1. Pra manhisthaya brhate brhadraye satyasu- 
smaya tavase matim bhare. Apamiva pravane 
yasya durdharam radho visvayu Savase apavrtam. 


To the most generous lord of the world, Indra, 
great, awfully wealthy, truly fragrant blissful, and 
mighty strong, I offer my homage of faith and 
celebration whose universal gift of wealth, knowledge 
and efficiency of karma, released and open to all for 
strength and enlightenment, flows freely like streams 
of water rushing down to the sea. 


246 RGVEDA 


अधं ते विश्वमनु हासदिष्टय आपो Frere सव॑ना efera: | 
यत्पर्वते न समशीत हर्यत इन्द्र॑स्य ag: श्नथिता हिर - 
vad: ॥ २॥ 


2. Adha te visvamanu hasadistaya apo nimneva 
savana havismatah. Yatparvate na samasita 
haryata indrasya vajrah snathita hiranyayah. 


Just as the golden glorious thunderbolt of Indra 
struck at the cloud reaches to the heart of the vapours 
and the treasure streams of water flow down to the sea, 
so may the fruits of the holy works of yajnic people and 
the wealth of the world flow to you like streams of water 
for your fulfilment and freedom. (The ruler is the 
nation’s centre and chief yajamana of the nation’s yajnic 
activity.) 


अस्मै भीमाय नम॑सा सम॑ध्वर उषो न शश्च आ भ॑रा पनीयसे । 
यस्य धाम्‌ श्रव॑से नामेद्धियं ज्योतिरकारि हरितो नाय॑से ।॥। ३॥ 


2; Asmai bhimaya namasad samadhvara uso na 
subhra a bhara paniyase. Yasya dhama sravase 
namendriyam jyotirakari harito nayase. 


O man of knowledge, come to the auspicious 
yajna like the glorious dawn bearing gifts of food power 
and energy for this awful lord of majesty and charity, 
whose house, famous for gold and chant of the Word, 
emanates the light and power of science and knowledge 
as the spaces in the morning reflect the light and glory 
of the dawn. 


इमे त॑ इन्द्र ते वयं पुरुष्टुत ये त्वारभ्य चरांमसि प्रभूवसो | 
नहि त्वदन्यो गिर्वणो गिरः सघ॑त्श्चोणीरिव प्रति नो हर्य 
तद्वच॑ः ॥ ड ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 57 247 


4. Ime ta indra te vayam purustuta ye tvarabhya 
caramasi prabhuvaso. Nahi tvadanyo girvano 
girah saghat ksoniriva prati no harya tad vacah. 


These are yours, Indra, We are yours, lord 
praised and celebrated by all. Beginning with you we 
go about the business of living, lord of existence and 
shelter of life. Other than you there is no one else, lord 
of holy Word, who would listen to our prayer. Hear our 
prayer as the voice of earth and humanity and respond 
with grace. 


भूरिं त इन्द्र def ae स्मस्यस्य स्तोतुर्म॑घवन्काममा पुंण। 
अनु ते द्यौर्बृहती वीर्य मम इयं च॑ ते पृथिवी नेम 
ओज॑से ॥ ५॥ 


>, Bhuri ta indra viryam tava smasyasya stoturma- 
ghavan kamama prna. Anu te dyaurbrhati viryam 
mama iyam ca te prthivi nema ojase. 


Great is your power and splendour, Indra. We 
are yours, under your law and shelter. Lord of glory, 
listen to this devotee and grant his prayer. The vast 
heaven acknowledges and celebrates your power and 
glory. This earth too does homage to your might and 
grandeur. 


त्वं तमिन्द्र पर्वतं महामुरुं adur वजिन्पर्वशश्च॑कर्तिंथ | 
अवासृजो निवृताः सर्तवा अपः सत्रा विश्वं दधिषे केव॑लं 
सह॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam tamindra parvatam mahamurum vajrena 
vajrinparvaSsascakartitha. Avasrjo nivrtah sar- 
tava apah satra visvam dadhise kevalam sahah. 


Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you break that 


248 RGVEDA 


mountainous cloud of vast dimensions part by part with 
the thunderbolt of lightning energy. You release the held 
up waters for downward flow in the streams. Eternal 
and absolute lord of omnipotence, you alone wield and 
sustain the universe and universal energy. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 58 
Agni Devata, Nodha Gautama Rshi 


नू चित्सहोजा अमृतो नि तुन्दते होता aed अभवद्विवस्वतः | 
वि साधिष्ठेभिः पथिभी रजो मम आ देवताता हविषां 
विवासति ॥ ९॥ 


1. Nu cit sahoja amrto ni tundate hota yad dito 
abhavad vivasvatah. Vi sadhisthebhih pathibhi 
rajo mama ठ devatata havisa vivasati. 


Agni, surely born of strength and omnipotence, 
and immortal, never hurts. Giver and receiver of 
oblations, it is the carrier of yajna and inspirations of 
the Divine. Coexistent with other powers of nature, it 
traverses the paths of spaces from earth to heavens. 
Divine among divinities, when it is fed on holy offerings, 
it shines itself and shines others with light. 


आ tanal gant अजरस्तृष्व॑विष्यन्नं तसेषुं तिष्ठति । 
अत्यो न पृष्ठं प्रुषितस्य रोचते दिवो न सानुं स्तनयंन्न- 
Famed २॥ 

ps A svamadma yuvamano ajarastrsvavisyanna- 


tasesu tisthati. Atyo na prstham prusitasya rocate 
divo na sanu stanaya-nnacikradat. 


Unaging and immortal, instantly consuming its 
food, it protects the environment and abides in the winds 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 58 249 


and the vast skies. Like a courser on the wings, it flies 
and shines on top when it is sprinkled with ghrta, and 
as on the peak of heaven, it thunders as lightning. 


क्राणा रुद्रेभिर्वसुभिः पुरोहितो होता निष॑त्तो रयिषाव्मं्त्यः | 
रथो न विक्ष्वुञ्जसान आयुषु व्यानुषग्वायी देव ऋण्वति ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Krana rudrebhirvasubhih purohito hota nisatto 
rayisalamartyah. Ratho na viksvrnjasana ayusu 
vyanusagvarya deva rnvati. 


Immortal agent of nature’s karma, living and 
acting with pranic energies and the abodes and supports 
of life, it is the high priest of cosmic yajna both offering 
and receiving the oblations in the dynamics of existence, 
and it is the treasure source of wealth. Beautiful and 
moving like a chariot, mixing with people, it integrates 
with life and age and, brilliant and generous, it creates 
and provides the choicest gifts of life. 


वि वात॑जूतो अतसेषु, तिष्ठते get जुहूभिः सरण्या तुवि- 
ष्वणिः । तुषु aad वनिनो वृषायसे कृष्णं त एम रूशूर्मे 
अजर॥ ४॥ 


4. Vi vatajuto atasesu tisthate vrtha juhubhih srnya 
tuvisvanih. Trsu yadagne vanino vrsayase krsnam 
ta ema rusadurme ajara. 


Impelled by Vayu, Agni abides in its natural 
abodes, in wind and air and in its own flames, moving 
on loud and bold by its yajnic actions. Agni, unaging 
and ever young, refulgent with your own light, since 
you instantly shower the supplicants with favours, may 
we, we pray, share your love and protection. 


250 RGVEDA 


तपुर्जम्भो वन आ वात॑चोदितो यूथे न साह्यं sta वाति 
वंसंगः। अधित्रजन्नक्षितं पाज॑सा रज॑: स्थातुश्चरथं' भयते 
पतत्रिणः ॥ ५ ॥ 


2; Tapurjambho vana a vatacodito yuthe na sahvan 
ava vati vamsagah. Abhivrajannaksitam pajasa 
rajah sthatuscaratham bhayate patatrinah. 


Voracious power of the jaws of flame, enveloped 
in the rays of its own light, inspired by the energy of 
Vayu, it moves around bold and fearless like a bull in 
the herd of cows in the forest far and near. It moves 
across the moving and undecaying world of earth and 
sky up and down with its force, and the world feels 
afraid of it whether it stays or flies like a bird. 


Seger भृग॑वो मानुषेष्वा रयिं न are सुहवं जनेभ्यः । 
होतारमग्ने अतिथिं वरेण्यं fast न शोवं दिव्याय जन्म॑ने ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Dadhustva bhrgavo manusesva rayim na carum 
suhavam janebhyah. Hotaramagne athithim 
varenyam mitram na Sevam divyaya janmane. 


Agni, eminent scholars of science among humanity 
hold and install you as precious wealth for the people, Agni, 
divine yajnic power, welcome as a cherished visitor, worthy 
of choice, deserving of hospitality like a dear friend, bliss 
incarnate. They install you so that you kindle, rise and 
blaze like a divinity of heaven. 


Balt सप्त Tals ahs यं areal वृणते अध्वरेषु । अथं 
विश्वेषामरतिं वसरंनां सपर्यामि प्रय॑सा यामि Tari ७॥ 


7. Hotaram sapta juhvo yajistham yam vaghato 
vrnate adhvaresu. Agnim visvesamaratim 
vasunam saparyami prayasa yami ratnam. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 58 251 


Intelligent men of knowledge and divine speech 
offer to invoke Agni, as generous yajnic power of seven 
beautiful tongues of flame, worthiest of adoration in 
yajna. That same power, a very jewel, giver of all wealths 
of the world, which they invoke in yajna, I too serve 
and attain. 


अच्छिद्रा सूनो सहसो नो अद्य ettaeal मित्रमहः orf 
यच्छ। अग्न गृणन्तमंहंस उरुष्योर्जो नपात्पर्भिरायंसीभिः॥ ८ ॥ 


of Acchidra suno sahaso no adya stotrbhyo mitra- 
mahah sarma yaccha. Agne grnantamamhasa 
urusyorjo napat purbhirayasibhih. 


Agni, child of omnipotence, greatest friend most 
adorable, give us today, your devotees, perfect peace 
and comfort of a happy home, energy and power of the 
world. Save the devotee and admirer from sin and 
perfect him with the strength of steel and beauties of 
gold. 


भवा वरूथं गृणते विभावो val मघवन्मघवद्भ्यः र्म। 
उरुष्याग्ने अंह॑सो गृणन्तं प्रातर्मक्षू धियावसुर्जगम्यात्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


= Bhava varutham grnate vibhavo bhava maghavan 
maghavadbhyah sarma. Urusyagne amhaso 
grnantam pratarmaksu dhiyavasurja-gamyat. 


Agni, lord of light and brilliance you are, be a 
very home for the admirer. Lord of wealth and honour, 
be the very light and honour for the men of wealth and 
power. Save the devotee from sin and crime with 
protection from within and without. Agni, you are the 
lord of intelligence, wealth and knowledge, come post- 
haste in the morning and bless me. 


252 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 59 
Agni-Vaishvanara Devata, Nodha Gautama Rshi 


वया इदंगरे अग्रय॑स्ते अन्ये त्वे विश्वे अमरतां मादयन्ते। 
avatar नाभिरसि क्षितीनां स्थूणेव जनौ उपपिद्य॑- 
यन्थ।॥ ९॥ 


1. Vaya idagne agnayaste anye tve viSve amrta 
madayante. Vaisvanara nabhirasi ksitinam 
sthuneva janan upam id yayantha. 


Agni, light and life of the universe, other agnis, 
lights, fires and vitalities are reflective branches of you 
only. All the immortals of the world, devas, jivas and 
lights such as the sun rejoice in you. Vaishvanara, vitality 
and leading light of the earthly worlds, you are the navel, 
centre-hold of the earths and the people, and, like the 
pillar of a house or the hub of the wheel of existence, 
you hold the people in the law of Dharma and keep 
them in their orbit. 


मूर्धा दिवो नाभिर॑रिः पंथिव्या अथांभवदर ती रोद॑स्योः | 
तं त्वां देवासोऽजनयन्त देवं वैश्वानर ज्योतिरिदा्यीय i २॥ 


2 Murdha divo nabhiragnih prthivya athabha- 
vadarati rodasyoh. Tam tva devaso’janayanta 
devam vaisvanara jyotiridaryaya. 


Agni is the top of heaven and the centre hold of 
the earth, and it is the ruler of the earths, the skies and 
the heavens all. Vaishvanara, leading light of the 
universe, such as you are, the brilliancies of nature such 
as sun and moon reveal your presence and the nobilities 
of humanity celebrate you as light of the Word and life 
of the world for the good and the pious. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 59 253 


आ सूर्ये न रश्मयो ध्रुवासो वैश्वानरे afar sat वसूनि । 
या पर्वतेष्वोष॑धीष्ठप्सु या मानुषेष्वसि तस्य राजा ॥ ३ ॥ 


a A surye na rasmayo dhruvaso vaisvanare dadhi- 
re’gna vasuni. Ya parvatesvosadhisvapsu ya 
manusesvasi tasya raja. 


Just as the sun-rays abide in the sun, so do the 
stars and planets and the Vasus, abodes of life, abide in 
Vaishvanara Agni, self-existent power and force of the 
universe. Lord supreme, whatever wealth and vitality 
is there in mountains, herbs, waters and humanity, you 
are the ruler and ordainer of it all. 


बहती इव सूनवे रोद॑सी गिरो होता मनुष्यो Tar: | 
स्व॑र्वते सत्यशुष्माय पूर्वीर्विश्वानराय नृत॑माय यह्वीः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Brhatiiva sunave rodasi giro hota manusyo na 
daksah. Svarvate satyasusmaya purvirvaisvana- 
raya nrtamaya yahvih. 


Just as the wide and expansive heaven and earth 
honour and serve the sun, source of light and inspiration, 
so should the hota, the yajaka, like an expert man of 
yajna, offer great, eternal and divine hymns of praise in 
honour of Vaishvanara, life universal, self-existent, ever 
truly powerful and the best friend of humanity. 


दिवश्चित्ते बृहतो जातवेदो avatar प्र रिरिचे afer 
राजां कृष्टीनामसि मानुषीणां युधा देवेभ्यो वरिवश्च- 
कर्थ॥५॥ 

D, Divascit te brhato jatavedo vaisvanara pra ririce 
mahitvam. Raja krstinamasi manusinam yudha 
devebhyo varivascakartha. 


254 RGVEDA 


Vaishvanara, lord omniscient and omnipresent 
life and leader of the universe, your greatness and 
majesty exceeds the light and grandeur of the heavens. 
You are the lord ruler of the classes of humanity, and 
with your warlike exploits create treasures of wealth 
for the divinities of nature and humanity. 


प्र नू ded duvet वोचं यं पूरवो वृत्रहणं सच॑न्ते । 
वैश्वानरो दस्युं मगिर्जधन्वां अधूनोत्काष्ठा अव शम्ब॑रं 
भेत्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Pranu mahitvam vrsabhasya vocam yam puravo 
vrtrahanam sacante. Vaisvanaro dasyum agnirja 
ghanvan adhunot kastha ava Sambaram bhet. 


Spontaneously I celebrate the greatness and 
grandeur of the mighty and generous Vaishvanara Agni, 
Lord Omnipotent and Omnipresent, whom all people 
of the world seek and worship. Lord of light, breaker of 
the cloud, dispeller of darkness and destroyer of the 
wicked, He shakes the quarters of space and terrifies 
the demons of evil. 


वैश्वानरो महिम्ना विश्वकुष्ि भरद्वाजेषु यजतो विभावा । 
शातवनेये शतिनीभिर भिः पुरुणीथे ज॑रते सूनृतावान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


a, Vaisvanaro mahimna visvakrstirbharadvajesu 
yajato vibhava. Satavaneye Satinibhiragnih puru- 
nithe jarate sunrtavan. 


Vaishvanara, lord pervasive and leader of the 
world of existence, is the lord of world humanity by 
virtue of His might and grandeur. Among the sources 
of life sustenance such as earth and showers of rain, He 
is the light and glory of the man of yajna. Lord of the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 60 255 


reality of existence and the word of truth, in the world 
of hundredfold splendour, Agni is praised and 
worshipped in a hundred manners in choric songs by 
the celebrants. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 60 
Agni Devata, Gautama Nodha Rshi 


afa यशसं facades केतुं सुप्राव्यं दूतं सद्योअर्थम्‌ । 
द्विजन्मानं रयिपिंव प्रशस्तं रातिं भ॑रद्‌ भृग॑वे मातरिश्वा i ९॥ 


if Vahnim yasasam vidathasya ketum supravyam 
dutam sadyo-artham. Dvijanmanam rayimiva 
prasastam ratim bharad bhrgave matarisva. 


Matarishva, Vayu energy existent in space and 
operative in wind and electricity, bears Agni, carrier of 
oblations, mark of fame and honour, honour flag of the 
yajna of the world, worthy of preservation and 
advancement, instant mover and messenger, always 
valuable, twice born of Heaven and Vayu for earth and 
the skies. Vayu bears it like a real celebrity and beauty 
and generous giver in life and conducts it to Bhrgu, 
scientist and technologist, for heat treatment from 
cooking to tempering of sophisticated materials. (The 
Bhrgu collects and develops the fire.) 


अस्य oT Se aa: सचन्ते हृविष्म॑न्त उशिजो ये च मतीः 1 
दिवश्चित्पूर्वो न्यसादि होताऽऽपुच्छ्यो' विश्पतिर्विक्षु 
वेधाः ॥ २॥ 

2. Asya sasurubhayasah sacante havismanta usijo 
ye ca martah. Divascit purvo nyasadi hota’’ 
prechyo vispatirviksu vedhah. 


Ordinary people and men of means both, who 


256 RGVEDA 


are ambitious for noble yajnic acts, abide by the law 
and order of this ruler of truth and justice. Giver as well 
as receiver of the gifts of yajna, man of discriminate 
wisdom, protector of the people, intelligent and highly 
knowledgeable, he takes his place among the people 
like the sun before the rise of day. 


तं नव्य॑सी हृद आ जाय॑मानमस्मत्सुंकीर्तिर्मधुंजिहमश्याः । 
यमृत्विजो वृजने मानुषासः प्रय॑स्वन्त आयवो जीजं- 
नन्त ॥ ३॥ 


Tam navyasi hrda a jayamanam asmat sukirtir- 
madhujihvamasyah. Yamrtvijo vrjane manusasah 
prayasvanta ayavo jijananta. 


To the man of noble honey tongue, whom men 
of yajnic service, men of means and knowledge, seniors 
with vision and experience and the people in general 
raise higher and greater in the battle of life, to such a 
man rising high and higher, may new and newer 
appreciation and admiration reach from our heart and 
soul. 


उशिक्पावको वसुर्मानुषेषु वरेण्यो होताधायि विक्षु | 
दमूना गृहप॑तिर्दम ओं अभिर्भवद्रयिपती रयीणाम्‌ x ॥ 


4. Usik pavako vasurmanusesu varenyo hotadhayi 
viksu. Damuna grhapatirdama an agnirbhuva- 
drayipati rayinam. 


The man of love and initiative worthy of love, 
pure and purifying as fire, generous among people, 
worthy of choice, commanding loyalty, dedicated to 
yajna and social good, such a person should be given a 
prominent position among people. Man of peace and 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 61 257 


self-control, keeper and protector of the home, creator 
and protector of wealth, such a person shines as fire on 
top and commands the nation. 


तं त्वां वयं पतिंमगरे रयीणां प्र शंसामो पतिधिर्गोत॑ंमासः। 
आशं न वाजम्भरं मर्जयन्तः ureter धियाव॑सुर्ज- 
गम्यात्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


Tam 110 vayam patimagne rayinam pra Samsamo 
matibhirgotamasah. Asum na vajambharam 
marjayantah pratarmaksu dhiyavasurjagamyadt. 


Agni, lord of light and leader, Agni, lord creator 
and protector of the wealth of nations, instant in action, 
commanding speed and prosperity, we, men of the 
Divine Word, with all our mind and intelligence, with 
all the saints and the wise, cleansing, sanctifying and 
anointing you as leader, praise and celebrate you, and 
we pray that the lord of wealth and intelligence may 
come post-haste and bless us in the early morning. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 61 
Indra Devata, Gautama Nodha Rshi 


अस्मा इदु प्र तवसें तुराय प्रयो न ह्मि स्तोमं मार्हिनाय । 
ऋची षमायाधिंगव ओहमिन्द्रय ब्रह्माणि रातत॑मा ॥ ९॥ 


1. Asma idu pra tavase turaya prayo na harmi 
stomam mahinaya. Rcisamayadhrigava oha- 
mindraya brahmani ratatama. 


In honour of this lord Indra, mighty power, great 
leader, holy celebrity and commander of the brave, 
informidable to the enemies, I offer an excellent song 
of praise in adoration and holiest offerings of the most 
spontaneous and liberal homage. 


258 RGVEDA 


अस्मा इदु प्रय॑डव प्र यंसि भराम्याङ्गूषं बाधे सुवृक्ति । 
इन्द्राय हृदा मन॑सा मनीषा प्रलाय पत्ये धियो मर्जयन्त ॥ २॥ 


pA Asma idu praya iva pr yamsi bharamyangusam 
badhe suvrkti. Indraya hrda manasa manisa 
pratnaya patye dhiyo marjayanta. 


You offer to this Indra, lord of life and power, 
libations of homage and reverence like gifts of dainty 
food. So do I bear and offer to him songs of praise well- 
structured and formulaic modes of defence and 
protection against the enemies of humanity. Come ye 
all, cleanse your mind honestly by heart, mind and soul 
for Indra, ancient and eternal lord of life and light, and 
serve him. 


अस्मा इदु त्यमुपमं स्वर्षा भराम्याङ्गूषमास्येन । 
महिं मच्छोक्तिभिर्मतीनां सुवृक्तिभिः सूरिं वावृधध्यै ॥ ३॥ 


3 Asma idu tyamupamam svarsam bharamyangu- 
samasyena. Manhistham achoktibhir matinam 
suvrktibhih surim vavrdhadhyai. 


For the sake of the advancement of Agni, the 
ruler, and of the people of knowledge and wisdom, I 
speak noble and powerfully persuasive words in support 
of this exemplary, generous, revered and magnanimous 
hero, a great man of wisdom and piety of conduct. 


अस्मा इदु स्तोमं सं हिनोमि रथं न ava तस्सिंनाय । 
गिरश्च freee सुवृक्तीन्द्रीय विश्वमिन्वं मेधिराय ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Asma idu stomam sam hinomi ratham na tasteva 
tatsinaya. Girasca girvahase suvrktindraya visva- 
minvam medhiraya. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 61 259 


For this Indra, ruling lord of knowledge and 
power, master promoter of divine speech and veteran 
of wisdom, I create and float a song of praise of universal 
and persuasive purport and use words of discriminating 
wisdom to strengthen his power and control over the 
land and people just as an engineer creates a strong 
structure for the chassis of the master’s chariot. 


अस्मा इदु ofthe श्रवस्येन्द्रायार्कं जुह्वा ३ सम॑ञ्जे | 
वीरं दानौकसं वन्दध्यै पुरां गृर्तश्र॑वसं दर्माणम्‌ ॥५॥ 


Asma idu saptimiva sravasyendrayarkam juhva 
samanyje. Viram danaukasam vandadhyai puram 
gurtasravasam darmanam. 


As a driver yokes the horse to the master’s 
chariot to drive him on, so, in honour of Indra and in 
order to celebrate and exalt him, the brave hero as he is, 
treasure home of charity and destroyer of enemy 
strongholds, whose fame rings far and wide, I compose 
a song in my own words and offer it as a libation to him 
with my own ladle in homage. 


अस्मा इदु त्वष्टां dasa स्वप॑स्तमं स्वर्यं ॥ रणाय । 
वृत्रस्य॑ चिद्विदद्येन मर्म तुजन्नीशांनस्तुजता कियेधाः ॥ € ॥ 


6. Asma idu tvasta taksad vajram svapastamam 
svaryam ranaya. Vrtrasya cid vidad yena marma 
tujannisanastujata kiyedhah. 


Let Tvashta, the Maker, design and form for this 
Indra, ruling Lord of power and defence, the thunderbolt 
of lightning force blazing for the battle so that he (Indra), 
striking with this fatal weapon, taking many enemies 
on, may reach the mortal centrespot of Vritra, the cloud 


260 RGVEDA 


of darkness and ignorance (and release the showers of 
rain and prosperity and the light of knowledge). 


अस्येदु मातुः सव॑नेषु सद्यो महः पितुं पपिवाञ्चार्वन्ना । 
मुषायद्विष्णुः पचतं सही याच्विध्य॑दराहं तिरो अद्वि- 
मस्ता ।॥। ७॥ 


7 Asyedu matuh savanesu sadyo mahah pitum 
papivancarvanna. Musayad visnuh pacatam 
sahiyan vidhyad varaham tiro adrimasta. 


In the yajnic programmes of this Indra, lord of 
rule and power who measures everything to size, Vishnu, 
the great sun pervading everything with its light, drinks 
up the delicious holy foods prepared and sent up 
sanctified from the yajna, and then, challenging the 
mountainous cloud hoarding up the wealth of the same 
yajnic foods in the form of vapours, breaks up the cloud 
and throws it down (releasing the showers of rain). 


अस्मा इदु ग्राश्चिं देवप॑लीरिन्द्राया कम॑हिहत्यं Ha: | 
परि द्यावापृथिवी ज॑भ्र उर्वी नास्य ते म॑हिपानं परिं ्टः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asma idu gnascid devapatnirindrayarkamahi- 
hatya uvuh. Pari dyavaprthivi jabhra urvi nasya 
te mahimanam pari stah. 


For this Indra, blazing as the sun with light and 
grandeur, holy voices served and preserved by noble 
sages and scholars composed hymns of praise and 
offered homage to Indra on the break up of the cloud. 
Indra holds both the vast heaven and earth, but these 
two do not comprehend his grandeur and greatness 
(which exceeds heaven and earth both). 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 61 261 


अस्येदेव प्र रिरिचे महित्वं दिवस्पुंथिव्याः पर्यन्तरिक्षात्‌ । 
स्वराच्िन्द्रौ दम आ fasadd: स्वरिरमत्रो ववक्षे 
MAUS 


0. Asyedeva pra ririce mahitvam divasprthivyah 
paryantariksat. Svaralindro dama 4G visvagurtah 
svariramatro vavakse ranaya. 


Surely the greatness and grandeur of this Indra 
exceeds the heaven, skies and earth. The self-refulgent 
hero, universal warrior, brilliant and brave, infinitely 
strong and bold, resounds in the universe for battle 
against evil and negation. 


अस्येदेव शव॑सा शुषन्तं वि वृंश्चद्वजरैण वृत्रमिन्द्रः | 
गान त्राणा अवनीरमुञ्चदभि श्रवो दावने सचेताः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Asyedeva Savasa Susantam vi vrscad vajrena 
vrtramindrah. Ga na vranad avaniramuncada- 
bhi sravo davane sacetah. 


O lord of power and law, with the strength and 
rectitude of this Indra, the universal force of Divinity 
uproots the exploitative forces, just as the sun breaks 
down the cloud which holds up the rain and scorches 
the earth. And just as held up cows are released from 
the stalls, so the ruler releases the streams of life on the 
earth, enlightened hero as he is, who releases food and 
justice for the powers of generosity. 


अस्येदु त्वेषसा रन्त सिन्ध॑वः परि यद्वज्रेण सीमय॑च्छत्‌। 
ईशा नकृदाशुषै दशस्यन्तुर्वीतये गाधं तुर्वणिः कः ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Asyedu tvesasa ranta sindhavah pari yadvajrena 


stmayacchat. Isanakrd dasuse daSasyan turvitaye 
gadham turvanih kah. 


262 RGVEDA 


By the might and splendour of this Indra, the 
rivers flow and seas roll at will since he gives the blow 
(to Vritra and releases the waters below). Ruler, 
controller, and giver of power and honour, instantly 
victorious, giving liberally to the generous, he creates 
firm standing ground for the speedy success of 
generosity all round. 


अस्मा इदु प्र भ॑रा तू तुंजानो वृत्राय वच्रमीशानः foram: | 
गोर्न ud वि र्दा तिरश्चेष्यन्नणी स्यपां चरध्यै ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Asma idu pra bhara tutujano vrtraya vajrami- 
sanah kiyedhah. Gorna parva vi rada tirasce- 
syannarnamsyapam caradhyai. 


Indra, ruling lord of manifold power, fast and 
impetuous, wields the thunderbolt of sunrays for this 
Vritra, cloud of vapours and darkness, and releasing 
the waters for the streams to flow on earth, breaks the 
layers of vapours with the thunderbolt as lightning 
breaks things into pieces bit by bit. 


अस्येदु प्र ब्रूहि पूर्व्याणि तुरस्य कर्मणि नव्यं उक्थेः 1 युधे 
यदिष्णान आयुधान्यृघायमाणो निरिणाति शत्रुन्‌ 83 ॥ 


13. Asyedu pra bruhi purvyani turasya karmani navya 
ukthaih. Yudhe yadisnana ayudhanyr-ghayamano 
nirinati Satrun. 

Sing and celebrate the old and new exploits of 
this fast and powerful Indra in songs of praise, Indra 
who, passionate and tempestuous, updating and 
wielding the weapons for battle, strikes and destroys 
the enemies. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 61 263 


अस्येदु भिया गिरय॑श्च goer द्यावां च भूमां जनुषस्तुजेते । 
उपो वेनस्य जोगुवान ओणि सद्यो भुंवदी्यीय नोधाः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Asyedu bhiya girayasca drlaha dyava ca bhuma 
Janusastujete. Upo venasya joguvana onim 
sadyo bhuvad viryaya nodhah. 


By the power and holy fear of this omnipotent 
Indra, the mountains stay firm and fixed, and the heaven 
and earth and the people shake with awe. The leader, 
abiding in the protective shade of this intelligent and 
handsome power and chanting words of praise 
immediately rises and grows capable of great action. 


अस्मा इदु Tad दाय्येषामेको GEA भूरेरीशानः | 
प्रैतशं सूर्ये पस्पृधानं सौवश्व्ये सुष्विंमावदिन्द्र॑ः ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Asma idu tyadanu dayyesameko yad vavne 
bhurerisanah. Praitasam surye pasprdhanam 
sauvasvye susvimavadindrah. 


Indra, sole one lord of himself is the absolute 
ruler of many. Whatever he wills of these and 
commands, the same is rendered in reverence and 
obedience. And Indra himself advances and protects the 
hero of power and honour who, fighting for victory in 
the battle of horse, spurs on his steed in the direction of 
the sun. 


एवा ते हारियोजना सुवृक्तीन्द्र ब्रह्माणि गोत॑मासो अक्रन्‌ | 
te विश्वपेशसं धियं धाः प्रातर्मक्षू धियाव॑सुर्जगम्यात्‌॥। ९६ ॥ 

16. Eva te hariyojana suvrktindra brahmani gota- 
maso akran. Aisu visvapesasam dhiyam dhah 
pratarmaksu dhiyavasurjagamyadt. 


264 RGVEDA 


Indra, O Lord of sunbeams, these are the songs 
divine, purest and serene, offered by the highest souls 
of faith and vision. Bless these souls with universal 
brilliance of vision and intelligence, lord omniscient. 
Lord Omnificent, reveal your presence in our mind 
instantly with the light of the dawn. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 62 
Indra Devata, Nodha Gautama Rshi 


प्र म॑न्महे शवसानाय॑ शूषमाङ्गूषं गिर्वणसे अद्भिर स्वत्‌। 
सुवृक्तिभिः स्तुवत ऋग्मियायाऽचीमार्कं नरे विश्रुताय i ९॥ 


iL: Pra manmahe savasanaya Susam angusam 
girvanase angirasvat. Suvrktibhih stuvata rgmi- 
yaya’rcamarkam nare visrutaya. 


With selected words of purity and pious deeds 
we offer songs of adoration to Indra, lord omnipotent, 
poet of Divine omniscience, universal object of worship, 
celebrated in the Rgveda, sole guide of humanity and 
celebrated in story all over the world, and we pray for 
strength and knowledge as for the very breath of life. 


प्र वों महे महि नमो! भरध्वमाङ्गूष्यं शवसानाय सामं | 
येना नः पूर्वे" पितर: पदज्ञा अर्चन्तो अद्धिरसो गा 
अविन्दन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2: Pra vo mahe mahi namo bharadhvam angusyam 
Savasanaya sama. Yena nah purve pitarah pada- 
jna arcanto angiraso ga avindan. 


All ye men and women of the world, bear and 
offer to Indra, great lord of strength and power, 
celebrative songs of adoration and holy offerings in 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 62 265 


Samans and hymns of knowledge and enlightenment, 
by virtue of which our ancient forefathers, who knew 
the life stages of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha 
and who were scholars of divine knowledge and 
worshippers of the Lord, received the gift of holy speech 
and universal knowledge. 


इन्द्रस्याद्धिरसां चेष्टौ विदत्सरमा तन॑याय धासिम्‌ ब॒हस्प- 
fines विदद्‌ गाः समुस्तरियाभिरर्वावशन्त नर: ॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Indrasyangirasam cestau vidat sarama tanaydaya 
dhasim. Brhaspatirbhinadadrim vidad gah 
samusriyabhirvavasanta narah. 


Just as a mother gives milk to the child, as 
Brihaspati, the sun, breaks the cloud with its rays and 
the light reaches the earth, so you, men and women of 
the world, in the yajna of Indra and the yajnic 
programmes of the scholars of science and society, 
shining and advancing like sun-rays, spread the light of 
knowledge and the joy of life. 


स सुष्टुभा स स्तुभा wa विप्रैः स्वरेणाद्रिं स्वर्यो ३ नव॑ग्वैः । 
सरण्युभिः फलिगपिन्द्र शक्र वलं रवेण दरयो दश॑ग्वैः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa sustubha sa stubha sapta vipraih svarenadrim 
svaryo navagvaih. Saranyubhih phaligamindra 
Sakra valam ravena darayo dasagvaih. 


Just as the bright sun breaks the powerful clouds 
with its fresh, all embracing, all expansive, sustaining 
and sustained but resounding rays of light, similarly 
Indra, powerful ruler of the world, shining and 
resounding, with balanced and all-sustaining order, 
seven orders of the wise, his rolling voice, new and all 


266 RGVEDA 


expansive radiating powers and burning and roaring 
weapons, breaks down the thick and powerful clouds 
of darkness which hoard the system’s life and progress. 


गृणानो अद्धिरोभिर्दस्म वि वरुषसा सूर्येणा wed: । 
वि भूम्यां अप्रथय इन्द्र सानुं दिवो रज उप॑रमस्तभायः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Grnano angirobhirdasma vi varusasa suryena 
gobhirandhah. Vi bhumya aprathaya indra sanu 
divo raja uparamastabhayah. 


Indra, lord of wondrous deeds, proclaiming his 
power and presence by the pranic energies of nature, 
the dawn, the sun and the sun-rays, dispels the darkness 
and creates the food for life and growth. He expands 
the earth and the hills and mountains of the earth and 
stabilizes the heights of the skies and the heavens. 


So should the ruler proclaim his power and 
presence dispelling the darkness of ignorance, injustice 
and poverty, create food and prosperity and thereby 
expand the character, power and potential of the land 
and stabilize the common wealth of humanity. 


तदु weary कर्म दस्मस्य चारुतममस्ति SA: 1 
उ पह्रे यदुपरा अपिन्वन्मध्व॑र्णसो नद्य ९ श्चतस्रः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tadu paryaksatamam asya karma dasmasya 
carutamam asti damsah. Upahvare yadupara 
apinvan madhvarnaso nadyascatasrah. 


The most charming act and the most admirable 
achievement of this lord Indra of wondrous deeds 18 
that in the business of life on the earth all the streams 
and rivers and all the four directions of space are full 
and abundant with delicious waters and flow for all the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 62 267 


people freely. 


द्विता वि da सनजा सनींठे अयास्यः स्तव॑मानेभिरकः। 
भगो न मेने परमे व्योमन्नधा॑रयद्रोद॑सी सुदंसाः ॥ ७॥ 


I Dvita vi vavre sanaja sanile ayasyah stavama- 
nebhirarkaih. Bhago na mene parame vyomanna- 
dharayad rodasi sudamsah. 


Indra, valiant lord of infinite action, concealed 
and held and then revealed a duality of creation, two 
complementarities, both born of the same mother, 
Prakrti, and both coexistent and cooperative, both held 
by waves of energy (light and dark), both doing homage 
to the lord creator. He, Bhaga, lord of existence and 
master of materials, held the two in space as two co- 
workers, complementary like the sun holding heaven 
and earth and the skies in eternal space. 


सनादिवं परि भूमा विरूपे पुनर्भुवा युवती स्वेथिरेवैः | 
कृष्णोभिर क्तोषा रुशद्धिर्वपुंर्भिरा च॑रतो अन्यान्या ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sanad divam pari bhuma virupe punarbhuva 
yuvati svebhirevaih. Krsnebhiraktosa rusadbhir- 
vapurbhira carato anyanya. 


Since time immemorial, from the same eternal 
cause, co-existent and cooperative from heaven to earth, 
the two complementarities of distinctive forms, night 
and day, both ever young and born again and again, 
move on and on by their own path together yet 
separately, the night in the forms of darkness and the 
day in the forms of light. Both move in and on serving 
the heaven and earth. 


268 RGVEDA 


सनेमि सख्यं स्वपस्यमानः सूनुदौ धार्‌ शव॑सा सुदंसाः | 
आमासु चिदधिषे पक्वमन्तः ua: कृष्णासु रुशद्रोरहि- 
णीषु ॥ ९॥ 


9. Sanemi sakhyam svapasyamanah sunurdadhara 
Savasa sudamsah. Amasu cid dadhise pakva- 
mantah payah krsnasu rusad rohinisu. 


Lord of the thunderbolt, eternal creator, master 
of wondrous actions, beatific in performance by his own 
might holds and maintains equality of company and 
cooperation between the light and the dark, raw and 
ripe, just as he holds the same herbal juice in the mature 
as well as the maturing vegetation and the same white 
milk in the white, dark and ruddy cows. 


सनात्सनींव्ठा अवनीरवाता व्रता रक्षन्ते अमृताः सहोभिः 1 
पुरू Geen जन॑यो न पलु वस्यन्ति स्वसारो अदह॑या- 
णम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sanat sanila avaniravata vrata raksante amrtah 
sahobhih. Puru sahasra janayo na patnirduva- 
syanti svasaro ahrayanam. 


Since time immemorial, born of the same cause, 
Prakrti, coexistent and cooperative, thousands of earths 
immortal in their own nature, undisturbed even by a 
breath of wind, observe the eternal laws of their 
existence with their innate powers. And as mothers 
nourish their child, wives love and serve their husbands, 
and sisters love and cooperate with their brothers, they 
do homage to the bold and intrepidable Indra. 


सनायुवो नम॑सा नव्यो! अकैर्वसूयवों ude! दस्म aE: | 
पतिं न पलीरशतीरु शन्तं स्पृशन्ति त्वा शवसावन्म- 
नीषाः॥ १९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 62 269 


11. Sanayuvo namasa navyo arkairvasuyavo matayo 
dasma dadruh. Patim na patnirusa-tirusantam 
sprsanti tva Savasavanmanisah. 


Indra, lord adorable of wondrous action, bright 
and generous, people of intelligence, faith and 
meditation, desirous of wealth and food for the body, 
mind and soul, lovers of yajna, rush to you offering gifts 
of homage with hymns of praise and prayer as loving 
wives in passion approach the loving husbands and feel 
immortalised by the beatific touch of your presence. 


सनादेव तव रायो गभ॑स्तौ न क्षीय॑न्ते नोप॑ दस्यन्ति दस्म। 
gat असि क्रतुमा इन्द्र धीर : शिक्षां शचीवस्तव नः 
शचीभिः ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sandadeva tava rayo gabhastauna ksiyante nopa 
dasyanti dasma. Dyuman asi kratuman indra 
dhirah siksa Sacivastava nah sactbhih. 


Since eternity, O lord of infinite light and 
generosity, the wealths in your open hand never 
decrease, never will they exhaust. You are the lord 
supreme of light and knowledge. You are the lord of 
omnipotence. You are the master of the dynamics of 
existence. You are calm and constant. You are the lord of 
kindness, favour and grace. Enlighten us with the light 
of knowledge. Bless us with your favours and grace. 


सनायते गोत॑म इन्द्र नव्यमत॑श्चद्ब्रह्य॑ हरियोजनाय । erat 
नः शवसान नोधाः प्रातर्मक्षू धियाव॑सुर्जग-म्यात्‌॥ ९३ ॥ 
13. Sanayate gotama indra navyamataksad brahma 


hariyojanaya. Sunithaya nah savasana nodhah 
pratarmaksu dhiyavasurjaga myadt. 


270 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of omnipotence and infinite action, 
lord omnipresent of infinite motion, since eternity you 
are ever present just at hand. Nodha, the poet of constant 
adoration, Gotama, spirit of fastest thought and 
imagination, creates the latest songs of celebration in 
honour of you, lord of universal light and humanity, 
lord giver of infinite freedom and joy. May the lord of 
eternal wealth and joy, may the spirit of eternal vision 
and imagination be with us upon the instant with the 
light of the dawn. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 63 
Indra Devata, Gautama Nodha Rshi 


त्वं महां इन्द्र यो ह शुष्परर््यावा। जज्ञानः पृथिवी अमे धाः। 
ae ते विश्वां गिरय॑श्चिदभ्वां भिया goer: किरणा 
नैज॑न्‌ ९॥ 


I Tvam mahan indra yo ha Susmairdyava jajnanah 
prthivi ame dhah. Yaddha te visva girayasci- 
dabhva bhiya drlhasah kirana naijan. 


Indra, lord omnipresent, great you are indeed 
who, manifest in creation, hold the heaven and earth in 
your power and law of omnipotence. It is by that eternal 
power and awe that all the mighty mountains and the 
impetuous rays of light do not deviate from their fixed 
course. 


आ यन्दधरीं इन्द्र विव्र॑ता वेरा ते वज्रं जरिता aretefter 
येनाविहर्यतक्रतो अमित्रान्पुर इष्णासि पुरुहूत पूर्वीः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. A yaddhari indra vivrata vera te vajram jarita 
bahvordhat. Yenaviharyatakrato amitran pura 
isnasi puruhuta purvih. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 63 271 


Indra, lord almighty of immaculate action, 
universally invoked, when you deploy your forces of 
movement and advance, observing the rules and 
discipline of your universal law, your worshippers and 
admirers too hold in their arms the same thunderbolt of 
law by which you destroy the many strongholds of the 
enemies of life and humanity. 


त्वं सत्य इन्दर PU aa Mant नर्यस्त्वं षाट्‌ । त्वं शुष्णं 
वृजने gat आणौ यूने कुत्साय द्युमते सचाहन्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


SF Tvam satya indra dhrsnuretan tvamrbhuksa 
naryastvam sat. Tvam Susnam vrjane prksa anau 
yune kutsaya dyumate sacahan. 


Indra, you are ever true, constant destroyer of 
these negativities of life and nature. You are the protector 
and promoter of the wise artists and scientists. You are 
the leader and friend of humanity. You are ever patient 
and forbearing. In the great battles of unity and 
fulfilment, you eliminate want and drought for the sake 
of the young generation, bright and brave wielders of 
the force of the thunderbolt of plenty and righteousness. 


त्वं ह aids चोदीः सखा वृत्रं यद्वजिन्वृषकर्मन्चुभ्नाः। 
यद्धं शूर वृषमणः Urata दस्यूर्योनावकुतो वृथाषाट्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tvam ha tyadindra codth sakha vrtram yad vajrin 
vrsakarmannubhnah. Yaddha sura vrsamanah 
paracairvi dasyunryonavakrto vrthasdt. 


You only, for sure, Indra, are the universal friend, 
wielder of the thunderbolt, and hero of vast operation 
who take on the cloud of darkness and want, overthrow 
the demon of want and darkness and shower the 


272 RGVEDA 


blessings of plenty and fulfilment and who, O brave 
one, generous at heart, by nature and instinct nip evil 
and wickedness in the bud itself. 


त्वं ह त्यदिन्द्रारिंषण्यन्दूक्हस्यं चिन्मतीनामजुष्ट | 
व्यस्मदा काष्ठा अर्वते वघनिव॑ वजिञ्छ्नधिह्यमित्रांन्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Tvam ha tyadindrarisanyan drlhasya cinmarta- 
namajustau. Vyasmada kastha arvate varghaneva 
vajrinchnathihyamitran. 


Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you surely are he 
who is unwilling to injure the strong and firm among 
humanity and the strong and stable system of the order. 
Fall like a hammer upon the disagreeables of humanity, 
fix them, and scatter the unfriendly as the sun scatters 
the clouds, and open the paths of advancement for 
progress in all directions. 


त्वां ह त्यदिन्द्रा्णीसातौ स्व्॑पी्व्हे नर॑ आजा ह॑वन्ते । 
तव॑ स्वधाव इयमा dae ऊतिवजिंष्वतसाय्या भूत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam ha tyadindrarnasatau svarmilhe nara aja 
havante. Tava svadhava iyama samarya utirva- 
Jesvatasayya bhit . 


In the tumult of the battles of the brave for 
victory and the showers of peace and joy, the leaders of 
humanity call upon you, Indra, to join the strife and 
win. Lord of innate wealth and power, may this help 
and protection of yours be available to us in our joint 
ventures and our battles for food, knowledge, science 
and social progress. 


त्वं ह त्यदिन्द्र सप्र युध्यन्पुरो वजिन्पुरुकुत्सांय दर्दः । 
बर्हिनं यत्सुदासे वृथा वग्ि राजन्वरिवः पूरवे कः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 63 273 


8. Tvam ha tyadindra sapta yudhyan puro vajrin 
purukutsaya dardah. Barhirna yat sudase vrtha 
varganho rajan varivah purave kah. 


Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, ruler of the world, 
fighting seven evils and defending the seven-fold power 
of the order, you break down the strongholds of sin and 
crime for the sake of the generous and the many 
splendoured social order. Uproot the sin and crime like 
grass and deliver the wealth to the people for the sake 
of joy and fulfilment and take the order to the heights 
of the sky. (The sevenfold powers are: the council, 
councillors, president, army, commander, services and 
the people.) 


त्वं त्यां न॑ इन्द्र देव चित्रामिषमापो न पीपयः परिज्यन्‌। 
ययां शर प्रत्यस्मभ्यं यंसि त्मनमूर्जं न विश्वध क्षर॑ध्यै ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam tyam na indra deva citramisamapo na 
pipayah parijman. Yaya Sura pratyasmabhyam 
yamsitmanamurjam na visvadha ksaradhyai. 


Indra, brilliant lord of generosity, ever present and 
all protective, brave hero, ruler and holder of the world, 
like the flow of nature’s waters, let that various and 
wondrous energy, mind and means flow freely for us for 
the expression and fulfilment of our spiritual self by which 
you again and again direct and guide the conduct of our 
soul as well as the psychic flow of our energy. 


अकारि त इन्द्र गोत॑मेभिर्ब्रह्याण्योक्ता नम॑सा हरिभ्याम्‌ । 
सुपेशसं वाजमा भ॑रा नः प्रातर्मक्षू धियावंसुर्जगम्यात्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


व Akari ta indra gotamebhir brahmanyokta namasa 
haribhyam. Supesasam vajama bhara nah 
pratarmaksu dhiyavasurjagamyat. 


274 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of the world, by the most eminent 
sages of vision and intelligence, like fast motions of 
light rays for the sun, songs of homage have been 
presented with heart and soul with offerings of faith 
and reverence and sung for you. 


May the same lord of wealth and intelligence 
come to us and bless us with wondrous wealth of food, 
light and energy at the break of dawn. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 64 
Maruts Devata, Gautama Nodha Rshi 


वृष्णो शधीौय सुम॑खाय वेधसे ate: सुवृक्तिं प्र भ॑रा 
मरुद्दधय॑ः। अपो न धीरो मन॑सा सुहस्त्यो गिर: सम॑ञ्जे 
विदथेष्वा भुव॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


1 Vrsne Sardhaya sumakhaya vedhase nodhah 
suvrktim pra bhara marudbhyah. Apo na dhiro 
manasa suhastyo girah samanje vidathesva- 
bhuvah. 


Nodha, poet of vision and wisdom, come and 
sing a song of celebration in selected words of pure 
beauty for the generous, mighty and omniscient lord of 
universal yajna and in honour of the Maruts, divine 
energies of universal motion. Settled and constant, pure 
and fluent as waters, dexterous of hand in structure and 
form, with heart and soul I compose, adorn and chant 
holy voices revealed in meditation, presenting 
themselves as celebrants of the Lord. 


ते ज॑ज्ञिरे दिव ऋष्वासं उक्षणो सद्रस्य मर्या star sae: | 
पावकासः शुच॑यः सूयी इव सत्वानो न द्रप्सिनो घोर- 
वर्पसः ।॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 64 275 


2. Te jajnire diva rsvasa uksano rudrasya marya 
asura arepasah. Pavakasah Sucayah surya iva 
satvano na drapsino ghoravarpasah. 


Those Maruts, waves of winds, children of the 
light of heaven, reveal the light of knowledge. Friends 
of humanity, they are the breath of Rudra, cosmic energy 
of prana, generous, inspiring, pure and unpolluted, pure 
and purifying, brilliant as sunbeams, replete with vitality, 
carrying particles of living energy, they are awful and 
sublime in form. 


युवानो Sat अजरां अभोग्घनो ववक्षुरध्िंगावः पर्वता इव । 
goa चिद्विश्वा भुव॑नानि पार्थिवा प्र च्यावयन्ति दिव्यानि 
मज्मना ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Yuvano rudra ajara abhogghano vavaksura- 
dhrigavah parvata iva. Drlha cid visva bhuva- 
nani parthiva pra cyavayanti divyani majmana. 

Fresh, powerful and ever young, dynamic 
catalytic energies, unaging, free from suffering and 
death, they grow and augment. Unseen and irresistible 
in motion, strong and steady as mountains, with their 
power and force they move everything on earth and in 
heaven and all the worlds in existence. 


चित्रैरज्जिधिर्वपुंषे व्य॑ञ्जते वक्च॑ःसु waar अधिं येतिरे 
शुभे। अंसेष्वेषां नि पिमृक्षुऋष्टय॑ः साकं जजिरे स्वधया 
दिवो नर॑: ॥ ४॥ 

4. Citrairanjibhirvapuse vyanjate vaksahsu rukman 
adhi yetire Subhe. Amsesvesam ni mimrksurrsta- 
yah sakam jajnire svadhaya divo narah. 

In various colourful shapes they manifest and 


276 RGVEDA 


define themselves in beautiful forms of nature. They 
activate the heat and light of vitality in the body system. 
Their dynamic powers shine in the athletic shoulders 
of their favourite heroes. Life of heroic people, they 
arise and shine with their innate light and power from 
heaven itself. 


ईशानकृतो धुन॑यो रिशाद॑सो वातांच्विद्यु तस्तविंषीभिरक्रत। 
दुहन्त्युधं्दिव्यानि धूत॑यो भूमिं पिन्वन्ति पय॑सा परिज्रयः ॥ ५॥ 


a: Isanakrto dhunayo risadaso vatan vidyutastavist- 
bhirakrata. Duhantyudhardivyani dhutayo bhu- 
mim pinvanti payasa parijrayah. 


Creators and makers of ruling powers on earth, 
they are the movers and shakers of things and people. 
Destroyers of the destroyers, they generate winds and 
lightning with their blazing splendour. They distil the 
essence of energy from the celestial sources of nature 
and, vibrating every particle of matter and energy, they 
feed the earth with the nectar of vitality while they go 
round in spaces at their tempestuous speed. 


पिन्वन्त्यपो मरुत॑ः सुदान॑वः val घुतवंद्धिदथेष्वा भुवं: | 
अत्यं न fae वि न॑यन्ति वाजिनमुत्सं दुहन्ति स्तन- 
य॑न्तमस्िंतम्‌।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pinvantyapo marutah sudanavah payo ghrta-vad 
vidathesvabhuvah. Atyam na mihe vi nayanti 
vajinamutsam duhanti stanayantamaksitam. 


The generous Maruts, waves of cosmic energy, 
feed the vitality of waters. Instantly present at the yajnas 
of nature and humanity, as they radiate the ghrta across 
the spaces, so they feed and augment milk and juices 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 64 277 


from spaces. And for the sake of rain, like a horse in the 
reins, they rule the floating cloud and the lightning 
thunder and milk the cloud like a perennial spring for 
life. 
महिषासो मायिनंश्चित्रभांनवो गिरयो न स्वत॑वसो रघुष्यदः | 
wea हस्तिनं: खादथा वना यदारुणीषु तविंघीर- 
area ॥ ७ ॥ ति 


५. Mahisaso mayinascitrabhanavo girayo na svata- 
vaso raghusyadah. Mrga iva hastinah khadatha 
vana yadarunisu tavistrayugdhvam. 


Mighty strong and strengthening, magical 
stimulators of intelligence and performance, various and 
versatile in heat and light, innately powerful and firmly 
rooted as mountains and inherently rich as clouds, the 
winds are impetuous in motion as the shooting deer and 
mighty as the elephants which destroy the forests. If 
you use these brilliant powers of light and winds in your 
fieriest forces of creation and defence you would destroy 
the destroyers and protect the beauties of life and nature 
and enjoy yourselves. 


सिंहा इव नानदति प्रचेतसः पिशा इव सुपिशो विश्ववेदसः | 
क्षपो जिन्वन्तः प्रष॑तीधि ऋषिभिः समित्सबाधः शवसाहि- 
मन्यवः॥ 4८ Ul 

8. Simha iva nanadati pracetasah pisa iva supiso 
visvavedasah. Ksapo jinvatah prsatibhirrstibhih 
samit sabadhah savasahimanyavah. 


Like lions, the Maruts roar and proclaim the 
nature of nature (since, as waves of energy, they are in 
touch with everything 111 existence and hence know what 


278 RGVEDA 


itis). Powerful as they are possessed of minute particles 
of energy they possess the world and put you in touch 
with everything if you know them. Keeping everything 
in its own shape and order, coexistent with the clouds 
in their action of sun and shower, they vitalise the nights 
with the showers of their waves like mists. 


(If you know the Maruts, you know what they 
touch and proclaim.) 


रोद॑सी आ व॑दता गणश्रियो Testa: शुराः शवसाहिमन्यवः | 
आ वन्धुरेष्वमतिर्न दर्शता विद्युन्न त॑स्थौ मरुतो रथेषु 
वः।॥ ९॥ 


9. Rodasi a vadata ganasriyo nrsacah surah sasa- 
himanyavah. A bandhuresvamatirna darsata 
vidyunna tasthau maruto rathesu vah. 


Maruts, scholars, soldiers, leaders of humanity, 
organised in graceful classes, friends of mankind, brave, 
breakers of the clouds, with your own power reach over 
earth and heaven, address them and proclaim of them. 
And may the Maruts, energies of winds, like lightning, 
electric energy, in beautiful body form, come and sit in 
the strong structure of your cars to take you over earth 
and heaven. 


विश्ववेदसो tifa: समोकसः संपिश्लासस्तविषी- 
भिर्विरिष्छिनंः। अस्तार इषुं दधिरे गभ॑स्त्योरनन्तशष्पा 
वृष॑खादयो नर॑: ॥ १०॥ 


10. Visvavedaso rayibhih samokasah sammislasa- 
stavistbhirvirapSinah. Astara isum dadhire 
gabhastyoranantasusma vrsakhadayo narah. 


Heroic men, mighty powers, cosmic energies, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 64 279 


Maruts, voracious eaters, excellent and exuberant, who 
know and rule the world live together with all their 
wealth together, mix together in equal homes with all 
their light and power of the elements, hold immense 
strength in their hands, fix the arrow on the bow and 
shoot. They are the real men, the Maruts. 


हिरण्ययेभिः पविभिः पयोवृध उजिनिंघ्नन्त आपथ्यो न 
पर्वतान्‌। मखा अयासं: स्वसृतो ध्रुवच्युतो दुध्रकृतो मरुतो 
भ्राजंदुष्टयः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Hiranyayebhih pavibhih payovrdha ujjighnanta 
apathyo na parvatan. Makha ayasah svasrto 
dhruvacyuto dudhrakrto maruto bhrajadrs-tayah. 


Maruts, creators and promoters of water, juice 
and milk, powers of cosmic yajna, advancing, self- 
driven, shakers of the fixed, makers of the firm, 
brandishing their burnishing steel, shatter the mountains 
and scatter the clouds like leaves on the pathways by 
the golden wheels of their chariots. 


घृषुं पावकं वनिनं विचंर्षणि सद्रस्य॑ सूनुं हवसा। गृणीमसि | 
रजस्तुरं dad मारुतं गणमरजीषिणं वृष॑णं सचत 
श्चिये।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ghrsum pavakam vaninam vicarsanim rudrasya 
sunum havasa grnimasi. Rajasturam tavasam 
marutam ganamryjisinam vrsanam sascata Sriye. 


We invoke, praise and celebrate in song the band 
of Maruts, nature’s powers of grinding and crushing, 
purifying as fire with refinement, generous, ever active, 
children of Rudra, 1.e., products of cosmic metabolism 
in the process of joining, disjoining, consuming and 


280 RGVEDA 


creating. You too love, study and serve the Maruts, most 
active energy of the universe, fiery and powerful, 
creative and collective forces which bestow the gifts of 
life on us. Do so for beauty, prosperity and grace. 


प्रनू स मर्तः शव॑सा war अति तस्थौ व॑ ऊती म॑रुतो 
यमाव॑त। अर्व द्धिर्वाजं भरते धना नृभिरापृच्छ्यं क्रतुमा 
श्चेति पुष्य॑ति ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Pranu ऽद martah Savasa janan ati tasthau va uti 
maruto yamavata. Arvadbhirvajam bharate 
dhana nrbhiraprcchyam kratuma kseti pusyati. 


O Maruts, surely that person soon surpasses 
other people with power and merit and settles whom 
you protect and promote with your favours. He achieves 
food, energy and success with the fastest means of 
movement and progress, gets the desired wealth for the 
asking with the people around, and collects and 
advances the wealth and beauty of yajnic life. 


चर्कृत्यं मरूतः पृत्सु दुष्टरं द्युमन्तं शुष्मं मघवत्सु धत्तन । 
ध नस्पृत॑मुक्थ्यं विश्वच॑र्षणि तोकं पुष्येम तन॑यं शतं 
feat: ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. = Carkrtyam marutah prtsu dustaram dyumantam 
susmam maghavatsu dhattana. Dhanasprtamu- 
kthyam visvacarsanim tokam pusyema tanayam 
Satam himah. 

O Maruts, heroes of the world, bear for us valour 
and virility of sustained value for work, strength and 
courage irresistible in battles, and brilliant excellence 
among people of power and honour. Bless us with a 
son and a grandson, winner of wealth and victory, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 65 281 


worthy of praise and universally admirable, whom we 
may nurse, nourish, protect and promote for a hundred 
years to advance in life. 


नू ष्ठिरं म॑रुतो वीरव॑न्तमरतीषाहं thread धत्त rere feat 
शतिनं शूशुवांसं प्रातर्मक्षू धियावसुर्जगम्यात्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Nu sthiram maruto viravantamrtisaham rayima- 
smasu dhatta. Sahasrinam Satinam susuvam-sam 
pratarmaksu dhiyavasurjagamyadt. 


O Maruts, heroes of humanity fast as winds, bear 
among us stable wealth comprising most heroic youth 
who are ever felicitous and victorious, and happiness 
of a hundred fold and a thousandfold order. May the 
spirit of pious intelligence and wealth of mind and soul 
visit and bless us instantly with the light of dawn. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 65 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


पर्वा न तायुं Wet चतन्तं नमो युजानं नमो वहन्तम्‌ । 
सजोषा धीराः पदैरनु ग्मन्नुप त्वा सीदन्विश्वे यजत्राः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Pasva na tayum guha catantam namo yujanam 
namo vahantam. Sajosa dhirah padairanu gma- 
nnupa tva sidan visve yajatrah. 


Tracing and following the foot-prints of the 
animal, the master finds where the cattle carrier is hiding 
in the cave. So do all the yajakas, loving together and 
dedicated, patient and constant in their search, follow 
you, Agni, by yogaic stages and find you where you are 
hiding in the cave of the heart, creating and commanding 
food and energy, bearing and bestowing food and energy 


282 RGVEDA 


of life, and they sit close around you, preparing and 
feeding the fire, seeking and finding. 


ऋतस्य देवा अनुं व्रता गुर्भुवत्परि्टि्यौ्नं ya । वर्धन्तीमापः 
पन्वा सुशिश्विमृतस्य योना गर्भँ सुजातम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Rtasya deva anu vrata gurbhuvat paristirdyaurna 
bhuma. Vardhantimapah panva susisvimrtasya 
yona garbhe sujatam. 


Noble yajakas dedicate themselves to the Law 
of Truth in sacred vows. The search for Agni goes on. 
They augment the waters, exalt the earth and, with their 
noble actions, promote the agni born in the vedi at the 
centre of the womb of nature and the Laws of Divinity. 
And the earth grows bright and blest as heaven. 


पुष्टिर्न Coen क्चितिनं पृथ्वी गिरिर्न भुज्य क्षोदो न शंभु । 
अत्यो नाच्मन्त्सर्ग प्रतक्तः सिन्धुर्न क्षोदः क ई वराते ॥ ३॥ 
3; Pustirna ranva ksitirna prthvi girirna bhujma 


ksodo na Sambhu. Atyo najmantsargaprataktah 
sindhurna ksodah, ka im varate. 

Delightful as the glow of health, vast and happy 
dwelling as earth, generous as a cloud, sanctifying as 
waters, fast as a flying horse in rapid motion, deep and 
rolling as the sea, who can stop it, just at hand as it is? 


जामिः सिन्धूनां भ्रातेव स्वस्रामिभ्यान्न राजा वनान्यत्ति। 
यद्वातजूतो वना व्यस्थांदयिर्ह' दाति रोमा पृथिव्याः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Jamih sindhunam bhrateva svasramibhyanna raja 
vananyatti. Yad vatajuto vana vyasthada-gnirha 
dati roma prthivyah. 


It is a friend of the seas, dear as a brother of his 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 66 283 


sisters. It rules over the wealthy as over its attendants, 
and devours the forests. Driven by the winds, it abides 
in the waters, clouds and the sunbeams. And it is only 
Agni which matures and harvests the grasses and herbs 
of the earth. 


श्वसित्यप्सु हंसो न सीदन्क्रत्वा चेतिष्ठो fas षर्भत्‌। 
सोमो न वेधा ऋतप्र॑जातः पशुर्न शिश्वा विभुर्दूरेभाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Svasityapsu hamso na sidan kratva cetistho visa- 
musarbhut. Somo na vedha rtaprajatah pasurna 
sisva vibhurdurebhah. 

It breathes in the waters, vitalising them, playing 
with them like a swan. Most intelligent and wide-awake, 
it awakens the people at dawn with its light and yajnic 
action. Born of Divine Law and Truth of Nature, it is an 
inspirer and energiser like soma. Playful as a calf, it is 
omnipresent, shining far and wide. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 66 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


रयिन चित्रा सूरो न et प्राणो नित्यो न सूनुः । तक्वा 
न भूर्णिर्वना सिषक्ति पयो न धेनुः शुचिर्विभावा neu 


1. Rayirna citra suro na samdrgayurna prano nityo 
na sunuh. Takva na bhurnirvana sisakti payo na 
dhenuh sucirvibhava. 


Wondrous as wealth and beauty, illuminating 
as the sun, breath of energy as life itself, ever present 
and essentially constant as a son, restless as a falcon, 
abiding with the forests and sunbeams, a very mother 
cow, nourishing and life-giving as milk, it is pure and 


284 RGVEDA 
blazing, shining and revealing all. 


दाधार क्षेममोको न रण्वो यवो न पक्वो जेता SAAT 
ऋषिर्न स्तुभ्वा विक्षु werent वाजी न प्रीतो वयो 
दधाति॥ २॥ 


५९ Dadhara ksemamoko na ranvo yavo na pakvo jeta 
jananam. Rsirna stubhva viksu prasasto vaji na 
prito vayo dadhati. 


It is the treasure of peace and welfare. Soothing 
as ahome and food as barley, it is the winner of victories 
for humanity. Worthy of reverence as a seer, it is admired 
of people. It is worthy of admiration as a war-chariot 
and bears life, energy and long age for us. 


दुरोकशोचिः set नित्यो जायेव योनावरं विश्वस्मै । चित्रो 
यदश्रांट्‌ छवेतो न विक्षु रथो न रुक्मी त्वेषः समत्सु ॥ ३ ॥ 
3. Durokasocih kraturna nityo jayeva yonavaram 


visvasmai. Citro yadabhrat chveto na viksu 
ratho na rukmi tvesah samatsu. 


Lord of awful light for all places, eternal like 
the yajna of creation, beauty of the home like the wife, 
for all, wondrous of form and character that shines 
among people like the very sunlight, it is magnificent 
as a watrior’s chariot, blazing in battles with victory. 


tila सृष्टामं दधात्यस्तुर्न दिद्यु्त्वेषप्र॑तीका | यमो हं जातो 
यमो जनित्वं जारः कनीनां पतिर्जनीनाम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Seneva srstamam dadhatyasturna didyut tvesa- 
pratika. Yamo ha jato yamo janitvam jarah 
kaninam patirjaninam. 


Like an army sent up to advance in battle, it 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 67 285 


wields power and force. Like an electric missile of fire 
itis blazing and voracious, a symbol of light and fire. It 
is the guide, controller, and destiny of all that is born, 
and the guide, controller and destiny of all that is on 
way to life. It is the paramour of maidens and the 
protector of wives. 


तं dventen वयं daar न गावो नक्ष॑न्त इन्दम्‌। 
सिन्धुर्न क्षोदः प्र नीचीरैनोत्रवन्त गावः स्व Soe ॥ ५॥ 


a: Tam vascaratha vayam vasatyastam na gavo 
naksanta iddham. Sindhurna ksodah pra nicirai- 
nonnavanta gavah svardrsike. 


Just as cows return to their stall, just as rays of 
the sun withdraw to the sun, just as streams and rivers 
flow down to the sea, so may we all, moving as well as 
settled people, attain to you, Agni, light of the sun, and 
the Lord Almighty. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 67 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


वनेषु जायुर्मर्तेषु मित्रो duitt श्रुष्टिं राजेवाजुर्यम्‌ । 
क्षेमो न साधुः क्रतुर्न भद्रो भुव॑त्स्वा धीर्होता॑ हव्यवाट्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


ll; Vanesu jayurmartesu mitro vrnite Srustim rajeva- 
juryam. Ksemo na sadhuh kraturna bhadro 
bhuvat svadhirhota havyavat. 


Just as a ruler selects a young, unaging and 
enthusiastic worker, best of the desirable lot and 
friendliest among people, so does Agni select and bless 
a devotee for the divine mission of life’s yajna. May 
this Agni, Lord of yajna, Itself the giver and receiver, 


286 RGVEDA 


carrier of the fragrances across life and the world, 
immanent in forests and manifest in sunbeams, 
friendliest power among living beings, good like 
happiness incarnate, creative and blissful as yajna itself 
be our sustainer, protector and promoter in life and select 
us for the sacred mission of Divinity. 


हस्ते दधानो Tom विश्वान्यमे देवान्धाद्‌ गुहां निषीद॑न्‌। 
विदन्तीमत्र नरो धियंधा हृदा यत्तष्टान्मन्त्रोँं अशंसन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


De Haste dadhano nrmna visvanyame devan dhad 
guha nisidan. Vidantimatra naro dhiyamdha hrda 
yat tastan mantran asamsan. 


People of faith and dedication, possessed of 
sacred intelligence who chant and meditate on mantras, 
divining into the secrets of nature and divinity with their 
heart and soul, come to know and realise here itself in 
actuality the presence and attributes of Agni which is 
immanent in the depth of the soul, reveals Itself, holding 
the wealths of the world for the devotees, and establishes 
the dedicated generous brilliancies in knowledge, power 
and wealth of the world and protects and promotes them 
in life. 
अजो न क्षां दाधार पथिवीं तस्तम्भ द्यां मन्त्रेभिः सत्यैः। 
प्रिया पदानि पश्वो नि पाहि विश्चायुःरगरे गुहा गुहं गाः ॥ ३ ॥ 

a: Ajo na ksam dadhara prthivim tastambha dyam 
mantrebhih satyaih. Priya padani pasvo ni pahi 
visvayuragne guha guham gah. 

The eternal lord of existence, Agni, light and 


life of the universe, holds the earth as He holds the sky 
and sustains heaven in space with true mantras of Rtam 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 67 287 


(which are identical with His thoughts and laws of 
nature). Agni, lord and spirit of the universe, deepest in 
the depth of the soul as you are, protect the steps of the 
growth of the soul’s vision of divinity, guard them 
against the violence and vulgarity of brute force. 


य ई' चिकेत गुहा भवन्तमा यः ware धारामृतस्यं | 
वि ये चृतन्त्यृता सप॑न्त॒ आदिद्वसूनि प्र व॑वाचास्मै ॥ ठ i 


4. Yaim ciketa guha bhavantama yah sasada dhara 
mrtasya. Vi ye crtantyrta sapanta adidva-suni pra 
vavacasmal. 


One who knows Agni existent in the cave of 
the heart, takes the shower in the stream of Truth and 
life flowing from Divinity. Those who tie the knot with 
the presence, serve It and shine the path of realisation 
along the steps, to them Agni reveals the secrets of the 
wealths of life and light of the Spirit. 


fa यो वीरुत्सु रोध॑न्महित्वोत प्रजा उत प्रसूष्वन्तः | 
चित्तिरपां दमे विश्वायुः cata धीरा: dare चक्कुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


=f Vi yo virutsu rodhanmahitvota praja uta prasu- 
svantah. Cittirapam dame visvayuh sadmeva 
dhirah sammaya cakruh. 


Agni, that universal spirit and energy of life 
which manifests in form and measure in the shoots that 
come forth in the herbs and trees and in the child in the 
womb of the mother, that superconsciousness, the 
realised souls experience when they have collected their 
consciousness as if behind closed doors, when even the 
motion of their pranas has been stilled. 


(The energy of life which is the heat, vitality 


288 RGVEDA 


and glow of health in life forms, which is universally 
active, the scientists and yogis realise in a state of total 
concentration.) 


Mandala 1/Sukta 68 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


श्रीणन्ञुपं स्थादिवं भुरण्युः tava PUT | 
परि यदेषामेको विश्वेषां भुवं देवो देवानां महित्वा ॥ ९ ॥ 


1 Srinannupa sthad divam bhuranyuh sthatu- 
S§carathamaktun vyurnot. Pari yadesameko 
visvesam bhuvad devo devanam mahitva. 


The blazing, vibrating, ripening, perfecting 
power and energy of the Lord, Agni, that sustains and 
beautifies the world pervades and abides by the moving 
and non-moving forms of existence and covers as well 
as brightens and defines the day and night with His 
presence. He is the sole one lord and light of all the 
brilliancies of the universe by virtue of His own might. 


आदित्ते विश्वे क्रतुं जुषन्त शुष्काद्यदैव जीवो SPST: 1 
भज॑न्त विश्वे देवत्वं नाम॑ ऋतं सप॑न्तो अम्रतमेवैः ॥ २॥ 


Adit te visve, kratum jusanta Suskad yad deva, 
Jivo janisthah. Bhajanta visve devatvam nama 
rtam sapanto, amrtamevaih. 


Brilliant lord of existence, most generative 
support of life-force arising from dry sources of energy, 
all the brilliancies of the universe join your sacred act 
of creation. All of them worship your divinity in truth 
and faith. All of them with all their manners, customs, 
rituals, in short with every motion of their thought and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 68 289 


body, do homage to your laws of existence and your 
immortal presence. 


ऋतस्य प्रेषां ऋतस्य धीतिर्विंश्वायुर्विंश्वे अपांसि agp: | 
यस्तुभ्यं दाशाद्यो वा ते शिक्षात्तस्मै चिक्ित्वाच्रयिं 
द॑यस्व ॥ ३ ॥ 


3, Rtasya presa rtasya dhitirvisvayurvisve apamsi 
cakruh. Yastubhyam dasadyo va te Siksat tasmai 
cikitvan rayim dayasva. 


Agni, first impulse of creative intelligence, 
wielder of the laws of Truth and laws of evolution, life 
of the universe, all the forces of existence do your 
bidding and perform their action. Lord all percipient 
and omniscient, whosoever be intelligent and give away 
charity in homage to you or learn from your eternal Word 
and universal acts, bless him/her with the wealth of the 
world. 


होता निष॑त्तो मनोरपत्ये स fasatat पती veto । 
इच्छन्त रेतो मिथस्तनूषु सं जानत स्वैर्दश्चैरमराः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Hota nisatto manorapatye sa cinnvasam pati 
rayinam. Icchanta reto mithastanusu sam janata 
svairdaksairamurah. 


Lord of light, high-priest of the cosmic yajna of 
creation and generation, receiver of oblations and 
creator and begetter of blessings, immanently seated in 
humanity, Agni is the lord ruler and controller of these 
wealths of life, and its yajnic creations. Ye men and 
women of intelligence and generative science mutually 
desirous of creative energy and fertility together in your 
body system, know the science of generative yajna with 


290 RGVEDA 
your knowledge, education and expertise. 


पितुर्न पुत्राः sod जुषन्त श्रोषन्ये ates शासं TATE: | 
वि राय॑ ओर्णोहुरः पुरुक्षुः पिपेश नाकं स्त॒थिर्दमूंनाः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


5. Piturna putrah kratum jusanta srosan ye asya 
sasam turasah. Vi raya aurnod durah puruksuh 
pipesa nakam strbhirdamunah. 


If men of genius and action were to dedicate 
themselves to yajna and listen to the divine voice and 
obey the discipline and command of this divine Agni as 
children listen to the father and do his behest, then the 
omnificent Lord of wealth and omnipotence would bless 
them with showers of wealth and open the beautiful 
doors of heaven and happiness to them. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 69 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


शुक्रः शुशुक्वाँ उषो न जारः पप्रा समीची दिवो न ज्योतिः । 
परि प्रजांतः क्रत्वां बभूथ भुवो देवानां पिता पुत्रः SLU ९॥ 


i; Sukrah susukvan uso na jarah papra samici divo 
na jyotih. Pari Prajatah kratva babhutha bhuvo 
devanam pita putrah san. 


Bright and blazing, pure and purifying as the 
sun, lover of the dawn, filling both earth and heaven 
like the light of the sun, Agni, emerging and rising, 
shines over all with its light and power, being both 
generator and generated of the divinities of the earth. 


वेधा stant अभिर्विजानन्रू ert गोनां caren पितूनाम्‌ | 
जने न sre आहूर्यः सन्मध्ये निष॑त्तो रण्वो दुरोणे ॥ 2 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 69 291 


2. Vedha adrpto agnirvijanannidharna gonam sva- 
dma pitunam. Jane na Seva ahuryah san madhye 
nisatto ranvo durone. 


Lord of light and intelligence, free from pride 
and infatuation, knower of right and wrong, light and 
dark, generous as cow’s udders overflowing with milk, 
Agni ripens and sweetens the food of life. Like a 
benefactor of humanity, worthy of invocation and 
invitation, sanctified in the middle of the home, it adds 
to the delight of the family. 


UAT A Set Coat दुरोणे Arsh न प्रीतो विशो वि तांरीत्‌। 
विशो ace नृभिः सनीव्ठा अथिर्देवत्वा विश्वान्यश्याः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Be Putro na jato ranvo durone vaji na prito 1750 vi 
tarit. Viso yadahve nrbhih sanila agnirdevatva 
visvanyasyah. 

Rising like a darling son, delight of the home, 
beautiful and joyous as a horse, Agni takes people across 
the hurdles of life. To whatever creative and productive 
yajnic programmes people invite and invoke Agni, It 
joins the people with Its light and divinity of power and 
blesses them with all the wealths of life. 


नकिष्ट एता व्रता मिनन्ति नृभ्यो यदेभ्यः श्रुष्टिं चकर्थ। 
तत्तु ते दंसो यद्हन्त्समानैर्नृभिर्यद्युक्तो विवे रपांसि ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Nakista eta vrata minanti nrbhyo yadebhyah sru- 
stim cakartha. Tat tu te damso yadahantsamanair- 
nrbhiryad yukto vive rapamsi. 


Agni, none of these people violate your laws 
and discipline since you do good to them, for them. 
Agni, Lord of light and life, it is your grand act of 


292 RGVEDA 


generosity that you, joining with people of equality, 
repair their infirmities and ward off their sins without 
doing violence to anyone or anything. 


उषो न जारो विभावोस्रः संज्ञांतरूपश्चिकैतदस्यै | 
त्मना वह॑न्तो दुरो व्युंण्वन्नवन्त विश्वे स्व sot ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Uso na jaro vibhavosrah samjnatarupascike- 
tadasmai. Tmana vahanto duro vyrnvan navanta 
visve svardrsike. 


Agni, bright and blazing like the sun, lover of 
the dawn, is the dispeller of darkness like the first ray 
of morning light and reveals the beauteous forms of 
things, opening the doors of yajna, and destroys 
suffering. Carrying gifts of homage for it with their heart 
and soul in every noble act of yajna, let all the people 
know It and bow to it. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 70 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


वनेमं पूर्वीरर्यो म॑नीषा अभिः सुशोको विश्वान्यश्याः | 
आ दैव्यानि व्रता चिकित्वाना मानुषस्य जनस्य जन्म॑ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vanema purviraryo manisa agnih susoko visvan- 
yasyah. A daivyani vrata cikitvana manusasya 
Janasya janma. 


We, ancient people, with our heart and soul 
honour and worship Agni, Lord of universal wealth and 
power, brilliant and blazing Divinity, who knows, 
pervades, reaches and controls all the divine laws and 
rules of the world and the origin, birth and history of all 
the people and nations. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 70 293 


गर्भो यो अपां गर्भो वनानां गर्भश्च स्थातां aS arena । 
अद्रौ चिदस्मा अन्तर्ट्ध्रोणे विशां न विश्वो अमृतः 
स्वाधीः ॥ २॥ 


2. Garbho yo apam garbho vananam Garbhasca 
sthatam garbhascaratham. Adrau cidasma 
antardurone visam na visvo amrtah svadhih. 


Agni abides at the heart of the waters and the 
pranic energies of the universe. It is at the heart of 
forests, sunbeams and all the lovely and beloved 
beauties of the world. It is at the heart of all that is still 
and all that moves. It abides in the cloud and in the 
mountain and it is the centre of the homes of people. 
Universal, immortal, free and absolute, it is the very 
life and ruler of everything in nature as it is the life and 
ruler of all the people for their sake only. 


सहि qoret amit स्यीणां दाशद्यो stem अरं am: | 
एता चिकित्वो भूमा नि पाहि देवानां wea मतीश्च 
विद्धान्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


2; Sa hi ksapavan agni rayinam dasadyo asma aram 
suktaih. Eta cikitvo bhuma ni pahi devanam janma 
martansca vidvan. 


That Agni is the lord of night and day. It is the 
giver of wealth and power in ample measure for anyone 
who adores it with hymns of divinity. It is aware of all, 
knows the manifestations and operations of all the 
divinities of nature, and it knows all that are mortal. 
Lord of knowledge, wealth and power, protect and 
promote all these children of nature and the earth. 


वर्धान्यं पूर्वीः erat विरूपाः स्थातुश्च रथ॑मृतप्र॑वीतम्‌ । 
अराधि होता tan eta: करण्वस्विश्वान्यपांसि सत्या tt ४ ॥ 


294 RGVEDA 


4. Vardhanyam purvih ksapo virupah sthatusca 
rathamrtapravitam. Arddhi hota svarnisattah 
krnvan visvanyapamsi satya. 


The nights and days of various hues and forms 
since time immemorial serve this Agni born of constant 
Prakrti inspired and energised by the Divine Laws of 
Rtam, which is the delight and impeller of all that is 
still and on the move. Let the man of the yajna of science 
and research study and advance the knowledge of this 
Agni abiding in light and the sun, doing all the real 
actions and operations of the natural world. 


गोषु प्रशस्तिं वनेषु धिषे भर॑न्त॒ विश्वं बकं स्व॑र्णः | 
वित्वा नर॑: पुरुत्रा स॑पर्यप्पितुर्न जिव्रेर्वि वेदों भरन्त ॥ ५ ॥ 


Gosu prasastim vanesu dhise bharanta 1751८ 
balim svarnah. Vi tva narah purutra saparyan 
piturna jivrervi vedo bharanta. 


Agni, lord sustainer of life and the world, you 
in-vest the cows and forests and the earth and sunbeams 
with excellence of quality, virtue and wealth. May all 
powers of nature and humanity bear and bring joy for 
us. May all people doing homage to you in various ways 
receive from you and bear and advance knowledge like 
children receiving patrimony from the parents. 


साधुर्न गृध्नुरस्तेव श्गूरो यातेव भीमस्त्वेषः समत्सु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sadhurna grdhnurasteva suro yateva bhimastve- 
sah samatsu. 


Immensely loving, generous and venerable as a 
saint, heroic like a brave archer, terrible like the 
dispenser of punishment, and blazing and brilliant in 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 71 295 


the battles of life: such is Agni, light, life and might of 
the world. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 71 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 


उप प्र जिन्वन्नु्॒तीरुशन्तं पतिं न नित्यं जन॑यः सनींव्ठाः। 
स्वसार : श्यावी मरु षीमजुप्रज्चित्रमुच्छन्तींमुषसं न 
Tra: ९॥ 


I. Upa pra jinvannuSsatirusantam patim na nityam 
jJanayah sanilah. Svasarah $yavimarusimaju-sran 
citramucchantimusasam na gavah. 


Like married women in a state of love and desire 
meeting the loving husband for the joy of living, like 
cows of the same stall going up and out to welcome 
and feel the sallow, ruddy, wonderful and brilliant dawn, 
harbinger of light, for a fresh lease of life, let all the 
people together in love and faith always worship the 
wondrous, loving protector, Agni, eternal father, for a 
fresh lease of life and the joy of living. 


aie faa qaer पितरों न उक्थेरद्रि' रुजन्नद्धिरसो रवेण | 
चक्रुर्दिवो वुं हतो गातुमस्मे अहः स्व॑विंविदुः केतुमुस्राः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Vilu cid drlha pitaro na ukthairadrim rujanna- 
ngiraso ravena. Cakrurdivo brhato gatumasme 
ahah svarvividuh ketumusrah. 


Our forefathers sustain our strength and 
constancy. The Angirasas, sustainers of life, the winds, 
and our fathers with Veda-mantras, break the cloud for 
us with the voice of thunder. They create the path to the 
vast heaven and the space and show us the way to rise 


296 RGVEDA 


to the sun. They know the light of the dawn, the 
brilliance of the day and the bliss of heaven. They give 
us the light, the day and the bliss and vest us with an 
identity of splendour, a banner of recognition and a ruler 
and the law. 


दधंत्रृतं धनयंन्रस्य धीतिमादिदर्यो दिधिष्वो विभृत्राः | 
अतुष्यन्तीर पसो! यन्त्यच्छा देवाञ्जन्म प्रय॑सा aef- 
य॑न्तीः॥ ३॥ 


Dadhannrtam dhanayannasya dhitimadidaryo 
didhisvo vibhrtrah. Atrsyantirapaso yantyaccha 
devanjanma prayasa vardhayantih. 


Holding on to Truth and Dharma, wielding the 
knowledge and power of Agni, lord of light, then 
possessing wealth as the Vaishyas, giving nourishment 
and help without thirst or selfishness, doing good acts 
with generosity of giving food and social service and 
promoting nobilities, specially children, the people and 
specially Brahmacharinis move on in life with grace. 


मथीद्यदीं विभृतो मातरिश्वा गृहेगुंहे श्येतो जेन्यो भूत्‌ । 
आदीं राज्ञे न सहीयसे सचा सन्ना दूत्यं भृग॑वाणो 
विवाय॥ ४॥ 


4. Mathid yadim vibhrto matarisva grhegrhe Syeto 
jJenyo bhut. Adim rajne na sahiyase saca sanna 
dutyam bhrgavano vivaya. 


If the wind, bearing the wealth of agni, and 
others were to churn out and produce fire and electricity 
which then emerges bright and victorious in every home, 
then the scholars of science would refine and develop 
it for the purpose of communication and transport and 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 71 297 


use it as ambassador for the grand ruling power and 
order of the society between one people and another in 
friendship. 


महे यत्पित्र ई रसं fea करव॑ त्सरत्यृशटान्य॑श्चिक्छित्वान्‌ । 
सृजदस्ता धृषता दिद्युम॑स्मै स्वायां देवो दुहितरि त्विषिं 
धात्‌॥ ५॥ 


Mahe yat pitra im rasam dive karavatsarat 
prsanyascikitvan. Srjadasta dhrsata didyumasmai 
svayam devo duhitari tvisim dhat. 


It is the sun, self-refulgent giver of comfort and 
bliss, reaching all with its rays, knowing all and revealing 
all, who creates the nectar of life for the great fatherly lord 
of heaven, Agni, who radiates light like a mighty hero of 
the bow shooting arrows for the purpose of humanity, 
and who vests the light and splendour of the morning in 
its daughter, the dawn, dispelling the darkness. Who can 
get away from it or steal the light? None. 


स्व आ यस्तुभ्यं दम आ विभाति नमो! वा दाशादुशतो अनु 
द्यून्‌। auf अग्ने वयो अस्य द्विबर्हा यासद्राया सरथं यं 
जुनासि ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Sva a yastubhyam dama ठ vibhati namo va 
dasadusato anu dyun. Vardho agne vayo asya dvi- 
barha yasad raya saratham yam junasi. 


Agni, lord of light and life, who ever lights the 
fire in the home in the vedi, whoever in fervent love 
and faith offers food and reverence in yajna every day, 
you, giver of twofold advancement in knowledge and 
valour, grant him full age of honour and glory. Who 
ever you inspire and send up to battle of the chariot, 


298 RGVEDA 
you bless with the all-round wealth of life. 


अभिं विश्वां अभि पृक्ष॑ः सचन्ते समुद्रं न Sad: GA TET: | 
न जामिभिर्वि चिकिते वयो! नो विदा देवेषु प्रम॑तिं 
चिकित्वान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


0 Agnim visva abhi prksah sacante samudram na 
sravatah sapta yahvith. Na jamibhirvi cikite vayo 
no vida devesu pramatim cikitvan. 


All foods, all that move and ripen go to Agni 
like the seven restless streams heading to the sea. The 
web of our life is incomprehensible to those on the move. 
May the Lord of Omniscience direct our will and 
intelligence and establish us among the wise and the 
brilliant sages of vision. 


आ यदिषे नृपतिं तेज आनट्‌ छचि रेतो निषिक्तं द्यौर्‌ भीक । 
अभिः शर्ध॑भनवद्यं युवानं स्वाध्यं जनयत्सूदयंच्य ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. A yadise nrpatim teja काव chuci reto nisiktam 
dyaurabhike. Agnih sardhamanavadyam yuva- 
nam svadhyam janayat sudayacca. 


When pure light and lustre, living and sanctified, 
come to the ruling soul for the fulfilment of desire and 
perfection, then Agni creates the strong, praiseworthy, 
healthy and self-dependent youth, perfects and guides 
him in the battle of life. 


मनो न योऽध्व॑नः Gel एत्येकः स॒त्रा सूरो वस्व॑ ईशो । 
राजाना ित्रावरुणा सुपाणी गोषु aaa रक्षमाणा ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Mano na yo’dhvanah sadya etyekah satra suro 
vasva ise. Rajana mitravaruna supani gosu 
priyamamrtam raksamana. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 72 299 


The sun that instantly goes on its course in orbit 
all by itself as at the speed of mind and rules over all 
the Vasus, and Mitra and Varuna, brilliant powers of 
universal love and justice of the Divine with hands of 
generosity, which protect and promote the cherished 
immortal values of life on earths as milk in the cows: 
all this is the gift of Agni. 
मानोअगरे सख्या पित्र्याणि प्र मर्षिष्ठा अभि विदुष्कविः 
सन्‌। नभो न रूपं ज॑रिमा पिंनाति पुरा तस्यां अभि 
स्तरधींहि॥ ९०॥ 

10. Mano agne sakhya pitryani pra marsistha abhi 
viduskavih san. Nabho na rupam jarima minati 
pura tasya abhisasteradhthi. 


Agni, lord giver and protector of life, let not 
our ancestral values of love and friendship be destroyed, 
all-knowing and visionary creator as you are. Old age 
destroys the health and beauty of life as the cloud covers 
and hides the sun and sky. Lord protector and preserver, 
come before the onslaught of that, stop that and help us 
preserve ourselves. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 72 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 

नि काव्यां वेधसः शश्व॑तस्कर्हस्ते दधानो नयी पुरूणि । 
अथिर्थुःवद्रयिपतीं रयीणां सत्रा चक्राणो अमृतानि 
विश्वा॥ ९॥ 

il. Ni kavya vedhasah sasvataskarhaste dadhano 
narya puruni. Agnirbhuvad rayipati rayinam 
satra cakrano amrtani visva. 


300 RGVEDA 


Agni, the man of faith and devotee of Agni, lord 
of life, light and wealth of existence, holding in hand 
the many hymns of the poetry of the eternal poet of 
omniscience, all-time beneficial to humanity, observing 
the rules of Dharma, and doing all the essential acts of 
immortal value becomes the highest master of the 
wealths of life and existence. 


अस्मे वत्सं परि षन्तं न विन्दन्निच्छन्तो विश्वे अमरता stat: । 
श्रमयुवः पदव्यो धियंधास्तस्थुः पदे परमे चार्वयेः॥ २॥ 


2. Asme vatsam pari santam na vindannicchanto 
visve amrta amurah. Sramayuvah padavyo 
dhiyamdhastasthuh pade parame carvagneh. 


People ordinarily do not attain to our darling 
Agni, immanent and transcendent lord of existence. But 
all the immortal souls, men of divine intelligence 
dedicated to divine love, relentlessly following the paths 
of Divinity, holding on to piety of faith in reason and 
passion both, reach and abide in the beatific state of 
supreme bliss in Agni’s direct presence. 


fret aa शरदस्त्वामिच्छुचिं घृतेन शुच॑यः aaa | 
नामानि चिदधिरे यज्ञियान्यसुंदयन्त तन्व : GMT: ॥ ३ ॥ 


1 17570 yadagne Saradastvamicchucim ghrtena 
Sucayah saparyan. Namani cid dadhire yajniya- 
nyasudayanta tanvah sujatah. 


Agni, lord of light and cosmic yajna of 
evolution, those people of pure and dedicated soul who 
serve you, lord of purity, for three years with oblations 
of ghrta in yajna would justify their name with fame 
and yajnic karma and also perfect their physical 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 72 301 


existence in perfect bodies reborn in happy and 
enlightened homes. 


आ रोद॑सी बृहती वेविदानाः प्र रुद्रियां BRR यज्ञियांसः। 
विदन्मर्तो" नेमधिता चिक्कित्वानयिं पदे परमे त॑स्थि- 
वांस॑म्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. A rodasi brhati vevidanah pra rudriya jabhritre 
yajniyasah. Vidanmarto nemadhita cikitvana- 
gnim pade parame tasthivamsam. 


Dedicated yajnic souls, lovers of Rudra pranas 
and devotees of Rudra, lord of justice and dispensation 
of karma, know, reach and replenish the vast heaven 
and earth with the fragrance of yajna. Such a man in 
mortal body finds the objects of his desire and, rising to 
divine knowledge, attains to the beatific vision of Agni 
abiding in the highest state of man’s spiritual experience. 


संजानाना sd dreafsa पत्नीवन्तो नमस्यं ATE 
रिरिक्वां संस्तन्व॑ः कृण्वत स्वाः सखा सख्युर्निमिषि 
रश्चमाणाः॥ ५॥ 


oF Sanjanana upa sidannibhijnu patnivanto nama- 
syam namasyan. Ririkvamsastanvah krnvata svah 
sakha sakhyurnimisi raksamanah. 


Knowing well the science of yajna, let men of 
yajna with their wives sit on their knees doing homage 
to the adorable Agni and to others, parents, teachers 
and seniors. Men of purity, they would be purifying their 
own bodies, and they would abide as friends protecting 
each other in yajnic action and protected by yajna every 
moment of their life. 


302 RGVEDA 


ff: सप्त यद्‌ गुह्यानि त्वे इत्पदाविंदन्निर्हिंता यज्ञियासः 1 
तेभी रक्षन्ते अमृतं सजोषाः परूञ्शच॑ स्थातृञ्ख्चरथं च 
पाहि॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Trih sapta yad guhyani (17८ it padavidannihita 
yajniyasah. Tebhi raksante amrtam sajosah 
pasunsca sthatrnscaratham ca pahi. 


Agni, lord of life and positive living, those 
devotees established in you and dedicated to yajna, who 
know and achieve the thrice-seven deep and secret 
stages of yajna and abide therein, protect and preserve 
thereby the immortal wealth of life. Lovers of yajna and 
the yajnics, protect and promote all movable and 
immovable wealth of life, humans and animals all. 


(According to Swami Dayanand the thrice-seven 
are: reading, reflection and meditation across the four 
Vedas, knowledge, practice and industry through 
Dharma, universal values of life, Artha, economic and 
social achievement, Kama, love and emotional 
fulfilment, and Moksha, ultimate freedom. Another way 
to explain it is to refer to the threefold meaning of yajna: 
reverence and worship, socialisation and social service, 
and charity including protection and replenishment of 
the environment, and then apply those to the seven 
stages of existence: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Swah, Maha, Janah, 
Tapah and Satyam. This mystique of yajna is described 
in detail in the Brahmana works on the Veda and briefly 
in the Upanishads, Katha and Chhandogya specially.) 


fast अंगे वयुनानि क्षितीनां व्यानुषक्छुरुधो जीवसे धाः | 
अन्तर्वि अध्व॑नो देवयानानतन्द्रो दूतो अभवो हविर्वाट्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 72 303 


7. Vidvan agne vayunani ksitinam vyanusak chu- 
rudho jivase dhah. Antarvidvan adhvano devaya- 
nanatandro dito abhavo havirvat. 


Agni, lord omniscient of the sciences and ways 
of the world, you continuously provide nourishing 
foods, healing herbs and means of comfort for the life 
and sustenance of the children of the earth. You know 
the divine paths of spiritual evolution between earth 
and heaven. Pray, be the harbinger of holy fragrance of 
Divinity like a prophet for us without relent or delay. 


waren दिव आ सप्त यह्वी रायो दुरो व्युंतज्ञा अंजानन्‌। 
विदद्‌ गव्यं सरमां goeye येना नु कं मानुषी भोज॑ते 
faze ॥ 


8. Svadhyo diva ठ saptayahvi rayo duro vyrtajna 
ajanan. Vidad gavyam sarama drlhamurvam 
yena nu kam manust bhojate vit. 


Men of noble thought and action, who know 
the seven streams of light flowing from heaven, who 
know the paths of Divine truth and spiritual evolution, 
who know the celestial doors of existential wealth and 
divine bliss, realise and bring to the earth all good for 
the cows, for the mind and senses, message of 
knowledge, strength and constancy, and immunity 
against suffering, virtues by which the human 
community enjoys peace, health and comfort in life. 


आ ये विश्वां cage तस्थुः कृण्वानासो! अमृतत्वाय 
गातुम्‌ । मह्ना महद्धि: पृथिवी वि त॑स्थे माता पुत्रैरदिंतिर्धाय॑से 
वेः॥ ९॥ 


304 RGVEDA 


9. A ye visva svapatyani tasthuh krnvanaso amrta- 
tvaya gatum. Mahna mahadbhih prthivi vi tasthe 
mata putrairaditirdhayase veh. 


Just as all parents abide by their children, men 
of noble action abide by the way of knowledge and 
virtue for the attainment of the nectar of salvation, the 
earth abides by her children with her great virtues and 
universal generosity, the mother abides by her children, 
the vast heaven abides for the support of her creations, 
and the sun light abides by the birds, so do I abide with 
life for the sake of good actions in the yajna of life. 


अधि fora नि द॑शुश्चारु मस्मिन्दिवो यदक्षी अमृता 
अकुण्वन्‌। अधं क्षरन्ति सिन्ध॑वो न सृष्टाः प्र नीचीरग्ने 
अरुषीरजा-नन्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Adhi Ssriyam ni dadhuscarumasmin divo yadakst 
amrta akrnvan. Adha ksaranti sindhavo na srstah 
pra niciragne arusirajanan. 


The Immortals, realised souls with the vision 
of Divinity, create the beauty of knowledge, honour and 
happiness here on earth itself as if the light of heaven is 
blessing the world with its benign eyes through the 
divinity of Agni. Agni, like streams released from the 
waters of space flowing on the earth and blessing it with 
joy, the rays of light and flames of fire: all constantly 
revitalise humanity like the light of the dawn 
resurrecting life and nature after the cover of darkness. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 73 
Agni Devata, Parashara Shaktya Rshi 
रयिर्न यः पितृवित्तो daten: सुप्रणीतिश्चिकितुषो न शासुः | 
स्योनशीरतिथिर्न प्रीणानो होतेव सदां विधतो वि तांरीत्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 73 305 


im Rayirna yah pitrvitto vayodhah supranitisci- 
kituso na sasuh. Syonasiratithirn aprinano hoteva 
sadma vidhato vi tarit. 


Agni is young and fresh, a philanthropist like a 
noble heir to the knowledge, power and wealth of 
ancestors, a controller and disciplinarian with policy 
like the noble and benevolent policy and orders of the 
wise, pleasing and blissful like a wise and learned guest 
enjoying liberal hospitality, and one who helps you cross 
over the seas of life like a priest conducting the yajna in 
the house of the yajamana. 


देवो न यः सविता सत्यमन्मा ्रत्वां निपातिं वृजनानि 
विश्वा। । पुरुप्रशस्तो अमतिर्न सत्य आत्मेव शेवो दिधिषाय्यो 
भूत्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2: Devo na yah savita satyamanma kratva nipati 
vrjanani visva. Puruprasasto amatirna satya 
atmeva sevo didhisayyo bhut. 


Protector and promoter of truth like the bright 
sun, he saves from sin and evil and defends and 
augments all the strength and powers of humanity. 
Highly praised and revered like light and beauty, he 
knows the essences of things and traverses the right 
paths of life. He is kind and helpful like the very soul of 
the community, and like the conscience of the people 
he wields, supports and commands the nation in every 
respect. Such is the ruler. 


देवो न यः पूंथिवीं विश्वधांया उपक्षेति हितमित्रो न ust | 
पुर सद॑: शर्मसदो न वीरा अनवद्या पतिजुष्टेव नारीं ॥ ३ ॥ 


306 RGVEDA 


छ Devo na yah prthivim visvadhaya upakseti hita- 
mitro na raja. Purah sadah sarmasado na vira 
anavadya patijusteva nari. 


Holding the world like the brilliant sun, ruling 
over the heart like a sincere friend, he closely abides by 
the earth. The people of the state live together in unison 
like young and brave children of the house living 
together in a blessed home. The women are pure and 
worthy of praise like wives dedicated to the husband. 
Such is the leader. 


dat an आ नित्यमिब्दमग्रे सच॑न्त श्ितिषुं gare | 
अधिं द्युम्नं नि द॑धुरभूर्यस्मिनभवां विश्वायुर्धरुणो रयी- 
णाम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Tam tva naro dama a nityamiddhamagne sacanta 
ksitisu dhruvasu. Adhi dyumnam ni dadhur- 
bhuryasmin bhava visvayurdharuno rayinam. 


Agni, such as you are, people serve you, lighting 
you every day in the home in the land of peace and 
stability and winning ample knowledge and power, 
wealth and honour. Lord of universal energy, life of the 
world, be the treasure home and giver of the wealths of 
existence for all in this life in this world. 


वि gett अग्ने मघवानो अश्युर्वि सूरयो दद॑तो विश्वमायुः | 
सनेम वाजं समिथेष्वर्यो भागं देवेषु श्रव॑से दधानाः ॥ ५॥ 


2: Vi prkso agne maghavano aSyurvi surayo dadato 
visvamayuh. Sanema vajam samithe-svaryo 
bhagam devesu sravase dadhanah. 


Agni, lord of light and life, may the men of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 73 307 


wealth and power be blest with abundance of food and 
energy. May the brilliant men of knowledge, generous 
teachers, be blest with long and full age and good health. 
May the people engaged in economic endeavour win 
science and success in their battles of the people, playing 
their part among the brilliancies of the nation for the 
sake of honour and fame. 


ऋतस्य हि धेनवो वावशानाः स्मदूध्नीः पीपय॑न्त द्युभ॑क्ताः | 
परावतं: सुमतिं भिक्ष॑माणा वि सिन्ध॑वः समयां सस्तु- 
रद्धिम्‌॥ ६॥ 


6. Rtasya hi dhenavo vavasanah smadudhnih 
pipayanta dyubhaktah. Paravatah sumatim 
bhiksamana vi sindhavah samaya sasruradrim. 


Cows yearning for their calves and overflowing 
with milk in the udders drink of Agni’s law of nature 
and follow it in love. Rays of light, sharing the splendour 
of the sun from afar bring favours to the earth by the 
law of Agni. Rivers flow from the vicinity of the 
mountains to the far off seas by the law of Agni. 
Sunbeams break the cloud by the law of Agni. (So 
should mankind follow nature’s law of generous Agni 
in yajna and shower love and favour on all life and the 
environment.) 


त्वे sit सुमतिं भिक्षमाणा दिवि श्रवो दधिरे यज्ञियासः | 
नक्ता च चक्रुरुषसा विरूपे कृष्णं च वर्णमरुणं च सं 
धुं: ॥ ७॥ ति 

7. Tve agne sumatim bhiksamana divi Sravo dadhire 
yajniyasah. Nakta ca cakrurusasa virupe krsnam 
ca varnam arunam ca sam dhuh. 


308 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of cosmic yajna, praying for will and 
intelligence and sharing your immanence of power and 
splendour, the high-priests of nature sent up their 
oblations into the vedi of heaven and created the night 
and the dawn, both different in form as flame and smoke. 
They filled the dark into the night and the blazing red 
into the dawn. 


Agni, lord of cosmic yajna, praying for pious 
will and intelligence, the high-priests of human yajna 
sent up the fragrance of their oblations into heaven and 
realised the mystery of night and dawn, both different 
in form like flames and smoke arising from the vedi. 
They associated the dark with the night and the blazing 
red with the dawn. 


(Note: To understand this mantra further, 
reference may be made to Rgveda 10, 90, Yajurveda 31 
and Atharva-veda 19, 6, and 10, 8, 23.) 


aaa मर्तान्त्सुषुदो अग्ने ते स्याम मघवानो वयं च॑ । छायेव 
विश्वं भुव॑नं सिसक्ष्यापप्रिवाप्रोद॑सी अन्तरिक्षम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yan raye martantsusudo agne te syama magha- 
vano vayam ca. Chayeva visvam bhuvanam sisa- 
ksya paprivan rodasi antariksam. 


Agni, the mortals whom you inspire and guide 
for the achievement of wealth, may they all and we all 
be blest with wealth and honour and the favours of 
Divinity. Lord omnipresent, pervading the earth, the 
skies and the heavens, the entire universe abides with 
you inseparably since you are one with it as body is 
with the shadow and you shelter them all. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 74 309 


अर्वबद्धिरगरे अर्वतो न॒भिरनृन्वीरैर्वीरान्व॑नुयामा त्वोतांः। 
ईशानासः पितृवित्तस्य रायो वि सूरयः शतहिमा नो 
अश्युः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Arvadbhiragne arvato nrbhirnrn virairviran 
vanuyama tvotah. Isanasah pitrvittasya rayo 
vi surayah satahima no asyuh. 


Agni, lord of light and wealth of life, we pray, 
under your shelter and protection, let us continuously 
have horses with horses, brave men with men, and heroic 
children with children. Inheritors of the wealth and 
knowledge of our ancestors, let us be good managers 
of our heritage and move ahead. And may men of heroic 
vision and wisdom give us protective guidance for 
hundreds of years. 


एता ते अग्र उचथानि वेधो जुष्टानि सन्तु मन॑से हृदे च॑ । 
शकेम॑ रायः सुधुरो यमं तेऽ धि श्रवों देवभक्तं दधानाः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Eta te agna ucathani vedho justani santu manase 
hrde ca. Sakema rayah sudhuro yamam te’dhi 
sravo devabhaktam dadhanah. 

Agni, lord of light and life, omniscient giver of 
knowledge and vision, may these holy words of divinity 
be songs of faith and love for our mind and soul. May 
we, holding holy foods and blest by words of divine 
souls, be steady on our path of life and be able to conduct 
the management of life’s wealth in proper yajnic manner. 

Mandala 1/Sukta 74 


Agni Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 
उपप्रयन्तों अध्वरं मन्त्रं बोचेमाग्रयें। 
आरे अस्मे च॑ श॒ण्वते।॥ ९॥ 


310 RGVEDA 


1. Upaprayanto adhvaram mantram vocemag-naye. 
Are asme ca Srnvate. 


Moving close to the vedi of the yajna of love 
and non-violence, let us chant holy words of thought 
and devotion in praise of Agni, lord of light and yajna 
who listens to us from far as well as from near. 


यः स्नीहितीषु get: संजग्मानासु कृष्टिषु | 
अरक्चदाशुषे गय॑म्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

2 Yah snthitisu purvyah sanjagmanasu krstisu. 
Araksad dasuse gayam. 

Agni is the eternal lord of yajna who, in 
gatherings of people meeting for the purpose of 
fellowship and yajna of love, protects and promotes the 
wealth of the generous yajamana. 

उत dard जन्तव उदयिर्वृ्रहाज॑नि । धनंजयो रणेरणे ॥ 3 ॥ 
3 Uta bruvantu jantava udagnirvrtrahajani. 
Dhananjayo ranerane. 


And let the people praise and celebrate Agni 
who dispels the clouds of darkness, creates and protects 
the wealth of the charitable yajamana, and gives us 
victory in the battles for wealth one after another. 


यस्य॑ दूतो असि क्षये ae gent वीतये | 
दस्मत्कृणोष्य॑ध्वरम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yasya duto asi ksaye vesi havyani vitaye. 
Dasmat krnosyadhvaram. 


Agni, you are the harbinger of light. Wherever 
you go, you carry holy sacrificial materials into the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 74 311 


house for the joy of the family and conduct and 
accomplish blissful yajna which dispels want and 
suffering from the home. 


तमित्सुह व्यम॑ङ्धिरः सुदेवं स॑हसो यहो । 
जनां आहुः सुबर्हिष॑म्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


१ Tamit suhavyamangirah sudevam sahaso yaho. 
Jana ahuh subarhisam. 


Agni, Angira, breath of life for the world arising 
in yajna as the child of omnipotence, you are the same 
whom people call the lord of brilliance, master of 
science, waters and of the skies, worthy of being invoked 
in yajna for the gifts of wonderful wealths. 


आ च वहासि at इह देवां उप प्रशस्तये । 
हव्या सुश्चन्द्र वीतये ।॥। ६ ॥ 

6. A ca vahasi tam iha devan upa prasastaye. 
Havya suSscandra vitaye. 
Agni, lord of light, beauty and joy, you are the 
power who bring in here close to us the brilliant and 
generous divinities worthy of invocation for their 
celebration and harbingers of holy gifts for the joy of 
the yajamana. 
न योरुपब्दिरश्व्यः श्रृण्वे रथ॑स्य ears । 
यदग्रे यासि दूत्यम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

ve Na yorupabdirasvyah srnnve rathasya kaccana. 
Yadagne yasi dutyam. 


Agni, lord of light, power and yajnic communi- 
cation, when you move on your mission then the 


312 RGVEDA 


tempestuous roar of your superfast chariot is not even 
heard. 

त्वोतो aregats भि पूर्वस्मादपरः 1 

प्र aval अंगे अस्थात्‌॥ ८ ॥ 
8. 11010 vajyahrayo’bhi purvasmadaparah. 

Pra dasvan agne asthdt. 

Lord of light and power, Agni, protected by you 
and blest with your speed, the generous and creative 
yajamana of scientific adventure, superfast, free and 
bold, shoots from one place and reaches the other. 

उत द्युमत्सुवीर्य' बृहदंगरे विवाससि । 
देवेभ्यो! देव दाशुषे ॥। ९ ॥ 


2 Uta dyumat suviryam brhadagne vivasasi. 
Devebhyo deva dasuse. 


Agni, lord of light, wealth and generosity, you 
are ever keen to shower upon the charitable yajamana 
and eminent scholars of scientific brilliance abundant 
gifts of valour, honour and universal excellence. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 75 
Agni Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 
weed सप्रथ॑स्तमं वचो देवप्स॑रस्तमम्‌। 
हव्या Walt आसनि ॥ ९॥ 


ie Jusasva saprathastamam vaco devapsarastamam. 
Havya juhvana asani. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and speech, since 
you accept sacred words and sacrificial foods into your 
vedi-like holy mouth, be kind to receive and enjoy the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 75 313 


most liberal and extensive words and most divinely 
inspired prayerful exhortations of ours and be pleased 
to bless us. 

अथा ते अद्धिरस्तमाग वेधस्तम प्रियम्‌ । 

वोचेम ब्रह्मं सानसि ॥ २॥ 


2 Atha te angirastamagne vedhastama priyam. 
Vocema brahma sanasi. 


Agni, lord most knowledgeable, dearest breath 
of enlightenment, bless us, and then we would speak 
the eternal victorious words of divinity dear to you. 


कस्ते जामिर्जनानामग्ने को दाश्वध्वरः | 
को ह कस्मिन्नसि fara: 13 01 


3 Kaste jamirjananamagne ko dasvadhvarah. 
Ko ha kasminnasi Sritah. 


Agni, who among people is your brother that 
knows well? Who is the giver? Who is the yajaka? Who 
are you? Wherein do you abide. 
त्वं जापिर्जनांनामगं पित्रो असि fire: 1 
सरा सखिभ्य ईड्यं: ॥ 2 ॥ 

4. Tvam jamirjananamagne mitro asi priyah. 
Sakha sakhibhya tdyah. 


Agni, you are the brother and saviour of the 
people. You are the friend. You are so dear and 
affectionate a source of fulfilment. You are the friend 
of friends, adorable for your companions. 


यजां नो मित्रावरुणा यजां देवाँ ऋ तं बृहत्‌। 
अग्ने afar स्वं द्म॑म्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


314 RGVEDA 


5. Yaja no mitravaruna yaja devan rtam brhat. 
Agne yaksi svam damam. 


Agni, do yajna for Mitra and Varuna, pranic 
energy of prana and apana. Do yajna for the divine 
energies of nature. Do yajna for Rtam, promotion of 
Eternal Knowledge of divine Law. Do yajna for the sake 
of your own home and for self-control and self-culture. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 76 
Agni Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


कात उपेतिर्मन॑सो वरांय भुवदग्ने शन्त॑मा का म॑नीषा। 
को वां aa: परि cat त आप केन॑ वा ते मन॑सा दाशेम ॥ ९॥ 


lL, Ka ta upetirmanaso varaya bhuvadagne Santama 
ka manisa. Ko va yajnaih pari daksam ta apa kena 
va te manasa dasema. 


Agni, lord of peace and enlightenment, what is 
your way to the improvement of mind? What is the most 
tranquillising exercise of the mind? Who attains to 
laudable success in the realisation of Divinity by yajnas 
of study, socialisation and self sacrifice? By what state 
of mind shall we offer to serve and honour you? 


एह्य॑ग्र इह होता नि षीदादब्धः सु पुरएता भ॑वा नः | अव॑तां 
त्वा रोद॑सी विश्वपिन्वे यजा महे सौमनसाय देवान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Ehyagna tha hota ni sidadabdhah su pura eta 
bhava nah. Avatam tva rodasi visvaminve yaja 
mahe saumanasaya devan. 


Agni, lord of kindness and benevolence, come 
to us fearless and bold and lead our yajna as high-priest 
to take us forward. May the heaven and earth which 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 76 315 


sustain the world be with you. Come to the noblest 
brilliancies of humanity for the sake of peace and joy 
of the mind and soul. 


प्र सु विश्वात्रक्षसो ceed भवा यज्ञानांमभिशस्तिपावां। 
अथा व॑ह सोम॑पतिं हरिभ्यामातिथ्यमंस्मै चकृमा Fara ॥ 3 ॥ 


a Pra su visvan raksaso dhaksyagne bhava yajnana 
mabhisastipava. Atha vaha somapatim haribhya 
matithyamasmai cakrma sudavne. 


Agni, lord of light, power and justice, burn off 
the evil to extinction. Be the saviour and protector of 
yajnas of common endeavour from violence. Bring in 
Indra, lord of energy and the joy of soma. And we shall 
extend the heartiest welcome and hospitality to him. 


प्रजाव॑ता वच॑सा वह्धिरासा च॑ हुवे नि च॑ सत्सीह Sa: | 
वेषिं होत्रमुत पोत्रं य॑जत्र बोधि प्र॑यन्तर्जनितर्वसूंनाम्‌॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Prajavata vacasa vahnirasa ca huve nica satstha 
devaih. Vesi hotramuta potram yajatra bodhi 
prayantarjanitarvasunam. 


Agni, power of yajna and harbinger of joy and 
prosperity, creative force of nature in yajna, voracious 
consumer of input oblations and creator of a 
thousandfold wealth and energies of life and prana, I 
invoke you with holy words of social import for the 
sake of all my people. Come to the yajna with blessings 
of divine brilliancies and sit on the vedi. Front leader 
as you are, creator of wealth as you are for the hearth 
and home of people, spirit of yajna as you are, bring us 
the holiest sanctifying materials for our life of yajna 
and enlighten us on the art of advancement and progress. 


316 RGVEDA 


यथा विप्र॑स्य at ot efafel dat अय॑जः कविभिः कविः 
सन्‌। एवा होतः सत्यतर AMEN ASA AT यजस्व ॥ ५ ॥ 


Ds Yatha viprasya manuso havirbhirdevan ayajah 
kavibhih kavih san. Eva hotah satyatara tvama- 
dyagne mandraya juhva yajasva. 


Just as a person, being a poet going with the 
poets, performs yajna in honour of divinities and brilliant 
persons, with the sacred materials of a noble and 
intelligent person, similarly, O Agni, noble performer, 
noble visionary, truer and more sincere than truth and 
sincerity itself, perform yajna for us in the home today 
with a beautiful ladle and the divine voice of wisdom. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 77 
Agni Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


कथा दाशोमाग्रये areal देवजुष्टोच्यते भामिने गीः। 
यो मर्त्येष्वमृत ऋतावा होता यजिं इत्कृणोति देवान्‌ ॥। ९ ॥ 


il, Katha dasemagnaye kasmai devajustocyate 
bhamine gith. Yo martyesvamrta rtava hota yaji- 
stha it krnoti devan. 


What shall we offer, how shall we offer, what 
appropriate words worthy of divinities, to this Agni, 
lord of yajna, light of knowledge, loving, kind and 
righteous, who, immortal among the mortals, is the 
master of eternal truth and Law, lord promoter of yajnic 
projects, most adorable and most sacrificing, creates 
brilliant and generous celebrities? 


यो अध्वरेषु शन्त॑म ऋतावा होता तमू नमोभिरा कुणुध्वम्‌ | 
अभिरयिर्मतीय cara चा बोधाति मन॑सा यजाति ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 77 317 


2. Yo adhvaresu santama rtava hota tamu namo- 
bhira krnudhvam. Agniryad vermartaya devantsa 
ca bodhati manasa yajati. 


All ye yajakas, do honour and homage with 
salutations and oblations in yajna to Agni, harbinger of 
peace and bliss, ever true in nature, attributes and 
functioning, most creative and generous performer in 
yajna, who invokes the divinities for humanity, knows 
and awakes all to knowledge and self-awareness, and 
guides and leads the yajakas with his heart and soul. 


afemd: स मर्यः स साधुर्मित्रो न भूदद्भुतस्य र थीः। 
तं मेधेषु प्रथमं देवयन्तीर्विश sd ब्रुवते दस्ममारीः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Sa hi kratuh sa maryah sa sadhurmitro na bhuda 
dbhutasya rathth. Tam medhesu pratha-mam 
devayantirvisa upa bruvate dasmamarth. 


Agni is the power and performer of yajna. He is 
human, close to humanity. He is good and saintly. May 
he abide as our friend, master of the wonderful chariot 
of existence. Lord of love, beauty and goodness as he 
is, him only, in the noblest yajnic programmes the 
loving, pious and knowledgeable people approach for 
address and redress, first and supreme as he is. 


स नों नृणां नृत॑मो Rerret अथिरगिरोऽव॑ंसा वेतु धीतिम्‌। 

तना च ये मघवानः शविष्ठा वाज॑प्रसूता इषयन्त मन्म॑ ॥। ४ ॥ 
4. Sa no nrnam nrtamo risada agnirgiro’vasa vetu 

dhitim. Tana ca ye maghavanah savistha vajapra- 

suta isayanta manma. 


He who among our people is the most human 
and gracious, destroyer of violence, is Agni, lord of light, 


318 RGVEDA 


power and leadership. May he join our voices and the 
powers of governance with defence, protection and 
progress and hold it together with the wealth of the 
nation and those who are men of honour, strongest in 
courage, endowed with food and energy and have the 
desire for knowledge and wisdom. 


एवायिर्गोतिमेभिकऋऋतावा विप्रेभिरस्तोष्ट जातवेदाः 1a एषु 
दयुम्नं पीपयत्स वाजं स पुष्टं यांति जोषमा चिकित्वान्‌ ॥। ५ ॥ 


a Evagnir gotamebhir rtava viprebhirastosta jdata- 
vedah. Sa esu dyumnam pipayat sa vajam sa 
pustim yati josama cikitvan. 


And Agni, lord ruler of truth and law, omniscient 
of things in existence is praised and acclaimed by sincere 
admirers and men of piety and dedication. And he, 
among these, providing for food, energy and prosperity 
and the light of knowledge in abundance, himself 
growing higher in knowledge, self-satisfaction and all 
round progress, goes on ever forward. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 78 
Agni Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 
अभि त्वा गोत॑मा गिरा जात॑वेदो विचर्षणे | 
द्युम्नैरभि प्र णोनुमः॥ ९॥ 


॥ Abhi tva gotama gira jatavedo vicarsane. 
Dyumnairabhi pra nonumah. 


Jataveda, Agni, omniscient lord of universal 
vision, we, men of knowledge and your admirers, offer 
homage to you with all our wealth and honour and our 
noblest songs of praise. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 78 319 


तयुं त्वा गोत॑मो गिरा रायस्कांमो दुवस्यति। 
द्युम्नैरभि प्र णोनुमः॥ २॥ 

2. Tamu tva gotamo gird rayaskamo duvasyati. 
Dyumnairabhi pra nonumah. 
The man of knowledge and admiration, desirous 
of wealth and honour, offers homage and prayer to you, 
Agni, lord of light and power, with his voice of the heart. 
We do homage to you with all our wealth and power 
and with noblest songs of praise. 
aq त्वा वाजसातंमपद्धिर स्वन्द॑वामहे | 
द्युम्नैरभि प्र णोनुमः॥ ३॥ 

3; Tamu tva vajasatamam angirasvaddhavahame. 
Dyumnairabhi pra nonumah. 


Agni, you who are lord of light, knowledge and 
power and giver of victory, we invoke like the very 
breath of life and do homage with all our honour, wealth 
and virtue. 


तमु त्वा वृत्रहन्त॑मं यो दस्यूँरवधूनुषे । 
द्युम्नैरभि प्र णोनुमः॥ ॐ ॥ 
4. Tamu tva vrtrahantamam yo dasyunravadhunuse. 


Dyumnairabhi pra nonumah. 


Agni, breaker of the cloud and dispeller of 
darkness, who shake the evil and wicked to destruction, 
we celebrate you in homage with all the power and 
valour at our command. 


अवोचाम रहूगणा अग्रये Beluga: | 
द्युम्नैरभि प्र णोनुमः॥ ५॥ 


320 RGVEDA 


5. Avocama rahugana agnaye madhumad vacah. 
Dyumnairabhi pra nonumah. 


We all, free from sin and evil, offer honey-sweet 
songs of praise and celebration in honour of Agni with 
all our knowledge and brilliance. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 79 
Agni Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


हिरण्यकेशो रज॑सो fransteeitratdga ध्रजीमान्‌ । 
शुचिभ्राजा उषसो नवेदा यश्ट॑स्वतीरपस्युवो न सत्याः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Hiranyakeso rajaso visare’hirdhunirvata iva 
dhrajiman. Sucibhraja usaso naveda yasasva- 
firapasyuvo na satyah. 


The sun, lord of golden beams blazing in the 
expanse of spaces, skies and the earth, shaker of the 
clouds and tempestuous like the winds, is Agni. The 
dawns of pure splendour like fairies and angels of truth 
and honour, shining and rising like flames of yajna fire, 
revealing like the vibrations of primordial knowledge, 
these are Agni too. 


आ ते quant अंमिनन्तं एवैः कृष्णो नोनाव वृषभो यदीदम्‌। 
शिवाभिर्न स्मय॑मानाभिरागात्पत॑न्ति fad: स्तनय॑न्त्यभ्रा ॥ २ ॥ 


2. A te suparna aminantan evaih krsno nonava 
vrsabho yadidam. Sivabhirna smayamana- 
bhiragat patanti mihah stanayantyabhra. 


Agni, if your golden sunbeams were to expand 
with their forces across the spaces, and if the sun holding 
the skies and the earth were to break the cloud pregnant 
with vapours, the cloud would roar and showers would 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 79 321 


fall, coming to the earth as if with smiling blissful 
breezes of joy. 


यदीमृतस्य पय॑सा पियानो नय॑त्ृतस्य॑ पथिभी रजिष्ठैः । 
अर्यमा fast वरुणः परिज्मा त्वचं पृञ्चन्त्युपरस्य 
योनौ ।। ३॥ 


ध Yadimrtasya payasa piyano nayannrtasya pathi- 
bhi rajisthaih. Aryama mitro varunah parijma 
tvacam pricantyuparasya yonau. 


When the sun drinking and waxing with the 
vapours of water takes these up by the straightest and 
speediest paths, then Aryama, the sunlight, Mitra and 
Varuna, complementary energies of the sun holding the 
earth and skies together, and Parijman, winds and 
electric energies in the higher space, create the body of 
the cloud. 


अग्ने वाज॑स्य गोम॑त्‌ ईशानः सहसो यहो | 
अस्मे धेहि जातवेदो महि श्रव॑ः usu 


4. Agne vajasya gomata isanah sahaso 24/10. 
Asme dhehi jatavedo mahi Sravah. 

Agni, lord of the knowledge of existence, creator 
and ruler of food, energy and wealths of life and lord of 
cows and sunbeams, child of omnipotence, bring us the 
brilliance of knowledge and great splendour of life’s 
victories. 


स इधानो वसुंष्कविर थिरीव्ेन्यो frr 
रेवदस्मभ्यं पुर्वणीक दीदिहि॥ ५॥ 


a. Sa idhano vasuskaviragnirilenyo gira. 
Revadasmabhyam purvanika didihi. 


322 RGVEDA 


Agni, that brilliant lord of light and knowledge, 
treasure home of wealth and joy, divine visionary of 
creation, adorable with holy words, lord of wealth, 
blazing with flames and flaming with forces, may he 
ever shine and shine us with knowledge. 


क्षपो राजन्नुत त्मनाग्ने वस्तोरुतोषसः | 
स तिग्मजम्भ र॒कश्चसों दह प्रतिं ॥ ६॥ 

6. Ksapo rajannuta tmanagne vastorutosasah. 
Sa tigmajambha raksaso daha prati. 


Agni, blazing with light and power, creating and 
ruling over nights, days and the dawns, lord of the 
mighty order of justice and dispensation, burn up the 
evil and the wicked. 


अवा नो ata ऊतिभिंगयत्रस्य प्रभर्मणि। 
विश्वासु धीषु वन्द्य ॥ ७॥ 

ae Ava no agna utibhirgayatrasya prabharmani. 
Visvasu dhisu vandya. 


Lord adorable all over the world in the affairs 
of enlightenment, protect and advance us with your care 
and powers of defence and development in the 
transactions of knowledge and happiness of the people 
with your heart and soul. 


आ नो अगे रयिं भ॑र सत्रासाहं वरेण्यम्‌ । 
विश्वासु पृत्सु दुष्टर॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A no agne rayim bhara satrasaham varenyam. 
Visvasu prtsu dustaram. 


Agni, lord of wealth and power, bless us with 
cherished wealth and power, formidable and invincible 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 79 323 
in all the battles of life, overcoming all and ever. 
आ नो अगे सुचेतुना रयिं विश्वायुपोषसम्‌ । 
माडीकं धेहि जीवसे ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. A no agne sucetuna rayim visvayuposasam. 
Mardikam dhehi jivase. 


Agni, lord of life, light and wealth, bring us and 
bless us with wealth along with knowledge, science and 
technology that may provide nourishment and health 
for all, soothing and joyful for happy living. 
प्र पूतास्तिग्मशोंचिषे वाचो गोतमाग्मये । 
भर॑स्व सुम्नयुर्गिरः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Pra putastigmasocise vaco gotamagnaye. 
Bharasva sumnayurgirah. 
Most dedicated celebrant in search of peace and 
well-being of the soul, raise your voice and say holy words 
and sing pure songs of knowledge, wisdom and prayer in 
honour of Agni, blazing lord of splendour and vision of 
omniscience who would purify your mind and soul. 
यो नों अग्नेऽभिदासत्यन्ति दूरे प॑दीष्ट सः। 
अस्माकमिद्‌ वृधे भ॑व ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Yono agne’bhidasatyanti dure padista sah. 
Asmakamid vrdhe bhava. 


Agni, lord of light and power, whosoever far or 
near hate us or enslave us, may he be destroyed. Lord 
of life and wealth, be kind and gracious for our growth 
and progress. 


Also: Agni, lord of light and wealth, whatever 


324 RGVEDA 


you give us, or whenever and wherever you oblige us 
in person, that may be for our good and advancement. 


सहस्त्राश्चो विचर्षणिरग्री रश्चांसि सेधति। 
होता गृणीत उक्थ्यं: ॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. Sahasrakso vicarsaniragni raksamsi sedhati. 
Hota grnita ukthyah. 


Agni, lord of a thousand eyes (such as the sun), 
lord of universal vision, dispels and destroys the evil, 
the demons, darkness and suffering and poverty. High- 
priest of cosmic yajna, he is adorable and reveals the 
voice of omniscience in the soul. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 80 
Indra Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


इत्था हि सोम इन्मदे gan चकार वर्धनम्‌ । शविंछ वचिन्नो- 
wer पृथिव्या निः शशा अहिमर्चन्ननु स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


le Ittha hi soma inmade brahma cakara vardhanam. 
Savistha vajrinnojasa prthivya nihsasa ahimarca- 
nnanu svardjyam. 


Giving to freedom and self-government an 
exalted place of honour, Brahma, lord creator, in-vested 
the joy and excitement of life with animation, growth 
and independence. And for the same reason, Indra, 
strongest in courage and valour, wielder of the 
thunderbolt of freedom and self-government, with your 
might and main, strike off the serpent of evil, suffering 
and slavery from the earth for all time. 


स त्वांमदद्‌ वृषा मदः सोम॑ः श्येनाभूंतः Ya: | at at 
निर द्यो जघन्थ व्िन्नोजसार्चन्ननुं स्व॒राज्य॑म्‌ 2 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 80 325 


2. Sa tvamadad vrsa madah somah syenabhrtah 
sutah. Yena vrtram niradbhyo jaghantha vajrinno 
jJasarcannanu svarajyam. 


That excitement and enthusiasm arising from 
the eagle-shaped vedi of yajna and defended and 
advanced by the army in eagle array, raining from 
showers of divinity from Brahma, may boost your 
morale, and thereby, O Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, 
doing homage to the freedom and self-government of 
your people with your valour and heroism, you break 
the cloud of darkness, want and suffering and release 
the flow of plenty and prosperity. 


परदह्यभीहि धृष्णुहि न ते ast नि dad इन्द्र॑ नुम्णं हि ते 
शवो हनो वृत्रं जयां अपोऽर्चन्ननु स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Prehyabhthi dhrsnuhi na te vajro ni yamsate. 
Indra nrmnam hi te Savo hano vrtram jaya apo’- 
rcannanu svarajyam. 


Indra, lord of power and brilliance, ruler of the 
land, go forward. Go forward all round. Shake the evil. 
Irresistible is your thunderbolt of light and power. Your 
power and force is the wealth of the nation. Destroy the 
demon of want and drought, release and win the waters, 
plenty and prosperity and, in homage and reverence 
advancing the freedom and self-government of 
humanity, move ahead and higher. 


PRS भूम्या अधिं qt ज॑घन्थ निर्दिवः । सजा मरुत्व॑तीरवं 
जीवधन्या इमा अपोऽर्चन्ननु स्वराज्य॑म्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Nirindra bhumya adhi vrtram jaghantha nirdivah. 
Srja marutvatirava jivadhanya ima apo’rcannanu 
svarajyam. 


326 RGVEDA 


Indra, all-ruling creative power of enlighten- 
ment and freedom, eliminate evil, darkness and 
ignorance from the face of the earth, bring the light of 
knowledge and vision of spirit from heaven and, 
reverentially advancing the republic of human freedom 
and self-governance, create and release these life-giving 
and energising waters to vitalise the nation of humanity 
to the speed and vibrancy of the winds. 


Sal वृत्रस्य दोध॑तः सानुं avur हीच्ठितः | अभिक्रम्याव 
जिघ्रतेऽपः समीय चोदयन्नर्चन्ननु स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5: Indro vrtrasya dodhatah sanum vajrena hilitah. 
Abhikramyavajighnate’pah sarmaya codaya- 
nnarcannanu svarajyam. 


Indra, lord ruler of might, hero of war, adored 
and passionate, striking with the thunderbolt on the top 
of the ferocious cloud of evil fighting against sustenance 
of life, exhorts his own forces of freedom and, in 
reverence and homage to the land of freedom and self- 
governance, breaks the cloud to let the waters of light 
and life aflow. 


अधि सानौ नि जिघ्नते व्ण शतपर्वणा । मन्दान इन्द्रो 
अन्ध॑सः सखिभ्यो गातुमिच्छत्यर्चन्ननुं स्व॒राज्य॑म्‌ ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Adhi sanau ni jighnate vajrena Sataparvana. 
Mandana indro andhasah sakhibhyo gagumi- 
cchatyarcannanu svardjyam. 


Indra strikes on the head and shoulders of Vrtra, 
demon of want and suffering with his thunderbolt of a 
hundredfold power and, rejoicing and doing honour and 
reverence to freedom and self-government, wants and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 80 327 


plans to clear the way for the food and joy of his friendly 
allies and citizens of the nation. 


इन्द्र तुभ्यमिदद्विवोऽ नुत्तं विन्वीर्यम्‌। यद्ध त्यं मायिनं 
मृगं तमु त्वं माययांवधीरर्चन्ननुं स्वराज्य॑म्‌ ।॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Indra tubhyamidadrivo’ nuttam varjin viryam. 
Yaddha tyam mayinam mrgam tamu tvam 
mayayavadhirarcannanu svarajyam. 


To you, Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, mighty 
ruler of the republic, high as mountain and the cloud, 
cheers for incomparable excellence of valour since you, 
doing honour and reverence to the freedom and self- 
governance of the republic, destroyed that artful roaring 
demon of a cloud of darkness with your extraordinary 
power. 


वि ते वज्रांसो अस्थिरन्नवतिं नाव्या३ अनुं। महत्त इन्द्र वीर्यः 
wee बलं हितमर्चन्ननु स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vi te vajraso asthirannavatim navya anu. Mahat 
ta indra viryam bahvoste balam hitamarcanna- 
nu svarajyam. 


Indra, your naval forces of the thunderbolt stand 
by ninety rivers and the sea. Mighty is your power, awful 
the valour concentrated in your arms, great ruler, 
dedicated in faith and reverence to freedom and the 
sovereign republic. 


सहस्त्रं साकमर्चत परिं stare feorfa: शतैनमन्व॑नोन- 
वुरिन्द्रांय ब्रह्मोद्य तमर्चन्ननुं स्वराज्य॑म्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 
+ १ Sahasram sakamarcata pari stobhata vimSatih. 


Satainamanvano navurindrayabrahmodyatam 
arcannanu svarajyam. 


328 RGVEDA 


Let all together with unanimity honour Indra, 
the ruler dedicated in faith and honour to the freedom 
and sovereignty of the Republic and the law and 
constitution in force under the rules of Veda, universal 
knowledge and universal values of humanity. Let a 
council of twenty assist and support him for work and 
stability of the government. Let hundreds of 
commanders obey and admire him for the success and 
glory of the land and the people. 


इन्द्रो वृत्रस्य तविषीं निरं हन्त्सह॑सा ue: । महत्तद॑स्य पौस्यं 
वृत्रं ज॑घन्वां असृजदर्चन्ननु स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. _Indro vrtrasya tavisim nirahantsahasa sahah. 
Mahat tadasya paumsyam vrtram jaghanvan 
asrjadarcannanu svarajyam. 


Indra, lord mighty as the force of lightning, with 
his courage and valour breaks down and eliminates the 
force and power of Vrtra, demon of ignorance, injustice 
and poverty. Great is that manliness and virility of his. 
Destroyer of the forces of darkness and slavery, he 
releases the spirit of freshness and the waters of new 
life in dedication and reverence to freedom and 
sovereignty of the grand world order of humanity. 


इमे चित्तव॑ मन्यवे वेपेते भियसा! मही । यर्दिन््र वचिन्नोज॑ंसा 
वृत्रं मरुत्वाँ अवंधीरर्च्ननुं स्वराज्य॑म्‌ 82 
11. Ime cit tava manyave vepete bhiyasa mahi. 


Yadindra vajrinnojasa vrtram marutvan avadhi- 
rarcannanu svarajyam. 


Indra, lord of law and the thunderbolt of strength 
and power, both these, the great earth and the vast 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 80 329 


environment, feel stirred with awe in reverence to your 
spirit and passion when you, O lord of stormy troops, 
with your valour and blazing brilliance, attack and 
destroy Vrtra, demon of darkness and want, to defend 
and maintain the sanctity and glory of the freedom and 
sovereignty of the republic. 


न वेप॑सा न त॑न्यतेन्द्रं॑वृत्रो fa बींभयत्‌। अभ्येनं aw 
आयसः सहस्त्र॑भृष्टिरायतार्चन्ननु स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Na vepasa na tanyatendram 1111-0 vi bibhayat. 
Abhyenam vajra ayasah sahasrabhrstrayatarca- 
nnanu svarajyam. 


Neither by thunder nor by lightning can Vrtra, 
the cloud, terrorize Indra, the sun. Similarly neither by 
force nor by fear can the forces of evil, injustice and 
violence shake Indra, the ruler, who is dedicated with 
faith and reverence to the freedom and self-government 
of the people and the republic. Instead, the thunderbolt 
of inviolable steel and a hundred-fold lightning blaze 
overwhelms this demon of destructive forces from all 
round. 


यद्‌ qa तवं चाशनिं व्रण समयोधयः | अ्िंमिन्द्र 
जिघांसतो दिवि ते age शवोऽर्चन्ननु स्वराज्य॑म्‌॥ ९२३ ॥ 


13. Yad vrtram tava casanim vajrena samayodha- 
yah. Ahimindra jighamsato divi te badbadhe 
Savo’rcannanu svarajyam. 


Indra, heroic ruler, dedicated in reverence and 
faith to the freedom and sovereignty of the republic, 
when you fight Vrtra, the cloud of evil and violence, 
shoot the force of lightning with your thunderbolt killing 


330 RGVEDA 


the demon, then your valour and fame as killer of the 
serpent of evil reaches heaven and abides there. 


अभिष्टने ते अद्रिवो यत्स्था जग॑च्च रेजते । cast चित्तवं 
मन्यव इन्द्र॑ वेविज्यते भियार्चन्ननु स्वराज्य॑म्‌॥ ex ॥ 


14.  Abhistane te adrivo yat stha jagacca rejate. 
Tvasta cit tava manyava indra vevijyate bhiyar- 
cannanu svarajyam. 


Indra, lord ruler of the republic, dedicated to 
the freedom of the people and sovereignty of the state, 
when in the resounding fame and reverberations of your 
power, everything non-moving and everybody moving 
shines with brilliance, and the artists and technologists, 
Tvashtas of the nation, creators and makers of beautiful 
things, move with awe in homage to your spirit and 
passion for freedom and governance, then your 
dedication to the republic would be complete and wholly 
fulfilled. 


नहिनु याद॑धीमसरीन्द्रं को वीर्यौ परः । तस्मिं्रुम्णमुत क्रतुं 
देवा ओजांसि सं द॑धुर्चन्ननुं स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Nahi nu yadadhimasindram ko virya parah. 
Tasminnrmnamuta kratum deva ojamsi sam 
dadhurarcannanu svarajyam. 


Who would not approach Indra? We all 
approach and admire him. Supreme are his virtues and 
attributes. Who can surpass? The divinities vest in him 
all the wealth desired by humanity, noble yajnic action 
and all the valour, splendour and heroism, dedicated as 
he is in reverence and faith to freedom and self- 
government. In him and under his rule all good people 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 81 331 


are blest with wealth of knowledge, action, valour and 
fame. 


यामथर्वा मनुष्पिता cease धियमल्न॑त। तस्पिन्ब्रह्ाणि 
पूर्वथेन्द्र उक्था सम॑ग्मतार्चन्ननुं स्वराज्यम्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Yamatharva manuspita dadhyan dhiyamatnata. 
Tasmin brahmani purvathendra uktha Samag- 
matarcannanu svarajyam. 


That intelligence, knowledge and enlightenment 
which Atharva, men of love and settled peace, Manu, 
men of thought and science, Pita, parents and teachers, 
and men of attainment and acquisition developed and 
spread across the land in faith and service to the 
sovereign republic of the peoples’ freedom and self- 
governance, and, like the ancients, vested in Indra, the 
ruler, the same multiple sciences and songs of 
celebration, the same intelligence, knowledge and 
enlightenment, you all, people of the land, acquire and 
develop in furtherance of the freedom and sovereignty 
of the republic with faith and reverence. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 81 
Indra Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 
इन्द्रो मदाय वावृधे शव॑से gael FU: । तमिन्महत्स्वाजिषू- 
तेमर्भ हवामहे स वाजेषु प्र नोऽविषत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i. Indro madaya vavrdhe savase vrtraha nrbhih. 
Taminmahatsvajisutemarbhe havamahe sa vajesu 
pra no’ visat. 


Indra, the hero who destroys Vrtra, the cloud of 
want and suffering, and releases the showers of plenty 
and prosperity, goes forward with the people for the 


332 RGVEDA 


achievement of strength and joy of the land of freedom 
and self-government. And him we invoke and exhort in 
the battles of life, great and small, so that he may defend 
and advance us in all our struggles for progress and 
lead us to victory. 


असि हि वीर सेन्योऽसि भूरिं पराददिः। असिं दभ्रस्य॑ चिद्‌ 
वृधो यज॑मानाय शिक्चसि सुन्वते भूरिं ते वसु ॥ २॥ 


(५१ Asi hi vira senyo’si bhuri paradadih. Asi dabhra- 
sya cid vrdho yajamanaya Siksasi sunvate bhuri 
te vasu. 


Indra, you are the valiant hero. You are the 
warrior taking on many enemies and oppositions at a 
time. Even the small, you raise to greatness. You lead 
the creative and generous yajamana to knowledge and 
power. Hero of the battles of existence, may your wealth, 
power and honour grow higher and higher. 


यदुदीरंत sisal धृष्णवे धीयते ea Gear म॑दच्युता 
हरी कं हनः कं वसौ दधोऽस्मों इन्द्र वसौ दधः ॥ ३॥ 


3. Yadudirata ajayo dhrsnave dhiyate dhana. Yuksva 
madacyuta hart kam hanah kam vasau dadho’- 
sman indra vasau dadhah. 


When battles confront the nation, means and 
money are raised and prizes won for the brave. 
Commander of the forces, yoke the forces exuberant 
and raging for war. Destroy the enemy. Settle the 
victorious in wealth and peace. Indra, pray settle us in 
peace and comfort. 


क्रत्वां wer अनुष्वधं भीम आ वावृधे शव॑ः । चिय ऋष्व 
उपाकयोर्नि शिप्री हरिवान्दधे हस्त॑योर्वज्र॑मायसम्‌॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 81 333 


4. Kratva mahan anusvadham bhima a vavrdhe 
Savah. Sriya rsva upakayorni Sipri harivan dadhe 
hastayorvajramayasam. 


Great by knowledge, awful by action, in his own 
right and by his own might, he grows in power and 
majesty. Elevated and sublime, blazing brilliant, lord 
of horses and speed of motion, he wields the golden 
thunderbolt of power and force in both his hands for 
the beauty and dignity of life and the republic of 
humanity. 


am पप्रौ पार्थिवं रजो age रोचना fafa i न caval इन्द्र 
कश्चन न जातो न जनिष्यतेऽति विश्वं aafarer i ५ ॥ 


Di A paprau parthivam rajo badbadhe rocana divi. 
Na tvavan indra kascana na jato na janisyate’ti 
visvam vavaksitha. 


You pervade the earth and all that is earthly. You 
pervade the sky. You pervade and fix the bright heaven 
in place. Indra, none like you was ever born, nor shall 
ever be born. Indeed, you hold, rule, pervade and 
transcend the entire universe of existence. 


यो अर्यो मर्तभोजनं पराददाति दाशुषे । इन्द्रो अस्मभ्यं 
शिक्षतु वि भ॑जा भूरिं ते वसुं भक्षीय तव राध॑सः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yo aryo martabhojanam paradadati dasuse. Indro 
asmabhyam Ssiksatu vi bhaja bhuri te vasu bha- 
kstya tava radhasah. 


Indra, lord of the universe, master of life, 
provides food and sustenance for living beings. He gives 
wealth and comfort for the generous giver and for us. 
May the lord take us unto himself and give us knowledge 


334 RGVEDA 


and instruction. O lord, may we, we pray, share your 
abundant treasure of wealth and divine happiness. May 
I enjoy the wealth and knowledge given by the lord. 


मदेमदे fe नों ददिर्युथा गवामृजुक्रतुः । सं गृभाय पुरू 
शातोभ॑याहस्त्या वसु शिशीहि राय आ भ॑र॥ ७॥ 


0६ Mademade hi no dadiryutha gavamrjukratuh. 
Sam grbhaya puru satobhayahastya vasu Sisthi 
raya a bhara. 


Indra, lord of wealth, power and generosity, in 
every joy of life, you are the giver. You are the giver of 
plenty of cows and abundance of light and sense. Lord 
of simple, natural and divine action of yajna, may he 
provide hundreds of kinds of wealth for us and bless us 
with both of his hands generously. Lord of wealth and 
glory, bring us the wealth of joy, dignity and glory and 
let us shine with honour. 


मादय॑स्व सुते सचा शव॑से शूर wee विद्या fe wat 
पुरूवसुमुप कामात्ससूज्महेऽथां नोऽ विता भ॑व ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Madayasva sute saca Savase Sura radhase. Vidma 
hi tva puruvasumupa kamantsasrjma-he’tha 
no’vita bhava. 


Brave hero, be with us in this holy yajnic 
programme of the land of freedom and sovereignty for 
the creation of wealth, power and joy. Join us and let us 
celebrate together. Lord of abundant wealth, power and 
joy you are. May we, we pray, know you and be with 
you at the closest. Be our saviour, our protector, our 
promoter, so that we may creatively realise all our 
desires and ambitions. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 82 335 


एते त॑ इन्द्र जन्तवो विश्वं पुष्यन्ति वार्यम्‌। अन्तर्हि ख्यो 
जनानापर्यो वेदो अदाशुषां तेषां नो वेद आ भ॑र ॥ ९॥ 


on Ete ta indra jantavo visvam pusyanti varyam. 
Antarhi khyo jananamaryo vedo adasusam tesam 
no veda a bhara. 


Indra, lord of life and spirit, these living beings, 
yours all, do homage to you and augment the wealth 
and glory of the entire world. Lord and master of the 
people, you know the very heart of them inside out. 
Bring us the wealth of knowledge and spirit. Restore 
the wealth and knowledge of those ungenerous 
miserables who have lost it. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 82 
Indra Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


उपो षु Borat गिरो मघ॑वन्मात॑थाइव | यदा न॑: GMa: 
कर आदर्थयास इद्योजा स्विन्द्र ते हरीं ॥ ९॥ 


i, Upo su Srnuhi giro maghavan matatha iva. Yada 
nah sunrtavatah kara adarthayasa idyoja nvindra 
te hari. 


Indra, lord of wealth and glory, listen to our 
prayer at the closest, not like one distant or different. 
And when we pray bless us with a voice of sweetness 
and the light of holy truth. Lord of speed and motion, 
yoke your horses (and come to join the yajna). 


अक्षन्नमीमदन्त we प्रिया steed । अस्तोषत स्वभानवो 
विप्रा नविंछया मती योजा न्विन्द्र ते हरीं २॥ 

2. Aksannamimadanta hyava priya adhusata. Asto- 
sata svabhanavo vipra navisthaya mati yoja nvi- 
ndra te hari. 


336 RGVEDA 


Noble men acquiring holy knowledge, rejoicing, 
dearest favourite saints and sages brilliant with their 
innate genius and virtue, ward off the evil and pray to 
Indra with latest words of wisdom and homage. Indra, 
yoke your horses (on the wing and come to join the 
yajna). 

सुसंदुशं त्वा वयं मघवन्वन्दिषीमहि । प्र नूनं पूर्णवन्धुरः 
स्तुतो यांहि वशँ अनु योजा न्विन्द्र ते हरीं ॥ ३॥ 


3 Susamdrsam tva vayam maghavan vandisimahi. 
Pra nunam purnabandhurah stuto yahi vasan anu 
yoja nvindra te hari. 


Indra, lord of wealth, power and universal glory, 
we pray to you, lord of the blissful eye. Lord in perfect 
covenant with humanity, worshipped and prayed to in 
sincerity, proceed and overwhelm the enemies of yajna 
and humanity. Yoke your horses (and come to bless the 
yajna). 


aad वृष॑णं रथमधि तिष्ठाति गोविद॑म्‌। यः ut 
हारियोजनं पूर्णमिन्द्र चिकैतति योजा न्विन्द्र ते हरीं ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa gha tam vrsanam rathamadhi tisthati govidam. 
Yah patram hariyojanam purnamin-dra ciketati 
yoja nvindra te hari. 


Indra, only that person who knows the science 
and technology of that horse-powered chariot which is 
perfect and fully capable of defence and safety against 
the enemy, would ride that prize-winning chariot of 
victory which would lead him to the conquest of territory 
and prosperity. Indra, yoke your horses (and come to 
join the yajna of defence and protection). 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 82 337 


युक्तस्ते अस्तु afar उत सव्यः शतक्रतो । तेन॑ Sarg 
प्रियां म॑न्दानो याह्यन्ध॑सो योजा Fass ते हरीं ॥ ५॥ 


5. Yuktaste astu daksina uta savyah Satakrato. Tena 
jayamupa priyam mandano yahyandhaso yoja 
nvindra te hari. 


Indra, hero of a hundred yajnic battles, let your 
horse power on the right, and your horse power on the 
left of the chariot be yoked, and, happy at heart, with 
presents of delicacies, go to meet your darling wife. 
Lord of love, power and victory, yoke your horses and 
proceed. 


युनम्सिं ते ब्रह्म॑णा केशिना हरी उप प्र यांहि दधिषे गभ॑स्त्योः | 
seat सुतासो रभसा अमन्दिषुः पूषण्वान्व॑चिन्त्समु 


पत्न्यामदः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yunajmi te brahmana keSsina hari upa pra yahi 


dadhise gabhastyoh. Uttva sutaso rabhasa ama- 
ndisuh pusanvan vajrintsamu patnyamadah. 


I yoke your horses of beautiful mane to the 
chariot with holy chant of divine hymns and delicacies 
for sacred presents and gifts. Hold the reins in your 
hands and proceed for home. And then, lord of the 
thunderbolt and leader of heroic warriors, there, 
enthusiastic and ecstatic friends, well-trained, educated 
and cultured would join you for delightful company. 
And then, go and meet your wife and, with her, enjoy 
yourself with the family. 


338 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 83 
Indra Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


अश्वावति प्रथमो गोषु गच्छति सुप्रावीरिन्द्र मर्त्यस्त- 
वोतिभि॑ः। तमित्पुंणश्चि वसुना भवीयसा सिन्धुमापो 
यथाभितो विचेतसः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Asvavati prathamo gosu gacchati supravirindra 
martyastavotibhih. Tamit prnaksi vasuna bha- 
viyasa sindhumapo yathabhito vicetasah. 


O Indra, lord ruler and protector, in a horse- 
powered chariot the pioneer goes forward first over 
lands and oceans in the world, man of zeal and courage 
as he is, protected by all your means of safety and 
defence. And him you bless with abundant wealth and 
fame which come to him as prominent rivers from all 
round join and flow into the sea. 


आपो न देवीरुपं यन्ति aana: प॑श्यन्ति वित॑तं यथा 
रज॑ः । प्राचैर्देवासः प्र ण॑यन्ति देवयुं daft जोषयन्ते 
Ra NU 


2 Apo na devirupa yanti hotriyamavah pasyanti 
vitatam yatha rajah. Pracairdevasah pra nayan- 
ti devayum brahmapriyam josayante vara iva. 


Just as holy waters go to the sea and the vapours 
concentrate in the cloud, so do holy people go to yajna 
and to Indra, lord of yajna, and as they see the yajna 
spread around from the vedi as shelter of life’s 
protection, so they conduct themselves in the tradition 
of ancient scholars and go forward to the holiest of the 
holies of existence and, like the best people of 
knowledge, action and devotion, love the divine lord 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 83 339 
and the divine lore as the highest boon of life. 


अधि द्योंरदधा उक्थ्यं वचो यतस्रुचा मिथुना या संपर्यतंः । 
असंयत्तो व्रते ते क्षेति पुष्य॑ति भद्रा शक्तिर्यजमानाय 
सुन्वते ॥ ३ ॥ 


3, Adhi dvayoradadha ukthyam 14८0 yatasruca 
mithuna ya saparyatah. Asamyatto vrate te kseti 
pusyati bhadra saktiryajamanaya sunvate. 


Indra, lord of yajna, just as you accept the 
offerings held in the ladles raised by the wedded couple, 
so graciously listen and accept the holy prayers of the 
two, ancients and moderns, teacher and disciple, 
husband and wife, parent and child, for the good of both. 
Even the loose and the wanton, under your care, find 
shelter and protection and grow. The gracious power of 
yajna creates and offers everything for the yajamana. 


आदङ्धिराः प्रथमं द॑धिरे aa इब्दाग्र॑यः शम्या ये AHA । 
सर्व" पणेः सम॑विन्दन्त॒ भोज॑नमश्वां वन्तं गोमन्तमा ust 
नरं: ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Adangirah prathamam dadhire vaya iddhagnayah 
Samya ye sukrtyaya. Sarvam paneh samavindanta 
bhojanam asvavantam gomantama pasum narah. 


And then the scientists of fire and energy, leaders 
of mankind who light the fires and who first offer the 
libations into the fire with holy acts of love and peace, 
win their share of praise and fame with the reward of 
horses, speed and motion, wealth of cows, sensitivity 
of mind and senses and the joy of life and celestial 
vision. 


340 RGVEDA 


aaraat प्रथमः पथस्त॑ते ततः सूर्यो व्रतपा वेन आजंनि। 
आ गा आजदुशना काव्यः सचा! यमस्य॑ जातममृतं 
यजामहे ॥। ५५ ॥ 


a: Yajnairatharva prathamah prathastate tatah 
suryo vratapa vena ajani. A ga ajadusana kavyah 
saca yamasya jatamamrtam yajamahe. 


As Atharva, scholar of sustained constancy like 
energy in stasis, discovers and creates the prime path of 
motion by yajnic research, the noble solar scientist 
brilliant as the sun dedicated to his vow rises in 
knowledge and discovers the path of the earth. Then 
the poetic sage prophetically inspired sings of the beauty 
of Venus and satellites born of the sun. And we meditate 
and pray for immortality of the state of moksha. 


afeat यत्स्व॑पत्यायं वृज्यतेऽ cat वा श्लोकमाघोषते दिवि। 
ग्रावा यत्र वद॑ति क्छारुरुक्थ्यप स्तस्येदिन्द्रो अभिपित्वेषु 
रण्यति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Barhirva yat svapatyaya vrjyate’rko va Slokama- 
ghosate divi. Grava yatra vadati karurukthya- 
stasyedindro abhipitvesu ranyati. 


Where knowledge and science is collected like 
holy grass of yajna for the sake of noble posterity, where 
holy verses illuminating as the sun in heaven are 
chanted, where the artist carves around the vedi and 
holy mantras resound as thunder of the clouds, there in 
the blessed foods and offerings, Indra, lord of yajna, 
rejoices and speaks. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 341 


Mandala 1/Sukta 84 
Indra Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


असावि ard इन्द्र ते शविं् धृष्ण॒वा ग॑हि 1 
आ त्वां पणक्त्विद्धियं रजः सूर्यो न ciara: ॥ ९॥ 


i, Asavi soma indra te Savistha dhrsnava gahi. 
A tva prnaktvindriyam rajah suryo na rasmibhih. 


Indra, lord ruler of power, strong and resolute, 
come, this soma has been distilled for you. May it 
exhilarate and strengthen your mind as the sun fills and 
brightens the sky with its rays. 


इन्द्रमिद्धरी वहतोऽ प्र॑तिधृष्टशावसम्‌ । 
ऋषीणां च स्तुतीरुप यज्ञं च मानुषाणाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Indramiddhari vahato’ pratidhrstaSavasam. 
Rsinam ca stutirupa yajnam ca manusanam. 


The horses carry Indra, lord of informidable 
force and resolution of mind, to the Rshis’ songs of 
praise and yajnic programmes of the people. 


आ fds qugaad युक्ता ते ब्रह्म॑णा हरीं । 
अर्वाचीनं सु ते मनो oral कृणोतु aga ॥ ३॥ 


ध A tistha vrtrahan ratham yukta te brahmana hari. 
Arvacinam su te mano grava krnotu vagnuna. 


Indra, lord ruler, breaker of the cloud, releaser 
of the waters of life, ride your chariot of the latest design 
and come. The horses are yoked with the right mantra 
and necessary stuffs. And may the high-priest of 
knowledge with his words of knowledge exhilarate you 
at heart. 


342 RGVEDA 


इममिन्द्र सुतं fa ज्येष्ठममर्त्यं मद॑म्‌ । 
शुक्रस्य॑ त्वाभ्यंश्षर न्धारां ऋतस्य साद॑ने ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Imamindra sutam piba jytestham amartyam 
madam. Sukrasya tvabhyaksaran dhara rtasya 
sddane. 


Indra, lord of light and universal rule, drink of 
the ecstasy of joy distilled, highest and immortal. The 
streams of pure and brilliant power and glory flow 
towards you in the house of Truth and Law. 


इन्द्राय नूनमंर्चतो क्शयानिं च ब्रवीतन | 
सुता अ॑मत्सुरिन्द॑वो ज्येष्ठं नमस्यता सह॑ः ॥ ५॥ 


oe Indraya nunamarcatokthani ca bravitana. 
Suta amatsurindavo jyestham namasyata sahah. 


All ye children of the earth, in truth and sincerity, 
do reverence and homage to Indra, ruling lord of light 
and life. Speak words of thanks and praise in 
appreciation of his dominion. Let the drops of distilled 
soma give him delight and ecstasy. Bow to him, lord 
supreme of courage and power. 


नकिष्ट द्र थीत॑रो हरी यदिन्द्र यच्छसे । 
नकिष्ट्रानु मज्मना af: vase आनशे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nakistvad rathitaro hart yadindra yacchase. 
Nakistvanu majmana nakih svasva anase. 


Indra, while you yoke and drive the horses, 
powers of the chariot of your dominion, none could be 
a better master of the chariot. None could equal you in 
power, courage and force. None as master of horse and 
chariot could claim even to approach you in power, 
efficiency and glory. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 343 


य एक इद्धिदयंते वसु मतीय area । 
ईशानो अप्रतिष्कुत इन्द्रो अङ्क ॥७॥ 
Ve Ya eka id vidayate vasu martaya dasuse. 


Isano apratiskuta indro anga. 


Dear friend, the one sole lord who gives 
everything in life to the man of charity and generosity 
is Indra, supreme ruler of the world, who is constant, 
unmoved and unchallenged. 


कदा मर्तमराधसं पदा क्षुम्प॑मिव स्फुरत्‌ | 
कदा न॑ः शुश्रवद्धिर इन्द्रो अङ्ग neu 
8. Kada martam aradhasam pada ksumpamiva 


sphurat. Kada nah susravad gira indro anga. 


Dear friend, when would Indra, lord of wealth, 
power and justice, shake the miserly, uncreative, 
ungenerous and selfish person like a weed? Who 
knows? And would he listen to our prayers? Any time! 


यश्चिद्धि eat बहुभ्य आ सुतार्वा! आविवासति | 
उग्रं तत्प॑त्यते शव इन्द्रो BTS UU 


Ugram tat patyate Sava indro anga. 


Dear friend, it is Indra, creator of energy, vitality 
and the joy of soma, who, for the sake of many does 
special favours to you and makes you shine, and it is 
he, again, who controls violent force, that which could 
be anywhere. 


स्वादोरित्था विषूवतो मध्व॑ः पिबन्ति vite 1 या इन्द्रेण 
सयावरीर्वृष्णा मद॑न्ति शोभसे वस्वीरनु स्वराज्य॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


344 RGVEDA 


10. Svadorittha visuvato madhvah pibanti gauryah. 
Ya indrena sayavarirvrsna madanti sobhase 
vasviranu svarajyam. 


The golden and brilliant people and forces of 
the land drink of the delicious, exciting and universal 
honey sweets of national pride and prestige and joyously 
celebrate their achievements in the company of generous 
and valorous Indra for the advancement of the honour 
and glory of the republic in obedience to the demands 
and discipline of the freedom and self-government of 
the nation. 


ता अंस्य पृशनायुवः सोमं श्रीणन्ति पृश्न॑यः । प्रिया इन्द्र॑स्य 
धेनवो ag हिन्वन्ति साय॑कं वस्वीरनु स्वराज्यम्‌ 22 


11. {त asya prsanayuvah somam Srinanti prsnayah. 
Priya indrasya dhenavo vajram hinvanti sayakam 
vasviranu svarajyam. 


Those forces of Indra, the ruler, close together 
in contact and unison, of varied forms and colours, 
brilliant as sunrays and generous and productive as 
cows, who are dearest favourites of the ruler, create the 
soma of joy and national dignity and hurl the missile of 
the thunderbolt upon the invader as loyal citizens of 
the land in accordance with the demands and discipline 
of freedom and self-government. 


a अंस्यनम॑सा सह॑ः सपर्यन्ति प्रचेतसः । व्रतान्य॑स्य सश्चिरे 
पुरूणि पूर्वचित्तये वस्वीरनु स्व॒राज्य॑म्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Ta asya namasa sahah saparyanti pracetasah. 
Vratanyasya sascire puruni purvacittaye vasvi- 
ranu svarajyam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 345 


Those forces, noble and intelligent, serve and 
augment the courage and power of this Indra with food, 
energy and armaments and, as citizens of the land, as a 
matter of duty to the freedom and discipline of the 
republic, predictably join many dedicated projects and 
programmes of his in anticipation of success. 


इन्द्रो दधीचो अस्थभिववृत्राण्यप्र॑तिष्कुतः। 
जघानं नवतीर्नव ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Indro dadhico asthabhirvrtranyapratiskutah. 
Jaghana navatirnava. 


Indra, lord of light and space, unchallenged and 
unchallengeable, wields the thunderbolt and, with 
weapons of winds, light and thunder, breaks the clouds 
of ninety-nine orders of water and electricity for the 
sake of humanity and the earth. 


इच्छन्नश्वस्य यच्छिरः पर्व'तेष्वप॑श्चितम्‌। 
तद्विंदच्छर्यणावंति ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Icchannasvasya yacchirah parvatesvapasritam. 
Tad vidaccharyanavati. 


Just as the sun reaches and breaks the densest 
concentrations of vapours in the clouds fast moving in 
the regions of the sky, so should the ruler know the best 
part of his fastest forces stationed on the mountains and 
of the enemy forces lurking around and in the forests if 
he desires victory. 


अत्राह गोर॑मन्वत नाम त्वष्टुरपीच्यम्‌ । 
इत्था चन्द्रम॑सो गृहे ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Atraha goramanvata nama tvasturapicyam. 
Ittha candramaso grhe. 


346 RGVEDA 


Just as here on the surface of the earth and in its 
environment, we know, there is the beautiful light of 
the sun penetrating and reaching everywhere, similarly, 
let all know, it is there on the surface of the moon. (Just 
as the sun holds and illuminates the earth and the moon, 
so should the ruler with his light of justice and power 
hold and brighten every home in the land.) 


को अद्य as धुरि गा ऋतस्य शिमीवतो भामिनो दुर्हणायून्‌ | 
आसन्नि॑षून्हत्स्वसों मयोभून्य एषां भृत्यामृणधत्स 
जीवात्‌ ॥ १६॥ 


16. Koadya yunkte dhuri ga rtasya Simivato bhamino 
durhrnayun. Asannisun hrtsvaso mayobhunya 
esam bhrtyamrnadhat sa jivat. 


Who joins the bullocks to the front yoke of the 
chariot of Truth to-day as ever? The Lord Ruler of the 
universe. And he who joins men of noble action, heroes 
of passion and righteousness, frightful fighters, archers 
of the bow and arrow who pierce the hearts of 
contradictions and maintain peace and joy, may he who 
joins these to truth and promotes these servants of truth 
to prosperity live long. 
क ईषते तुज्यते को बिभाय को मंसते सन्तमिन्द्रं को 
sid | कस्तोकाय क इभायोत रायेऽधि ब्रवत्तन्वे 
को जनाय ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Ka isate tujyate ko bibhaya ko mamsate santa- 


mindram ko anti. Kastokaya ka ibhayota raye’dhi 
bravat tanve ko janaya. 


Who attacks and wins? Who is attacked and 
overthrown, who is smothered by fear? Who knows 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 347 


Indra being at the closest? Who speaks for the child? 
Who for the household? Who for wealth and prosperity? 
Who for the body? And who for the people? Who speaks 
for these with authority? The ruler knows. 


को अगिमींडे हविषां घृतेन॑ pen य॑जाता ऋतुभि्चवेभिः। 
we car आ वहानाशु aa को मंसते वीतिहोत्र 
सुदेवः॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Koagnimitte havisa ghrtena sruca yajata rtubhir- 
dhruvebhih. Kasmai deva a vahanasu homa ko 
mamsate vitihotrah sudevah. 


Who worships Agni with ghrta and holy 
materials for the progress of life? Who performs yajna 
with ladles of offerings definitely according to the 
seasons? For whom do the divinities instantly bear and 
bring the blessings of holiness? Who, noble and 
generous yajaka and brilliant scholar, really knows? The 
lord ruler. 


wang प्र शंसिषो देवः श॑विष्ठ मर्त्यम्‌ । 
न त्वद॒न्यो म॑घवन्नस्ति म्ितेन्द्र्‌ ब्रवीमि ते वच॑ः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Tvamanga pra samsiso devah Savistha martyam. 
Na tvadanyo maghavannasti marditenra bravimi 
te vacah. 


Anga, dear friend, Indra, dear and saviour, giver 
of joy, omnipotent lord, self-refulgent and omniscient, 
reveal the truth for mortal humanity. Lord of universal 
wealth, none other than you is the giver of peace and 
bliss. I speak the very word of yours in covenant. 


माते राधांसि ad ऊतयो वसोऽस्मान्कदा चना द॑भन्‌। 
विश्वां च न उपमिमीहि मानुष वसरनि चर्षणिभ्य आ॥ २०॥ 


348 RGVEDA 


20. Mate radhamsi ma ta utayo vaso’sman kada cana 
dabhan. Visva ca na upamimthi manusa vasuni 
carsanibhya a. 


Indra, universal shelter of the world, may all 
your blessings of wealth and modes of protection never 
forsake us. Loving father of humanity, grant us all the 
wealth of knowledge and bliss here and hereafter for 
all the people of the world. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 85 
Maruts Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


प्रये शुम्भ॑न्ते जन॑यो न at यामंनुद्रस्यं ae: eae: | 
रोदसी हि मरुत॑श्चक्िरे वृधे मद॑न्ति वीरा विदथेषु 
घृष्व॑यः ।॥ ९॥ 


im Pra ye sumbhante janayo na saptayo yaman 
rudrasya sunavah sudamsasah. Rodast hi maruta- 
scakrire vrdhe madanti vira vidathesu ghrsvayah. 


Maruts, the winds, currents of energy, 
tempestuous warriors of noble action, children of Rudra, 
lord of justice and dispensation, move on their highways 
and shine like graceful beauties and coursers of lightning 
speed. They fill the heaven and earth with their 
vibrations and actions for the sake of progress and 
expansion. Heroes of mighty power, they fight and 
rejoice in yajnic acts of creation and growth of life. 


त Sfararal महिमानमाशत दिवि earat अधिं चक्रिरे 
सद॑ः | अर्चन्तो अर्कं जनयन्त इद्धियमधि feral दधिरे 
पृश्निमातरः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 85 349 


2. Ta uksitaso mahimanamasata divi rudraso adhi 
cakrire sadah. Arcanto arkam janayanta indriyam 
adhisriyo dadhire prsnimatarah. 


Maruts, children of Rudra, lord of might and 
justice, born of space, showerers of fertility over the 
earth, they win grandeur for themselves and build their 
home high over the skies in heaven. Worshipping the 
sun and creating wealth of mind and material, they shine 
with grace over the wealth and beauty of the mortal 
world. 


Trt यच्छुभयन्ते अचज्जिभिंस्तनृषु! शुभ्रा द॑धिरे 
विरुक्स॑तः। बाधन्ते विश्व॑मभिमातिनमप वत्मीन्येषामनु 
रीयते TAN ३॥ 


a Gomataro yacchubhayante anjibhistanusu subhra 
dadhire virukmatah. Badhante visvam abhimati- 
namapa vartmanyesamanu riyate ghrtam. 


Maruts, children of the earth, shining with 
noblest sciences and actions, commanding glowing 
health and handsomeness, bear light and grace of body 
and mind. They stall all their opponents in the world, 
and wherever they go, life’s nectar, ghrta and waters 
flow in abundance and follow in their footsteps. 


वि ये भ्राज॑न्ते सुम॑खास ऋष्टिभिः weareae=at अच्युता 
चिदोज॑सा। मनोजुवो यन्म॑रुतो रथेष्वा वृष॑त्रातासः 
प॒ष॑तीरयुग्ध्वम्‌॥। ४ ॥ 

4. Vi ye bhrajante sumakhasa rstibhih pracyava- 


yanto acyuta cidojasa. Manojuvo yanmurato 
rathesva vrsavratasah prsatirayugdhvam. 


They are the heroes, Maruts, who shine with 


350 RGVEDA 


their own lustre, powers of noble yajnic action and 
scientific achievement who, moving at the speed of 
mind, shake even the unshakable with their mighty 
weapons, using the energy of wind, water and electricity. 
Ye, rulers and commanders of the forces, powerful 
tacticians and organisers, deploy the maruts and use the 
power of versatile wind, water and electricity in your 
cars and battle chariots. 


प्र सद्रथेषु पृष॑तीरयुंःगध्वं वाजे अद्रिं मरुतो रंहयन्तः | 
उतारुषस्य वि ष्यन्ति धाराश्चर्मेवोदधिर्व्युन्दन्ति भूम॑ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Pra yad rathesu prsatirayugdhvam vaje adrim 
maruto ranhayantah. Utarusasya vi syanti dhara 
scarmevodabhirvyundanti bhuma. 


O Maruts, heroes of the nation, when in the 
battle of life you apply the versatile winds and water 
which move the cloud to shower the rains, then the 
brilliant streams issue forth and cover the earth with 
water just as the streams of soma flow and soak the 
filter spread out for distillation. 


आ वों वहन्तु सप्त॑यो रघुष्यदो रघुपत्वानः प्र जिंगात बाहुभिः | 
सीदता बर्हिरुरु वः सद॑स्कृतं मादयध्वं मरुतो मध्वो 
अन्ध॑सः ॥ ६॥ 


6. A vo vahantu saptayo raghusyado raghupa- 
tvanah pra jigata bahubhih. Sidata barhiruru vah 
sadaskrtam madayadhvam maruto madhvo 
andhasah. 


Maruts, may superfast vehicles transport you 
here and everywhere. May the flying planes at top speed 
take you anywhere by the force of their arms. Come, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 85 351 


the chamber is made ready for you. Come and be 
comfortable in the seats. Enjoy yourselves with honey 
sweets of food and drink. 


तेऽवर्धन्त स्वत॑वसो महित्वना नाकं"तस्थुरुरु च॑क्रिरे सद॑ः । 
विष्णर्यब्धावद्‌ वृष॑णं मदच्युतं वयो न सीदन्नधि बर्हिषि 
प्रिये ॥ ७॥ 


५. Te’vardhanta svatavaso mahitvana nakam tasthu- 
ruru cakrire sadah. Visnuryaddhavad vrsanam 
madacyutam vayo na sidannadhi barhisi priye. 


They surely grow and advance by their own 
strength and high merit, abide in regions of bliss and 
expand their home whom Vishnu, lord of knowledge 
and science, protects while they ride a luxurious plane 
powered by wind and water and, seated in a beautiful 
and comfortable chamber, they fly like birds. 


शुरांइवेद्युयुधयो न जग्म॑यः श्रवस्यवो न पृत॑नासु Afar 
भय॑न्ते विश्वा भुव॑ना मरुद्भ्यो राजांन इव त्वेषसंदुशो 
नर॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sura ived yuyudhayo na jagmayah sravasyavo na 
prtanasu yetire. Bhayante visva bhuvana marud- 
bhyo rajana iva tvesasamdrso narah. 


Like heroes they are warriors. Like warriors they 
rise and advance. In battles they strike like flying 
dragons. The entire world quakes with fear of the 
Maruts. They are leaders of men blazing in majesty like 
emperors. 


त्वष्टा यद्वञ्जं सुकुतं हिरण्ययं Gees स्वपा stadia 
धत्त इन्द्रो नर्यपांसि कर्तवेऽहन्वृत्रं निर पामौँब्जदःर्णावम्‌ i ९ ॥ 


352 RGVEDA 


9. Tvasta yad vajram sukrtam hiranyayam saha- 
srabhrstim svapa avartayat. Dhatta indro narya- 
pamsi kartave’han vrtram nirapamaubjadar- 
navam. 


Tvashta, the expert maker of weapons, tools and 
instruments for defence and development, provides the 
thunderbolt, total infrastructure, well-done, golden and 
capable of countless possibilities of performance. Indra, 
mighty ruler, defender and creator, wields that 
thunderbolt and apparatus for the accomplishment of 
desired and planned actions in the world of humanity. 
He strikes Vrtra, the cloud holding waters of fertility, 
the resources of materials and energy, and thus releases 
the oceanic flow of wealth. (This is how scientific, 
technological and economic development of the human 
nation goes on for the achievement of economic 
prosperity, political stability and generous happiness and 
well-being for all. All through, the Maruts are active 
since they are nature’s forces ever at work anywhere 
and everywhere.) 


ऊर्ध्व नुनुद्रेऽ वतं त sister दादृहाणं चिद्धिभिदुर्विं ae | 
धम॑न्तो वाणं wed: सुदानवो मदे सोमस्य रण्यानि 
चक्रिरे॥ 20 1 


10. Urdhvam nunudre’vatam ta ojasa dadrhanam cid 
bibhidurvi parvatam. Dhamanto banam marutah 
sudanavo made somasya ranyani cakrire. 


With their lustrous power and valour, up and 
high they impel the cloud holding the reservoir of water, 
drive it on and break it to release the flow of energy for 
earth’s fertility. Blowing the conch, they call upon the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 85 353 


nation and, playing the veena and burnishing their 
weapons, the tempestuous Maruts, commanders of 
Indra, generous heroes of humanity, perform delightful 
acts of joy and martial celebration in the midst of life’s 
ecstasy. 


जिह्यं नुनुद्रेऽ वतं तयां दिशासिंञ्चन्ुत्सं गोत॑माय तृष्णजे | 
आ गंच्छन्तीमव॑सा चित्रभानवः कामं विप्र॑स्य तर्पयन्त 
धाम॑भिः 122 01 


11. Jihmam nunudre’vatam taya disasincannutsam 
gotamaya trsnaje. A gacchantimavasa citrabha- 
navah kamam viprasya tarpayanta dhamabhih. 


Maruts, powers of wondrous light with their 
might and generosity direct the controlled waters of the 
cloud by various paths in the desired directions, filling 
wells, tanks, springs and depressions for the thirsting 
children of the earth. Thus do the powers of beneficence 
come to the earth with protection and progress fulfilling 
the need of noble humanity with their power and 
potential. 


या वः शर्म णमानाय सन्तिं त्रिधातूनि दाशुषे यच्छताधि 1 
अस्मभ्यं तानिं मरुतो fa य॑न्त रयिं नों धत्त वृषणः 
सुवीरम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yavah Sarma Sasamanaya santi tridhatuni dasuse 
yacchatadhi. Asmabhyam tani maruto vi yanta 
rayim no dhatta vrsanah suviram. 


O Maruts, dynamic powers of nature and 
humanity, creative, generous and kind, whatever your 
gifts of shelter, comfort and protection there be, 
whatever gifts of balanced health and triple physical, 


354 RGVEDA 


mental and material wealth there be, bear and bring for 
the toiling, working, worshipping humanity, specially 
for the generous man of philanthropy. Powers and 
showers of divine favours, bear and bring for us those 
gifts of wealth and brave progeny. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 86 
Maruts Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


मरुतो यस्य हि eral पाथा दिवो विंमहसः। 
स सुंगोपात॑मो जनं: ॥ ९॥ 

Ly Maruto yasya hi ksaye patha divo vimahasah. 
Sa sugopatamo janah. 


Maruts, dear as the breath of life, bright as the 
light of heaven, agents of great and adorable action, the 
person whose house you visit and bless with protection 
grows to be the most secure and meritorious person. 


यज्ञैवी यज्ञवाहसो विप्र॑स्य वा मतीनाम्‌ । 
मरुतः शृणुता हव॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2, Yajnairva yajnavahaso viprasya va matinam. 
Marutah srnuta havam. 
Maruts, carriers and promoters of universal 
yajna by various acts of yajna in nature and society, 
listen to the prayer and invocations of the pious and 
intelligent people and promote their acts of holiness. 
उत वा यस्य॑ वाजिनोऽनु विप्रमतक्षत | 
स गन्ता गोम॑ति व्रजे॥ ३॥ 

3. Uta va yasya vajino’nu vipramataksata. 
Sa ganta gomati vraje. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 86 355 


Maruts, powers of exceptional speed and 
intelligence, the man of knowledge whom you shape 
into a sophisticated scholar of eminence grows to be a 
pioneer on the path of the stars. 


अस्य ied बर्हिषि सुतः सोमो दिविष्टिषु | 
उक्थं मद॑श्च शस्यते ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Asya virasya barhisi sutah somo divistisu. 
Uktham madasca Sasyate. 


The soma of honour and fame distilled on the 
holy seats of yajna, the holy chant of praise, and the joy 
and celebration of the brilliant achievement of this brave 
young man is exceptional and it is raised all round. 


अस्य श्रोषन्त्वा भुवो विश्वा यश्चर्षणीरभि | 
सूरं चित्सस्रुषीरिषः ॥ ५ ॥ 

Asya Srosantva bhuvo visva yascarsanirabhi. 
Suram cit sasrusirisah. 


Let all people of the world listen to this brave 
young man and let their homage reach him as the 
homage and gratitude of the world reaches the sun for 
the gift of light and life. 


पूर्वीभिर्हि ददाशिम शरद्धिं्मरुतो वयम्‌ | 
अवोंभिश्चर्षणीनाम्‌।॥। ६ ॥ 
6. Purvibhirhi dadasima saradbhirmaruto vayam. 


Avobhiscarsaninam. 


Maruts, dynamic powers of brilliance and 
generosity, old and ancient, just as you have been giving 
knowledge, power and protection to humanity since the 
earliest years of life, so may we, we pray, do honour 


356 RGVEDA 


and homage to you with the faithful gifts of a grateful 
people. 


सुभगः स प्र॑यज्यवो मरुतो अस्तु मर्त्यः । 
यस्य प्रयांसि पर्ष॑थ ॥ ७॥ 


oi Subhagah sa prayajyavo maruto astu martyah. 
Yasya prayamsi parsatha. 


Maruts, adorable yajnic powers, generous and 
self sacrificing, surely that person is fortunate and 
prosperous whose delightful oblations you bless and 
sprinkle with the showers of your favours. 


VISTAS वा नरः स्वेद॑स्य सत्यशवसः | 
विदा काम॑स्य वेन॑तः ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sasamanasya va narah svedasya satyasavasah. 
Vida kamasya venatah. 


Maruts, dynamic powers of action and 
generosity, know and fulfil the plan and desire of the 
man truly courageous and powerful, knowledgeable, 
cultured and graceful who honestly lives by the sweat 
of his brow. 


यूयं तत्स॑त्यशवस आविष्कर्त महित्वना | 
विध्य॑ता विद्युता रश्च: ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Yuyam tat satyaSavasa aviskarta mahitvana. 
Vidhyata vidyuta raksah. 


Maruts, men of real courage and power, with 
your honour and reputation and technological weapons, 
let that power and force come into play which would 
fix and break down the forces of crime and evil from 
the social scene. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 87 357 


Wea Tet तमो वि ata विर्व॑मत्रिण॑म्‌। 
ज्योतिष्कर्ता यदुश्मसि ॥ ९० ॥ 


10.  Guhata guhyam tamo vi yata visvamatrinam. 
Jyotiskarta yadusmasi. 


Maruts, powers of courage and justice, uncover 
and reduce the deep darkness of want and ignorance to 
nullity, eliminate the voracious hoarders of the world, 
and create the light that we love and adore. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 87 
Maruts Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


प्रत्वक्षसः प्रत॑वसो विर ष्डिनोऽ ataar अविथुरा 
ऋजीषिणः । जुष्टतमासो नृत॑मासो अन्िधिरव्यीनच्रे के 
चिदुस््राइव स्तृभिः ॥ ९॥ 


lL. Pratvaksasah pratavaso virapSino’nanata avi- 
thura rjisinah. Justatamaso nrtamaso anyjibhir 
vyanajre ke cidusra iva strbhih. 


Maruts, shaping and refining powers of life and 
nature, active powerfully, mighty exuberant, unbent, 
unshaken, lovers of truth, knowledge and joy to the last 
drop of soma, most adorable, foremost leaders of 
humanity shine as the lights of dawn with their 
splendour and cover the beauty of life with their 
blessings of protection. 


उ पहरेषु यदचिध्वं ययिं वय॑इव मरुतः केन॑ चित्पथा | 
श्चोतन्ति कोशा उप॑ वो रथेष्वा घृतमुक्षता मधुवर्णमर्चते ॥ २॥ 
2. Upahvaresu yadacidhvam yayim vaya iva 


marutah kena cit patha. Scotanti kosa upa vo 
rathesva ghrtamuksata madhuvarnam arcate. 


358 RGVEDA 


O Maruts, tempestuous heroes of the human 
nation, flying like birds by whatever path you choose, 
whatever the prize of success and victory you collect 
on your winding courses, the clouds consecrate you 
around your chariots, and shower golden honey-ghrta 
on the admiring faithfuls dedicated to you and your 
project. 


Toray विथुरेव रेजते भूमियपिंषु aed युञ्जते शुभे। 
ते mien धुन॑यो भाजंदुष्टयः स्वयं महित्वं प॑नयन्त 
धूत॑यः ॥ ३॥ 


3; Praisamajmesu vithureva rejate bhumiryamesu 
yaddha yunyjate subhe. Te krilayo dhunayo bhraja- 
drstayah svayam mahitvam panayanta dhutayah. 


During their mighty operations the earth vibrates 
like a maiden stricken with awe when the Maruts launch 
upon their noble courses. And they, sporting, shaking, 
burnishing their weapons and storming, mount up their 
own grandeur by themselves. 


स हि स्वसूत्पृष॑दश्चो gat गणो ३ऽ या ई्शानस्तविंषीभथि- 
Waa: | असिं सत्य ऋणयावानेंद्योऽ स्या धियः प्राविताथा 
तृषां गणः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa hi svasrt prsadasvo yuva gano’ya isanasta- 
vistbhiravrtah, Asi satya rnayavanedyo’sya 
dhiyah pravitatha vrsa ganah. 


The same force of Maruts, troop of heroes, 
young, self-inspired and inspiring their people, equipped 
with variety of tempestuous horse-power, all ruling with 
comprehensive intelligence, clothed in the light of 
essential merit and grandeur, you are realistic and 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 87 359 


dedicated to truth, acquitting yourselves of your 
obligations, worthy of praise, protectors of this 
intelligence of the nation with promotion and progress, 
and generous as blessed winds that bring showers of 
rain. 


पितुः प्रलस्य जन्म॑ना वदामसि सोम॑स्य rear प्र जिगाति 
चक्ष॑सा । यदीमिन्द्रं शम्युक्वांण आशतादिन्नामानि यज्ञियानि 
दधिरे ॥ ५॥ 


5. Pituh pratnasya janmana vadamasi somasya jihva 
pra jigati caksasa. Yadimindram samyrkvana 
asatadinnamani yajhiyani dadhire. 

We speak of the ancient and eternal Lord by 
virtue of birth from the same father of creation. By virtue 
of the joy of being and the sight and light of the sun, the 
tongue celebrates and advances the language of 
knowledge. Those researching and activating water and 
energy study the Rks and realise the knowledge and 
power, and then define the names, properties and yajnic 
uses of these in peace for progress. 


श्ियसे कं भानुधिः सं पिपिक्षिरे ते रण्मिधिस्त ऋक्व॑भिः 
सुखादयः । ते वाशीमन्त इष्यिणो अभीरवो विद्रे प्रियस्य 
मारुतस्य धाम्न॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sriyase karn bhanubhih sam mimiksire te rasmi- 
bhista rkvabhih sukhadayah. Te vasimanta ismino 
abhiravo vidre priyasya marutasya dhamnah. 


For the sake of the beauty, comfort and culture 
of life, they mix water with the flames of fire and clouds 
with the rays of the sun with the advice of the scholars 
of Rks, and they bring showers of rain. And, blest with 


360 RGVEDA 


sophisticated instruments and weapons, impetuous of 
speed and power, free of fear, they know the secrets 
and sources of the wondrous and dear energies of the 
Maruts. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 88 
Maruts Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


आ विद्युन्मद्धिर्मरुतः स्वर्कै रथेभिर्यात ऋष्टिमद्धिरश्व॑पर्णैः | 
आ वर्षिष्ठया न इषा वयो न deat सुमायाः ॥ ९॥ 


ly A vidyunmadbhirmarutah svarkai rathebhiryata 
rstimadbhirasvaparnaih. A varsisthaya na isa 
vayo na paptata sumayah. 


Maruts, heroes of the speed of winds, masters 
of wondrous science and power, go far by brilliant 
electric chariots fitted with high-powered weapons and 
equipped with aerial wings and, flying like birds, come 
to us with food and energy of the best and highest 
quality. 


तेऽरुणेभिर्वरमा पिशङ्खैः शुभे कं यान्ति रथतूर्भिरश्वैः | 
रुक्मो न चित्रः स्वधिंतीवान्‌ पव्या रथ॑स्य जङ्कनन्त 
भूमं । २॥ 


00 Te’runebhirvarama pisangaih subhe kam yanti 
rathaturbhirasvaih. Rukmo na citrah svadhiti-van 
pavya rathasya janghananta bhuma. 


Maruts, heroes of the speed of winds, come to 
high comfort for the sake of noble work by chariots 
powered by red flaming and yellow fire power and used 
for horses on the wing. The troop of heroes, brilliant as 
well as wonderful, commanding the force of thunder- 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 88 361 


bolt, arrives striking and breaking the ground with the 
felly of the chariot wheel. 


Br कं at अधिं तनूषु वाशीर्मेधा वना न कृणवन्त 
ऊर्ध्वा । युष्मभ्यं कं म॑रुतः सुजातास्तुविद्युम्नासो धनयन्ते 
SHAN ३॥ 


3, Sriye kam vo adhi tanusu vasirmedha vana na 
krnavanta urdhva. Yusmabhyam kam marutah 
sujatastuvidyumnaso dhanayante adrim. 


For the grace of beauty, freedom and power, and 
to provide you comfort, they raise the level of 
intelligence and knowledge of the divine Word of the 
Veda in your personality just as they raise and develop 
the trees of the forest. The Maruts, high born, abundant 
and exuberant in the wealth and knowledge of nature 
and mind, enrich the cloud and the mountain to bear 
fruit and provide comfort and joy for you. 


अहानि Wat: wal व आगुरिमां धियं वार्कार्यां a 
देवीम्‌ gal कृण्वन्तो गोत॑मासो अकैरूर्ध्व नुनुद्र उत्सधिं 
पिब॑ध्यै iw 


4. Ahani grdhrah parya va agurimam dhiyam 
varkaryam ca devim. Brahma krnvanto gotamaso 
arkairurdhvam nunudra utsadhim pibadhyai. 


Lovers of noble ambition, good days are come 
for you all round. Scholars of divine knowledge creating 
food for knowledge and spirit with the chant of holy 
mantras inspire this brilliant vision and intelligence of 
yours pure as celestial waters. Just as they uplift the 
water to provide drink and irrigation to dry area, so they 
impel our knowledge and intelligence to rise high. 


362 RGVEDA 


एतत्त्यन्न योज॑नमचेति सस्वर्ह यन्म॑रुतो गोत॑मो a: | 
पश्यन्‌ दिर॑ण्यचक्छानयो'दंष्रात्विधाव॑तो वराहून्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Etat tyanna yojanam aceti sasvarha yanmaruto 
gotamo vah. Pasyan hiranyacakran ayodam-stran 
vidhavato varahun. 


Maruts, heroes of knowledge and action moving 
at the speed of winds, this order of knowledge, action, 
science and progress which the scholars of science and 
Divinity, seeing the chariots of golden wheels and jaws 
of steel flying around and roaring, describes and teaches 
like an ideal teacher, awakens you to higher 
consciousness of knowledge and responsibility. 


एषा स्या at मरुतोऽनुभर्त्री प्रतिं ्टोभति वाघतो न वाणीं | 
अस्तोभयद्‌ वृथांसामनुं स्वधां गभस्त्योः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Esa sya vo maruto’nubhartri prati stobhati 
vaghato na vani. Astobhayad vrthasam anu 
svadham gabhastyoh. 


Maruts, heroes of the winds and leaders of 
humanity, this voice of celebration is replete with 
nourishment and confirmation of your honour and 
valour. It defines your action and achievement and, in 
consequence, it commits you to your honour and duty 
as the voice of the high priest commits the yajamana to 
his duty on purpose, according to the power and 
potential in his hands. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 89 363 


Mandala 1/Sukta 89 
Vishvedeva Deva, Aditi Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


आनो भद्राः क्रत॑वो यन्तु विश्वतोऽ द॑ब्धासो अप॑रीतास 
उद्धिद॑ः । देवा नो यथा सदमिद्‌ वृधे असन्नप्रायुवो रद्चितारों 
दिवेदिवे ॥ ९॥ 


1. A no bhadrah kratavo yantu visvato’dabdhaso 
aparitasa udbhidah. Deva no yatha sadmid vrdhe 
asannaprayuvo raksitaro divedive. 


From all sides, may noble thoughts, actions and 
meritorious people come and bless us, people fearless, 
indispensable, creative and all round saviours. Long 
lived they be, these noble ones of divine character, ever 
progressive and protective for us so that our life and 
home may grow and advance day by day. 


देवानां भद्रा सुंमतिकऋंजुयतां देवानां रातिरभिनो नि 
व॑र्तताम्‌ । देवानां सख्यमुप सेदिमा वयं देवा न आयुः प्र 
तिरन्तु जीवसे ।॥ २॥ 


2. Devanam bhadra sumatirrjuyatam devanam 
ratirabhi no ni vartatam. Devanam sakhyamu-pa 
sedima vayam deva na ayuh pra tirantu jivase. 


May the holy wisdom of the noble people 
dedicated to truth, simplicity and divinity come and bless 
us. May the wealth and generosity of the self-realised 
souls ever shine on us. May we ever be close to the 
love and friendship of the creative and brilliant people. 
May all powers of divinity bless us with good health 
and long age for a noble and full life. 


364 RGVEDA 


तान्पूर्व॑या निविदां हूमहे वयं भगं मित्रमदितिं cataterety | 
अर्यमणं वरूणां सोम॑मश्विना सर॑स्वती नः सुभगा मय॑- 
स्करत्‌॥ ३॥ 


Tan purvaya nivida humahe vayam bhagam 
mitram aditim daksam asridham. Aryamanam 
varunam somam aSvina sarasvati nah subhaga 
mayaskarat. 


Them, with the ancient and eternal Vedic voice 
of omniscience, do we invoke and celebrate: we praise 
and celebrate Bhaga, lord of glory, Mitra, universal 
friend, Aditi, mother of light, Daksha, lord of skill and 
expertise, Asridha, lord of love and ahinsa, Aryaman, 
lord of justice, Varuna, lord of all virtue worthy of 
choice, Soma, lord of beauty, peace and joy, Ashvins, 
lords of natural complementarities, and Sarasvati, 
mother of knowledge and learning and giver of good 
fortune who may, we pray, do us all the good in life. 


तन्नो वातो ware वातु भेषजं तन्माता पुथिवी aferar 
द्योः । तद्‌ ग्रावांणः सोमसुतो मयो भुवस्तद॑श्विना शृणुतं 
धिष्ण्या युवम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. 1८71710 1410 mayobhu vatu bhesajam tanmata 
prthivi tat pita dyauh. Tad gravanah somasuto 
mayobhuvastadasvina srnutam dhisnya yuvam. 


May the wind, refreshing and delightful, blow 
good and bring us that healthful medicinal freshness 
and joy. May mother earth and father sun give us that 
fresh lease of life. May the clouds, showers of joy, and 
the soma press of yajna rain down peace, health and 
happiness on us. O Ashvins, both nature’s powers of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 89 365 


growth, complementarity and enlightenment, innately 
vested with universal wisdom, listen to our prayer. 


wns जग॑तस्तस्थुषस्पतिं धियंजिन्वमवसे हूमहे वयम्‌। 
पूषा नो यथा वेदसामसद्‌ वृधे रक्चिता पायुरदब्धः 
स्वस्तये ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Tamisanam jagatastasthusaspatim dhiyam 
Jinvamavase humahe vayam. Pusa no yatha 
vedasamasad vrdhe raksita payuradabdhah 
svastaye. 


For our safety and protection, we invoke and 
pray to that Lord Ruler of the universe, father and 
controller of the moving and the non-moving world who 
inspires and enlightens our mind and sense so that 
Pusha, lord of health and growth, beyond fear and 
violence, protector and giver of nourishment be kind 
and favourable to us for our good and for the growth of 
our knowledge and competence. 


स्वस्ति न इन्द्रो वृद्धश्रवाः स्वस्ति न॑: पूषा विश्ववेदाः | 
स्वस्ति नस्ता्ष्यो अरिष्टनेमिः स्वस्ति नो बृहस्पति 
दधातु ॥ ६॥ 


6. Svasti na indro vrddhasravah svasti nah pusa 
visvavedah. Svasti nastarksyo aristanemih svasti 
no brhaspatirdadhatu. 


May Indra, lord of power and majesty, abundant 
in food, energy and honour, be for our good and bless 
us with favours. May Pusha, lord of universal growth, 
be for our good and bless us with progress. May 
Tarkshya, lord inviolable, worthy of love and friendship, 
destroyer of suffering, be good for us and bless us with 


366 RGVEDA 


good fortune. And may Brhaspati, lord of universal 
knowledge and wisdom be good and bless us with 
knowledge, wisdom and sweet language. 


पृष॑दश्वा मरुतः पृश्निमातरः शुभंयावानो विदथेषु जग्म॑यः | 
अगिजिह्ा मनवः सूरचक्षसो विश्वे नो देवा अवसा 
TAPAS ७॥ 


7. Prsadasva marutah prsnimatarah subhamya- 
vano vidathesu jagmayah. Agnijihva manavah 
suracaksaso visve no deva avasa gamanniha. 


Maruts, tempestuous heroes of war, of a variety 
of horses and chariots, children of the earth, lovers of 
good and beauty, moving to yajnas and marching to 
battles, having tongues of fire, thoughtful, radiant as 
the sun, all of them choice nobilities of the world may, 
we pray, come to us with the gift of protection and 
progress. 


भद्रं Huy: शृणुयाम देवा us प॑श्येमाश्चभिर्यजत्राः । 
स्थिरैरङ्धैस्तुष्टुवां स॑स्तनूभिर्व्खशोम देवहितं यदायुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Bhadram karnebhih srnuyama deva bhadram 
pasyemaksabhiryajatrah. Sthirairangaistustu- 
vamsastanubhirvyasema devahitam yadayuh. 


Noble people of brilliant, generous and divine 
nature, help us to hear with our ears what is good and 
beneficial. Noble people dedicated to yajna, may we, 
by your favour and kindness see with our eyes what is 
good and elevating. May we, enjoying with firm and 
strong bodies and body parts, thanking the Lord Divine 
and praising the things given by Him live a full life fit 
for and blest by the divinities. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 89 367 


शतमिन्नु शरदो अन्ति देवा यत्रां नश्चक्रा जरसं ATL 
पुत्रासो यत्र॑ पितरो भव॑न्ति मानों मध्या रीरिषता- 
ariel: ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Sataminnu sarado anti deva yatra nascakra jara- 
sam tanunam. Putraso yatra pitaro bhavanti ma 
no madhya ririsatayurgantoh. 


O Devas, powers of nature and divinity, hundred 
years is the proximity of our life in which are also 
provided the years of our old age. In that very period, 
our children will grow to be the fathers of their children. 
We pray, let not the life line of a person moving on to 
the hundred year mark be snapped on the way. 


अदिंतिर्यौरिदिंतिर न्तरिंक्चमदितिर्माता स पिता स पुत्रः । Fergal 
देवा अदितिः पञ्च जना अदिंतिर्जातमदिंतिर्जनित्वम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Aditirdyauraditirantariksamaditirmata sa pita sa 
putrah. Visve deva aditih panca jana aditirjata- 
maditirjanitvam. 


Heaven, the region of light, the lord of light, is 
eternal, imperishable. Akasha, i.e., the sky region is 
eternal. Mother is eternal. The father is eternal. The son 
is eternal. All the divinities of nature and humanity are 
eternal. The five orders of society are eternal. All that is 
born is eternal. All that is being born and will be born is 
eternal. 


Note: Eternal, imperishable, permanent: these 
terms are to be understood in the context of Vedic 
philosophy, and not in the context of daily life. Things 
are eternal in two ways: essentially and existentially. 
God, i.e., Ishvara/Brahma, jiva/ the soul, and Prakrti, 


368 RGVEDA 


these are eternal essentially. They are there when the 
universe is created and they remain after the life of one 
creation is over at the time of pralaya, annihilation. But 
the things that come into existence at the time of 
creation, such as light, sun, sky, air, water, earth, human 
and other forms of life, human relations such as father, 
mother, son, daughter, classes of people etc., go out of 
existence to annihilation at the time of pralaya. And yet, 
at the time of the next creation, they come into existence 
again. Thus they come into existence and go out of 
existence, and this flow of existence-non existence 
continues for all time, eternally. This flow is eternal. 
This flow is called Pravaha. These things are eternal in 
relation to this flow of existence. They are eternal 
existencially. The three, God, soul and Prakrti (nature) 
are eternal essentially. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 90 
Vishvedeva Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


ऋजुनीती नो वरुणो मित्रो न॑यतु विद्धान्‌ । 
अर्यमा देवैः सजोषाः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Rjuniti no varuno mitro nayatu vidvan. 
Aryama devaih sajosah. 


May God, Lord Omniscient, Varuna, lord of 
justice and worthy of our intelligent choice, Mitra, lord 
of universal friendship, and the man of knowledge, 
wisdom and divine vision bless us with a natural simple 
and honest way of living. May Aryama, lord of justice 
and dispensation, bless us with a straight way of living 
without pretence. May He, lord of love who loves us 
and whom we love bless us with the company of noble, 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 90 369 


generous and brilliant people in humanity, and may He 
grant us the benefit of such generous powers of nature. 


ते हि वस्वो adarred अप्र॑मूरा महोंभिः। 
व्रता tad विश्वाहा ॥। २॥ 


2. Te hi vasvo vasavanaste apramura mahobhih. 
Vrata raksante visvaha. 


They are the wealth, they are the values. They 
shower all with wealth and the values of life. They are 
intelligent, they know, they are great with great things 
and grandeur of existence. They guard and maintain the 
discipline and laws of life for all time. 


ते अस्मभ्यं शर्म यंसन्नमृता मर्त्येभ्यः | 
बाध॑माना अप द्विषः ॥ ३॥ 


Te asmabhyam Sarma yamsannamrta martye- 
bhyah. Badhamana apa dvisah. 


May they, lords of power and intelligence, 
immortal and free, bring us, for all the mortals, comfort 
and well-being, keeping off hate and enmity. 


वि न॑ः पथः सुविताय चियन्त्विन्द्रो wed: | 
पूषा भगो वन्द्यासः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Vi nah pathah suvitaya ciyantvindro marutah. 
Pusa bhago vandyasah. 


May Indra, lord of power and majesty, Maruts, 
vibrant powers of nature and leaders of humanity, Pusha, 
lord of health and growth, Bhaga, lord of plenty and 
good fortune, all worthy of adoration, select and prepare 
for us the right paths of living and confirm us in the 
good life for comfort and well-being. 


370 RGVEDA 


उत नो धियो गोअग्राः पूषन्विष्णवेव॑यावः। 
कती नः स्वस्तिमतः ॥ ५५ ॥ 

5. Uta no dhiyo go agrah pusan visnavevayavah. 
Karta nah svastimatah. 

Pusha, lord of health and growth, Vishnu, lord 
omnipresent, and the leading man of enlightenment may, 
we pray, guide us to the intelligence and imagination 
which may issue in the right sense of perception, will 
and action, and may they confirm us in the good life of 
plenty and well-being. 


मधु वातां ऋतायते मधुं क्षरन्ति सिन्ध॑वः। 
माध्वीर्नः सन्त्वोषधीः ue ॥ 

6. Madhu vata rtayate madhu ksaranti sindhavah. 
Madhvirnah santvosadhih. 


Sweet as honey the winds blow for the soul of 
simplicity and naturalness. The waters rain, rivers flow 
and the oceans roll sweet as honey. May the herbs too 
be sweet as honey for us all. 


मधु नक्तमुतोषसो मधुमत्पार्थिवं Tat: | 
मधु द्यौर॑स्तु नः पिता ॥ ७॥ 


a: Madhu naktamutosaso madhumat parthivam 
rajah. Madhu dyaurastu nah pita. 


May the night be soothing sweet as honey. May 
the days be energetic sweet as honey. May the dust of 
earth be fragrant sweet as honey. And may the sun in 
heaven, our father, shine bright and sweet as honey. 


मधुमान्नो वनस्पतिर्मधुमां अस्तु सूर्य । 
माध्वीगविो भवन्तु नः॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 371 


8. Madhumanno vanaspartirmadhuman astu suryah. 
Madhvirgavo bhavantu nah. 


May the trees be full of honey for us. May the 
sun be full of honey for us. May the cows be abundant 
in honey sweet milk for us. 


vi al fas: शं वरुणः शं al भवत्वर्यमा। 
शं न इन्द्रो बहस्पतिः शं नो false: eu 


9. Sam no mitrah sam varunah sam no bhavatvar- 
yama. Sam na indro brhaspatih sam no visnururu- 
kramah. 


May Mitra bless us with peace. May Varuna 
bring us peace. May Aryama lead us to peace. May Indra 
and Brhaspati shower us with peace. May Vishnu, lord 
of mighty action, bless us with peace and action. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 91 
Soma Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


त्वं सोम प्र चिकितो मनीषा त्वं tise नेषि पन्थाम्‌ । 
तव प्रणीती पितरो न इन्दो देवेषु रल्र॑मभजन्त धीराः ॥ ९ ॥ 


I. Tvam soma pra cikito manisa tvam rajisthama- 
nu nesi pantham. Tava praniti pitaro na indo 
devesu ratnam abhajanta dhirah. 


Soma, lord of peace, power and joy, you are 
wide-awake with understanding and alertness of mind. 
You lead to the simple, natural and truthful path of life 
and action. By virtue of your guidance and leadership, 
soothing and gracious as the moon, our wise seniors 
and forefathers enjoy the very jewels of life among the 
divinities. 


372 RGVEDA 


त्वं Gin क्रतुभिः सुक्रतुरभूस्त्वं aa: qaail विश्ववेदाः | 
त्वे वृषा। वृषत्वेभिवर्महित्वा द्युम्नेभिरयुम्य॑भवो नृचक्षा: ॥ २॥ 


2: Tvam soma kratubhih sukraturbhustvam daksaih 
sudakso visvavedah. Tvam vrsa vrsatvebhirma- 
hitva dyumnebhirdyumnyabhavo nrcaksah. 


Soma, lord of peace and joy, with acts of 
knowledge, vision and wisdom, you are a hero of noble 
action. With science and expertise, you are the specialist, 
possessed of universal knowledge. With showers of 
generosity and noble qualities, you are generous as the 
cloud. Lord of knowledge and vision of humanity, with 
your wealth and charities, you are the ideal honoured 
philanthropist. 


राज्ञो नु ते वरूणस्य व्रतानि बृहद्‌ ग॑भीरं तव॑ सोम ers | 
शुचिष्ट्रम॑सि प्रियो न पित्रो दक्षाय्यो अर्यमिवांसि सोम ॥ ३॥ 


of Rajno nu te varunasya vratani brhadgabhiram 
tava soma dhama. Sucistvamasi priyo na mitro 
daksayyo aryamevasi soma. 


Soma, royal and exceptional are your vows of 
discipline dedicated to the world ruler Varuna. Grand 
and deep is your home. Pure and immaculate are you, 
dear as a bosom friend, Soma, and master of ceremonies 
as the foremost leader of a yajna. 


याते arn दिवि या पुंथिव्यां या पर्वतेष्वोष॑धीष्वप्सु | 
तेभिर्नो विश्वै: सुमना अदहेव्छत्राज॑न्त्सोम प्रति हव्या 
गुंभाय॥ SU ति 

4. Ya te dhamani divi ya prthivyam ya parvate- 
svosadhisvapsu. Tebhirno visvaih sumana ahelan 
rajantsoma prati havya grbhaya. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 373 


Soma, ruling lord of vitality, life and joy, 
whatever and wherever your homes in the regions of 
light, wherever on earth, wherever on the mountains, 
wherever in the herbs and waters, with all of them, lord 
good at heart and well-disposed, bless us with the holy 
materials for yajna and, in return, accept our homage of 
yajnic oblations. 


त्वं सोमासि सत्प॑तिस्त्वं राजोत वुंत्रहा | 
त्वं भद्रो असि क्रतुः ॥ ५॥ 


9, Tvam somasi satpatistvam rajota vrtraha. 
Tvam bhadro asi kratuh. 


Soma, you are the lord and ruler of the ultimate 
and essential reality of existence. You are the ruler and 
controller of the negativities of existence and a breaker 
of the clouds of rain. You are the ultimate good and 
kind father, lord of yajna, omniscient, giver of 
knowledge, creator of knowledge and yajna. 


त्वं चं सोम नो agit जीवातुं न म॑रामहे। 
प्रियस्तोत्रो वनस्पतिः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam ca soma no vaso jivatum na maramahe. 
Priyastotro vanaspatih. 


Soma, you are the pleasure, beauty and charm 
of our life for health and age. By virtue of you, we shall 
not die. You are the darling magic mantra against 
mortality, the ultimate Tree of Life and freedom. 


त्वं सोम महे भगं त्वं यून॑ ऋतायते | 
दक्षं दधासि जीवसे ।। ७ ॥ 


(९ Tvam soma mahe bhagam tvam yuna rtayate. 
Daksam dadhasi jivase. 


374 RGVEDA 


For the great and young and the devotee of 
simplicity, nature and universal law, you bring science 
and expertise and great wealth of special knowledge 
for life, well-being and full age. 


त्वं न॑: सोम विश्वतो tet राजन्नघायतः | 
न रिष्येत्वाव॑तः सखा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam nah soma visvato raksa rajannaghayatah. 
Na risyet tvavatah sakha. 


Soma, ruler of life and nature, you are the all 
round protector of ours against all sin and evil. No friend 
and devotee of yours under your divine protection ever 
suffers. He never perishes. 


सोम यास्ते मयोभुवं ऊतयः सन्तिं दाशुषे । 
ताभिर्नोऽ विता भ॑व।॥ ९॥ 


9. Soma yaste mayobhuva utayah santi dasuse. 
Tabhirno’ vita bhava. 
Soma, whatever safeguards, protections and 
immunities of yours there be, refreshing and 


rejuvenating for the generous and the charitable, with 
those be the saviour and protector for us too. 


इमं यज्ञमिदं वचो जुजुषाण उपागंहि। 
सोमत्वं नो वृधे Hat ९०॥ 

10. Imam yajnamidam 14८6 jujusana upagahi. 
Soma tvam no vrdhe bhava. 


Soma, accept this yajna, this yajnic homage of 
divine words, come close and be good and kind for our 
growth and progress. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 375 


ara गीर्भिष्ट्र वयं aefatat वचोविदः । 
सुमृव्टीको न आ विंश॥ ९९॥ 

11. Soma girbhistva vayam vardhayamo vacovidah. 
Sumrliko na a visa. 


Soma, lord of health and well-being, we praise, 
celebrate and extol you in the words we know, which 
describe your virtues and powers. Harbinger of peace 
and well-being, come and be with us. 


गयस्फानो! अमीवहा व॑सुवित्ुंषटि वर्धनः 
सुमित्रः सोम नो भव ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Gayasphano amivaha vasuvit pustivardhanah. 


Sumitrah soma no bhava. 


Soma, you are the giver and promoter of pranic 
vitality. You are the destroyer of disease. You are the lord 
giver of the wealth of good health and growth with 
nourishment. You are a good friend. Come and be 
with us. 


सोमं acter at हृदि गावो न यवसेष्वा । 
मर्यइव स्व ओक्ये ।। ९३॥ 
13. Soma rarandhi no hrdi gavo na yavasesva. 


Marya iva sva okye. 


Soma, come and abide with pleasure in our 
heart, and let us be at peace with delight at heart as 
cows are in the fields of rich barley and humans are at 
peace in security in their own homes. 


यः सोम सख्ये तव॑ रारणंदेव मर्त्य । 
तं दश्च: सचते कविः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


376 RGVEDA 


14. Yah soma sakhye tava raranad deva martyah. 
Tam daksah sacate kavih. 


Soma, lord of health and happiness, lucky is the 
man who enjoys life in your company with your 
delightful gifts. The man of efficiency loves to have 
him for company, and the poet loves to sing of him. 


उरुष्या णो अभिशस्तेः सोम नि पाद्यंहंसः। 
सखा सुशेवं एधि नः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Urusya no abhisasteh soma ni pahyanhasah. 
Sakha suseva edhi nah. 


Soma, lord of health and happiness, guard us 
against hate, imprecation and depression. Save us from 
sin and damnation. Come, we pray, and be with us a 
good friend, philosopher and guide. 


आ प्यायस्व समेतु ते favad: सोम वृष्ण्य॑म्‌ । 
भवा वाजस्य संगथे ॥ ९६॥ 


16. A pyayasva sametu te वाद soma vrsnyam. 
Bhava vajasya samgathe. 


Source and secret of health and life, Soma, lord 
giver of strength and vitality, grow and help us grow. 
May growth and progress come to you from all round. 
Let it come to us from all round. Be at the heart of 
congregations and in the thick of battles where strength 
and courage rule the life for victory. 


आ प्यांयस्व मदिन्तम सोम विश्वेभिरंशुभिः । 
भवां नः सुश्रवस्तमः सखा वृधे ॥ ९७॥ 


17. A pyayasva madintama soma visvebhiramsu-bhih. 
Bhava nah susravastamah sakha vrdhe. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 Sd 7 


Most ecstatic Soma, grow all round with every 
filament of growth, with the rays of the sun all round, 
with every libation in the vedi, and help us grow too. 
Be a friend of ours, most reputable and prosperous, for 
all round growth. 


सं ते पयांसि ad यन्तु वाजाः सं वृष्ण्यान्यभिमातिषाहः | 
आप्यायमानो अमृताय सोम दिवि श्रवांस्युत्तमानि 
धिष्व 1 ९८ ॥ 


18. Sam te payamsi samu yantu vajah sam vrsnyanya- 
bhimatisahah. Apyayamano amrtaya soma divi 
Sravamsyuttamani dhisva. 


Soma, lord of light, health and energy of life, 
may all the waters, foods and vitalities of existence, 
antidotes to the negativities of existence come to you 
in abundance, and may all those abundant and powerful 
drinks, foods and energies of yours come to us and 
augment our vitality to fight out the negative and 
cancerous forces of life. Lord of life, thus strengthened 
by nature in the regions of light and blessing us for health 
and immortality, bear for us the best of foods and 
energies of life for growth and for victory in the battles 
of life. 

या ते धामानि हविषा यज॑न्ति ता ते विश्वां cient 
यज्ञम्‌। गयस्फानः प्रतरणः सुवीरोऽवीरहा प्र च॑रा सोप 
earn ९९॥ 


19. Yate dhamani havisa yajanti ta te visva paribhu- 
rastu yajnam. Gayasphanah prataranah suviro’- 
viraha pra cara soma duryan. 


Soma, lord of life, energy and vitality, all those 


378 RGVEDA 


places and nature’s activities which feed and promote 
your yajna of evolution may, we pray, bless and benefit 
us. Lord supreme over all, generous giver of promotion 
and progress, saviour across the seas of life, commander 
of the brave and support of the meek, be close to us, 
our families and our homes. 


सोमो धेनुं सोमो अर्वन्तमाश सोमो! वीरं कर्मण्यं ददाति। 
सादन्यं विदथ्यं सभेयं पितुश्रव॑णं यो ददाशदस्मै ॥ २०॥ 


20. Somo dhenum somo arvantamasum somo viram 
karmanyam dadati. Sadanyam vidathyam 
sabheyam pitrsravanam yo dadasadasmai. 


Blessed is the man who gives in faith in homage 
to Soma, this lord of life, to augment his yajna of 
evolution at the human level. And Soma gives him the 
cow, the fast horse, the brave hero for progeny dedicated 
to the family and the home, yajna and the battles of life, 
the congregation and the assembly, and the words and 
wishes of the parents. 


sae युत्सु पृत॑नासु पप्रिं स्वर्षामप्सां वृजन॑स्य गोपाम्‌। 
भरेषुजां सुश्चितिं सुश्रव॑सं जय॑न्तं त्वामनु मदेम सोम ॥ २९॥ 


21. Asalham yutsu prtanasu paprim svarsamapsam 
vrjanasya gopam. Bharesujam suksitim susrava- 
sam jayantam tvamanu madema soma. 


Soma, lord of joy, ecstasy and generosity in 
abundance, informidable in battles, protective and 
promotive in contests, abundant in the shower of waters, 
preserver of strength, hero of abundance in means of 
defence, lord of land and shelter, commanding fame and 
honour, and always victorious, we praise and celebrate 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 92 379 
you and enjoy life with you. 


त्वमिमा ओष॑धीः सोम विश्वास्त्वमपो अजनयस्त्वं गाः। 
त्वमा त॑तन्थोर्व१ न्तरिश्चं त्वं ज्योतिषा वि तमों ववर्थ 11 २२॥ 


22. Tvamima osadhih soma visvastvamapo ajanaya- 
stvam gah. Tvama tatanthorvantariksam tvam 
Jyotisa vi tamo vavartha. 


Soma, lord of creation and evolution, you create 
all these herbs of the world, you create the waters, the 
mind and senses, the cows, the earths and all else that 
moves. You create, expand and pervade the skies, and 
you dispel the dark and cover the spaces with light. 


देवेन॑ नो मन॑सा देव सोम रायो भागं dearaafa aes । 
मात्वा त॑नदीशिषे वीर्यस्योभयेभ्यः प्र चिकित्सा 
गविष्ठो ॥ २३॥ 


23. Devena no manasa deva soma rayo bhagam 
sahasavannabhi yudhya. Ma tva tanadisise virya- 
syobhayebhyah pra cikitsa gavistau. 


Soma, lord of generosity and invincible force, 
move and, with brilliance of mind and intelligence, fight 
against opposition for the creation of our share of wealth. 
No one would oppose and thwart you. You rule the 
strength for both body and mind. In the battles of 
humanity for light, freedom and prosperity, increase 
your power and influence. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 92 
Usha and Ashvins Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 
एता उ त्या sae: केतुम॑क्रत पूर्वे अर्थे रज॑सो UTS | 
निष्कृण्वाना आयुधानीव youre: प्रति wets रुषीर्यन्ति 
मातरः ॥ ९॥ 


380 


ll; Eta u tya usasah ketumakrata purve ardhe rajaso 
bhanumanjate. Niskrnvana ayudhaniva dhrsna- 
vah prati gavo’rusiryanti matarah. 


The lights of the dawn over there in the eastern 
half of the sky over earth reveal the sun and proclaim 
the day. Like resolute warriors burnishing their swords, 
the flames of the dawn, shining scarlet red, move 
forward with the rising sun bringing a fresh breath of 
life for humanity, like mother cows. 


उद॑पप्तन्नरूणा भानवो वृथां स्वायुजो अरुषीर्गा अयुक्षत । 
sage वयुनानि पूर्वथा रुशन्तं भानुमरुषीरशि- 
श्रयुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Udapaptannaruna bhanavo vrtha svayujo arustr- 
ga ayuksata. Akrannusadso vayunani purvatha 
rusantam bhanumarusirasisrayuh. 


Up rise the red flames of the dawn, naturally 
and spontaneously like willing red horses yoked to the 
chariot. The ruddy lights of the dawn awakening 
humanity to their daily chores as before proclaim the 
rise of the brilliant sun in obedience to his command. 


अर्चन्ति नारीरपसो न विष्टिभिः समानेन योजनेना प॑रावतंः 1 
इषं वर्हन्तीः सुकृते सुदानवे विश्वेदह यज॑मानाय सुन्वते ॥ ३ ॥ 
Arcanti narirapaso na vistibhih samanena yoja- 


nena paravatah. Isam vahantth sukrte sudanave 
visvedaha yajamanaya sunvate. 


The lights of the dawn, like blessed women 
expert in their noble work, serve and illumine from afar 
with equal brilliance various regions of the world, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 92 381 


bearing vital food and rejuvenating energy for the pious 
and generous yajamana dedicated to the creative service 
of life and nature everywhere every day. 


अधि पेशांसि वपते नृतूरिवापोर्णुते aa sera aster 
ज्योतिर्विश्व॑स्पै भुव॑नाय कृण्वती गावो न व्रजं व्युपैषा 
आवर्तमः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Adhi pesamsi vapate nrturivapornuta vaksa 
usreva varjaham. Jyotirvisvasmai bhuvanaya 
krnvati gavo na vrajam vyusa avartamah. 


Just as a dancer puts on various costumes and 
characters and just as a cow waxes its udders full of 
milk for the calf, so does the dawn assume many forms 
and bares her bosom of light to illuminate the whole 
world with lights as the flames dispel the darkness from 
all places reaching there as cows reach their stalls. 


प्रत्यचीं रुश॑दस्या steht वि fied बाधंते कृष्णमभ्वम्‌ | 
स्वरू न पेशो विद्थेष्वञ्जज्चित्रं दिवो दुहिता भानु- 
म॑श्रेत्‌॥ ५॥ 


ॐ, Pratyarct rusadasya adarsi vi tisthate badhate 
krsnamabhvam. Svarum na péso vidathesvanjan 
citram divo duhita bhanumasret. 


The brilliant light of the dawn arises in the east, 
radiates and expands, it stalls and dispels the deep dark 
of the night. And just as an artist decorates a yajnic post 
in great congregations so, adorning the wondrous sun 
as an ornament of light, this daughter of heaven reveals 
the glory of the sun. 


अतारिष्प तम॑सस्पारमस्योषा See वयुनां कृणोति । rar 
छन्दो न स्म॑यते विभाती सुप्रतीका सौमनसायाजीगः ॥ € ॥ 


382 RGVEDA 


6. Atarisma tamasasparamasyosa ucchanti vayuna 
krnoti. Sriye chando na smayate vibhati supratika 
saumanasayajigah. 


At the rise of the dawn, we cross this dark of 
the night. Rising and radiating, the brilliant dawn 
awakens us to the bright business of the day. Like the 
joyous hymns of the Veda for the beauty, prosperity and 
graces of life, it smiles, shining, consumes the darkness 
and, itself beautiful of form, it reveals the beauties of 
the world for our refreshment and rejuvenation. 


भास्व॑ती नेत्री सूनृतानां दिवः स्त॑वे दुहिता गोत॑मेभिः | 
प्रजाव॑तो नृवतो अश्वबुध्यानुषो गोअग्राँ sd मासि 
वाजान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Bhasvati netri sunrtanam divah stave duhita 
gotamebhih. Prajavato nrvato asvabudhyanuso 
go-agran upa masi vajan. 

Brilliant and radiating, inspiring the devotees 
of truth and piety, the Dawn, daughter of light, is 
celebrated by divine scholars. So do I sing in honour of 
her. She brings over the foods, energies, inspirations 
and noble aspirations and battles of action which lead 
to awakening of family people and leaders of men to 
speed of advancement, planning for land and cows, 
human development and family management. 


उषस्तम॑श्यां यशसं सुवीरं दासप्रवर्ग thravagery| 
सुदंसंसा श्रव॑सा या विभासि वाजप्रसूता सुभगे बृहन्त॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Usastamasyam yasasam suviram dasapravar- 
gam rayimasvabudhyam. Sudamsasa Sravasa ya 
vibhasi vajaprasuta subhage brhantam. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 92 383 


O Dawn, daughter of sunlight, divine and 
charming, who shine with the morning splendour of 
action and glory of fame and generosity, I pray, with 
your inspiration and initiation, may I be blessed with 
that great growing and highest wealth of life which is 
full of honour, maintained by brave heroes and multitude 
of manpower, and characterized by speed, advancement 
and achievement. 


fasalft देवी भुव॑नाथिचक्ष्यां प्रतीची चक्षुरुर्विया fa 
alfa विश्वं जीवं चरसे बोधयन्ती विश्व॑स्य वाच॑म- 
विदन्मनायोः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Visvani devi bhuvanabhicaksya pratict caksu- 
rurviya vi bhati. Visvam jivam carase bodhayan- 
fi visvasya vacam avidanmanayoh. 


Dawn, brilliant daughter of light and heaven, 
eye of the eye, watching all the regions of the world, 
shines and moves to the west in relation to the earth, 
awakening all the forms of life to daily activities, 
speaking as if and inspiring the language of the people 
of thought and imagination. 

a: पुनजयमाना पुराणी संमानं वर्णीमभि शुम्भं 
माना । श्वघ्नीव कृलुर्विंजं आमिनाना मर्त॑स्य देवी जर- 
यन्त्यायुः ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Punah punarjayamana purani samanam varna- 
mabhi sumbhamana. Svaghniva krtnurvija ami- 
nana martasya devi jarayantyayuh. 

Old and ancient, born and reborn again and 


again, ever a new, the Brilliant Dawn, shining in glory 
with the same refulgence of beauty, an artificer of 


384 RGVEDA 


eternity consuming time today and tomorrow collects 
the stakes at play and counts out the age of mortals day 
by day. 


व्यूण्वती दिवो अन्ताँ अबोध्यप raat सनुतर्युंधोति । 
प्रमिनती मनुष्यां युगानि योषा जारस्य चक्ष॑सा वि 
भाति।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Vyurnvati divo antan abodhyapa svasaram 
sanutaryuyoti. Praminati manusyad yugani yosa 
jarasya caksasa vi bhati. 


The Dawn wakes up, illuminating and revealing 
the bounds of heaven and expanse of the sky, and 
constantly dispels her sister, the dark night. Wearing 
away and counting out the ages of humanity, she shines 
by the light of the sun like a maiden blooming and 
blushing at the sight of her admirer. 


पशून्न चित्रा सुभगां प्रथाना सिन्धुर्न क्षोदं उर्विया algae 
अमिनती दैव्यानि व्रतानि सूर्यस्य चेति ciated 
SITU VI 


12. Pasunna citra subhaga prathana sindhurna ksoda 
urviya vyasvait. Aminati daivyani vratani surya- 
sya ceti rasmibhirdrsana. 


Wonderful and glorious, waxing like animals 
spreading and roaming around out of the stalls, like a 
river in spate and like swell of the sea, the Dawn radiates 
and expands over the expanse of the earth. Transgressing 
no laws of Nature and holy observances of Truth, 
shining with the rays of the sun, she reveals herself to 
our eyes. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 92 385 


उषस्तच्यित्रमा भ॑रास्मभ्यं वाजिनीवति | 
येन॑ तोकं च तन॑यं च धाम॑हे ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Usastaccitrama bharasmabhyam vajinivati. 
Yena tokam ca tanayam ca dhamahe. 


O Dawn, harbinger of food, energy and 
rejuvenation of thought, will and action, bear and bring 
that health and wealth of wondrous and various kinds 
for us by which we may be able to beget, maintain and 
advance our children and grand-children and others, 
friends and assistants in life. 


उषो अद्येह गोमत्यश्वावति विभावरि 1 
रे वदस्मे व्युच्छ सूनृतावति ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Uso adyeha gomatyasvavati vibhavari. 
Revadasme vyuccha sunrtavati. 


O Dawn, lady of light, generous with cows and 
fertility, horses and fast movement, light and knowledge, 
truth and piety of life with favours of divinity, bear and 
bless us here and now in this life with wealth of 
prosperity and a happy home. 


युक्ष्वा हि वाजिनीवत्यश्वाँ ' अद्यारुणाँ Sa: । 
अथां नो विश्वा सौभगान्या व॑ह ॥ ९५॥ 
15. Yuksva hi vajinivatyasvan adyarunan usah. 
Atha no visva saubhaganya vaha. 
O Dawn, lady of radiance and the energy and 
vibrancy of life, yoke the red rays of sunbeams to your 


celestial chariot and then bear and bring us all the 
wealths and good fortunes of the world. 


386 RGVEDA 


अश्विना वर्तिरस्मदा गोमंहस्त्रा हिर॑ण्यवत्‌ | 
अ्वग्रिथं सम॑नसा नि य॑च्छतम्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Asvina vartirasmada gomad dasra hiranyavat. 
Arvagratham samanasa ni yacchatam. 


Generous scientists of fire and waters, Ashvins, 
expert technologists working together with equal 
cooperative mind, bring hither before us a chariot 
sensitive in reception and communication of signals, 
golden in quality and extremely fast in motion anywhere 
on earth, over water and in the sky. 


यावित्था श्लोकमा दिवो ज्योतिर्जनाय चक्रथुः । 
आ न ऊर्ज" वहतमश्विना युवम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


10. = Yavittha slokama divo jyotirjanaya cakrathuh. 
A na urjam vahatamaSsvina yuvam. 


Ashvins, scientist and technologist of fire and 
water, both of you thus from the sun create the mantra, 
light and energy and bring it for us and the people for 
common use. 


एह देवा Hayat cer हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी । 
उषर्बुधो वहन्तु सोमपीतये ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Eha deva mayobhuva dasra hiranyavartani. 
Usarbudho vahantu somapitaye. 


Let the Ashvins, people of divine nature, 
scientists and technologists, generous experts of fire and 
water, water and air, creators of comfort and joy, 
working on the golden sunbeams of the morning dawn, 
create and bring us energy and vitality for the health, 
vitality and joy of humanity. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 93 387 


Mandala 1/Sukta 93 
Agni-Soma Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi 


अग्नीषोमाविमं सु A शृणुतं वुंषणा हव॑म्‌ । 
प्रतिं सूक्तानि हर्यतं भव॑तं दाशुषे wa: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Agnisomavimam su me $rnutam vrsana havam. 
Prati suktani haryatam bhavatam dasuse mayah. 


Agni-Soma, power divine both fire and water 
in one, beauty and brilliance of the Lord’s Nature in 
existence blissful as sun-and-moon, fire and air, exciting 
and soothing, lord of dynamic knowledge, kind 
disposition and steady action, generous and abundant, 
listen to this prayer of mine, respond with love and 
kindness to these honest words and be gracious to me, 
this dedicated child and faithful disciple. 


अग्नीषोमा यो अद्य वामिदं वच॑: सपर्यति । 
तस्मै धत्तं सुवीर्यं गवां पोषं स्वश्व्य॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2 Agnisoma yo adya vamidam vacah saparyati. 
Tasmai dhattam suviryam gavam posam svasv- 
yam. 

Agni-Soma, whoever may listen to this word of 
yours, and faithfully follow it in spirit and action, bless 
him with health and nourishment, speed and success in 


advancement, sensitivity of mind and brain and 
generous productivity and social dynamism. 


अग्नीषोमा य आहुतिं यो वां दाशा द्धविष्करःतिम्‌ । 
स प्रजयां सुवीर्यं विश्वमायुर्व्य'श्नवत्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


2 Agnisoma ya ahutim yo vam dasaddhaviskrtim. 
Sa prajaya suviryam visvamayurvyasnavat. 


388 RGVEDA 


Agni-Soma, fire, air and waters of the 
firmament, whoever the person offering you oblations 
in yajna and holy gifts of yajna in charity, may he, we 
pray, be blest with best of health and energy and a full 
age of universal prosperity with a happy family and 
noble friends. 


अग्रीषोपा चेति तद्वीर्य' वां यदमुष्णीतमवसं पणिं गाः । 
अवातिरतं ब॒स॑यस्य षोऽ विन्दतं ज्योतिरेकं, बहुभ्यः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Agnisoma ceti tad viryam vam yadamusnitama- 
vasam panim gah. Avatiratam brsayasya Seso’- 
vindatam jyotirekam bahubhyah. 


Agni-Soma, fire and water, your valour and 
power is revealed and known when you acquire and 
absorb the protective power of sun-rays, retain a part of 
the blaze, release the rest of the sun’s heat and bring 
down one uniform light for the many forms of life to 
survive and grow. 


युवमेतानि दिवि रोचनान्यिश्च॑ सोम सक्रतू अधत्तम्‌ | 
युवं सिन्धूरभिशंस्तेरवद्यादग्रीषोमावमुंञ्चतं गृभीतान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Yuvametani divi rocananyagnisca soma sakratu 
adhattam. Yuvam sindhunrabhisasteravadya- 
dagnisomavamuncatam grbhitan. 


Agni and Soma, you two, electric energy and air 
of equal power and joint function, hold and sustain these 
wondrous lights of the stars in heaven. Agni and Soma, 
you two release the rivers and seas of waters held up above 
and save them from disagreeable imprecations below. 


आन्यं दिवो मा॑त्रिश्वां जभारामथ्नादन्यं परि श्येनो अद्र: । 
अग्रींषोमा ब्रह्म॑णा वावृधानोरुं यज्ञाय॑ चक्रथुरु CHA ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 93 389 


6. Anyam divo matarisva jabharamathnadanyam 
pari syeno adreh. Agnisoma brahmana vavrdha- 
norum yajnaya cakrathurulokam. 


Agni and Soma growing by the energy and 
power of Brahman extend and expand the universe 
wider and wider for the divine yajna of creation. Of 
these, Matarishva, electric energy that rolls in space, 
derives from and holds another, i.e., the subtle energy 
from the sun in heaven. And Agni, moving like a 
celestial horse at the speed of light, holds the other, that 
is, the subtle Soma, from the sun and the cloud. 


अग्नीषोमा हविषः प्रस्थितस्य वीतं हर्यतं वृषणा जुषेथाम्‌। 
सुशमौणा स्ववसा हि भूतमथा धत्तं यज॑मानाय शं 
योः॥ ७॥ 


Te Agnisoma havisah prasthitasya vitam haryatam 
vrsana jusetham. Susarmana svavasa hi bhita- 
matha dhattam yajamanaya sam yoh. 


Agni and Soma, fire and wind, vitalise and impel 
the holy materials offered into the fire, carry it on and 
delight in their creative and expansive process. Creators 
and givers of comfort and joy, protectors of life they 
are, they bring peace and happiness for the yajamana, 
catalyse, refine and create new materials for him. 


यो अग्रीषोमां हविषां सपर्यां वद्रीचा मन॑सा यो घृतेन॑ । 
तस्यं ad tard पातमंहसो fast जनय महि शर्म 
सच्छतम्‌।। ८ ॥ 

8. Yo agnisoma havisa saparyad devadrica manasa 


yo ghrtena. Tasya vratam raksatam patamanhaso 
vise janaya mahi sarma yacchatam. 


390 RGVEDA 


Whoever is dedicated to Agni and Soma, fire 
and wind, and with an honest mind offers homage to 
them with ghrta and other holy materials, Agni and Soma 
protect and support his vows of piety for life, save him 
from sin, and give the citizens, people high and low all, 
great and noble peace, comfort and joy. 


अग्नीषोमा सवेदसा सहूती वनतं Fire: । 
सं देवत्रा ब॑भूवथुः ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Agnisoma savedasa sahuti vanatam girah. 


Sam devatra babhuvathuh. 


Agni and Soma, invoked and served together, 
sharing the offerings together in yajna, pray listen and 
grant our prayers, come and be with the noble and 
dedicated people at the yajna. 


अग्नीषोमावनेन वां यो वां घृतेन दा॑ति। 


तस्यै दीदयतं बृहत्‌ ॥ ९० ॥ 
10. Agnisomavanena vam yo vam ghrtena daSati. 
Tasmai didayatam brhat. 


Agni and Soma, whoever offers homage to you 
with this ghrta and water in scientific yajna, bless him 
with great good fortune and wealth of life. 


अग्रीषोमाविमानिं नो युवं हव्या Asia | 
आ यातमुप नः सचां ॥ eeu 

11. Agnisomavimani no yuvam havya jujosatam. 
A yatamupa nah saca. 


Agni and Soma, fire and wind, both of you 
accept these holy materials of ours in scientific yajna, 
come and be our friends and benefactors. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 391 


अग्नीषोमा पिपृतमर्वतो न आ प्यांयन्तामुस्तरिय। हव्यसूदः | 
अस्मे बलानि म॒घव॑त्सु धत्तं कृणुतं नो! अध्वरं श्रुष्टि - 
मन्त॑म्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Agnisoma piprtamarvato na a pyayantamusriya 
havyasudah. Asme balani maghavatsu dhattam 
krnutam no adhvaram srustimantam. 


Agni and Soma, yajnic leaders of the nation, 
feed and empower our horses, modes of travel and 
transport. Nourish and upbreed our cows for the gift of 
holy milk and ghrta for our yajnas. Invest our economic 
and governing powers with strength and generosity and 
universalise our yajnic endeavours with instant response 
and rich production for all of us. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 94 
Agni Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


इमं स्तोममर्हते जातवेदसे रथ॑मिव सं म॑हेमा मनीषयां । 
भद्रा हि नः प्रम॑तिरस्य Geen! सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं 
तवं ।॥। ९॥ 


i Imam stomamarhate jatavedase rathamiva sam 
mahema manisaya. Bhadra hi nah pramatirasya 
samsadyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


This song of celebration and worship in honour 
of venerable Jataveda, Agni, omnipresent in the created 
world and lord omniscient, we sing in praise of his glory 
with our mind and soul in sincerity and offer it to him 
as a joyous holiday chariot fit for his majesty. Blessed 
is our mind in his company, while we sit in the assembly 
of devotees. 


392 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may 
we never come to suffering while we enjoy your 
company and friendship. 


यस्मै त्वमायजसे स साधत्यनर्वा क्षेति cela सुवीर्यम्‌ | 
स तंताव नैन॑ंमश्नोत्यंहतिरगं सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं तव॑ i २॥ 


De Yasmai tvamayajase sa sadhatyanarva kseti 
dadhate suviryam. Sa tutava nainamasnotyan- 
hatiragne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Agni, whoever you bless grows in strength and 
competence. He lives and moves undisturbed, 
irresistible, wins power and valour, and rises to greatness 
and prosperity. Want, anxiety and poverty touch him 
never. Agni, we pray, we may never suffer want and 
misery while we enjoy your friendship and company. 


rena त्वा समिधं साधया धियस्त्वे देवा हविरदन्त्याहुतम्‌ | 
त्वमादित्याँ आ वंह तान्‌ ह्यु रमस्यगनँ सख्ये मा रिंघामा 
वयं तव॑ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3s Sakema tva samidhar sadhaya dhiyastve deva 
haviradantyahutam. Tvamdadityan a vaha tan 
hyusmasyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may 
we be able to kindle and develop the fire power of yajna. 
Pray refine our intelligence and bless us with success 
in our intellectual endeavours. Whatever we offer in 
yajna, the divinities receive and share. Bring over the 
scholars of the highest order of brilliance and realise 
the light of the stars on earth. We love them, honour 
and cherish them. Agni, we pray, may we never suffer 
any want or misery in your company. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 393 


भरामेध्मं कृणवामा हवीं पिं ते चितय॑न्तः पर्वणापर्वणा 
aa जीवातवे प्रतरं साधया धियोऽगे सख्ये मा रिषामा 
वयं तव॑ ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Bharamedhmam krnavama havimsi te citayantah 
parvana parvana vayam. Jivatave prataram 
sadhaya dhiyo’gne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Lighting the fire, observing and learning step 
by step, yajna by yajna, the full and fuller preparation, 
we collect the fuel and create the inputs of yajna for 
Agni. Agni, lord of light and fire, refine our mind and 
intelligence to be more subtle and sophisticated for the 
sake of better and better life. Agni, we pray we may 
never suffer a set back or loss of success while we are 
in your company. 


विशां गोपा ster चरन्ति जन्तवो द्विपच्च aga चतुंष्प- 
दक्तभि॑ः | चित्रः प्रकेत उषसो महां sre सख्ये मा रिषामा 
वयं तव॑ ॥ ५ ॥ 


Visam gopa asya caranti jantavo dvipacca yaduta 
catuspadaktubhih. Citrah praketa usaso mahan 
asyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Agni is people’s protector. By the rays of this 
Agni’s light, living creatures, bipeds such as humans, 
quadrupeds such as cows, and others move around days 
and nights. 


Agni, various and brilliant you are, greater than 
the dawn and the days. Lord of light and action, may 
we never suffer misery in your company and friendship. 


394 RGVEDA 


त्वम॑ध्वर्यरुत arate पूर्व्यः प्रशास्ता पोतां जनुषां पुरोहितः | 
विश्वा fagt आर्त्विज्या धीर पुष्यस्यगे सख्ये मा रिषामा 
वयं तव॑ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvamadhvaryuruta hotasi purvyah prasasta pota 
janusa purohitah. Visva vidvan artvijya dhira 
pusyasyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


You are the high priest and the yajamana, ancient 
and eternal, of the yajna of creation. Teacher and ruler, 
sanctifier, invoked and worshipped since creation and 
manifestation, omniscient leading priest of creation, lord 
of universal knowledge, constant and imperishable, you 
nourish all. Lord, we pray, may we never suffer under 
your protection. 


यो विश्वतः सुप्रतीकः सदृङ्ङसि दूरे चित्सन्तच्ठिदिवातिं 
रोचसे । रात््याश्चिदन्धो अति देव पश्यस्यगरे सख्ये मा 
रिषामा वयं तव॑ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Yo visvatah supratikah sadrnnasi dure cit san 
talidivati rocase. Ratryascidandho ati deva 
pasyasyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Agni, you are the lord who are universally 
beatific of form and constant of eye. You may be far 
off, yet you awfully blaze like the explosion of lightning. 
Even in the darkness of the night you shine and see and 
reveal things for all. Lord of light and revelation, we 
pray, may we never suffer ignorance and misery but 
ever enjoy your company and friendship. 


पूर्वो देवा भवतु सुन्वतो रथोऽस्माकं शंसो अभ्यस्तु Gea: | 
तदा जानीतोत पुष्यता वचोऽगरे सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं 
तवं ।॥। ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 395 


8. Purvo deva bhavatu sunvato ratho’smakam 5417150 
abhyastu dudhyah. Tada janitota pusyata 
vaco’gne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Scholars of science and technology, may the 
chariot of the man of yajnic project be the first and 
foremost, the same as ours, so admirable, yet difficult 
for the ill-intentioned even to understand. Therefore, 
know the word, the secret of it, feed it with more 
research and knowledge, grow and let us grow too. Agni, 
lord of light, power and speed, may we never suffer 
any misery, injury or onslaught from anywhere under 
your friendship and protection. 


वधैर्दुःशंसाँ अप॑ दूढ्यो जहि दूरे वा ये aid at के 
चिदत्रिणः | अथां यज्ञाय॑ गृणते सुगं कृध्यग्ने सख्ये मा रिषामा 
वयं तव॑ ॥ ९ ॥ 


o. Vadhairduhsamsan apa dudhyo jahi dure va ye 
anti va ke cidatrinah. Atha yajnaya grnate sugam 
krdhyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


With punishments and even with the 
thunderbolt, strike away, even eliminate, the despicable, 
evil intentioned and those who are enemies of the society 
whether they be far away or lurking close by. Clear the 
path for the dedicated who chant and work in faith for 
the yajna of development and progress. Agni, lord of 
light, knowledge and progress, may we never suffer any 
set back, injury or defeat under your guidance and 
friendship. 


यदयुक्था अरुषा tear रथे वात॑जूता वृषभस्येव ते रव॑ः । 
आदिन्वसि वनिनो धूमकेतुनाऽग सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं 
तवं ।॥। ९०॥ 


396 RGVEDA 


10. Yadayuktha arusa rohita rathe vatajuta vrsabha- 
syeva te ravah. Adinvasi vanino dhumaketuna’- 
gne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Agni, lord of light and nature’s power, when 
you yoke, employ and ignite the red and fiery power at 
the speed of wind for your chariot, your roar is like the 
thunder of clouds. You cover the forest trees with grey 
smoke and leave it behind like the trail of a shooting 
star. Agni, lord of knowledge, power and speed, may 
we never suffer any mishap or injury under your power 
and friendship. 


अधं स्वनादुत बिभ्युः पतत्रिणो, द्रप्सा ad यवसादो 
व्यस्थिरन्‌ । सुगं तत्ते तावकेभ्यो रथेभ्योऽ ग सख्ये मा रिषामा 
वयं तव॑ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Adha svanaduta bibhyuh patatrino drapsa yat te 
yavasado vyasthiran. Sugam tat te tavakebhyo 
rathebhyo’gne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


When on the roar of the chariot the birds fly in 
fright, when the flames of fire shake the grass and rise 
to the optimum, then the path is clear for the flight of 
your chariots. Agni, lord of light, fire and flight, may 
we never suffer any set-back or mishap under your 
power, guidance and friendship but fly on and on. 


अयं मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाय॑सेऽ वयातां मरुतां Sat अद्तः। 
Ter सु नो भूत्वेषां मन॑: पुनरग्रे सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं 
तव॑ ।॥ ९२॥ 

12. Ayam mitrasya varunasya dhayase’vayatam 
marutam helo adbhutah. Mrla su no bhiutvesam 
manah punaragne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 397 


This Agni is the power for the support of Mitra 
and Varuna, friends and the best people among humanity. 
Itis also the awful terror of the Maruts, forces of defence 
and justice, against the people of anti-human values. 
Lord of light, justice and generosity, such as you are, 
be kind and gracious and a source of peace and joy to 
the mind of these good and law-abiding people. We pray 
that we may not suffer any want and misery under your 
guidance and control as friends. 


देवो देवानामसि मित्रो sedi वसुर्वसरंनामसि चारुरध्वरे | 
शर्म॑न्त्स्याम तव॑ सप्रथ॑स्तमेऽ गे सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं 
तव॑ ।। ९३॥ 


13. Devo devanamasi mitro adbhuto vasurvasuna- 
masi caruradhvare. Sarmantsyama tava sapra- 
thastame’gne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. 


Agni, lord of light and peace, you are the 
divinest of divinities, a friend of friends most wonderful. 
You are the shelter of shelters for all and the treasure of 
all treasures. In your vastest and supreme order of yajnic 
existence, we pray, we may enjoy perfect peace of mind 
and soul. May we never face any suffering or misery 
under your rule of friendship, gracious as you are. 


ad भद्रं यत्समिद्धः स्वे दमे सोमाहुतो SRA मृव्छयत्त॑मः। 
दधासि ta द्रविणं च दाशुषेऽ गँ सख्ये मा रिषामा वयं 
तवं ।॥। ९४ ॥ 


14. Tat te bhadram yat samiddhah sve dame soma- 
huto jarase mrlayattamah. Dadhasi ratnam 
dravinam ca dasuse’gne sakhye ma risama vayam 
tava. 


398 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of light and grace, it is the highest 
blessing of yours that, self-lighted and self-manifested 
in your own house, this house of existence of your own 
creation, worshipped with oblations of soma in yajna, 
you spontaneously become gracious to bless the 
admiring devotee and bestow jewels and wealths of the 
world upon the generous yajamana. Lord of generosity, 
we pray, we may never suffer any misery of poverty for 
the body, mind and soul under the control of your grace 
and friendship. 


यस्यै त्वं सुद्रविणो ददांशोऽ नागास्त्वम॑ंदिते सर्वताता 1 यं 
भद्रेण शव॑सा चोदयासि प्रजाव॑ता राध॑सा ते स्यांम ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Yasmai tvam sudravino dadaso’nagastvamadite 
sarvatata. Yam bhadrena savasa codayasi 
prajavata radhasa te syama. 

Agni, lord of divine wealth of existence, power 
imperishable, whoever the person you bless with purity 
and sinlessness in all the affairs of life, whoever you 
inspire with noble courage and valour, he begets good 
children and a happy family and obtains abundant 
wealth of the world. Lord of wealth and generosity, we 
pray, bless us with that same wealth and good fortune. 


स त्वमग्रे Grae fagrenrnary: प्र तिरेह eat 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Sa tvamagne saubhagatvasya vidvanasmaka- 
mayuh pra tireha deva. Tanno mitro varuno 
mamahantamaditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Agni, lord of light and wealth of the world, lord 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 95 399 


and giver of all good fortune, honour and glory of life, 
give us a happy and full life here and let it thrive and 
prosper. The same may Mitra, prana energy, Varuna, 
udana energy, Aditi, Mother Nature, the sea, the earth, 
the heaven and the skies support, strengthen and 
promote. The same, lord Agni, giver of life, bless and 
let us cross the seas of existence with grace divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 95 
Agni Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


दे विरूपे चरतः स्वर्थे अन्यान्या aera धापयेते । हरिरन्य- 
स्यां भवंति स्वधावाञ्छुक्रो अन्यस्यां ददे Garett: ॥ ९ ॥ 


lL Dve virupe caratah svarthe anyanya vatsamupa 
dhapayete. Hariranyasyam bhavati svadhavan- 
chhukro anyasyam dadrse suvarcah. 


Night and day, two different forms of nature, 
two divisions of time, two different states of Agni, one 
direct, the other reflected, move on with their priest- 
like task. Both, co-existent and continuous but 
separately, like two women, feed and nurse each other’s 
child as their own. In one, the night, the moon grows 
on with its inherent character of beauty, peace and bliss, 
while the sun in the other, the day, blazes with light and 
fire, pure, immaculate, glorious. The sun sleeps at night 
and the moon sleeps in the day. 


ase त्वष्टर्जनयन्त गर्भमतन्द्रासो युवतयो faa । 
तिग्मानीकं स्वय॑शसं जनेषु विरोचमानं परि षीं नयन्ति २॥ 

2. Dasemam tvasturjanayanta garbham atandraso 
yuvatayo vibhrtram. Tigmanikam svayasasam 
jJanesu virocamanam pari sim nayanti. 


400 RGVEDA 


Ten directions of space, young and unaging, and 
ever-vigilant, create, produce and manifest this sun, 
child of Tvashta, Vayu, cosmic energy. It is of versatile 
action and purpose and sustains the various forms of 
existence. It is blazing and beautiful, self-refulgent with 
inherent glory, glowing and showing among the people, 
and the same directions move it around for the 
accomplishment of the tasks of creation. 


त्रीणि जाना परि भूषन्त्यस्य समुद्र एकं दिव्येकमप्सु । 
पूर्वामनु प्र दिशं पार्थिवानामृतूनप्रशासद्वि द॑धावनुष्ठु ॥ ३ ॥ 


तः Trini jana pari bhusantyasya samudra ekam 
divyamekamapsu. Purvamanu pra disam parthi- 
vanamrtun prasasadvi dadhavanusthu. 


Three manifestations of this Agni shine in 
nature, space and time, the womb of the universe: one 
is in the oceans, another one is in the heavenly region 
of light, and yet another is in the waters in the middle 
region. Accordingly, it creates and controls the seasons 
in relation to the sun and earth and, in relation to the 
earth and her people, it creates the directions such as 
east and others. 


क इमं at निण्यमा चिकेत वत्सो मातूर्जनयत CaM: 1 
बह्वीनां गर्भो अपसा।मुपस्थान्महान्क विर्निश्च॑रति स्व- 
धावान्‌ ४ ॥ 

4. Ka imam vo ninyama ciketa vatso matrrjanayat 


svadhabhih. Bahvinam garbho apasamupas- 
thanmahan kavirniscarati svadhavan. 


Who among you could know this mysterious 
nursling of the day and night, the sun born of Agni and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 95 401 


Vayu, cosmic energy, who creates its own mothers, the 
day and the night? It is the creature of many forces of 
nature and itself the womb of many, being the measure 
of physical time and creator of the directions of space. 
Great, visionary, and innately powerful, it moves on and 
across the regions of water and air in space. 


आविष्ट्यो! वर्धते चारुरासु जिह्यानामृर्ध्वः स्वय॑शा उपस्थे | 
उभे त्वष्टुर्बिभ्यतुर्जाय॑मानात्प्रती ची सिंहं प्रति जोषयेते WG 


a, Avistyo vardhate carurasu jihmanamirdhvah 
svayasa upasthe. Ubhe tvasturbibhyaturjaya- 
manat pratici sinham prati josayete. 


Having entered these directions of space and 
the objects therein, it grows and expands. Present within 
the oblique and wavy motions of wind, air and the rays 
of light, it rises above by its own power. On the rise of 
the sun, the day and night split up as if out of fear. The 
same split marks the west. And yet the night and day 
again nurse the hero of light as a favourite hero. 


उभे भद्रे जोषयेते न मेने गावो न वाश्रा उपं तस्थुरेवैः | 
स दक्षाणां दक्च॑पतिर्बभूवाञ्जन्ति यं दक्षिणतो हविर्भिः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Ubhe bhadre josayete na mene gavo na vasra upa 
tasthurevaih. Sa daksanam daksapatirbabhu- 
vanjanti yam daksinato havirbhih. 


Both night and day, noble and loving, nurse and 
serve the sun, Agni, just as lowing cows stay by the 
calves with all their love and care. Of those dedicated 
experts of yajna who serve Agni with oblations, he rises 
above all who offers the oblations from the south. 


402 RGVEDA 


उद्यंयमीति सवितेव बाहू उभे सिचौ यतते भीम aS 
उच्छुक्रमत्कमजते सिमस्मान्नवा मातृभ्यो वस॑ना जहाति ॥ ७॥ 

7. Ud yamyamiti saviteva bahia ubhe sicau yatate 
bhima rnjan. Ucchukramatkam ajate simasma- 
nnava matrbhyo vasana jahdati. 


As the sun, this Agni raises its rays upward as 
two arms continuously and, growing awful and blazing, 
it joins both the horizons, brightening them both 
together. All round it radiates its light as if it offers new 
clothes to its mothers, the day and the night or the heaven 
and earth which hold the light in their lap. 


त्वेषं रूपं कृणुत उत्त॑रं यत्संपृञ्चानः सद॑ने MPT: | 
कविर्बुध्नं oR मर्मृज्यते धीः सा देवताता समितिर्बभूव ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvesam rupam krnuta uttaram yat samprncanah 
sadane gobhiradbhih. Kavirbudhnam pari mar- 
mrjyate dhih sa devatata samitirbabhuva. 


When Agni, sunlight, assumes a brighter and 
higher form mixing the rays of light and vapours of 
water in its own region, then, shining as lord of celestial 
light and vision, it purifies the sky, elevates intelligence 
and refines knowledge and science, and that state of 
intelligence and knowledge is divinely pious and 
supreme. 


se ते ज्रयः पर्येति बुध्नं विरोच॑मानं महिषस्य धाम॑ | 
विश्वेभिरग्ने स्वय॑शोभिरिब्दोऽद॑ब्धेभिः पायुभिः पाद्य 
स्मान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Uru te jrayah paryeti budhnam virocamanam 


mahisasya dhama. Visvebhiragne svayasobhiri- 
ddho’dabdhebhih payubhih pahyasman. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 95 403 


Agni, mighty as the sun, the vast expanse of 
your sphere travels and reaches across and over the 
bright regions of the skies. Bright and blazing with all 
your own powers and irresistible modes of protection, 
protect and promote us. 


raed: कृणुते गातुमूर्मिं शुक्रैरूर्मिभिर भि नक्षति 
am विश्वा सनानि जटरेषु धत्तेऽन्तर्नवासु चरति 
प्रसूषु ॥॥ ९० ॥ 


10. = Dhanvantsrotah krnute gatumurmim sukrairur- 
mirbhirabhi naksati ksam. Visva sanani jatharesu 
dhatte’ntarnavasu carati prasusu. 


Agni as electric power and vital heat of life 
creates paths over the deserts and in the skies, makes 
waterways to flow with rippling waves, and with bright 
rays of light illuminates the earth. It creates all the foods 
and vitalities for the internal organs of the living body 
systems and vibrates in all the new and upcoming forms 
of nature and human generations. 


एवा at अगे समिधा वृधानो रेवत्पावक श्रव॑से वि भाहि। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Eva no agne samidha vrdhano revat pavaka 
Sravase vi bhahi.Tanno mitro varuno mamahan- 
tamaditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


These, O Agni, light, life and vitality of the 
world of existence, pure and purifying, treasure and 
dispenser of universal wealth, growing by fuel and 
making us grow, pray shine and illuminate us with 
nourishments, light and honour. Thus also may Mitra 


404 RGVEDA 


and Varuna, sun and air and pranic energies, the skies, 
the sea and the earth, and the light of heaven and the 
electric energy of Agni may shine and make us shine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 96 
Dravinoda Agni Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


स प्रलथा सह॑सा जाय॑मानः सद्यः real बव्छधत्त विश्वां | 
आप॑श्च fast धिषणा च साधन्देवा अयिं धा॑रयन्द्रविणो- 
STAN ९॥ 


i, Sa pratnatha sahasa jayamanah sadyah kavyani 
baladhatta visva. Apasca mitram dhisana ca 
sadhan deva agnim dharayan dravinodam. 


That is Agni, light and fire of life, instantly rising 
as ever with power and force for the devotee. He bears 
the strength, vision and wisdom of the world and helps 
the dedicated person to realise the values of life with 
waters, energy, intelligence and friendship in the society. 
The devas, divinities of nature and humanity dedicate 
themselves to Him, lord giver of universal wealth, and 
bear on the fire of yajna from generation to generation. 


aude निविदां कव्यतायोरिमाः प्रजा अआंजनयन्मनुनाम्‌। 
विवस्व॑ता चक्ष॑सा द्यापपश्च॑ देवा अगिं धारयन्द्रविणो- 
दाम्‌॥ २॥ 
me Sa purvaya nivida kavyatayorimah praja ajana- 
yan manunam. Vivasvata caksasa dyamapasca 
deva agnim dharayan dravinodam. 
With the ancient and eternal poetry of 


omniscience and from the eternal cause, He, the lord of 
light, creates these children of Manus, men of thought 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 96 405 


and vision. And with the brilliant light of the sun, he 
creates the regions of light and waters and others such 
as the earth. The devas, divinities of nature and the 
noblest of humanity, hold on to him and bear on the fire 
of yajna from generation to generation, universal giver 
as He is. 


तमीव्छत प्रथमं य॑ज्ञसाधं fast आरीराह॑तमृञ्जसानम्‌ । 
ऊर्जः पुत्रं भ॑र तं सृप्रदानुं देवा ahi धा॑रयन्द्रविणोदाम्‌॥ ३ ॥ 
=, Tamilata prathamam yajnasadham visa arira- 
hutam rnjasanam. Urjah putram bharatam srpra- 
danum deva agnim dharayan dravinodam. 


O grateful and dynamic people, serve and 
worship Him, Agni, first and highest of existence, 
invoked and loved with homage through yajna, 
visualised and realised through vision and 
discrimination, manifested in energy and products of 
energy, sustainer of all and inspiring all with knowledge. 
Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, 
hold on to Him and bear on the fire of yajna from 
generation to generation, universal giver as He is. 


alata पुरु वारर॑पुष्टिर्विदद्‌ गातं तन॑याय स्वर्वित्‌ । विशां 
गोपा ज॑निता रोद॑स्योर्देवा अगिं धांरयन्द्रविणोदाम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Sa matarisva puruvarapustirvidad gatum tana- 
yaya svarvit. Visam gopa janita rodasyordeva 
agnim dharayan dravinodam. 


He, Agni, is Matarishva, universal breath of life 
replete in the middle regions of space. He is the 
inexhaustible treasure-home of energy and nourishment. 
He revealed the Holy Word of the Veda for His child, 


406 RGVEDA 


the humanity. He is the giver of light and happiness. He 
is the protector of the people and creator of heaven and 
earth and the skies. Devas, divinities of nature and 
humanity, worship Him, universal and generous creator 
and giver of wealth, and bear on the fire of yajna from 
generation to generation. 


नक्तोषासा व्णीमामेम्याने धापयेते शिशुमेकं समीची । 
maar रुक्मो अन्तर्वि भाति देवा अगिं धांरयन्द्रविणो- 
दाम्‌॥ ५॥ 


2; Naktosasa varnamamemyane dhapayete sisume- 
kam 547717८7. Dyavaksama rukmo antarvibhati 
deva agnim dharayan dravinodam. 


The night and the day both of different light and 
form like two nursing mothers together feed the same 
one child. The child, Agni, the sun, pervades and shines 
in heaven and over earth. The devas serve and worship 
Agni, giver of universal wealth, and move on bearing 
the fire of yajna from generation to generation. 


रायो बुध्नः संगम॑नो agai यज्ञस्य॑ केतुर्मन्मसाधनो a: | 
अमृतत्वं रक्ष॑माणास एनं देवा अगिं धा॑रयन्द्रविणो- 
दाम्‌।॥ ६॥ 


6. Rayo budhnah samgamano vasunam yajnasya 
keturmanmasadhano veh. Amrtatvam raksma- 
nasa enam deva agnim dharayan dravinodam. 


Agni is the foundation and magic mantra of 
wealth and power. It is the companion of the Vasus, 
sustainers of life such as the earth, and our guide to 
achieve them. It is the flag-post and light-house to the 
yajnic projects of life, and means to the fulfilment of 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 96 407 


cherished desires. The seekers of immortality and 
protectors of eternal values hold on to this giver of 
universal wealth and bear on the fire of yajna from 
generation to generation. 


नू च॑ पुरा च सद॑नं रयीणां जातस्य॑ च जाय॑मानस्य च 
क्षाम्‌। सतश्च गोपां भवतश्च भूरे देवा अगिं धारयन्द्रविणो- 
दाम्‌॥ ७॥ 


ve Nu ca pura ca sadanam rayinam jatasya ca 
jJayamanasya ca ksam. Satasca gopam bhavata- 
sca bhurerdeva agnim dharayan dravinodam. 


Agni is the new as well as the old and eternal 
cause and the haven and home of all the material wealth 
of the created universe already born and what is 
continuously being born. It is the holder, sustainer and 
protector of the constant and the mutable forms of the 
vast creation. The devas, divinities of nature and 
humanity, hold on to Agni in faith and maintain the fire 
of yajna from generation to generation, giver of 
universal wealth as It is. 


द्रविणोदा द्रविंणसस्तुरस्यं द्रविणोदाः सनरस्य प्र यं सत्‌। 
द्रविणोदा वीरवतीमिषं नो द्रविणोदा रांसते दीर्घमायुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Dravinoda dravinasasturasya dravinodah 
sanarasya pra yamsat. Dravinoda viravatimi-sam 
no dravinoda rasate dirghamayuh. 


Agni, universal creator and giver of universal 
and omnipresent wealth, may, we pray, grant us the 
wealth of knowledge and piety. The creator and giver 
of social wealth may, we pray, grant us our share of 
material wealth. The creator and giver of food and 


408 RGVEDA 


energy may, we pray, grant us the food and energy which 
gives rise to a community of heroes. The creator and 
giver of life and health may, we pray, grant us our full 
share of life and age with health and plenty. 


एवा at अग्रे समिधां वृधानो रेवत्पांवक्‌ श्रव॑से fa भाहि। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः।॥ ९॥ 

9. Eva no agne samidha vrdhano revat pavaka 


Sravase vi bhahi. Tanno mitro varuno mama- 
hantamaditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Thus may Agni, lord of wealth, pure and 
purifying, flaming and growing with fuels and oblations, 
shine for our honour and fame. And may Mitra, the sun, 
Varuna, the air and pranic energies, Aditi, the sky, the 
sea, the earth and the light of heaven, bless us with 
health, wealth, knowledge and piety. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 97 
Agni Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


अपं नः शोशुचदघमग्ने शुशुग्ध्या र यिम्‌। 
अप॑ नः शोशुचदघम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

i, Apa nah sosucadaghamagne susugdhya rayim. 
Apa nah Sosucadagham. 


Agni, lord of light, power and purity, pray shine 
on us, burn off our sins and purify us. Shine, purify and 
sanctify our wealth of body, mind and soul. O lord, burn 
off our sins and let us shine in purity. 


qahen सुगातुया agar चं यजामहे | 
अप॑ नः शोशुचदघम्‌ UN २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 97 409 


2. Suksetriya sugatuya vasuya ca yajamahe. 
Apa nah Sosucadagham. 


With our desire and plans for waving green 
fields, straight and simple highways for movement, and 
honest wealth for body, mind and soul and for the power 
of defence and protection do we approach and honour 
you, Agni, lord of light and power. Pray burn off our 
sins and let us shine in purity. 


प्र Sees एषां प्रास्माकासश्च Ta: । 
अप॑ नः शोश्णुंचदघम्‌॥ ३॥ 

2 Pra yad bhandistha esam prasmakasasca 
surayah. Apa nah sosucadagham. 


Lord most shining and excellent, whosoever 
among these people be the best of our people, let them 
be the leaders of the assembly and administrators. Agni, 
lord of light and power, cleanse us of our sins and let us 
shine. 


प्र यत्त अग्रे सूरयो जायेमहि प्र तै वयम्‌। 
अप॑ नः शोशुचदघम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Pra yat te agne surayo jayemahi pra te vayam. 
Apa nah sosucadagham. 


Lord of light and power, Agni, as your leading 
and brilliant brave heroes and devotees are, so may we 
rise to be. Lord, we pray, save us from our sins and let 
us shine. 


प्र यदग्नेः सह॑स्वतो विश्वतो यन्ति arta: | 
अप॑ नः शोशुचदघम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


410 RGVEDA 


5: Pra yadagneh sahasvato visvato yanti bhanavah. 
Apa nah Sosucadagham. 


As the lights of this powerful Agni go up in 
flames all round and blaze, so may we be, we pray. Lord 
of light and power, purge us of our sins and let us shine 
in purity. 


त्वं हि विंङ्वतोमुखर favad: परिभूरसि | 
अप॑ नः शोशुचदघम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tvam hi visvatomukha visvatah paribhurasi. 


Apa nah Sosucadagham. 


Agni, lord omnipresent of universal face and 
all-seeing eye, you are the lord supreme over all the 
worlds. Lord of light and fire, burn off our sins and let 
us shine pure and powerful. 


द्विषो नो विश्वतोमुखाति area पारय | 
अप॑ नः शोशुचदघम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

7. Dviso no visvatomukhati naveva paraya. 
Apa nah Sosucadagham. 
Agni, light of life, all-watching eye, saving ark 
over the seas of existence, lead us over and across the 
whirl-pools of jealousies and enmities of the world and 
conquer the flood for us. Purge us of our sins and let us 
shine in purity. 
सनः सिन्धुमिव नावयाति पर्षा स्वस्तये | 
अप॑ नः शोशुःचदघम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sa nah sindhumiva navaydati parsda svastaye. 
Apa nah Sosucadagham. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 98 411 


Just as we cross a river in flood by boat, so for 
the sake of good life and ultimate joy, may Agni, lord 
of light and life, help us cross the seas. Lord of light 
and purity, cleanse us of evil, burn off our sins and help 
us shine in purity, power and piety. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 98 
Agni Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


वैश्वानरस्य सुमतौ wala राजा हि कं भुव॑नानामधथिश्रीः। 
इतो जातो विश्व॑यिदं वि Bd वैश्वानरो aaa सूर्येण i ९॥ 


if Vaisvanarasya sumatau syama raja hi kam 
bhuvananamabhisrih. Ito jato visvamidam vi 
caste vaisvanaro yatate suryena. 


May we abide in the pleasure and good will of 
Vaishvanara Agni, ruler of humanity and indeed the 
spirit and vitality of all life on earth. The ruling power, 
for sure, is the order, beauty and grace of the world, the 
real wealth and life of existence. Born of the original 
cause, Prakrti, and manifesting here, this Agni shows 
this world and acts in unison with the sun and prana. 


पृष्टो दिवि पृष्टो अभिः प्रधिव्यां पृष्टो विश्वा ओष॑धीरा 
विवेश । वैशूवा नरः सह॑सा पृष्टो अथिः स नो दिवा स रिष 
पातु नक्तम्‌॥ २॥ 

2. Prsto divi prsto agnih prthivyam prsto visva 
osadhira vivesa. Vaisvanarah sahasa prsto agnih 
sano diva sa risah patu naktam. 

It is sanctified: sanctified as light in heaven, as 


heat in fire, as energy in earth, as vitality in all the herbs 
in which it has entered. Vaishvanara Agni, sanctified 


412 RGVEDA 


and replete with strength, energy and courage, may, we 
pray, protect us against hate, enmity and negativity day 
and night, both in the waking and in the sleeping state. 


VAAL तव तत्सत्यम॑स्त्वस्मान्‌ रायो मघवानः सचन्ताम्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Vaisvanara tava tat satyamastvasman rayo 
maghavanah sacantam. Tanno mitro varuno 
mamahantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


May that divine nature, energy and vitality of 
Vaishvanara Agni, ruling and breathing power of life, 
be right and true for the world. May all the treasures 
and holders of the wealth of this world be kind and 
friendly to us. May Mitra, universal friend, Varuna, the 
best, just and reasonable worthy of choice, Aditi, 
motherly powers of nature and humanity, the earth, the 
seas, the cool waters above and the light of heaven bless 
us with the health and vitality of existence. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 99 
Agni Jataveda Devata, Maricha Kashyapa Rshi 


जातवेदसे सुनवाम सोममरातीयतो नि द॑हाति ad: vata: 
पर्षदति दुर्गाणि विश्वां नावेव सिन्धुं दु रितात्यभिः ॥ ९॥ 


iB Jatavedase sunavama somam aratiyato ni dahati 
vedah. Sa nah parsadati durgani visva naveva 
sindhum duritatyagnih. 


For the sake of Jatavedas Agni, lord omnipresent 
and omniscient of creation, we love and respect the 
abundant things of the world and, in a spirit of thanks 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 100 413 


to Him, distil every drop of soma joy from it. Indeed, 
He burns off the easy wealth of those who are jealous, 
hateful, ungrateful and wasteful. Just as a boatman helps 
us cross the river by boat, so does the omnipresent lord 
help us cross all the evils and the most difficult problems 
of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 100 


Indra Devata, Varshagirah Rjrashva, Ambarisha, 
Sahadeva, Bhayamana, Suradhasa Rshi 


सयो वृषा वृष्ण्येधिः समोका महो fea: direst सम्राट्‌। 
सतीनसत्वा हव्यो भरेषु मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती ॥ ९॥ 


Ils Sa yo vrsa vrsnyebhih samoka maho divah 
prthivyasca samrat. Satinasatva havyo bharesu 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


He, Indra, who is mighty and generous, existing 
with his showers and powers of generosity, who rules 
over the great heaven and earth, who collects the clouds 
of water and commands the force of windy Maruts, 
tempestuous heroes, and who is ever invoked in the 
yajnic battles of life, may that Indra, lord of power and 
glory, be for our protection and promotion in prosperity. 


यस्यानाप्तः सूर्यस्येव यामो भरेभरे वृत्रहा शुष्मो अस्तिं । 
वृषन्तमः सखिः स्वेभिरे वै्म॑रु त्वन्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती ॥ २॥ 


2 Yasyanaptah suryasyeva yamo bharebhare 
vrtraha susmo asti. Vrsantamah sakhibhih svebhi- 
revairmarutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


Unapproachable is Indra’s speed and power for 


414 RGVEDA 


the wicked. In battle after battle of life he is the same 
breaker of the cloud and destroyer of evil. Lord of 
Maruts, tempestuous heroes, most generous and 
powerful, may he with his friends and their exploits be 
for our protection, promotion and prosperity. 


दिवो न यस्य रेत॑सो carat: पन्थासो यन्ति शवसापरीताः 1 
ave. sur: सासहिः पौस्येभिर्मरुत्वांन्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती ॥ ३ ॥ 


Divo na yasya retaso dughanah panthaso yanti 
Savasaparitah. Tarad dvesah sasahih paumsye- 
bhirmarutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


The showers of the favours of Indra overflow 
like the rays of light from heaven. They hurry on apace 
uninterrupted on their paths with force and overwhelm 
hate, fear and enmity. May he, lord of courage and 
valour, commander of tempestuous Maruts, with his 
irresistible forces be our protector for progress and 
prosperity. 


सो अद्धिरोभिरद्धिरस्तमो भूद्‌ वृषा वृष॑भिः सखिभिः सखा 
TL ऋग्मिभिंऋग्मी गातुभिर्ज्येष्ठो! मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती usu 


4. So angirobhirangirastamo bhiud vrsa vrsabhih 
sakhibhih sakha san. Rgmibhirrgmi gatubhir- 
Jyestho marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


With inflow of pranic energies, Indra is the life 
of life, mighty generous with showers of strength and 
joy, being a friend with friends. With scholars of Rks, 
he is master of divine knowledge and supreme of 
movement with those who are ever on the move. Lord 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 100 415 


and commander of Maruts, heroes of tempestuous speed 
and force, may he be our protector for progress and 
prosperity. 


स सूनुभिर्न रुद्रेभिऋभ्वां yard सासह्यां अमित्रान्‌ । 
Tila: श्रवस्यानि तूर्वन्मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती ॥ ५ ॥ 


me Sa sunubhirna rudrebhirrbhva nrsahye sasahvan 
amitran. Sanilebhih sravasyani turvan marutvan 
no bhavatvindra uti. 


Indra, prudent and wise, commander of the 
Maruts, challenging his opponents in the battle of the 
brave with the assistance of Rudras, fierce fighters dear 
as his children, and overthrowing the shooting bowmen 
of the enemy with the force of his companions, may he, 
we pray, be our leader and protector on way to progress. 


स मन्युमीः Gaeta कर्ताऽस्माकेभिर्नृभिः सूर्य" A 
अस्मित्रहन्त्सत्प॑तिः पुरुहूतो मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa manyumih samadanasya (वत ' smakebhirnr- 
bhih suryam sanat. Asminnahantsatpatih puru- 
huto marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


Let Indra, ruler of the world, passionate 
controller of anger and passion, creator of projects for 
freedom and joy, bring the light and bliss of heaven on 
earth. Protector and promoter of truth and the true, 
invoked and praised by many, may he, commander of 
the force of tempestuous Maruts, we pray, be our leader 
and guide and protect us on way to progress with the 
assistance and cooperation of our people. 


तमूतयो wrasse तं क्षेम॑स्य facta: कृण्वत त्राम्‌ । 
स विश्व॑स्य करुणस्येश एको मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती ॥ ७॥ 


416 RGVEDA 


19 Tamiutayo ranayanchurasatau tam ksemasya 
ksitayah krnvata tram. Sa visvasya karunasyesa 
eko marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


Him, the battles of defence inspire for victory 
of the brave. Him, the people elevate to the status of the 
protector of peace and prosperity. He, unique among 
all, rules the projects of love and cooperation among 
the people. May he, commander of the Maruts, be our 
leader and protector for peace and progress. 


तम॑प्सन्त॒ शव॑स उत्सवेषु नरो नर्‌ मवसे तं धनांय । 
सो अन्धे चित्तम॑सि ज्योतिर्विदन्मरुत्वांन्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tamapsanta Savasa utsavesu naro naramavase 
tam dhanaya. So andhe cit tamasi jyotirvidan 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


Him, in battles of greatness and celebrations, 
the people discover as a man among men for the sake 
of protection and prosperity. May he, creating light in 
the midst of utter darkness and commanding the force 
of Maruts, be our defender and promoter on way to 
peace and progress. 


स Wea यमति त्राध॑तश्चित्स द॑क्चिणे संगरंभीता pan 
स कीरिणा चित्सनिता धनानि मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती usu 

9. Sa savyena yamati vradhatascit sa daksine 
samgrbhita krtani. Sa kirina cit sanita dhanani 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


With his left hand he overcomes even the strong 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 100 417 


oppositions, and with the right he holds and secures the 
fruits of his success. With his acts of success and 
assessment, he manages and distributes the wealth of 
the nation. May he, commander of the Maruts, be our 
protector for freedom and progress. 


स ग्रामेभिः सनिता स रथेभिर्विदे favair: कृष्टिभिन्वैद्य । 
स पौस्येभिरथिभूरशस्तीर्मरुत्वांन्नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती ॥ gon 


10. Sa gramebhih sanita sa rathebhirvide visvabhih 
krstibhirnvadya. Sa paumsyebhirabhibhurasastir- 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


He shares the wealth of the nation with the 
farming people in the villages, warriors of the chariot, 
and all sections of the people without exception, and 
thus he faces and overcomes all shades of criticism and 
opposition with the strength of his body, mind and soul 
and his noble actions for the sake of mutual confidence 
and understanding for harmony. May he, commander 
of the Maruts, be our protector for progress and 
prosperity in unison and freedom. 


स जामिभिर्यत्छमजांति Hees जांमिभिर्वां पुरुहूत एवैः । 
अपां तोकस्य तन॑यस्य जेषे मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Sa jamibhiryat samajati milhe’jamibhirva 
puruhuta evaih. Apam tokasya tanayasya jese 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


When invoked and called upon by many, Indra 
goes to battle with his friends, opponents and the 
indifferent ones with all his might and main, he fights 
at his best for victory for the future generations of sons 
and grandsons of the nation. May Indra, commander of 
the Maruts, be our leader and defender for our protection 


418 RGVEDA 
and progress. 


स day भीम उग्रः सहस्रचेताः शतनीथ sea | 
चम्रीषो न शव॑सा पाञ्च॑जन्यो मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Savajrabhrd dasyuha bhima ugrah sahasra-cetah 
Satanitha rbhva. Camriso na $avasa pancajanyo 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


Indra is the wielder of the force of the 
thunderbolt, destroyer of the wicked, fierce, passionate, 
knowledgeable of a hundred things and problems, 
versatile with a hundred plans and policies, mighty, 
concentration of the force of armies as the centre of 
yajna congregations, manager of all the five 
communities with his power and intelligence. May be, 
commander of the Maruts, he our ruler and protector 
for freedom and progress. 


तस्य ag: क्रन्दति स्मत्स्वर्षा दिवो न aut रवथः 
शिमीवान्‌ । तं स॑चन्ते सनयस्तं धनानि मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती UVB ul 


13. Tasya vajrah krandati smat svarsa divo na tveso 
ravathah Simivan. Tam sacante sanayastam 
dhanani marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


The thunderbolt of Indra is vocal and effective 
appropriately: It is a call to action for the warrior, roar 
of terror for the wicked, soothing shower of rain for the 
generous, blaze of the sun for the hero, song of the 
cuckoo for the artist, and whirring of the wheels for the 
industrious. Varieties of wealth abound in him, streams 
of generosity flow from him. May Indra, commander 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 100 419 


of the Maruts, be our leader and protector on way to 
progress and prosperity in peace with freedom. 


यस्याज॑सरं शव॑सा मानमुक्थं परिभुजद्रोदसी favad: सीम्‌। 
स पांरिषत््रतुंभिर्मन्दसानो मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र ऊती ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Yasyajasram Savasa manamuktham paribhujad 
rodast visvatah sim. Sa parisat kratubhirman- 
dasano marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


Whose constant measure and grandeur divine, 
the heaven and earth with their power and potential share 
and celebrate all round, may that Indra, we pray, happy 
with our yajnic performances, take us across the seas of 
existence. May he, commanding the Maruts, be our 
protector in life and hereafter. 


न यस्य॑ देवा देवता न मर्ता आप॑श्चन शव॑सो stare: | 
स प्ररिक्वा त्वक्ष॑सा ent दिवश्च मरुत्वान्नो भवत्विन्द्र 
ऊती ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Nayasya deva devata na marta apascana 5417८50 
antamapuh. Sa prarikva tvaksasa ksmo divasca 
marutvan no bhavatvindra uti. 


The end of whose power and potential, neither 
divinities, nor the mind and sense and imagination of 
any one, nor the human mortals, nor even the realised 
souls reach and comprehend, that Indra pervades and, 
with his subtle and mysterious omnipotence, transcends 
heaven and earth. May he, lord of Maruts, be our 
protector and saviour. 


रोहिच्छ्यावा qudyscrdielan राय ऋज्राश्वस्य | 
वृष॑ण्वन्तं faudt qe रथं मन्द्रा चिकेत नाहुषीषु 
विक्षु ues ul 


420 RGVEDA 


16. Rohicchyava sumadamsurlalamirdyuksa raya 
rjrasvasya. Vrsanvantam bibhrati dhursu ratham 
mandra ciketa nahusisu viksu. 


Red and dark, bright and beautiful flames, as a 
banner mark, touching the heaven, carrying the mighty 
chariot of Indra, master of horse power, shooting straight 
on wheels for the target of wealth and knowledge, shine 
glorious for the people on earth, a blessed sight indeed. 


एतत्त्यत्त इन्द्र वृष्ण॑ उक्थं वार्षागिरा अभि गुंणन्ति राधः । 
Tava: प्रिंभिरम्बरीष॑ः सहदेवो भय॑मानः सुराधां: ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Etat tyat ta indra vrsna uktham varsagira abhi 
grnanti radhah. Rjrasvah prstibhirambarisah 
sahadevo bhayamanah suradhah. 


Indra, lord of power and prosperity, this is that 
song of praise which the children of divine voice 
alongwith friends and companions sing as a gift of love 
and homage for the lord of eternal prosperity and infinite 
generosity: they are Rijrashvas, sages of simple thought 
and honest conduct, Ambarisha, scholar of holy word 
and knowledge, Sahadeva, who loves to be with lovers 
of divinity, Bhayamana, who fears the Divine and whom 
the wicked and the crooked fear, and Suradha, man of 
honest wealth and versatile genius. 


दस्यूज्छिम्यूच पुरुहूत एवैर्हत्वा पूथिव्यां grat नि बर्हत्‌। 
सनत्शेत्रं सखिभिः श्वित्न्येभिः सनत्सूर्यं सन॑दपः 
सुव॑: ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18.  Dasyunchimyunsca puruhita evairhatva prthi- 


vyam Sarva ni barhit. Sanat ksetram sakhibhih 
Svitnyebhih sanat suryam sanadapah suvajrah. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 101 421 


Invoked and prayed by many, Indra, wielder of 
the defensive and protective thunderbolt, having 
destroyed the wicked and removed the aggressive, ought 
to root out the weeds, and, with the cooperation and 
brilliant actions of his friends and companions, acquire, 
enrich, distribute and manage the land, strengthen heat, 
light and health and energy, and manage the water 
resources. 


विश्वाहेन्द्रो अधिवक्ता नो अस्त्वपरिह्वृताः सनुयाम वाज॑म्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Visvahendro adhivakta no astvaparihvrtah sanu- 
yama vajam. Tanno mitro varuno mamahanta- 
maditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


May Indra, lord of power, justice and knowledge 
be the supreme speaker and adviser for us. Let us too, 
simple, straight and honest in thought, action and 
material support, cooperate with him. And we pray: May 
Mitra, the sun and human powers of friendship, Varuna, 
powers of justice worthiest of choice, the sky, the seas, 
the earth and the heavens bless and promote this union 
of ours with success. 


May this union last for all time! 


Mandala 1/Sukta 101 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


प्र मन्दिने पितुमदर्चता वचो a: puriut निरह॑ञ्नजिर्व॑ना । 
अवस्यवो वृष॑णं adatarut मरुत्व॑न्तं सख्याय हवामहे I ९ ॥ 


422 RGVEDA 


I. Pra mandine pitumadarcata vaco yah krsna- 
garbha nirahannrjisvana. Avasyavo vrsanam 
vajradaksinam marutvantam sakhyaya hava- 
mahe. 


All ye men and women of the earth, offer words 
of welcome and hospitality to joyous Indra, lord giver 
of the power of knowledge, who, in a simple natural 
manner, breaks open the secret treasures of the dark 
womb of nature and makes the streams of knowledge 
flow. We, seekers of protection and knowledge, invoke 
Indra, lord of light and power, rich and generous, expert 
in the use of the thunderbolt of knowledge against the 
demon of darkness, and commander of the tempestuous 
Maruts of social dynamics, and we pray for his love 
and friendship. 


यो व्यंसं जाहषाणेनं मन्युना यः शम्ब॑रं यो अहन्पिप्ंमव्रतम्‌। 
इन्द्रो यः शृष्ण।म्रशुषं न्यावृणङ् मरुत्वन्तं सख्याय 
हवामहे ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Yo vyamsam jahrsanena manyuna yah samba- 
ram yo ahan piprum avratam. Indro yah susna- 
masusam nyavrnan marutvantam sakhyaya 
havamahe. 


For friendship and support, we invoke Indra, 
lord of justice, power and generosity, commander of 
the Maruts, tempestuous guarding soldiers of humanity, 
Indra who, with overwhelming passion and 
righteousness breaks the shoulders of Vrtra, dark 
demonic cloud of hoarded vapours, and releases the 
showers of rain, who destroys the selfish Shambara and 
Pipru, undisciplined demons of social unrighteousness, 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 101 423 


and who overthrows the mighty but callous and 
voracious eater of the nation’s wealth who causes a 
drought and famine of the people’s resources for life 
and progress. 


यस्य द्यावापृथिवी पौस्यं महद्यस्य व्रते वरुणो यस्य सूर्यः | 
यस्येन्द्रस्य सिन्ध॑वः सश्च॑ति ad मरुत्वन्तं स॒ख्याय॑ 
हवामहे ॥ ३ ॥ 


Yasya dyavaprthivi paumsyam mahad yasya vrate 
varuno yasya suryah. Yasyendrasya sindhavah 
sascati vratam marutvantam sakhyaya havamahe. 


For love, friendship and support, we invoke and 
pray to Indra, omnipotent lord of the Maruts who post 
across the universe and maintain the kingdom. Mighty 
is the force in his Law of Dharma for nature and 
humanity. The heaven and the moon in their orbits move 
as fixed by Law. The seas roll and rivers flow in 
accordance with the Law. (We pray, help us, lord, to 
follow the Law and enjoy the divine grace.) 


यो अश्वानां यो गवां गोपतिर्वशी य आरितः कर्मणिकर्मणि 
स्थिरः | वीव्ठोश्चिदिन्द्रो यो असुन्वतो वधो मरुत्वन्तं 
सख्याय॑ हवामहे ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Yo asvanam yo gavam gopatirvasi ya aritah 
karmani karmani sthirah. Viloscidindro yo asun- 
vato vadho marutvantam sakhyaya havamahe. 


For our protection, friendship and support, we 
invoke and pray to Indra, lord ruler of the universe and 
humanity. He is the lord of horses. He is the lord of 
cows and controller of the moving earths and fluctuating 
mind and senses. Ever conscious and wide-awake, he 


424 RGVEDA 


is constant and active in every act and every movement 
that happens in nature and humanity. Mighty powerful 
is he, friend of the pious, and the very stroke of death 
for the selfish uncreators and violators of yajna. 


यो विश्व॑स्य जग॑तः प्राणतस्पतिर्यो wero? प्रथमो गा 
अविन्दत्‌। इन्द्रो यो दस्यूरधरां अवातिरन्‌ मरूत्व॑न्तं सख्याय 
हवामहे ॥ ५५ ॥ 


5. Yo visvasya jagatah pranataspatiryo brahmane 
prathamo ga avindat. Indro yo dasyunradharan 
avatiran marutvantam sakhyaya havamahe. 


Indra is the lord ruler, controller and sustainer 
of all the moving and breathing universe. He is the first, 
creator manifestive in expanding space who created the 
mind and senses and the moving earths for the living 
creatures. He is the lord of law and justice who throws 
down the wicked to the darkest caverns. We invoke and 
pray to Indra, lord of Maruts, for our protection and 
support as his dear ones and friends. 


यः शूरेभिर्हव्यो avd भीरुभिर्यो धावद्धिर्हूयते ave 
जिग्युभिः । इन्द्रं यं विश्वा भुवनाभि संन्दधुर्मरुत्व॑न्तं 
सख्याय॑ हवामहे ॥ & ॥ 


6. Yah surebhirhavyo yasca bhirubhiryo dhyavad- 
bhirhuyate yasca jigyubhih. Indram yam visva 
bhuvanabhi samdadhur-marutvantam sakhyaya 
havamahe. 


Indra is invoked and worshipped by the brave, 
and he is called upon by the timid as well as by the 
fearless, and he is called upon by the victors as well us 
by those who flee. Him, all people and worlds in 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 101 425 


existence hold at the centre of their being. That Indra, 
lord of Maruts, we invoke for support, sustenance and 
friendship. 


रुद्राणामिति प्रदिशां विचश्चणो सद्रेभिर्योषां तनुते पृथ्यु Aa: । 
इन्द्रं मनीषा अभ्यर्चति श्रुतं मरुत्वन्तं स॒ख्याय॑ हवामहे U9 


a Rudranameti pradisa vicaksano rudrebhiryosa 
tanute prthu jrayah. Indram manisa abhyarcati 
Srutam marutvantam sakhyaya havamahe. 


Lord of intelligence, Indra, acts by the paths of 
Rudras, that is, Maruts, powers of law and dispensation 
and the process of formation and reformation. With the 
Rudras, waves of Maruts’ energy, the dawn expands the 
lights of the day. Intelligence and mind invoke the 
famous powers of Indra, waves of Maruts, as they act 
in thought. That Indra, lord of the Maruts’ motion and 
energy in space, we invoke for support as divine friend 
and benefactor for progress and prosperity. 


यद्‌ वां मरुत्वः परमे सधस्थे यद्वावमे वृजने मादयासे | 
अत आ याह्यध्वरं नो अच्छा त्वाया हविश्चकृमा 
सत्यराधः ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yad va marutvah parame sadhasthe yad vavame 
vrjane madayase. Ata a yahyadhvaram no accha 
tvaya haviscakrma saytaradhah. 


Indra, lord of Maruts, tempestuous dynamics of 
divine energy, whether you are in the highest heaven of 
creation or at the lowest plane of space, there you rejoice 
and create joy for the play of life. Lord of light and the 
power of joy, come to our yajna of the will to live, and 
come well, happy and rejoicing. We are your own, lord 


426 RGVEDA 


of real wealth of success and giver of bliss. We are ready 
with holy and fragrant yajnic havi. 


त्वायेन्द्र सोमं सुषुमा सुदश्च त्वाया हविरुच॑कृमा ब्रहावाहः | 
अधां नियुत्वः सग॑णो परुद्धिर स्मिन्‌ यज्ञे बर्हिषि माद- 
यस्व ॥ ९ ॥ 


रः Tvayendra somam susuma sudaksa tvaya havi- 
$cakrma brahmavahah. Adha niyutvah sagano 
marudbhirasmin yajne barhisi madayasva. 


Gracious lord of versatile power, Indra, with you 
let us distil the soma of life’s joy and knowledge. Divine 
harbinger of universal wealth, let us create the means 
and materials of yajnic living with you. And then, lord 
of all-competence, allies and equipment, come with the 
Maruts, lightning carriers of fragrance, join, enjoy, and 
bless us on the holy seats of grass in the yajna. 


मादयस्व हरिभिर्ये त॑ इन्द्र fa ete शिप्रे fa dares धेने । 
आ त्वां सुशिप्र हर॑यो वहन्तृशन्‌ हव्यानि प्रतिं नो 
जुषस्व ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Madayasva haribhirye ta indra vi syasva Sipre vi 
srjasva dhene. A tva susipra harayo vahantusan 
havyani prati no jusasva. 


Indra, lord of light, power and joy, come by the 
lights of the dawn, they are yours. Find the heaven and 
earth of freedom and open the flood-gates of song and 
joy. Lord of noble helmet, let your horses of the speed 
of lightning transport you hither. Come to us and, in a 
mood of love and ecstasy, celebrate and bless our gifts 
of action and homage in our yajna of life. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 102 427 


मरुत्स्तोत्रस्य वृजन॑स्य गोपा वयमिन्द्रेण सनुयाम वाजंम्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Marutstotrasya vrjanasya gopa vayamindrena 
sanuyama vajam. Tanno mitro varuno mama- 
hantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


We are watchmen of the land of freedom and 
joy. We are singers of the song of Maruts in honour of 
Indra. May we, we pray, achieve success in our mission 
by the grace of Indra. May Mitra, universal friend, 
Varuna, our choice lord of justice and dispensation, the 
sun and moon, congregations of the learned, the rolling 
seas and flowing rivers, mother earth and generous skies, 
and the bright heavens help us in that yajnic mission. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 102 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


इमां ते धियं प्र भ॑रे महो महीमस्य स्तोत्रे धिषणा यत्तं 
आनजे। तमुत्सवे च॑ प्रसवे a सासहिपिन्द्रं देवासः 
शव॑सामदन्ननु ।॥ ९॥ 


1. Imam te dhiyam pra bhare maho mahimasya 
stotre dhisana yat ta anaje. Tamutsave ca prasave 
ca sasahimindram devasah Savasama-dannanu. 


I hold on to this great and adorable knowledge 
and wisdom of yours, Indra, which, loud and bold, is 
revealed in this divine song of yours in praise. That 
mighty lord Indra of valour and courage, the noblest 
leaders and teachers of humanity celebrate with all their 
might and wisdom in all yajnic projects for the 
expansion and elevation of human life and culture. In 


428 RGVEDA 


consequence, they too enjoy themselves and feel blest. 


अस्य stat wal: सप्त बिभ्रति arate पृथिवी dst 
aq: अस्मे सूंयचिन्द्रमसाधिचक्ष sree कमिन्द्र चरतो 
वितर्तुरम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Asya Sravo nadyah sapta bibhrati dyavaksama 
prthivi darsatam vapuh. Asme suryacandrama- 
sabhicakse sraddhe kamindra carato vitarturam. 


The power and fame of this Indra, the seven 
rivers hold in their flow and reveal. Heaven and earth 
and the skies manifest his majestic form. The sun and 
the moon shine and move so that we may realise his 
glory, have faith, feel the joy of life and finally cross 
through the ocean of existence. 


तं स्मा रथं मघवन्‌ Ure सातये Sat यं त अनुमदाम संगमे | 
आजा न॑ इन्द्र मन॑सा पुरुष्टुत त्वायद््यो मघवञ्छर्म यच्छ 
ABU 


3. Tam sma ratham maghavan prava sataye jaitram 
yam te anumadama samgame. Aja na indra 
manasa purustuta tvayadbhyo maghavan-charma 
yaccha nah. 


Maghavan, lord of power, wealth and victory, 
reveal and bring up that wondrous and victorious chariot 
of yours for our victory and success in battle which we 
celebrate in the contests of heroes. Invoked, praised and 
worshipped with our mind and soul for the battles of 
life, Indra, give us, who are your admirers, our part of 
wealth and comfort. 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 102 429 


वयं ज॑येम त्वया युजा वृत॑मस्माकमंशमुदंवा भरेभरे | 
अस्मभ्य॑मिन्द्र वरिवः सुगं कधि प्र शत्रणां मघवन्‌ वृष्ण्यौ 
SANS 


4. Vayam jayema tvaya yuja vrtamasmakamamsa- 
mudava bharebhare. Asmabhyamindra varivah 
sugam krdhi pra Satrunam maghavan vrsnya ruja. 


Indra, let us win the prizes of life with your help. 
In every battle and in every contest, keep our selected 
part and our deserved prize safe. Indra, lord of wealth 
and power, let the treasures of life be reachable and 
make the way to them straight and simple. Lord of power 
and force, break down the storms of enemy power for us. 


नाना हि त्वा हव॑माना जना इमे ela धर्त॒रव॑सा विपन्यवः | 
अस्माकं स्मा रथमा fas सातये जैत्रं हीन्द्र निभृतं 
मनस्तव ॥ ५॥ 


a. Nana hi tva havamana jana ime dhananam 
dhartaravasa vipanyavah. Asmakam sma 
rathama tistha sataye jaitram hindra nibhrtam 
manastava. 


Indra, lord controller and treasurer of the wealth 
of the nation, many people are there, your admirers and 
worshippers, who invoke you and call upon you with 
means of security and protection. Be seated in our 
chariot which is unbreakable and victorious and in 
which your mind would be cool, collected and at peace, 
and come to assign our share of rights and duties and to 
dispense our part of endeavour and prize. 


That बाहू अमितक्रतुः सिमः कर्मन्कर्मञ्छतमूंतिः 
रव्रजंकरः | अकल्प इन्द्रः प्रतिमानमोजसाथा जना वि ह्यन्ते 
सिषासवः ।॥ ६ ॥ 


430 RGVEDA 


6. Gojita bahu amitakratuh simah karman karman- 
chatamutih khajankarah. Akalpa indrah prati- 
manamojasatha jana vi hvayante sisasavah. 


Strong armed victor of lands, immensely 
intelligent, tactical fighter and winner, protector and 
defender in a hundred ways in every battle, heroic 
warrior, strongest of the strong, match for the matchless 
with his might and power, such is Indra, lord ruler of 
the world. Him, the men of admiration invoke for 
company and protection. 


उत्ते श॒तान्म॑घवन्नुच्य भूय॑स उत्सहस््राद्रिरिचे कृष्टिषु sta: | 
अमात्रं त्वां धिषणां तित्विषे मह्यधा वृत्राणि frre 
पुरन्दर ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Ut te Satanmaghavannucca bhiyasa ut sahasrad 
ririce krstisu Sravah. Amatram tva dhisana titvise 
mahyadha vrtrani jighnase purandara. 


Indra, lord of might and power, more than 
hundred, more than most, more than thousand exceeds 
your fame and power among the people. Great is your 
intelligence and action and noble is your voice which 
makes you shine immensely more than brilliant. And 
then you break the clouds of rain for the showers and 
rout the strongholds of the hoarders. 


त्रिविष्टिधातु प्रतिमानमोज॑सस्तिस्त्रो भूमींनपते त्रीणि रोचना । 
अतीदं विश्वं भुव॑नं ववक्षिथाशत्रुरिन्द्र जनुषां सनादसि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Trivistidhatu pratimanamojasastisro bhumirnr- 
pate trini rocana. Atidam visvam bhuvanam 
vavaksithasatrurindra janusa sanadasi. 


Indra, Nrpati, lord of the people and ruler of the 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 102 431 


world, in you, threefold is the existence of elements 
such as earth, water, fire, air and space, of the order of 
matter, motion and mind (sattva, rajas and tamas). You 
are the measure of omnipotence. Three are the regions 
of space, heaven, sky and earth. Three are the orders of 
heat and light, vaishvanara fire in earth, taijasa electric 
energy in the sky and Aditya light in heaven. O lord, 
Indra, you transcend this entire universe, and by nature 
since eternity you are without an enemy, contrariety and 
contradiction. 


त्वां देवेषु प्रथमं ह॑वामहे त्वं ब॑भूथ पृत॑नासु arate: | 
सेमं न॑ः कारूमुपमन्युमुद्धिदमिन्द्रः कृणोतु प्रसवे रथं! 
पुरः॥ ९॥ 


५.१ Tvam devesu prathamam havamahe tvam babhu- 
tha prtanasu sasahih. Semam nah karumupa- 
manyum udbhidam indrah krnotu prasave ratham 
purah. 


Indra, lord ruler of the universe, first and highest 
among devas, divinities of nature and humanity, greater 
than your own attributes, we invoke you, pray to you, 
and worship you. In the battles of the elements and 
conflicts of humanity, you are the unmoved victor. Lord 
Indra as you are, in our yajna of life for progress and 
prosperity, we pray, advance our chariot made of earthly 
materials to the front and raise our technologist maker 
and respected worker close at hand among us to high 
status. 


त्वं Rites eat रुरोधिथार्भष्वाजा मघवन्महत्सु च । 
त्वामुग्रमवसे सं शिशीमस्यथा न इन्द्र हव॑नेषु चोदय Ut ९०॥ 


432 RGVEDA 


10. Tvam jigetha na dhana rurodhitharbhesvaja 
maghavan mahatsu ca. Tvam ugram avase sam 
sistmasyatha na indra havanesu codaya. 


Indra, lord ruler of the wealth and power of the 
world, you win the battles great and small, and stall not 
the growth of wealth. In all the battles great and small, 
we invoke you, lord of power and passion, for protection 
and advancement, deplete the enemies and glorify you. 
Then, lord, inspire us in our yajnic programmes for joint 
progress and universal prosperity. 


विश्वाहेन्द्रो अधिवक्ता नो अस्त्वप॑रिह्ताः सनुयाम वाज॑म्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Visvahendro adhivakta no astvaparihvrtah sanu- 
yama vajam. Tanno mitro varuno mamahanta- 
maditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


May Indra, lord of light and power, universal 
destroyer, creator and preserver, be our teacher and 
supreme speaker for all time. And may we, obedient 
and protected, straight and simple, offer him homage, 
support and perfect service. We pray, may Mitra and 
Varuna, sun and shower, Aditi, saints and skies, Sindhu, 
rolling seas and rippling rivers, the earth and heaven 
protect and promote this holy programme of ours. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 103 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 
ad shat प॑र मं पराचैरधारयन्त कवय॑ः पुरेदम्‌ | 
क्षमेदमन्यदिव्य4न्यद॑स्य समी! पृच्यते समनेव केतुः ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 103 433 


im Tat ta indriyam paramam pardacairadharayanta 
kavayah puredam. Ksamedamanyad divyanya- 
dasya sami prcyate samaneva ketuh. 


That glory of yours, lord, which is supreme and 
eternal, which is essential, subtle and mysterious, and 
this which is actual and existential, the poets of vision 
and imagination realise by its manifestations. Of this 
glory of Indra, this which is on earth is one and distinct, 
and the other which is in heaven is distinct and another. 
The two mingle in form and mature as one just as two 
parties meet in the assembly, each with its identity, and 
become one community. 


स धारयत्पृथिवीं ureter वज्रेण हत्वा निरपः स॑सर्ज । 
अहन्नहिमभिनद्रौहिणं व्यहन्व्यंसं मघवा शचीभिः ॥ २॥ 


2. Sa dharayat prthivim paprathacca vajrena hatva 
nirapah sasarja. Ahannahim abhinad rauhinam 
vyahan vyamsam maghava Ssacibhih. 


Indra, lord of light and power, like the sun, with 
his actions, 1.e., waves of gravitation, holds the earth 
and manifests its vast expanse. Striking the electric 
thunderbolt of his energy, he constantly creates the 
waters of space. He breaks the cloud formed in the 
Rohini constellation, striking over its shoulders and 
releases the showers of rain on earth. 


स जातुभर्मा श्रदधान ओजः पुरो विभिन्दन्नचरद्वि दासींः। 
विद्वान्वचिन्दस्य॑वे हेतिमस्याऽऽ्यं सहो वर्धया द्युम्न- 
मिन्द्र ॥३॥ 

a Sa jatubharma sraddadhana ojah puro vibhinda- 


nnacarad vi dasth. Vidvan vajrin dasyave heti- 
masya’’ryam saho vardhaya dyumnamindra. 


434 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of knowledge and wielder of the 
thunderbolt, sustainer of all that is born, faithful and 
valorous, routing the strongholds of evil, roams around. 
Heroic Indra, having struck the thunderbolt on the 
wicked, develops wealth and valour for the noble ones. 


तदूचुषे मानुषेमा युगानि कीर्तेन्यं मघवा नाम बिभ्र॑त्‌ । 
उपप्रयन्द॑स्युहत्यांय वज्री See सूनुः श्रव॑से नाम॑ दधे ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Taducuse manusema yugani kirtenyam maghava 
nama bibhrat. Upaprayan dasyuhat-yaya vajri 
yaddha sunuh sravase nama dadhe. 


Surely that honour and fame for actions, the lord 
of power and wealth, Indra, maintains for the admirers 
for ages of human memory, which he, wielder of the 
thunderbolt, of omnipotence, achieves in action for the 
sake of wealth and fame while he advances for the 
destruction of the evil and the wicked. 


तदस्येदं प॑श्यता भूरिं पुष्टं श्रदिन्द्रस्य धत्तन वीयौय । 
स गा अविन्दत्सो अविन्ददश्वान्त्स ओष॑धीः सो अपः स 
वनानि ॥ ५॥ 


>: Tadasyedam pasyata bhuri pustam Sradindrasya 
dhattana viryaya. Sa ga avindat so avindadasvan 
tsa osadhih so apah sa vanani. 


Watch the mighty action, this great achievement 
of this lord Indra and take it on with conviction for the 
attainment of honour, fame and valour. He develops 
lands and cows. He acquires horses and develops modes 
of transport and communication. He develops herbs and 
trees, creates waters and develops water resources, and 
he creates all kinds of wealth and expands the forests. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 103 435 


भूरिकर्मणे वृषभाय वृष्णे सत्यशुष्माय सुनवाम सोम॑म्‌। 
य आदृत्य परिपन्थीव शूरोऽय॑ज्वनो विभजन्नेति वेद॑: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Bhurikarmane vrsabhaya vrsne satyasusmaya 
sunavama somam. Ya adrtya paripanthiva suro’- 
yajvano vibhajanneti vedah. 


We create wealth and distil the soma-joy of life 
for Indra, lord of abundant action, brave, generous and 
truly brilliant. Heroic and fearless, he respects the wise 
and, like a detective, uncovers the black money of the 
hoarders, shares it with the community and moves on. 


तदिन्द्र We वीर्य' चकर्थ यत्ससन्तं asturralerats fea 
अनुं त्वा पलनीर्हषितं वय॑श्च विश्वे देवासो अमदन्ननु 
त्वा॥ ७॥ 


7. Tadindra preva viryam cakartha yat sasantam 
vajrenabodhayo’him. Anu tva patnirhrsitam 
vayasca visve devaso amadannanu tva. 


Indra, joyous hero, you show your prowess then 
when you take on the sleeping cloud with the 
thunderbolt. And then the house-wives, the wise seniors, 
and all the noble pious people rejoice with you. 


शुष्णं fog कुय॑वं वृत्रमिन्द्र यदाव॑धीर्विं पुरः शम्ब॑रस्य । 
तन्नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ८ ॥ 

ne Susnam piprur kuyavam vrtramindra yadava- 
dhirvi purah sambarasya. Tanno mitro varuno 
mamahantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Indra, when you break down Vrtra, the mighty 
cloud which can raise green fields of barley and create 


436 RGVEDA 


prosperity for the farmers, and when you shatter the 
deep caverns of Shambara, the dark cloud pregnant with 
vapour as if destroying the formidable forts of an enemy, 
then Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the oceans, Aditi, the sky, 
the rivers, the earth and heaven rise and inspire us with 
reverence and faith. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 104 
Indra Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


योनिष्ट इन्द्र निषदे अकारि तमा नि dle स्वानो art 
विमुच्या वयोऽ वसायाश्वान्दोषा वस्तोर्वहीयसः 
प्रपित्वे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yonista indra nisade akari tama ni sida svano 
narva. Vimucya vayo’vasayasvan dosa vastorva- 
hiyasah prapitve. 


Indra, this seat of high office is prepared and 
reserved for you. Come, take it, rejoicing as a victorious 
knight of horse. Come post-haste to join for 
refreshments and holy food, leaving behind the birds, 
horses and the celestial carriers of the night and day. 


ओ त्ये नर्‌ इन्द्रमूतये We चित्तान्त्सद्यो अध्व॑नो जगम्यात्‌। 
देवासो मन्युं दास॑स्य श्चम्नन्ते न आ वक्षन्त्सुविताय 
वर्णौम्‌॥ २॥ 

2 O tye nara indramutaye gurni cit tan tsadyo 


adhvano jagamyat. Devaso manyum dasasya 
$camnan te na वं vaksan tsuvitaya varnam. 


Those people who approach Indra for protection 
and pray for advancement, he leads, all of them, by the 
right path at once and always. May the devas, noblest 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 104 437 


powers of nature and humanity, allaying the passion and 
fear of the demon of opposition, open the path of 
progress and bless us with inspiration and guidance for 
onward movement and protection. 


अव त्मनौ भरते केतवेदा अव त्मना। भरते फेन॑मुदन्‌ afttat 
स्नातः कुय॑वस्य योषे हते ते स्यातां प्रवणे शिफायाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Ava tmana bharate ketaveda ava tmana bharate 
phenamudan. Ksirena snatah kuyavasya yose 
hate te syatam pravane Siphayah. 


The clever financier carries away the wealth of 
others for his heart’s desire. He syphons away the 
nation’s wealth down to the scum with a passion and 
wallows in the milky waters of his bath. But bathed and 
anointed with milk, like the rival mistresses of a swindler 
both dying of violent jealousy, he would drown in the 
whirlpool of the flood of his own creation. 


युयोप नाभिरूप॑रस्यायोः प्र पू्वीभिस्तिरते TE: शूर॑ः । 
अञ्जसी कुलिशी वीरप॑त्ी पयों हिन्वाना उदभिर्भरन्ते ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yuyopa nabhiruparasyayoh pra purvabhistirate 
rasti Surah. Anjast kulist virapatni payo hinvana 
udabhirbharante. 


The life-string of the people’s energy, like the 
centre of the waters of the cloud, is implicit and hidden. 
And just as the sun breaks open the energy of the cloud 
with its rays and shines, so does Indra, the ruler, with 
the people themselves, release that energy and shines 
as a hero. And then, just as the straight and rapid, brilliant 
rivers fed by the heroic Indra, collecting streams of 
water, full to over flowing, move on, so the people, 


438 RGVEDA 


dynamic and brilliant, protected and guided by the 
heroic ruler, grow to their full capacity and, creating 
and collecting wealth and power, move on their way. 


प्रति यत्स्या “terest दस्योरोको नाच्छा सद॑नं जानती 
गात्‌। अधं स्मा नो मघवचञ्चर्कुतादिन्मा नो मघेव निष्षपी 
परां दाः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Prati yat sya nithadarsi dasyoroko naccha sada- 
nam janati gat. Adha sma no maghavaincar- 
krtadinma no magheva nissapi para dah. 


Seen is the path, the people know: like the one 
to the house of the robber and that which leads to the 
house of the good in full knowledge. Indra, lord of 
wealth and power, take us not away from the path of 
good action, throw us not away like the wealth of a 
wastour. 


स त्वं न॑ इन्द्र सूर्ये सो अप्स्वनागास्त्व आ भ॑ज जीवशंसे । 
मान्त॑रां भुजमा रीरिषो नः ste ते महत sear se ॥ 


6. Sa tvam na indra surye so apsvanagastva a bhaja 
jivasamse. Mantaram bhujama ririso nah sra- 
ddhitam te mahata indriyaya. 


Indra, lord ruler of light and power, give us the 
brilliance of the sun. Give us the coolness and plenty of 
waters. Establish us firmly in sinlessness for a full life 
of joy. Pray do not hurt our people, they are worthy of 
protection. We are dedicated in faith to you for the sake 
of wealth and prosperity. 


अधां मन्ये श्रत्ते अस्मा अधायि वृषां चोदस्व महते धनाय । 
मा नो stent पुरुहूत योनाविन्द्र ae वय॑ आसुतिं 
at: WON 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 104 439 


7. Adha manye Ssrat te asma adhayi vrsa codasva 
mahate dhanaya. Ma no akrte puruhuta yona- 
vindra ksudhyadbhyo vaya asutim dah. 


And I believe in you. We have reposed full faith 
in you for this life of joy. Great lord of strength and 
generosity, inspire us to achieve great wealth and 
honour. Honoured and invoked by many, O lord, do not 
deliver us, our life and descendants, unto an ignoble 
state of existence. Indra, provide ample food and soma 
drink for the hungry and thirsty. 


मानो वधीरिन्द्र मापरांदा मा न॑ः प्रिया asta प्र 
मोंषीः। आण्डा मा नो मघवञ्छक्र निर्थेन्मा नः पारां 
भेत्सहजानुषाणि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ma no vadhirindra ma para da ma nah priya 
bhojanani pra mosth. Anda ma no maghavan- 
chakra nirbhenma nah patra bhet sahajanusani. 


Indra, destroy us not, deliver us not unto aliens. 
Deprive us not of our cherished dreams and desires. 
Lord of great action and power, wealth and honour, 
destroy not the future in the womb. Neglect not those 
who deserve, let them not be lost in oblivion. Alienate 
not our brethren, descendents and traditions. 


अवङिहि सोम॑कामं त्वाहुर यं सुतस्तस्य पिबा मदाय । 
उरुव्यचा Ast आ daca पितेव नः शृणुहि हूयमानः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Arvanehi somakamam tvadhurayam sutastasya 
piba madaya. Uruvyaca jathara ठ vrsasva piteva 
nah srnuhi huyamanah. 


Indra, come right here and now. They say you 
love soma. Distilled is the soma of life’s joy, drink of it 


440 RGVEDA 


to your fill for the bliss of life. Lord of great honour 
and universal reverence, invoked by all with love in 
faith, listen to our prayers as a father and shower the 
rains of bliss. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 105 
Vishvedeva Devata, Trita Aptya or Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


चन्द्रमा अप्स्वन्तरा सुपर्णो धावते दिवि। न at हिरण्य- 
नेमयः पदं विन्दन्ति विद्युतो वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९॥ 


i Candrama apsvantara suparno dhavate divi. 
Na vo hiranyanemayah padam vindanti vidyuto 
vittam me asya rodasi. 


The moon glides in the middle regions of 
Antariksha in the midst of waters and pranic energies. 
So does the sun of wondrous rays run fast in the heaven 
of light. But the golden-rimmed flashes of lightning 
reveal themselves not to your state of consciousness. 
May the heaven and earth know the secret of this 
mystery and reveal it to men, the ruler and the people. 


अर्थमिद्वा ङ अर्थिन आ जाया gad पतिम्‌ dana वृष्ण्यं 
पय॑: परिदाय रसं ae वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ २॥ 


00 Arthamid va u arthina व jaya yuvate patim. 
Tunjate vrsnyam payah paridaya rasam duhe 
vittam me asya rodast. 


Those who love things of value get the thing 
they cherish just as a wife fascinates her husband she 
loves. They vitalise the fluent waters of life, distil the 
soma of ecstasy and giving themselves up to the spirit 
of life, taste the nectar of existence. O heaven and earth, 
know the secret of this mystery of love and life and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 441 
reveal it for me. 


मो षु dar अदः स्व4रव॑ पादि दिवस्परिं। मा सोम्यस्य 
शंभुवः शूने भूम कदां चन वित्तं में अस्य रोदसी ॥ ३॥ 


६ Mo su deva adah svarava padi divaspari. Ma 
somyasya Sambhuvah sune bhuma kada cana 
vittam me asya rodast. 


O divinities of life and nature, may that ecstasy 
and bliss of our life never fall below the top of heaven. 
May we never suffer frustration in vacuum of the peace 
and joy of the soma of existence. Heaven and earth, 
know the secret and mystery of living in the state of 
bliss and reveal it to me for all, the ruler as well as the 
ruled. 


aa पृच्छाम्यवमं स तद्‌ दूतो वि वोचति । क्व॑ ऋतं पूर्व्य 
गतं कस्तद्धिभरतिं नूत॑नो वित्तं A अस्य रोदसी ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yajnam prcchamyavamam sa tad dito vi vocati. 
Kva rtam purvyam gatam kastad bibharti nutano 
vittam me asya rodast. 


Lord of knowledge, you are the harbinger of 
truth and the message of Divinity. I ask you of that 
supreme yajna of life’s protection and promotion which 
sustains existence. Where is that eternal water and law 
of life hidden or gone? Who at the present time observes 
that same ancient and eternal yajna and law of life, and 
how? May the heaven and earth know and reveal the 
truth for us. 


अमी ये देवाः स्थनं त्रिष्वा रोचने fea: long ऋतं Hatt 
ad vel व आहुतिर्वित्तं A अस्य रोदसी ॥ ५॥ 


442 RGVEDA 


5: Ami ye devah sthana trisva rocane divah. Kad va 
rtam kadanrtam kva pratna va ahutirvittam me 
asya rodasi. 


O lords of knowledge, who or what are those 
divine powers of existence abiding in the light of heaven 
by their name, identity and state of being in the three 
regions of the universe? Where is the law of cosmic 
dynamics of evolution? What is truth and what is 
untruth? What is eternal and constant? What is 
existential and mutable? What was the first mutation of 
Prakrti in the cosmic yajna? What is going to be the last 
and closing oblation in the cosmic vedi? May the heaven 
and earth know and reveal it for us. 


we vate धर्णसि कद्वरुणस्य चक्ष॑णम्‌। Heart 
महस्पथाति क्रामेम geal वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Kad va rtasya dharnasi kad varunasya caksa- 
nam. Kadaryamno mahaspathati kramema 
dhudhyo vittam me asya rodasi. 


O divinities of existence, what and where is the 
ultimate cause of the original life and law, what is that 
omnipotence? What and where is that omniscient all- 
seeing eye that watches the created forms and their 
karmic movement? What and where is that awful path 
of the great sun by which we may comprehend and cross 
the challenges of existence? May the heaven and earth 
know of this and reveal the knowledge to me. 


अहं सो अस्मि यः पुरा सुते वदामि art चित्‌। तं at 
व्यन्त्याध्योड Gal न तष्णजं मगं वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 443 


7. Aham so asmi yah pura sute vadami kani cit. Tam 
ma vyantyadhyo vrko na trsnajam mrgam vittam 
me asya rodasi. 


I am the same who chant some songs of Vedic 
adoration at the dawn of the cosmic yajna of the Divine. 
And yet the loves and cares of existence overwhelm me 
as a wolf pounces upon a deer thirsting for life and 
existence. What is this mystery? May the heaven and 
earth know and reveal it to me! 


सं मां तपन्त्यभितः सपत्नीरिव usta: मूषो न शिश्ना 
व्य॑दन्ति माध्यः स्तोतारं ते शतक्रतो वित्तं A अस्य 
रोदसी ue ॥ 


8. Sam ma tapantyabhitah sapatniriva parsavah. 
Muso na Ssisna vyadanti madhyah stotaram te 
Satakrato vittam me asya rodasi. 


The knives and sickles of life all round cut into 
my vitals as rival mistresses consume the lover’s heart 
and soul. Just as mice eat up the warp and woof of cloth 
in the making, so do the cares of life eat away the original 
wealth of me who am, in reality, your admirer and 
worshipper, O Lord of a hundred yajnas of the universe. 
What is this mystery? Let heaven and earth reveal it to 
me. 


अमी ये सप्त रश्मयस्तत्रा मे नाभिरात॑ता | त्रितस्तदेंदाप्त्यः 
स जामित्वाय रेभति वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९॥ 


a Ami ye sapta rasmayastatra me nabhiratata. 
Tritastad vedaptyah sa jamitvaya rebhati vittam 
me asya rodasi. 


As far as the rainbow lights of the universe 


444 RGVEDA 


radiate, as far as the five elements, Ahankara, mind- 
matter complex and Mahan, first mutation of Prakrti 
expand, as far as the five pranas, mind and intellect 
energise life, that far exists the sphere of my life’s centre- 
hold. The self-realised soul who knows the time past, 
present and future upon the instant knows that and 
proclaims for the realisation of universal brotherhood 
of souls. May the heaven and earth know and reveal the 
secret of this universal brotherhood for me. 


अपी ये पञ्चोक्षणो मध्ये तस्थुर्महो fea: । देवत्रा नु प्रवाच्यं 
सध्रीचीना नि वावृतुर्वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ami ye pancoksano madhye tasthurmaho divah. 
Devatra nu pravacyam sadhricina ni vavrturvi- 
ttam me asya rodasi. 


There they are, five generous founts of energy, 
water and joy which abide in the great heavens, they 
being fire, wind, vapours of water, electricity and the 
sun. They are simultaneous, coexistent and worthy of 
being researched, analysed and explained by and to the 
noblest of generous scholars. May the heaven and earth 
know this mystery of nature and reveal it to me. 


सुपर्णा एत stad मध्य॑ आरोधने faa: ते सेधन्ति पथो 
तृक तर॑न्तं यह्वतीरपो वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Suparna eta asate madhya arodhane divah. Te 
sedhanti patho vrkam tarantam yahvarirapo 
vittam me asya rodasi. 


The waves of solar energy abide in the midst of 
the sun’s gravity. They being most potent regulate the 
paths and velocities of electricity and the formation and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 445 


movement of waters. May the heaven and earth know 
this mystery and reveal it to me. 


नव्यं तदुक्थ्यं हितं cata: सुप्रवाचनम्‌। ऋ तम॑षन्ति 
सिन्ध॑वः सत्यं तातान सूर्यो वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Navyam tadukthyam hitam devasah suprava- 
canam. Rtamarsanti sindhavah satyam tatana 
suryo vittam me asya rodasi. 


O men of knowledge and generosity, this new, 
laudable, sacred, useful and secret principle of nature’s 
truth and law of physical evolution is worthy of study, 
discussion and development. The rivers flow and the 
sea rolls the waters while the sun creates and expands 
the vapours and again sucks up the vapours. This 
mysterious cycle may the heaven and earth know and 
reveal to us. 


अग्ने तव त्यदुक्थ्यं देवेष्वस्त्याप्य॑म्‌। स न॑: सत्तो मनुष्वदा 
देवान्यक्षि विदुष्टरो वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ 23.01 


13. Agne tava tyadukthyam devesvastyapyam. Sa nah 
satto manusvada devan yaksi vidustaro vittam me 
asya rodasi. 


Agni, scholar of heat and vitality, that laudable 
knowledge of yours is worthy of confirmation with 
reference to the presence of vitality in various forms of 
nature. Scholar of eminence, come as a participant in 
yajna, study those forms of nature, cooperate with other 
scholars, and may the heaven and earth know the 
mysteries of nature and reveal the same to you and me. 


सत्तो होतां मनुष्वदा car अच्छं विदुष्टरः | अगिर्हव्या 
सुषूदति देवो देवेषु मेधिरो वित्तं मे| अस्य रोदसी ।॥ ex u 


446 RGVEDA 


14. Satto hota manusvada devan accha vidustarah. 
Agnirhavya susudati devo devesu medhiro vittam 
me asya rodasi. 


Scholar of eminence, researcher in the yajna of 
science, come as a participant in yajna. Specialist of 
natural sciences, adorable you are among scholars. Agni 
is the vital power that creates, matures and gives the 
materials for the yajna of humanity. May the heaven 
and earth know the mysteries of vital fire and reveal the 
same to you and me. 


ब्रह्मां कृणोति वरुणो गातुविदं तमींमहे। व्यूर्णोति हृदा 
मतिं नव्यो! जायतामृतं वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ १५ ॥ 


15. Brahma krnoti varuno gatuvidam tamimahe. 
Vyurnoti hrda matim navyo jayatamrtam vittam 
me asya rodasi. 


Brahma, lord supreme, creates, Varuna, lord of 
love and justice, reveals the knowledge and shapes the 
man of knowledge who knows the ways of nature and 
the ways of the world. We pray to the lord supreme, we 
request the man of knowledge. He removes the veil of 
ignorance with his heart of love and refines our 
intelligence. We pray may new and newer facts of nature 
and divine law arise. May heaven and earth know and 
reveal the knowledge to us. 


असौ यः पन्थां आदित्यो दिवि प्रवाच्यं कृतः। न स देवा 
अतिक्रमे तं म॑तसिो न प॑श्यथ वित्तं मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९६॥ 

16. Asau yah pantha adityo divi pravacyam krtah. Na 
sa deva atikrame tam martaso na pasyatha vittam 
me asya rodasi. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 447 


That is the path which is blazing glorious as the 
sun in heaven, eternal and imperishable, created in the 
light of eternal knowledge, Veda, to be meditated on, 
spoken of and followed. Not even the greatest in nature 
or humanity can exceed or violate it. O mortal men and 
women, you do not see it. I pray, may the heaven and 
earth know and reveal it to you and me. 


त्रितः Hts व॑हितो देवान्हवत ऊतये । तच्छुश्राव बह स्पतिः 
कृण्वन्नं टूर णादुरु fad मे अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Tritah kupe’vahito devan havata utaye. Tacchu- 
Srava brhaspatih krnvannamhuranaduru vittam 
me asya rodasi. 


Trita, the soul in possession of simultaneous 
vision of past, present and future time, having achieved 
efficiency in knowledge, action and prayer, withdrawn 
into the cave of the heart, or, even the soul fallen into 
disarray in all the three ways and deep in the well of 
desperation, calls upon the Lord for succour, protection 
and spiritual elevation. The Lord, Brhaspati, lord of the 
universe and universal voice, listens and creates a wide 
path of freedom from sin, despondency and limitations. 
May the heaven and earth know that path and reveal 
the words of prayer to me. 


अरुणो मां सकृद्‌ वृक॑ः पथा यन्तं ददर्शं fei उज्जिहीते 
निचाय्या asa usar वित्तं में अस्य रोदसी ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Aruno ma sakrd vrkah patha yantam dadarsa hi. 
Ujjihite nicayya tasteva prstyamayt vittam me 
asya rodasi. 


The Lord of golden majesty, creator and 


448 RGVEDA 


measurer of the months of time, giver of vision and bliss 
like the moon, watches the wayfarer going on the path 
of life created for humanity. And the person so observed, 
even a hunchback suffering the worst pains, is reshaped 
into form and, thanking the Lord, leaps and bounds on 
way to freedom in a state of perfect health. May the 
heaven and earth know that path and reveal the vision 
divine for me. 


wren वयपिन्द्र॑वन्तोऽभि ष्याम वृजने सर्ववीराः । 
तन्नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ १९॥ 


19. Enangusena vayamindravanto’bhi syama vrjane 
sarvavirah. Tanno mitro varuno mamahanta- 
maditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Inspired by this song of divinity sung by the 
sage of eternal vision, let us all, children of Indra, be all 
ways great and strong and move forward by leaps and 
bounds. And may Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the moon, 
Aditi, the sky, the river and the sea, the earth and heaven 
strengthen our resolve and advance us on way to 
freedom and bliss. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 106 
Vishvedeva Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 
इन्द्रं मित्रं वरुणमथिमूतये मारुतं शर्धो अदितिं हवामहे । 
रथं न दुर्गाद्वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान्नो अंह॑सो निष्पिं- 
परतन ॥ ९॥ 
Nie Indram mitram varunamagnimitaye marutam 


$ardho aditim havamahe. Ratham na durgdd vasa- 
vah sudanavo visvasmanno anhaso nispipartana. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 106 449 


For energy, power and protection, we invoke 
Indra, lord of power and natural energy, Mitra, pranic 
energy and universal friend, Varuna, noble scholar and 
power of will, Agni, fire, solar energy and lord of 
knowledge, troop and force of Maruts, power of the 
winds, Aditi, children of the earth, powers of nature 
and knowledge of the original cause of the physical 
world. May the Vasus, sustainers of life, generous and 
giving, save us from all sin and evil of the world and 
take us forward as a chariot over the difficult paths of 
earth, sea and sky. 


त आदित्या आ ग॑ता सर्वतातये भूत देवा वृत्रतूर्येषु शंभुव॑ः । 
रथं न दुर्गाद्वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान्नो अंह॑सो निष्पिं- 
पर्तन ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ta aditya a gata sarvatataye bhuta deva vrtra- 
turyesu Sambhuvah. Ratham na durgad vasavah 
sudanavo visvasmanno anhaso nispipartana. 


Let the Adityas, lights of the world, come for 
our total protection and prosperity. Come all the 
nobilities of nature and humanity to fight with us in all 
the battles against demons of darkness for creation and 
production, and may they be good for our peace and 
joy. May the Vasus, generous and giving, save us from 
all sin and evil of the world and take us forward as a 
chariot over the difficult paths of earth, sea and sky. 


अव॑न्तु नः पितरः सुप्रवाचना उत देवी देवपुत्रे ऋतावृधा । 
रथं न दुर्गाद्वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान्नो अंह॑सो निष्पिं- 
परतन ॥ ३ ॥ 

3 Avantu nah pitarah supravacana uta devi 


devaputre rtavrdha. Ratham na durgdad vasavah 
sudanavo visvasmanno anhaso nispipartana. 


450 RGVEDA 


May the wise and adorable ancients and seniors 
protect us, may the divine earth and heaven, and the 
daughters of divine nature help us and advance the rule 
of truth and law. And may the generous Vasus, we pray, 
save us from all sin and evil and lead us as a chariot 
over the difficult paths of earth, sea and sky. 


नराशंसं वाजिनं वाजयंच्चिह श्चयद्वीरं पूषणं सुम्नैरीमहे | 
रथं न दुर्गाद्वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान्नो अंह॑सो निष्पिं- 
पर्तन ॥ ४॥ 


4. Narasamsam vajinam vajayanniha ksayadviram 
pusanam sumnairimahe. Ratham na durgad 
vasavah sudanavo visvasmanno anhaso nispi- 
partana. 


With sincere mind and soul, we invoke the 
universally praised hero of knowledge and power, ideal 
of the brave, lord of protection and progress, heroic 
Pushan, fighting here for development of food, energy 
and social advancement. And we pray, may the generous 
Vasus save us from all sin and evil and take us forward 
as a chariot across the difficult paths of earth, sea and 
sky. 
वृहस्पते सदमिन्नः सुगं कुधि शं योर्यत्ते मनुर्हितं तदीमहे | 
रथं न दुर्गाद्वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान्नो अंह॑सो निष्पिं- 
पर्तन ॥ ५॥ 

चः Brhaspate sadaminnah sugam krdhi sam yoryat 
te manurhitam tadimahe. Ratham na durgad 


vasavah sudanavo visvasmanno anhaso nispi- 
partana. 


Brhaspati, lord of the wide wide world, lord of 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 106 451 


universal knowledge, we pray, make our path of 
movement easy for all time. We pray for peace and all 
round protection against suffering, all that is good for 
mankind. And, we pray, may the generous Vasus save 
us from all sin and evil and take us forward as a chariot 
over the difficult paths of earth, sea and sky. 


इन्द्रं कुत्सो वृत्रहणं शचीपत्ति' काटे Praag ऋषिरह्वदूतये | 
रथं न दुर्गाद्वसवः सुदानवो विश्वस्मान्नो अंह॑सो निष्पिं- 
परतन ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indram kutso vrtrahanam Sacipatim kate nibalha 
rsirahvadutaye. Ratham na durgad vasavah 
sudanavo visvasmanno anhaso nispipartana. 


Rshi, divine seer, Kutsa, master of knowledge 
and power, creator of peace and joy, in his programmes 
of peace and progress, invokes for help, inspiration and 
protection Indra, lord of universal action, speech and 
knowledge and divine destroyer of evil and darkness. 
We pray, may the generous Vasus save us from all sin 
and evil and take us forward as a chariot over the 
difficult paths of earth, sea and sky. 


देवैर्नो देव्यदितिर्नि ata देवस्त्राता जांयतामप्र॑युच्छन्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ७॥ 


cP Devairno devyaditirni patu devastrata traya tam 
aprayucchan. Tanno mitro varuno mamahantam 
aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


May Aditi, eternal knowledge with the gift of 
noble virtues protect us. May the scholar and generous 
seer, saviour from ignorance, in all sincerity protect us 


452 RGVEDA 


without relent. And may Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the 
moon, Aditi, the sky, the sea and rivers, earth and heaven 
support and bless us in our progress onward. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 107 
Vishvedeva Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


यज्ञो देवानां प्रत्येति सुम्नमादित्यासो भव॑ता asad: | 
आ वोऽ वाची सुमतिर्ववृत्यादंहोख्चिद्या व॑रिवोवित्त- 
रास॑त्‌ ९॥ 


i, Yajno devanam pratyeti sumnamadityaso bhavata 
mrlayantah. A vo’rvact sumatirvav-rtyad amho- 
Scidya varivovittarasat. 


Yajna brings peace, prosperity and happiness 
to the noble people. O scholars of science and divinity, 
be harbingers of peace and joy by yajnic creations and 
inventions. May your latest intellectual endeavour go 
on successfully so that it may save us from anxiety and 
fear, bring us wealth, and win honour and reverence for 
the wise. 


sa नो देवा अवसा ग॑मन्त्वद्धिरसां साम॑भिः स्तूयमानाः | 
इन्द्रं इद्ियेर्मरुतो मरुद्धिरादित्येर्नो अदितिः शर्म यंसत्‌॥ २ ॥ 


a. Upa no deva avasa gamantvangirasam samabhih 
stuyamanah. Indra indriyairmaruto marudbhira- 
dityairno aditih Sarma yamsat. 


Invoked, honoured and aroused with the soma 
songs of the Angirasa scholars of pranic energies, let 
the divinities come with protection to bless: may Indra 
come with wealth and powers, Maruts with energy of 
winds, and Aditi with the seasonal gifts of sunlight and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 108 453 


solar energy. May they, we pray, come close to us and 
bless us with peace, comfort and joy. 


तन्न इन्द्रस्तद्वरुणस्तदग्रिस्तदर्यमा तत्सविता चनो! धात्‌। तन्नो 
पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः usu 


3, Tanna indrastad varunastadagnistadaryama tat 
savita cano dhat. Tanno mitro varuno mamaha- 
ntam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


That food for life and wealth of the world may 
the divinities bring us: Indra, that power and wealth 
with energy and rain, Varuna, that peace and prosperity 
with water, Agni, that knowledge, light and fire for 
living, Aryama, that force and speed of the winds, and 
Savita, that light and life with solar energy distilled from 
nature. May the divinities bring us that food for life, 
that strength, enlightenment, justice, dignity and grace. 
And may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the seas and rivers, earth 
and heaven raise us to the heights of grandeur. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 108 
Indragni Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 
य इन्द्राग्री चित्रत॑मो रथो! वामभि विश्वानि भुव॑नानि ae । 
तेना यातं सरथं तस्थिवांसाथा सोमस्य पिबतं सुतस्य ॥ ९ ॥ 
ie Ya indragni citratamo ratho vamabhi visvani 


bhuvanani caste. Tena yatam saratham tasthi- 
vamsatha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, powers of air and fire, wonderful 
is the chariot which goes round and shows for you all 
the places and planets of the world. Come riding therein 


454 RGVEDA 


and bring us all that is there in the chariot and enjoy the 
beauty and pleasure of the Lord’s creation. 


यावदिदं भुव॑नं विश्वमस्त्युरुव्यचां वरिमता गभीरम्‌ 1 
तावा अयं पात॑वे सोमो! अस्त्वरमिन्द्राम्री मन॑से युवभ्यांम्‌॥ २॥ 


2: Yavadidam bhuvanam visvamstyuruvyaca 
varimata gabhiram. Tavan ayam patave somo 
astvaramindragni manase yuvabhyam. 


Indra and Agni, lords of the chariot, as far deep 
and majestic as this world is with its wide expanse and 
gravity, that far may be the beauty and pleasure of the 
soma for you to drink to your heart’s desire. 


चक्राथे हि सध्य4ङ्‌ नाम॑ भद्रं संश्रीचीना वुंत्रहणा उत 
स्थ॑: । ताविन्द्रागी सध्यंञ्चा निषद्या वृष्णः सोम॑स्य वृषणा 
ater ३ ॥ 


a: Cakrathe hi sadhryannama bhadram sadhricina 
vrtrahana uta sthah. Tavindragni sadhryanca 
nisadya vrsnah somasya vrsana vrsetham. 


Indra and Agni, together you are, together you 
exist, together you do good and together you break the 
cloud for rain. Therefore, acting together as ever, bring 
generous showers of the abundant soma joy of the Lord’s 
creation. 


समिद्देष्वयिष्वानजाना यतस्रुचा बर्हिरु तिस्तिराणा। 
तीव्रैः aa: परिषिक्तेथिर वगिन्द्रागी सौमनसाय यातम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Samiddhesvagnisvanajana yatasruca barhiru 
tastirana. Tivraih somaih parisiktebhirarva- 
gendragni saumanasaya yatam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 108 455 


The flames of yajna fire are blazing, the ladles 
are full and raised, the holy seats are spread and occupied 
in anticipation of Indra and Agni for whom the yajna is 
organised. And now Indra and Agni, we pray, come and 
join us with brilliant soma showers for the sake of joy. 


यानीन्द्रास्री चक्रथुंवीं्यौणि यानि रूपाण्युत वृष्ण्यानि । 
या वां werd सख्या शिवानि तेभिः सोम॑स्य पिबतं 
सुतस्य ।॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Yanindragni cakrathurviryani yani rupanyuta 
vrsnyani. Ya vam pratnani sakhya Sivani tebhih 
somasya pibatam sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, whatever great success you have 
inspired and achieved, whatever forms of abundant 
generosity you have assumed, whatever ancient and 
auspicious actions you have performed as friends of 
humanity, with all these drink of the soma distilled in 
celebration of your power and glory. 


यदब्र॑वं प्रथमं वां वृणानो ३ऽ यं सोमो असुरैर्नो fazed: 1 
तां सत्यां श्रद्धामभ्या हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिबतं 
सुतस्य ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yadabravam prathamam vam vrnano’yam somo 
asurairno vihavyah. Tam satyam sraddha- 
mabhya hi yatamatha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


What I spoke of you first, opting to invoke you 
in the yajna of science and creation, was true and 
faithful. And the soma distilled in yajna is worth 
invoking even by the asuras, those who live merely at 
the physical level. Come in response to that true and 
faithful voice of ours and drink of this soma of the joy 


456 RGVEDA 
distilled. 


यदिन्द्राग्री मद॑थः स्वे दुरोणे यद्‌ ब्रह्मणि राज॑नि वा यजत्रा । 
अतः परि वृषणावा हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिबतं 
सुतस्य ।॥ ७ ॥ 


Yadindragni madathah sve durone yad brahmani 
rajani va yajatra. Atah pari vrsanava hi 
ydatamatha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, adorable powers of yajna, as 
you celebrate your power and achievement in your own 
house and enjoy, or celebrate among the learned and 
the divines, or the rulers of the nation, the same way, O 
generous and abundant powers, holy and heroic, come 
and drink of the soma of your own creation with us. 


est यदुषु तुर्वशेषु यद्‌ द्रद्युष्वनुंघु FoR स्थः। 
अतः परि वृषणावा हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिलतं 
सुतस्य ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yadindragni yadusu turvasesu yad druhyusva- 
nusu purusu sthah. Atah pari vrsanava hi yata- 
matha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, generous and abundant, holy 
and heroic, whether you are among the industrious or 
the victorious, or the malicious, or followers or leaders, 
from there come and drink of the soma distilled. 


aidan अवमस्यां पृथिव्यां म॑ध्यमस्यां पर मस्यांमुत स्थः | 
अतः परिं वृषणावा हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिबतं सुतस्य ।॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Yadindragni avamasyam prthivyam madhyam- 


syam paramasyamuta sthah. Atah pari vrsanava 
hi yatamatha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 108 457 


Indra and Agni, whether you abide in the lower 
region of the earth, or in the middle region of the sky, 
or in the highest region of heaven, from there, powers 
generous and heroic, come and then drink of the soma 
of joy distilled from the life of existence. 


यदिन्द्राम्री परमस्यां पृथिव्यां Hear aM et स्थः। 
अतः UR वृषणावा हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिबतं सुत- 


AU ९०॥ 


10. Yadindragni paramasyam prthivyam madhyam- 
asyamavamasyamuta sthah. Atah pari vrsanava 
hi yatamatha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, whether you are in the highest 
regions of the heaven of light, or in the middle region 
of the skies of wind and lightning, or in the lowest region 
of the earth, from there come, powers generous and 
heroic, and then drink of the soma joy of life distilled. 


यदिन्द्राम्री fefast यत्पंथिव्यां यत्पर्वतेष्वोष॑धीष्वप्सु | अतः 

परि वृषणावा हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिबतं सुतस्य॑ ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Yadindragni divistho yat prthivyam yat parvate- 

svosadhisvapsu. Atah pari vrsanava hi yatamatha 
somasya pibatam sutasya. 

Indra and Agni, as you stay in the region of 

heaven, on the earth, in the mountains and the clouds, 

in the herbs and in the waters, from there come, powers 


generous and life-giving, and then drink of the soma of 
life distilled. 


यदिन्द्रागी उदिता सूर्यस्य मध्ये दिवः स्वधया! मादयेथे । 
अतः परि वृषणावा हि यातमथा सोम॑स्य पिलतं 
सुतस्य ।॥ ९२॥ 


458 RGVEDA 


12. Yadindragni udita suryasya madhye divah sva- 
dhaya madayethe. Atah pari vrsanava hi yata- 
matha somasya pibatam sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, generated of the sun in the midst 
of heaven, inspire and enlighten with their essential 
power of energy and food for life. From there, powers 
generous and brilliant, come and then delight with a 
drink of soma distilled for you and all. 


Tesh पपिवांसां सुतस्य विश्वास्मभ्यं सं ज॑यतं ert । 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Evendragni papivamsa sutasya visvasmabhyam 
sam jayatam dhanani. Tanno mitro varuno mama- 
hantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Indra and Agni, treasure sources of knowledge, 
wealth and victory, having drunk of the soma distilled 
from life and nature may, we pray, win for us all the 
wealth of the world. May Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, rivers 
and the seas, earth and heaven bliss this wish and prayer 
and raise us to the dignity and prosperity of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 109 
Indragani Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 
वि ह्यख्यं मन॑सा वस्य॑ इच्छनचिन्द्रांगी ज्ञास उत al SATA I 
नान्या युवत्म्रम॑तिरस्ति मद्यं स वां धियं वाजयन्ती- 
मतक्षम्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Vi hyakhyam manasa vasya icchannindragni 
jnasa uta va sajatan. Nanya yuvat pramatirasti 
mahyam sa vam dhiyam vajayantim ataksam. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 109 459 


O Indra and Agni, wishing with heart and soul 
for better life and wealth I speak to those who know 
and to my contemporary brethren: Other than you two, 
none is my protector, none preceptor, none my subject. 
Thus I improve and refine the worshipful and divine 
knowledge and understanding about fire and electricity. 


sista हि भूरिदाव॑त्तरा at विजामातुरुत at घा स्यात्छात्‌। 
अथा सोमस्य प्रय॑ती युवभ्यामिन्द्रासरी स्तोमं जनयामि 
नव्य॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Asravam hi bhuridavattara vam vijamaturuta va 
gha syalat. Atha somasya prayati yuvabhyam- 
indragni stomam janayami navyam. 


I hear that you are much more rich and 
munificent in gifts than a son-in-law or a brother-in- 
law. Hence an offering of soma for you both, a cherished 
gift of study, whereby I create and present the latest 
treatise on the energy of fire and electricity. 


मा च्छदा Coat Rid नाध॑मानाः पितृणां शक्तीर॑नुयच्छ॑मानाः। 
इन्द्रायिभ्यां कं वृष॑णो मदन्ति ता ह्यद्री धिषणाया 
उपस्थे ।॥ ३॥ 


क, Ma cchedma rasminriti nadhamanah pitrnam 
Saktiranuyacchamanah. Indragnibhyam kam 
vrsano madanti ta hyadri dhisanaya upasthe. 


“Let us not snap the life-line, keep the light 
flowing”, praying thus for progress and prosperity, 
pursuing the tradition of their forefathers’ energy, 
imbiding the nourishments of the seasons and directing 
themselves by Indra and Agni, heat and energy of 
nature’s divinity, the virile and generous children of 


460 RGVEDA 


humanity live and celebrate life in the magnetic field of 
intelligence along the perpetual line of piety and 
continuity. 


युवाभ्यां देवी धिषणा मदायेन्द्रास्री dryer सुनोति | 
ताव॑श्विना भद्रहस्ता सुपाणी आ धावतं मधुना oe 
TET NY A 


4. Yuvabhyam devi dhisana madayendragni soma- 
musati sunoti. Tavasvina bhadrahasta supani 
a dhavatam madhuna prnktamapsu. 


Indra and Agni, fire and power, with you and 
for you and for the pleasure and dignity of living does 
divine intelligence, inspired with love and passion for 
life, create beauty and power alongwith joy. Come 
generous handed Ashvins, complementary currents of 
nature’s energy, with honey sweets and join the two, 
fire and power, with waters in the sky. 


qatar aqat विभागे तवस्तमा शुश्रव वृत्रहत्ये | 
तावासद्या बर्हिषि यज्ञे अस्मिन्प्र चर्षणी मादयेथां 
सुतस्य ।॥ ५ ॥ 


श Yuvamindragni vasuno vibhage tavastama 
susrava vrtrahatye. Tavasadya barhisi yajne 
asmin pra carsani madayetham sutasya. 


Indra and Agni, lords of energy and fire power, 
you two I hear are the fastest and strongest in the battle 
against the clouds of darkness and want and in the 
creation and distribution of wealth and joy. Come 
benefactors, both of you, grace the seats of this yajna of 
science and technology and enjoy the honey-sweets of 
creation. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 109 461 


vod find: पृतनाहवेषु प्र पंथिव्या रिरिचाथे feared | 
प्र सिन्धुभ्यः प्र गिरिभ्यो महित्वा प्रन्द्रामी विश्वा भुवना- 
त्यन्या ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra carsanibhyah prtanahavesu pra prthivya 
riricathe divasca. Pra sindhubhyah pra giribhyo 
mahitva prendragni visva bhuvanatyanya. 


Indra and Agni, universal fire, light and electric 
energy, by your own power and grandeur, in the battles 
of existence and evolution, you exceed humanity, earth, 
heaven, seas, mountains and all other regions of the 
universe. 


आ भरतं शिक्ष॑तं aware अस्मां इन्द्रागी अवतं शचीभिः 1 
इमे नु ते रश्मयः सूर्यस्य येभिः सपित्वं पितरो न आसंन्‌।॥। ७॥ 

ve A bharatam Siksatam vajrabahu asman indragni 
avatam Sactbhih. Ime nu te rasmayah suryasya 
yebhih sapitvam pitaro na asan. 


Indra and Agni, of strong arms as adamant, 
come, sustain us, teach us and protect us with your 
knowledge and actions. And these and those far off are 
your rays of the sun, both knowledge and nourishment, 
by which our forefathers blest us with science, 
knowledge and sustenance. 


पुरंदरा शिक्ष॑तं वज्रहस्तास्माँ इन्द्रागरी अवतं भरेषु । 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः परथिवी उत 
द्यौः ।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Puramdara siksatam vajrahastasman indragni 


avatam bharesu. Tanno mitro varuno mamaha- 
ntam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


462 RGVEDA 


Indra and Agni, strong of arms as adamant, 
breakers of the strongholds of darkness and poverty, 
we pray, protect us, and advance us in the battles of 
success in life. And may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, seas and 
rivers, earth and heaven support this prayer of ours and 
raise us to the heights of achievement. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 110 
Rbhus Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


ततं मे अपस्तदु तायते पुनः स्वादिंछा धीतिरुचथाय शस्यते | 
अयं समुद्र इह विश्वदेव्यः स्वाहाकृतस्य समु, तृप्णुत 
ऋभवः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Tatam me apastadu tayate punah svadistha 
dhitirucathaya Sasyate. Ayam samudra iha 
visvadevyah svahakrtasya samu trpnuta rbhavah. 


Wide is my knowledge and action and it 
continues growing wider and higher. Sweet is my word 
and wisdom worthy of approval and appreciation in 
discourse and communication. Deep as the ocean is this 
world of knowledge, wisdom and dharmic action, divine 
and adorable, distilled from the voice of Divinity. Come, 
devotees of knowledge and wisdom and leaders of noble 
action, and drink of it to your heart’s content. 


आभोगयं प्र यदिच्छन्त एेतनापाव्छाः प्राञ्चो मम के 
चिदापयः | सौध॑न्वनासश्चरितस्य॑ भूमनागच्छत सवितु- 
दशुषो गृहम्‌ ॥ २॥ त 

2. Abhogayam pra yadicchanta aitenapakah 01470८0 
mama ke cidapayah. Saudhanvana-sascaritasya 
bhumanagacchata saviturdasuso grham. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 110 463 


Saints and sages, living on alms and uncooked 
vegetables and fruits, men of ancient knowledge and 
wisdom, realised souls for me, if you wish to taste the 
joy and ecstasy of life, then, like heroes of the mighty 
bow, with all your wealth of noble action, come to the 
house of generous Savita, light and life of the universe. 


wefan वोऽ मृतत्वमासुवदगो्यं wagaad-a एेत॑न । 
त्यं चिंच्यमसमसुरस्य भक्षणमेकं सन्तमकृणुता चतुर्व- 
यम्‌॥ ३॥ 


3 Tat savita vo ’mrtatvamasuvadagohyam yacchra- 
vayanta aitana. Tyam ciccamasamasurasya 
bhaksanamekam santamakrnuta caturvayam. 


O Saints and sages, when singing in praise of 
Divinity you reach the house of Savita, lord of light 
which can never be concealed, then He creates the nectar 
of bliss for you. And that one measure of holy food, 
which is held in the sacrificial ladle as water is held in 
the cloud or soul in the body, He increases fourfold for 
the living and breathing souls in existence. 


fast शमीं तरणित्वेन॑ वाघतो adda: aed! srqara- 
मानशुः । सौधन्वना ऋभवः सूर॑चक्षसः संवत्सरे सम॑पृच्यन्त 
धीतिभिः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Vistvi Sami taranitvena vaghato martasah santo 
amrtatvamanasuh. Saudhanvana rbhavah 
Suracaksasah samvatsare samaprcyanta dhi- 
tibhih. 


People of noble speech and action doing acts of 
piety with zeal attain freedom from death to immortality 
of bliss though they are still in the mortal state. Heroes 


464 RGVEDA 


of the mighty bow, commanding wisdom and dexterity, 
having universal vision as light of the sun attain 
perfection by virtue of good actions just in one year. 


क्षेत्रमिव fa dass एकं पात्रमृभवो जेह॑मानम्‌ । 
उप॑स्तुता उपमं नाधमाना अमर्त्येषु श्रव॑ इच्छमानाः UG 


5. Ksetramiva vi mamustejanenam 11.111 
bhavo jehamanam. Upastuta upamam nadha- 
mana amartyesu $rava icchamanah. 


The Rbhus, heroes of knowledge, wisdom and 
expertise of action, approached and solicited for 
exceptional work, desiring and winning honour and 
reputation among immortals, with their genius and 
brilliance measure and cross like a field any body of 
knowledge effective for one kind of achievement. 


आ म॑नीषामन्तरिक्चस्य नृभ्य॑ः aaa घृतं जुहवाम विदाना | 
तरणित्वा ये पितुरस्य सश्चिर ऋभवो वाज॑मरूहन्दिवो 
रज॑: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A manisamantariksasya nrbhyah sruceva ghrtam 
jJuhavama vidmana. Taranitva ye piturasya 
sascira rbhavo vajamaruhan divo rajah. 


For the sake of humanity we dedicate our mind 
and intelligence and offer it like ghrta in a sacrificial 
ladle to the Rbhus, inhabitants of the sky, who share its 
food and energy with their zeal and, with their force 
and power rise to the regions of heaven. 


ऋभुर्न इन्द्रः शव॑सा नवी यानुभुवजिभिरर्वसुभिर्वसुंर्ददिः। 
युष्माकं देवा अवसाहनि प्रिये ३ऽ भि fsa पृत्सुतीरसुंन्व- 
ताम्‌॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 110 465 


7. Rbhurna indrah savasa naviyanrbhurvajebhir- 
vasurbhirvasurdadih. Yusmakam deva avasahani 
priye’bhi tisthema prtsutirasunvatam. 


Rbhu, man of science and wonders is Indra for 
us, always new and fresh with discoveries and 
inventions. He is ever new and fresh with creation of 
food and energy and giver of new wealth and power. O 
spirits and dwellers of the sky, may we with your power 
and protection in our dearest days win over the force 
and armies of ungenerous and selfish people. 


निश्चर्मण ऋभवो गाम॑पिंशत सं aerate मातरं पुन॑ः | 
सौध॑न्वनासः स्वपस्यया नरो जिव्री युवाना पितरांकृणो- 
ATU Il 

8. Niscarmana rbhavo gamapimsata sam vatsena- 


srjata mataram punah. Saudhanvanasah svapa- 
syaya naro 7117 yuvana pitarakrnotana. 

O Rbhus, wondrous scholars of life-science and 
rejuvenation, rejuvenate and strengthen the skinny cow 
and recreate her as the mother cow with her calf. Heroes 
of the mighty bow, leaders of men, with your knowledge 
and action vitalise the worn out seniors and restore them 
to their youth. 


वाजेभिर्नो वाज॑सातावविङ््युभुमां इन्द्र चित्रमा द॑र्षि cet: | 
तन्नो मित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः परथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ९॥ 

9. Vajebhirno vajasatavaviddhyarbhuman indra 
citrama darsi radhah. Tanno mitro varuno mama- 
hantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Indra, lord of power and force, empowered with 


466 RGVEDA 


the Rbhus, wondrous force of knowledge and power of 
science, move into the battle of life for us and win us 
wealth as well as honour. And, we pray, may Mitra, 
Varuna, Aditi, rivers and the sea, earth and heaven bless 
and advance this united effort of knowledge, power and 
the people. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 111 
Rbhus Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


तक्षत्रथं सुवृतं विद्धनाप॑सस्तक्चन्हरी इन्द्रवाहा वृष॑ण्वसू | 
तक्ष॑त्पितृभ्यामृभवो युवद्वयस्तक्ष॑न्वत्सायं मातरं सचा- 
भुवम्‌ ।। ९ ॥ 


ly Taksan ratham suvrtam vidmanapasastaksan hari 
indravaha vrsnvasu. Taksan pitrbhyam rbhavo 
yuvad vayastaksan vatsaya mataram saca- 
bhuvam. 


Let the Rbhus, with their knowledge and action 
in the field of science and technology, manufacture a 
sophisticated multistage chariot for the ride of Indra, 
lord of wealth and honour and generous giver of showers 
of prosperity. Let them also creates the horse power for 
that chariot to carry Indra and the wealth of riches. Let 
them create new youthful vigour for the ageing parents 
and seniors and the mother cow for the calf to provide 
protection for it. 


आ नो! यज्ञाय तक्षत ऋभुमद्वयः क्रत्वे Cana सुप्रजावं॑ती - 
fae यथा क्षयाम सर्ववीरया विशा aa: शधीय धासथा 
स्विन्द्रियम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 111 467 


2. A no yajnaya taksata rbhumadvayah kratve 
daksaya suprajavatimisam. Yatha ksayama 
sarvaviraya visa tannah sardhaya dhasatha 
svindriyam. 


O Rbhus, create that youthful and vibrant health 
and age for our yajna of social order with science and 
technology which shapes the Rbhus for further 
advancement, create food and energy for a nation of 
the brave worthy of noble acts and expertise, and build 
up that science and wealth for our strength by which 
we may abide as a heroic nation in peace, security and 
prosperity. 


आ तक्षत सातिमस्मभ्यमृभवः सातिं रथांय सातिमर्वते Az: | 
सातिं नो जैत्रीं सं म॑हेत विशुवहां जामिमजामिं पृत॑नासु 
aaron ३॥ 


a: A taksata satim asmabhyam rbhavah satim 
rathaya satim arvate narah. Satim no jaitrim sam 
maheta visvaha jamim ajamim prtanasu 
saksanim. 

O Rbhus, leaders of science and commanders 
of the forces, create and refine the wealth of the nation 
for us. Create speed and power for the chariot, and 
strength and speed for movement and transport. Create 
and heighten our capacity for victory and advancement 
over the challenging enemy known or unknown, equal 
or unequal, in the battles of life. 


ऋभुक्षणमिन्द्रमा हव Ada ऋभून्वाजान्मरुतः सोम॑पीतये | 
उभा मित्रावरुणा नूनमश्विना ते नो हिन्वन्तु सातये धिये 
जिषे॥ ४॥ 


468 RGVEDA 


4. Rbhuksanamindrama huva utaya rbhun vajan 
marutah somapitaye. Ubha mitravaruna nunama- 
$vina te no hinvantu sataye dhiye jise. 


I invoke Indra, lord of glory and master friend 
of the Rbhus, for protection and progress. I invoke the 
Rbhus, experts of the art of living and creator of the 
beauty of life. I invoke these pioneers of intelligence, 
Vajas, leaders of knowledge and power, and the Maruts, 
spirits and forces of tempestuous movement forward. I 
call upon them all for protection, promotion and 
enjoyment of the beauty, wealth and excitement of life. 
May Mitra, spirit of love and friendship, Varuna, light 
of excellence, and surely both the Ashvins, 
complementary currents of divine energy, inspire and 
exhilarate us for wealth and dignity, intelligence and 
passion for victory in the struggle for progress in 
spiritual evolution. 


ऋभुर्भरांय सं fiend सातिं aaa Rg staat अविष्टु। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ ५॥ 


asman avistu. Tanno mitro varuno mamahan- 
tamaditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


May the Rbhus grant us wealth and victory for 
total fulfilment. May the victor, Vaja, inspire us with 
courage and valour. And may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the 
seas and the rivers, earth and heaven bless this resolve 
and prayer of ours with success. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 469 


Mandala 1/Sukta 112 
Dyavaprthivi, Agni, Ashvins Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


33 द्यावापृथिवी पूर्वचिंत्तयेऽ fi घर्म सुरुचं यामंिष्टयें | 
याथिभरें कारमंशाय जिन्वथस्ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


I. Ile dyavaprthivi purvacittaye’gnim gharmam 
surucam yamannistaye. Yabhirbhare karamam- 
Saya jinvathastabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


In continuation of the earlier yajnas of prayer 
and production, and moving on further on the same path 
of desired creation and comfort, I invoke at the outset 
heaven and earth and Agni, brilliant fire. O Ashvins, 
complementary currents of nature’s energy and teachers 
and scholars, come forth with those very means of 
protection and advancement by which you inspire and 
lead the efficient worker and researcher to play his part 
in the programmes of progress. 


युवोर्दानाय सुभरां असश्चतो रथमा तस्थुर्वचसं न मन्त॑वे | 
याधिर्धियोऽ der: कर्मत्रिष्टये ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Yuvordanaya subhara asascato rathama tasthur- 
vacasam na mantave. Yabhirdhi-yo’vathah 
karmannistaye tabhiru su utibhiras-vina gatam. 


Ashvins, teachers and scholars, complementary 
harbingers of natural wealth, just as creators and 
producers of food and energy, avoiding idlers and 
wastours, come to the man of knowledge for advice, so 
they come to your chariot to sit in for the gift of desired 
achievement in action. Come forth with those means of 


470 RGVEDA 


safety and success by which you protect and promote 
intellectuals and researchers for progress. 


युवे तासां दिव्यस्यं प्रशासने विशां क्षयथो अमृतस्य मज्मना| । 
याभिर्धनुमस्वं4 पिन्व॑थो नरा ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
TAT ३॥ 


3; Yuvam tasam divyasya prasasane visam ksayatho 
amrtasya majmana. Yabhirdhenuma-svam pin- 
vatho nara tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


O Ashvins, teachers, scholars and leaders of the 
nation, harbingers of health and vitality from the sap of 
nature, who reside in the midst of the socio-economic 
and educational system of the people and rule and teach 
by the power of celestial soma and by the grace of the 
pure and eternal lord of immortality, come and bless us 
with those means of vitality, safety and protection by 
which you revitalize the enervated holy speech and 
education like rejuvenation of the barren cow. 


याभिः परिज्मा तन॑यस्य मज्मना द्विमाता तूर्षु तरणि्॑विं- 
भूष॑ति । याभिंस्तिमन्तुरभंवद्विचक्चणस्ताभि॑रू षु afar 
रश्विना ग॑तम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Yabhih parijma tanayasya majmana dvimata 
tursu taranirvibhusati. Yabhistrimanturabhavad 
vicaksanastabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, complementary forces of natural 
evolution, teacher and scholar, human forces of social 
evolution, come with power and grace with those means 
and powers of protection and progress by which the 
all-round moving Vayu, wind energy, source of fire and 
water, blows and shines among the fast moving forces 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 471 


of nature with the light and grandeur of its extension, 
the fire, and by which the teacher and scholar shines in 
society by the merit of his disciple and power of his 
creative work, and by which the man of knowledge, 
action and prayer rises to the universal vision of 
existence. 


anit रेभं fad सितम द्र्य उद्वन्दनमैरयतं स्वंदुशो । 
याथः कण्वं प्र सिषासन्तमावतं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 


2: Yabhi rebham nivrtam sitamadbhya ud vanda- 
namairayatam svardrse. Yabhih kanvam pra 
sisasantamavatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


Ashvins, catalytic powers of nature’s divinity, 
analytic scholars of nature, educational and 
developmental powers of society, come up to us with 
grace with all those powers and protections by which 
you support and advance the scholar wholly and 
exclusively dedicated to worshipful study of nature in 
the field of water and liquids and see him emerging from 
the waters for a sight of divinity through success. Come 
with those protections by which you support the scholar 
of eminence in his analytical studies of the elements 
until he comes out successful. 


याभिरन्त॑कं Sea भुज्युं याभिरव्यथिभिर्जिं- 
जिन्वथुः । याभिः कर्कन्धुं वय्यं च जिन्व॑थस्ताभिंरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yabhirantakam jasamanamarane bhujyum yabhi- 


yam ca jinvathastabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


472 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, scholars of science and medicine, 
come with all that knowledge, protection and 
promotions and safety measures by which you develop 
pain killers, antibiotics, tonics and anesthetics in the 
battle of life and by which you save, sustain and develop 
the fetus after conception. Come with all these with 
grace. 


याभिः शुचन्तिं ध॑नसां ata तपतं घर्ममोम्याव॑न्तमत्र॑ये । 
याभिः gist पुरुकुत्समावतं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


ip Yabhih sucantim dhanasam susamsadam taptam 
gharmam omyavantam atraye. Yabhih prsnigum 
purukutsamavatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


Ashvins, scholars, teachers and social planners, 
come with grace with all those modes and means by 
which you protect and promote the pure hearted creator 
and distributor of wealth, the noble parliamentarian, 
brilliant enthusiast, protective warrior, the astronaut and 
the versatile scholar for the establishment of a social 
order free from physical, psychological and spiritual 
ailments. 


याभिः शचीभिर्वृषणा परावृजं प्रान्धं श्रोणं चक्षस एत॑वे 
कृथः । याभिर्वर्तिकां ग्रसिताममुञ्चतं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभि- 
vipat ग॑तम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yabhih sacitbhirvrsana paravrjam prandham 
Sronam caksasa etave krthah. Yabhirvartikam 
grasitam amuncatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 473 


Ashvins, powers of nature and humanity, 
generous and virile, come with grace with all those noble 
acts of protection and mercy by which you restore the 
rejected, the blind and the deaf back to their natural 
health and efficiency to see clearly and walk with 
confidence, and by which you release the poor bird 
caught in the falcon’s beak. 


याभिः सिन्धुं मधुमन्तमसश्चतं वसिष्ठं याभिंरजराव- 
जिंन्वतम्‌। af: कुत्सं श्रुतर्यं नर्यमावतं ताभिरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


8 Yabhih sindhum madhumantamasascatam vasi- 
stham yabhirajaravajinvatam. Yabhih kutsam 
Srutaryam naryamavatam tabhiru su utibhira- 
Svina gatam. 


Ashvins, scholars of science and leaders of the 
world, young and unaging, come with all those acts of 
power and protection by which you cross the sea and 
make the honey-sweets of rivers to flow, promote the 
pious scholar of Divinity and arm the warrior with 
thunder, train the man of information and create the 
leader of leaders. Come with all those and come with 
grace. 


याभिर्विश्पलां धनसाम॑थर्व्य' सहस्त्र॑मीव््ड आजावनजिंन्व- 
तम्‌। याभिर्वशमश्व्यं प्रेणिमाव॑तं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Yabhirvispalam dhanasamatharvyam sahasra- 
milha ajavajinvatam. Yabhirvasamasvyam 
prenimavatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, ruler and commander of the army, 


414 RGVEDA 


come with all those acts and powers by which you 
refresh and promote the defence forces which protect 
the people, create wealth and remain steady and 
unshaken in the war of a thousand battles, and by which 
you raise and maintain an impressive cavalry and 
armoured corps which is inspired and committed to the 
nation. Ashvins, come and come with grace. 


याभिः सुदानू ओशिजायं वणिजे दीर्घ॑श्र॑वसे मधु कोशो 
अक्षरत्‌। कक्षीवन्तं स्तोतारं याभिरावतं ताभिरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yabhih sudanu ausijaya vanije dirghasravase 
madhu koso aksarat. Kaksivantam stotaram 
yabhiravatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 

Ashvins, generous and highly creative scholars 
and leaders of humanity, come with all those acts and 
policies by which you open the treasure secrets of the 
wealth of nature and humanity and let flow the streams 
of water and honey for the children of the learned, the 
man of commerce and industry, and the masters of 
knowledge and wide wealth, and by which you protect 
and promote the devotees of the nation and national 
prestige who command the loyalty of their supporters. 

Come soon and come with grace. 


याभीं रसां क्षोदंसोद्गः पिपिन्वथुरनश्वं याभी रथमाव॑तं 
जिषे। याभि॑ंस्तिशोकं उस्रिया उदाजत ताभिरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Yabhi rasam ksodasodgah pipinvathuranasvam 
yabhi ratham avatam jise. Yabhistrisoka usriya 
udajata tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 112 415 


By feats of irrigation engineering you augment 
the stream of water with over-flowing rush of floods of 
water. By feats of automotive engineering you protect 
and propel the horse-less chariot onward for victory. 
By electrical engineering, the leader, feeling the want 
of education, justice and economic well-being throws 
up the currents of electric energy for development. With 
all these wonders of science and technology, O Ashvins, 
scientists and leaders, come with grace and protection 
for development and progress. 


aif: सूर्य" परियाथः प॑रावतिं मन्धातारं क्षेत्र॑पत्येष्वाव॑तम्‌। 
याधिर्विप्रं प्र भरद्वाजमावतं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ 23 ॥ 


13. Yabhih suryam pariyathah paravati mandha- 
taram ksaitrapatyesvavatam. Yabhirvipram pra 
bharadvajam avatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


With the communication by which you go round 
the sphere of the sun in far off orbit, by which you reach 
and protect the pious man of thought and action over 
the dominions, by which you protect and promote the 
scholar of science and the creator and harbinger of food, 
energy and speed, with all these gifts of protection and 
progress, O Ashvins, leaders of science and 
development, come with grace and bless us. 


याभिर्महाम॑तिथिग्वं कशोजुवं दिवोदासं शम्बर हत्य 
आव॑तम्‌। याभिः पूर्भिद्ये त्रसदस्युमावतं ताभिरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ex ul 


476 RGVEDA 


14. = Yabhirmaham atithigvam kasojuvam divodasam 
sambarahatya avatam. Yabhih purbhidye trasa- 
dasyum avatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, promoters and leaders of humanity, 
come with those protections and generosities by which 
in the most challenging battle of life you protect the 
great man of liberality, the manager of water resources 
and the promoter of sunlight and the light of Dharma, 
and by which you defend and advance the terror-warrior 
against the strongholds of the evil and the wicked in 
the struggle of life for light and knowledge. 


aids विपिपानमुपस्तुतं कलिं याभिर्वित्तजानिं दुव- 
waa: । याभिर्व्यश्वमुत पृथिमाव॑तं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिं- 
रश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९५५ ॥ 


15. Yabhirvamram vipipanam upastutam kalim 
yabhirvittajanim duvasyathah. Yabhirvyasvam- 
uta prthim avatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


Ashvins, scientists and technologists, come soon 
and with grace, with those preventives, protectives, 
curatives and restoratives by which you treat sickness 
and dehydration, create tonic drinks, protect approved 
preparations and specialists, and prepare sedatives and 
pacifiers, by which you protect and honour marriage 
partners, and by which you launch and protect 
technological vehicles and genius scholars. 


याभिर्नरा शयवे याभिरत्रये याभिः पुरा मन॑वे गातुमीषथुः | 
याभिः शारीराजतं waren ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
TATU ९६॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 112 477 


16.  Yabhirnara sayave yabhiratraye yabhih pura 
manave gatumisathuh. Yabhih sarirajatam 
syumarasmaye tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, leaders of humanity, come and bring 
us those protections and preparations by which you 
provide peace and security for the common man sleeping 
in comfort, assure freedom from weakness of body, mind 
and soul for the man of virtue, elevate the rule of the 
benevolent ruler to the sunlight of love and justice over 
the vast earth and wide paths of movement, and shoot 
arrows of defence for the rule of light, love and justice. 


याभिः पठर्वा जठरस्य मज्मनागिनदिींदेच्यित Seal अच्पत्ना। 
याभिः श्यीतमव॑थो महाधने ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Yabhih patharva jatharasya majmanagnirna- 
dideccita idvo ajmanna. Yabhih saryatamavatho 
mahadhane tabhiru su utibhirasvinad gatam. 


Ashvins, leaders and protectors of the people, 
come with the support and protections by which the 
ruler protects and promotes the teachers and the 
disciples. Come with the passion and power by which 
the warrior, inspired like fire lit up and blazing with the 
holy fuel in the vedi, rages and blazes with valour and 
rectitude in battle. Come with the defences by which 
you protect the warrior facing a shower of arrows in the 
mighty battle for justice and development. 


arate मन॑सा निरण्यथोऽग्रं गच्छ॑थो विवरे गो- 
अंर्णसः । याभिर्मनुं शूरमिषा समावतं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभि- 
रश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ee ॥ 


478 RGVEDA 


18. Yabhirangiro manasa niranyatho’gram gaccha- 
tho vivare goarnasah. Yabhirmanum Suramisa 
samavatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, leaders and commanders, come with 
the support by which you satiate the man of knowledge 
with peace and joy at heart. Come with the power and 
speed by which you fly over the paths of stars. Come 
with the plenty and generosity by which you strengthen 
the warrior for humanity with food, energy, movement 
and refreshment. With all these means of support and 
protection, come and bless us in peace and security. 


याभिः पल्नीर्विमदायं न्यूहथुरा घ॑ वा याभिररूणीरशिंश्चतम्‌ | 
याभिः सुदासं ऊहथुः सुदेव्यं ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
गतम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yabhih patnirvimadaya nyuhathura gha va 
yabhiraruntirasiksatam. Yabhih sudasa thathuh 
sudevyam tabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, generous powers of nature and 
humanity, teachers and celibates, come with the love 
and protection by which you bring generous and noble 
life-partners for young men. Come with the love and 
knowledge by which you teach bright girls and prepare 
them for life. Come with that bright and divine 
knowledge by which you enrich the man of charity and 
generosity. Come and bless us with all these modes of 
support and protection. 


याभिः शन्ताती भव॑थो carpe भुज्युं याभिरव॑थो 
TART! ओम्याव॑तीं सुभरामृतस्तुभं ताभिरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ 20 11 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 479 


20. Yabhih santati bhavatho dadasuse bhujyum 
yabhiravatho yabhiradhrigum. Omyavatim 
subharamrtastubham tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


Ashvins, harbingers of comfort and joy, come 
with those gifts of support and protection by which you 
bless the generous man with peace and comfort, by 
which you protect the man of prosperity and the man of 
power and honour. Come with that knowledge which 
bears and brings the wealth of peace and joy and the 
wealth of truth and right. 


याभिः कृशानुमसने दुवस्यथो जवे याभिर्यूनो अर्वन्त- 
माव॑तम्‌। मधुं प्रियं भरथो यत्सरड़भ्यस्ताभि॑रू षु ऊति- 
भिरण्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ २९॥ 


21. Yabhih krsanumasane duvasyatho jave yabhir- 
yuno arvantamavatam. Madhu priyam bhara-tho 
yat saradbhyastabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


Ashvins, rulers and commanders, come with 
those protections by which you protect the archer in 
battle, by which you protect the young rider and the 
horse in the race, by which you bear and bring the 
favourite honey for the bees. Come with all these and 
bless us. 


याभिर्नरं गोषुयुधं Tara क्षेत्र॑स्य साता तन॑यस्य जिन्व॑थः | 
याभी tat अव॑थो याथिरर्वतस्ताभिरू षु ऊतिभिरश्विना 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ २२॥ 

22. Yabhirnaram gosuyudham nrsahye ksetrasya sata 
tanayasya jinvathah. Yabhi rathan avatho 
yabhirarvatastabhiru su utibhirasvina gatam. 


480 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, rulers and commanders, come with 
those powers and protections by which in the battles of 
men you exhort the leader bravely fighting for the land 
and her cows, by which in the battle of the field you 
protect the children of the nation, and by which you 
defend the warriors of the chariot. Come with all these 
protections and bless us. 


याभिः कुत्समार्जुनेयं vic प्र तुर्वीतिं प्र चं दभीति- 
माव॑तम्‌। याभिर्ध्वसन्तिं पुरू षन्तिमाव॑तं ताभिरू षु 
ऊतिभिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ 23 ॥ 


23.  Yabhih kutsmarjuneyam satakratu pra turvitim 
pra ca dabhitim avatam. Yabhirdhvasantim 
purusantim avatam tabhiru su utibhirasvina 
gatam. 


Ashvins, rulers and commanders, heroes of a 
hundred acts of war and defence, come with those 
powers and protections by which you protect the 
lightning missile, by which you protect the tempestuous 
warrior terrorizing the enemy, by which you defend and 
advance the leader who takes on and destroys many 
hosts of the enemy. Come with these protections and 
advance us on way to progress. 


अप्र॑स्वतीमश्विना वाच॑मस्मे कृतं नो दस्त्रा वृषणा मनीषाम्‌ | 
अद्यूत्येऽ da नि हवये वां वृधे च॑ नो भवतं वाज॑सातौ ॥ २४॥ 

24.  Apnasvatim asvina vacamasme krtam no dasra 
vrsana manisam. Adyiutye’vase ni hvaye vam 
vrdhe ca no bhavatam vajasatau. 


Ashvins, complementary divinities of nature and 
powers of humanity, generous harbingers of showers 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 481 


of strength and prosperity, give us the holy voice which 
is creative and effective. Give us the intelligence and 
wisdom for reflection, imagination and planning. I 
invoke you for protection and advancement in the sure, 
clear and honest business of life for light and progress. 
We take no chances, nor gamble with life, be kind and 
gracious, lords, be favourable to grant us growth and 
prosperity in food, energy, success and advancement. 


द्युभिर क्तुथिः oR पातपस्मानरिष्टेभिरण्विना सौभ॑गेभिः। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ २५॥ 


25. Dyubhiraktubhih pari patam asmanaristebhir- 
asvina saubhagebhih. Tanno mitro varuno 
mamahantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Ashvins, protect and promote us, we pray, by 
days and by nights with steady and unobstructed 
progress, with wealth, grace and good fortune. And may 
Mitra and Varuna, the sun and shower, Aditi, mother 
nature, Sindhu, the sea and the rivers, Prithivi, mother 
earth and Dyau, the light of heaven and currents of 
spatial energies help, advance and bless this prayer and 
programme of ours. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 113 
Usha Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 
इदं श्रेष्ठं ज्योतिषां ज्योतिरागाच्ित्रः dent अजनिष्ट विभ्वां | 
यथा प्रसूता सवितुः TAT एवा TTS योनिमारैक्‌ ॥। ९ ॥ 


I, Idam Ssrestham jyotisam jyotiragaccitrah praketo 
ajanista vibhva . Yatha prasuta savituh savayan 
Eva ratryusase yonimaraik. 


482 RGVEDA 


Here comes this dawn, light of lights, supreme, 
wonderful, bright and enlightening, rising and 
expanding. Just as the night comes over for regeneration 
of the sun, so does it uncover the womb of darkness for 
the coming of dawn. 


रुशंदत्सा रुश॑ती श्वेत्यागादारैगु कृष्णा सद॑नान्यस्याः | 
समानबन्धू अमृते अनूची द्यावा वर्ण चरत आमिनाने ॥ २ ॥ 


2 RuSadvatsa ruSati Svetyagadaraigu krsna sadana- 
nyasyah. Samanabandhu amrte व्ल dyava 
varnam carata aminane. 


The bright dawn comes shining with light, 
bearing the bright sun new born. The dark night leaves 
its regions open for the light. Both, like sisters of the 
same one brother, immortal, assume their own form of 
light, one bright, the other covered and both come in 
succession, each retiring and succeeding the other. 


समानो अध्वा CAN AAT a चरतो SAH 
न मेथेते न त॑स्थतुः सुमेके नक्तोषासा सम॑नसा विरूपे ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Samano adhva svasroranantastamanyanya 
carato devasiste. Na methate na tasthatuh sumeke 
naktosasa samanasa virupe. 


One and the same is the path of the two sisters, 
which is space, endless and infinite, existentially 
speaking, which they follow one after the other as 
ordained by the Divine. They neither overlap, nor 
encroach, nor clash, nor stand still for a moment. Fixed 
and firm, each on its own, and of harmonious nature 
are they, although the night and the dawn are of different 
forms which are apparently contradictory as light and 
darkness. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 483 


भास्व॑ती नेत्री सूनृतानामचेति चित्रा वि दुरो न आवः। 
प्राप्या sige नो रायो अख्यदुषा अंजीग भुव॑नानि 
विश्वां ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Bhasvati netri sunrtanamaceti citra vi duro na 
avah. Prarpya jagadvyu no rayo akhyadusa ajiga- 
rbhuvanani visva. 


Brilliant shines the dawn, leading inspiration 
and revelation of divinity for spirits of piety. Wonderful 
and splendid, it opens the doors of intelligence and 
consciousness. Taking the world over, it reveals the 
wealth of nature and envelops the worlds of existence 
in beauty and splendour. 


जिह्यश्ये चरितवे मघोन्यांभोगयं ssa राय उ त्वम्‌ । 
दभ्रं usa उर्विया विचक्ष उषा अजीगर्भुवनानि 
विश्वां ॥ ५॥ 


Jihmasye caritave maghonyabhogaya istaye raya 
utvam. Dabhram pasyadbhya urviya vicaksa usa 
ajigarbhuvanani visva. 


O dawn, lady light of wealth and beauty, 
inspiring, vast and bright, for the lazy loon oversleeping 
or the squint eyed one, for moving around, for enjoyment 
of living, for the attainment of desire and yajna, for the 
achievement of wealth, for the weak-eyed one, and for 
the revelation of things on earth, you shine and wake 
up the worlds of existence into light, beauty and activity, 
revealing even the tiny things. 


aaa त्वं श्रव॑से त्वं महीया इष्टये' त्वमर्थमिव त्वमित्यै । 
विसंदुशा जीविताभिप्रचक्ष उषा अजीगर्भुवनानि 
विश्वां ॥ ६ ॥ 


484 RGVEDA 


6. Ksatraya tvam Sravase tvam mahiya istaye tvam 
artham iva tvamityai. Visadrsa jivitabhipra-caksa 
usa ajigarbhuvanani visva. 


O dawn, for governance and administration of 
the social order, for food, energy and national prestige, 
for honour and grandeur, for reaching the desired goal 
in life, and for the attainment of the various and versatile 
ways of life, you shine, wake up and envelop the worlds 
of existence in light and beauty. 


एषा दिवो दुहिता प्रत्य॑दि व्युच्छन्ती युवतिः शुक्रवासाः | 
विश्वस्येशाना पार्थिवस्य वस्व उषो' अद्येह सुभगे 
व्युच्छ ।। ७ ॥ 


4; Esa divo duhita pratyadarsi vyucchanti yuvatih 
Sukravasah. Visvasyesana parthivasya vasva 
uso adyeha subhage vyuccha. 


Dawn, this daughter of heavenly light, appears 
on the horizon, shining bright, a maiden clothed in light, 
over-whelming the entire beauty and wealth of the 
world. O dawn, lady of noble good fortune, come here 
for us and shine. 


परायतीनामन्वेति पाथ॑ आयतीनां प्र॑थमा शश्व॑तीनाम्‌ । 
व्युच्छन्ती जी वमुंदीरयंन्त्युषा मृतं कं चन बो धयंन्ती ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Parayatinamanveti patha ayatinam prathama 
Sasvatinam. Vyucchanti jivamudirayantyusa 
mrtam kam cana bodhayanti. 


The dawn follows the path of those that have 
gone before since eternity. It is the first pioneer of those 
that would follow for eternity. Shining bright, waking 
up, inspiring, exciting, even reviving life asleep as dead, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 485 
it comes on and shines on. 


उषो यद्थिं समिधे ane वि यदावश्चश्च॑सा सूर्यस्य | 
यन्मानुंषान्यक्ष्यमांणाँ अजींगस्तदेवेषुं चकृषे भद्रमप्रः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Uso yadagnim samidhe cakartha vi yadava- 
$caksasa suryasya. Yanmdnusan yaksyamanan 
ajigastad devesu cakrse bhadramapnah. 


O dawn, what you do for lighting of the fire of 
yajna early morning, what you do to reveal the beauty 
of the world with the light of the sun, what you do to 
awake and inspire the devotees of yajna, all that you do 
is noble action for the divinities of nature and humanity 
among the divinities. 


कियात्या यत्समया भवाति या व्युषुर्याश्चं नूनं व्युच्छान्‌ | 
अनु पूवीः कृपते वावशाना प्रदीध्याना जोष॑मन्याभिं - 
रेति ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Kiyatya yat samaya bhavati ya vyusurydasca 
nunam vyucchan. Anu purvah krpate vavasana 
pradidhyana josamanyabhireti. 


How long did the dawns last which came and 
shone earlier? How long would they shine and last 
which, lovely and brilliant as the earlier ones, remind 
us of the past ones and brighten up the present around? 
The dawn would last for ever thus in company with the 
preceding and the following. 


ईयुष्टे ये पूर्वतरामप॑श्यन्व्युच्छन्तींमुषसं मत्य सः | अस्माभिरू 
नु प्रतिचक्ष्याभूदो ते य॑न्ति ये अपरीषु पश्यान्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 
11. (2८5{८ ye purvataramapasyan vyucchantim- 


usasam martyasah. Asmabhiru nu praticaksya- 
bhiudo te yanti ye aparisu pasyan. 


486 RGVEDA 


The mortals who saw the bright and blazing 
dawn saw the light and passed away. By us too the lovely 
and shining dawn has been seen for the light. And those 
too who would see the light of life in the dawns that 
would follow, would go but with the light of life. (Life 
and light thus go together continuously in succession 
in the continuum that existence is.) 


यावयद्‌ Bot ऋतपा ऋतेजाः Geral सूनृतां ईरयंन्ती । 
सुमङ्कतगीर्बिभ्र॑ती देववींतिमिहाद्योषः श्रेष्ठतमा Sas ९२॥ 


12. Yavayad dvesa rtapa rtejah sumnavari sunrta 
trayantt. Sumangalirbibhrati devavitimiha- 
dyosah Sresthatama vyuccha. 


O Dawn, warding off the jealous, guardian of 
divine truth and yajna, born of divine truth and cosmic 
yajna, harbinger of peace and comfort, high-priestess 
of truth, inspiring and exciting, messenger of felicity, 
bearing joy and prosperity fit for divinity, arise and 
come, best and highest of lights, shine, inspire and bless 
us all with freshness. 


शश्वत्पुरोषा व्युवास देव्यथो अद्येदं व्यांवो मघोनी | अथो 
व्युच्छादुत्तराँ अनु द्यूनजरामृता! चरति स्वधाभिः ॥ ९३॥ 


13.  Sasvat purosd vyuvasa devyatho adyedam vyavo 
maghoni. Atho vyucchaduttaran anu dyuna- 
jaramrta carati svadhabhih. 


The bright dawn, ancient and eternal, shines 
since eternity. Bright and generous mistress of wealth, 
lights up this world this day and then brightens up the 
days following till eternity. Unaging and immortal, the 
dawn moves on and on with its own divine powers and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 487 
gifts of generosity. 


व्य4ज्जिभिरर्दिव आतास्वद्यौदप कृष्णां निर्णिजं genta: | 
प्रबोधयंन्त्यरूणेभिरश्वैरोषा याति सुयुजा रथेन ॥ ९२४ ॥ 


14. = Vyanjibhirdiva atasvadyaudapa krsnam nirnijam 
devyavah. Prabodhayantyarune-bhirasvairosa 
yati suyuja rathena. 


With her soothing celebrities, shining from 
heaven across the quarters of space, the bright dawn 
dispels the darkness of night and adorns and reveals 
the beauty of the world. Waking up the sleeping 
humanity she comes in the early morning by the celestial 
car of luxurious light drawn by the glorious sunbeams 
of fiery speed and splendour. 


आवहन्ती पोष्या areiifar चित्रं केतुं कृणुते चेकिताना । 
ईयुषीणामुपमा शश्व॑तीनां विभातीनां प्रथमोषा 
व्य॑श्वैत्‌ i ९५॥ 


15. Avahanti posya varyani citram ketum krnute 
cekitana. Iyusinamupama Sasvatinam vibhatinam 
prathamosa vyasvait. 


Bearing and bringing choice nourishments for 
body, mind and soul, waking those who sleep, lighting 
the dark, the dawn creates wonderful brilliance. 
Following upon the heels of the by-gones, first shining 
of the succeeding lights, measure of the eternal recurrent 
lights of the dawn, she goes on by her chariot of light 
drawn not by horses but by sunbeams. 


उदीर्ध्वं जीवो असुर्न आगादप प्रागात्तम आ ज्योतिरेति। 
आरैक्पन्थां यात॑वे सूर्यायागन्म यत्रं प्रतिरन्त आयुः ॥ ९६ ॥ 


488 RGVEDA 


16. Udirdhvam jivo asurna agadapa pragat tama a 
Jyotireti. Araik pantham ydtave suryayaganma 
yatra pratiranta ayuh. 


Awake ye all who sleep, arise ye all who wake, 
life has come, and the energy of life-prana flows for all. 
Darkness is gone. Light has come, having cleared the 
path for the sun to rise and move. Let us reach there, 
enjoy life and elevate life and ourselves. 


स्यूम॑ना वाच उदियर्ति ate: स्तवानो रेभ उषसो farsa: 1 
अद्या तदुच्छ गृणते म॑घोन्यस्मे आयुनि दिदीहि प्र॒जाव॑त्‌ Ut ९७॥ 


17. Syumana vaca udiyarti vahnih 51414710 rebha 
usaso vibhatith. Adya taduccha grnate magho- 
nyasme ayurni didthi prajavat. 


The admirer, poet of fiery imagination, sings 
inspiring songs in praise of brilliant dawn. O Dawn, 
lady of light and harbinger of wealth, shine for the 
worshipper and give him the light. And give us the health 
and age blest with progeny. 


या गोमतीरुषसः सर्ववीरा व्युच्छन्तिं दाशुषे मत्सौय। 
वायोरिव सूनृतांनामुदके ता अश्वदा अंश्नवत्सोम- 
सुत्वा ।॥ ९८. ॥ 


18. Ya gomatirusasah sarvavira vyucchanti dasuse 
martyaya. Vayoriva sunrtanamudarke ta asvada 
asnavat somasutva. 


Bright are the dawns, rich in sunbeams and 
wealth of cows, creators and inspirers of all the brave 
on earth. Generous are they for the man who gives and 
sacrifices, giver of horses fast as sunbeams. And when 
men of truth and law meditate on them, then, flying as 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 489 


the wind, they come and bless the man who performs 
the soma-yajna of creative joy for life. 


माता देवानामदितेरनीकं uae के तुर्ब हती fa भाहि। 
प्रशस्तिकृद्‌ ब्रह्म॑णे नो व्यु4च्छ नो जने जनय faa 
aru १९॥ 


19. Mata devanam aditeranikam yajnasya keturbrhati 
vi bhahi. Prasastikrd brahmane no vyuccha no 
Jane janaya visvavare. 


Creative power of Divinity, image of Eternity, 
fire of the cosmic yajna of creation and evolution, shine 
brilliant over the vast spaces. Light adorable, shine and 
let us shine for the service of Divinity. Universal giver 
of bliss, elevate us to the heights where we belong. 


यच्ित्रमप्रं उषसो agar शशमानाय भद्रम्‌ cat 
पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ॥ २०॥ 


20. Yaccitramapna usaso vahantijanaya Sasama- 
naya bhadram. Tanno mitro varuno mamahan- 
tam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Whatever creation and wonderful inspiration the 
dawns, lady lights of divinity, bear and bring for the 
zealous yajaka, may Mitra, universal friend of life, 
Varuna, lord of eternal peace and justice, Aditi, mother 
nature, the rivers and the sea, the earth, the sky and the 
light of heaven expand and elevate for humanity. 


490 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 114 
Rudra Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


इमा सद्राय॑ तवसे कपर्दिनं क्चयद्वीराय प्र भ॑रामहे ait: 1 
यथा शमसंद्‌ द्विपदे चतुष्पदे विश्वं पुष्टं ग्रामे अस्मिन्न 
नातुरम्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Ima rudraya tavase kapardine ksayadviraya pra 
bharamahe matith. Yatha samasad dvipade 
catuspade visvam pustam grame asminnana- 
turam. 


We offer these songs of prayer and adoration to 
Rudra, omnipotent lord of mercy and justice, father and 
protector of the brave, for the sake of the brahmachari 
student of the Rudra order so that all may be peace and 
joy among the humans and animals and all life on earth 
and the environment be healthy and happy in this 
settlement, this world and the universe. 


मृव्ठानों रुद्रोत नो मय॑स्कृधि क्चयद्वीराय नम॑सा विधेम ते। 
यच्छं च योश्च मनुरायेजे पिता तद॑श्याम॒ तव॑ रुद्र 
प्रणीतिषु ।॥ २॥ 


2. Mrla no rudrota no mayaskrdhi ksayadviraya 
namasa vidhema te. Yaccham ca yosca manu- 
rayeje pita tadasyama tava rudra pranitisu. 


Rudra, be kind to us, be good and give us peace, 
comfort and good health. We do homage to you, leader 
and protector of the brave, with oblations and 
salutations. The peace and freedom which Manu, father 
guardian of humanity, procured and secured for us, may 
we, we pray, attain under your kind guidance and 
discipline. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 114 491 


अश्याम ते सुमतिं देवयज्यया क्षयद्वीरस्य तव॑ रुद्र मीद्वः। 
सुम्नायञ्निद्धिशो अस्माकमा चरारिष्टवीरा जुहवाम ते 
हविः ॥ ३ ॥ 


2. Asyama te sumatim devayajyaya ksayadvirasya 
tava rudra midhvah.Sumnayannid viso asmakama 
cararistavira juhavama te havih. 


Rudra, good and generous, protector of the 
brave, may we attain the favour of your wisdom and 
advice by worship and homage to you. With our heroes 
of the nation unhurt and protected, we offer gifts of 
oblations and homage to you. Come, we pray, be kind 
and gracious to our people. 


त्वेषं वयं रुद्रं agar ag कविमवसे नि eae 
आरे अस्मदैव्यं tal अस्यतु सुमतिमिट्रयमस्या वुंणीमहे।। ४ ॥ 


4. Tvesam vayam rudram yajnasadham vankum 
kavimavase ni hvayamahe. Are asmad daivyam 
helo asyatu sumatimid vayamasya vrnimahe. 


For our protection and guidance we invoke 
Rudra, blazing brilliant, destroyer of enemies, giver of 
success in the yajnic projects of life, lord of instant 
motion and action, and seer of universal vision. May 
He ward off all furies of nature from us. We choose and 
pray for His vision and wisdom for our conduct in life. 


दिवो व॑राहम॑रुषं कपर्दिनं त्वेषं रूपं नम॑सा नि game 
हस्ते बिभ्रंद्धेषजा वायीणि शर्म॑ वर्म च्छर्दिरिस्मभ्यं यंसत्‌॥ ५॥ 
>. Divo varahamarusam kapardinam tvesam rupam 
namasa ni hvayamahe. Haste bibhrad bhesaja 


varyani Sarma varma cchardirasmabhyam 
yamsat. 


492 RGVEDA 


With offerings of food and salutations we invoke 
Rudra from the regions of light, generous as a cloud, 
brilliant, master controller of the gambler’s dice and 
blazing magnificent of form. May he come bearing in 
hand the choicest herbs for medicine and bless us with 
gifts of a peaceful happy home, protective armour, and 
preventive and deterrent arms and armaments. 


इदं पित्रे मरुतामुच्यते वच॑ः स्वादोः स्वादीयो Sara वर्धनम्‌। 
रास्वा च नो अमृत मर्तभोजनं त्मने तोकाय तन॑याय 
मृव्छ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Idam pitre marutamucyate vacah svadoh svadiyo 
rudraya vardhanam. Rasva ca no amrta marta- 
bhojanam tmane tokaya tanayaya mrla. 


This exhilarating song of homage, holiest of 
holies, is offered in honour of Rudra, father and protector 
of the Maruts, heroes of the nation. Lord of immortality, 
give us the best nourishing food for the mortals, sweetest 
of sweets, for our body, mind and soul, for our children 
and for our youth. Lord, be kind and gracious to bless us. 


मा नो महान्त॑मुत मानों अर्भकं मान उश्चन्तमुत मानं 
उद्चितम्‌। मानों वधीः पितरं मोत मातरं मा न॑: प्रियास्तन्वो 
रुद्र रीरिषः ॥ ७॥ 


ce Ma no mahantamuta ma no arbhakam ma na 
uksantamuta ma na uksitam. Ma no vadhih 
pitaram mota mataram ma nah priyastanvo rudra 
ririsah. 


Rudra, lord of mercy and justice, frustrate not 
our great men, saints and scholars, and our seniors. 
Strike not our children. Slay-not our youth. Kill not the 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 114 493 


fetus in the womb. Kill not our father, nor our mother. 
Hurt not our lovely bodies, nor hurt our beloved wives. 


मा Aedes तन॑ये मान॑आयोमानो गोषु मा नो अश्वेषु 
रीरिषः । वीरान्मा नो रुद्र भाषितो व॑धीर्हविष्प॑न्तः सदमित्त्वा 
हवामहे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ma nastoke tanaye ma na dyau ma no gosu ma 
no aSvesu ririsah. Viran ma no rudra bhamito 
vadhirhavismantah sadamit tva havamahe. 


Rudra, lord eternal of mercy and justice, strike 
not our baby, nor our child. Snap not our life short. Kill 
not our cows, nor horses. If ever you feel angry for our 
trespasses, forgive, we pray, strike not our brave. With 
our hands raised in prayer with holy offerings, we always 
invoke you and pray for kindness and grace. 


sa ते स्तोमान्पशुपा इवाकरं रास्वां पितर्मरुतां सुम्नमस्मे | 
भद्रा हि ते सुपतिर्मृव्छयत्तमाथां वयमव sa वृणीमहे ९ ॥ 


a. Upa te stoman pasupa ivakaram rasva pitarma- 
rutam sumnamasme. Bhadra hi te sumatirmrla- 
yattamatha vayamava it te vrnimahe. 


I bring these songs of praise in homage to you, 
father and protector of the brave Maruts, heroes of nature 
and humanity, just as a shepherd brings milk and curds 
to offer to his master. Lord, we pray, give us peace and 
joy. Blissful is the vision of Divinity, most beatific. 
Therefore we choose to pray for your protection and 
guidance, only that and none else’s. 


आरे ते गोघ्नमुत पूरुषघ्नं क्षयद्वीर सुम्नमस्मे A अस्तु । मूव्ठा 
चं नो अधिं च ब्रूहि देवाधा च नः शर्म यच्छ feat: ॥ ९० ॥ 


494 RGVEDA 


10. Are te goghnamuta purusaghnam ksayadvira 
sumnamasme te astu. Mrla ca no adhi ca bruhi 
devadha ca nah Sarma yaccha dvibarhah. 


Lord protector and shelter of the brave, let the 
butcher of cows and murderer of men be off by your 
protection and grace. May the peace and joy of your 
blessings be for us. Be kind and gracious to us. Speak 
to us in the heart from above. Lord of the world of here 
and after, give us peace and joy on earth, and the ultimate 
freedom after. 


अवोचाम नमो! अस्मा अवस्यवः syuitd नो हवं रुद्रो 
Tea तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः 
पृथिवी उत द्यौः ।॥ ९९॥ 

11. Avocama namo asma avasyavah srnotu no havam 


rudro marutvan.Tanno mitro varuno mama- 
hantam aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


Seekers of protection and bliss, let us sing in 
praise of the Lord. May Rudra, omniscient lord 
omnipotent, listen to our call and prayer. And may Mitra, 
Varuna, Aditi, the sea and rivers, the earth and heaven 
raise and sublimate our word of salutation and prayer 
to the divine presence. (The word is Namaste.) 


Mandala 1/Sukta 115 
Surya Devata, Angirasa Kutsa Rshi 


चित्रं देवानामुदगादनीकं चक्षुर्मित्रस्य वरुणस्यायः। 
आप्रा द्यावांपृथिवी अन्तरिक्षं we’ आत्मा जग॑तस्त- 
स्थुष॑श्च ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 115 495 


im Citram devanam udgad anikam caksurmitrasya 
varunasyagneh. Apra dyavaprthivi antariksam 
surya atma jagatastasthusasca. 


Lo! there rises the sun, wonderful image of 
Divinity, the very eye of Mitra, heaven, the soothing 
cool of Varuna, the waters, and the beauty of the moon. 
It pervades and fills the heaven and earth and the middle 
regions of the sky. It is indeed the very soul of the 
moving and the unmoving world. 


सूर्यो देवीमुषसं रोच॑मानां मर्यो न योषामभ्येति पश्चात्‌। 
यत्रा नरो देवयन्तो युगानिं वितन्वते प्रति भद्राय॑ भद्रम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Suryo devimusasam rocamanam maryo na yosam 
abhyeti pascat. Yatra naro devayanto yugani 
vitanvate prati bhadraya bhadram. 


The sun follows the brilliant and beautiful dawn 
just like a youthful lover who pursues his beloved. And 
therein, with reference to that, the leading astronomers 
of the stars extend their noble vision for the calculation 
of ages for the good of humanity. 


भद्रा svat हरितः सूर्यस्य चित्रा एतग्वा अनुमाद्यासः | 
नमस्यन्तो दिव आ पृष्ठम॑स्थुः परि द्यावापृथिवी य॑न्ति 
सद्यः ॥ ३ ॥ 

६ Bhadra asva haritah suryasya citra etagva 


anumddyasah. Namasyanto diva a prsthamas- 
thuh pari dyavaprthivi yanti sadyah. 


The blissful rays of the sun, reddish, various 
and wondrous, exhilarating, invigorating overspread the 
expanse of heaven and constantly go over the regions 


496 RGVEDA 
of space across the sky and the earth. 


तत्सूर्यस्य देवत्वं तन्म॑हित्वं मध्या atfeda सं Sz | 
यदेदयुक्त हरितं: सधस्थादाद्रात्री वास॑स्तनुते सिमस्मै ii ४ ॥ 


4. Tat suryasya devatvam tanmahitvam madhya 
kartorvitatam sam jabhara. Yadedayukta haritah 
sadhasthadadratri vasastanute simasmai. 


That Lord of the universe, Omnipotent Light of 
creation, is the Sun, Savita, who holds and sustains the 
light and grandeur of the sun pervading in the world of 
action. And it is He who withdraws and folds up the 
same divinity and grandeur of the sun. And when the 
Lord withdraws the light of the sun, then the Night of 
Pralaya absorbs everything of existence into her fold of 
darkness. (This is the story of the eternal round of 
evolution and involution of the universe.) 


When the sun, in the daily round of day-light 
and darkness at night, collects the rays of light from 
down below then the night spreads her cover of darkness 
over all. (This is the story of the daily round of the day- 
night cycle.) 


तन्मित्रस्य वरुणस्याथिचक्चे सूर्यो रूपं कुणुते द्योरुपस्थे | 
अनन्तमन्यद्रुश॑दस्य पाजः कृष्णमन्यद्छरितः सं भ॑रन्ति ॥५॥ 


चः Tanmitrasya varunasyabhicakse suryo rupam 
krnute dyorupasthe. Anantamanyad rusadasya 
pajah krsnamanyaddharitah sam bharanti. 


The Eternal Lord, in order that Mitra and Varuna, 
day and night, be seen, creates light and shade and form. 
And so, the sun, which is light incarnate, in the close 
space of heaven, shows the forms of things. Endless, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 497 


different and blazing is its power of one sort, while the 
shade of darkness is another, which the rays of the sun 
bear in the quarters of space. 


अद्या देवा उदिता सूर्य॑स्य निरंह॑सः पिपृता निरंवद्यात्‌। 
तन्नो पित्रो वरुणो मामहन्तामदितिः सिन्धुः पृथिवी उत 
द्यौः ug ॥ 


6. Adya deva udita suryasya niranhasah piprta 
niravadyat. Tanno mitro varuno mamahantam- 
aditih sindhuh prthivi uta dyauh. 


O powers divine and vitalities of nature born of 
the rising sun, pure and immaculate, save us to-day from 
whatever is sinful and despicable. And may the day and 
night, the wide space, the rivers and the sea, the earth 
and the heavens of light, we pray, bless us to rise in our 
hopes and endeavours. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 116 
Ashvins Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 


नास॑त्याभ्यां बर्हिरिव प्र वृञ्जे carat इयर्म्यश्चियेव are: । 
यावर्भ॑गाय विमदाय॑ जायां सेनाजुवा न्यूहतू रथेन ॥ ९ ॥ 


lp Nasatyabhyam barhiriva pra vrije stoman 
iyarmyabhriyeva vatah. Yavarbhagaya vimadaya 
jJayam senajuva nyuhatu rathena. 


Just as the priest selects and plucks sacred grass 
and spreads it over and around the vedi in celebration, 
and just as the winds move the vapour laden cloud across 
the sky, so do I select words of appreciation for the 
Ashvins, scientist and technologist, sincere and true, 
compose them into songs of praise and air them over 


498 RGVEDA 


the skies, for the Ashvins, who fly troops of the army 
by acarrier plane over the mountains like friends flying 
a damsel for the youthful sober lover. 


वीद्टुपत्म॑भिराशुहेम॑भिर्वा देवानां वा जूतिथिः शाश॑दाना । 
तद्रासभो नासत्या सहस्॑माजा यमस्य प्रधने जिगाय ॥ २॥ 


2. Vilupatmabhirasuhemabhirva devanam va juti- 
bhih sasadana. Tad rasabho nasatya sahasramaja 
yamasya pradhane jigaya. 


Ashvins, ever sincere and true, flying by the 
wings of powerful birds, fast at the speed of clouds, by 
the tempests of wind and fire splitting the currents of 
winds, eminent scholars and aeronauts, the power 
applied, controlled and directed in your chariot would 
win victories 111 a thousand battles of wealth against the 
deadly enemy. 


aa = भुज्युम॑श्विनोदमेघे र यिं न कश्चिन्ममृवाँ steer: | 
तमूहथुर्नौभिरात्मन्वतीभिरन्तरिक्चप्रद्धिरपोदकाभिः ॥ ३॥ 


3. Tugro ha bhujyum asvinodameghe rayim na 
kascin-mamrvan avahah. Tam uhathur-nau-bhir- 
atmanvatibhir-antariksaprudbhir-apoda-kabhih. 


Ashvins, commanders forceful as wind and 
lightning, if a great ruler and governor launches a fighter 
and pioneer beneficiary of the nation on the bottomless 
sea but then abandons hope like a dying man giving up 
his wealth of a life-time, you rescue him by self-driven, 
waterproof, flying boats. 


तिस्रः क्षपस्तरिरहातिव्रजंद्धिर्नासित्या wader: पतङ्खैः । 
समुद्रस्य ecard पारे त्रिभी रथे: शतपंद्धिः षट्टेश्वैः ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 116 499 


4. Tisrah ksapas-trir-ahativrajadbhir-nasatya 
bhujyum-uhathuh patangaih. Samudrasya 
dhanvannardrasya pare tribhi rathat Satapadbhih 
salasvaih. 


Ashvins, undeviating from truth and reality, you 
carry the ruler beneficiary across the unfathomable 
ocean and over the desert three-nights and three days 
non-stop by three flying chariots fitted with hundred 
wheels and six engines. 


अनारम्भणे तद॑वीरयेथामनास्थाने अग्रभणे WAS | 
यद॑श्विना ऊ हथुभुज्युमस्तं शतारित्रां नाव॑मातस्थि- 
वांसंम्‌॥ ५॥ 


आ Anarambhane tad-avirayetham-anasthane 
agrabhane samudre. Yad-asvina uhathur bhu- 
Jyum-astam Sataritram navam-datasthivamsam. 


Ashvins, scholars dedicated to truth and 
humanity, in the ocean of space where there is no 
beginning and no end, where there is no foothold and 
nothing to hold with hand, you carry the man of earthly 
enjoyment riding the carrier-boat worked with a hundred 
propellers to his haven of rest where there is no want, 
no pain, nothing beyond desire. That is great, heroic! 


यम॑श्विना ददथुः शवेतमश्वमघाश्वाय शश्वदित्स्वस्ति । 
तद्वां दात्रं महिं कीर्तेन्यं भूत्यैद्रो वाजी सदमिद्धव्यो 
अर्यः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yamasvina dadathuh svetamasvamaghasvaya 
Sasvadit svasti. Tad vam datram mahi kirtenyam 
bhut paidvo vajt sadamiddhavyo aryah. 


Ashvins, experts of velocity and motion, the 


500 RGVEDA 


brilliant white solar car which you provide for the 
adventurous traveller is all-time auspicious. That gift 
of yours is great, admirable all over the earth. The super- 
fast car is of undiminishing value and adorable in the 
economic world of business and industry. 


युवं न॑रा स्तुवते dire कश्चीव॑ते अरदतं पुरंन्धिम्‌। 
कारो तराच्छफादश्व॑स्य वृष्ण॑ः शतं कुम्भां असिञ्चतं 
सुरायाः ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Yuvam nara stuvate pajriyaya kaksivate aradatam 
puramdhim. Karotarac-chaphad-asvasya vrsnah 
satam kumbhan asincatam surayah. 


Ashvins, leading teacher and scholar of herbal 
science, you reward the faithful disciple of pious 
discipline ever ready in harness with exceptional 
knowledge and insight into the science and technology 
of restorative nectar by which you can fill a hundred 
jars of drink from one horse-hoof measure of virile 
essence distilled through the filter. 


हिमेनाभिं श्रं सम॑वारयेथां पितुमतीमूर्ज मस्मा अधत्तम्‌। 
ऋबीसे अत्रिंमश्विनावनीतमुच्निन्यथुः सर्वगणं स्वस्ति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Himenagnim ghramsam-avarayetham pitumatim- 
urjam-asma adhattam. Rbise atrim- asvinavant- 
tam-unninyathuh sarvaganam svasti. 


Ashvins, scholars of heat and energy, fight out 
fire and heat with ice and cool, and bear edible energy 
concentrate for us. Pull out the man fallen into the earth’s 
womb of fire and despondency and free him and his 
community from physical, mental and spiritual suffering 
for their common good. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 501 


Wad नांसत्यानुदेथामुच्यावुंध्नं चक्र थुर्जिह्यलांरम्‌ | 
क्षरन्नापो न पायनाय राये सहस्त्रांय तृष्य ते गोत॑मस्य ॥ ९ ॥ 


Paravatam nasatya nudetham-uccabudhnam 
cakrathurjihmavaram. Ksarannapo na payanaya 
raye sahasraya trsyate gotamasya. 


Ashvins, high-priests of nature and truth, lite 
up the waters from the bottom at the lowest level, raise 
it to a higher level by oblique channels, and let the 
streams flow for drink for a thousand people, and for 
the scholar and the administrator, to quench their thirst 
and for the production of wealth. 


जुजुरुषो नासत्योत afe प्रामुञ्चतं द्रापिमिव च्यवानात्‌ । 
प्रातिरतं जहितस्यायुर्दस््रादित्पतिंमकृणुतं कनीनाम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Jujuruso nasatyota vavrim pramuncatam drapi- 
miva cyavanat. Pratiratam jahitasyayurdasradit 
patimakrnutam kaninam. 


Ashvins, recuperative powers of nature, masters 
of medicine and psychiatrists, you free the ageing man 
from wrinkled skin, remove fear complex from the 
escapist running away from life, give a new lease of 
life to the depressed heading to suicide, and mature 
adolescent girls to grow and match with the right 
husband in marriage. 


तद्वां नरा शंस्यं राध्यं चाभिष्टिमन्नांसत्या वरूथम्‌ । 
यद्विद्वांसा निधिमिवापंगूठ्ह मुदं तादूपथयुर्वन्द॑नाय ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Tad vam nara samsyam radhyam cabhistima- 
nnasatya varutham. Yad vidvamsa nidhimivapa- 
gulhamud darsatadupathurvandanaya. 


502 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity dedicated 
to truth and reality, the protective and promotive work 
you do is appreciable, adorable and blissfully desirable. 
Leaders of knowledge and secrets of nature, it is so far 
hidden from view like an underground treasure. Let it 
come forth so that all may see and admire and do you 
the honour you deserve. 


तद्वां नरा सनये दंस॑ उग्रमाविष्करुणोमि तन्यतुर्न वृष्टिम्‌। 
दध्यङ्ह यन्मध्वाथर्वणो वामश्व॑स्य शीर्ष्णा प्र यदींमु- 
वाचं ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tad vam nara sanaye damsa ugramaviskrnomi 
tanyaturna vrstim. Dadhyan ha yanmadhva- 
tharvano va masvasya Sirsna pra yadimuvaca. 


Ashvins, leaders of men in knowledge and 
action, that marvellous work of yours in the interest of 
social good, I explain and proclaim in detail like thunder 
and lightning raining showers from the cloud, work and 
knowledge sweet as honey which the man of love and 
reverence, Dadhyang, child and disciple of the sober 
sage of non-violence, Atharvan, taught you from his 
mind inspired with wisdom and passion for superfast 
action in the form of a full treatise on the subject. 


अजोहवीन्नासत्या करा at महे याम॑न्पुरुभुजा पुर॑न्धिः। 
श्रुतं तच्छासुरिव वधिमत्या हिर'ण्यहस्तमणश्विनावद- 
त्तम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ajohavinnasatya kara vam mahe yaman puru- 
bhuja purandhih. Srutam tacchasuriva vadhri- 
matya hiranyahastam-aSsvinavadattam. 


Ashvins, lovers of truth and reality, munificent 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 503 


powers of action and knowledge, liberal givers of joy 
and prosperity for all, let the woman of noble 
intelligence invite you for the sake of abundant peace 
and prosperity, listen to her invocation as a 
commandment of the world Ruler, and give the fortunate 
woman that superior knowledge which showers the joys 
of life with golden hands of generosity. 


आस्नो वृकस्य वर्तिकामभीके युवं न॑रा नासत्यामुमुक्तम्‌ | 
उतो कृवि पुरुभुजा युवं ह कृप॑माणमकृणुतं विचक्ष ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. 45710 vrkasya vartikamabhike yuvam nara 
nasatya mumuktam. Uto kavim purubhuja yuvam 
ha krpamanam-akrnutam vicakse. 


Ashvins, defenders of truth, light and justice, 
leaders of humanity and creators of peace and prosperity 
for all, in the human search for progress and 
enlightenment, you save the poor bird from the 
devourer’s mouth, and give the poet a compassionate 
heart for a comprehensive vision of life. 


चरित्रं हि वेरिवाच्छैदि पर्णमाजा खेलस्य परितक्म्यायाम्‌ | 
सद्यो जङ्घामायसीं विश्पत्कांयै धने हिते सर्तवे प्रत्य॑ध- 
TN ९५॥ 


15. Caritram hi verivacchedi parnamaja khelasya 
paritakmyayam. Sadyo janghamayasim vispa- 
layai dhane hite sartave pratyadhattam. 


Ashvins, when the battle is raging for the 
defence and sustenance of the people but the issue is 
wavering in the night of uncertainty, you instantly take 
to the armour of steel for advance, strike and break down 
the enemy’s force as you cut off the wing of a bird. 


504 RGVEDA 


शतं मेषान्वृक्ये चक्षदानमूज्राश्वं तं पितान्धं च॑कार । तस्मां 
अक्षी नांसत्या विचक्ष आध॑त्तं दस्रा भिषजावनर्वन्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Satam mesan vrkye caksadanam-rjrasvam tam 
pitandham cakara. Tasma aksi nasatya vicaksa 
Adhattam dasra bhisajavanarvan. 


If a person were to sacrifice a hundred generous 
and creative contenders, meshas, for the pleasure of a 
wolfish thief and his wife, even though such a person 
were otherwise very intelligent and dynamic, the 
fatherly ruler should throw him into the darkness of 
prison. And yet, O Ashvins, lovers of ultimate truth, 
dispellers of untruth and darkness, generous showers 
of bliss, bring the eyes for the waking blind so that he 
could see what is real and true and good and be released 
from the dungeon of ignorance. (It is better to make the 
blind see than keep them in the prison. It is better to 
redeem the criminal and the sinner than throw him in 
the prison.) 


आ वां रथं दुहिता सूर्य॑स्य कार्ष्य वातिष्ठ दर्वता जय॑न्ती । 
विश्वे देवा अन्व॑मन्यन्त हृद्धिः aa शिया नासत्या 
सचेथे ॥ ९७॥ 


17. A एवा ratham duhita siryasya karsmevatistha- 
darvata jayanti. Visve deva anvamanyanta hrd- 
bhih samu Sriya nasatya sacethe. 


Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth in the 
battle of life and health of the world, let the dawn, 
daughter of the sun, arise and ride your chariot drawn 
by horses of light and win the battle. Let all the divinities 
of the world heartily applaud the beauty and power, and 
may you shine with the beauty and glory of the rise and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 505 
may you win the victory. 


यदयातं दिवोदासाय वर्तिर्भरद्वाजायाण्विना हयंन्ता। 
र वदुवाह सचनो रथो वां वृषभश्च शिंशुमारश्च युक्ता ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Yadayatam divodasaya vartir-bharadvajaya- 
Svina hayanta. Revad-uvaha sacano ratho vam 
vrsabhasca simsumarasca yukta. 


Ashvins, generous givers and protectors, ever 
on the move, when you come to the house of Divodasa, 
the giver of light and knowledge, and to Bharadvaja, 
bearer and giver of food, energy and the fighting force, 
let the chariot that transports you be delightful, laden 
with wealth, powerfully equipped, victorious and killer 
of the enemy. 


रयिं dat स्व॑पत्यमायुः सुवीर्य' नासत्या aera | आ 
Wert समनसोप वाजेस्तिरह्यो भागं दध॑तीमयातम्‌ ९९ ॥ 
19. Rayim suksatram svapatyam-ayuh suviryam 
nasatya vahanta. A jahnavim samanasopa 
vajaistrirahno bhagam dadhatim-ayatam. 


Ashvins, protectors of truth and leaders of equal 
and agreeable mind, come with food, energy and 
powerful forces, bearing wealth, good social order, 
noble progeny, good health and age, courage and valour, 
and free flowing streams of water for the people 
performing their daily duties full three times of the day. 


परिविष्टं जाहुषं fasad: सीं सुगेभिर्नक्तमूहथू रजोभिः। 
विभिन्दुना नासत्या रथेन वि पर्वताँ अजर यू अंयातम्‌॥ २० ॥ 


20.  Parivistam jahusam visvatah sim sugebhirnakta- 
muhathu rajobhih. Vibhinduna nasatya rathena 
vi parvatan ajarayu aydatam. 


506 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, defenders and saviours of truth and 
right, young and unaging, when the commander or a 
section of the army or the ruler is besieged on all sides, 
launch, and attack by an invincible killer chariot, rescue 
the besieged force by easy but misty paths and take over 
the caverns and mountains by night. 


एकस्या वस्तोरावतं रणाय वश॑मश्विना ara agent 
निरहतं दुच्छुना इन्द्र॑वन्ता पृथुश्रवसो वृषणावरातीः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Ekasya vastor-dvatam ranaya vasam-asvina 
sanaye sahasra. Nirahatam ducchuna indravanta 
prthusravaso vrsanavaratth. 


Ashvins, brilliant as sun and moon, forceful as 
lightning and thunder, generous as showers of rain, 
leaders of the land and commanders of the army, protect 
and promote the freedom of the land for a hundred gifts 
and acquisitions of peace and happiness. Protect and 
develop the army for battle for the sake of freedom and 
advancement. And in a single day rout the destructive 
force of the frustrative enemy even if it be of 
commanding fame in the world. 


wet चिदार्चत्कस्यांवतादा नीचादुच्चा च॑क्रथुः पात॑वे aT: | 
शयवे चिन्नासत्या शचीभिर्जसुरये स्तर्यं पिप्यथुर्गाम्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


22. Sarasya cidarcatkasyavatada nicdducca cakra- 
thuh patave vah. Sayave cinnasatya sactbhir- 
jasuraye staryam pipyathur-gam. 


Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth and the 
facts of life, with your noble actions of science and 
husbandry, you raise the water from the lowest level as 
that of a well or lake to the higher level for the drink of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 507 


the violent as well as of the worshipper, and you develop 
the dry cow to fertility for the drooping, depressed and 
the exhausted humanity. 


अवस्यते स्तुवते कुष्णियाय॑ं ऋजूयते नांसत्या Breil fas: 1 
पशुं न नष्टमिव दशनाय विष्णाप्वं ददथुर्विश्वकाय ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Avasyate stuvate krsniyaya rjuyate nasatya saci- 
bhih. Pasum na nastamiva darsanaya visnapvam 
dadathurvisvakaya. 


Ashvins, lovers of truth and humanity, with your 
noble words and acts of wisdom give that sagely vision 
and knowledge to the protective, worshipful, attractive, 
simple and sympathetic visionary with which the sages 
are blest in a state of samadhi communion with the 
divine. Give it like a lovely pet or a valuable treasure 
lost but then found and then restored to the master. 


दश रात्रीरशिंविना नवं द्यून॑वनब्दं Safar =a: । 
faud रेभमुदनि प्रवृक्तमुत्निन्यथुः सोम॑मिव स्त्रुवेण ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. = 1205८ ratrir-asivena nava dyun-avanaddham 
$nathitam-apsvantah. Viprutam rebham-udani 
pravrktam-unninyathuh somamiva sruvena. 


Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth and right, 
just as a boat is tied and transfixed under water for ten 
nights and nine days by an envious person, or it is held 
up, or drifts over water, but then is upraised and brought 
on the track by a noble ferry man, so if an admirer of 
truth and right and devotee of divinity feels supressed 
by adverse forces, feels depressed or distempered or 
drifts from the right track, then, O Ashvins, give him a 
hand and raise him like a soma libation raised in the 


508 RGVEDA 
ladle ready for offering into the fire of yajna. 


प्र वां दंसांस्यश्विनाववोचमस्य पतिः स्यां सुगव॑ः GaN: | 
उत पश्यंन्रश्नुवन्दीर्घमायुरस्त॑मिवेञ्नरिमाणं जगम्याम्‌ ॥ २५॥ 


25. Pra vam damsamsyasvinadvavocamasya patih 
syam sugavah suvirah. Uta paSyann asnuvan 
dirgham-ayurastam-ivejjarimanam jagamyam. 


Ashvins, noble divinities of truth and right 
action, generous givers of good health and purpose of 
life for a full age, I pray I may sing in praise of your 
great actions with gratitude and, blest with cows, noble 
speech and abundant land, in the company of brave 
children, seeing the world and the light of divinity, 
enjoying long and full age, and giving up this ageing 
body I should retire, set like the sun and go home. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 117 
Ashvins Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 


मध्वः Genser मदांय प्रो होता विवासते ary | 
बर्हिष्प॑ती रातिर्विंश्चिंता गीरिषा यातं नासत्योप वाजैः ॥ ९॥ 


1 Madhvah somasyasvina madaya pratno hota 
vivasate vam. Barhismati ratirvisrita girisa yatam 
nasatyopa vajaih. 


Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth, givers 
of health and joy, the veteran yajaka, high-priest of 
knowledge, invokes you for the honey sweets of soma’s 
joy for the health and ecstasy of living. Brilliant and 
blissful is your gift of peace and prosperity, celebrated 
is your voice and wisdom. Come with your gifts of food 
and energy and the vibrant ways of living and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 509 
advancement at the fastest. 


alata मन॑सो जवींयात्रथः स्वश्वो fast आजिगाति। 
येन गच्छथः सुकृतो दुरोणं तेन॑ नरा वर्तिर स्मभ्यं यातम्‌॥ २ ॥ 


2. Yo vam-asvina manaso javiyan rathah svasvo visa 
ajigati. Yena gacchathah sukrto duronam 
tena nara vartir-asmabhyam yatam. 


Ashvins, leaders of the people, faster than 
thought is your chariot which reaches the people with 
you. Wondrously made it is, drawn by horses fast as 
sun beams and lightning, by which you go home to the 
man of noble deeds. Riding that same chariot come 
home for us too (and bless us with light and speed). 


ऋषिं नरावंहसः पाञ्च॑जन्यमृबीसादव्रिं मुञ्चथो Wor | 
मिनन्ता दस्योरशिवस्य माया अनुपूर्वं वृषणा चोद- 
Sar ३॥ 


६ Rsim naravanhasah pancajanyam-rbisad-atrim 
muncatho ganena. Minanta dasyor-asivasya 
maya anupurvam vrsana codayanta. 


Ashvins, leaders of humanity, generous and 
inspiring as ever before with universal knowledge and 
human values, destroyers of the envious demonics and 
their crooked powers, you save Atri, visionary scholar 
free from the three bonds of physical, mental and 
spiritual ailments, self-realised soul with mastery over 
all the five pranic energies and dedicated to all the five 
classes of universal humanity without discrimination, 
and you deliver him along with his band of teachers 
and scholars from the evil of prison in utter darkness, 
against the light of reason, knowledge and rectitude, 


510 RGVEDA 


into which, such men of light and freedom are thrown 
by the envious and wicked blood suckers of society. 


अश्वं न गूठहमंश्विना दुरेवैऋषिं नरा वृषणा रे भमप्सु | 
सं तं रिणीथो fadd दंसोभिर्न वां जूर्यन्ति पूर्व्यां कृतानि ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asvam na gulham-aSvind durevair-rsim nara 
vrsana rebhamapsu. Sam tam rinitho viprutam 
damsobhirna vam juryanti purvya krtani. 


Rebha, eminent scholar of knowledge and 
wisdom, dynamic and productive proclaimer of the 
secrets of science, is obscured among the lesser stars 
and kept back, by manipulators of evil design, straying 
around lost like a horse in the jungle. Ashvins, brave 
and generous heroes and leaders of humanity and guides 
of knowledge, redeem that seer of light with your noble 
actions, he would otherwise be lost and gone. All your 
actions, old and ancient as well as new, never fade away 
nor die out. 


सुषुप्वांसं न निऋतेरुपस्थे सूर्य न द॑स्रा तम॑सि श्चियन्तम्‌। 
शुभे रुक्मं न cold निखा तमुदूंपथुरञ्विना वन्द॑नाय ॥ ५॥ 


5: Susupvamsam na nir-rterupasthe suryam na 
dasra tamasi ksiyantam. Subhe rukmam na 
darsatam nikhatmudupathurasvina vandanaya. 


Ashvins, heroic and generous powers of action, 
destroyers of want and suffering, like the soul’s 
awareness covered in deep sleep, like the dormant seed 
enfolded in the soil, like the sun resting as if in the night 
cover of darkness, like the lovely shining fold buried in 
the folds of the earth, the face of beauty and truth is 
hidden. Awaken the awareness of life divine, generate 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 511 


the life of the seed, let the sun arise, bring out the hidden 
gold of the earth, and sow the seeds of life, energy and 
light so that all may see, honour and admire the grandeur 
of existence. 


तद्वां नरा शंस्यं Ufa कक्षीव॑ता नासत्या परिज्मन्‌ । 
शफादश्वस्य वाजिनो जनाय शतं कुम्भां असिञ्चतं 
मधूनाम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6: Tad vam nara Samsyam pajriyena kaksivata 
nasatya parijman. Saphadasvasya vajino janaya 
satam kumbhan asincatam madhunam. 


Ashvins, dedicated to truth and nature, leaders 
of scientists and pharmacists, that work of yours is of 
universal value and worthy of praise by eminent scholars 
by which you manufacture a horse-hoof measure of 
herbal essence and from that prepare a hundred potfuls 
of honey sweet restorative tonics for the ailing people. 


युवं न॑रा स्तुवते कुष्णियाय॑ विष्णाप्वं ददथुर्विश्व॑काय। 
घोषायै चित्पितुषदे! दुरोणे पतिं जूर्यन्त्या अश्विनाव 
दत्तम्‌॥ ७॥ 


Yuvam nara stuvate krsniyaya visnapvam dada- 
thurvisvakaya. Ghosayai cit pitrsade durone 
patim juryantya asvinavadattam. 


Ashvins, generous givers and leaders of men, 
for the man of truth true to his word, kind ruler, planning 
development of agriculture, dedicated to parental 
seniors, provide the expert of farming on the land, and 
for the herdswoman growing old provide a caretaker. 


512 RGVEDA 


युवं श्यावाय रुश॑तीमदत्तं महः श्चोणस्याश्विना कण्वाय | 
प्रवाच्यं तद्‌ वुंषणा कृतं वां यन्नार्षदाय श्रवों अध्य- 
धंत्तम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yuvam syavaya rusatim-adattam mahah ksona- 
syasvina kanvaya. Pravacyam tad vrsana krtam 
vam yannarsadaya sravo adhyadhattam. 


Ashvins, brave and generous harbingers of 
fulfilment for the lover of learning, give brilliance of 
knowledge for the learned teacher and his resident pupil, 
give great strength of will and purpose, and for the 
successor of the man presiding over people and pupils, 
give communicable knowledge, strength of action, right 
reputation and the will to listen above all. 


पुरू वपींस्यश्विना दधाना नि tad ऊहथुराशुमश्वम्‌ । 
सहस्रसां वाजिनमप्र॑ंतीतमदहिहनं श्रवस्यं4 तरुत्रम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


9. Puru varpamsyasvina dadhana ni pedava 
uhathur-asumasvam. Sahasrasam vajinamapra- 
titam-ahihanam sravasyam tarutram. 


Ashvins, harbingers of many things for good 
and comfortable life, assuming various forms of workers 
and designers, you give to the traveller and transporter 
the instant motive power such as electricity, fast, serving 
a thousand purposes, invisible, present in earth and 
consumable fuels, breaker of the cloud and capable of 
crossing the seas. 


एतानि वां sara सुदानू ब्रह्माङ्गूषं सद॑नं रोद॑स्योः | 
यद्वां प्रासो अश्विना हव॑न्ते यातमिषा च॑ विदुषे चं 
ATH १०॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 513 


10. Etani vam Sravasya sudanu brahmangusam 
sadanam rodasyoh. Yad vam pajraso asvina 
havante yatamisa ca viduse ca vajam. 


Ashvins, generous divinities of nature and 
humanity, these are your reputable acts of charity. This 
is the song of praise for you. The infinite and omniscient 
lord, Brahma, is the home and sustenance of heaven 
and earth, whom you and your friends and admirers 
invoke and worship. Move on, powers of life and light 
divine, with your will and gifts of food for life and soul 
and with the vision divine for the man and seeker of 
knowledge. 


सूनोमनिंनाश्विना गृणाना वाजं विप्राय भुरणा रद॑न्ता । 
अगस्त्ये ब्रह्मणा वावृधाना सं fascet नासत्यारिणी- 
तम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11.  Sunormanenasvina grnana vajam vipraya bhu- 
rana radanta. Agastye brahmana vavrdhana sam 
vispalam nasatyarinitam. 


Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth and 
rectitude, generous harbingers of comfort, prosperity 
and happiness, sung and celebrated by the honour and 
reverence of the admirer and the lover of soma like a 
son, opening the channels of food, energy and 
knowledge for the pious and intelligent people, rising 
by the light of omniscience in knowledge and acts of 
charity in the service of Divinity, release the flow of 
vision, will and right policy for the advancement of 
humanity on the path of progress. 


कुह यान्ता। सुष्टुतिं काव्यस्य feel नपाता वृषणा शयुत्रा | 
हिर॑ण्यस्येव कलशं निखांतमुदूपथुर्दशमे अश्विनाहन्‌ 22 ॥ 


514 RGVEDA 


12. Kuha yanta sustutim kavyasya divo napata vrsana 
Sayutra. Hiranyasyeva kalasam nikhatam- 
udupathurdasame asvinahan. 


Ashvins, children of light, generous and brave, 
guardians of sleeping humanity, moving on the paths 
of divinity, where do you find celebration in poetry and 
discover the golden vessel of spiritual treasure buried 
under the folds of earthly existence, on the tenth day of 
yajnic performance, and then sow the seeds of piety? 
(The answer is: among the lovers of knowledge, children 
of divinity). 

युवं च्यवानमश्विना जरन्तं पुनर्युवानं चक्रथुः STAMP: 
युवो रथं दुहिता सूर्य॑स्य सह Patan नासत्यावृणीत ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yuvam cyavanamasvina jarantam punaryu- 
vanam cakrathuh sacibhih. Yuvo ratham duhita 
suryasya saha Ssriya nasatyavrnita. 


Ashvins, lovers of truth and masters of the 
currents of natural energy, by your noble and creative 
acts you rejuvenate Chyavana, man of dynamic living 
and prayerful culture but ageing and declining in energy, 
and you return him to his youth again, and the Dawn, 
daughter of the sun chooses you and rides your chariot 
in your company in all her beauty and grandeur. 


युवं qa पूर्व्यभिरेवैः पुनर्मन्याव॑भवतं युवाना । 
युवे भुज्युमणीसो निः स॑मुद्रादिभिरूहथुररहजेभिरश्वैः ॥ ९४ i 


14. Yuvam tugraya purvyebhirevaih punarman- 
yavabhavatam yuvana. Yuvam bhujyumarnaso 
nih samudrad vibhiruhathurrjrebhirasvaih. 


Ashvins, masters of the secrets of nature, youth 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 515 


and age, for the sake of vitality and energy and by the 
acts and achievements of the ancients, you grow young 
and come to know each other again, and you carry the 
man of joy and tonics of rejuvenation from and beyond 
the bottomless ocean of water and air by transports 
flying like birds straight and unobstructed. 


अजोहवीदश्विना deat वां tied: समुद्रम॑व्यथिजगन्वान्‌। 
निष्टमूहथुः सुयुजा रथेन मनोजवसा वृषणा स्वस्ति ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Ajohavidasvina taugryo vam prolhah samudram- 
avyathir-jaganvan. Nistamuhathuh suyuja 
rathena manojavasa vrsana svasti. 


Ashvins, generous and brave experts of energy, 
power and motion, let the powerful force assigned to 
the sea on the move call on you and you would transport 
it without trouble by the chariot meticulously driven at 
the speed of thought for the good of all. 


अजोहवीदश्विना वर्तिका वामास्नो यत्सीममुञ्चतं वृकस्य | 
वि जयुषा wag: सान्वद्रे'जांतं विष्वाचो अहतं 
विषेणं॥ ९६॥ 


16. Ajohavidasvina vartika vamasno yat simamun- 
catam vrkasya. Vi jayusa yayathuh sanvadrerja- 
tam visvaco ahatam visena. 


Ashvins, heroes of tempestuous speed and 
movement, let the army, stuck up, besieged, and helpless 
as a poor bird, call upon you for help any time which 
you rescue from the wolfish mouth of the enemy. Mount 
up to the peak of the mountain by your victory chariot 
and destroy the advancing army of the enemy with your 
reinforcements. 


516 RGVEDA 


शतं मेषान्वृक्ये मामहानं तमः प्रणीतमशिवेन पित्रा । 
आक्षी seared अश्विनावधत्तं ज्योतिरन्धाय चक्रथु- 
विचक्षे ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Satam mesan vrkye mamahanam tamah prani- 
tamasivena pitra. Aksi rjrasve asvinavadhattam 
Jyotirandhaya cakrathurvicakse. 


Ashvins, creators of light and givers of eyes, 
remove the social butcher who throws a hundred 
helpless persons like sheep to the she-wolf, correct the 
unkind father and the unreasonable judge who assigns 
the innocent youth to the dungeon, bring eyes for the 
injured of the swift army of horse, in short, create and 
bring light for the blind who may then see the light of 
truth. 


शुनमन्धाय भर॑मह्यत्सा Gara वृषणा नरेति | 
जारः कनीन॑ंडव चक्षदान waved: शतमेकं च मेषान्‌ ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Sunamandhaya bharamahvayat sa vrkirasvina 
vrsana nareti. Jarah kanina iva caksadana 
rjrasvah satamekam ca mesan. 


Ashvins, generous harbingers of the showers of 
comfort and joy, leading lights of humanity, bring peace, 
comfort and ample light of the eye for the poor blind as 
if the she-wolf herself were to call up and save the 
hundred and one innocent sheep, or an old wise man of 
experience, or the youthful spirit of hope, or the very 
pupil of the eye, or the light-giver for the eye of the fast 
horse rider were to bring comfort, safety and light for 
the needy. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 517 


मही वामूतिरश्विना मयोभूरुत स्रामं धिष्ण्या सं रिणीथः | 
अथा युवामिर्दहययत्पुरंन्धिराग॑च्छतं सीं वृषणाववोभिः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Mahi vamiutirasvina mayobhuruta sramam 
dhisnya sam rinithah. Atha yuvamidahvayat 
puramdhir-agacchatam sim vrsanavavobhih. 


Ashvins, heroes wise and brave, great, soothing 
and inspiring is your presence and protection. Shatter 
the injustice, release the lame and the disabled to 
freedom. And then the very spirit of wisdom and the 
nation would call upon you: come like the breath of 
fresh air with favours and fulfilment and be here for 
life. 


अधेनुं दस्त्रा स्तर्य4 विष॑क्तामपिन्वतं grad अश्विना गाम्‌ । 
युवं शचीभिर्विमदाय जायां न्यूहथुः पुरुमित्रस्य 
योषाम्‌ २०॥ 


20. Adhenum dasra staryam visaktam-apinvatam 
Sayave asvina gam. Yuvam Sacibhir-vimadaya 
jJayam nyuhathuh purumitrasya yosam. 


Ashvins, generous and brave fighters against 
suffering, destroyers of want and pain, nourish and 
revitalize the dry and barren cow, give nourishment to 
the weak and sleeping man, and, with your noble and 
generous actions, a wife for the happy and youthful man, 
the young and beautiful daughter of the friend of many. 


यवं वृकेणाण्विना वपन्तेषं दुहन्ता मनुषाय दस्रा । 
अभि दस्युं बकुरेणा धमन्तोरु ज्योतिंश्चक्रथुरायीय ॥ २९॥ 


21. Yavam vrkenasvina vapantesam duhanta-ma- 
nusaya dasra. Abhi dasyum bakurena dhaman- 
toru jyotiscakrathur-aryaya. 


518 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, brave heroes and destroyers of evil, 
want and suffering, sowing barley with the plough and 
uprooting the weeds, creating and drawing energy from 
nature and food, warding and blowing off the evil and 
wicked by warning and punishment all round, expanding 
and radiating the light of knowledge and justice for the 
good and progressive people, you build a grand social 
order of freedom and happiness. 


आथर्वणायाश्विना दधीचेऽ vet शिर : प्रत्यैरयतम्‌ । 
स वां मधु प्र वोचदूतायन्त्वाष्टरं य॑स््रावपिकक्ष्यं वाम्‌ ॥ २२ ॥ 


22. Atharavanayasvina dadhice’svyam Sirah pratyai- 
rayatam. Sa vam madhu pra vocadrtayan tva- 
stram yad dasravapikaksyam vam. 


For the child of the man of faith beyond doubt 
and question, for the admirer of men of knowledge and 
rectitude, you create the best and most dynamic brain 
and inspire him. Ashvins, generous and creative, the 
inspired man, in search of the honey sweets of life and 
nourishment, speaks of the science of yajna and of the 
science of anatomy and the structure of the forms of 
life, for you and all. 


सदा कवी सुमतिमा च॑के वां विश्वा frat अश्विना प्राव॑तं 
मे। अस्मे रयिं नासत्या बृहन्तमपत्यसाचं श्रुत्यं ररा- 
थाम्‌ ॥ २३॥ 

23. Sada kavi sumatima cake vam visva dhiyo asvina 


pravatam me. Asme rayim nasatya brhantamapa- 
tyasacam srutyam raratham. 


Ashvins, poetic visionaries of creation, high- 
priests of truth and reality, harbingers of cosmic 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 519 


intelligence and energy, I pray to you, always bless me 
with universal vision and understanding and protect it 
from doubt. Give us the wealth which is reputable and 
honourable, blest with family and children, and which 
is ever growing higher and higher. 


दिरंण्यहस्तमणश्विना ररांणा पुत्रं न॑रा वध्रिमत्या staat! 
त्रिधा ह श्यावमश्विना विकस्तमुज्जीवस एेरयतं सुदानू ॥। २४ ॥ 


24. Hiranyahastamasvinad rarana putram nara 
vadhrimatya adattam. Tridha ha syavamasvina 
vikastamujjivasa airayatam sudanu. 


Ashvins, harbingers of life, leading lights of 
humanity, kind and compassionate, rejuvenate the 
wedded couple and bless the intelligent woman with a 
golden-handed son. Three ways broken is the man of 
knowledge, otherwise blooming and brilliant, bring him 
back to life and let him rise to full stature again to higher 
life. 


wat वामश्विना वीयीपि प्र पूर्व्याण्यायवोऽ वोचन्‌ । rat 
कृण्वन्तो वृषणा युवभ्यां सुवीरांसो विदथमा व॑देम ॥ २५॥ 


25.  Etani vamasvina viryani pra purvyanydayavo’- 
vocan. Brahma krnvanto vrsana yuvabhyam suvi- 
raso vidathama vadema. 


Ashvins, brave and generous heroes of noble 
action, these are the great actions you have ever done 
and still do and which people celebrate in song. We 
pray that, blest with friends and brave children, singing 
songs of celebration for you, creating food and energy 
for life and living for yajna, we may live, and praise 
and propagate the yajnic way of creative life (as yours). 


520 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 118 
Ashvins Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 


आ at रथो अश्विना श्येनपत्वा सुमृव्टीकः carat 
यात्वर्वाङ्‌ । यो मर्त्य॑स्य मन॑सो जवीं यान्त्रिवन्धुरो Fao 
वात॑रंहाः ॥ ९॥ 


I; A vam ratho asvina Syenapatva sumrlikah svavan 
yatvarvan. Yo martyasya manaso javiyan triban- 
dhuro vrsana vataramhah. 


Ashvins, masters of nature’s energy and natural 
resources, let your chariot flying as the eagle, 
luxuriously comfortable, automotive, come here, chariot 
faster than the mind of man, three staged and 
tempestuous in power as the wind. 


fara त्रिवृता रथेन त्रिचक्रण॑ सुवृता यातमर्वाक्‌ | 
पिन्व॑तं गा जिन्वतमर्वतो नो वर्धय॑तमश्विना वीरमस्मे ॥ २॥ 


2. Tribandhurena trivrta rathena tricakrena suvrta 
yatamarvak. Pinvantam ga jinvatamarvato no 
vardhayatamasvina viramasme. 


Ashvins, masters of engineering, let the three- 
staged, triple—structured, three wheeled, thrice 
sophisticated chariot come here. Enrich the land, 
rejuvenate the people and the social order, develop 
transport and communication, and let the brave of the 
land flourish. 

प्रवद्यामना सुवृता रथेन दस्राविमं sured year: । 
किमङ् वां प्रत्यवर्तिं गमिं्ठाहूर्विप्रांसो अश्विना पुराजाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Pravadyamana suvrta rathena dasravimam 
srnatum Slokamadreh. Kimanga vam pratya- 
vartim gamisthahurvipraso asvina purajah. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 118 521 


Ashvins, harbingers of life and joy, destroyers 
of anti-life forces, travelling by the fastest sophisticated 
chariot from the heights of heaven, down the clouds 
over the mountain slopes across the valleys, listen to 
this rumble of the cloud and mountain echo: Ashvins, 
darling friends, going to fight out want and suffering at 
your fastest, didn’t the first-born wisest of the sages 
exhort you to move this way? And that is the rumble of 
the cloud, that is the voice of thunder, that is the 
mountain echo. That is our prayer. 


आ at saaral अश्विना वहन्तु रथे युक्तासं siete 
पतङ्घः। ये अपुरो दिव्यासो न wert अभि प्रयो नासत्या 
वर्ह॑न्ति usu 


4. A vam Syendso asvind vahantu rathe yuktasa 
asavah patangah. Ye apturo divyaso na grdhra 
Abhi prayo nasatya vahanti. 


Ashvins, powers of nature’s divinity and 
humanity, high-priests of truth and life’s joy, may the 
eagle-like motive powers fast as sunbeams yoked to your 
chariot drive you hither, which, shining as light, flying 
over water and vapour in the sky, carry you to your 
desired destination like a feathered arrow flying to its 
target. 


आ वां रथं युवतिस्तिं्ठ दत्र॑ जुष्टी न॑रा दुहिता सूर्य॑स्य । 
UR वामश्वा वपुषः Gast वयो! वहन्त्वरुषा अभीक ॥ ५ ॥ 


Di A vam ratham yuvatististhadatra justvi nara 
duhita suryasya. Pari vamasva vapusah patanga 
vayo vahantvarusa abhike. 


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, may the 


522 RGVEDA 


lovely maiden, loving daughter of the sun, ride your 
chariot with you, may the horses, fiery of body, radiating 
like sunbeams and flying like birds take you to the 
battlefield from anywhere and everywhere. 


उद्वन्द॑नमैरतं दंसनाभिरुद्रेभं द॑स्रा वृषणा शचीभिः । 
निष्टौग्यं पारयथः समुद्रात्‌ पुनश्च्यवानं चक्रथुर्युवानम्‌ ॥। & ॥ 


6. Ud vandanamairatam damsanabhirudrebham 
dasra vrsana Sacitbhih. Nistaugryam parayathah 
samudrat punascyavanam cakrathuryuvanam. 


Ashvins, generous as rain showers of new life, 
brave destroyers of evil, with your noble thoughts, words 
and acts, raise the venerable from adversity, rescue the 
worshipful from falling to violence, help the brave 
warrior cross over the sea and redeem the passionate 
youth from decrepitude to regain his youth. 


युवमत्रयेऽ व॑नीताय तप्रमूर्ज॑मोमान॑मश्विनावधत्तम्‌ | 
युवं कण्वायापिरिप्ताय चक्षुः प्रत्य॑धत्तं सुष्टुतिं जुजुषाणा ॥ ७॥ 


ce Yuvamatraye’vanitaya taptamurjamomanama- 
svinavaddhattam. Yuvam kanvayapiriptaya ca- 
ksuh pratyadhattam sustutim jujusana. 


Ashvins, powers of intelligence and light of 
knowledge, loved and admired of all, bear and bring 
seasoned, protective and promotive energy and power 
of action to the man free from physical, mental and 
spiritual want for the removal of darkness and ignorance. 
Bring the vision and wisdom of the world with 
appreciation and exhortation for the veteran of wisdom 
for the collection and expansion of knowledge and 
enlightenment. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 118 523 


युवं धेनुं शयवे नाधितायापिंन्वतमश्विना yeara | 
अमुञ्चतं affenigat निः प्रति wet विश्पलाया 
अधत्तम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yuvam dhenum Sayave nadhitayapinvata-masvina 
purvyaya. Amuncatam vartikamam-haso nih prati 
jJangham vispalaya adhattam. 


Ashvins, for the man of hereditary power and 
prosperity sleeping in ignorance and indifference, bring 
up the rousing call of divine speech. Rescue and save 
the poor, victimised people from sin and violence of 
injustice and give them a strong, protective and 
promotive social and political policy for development. 


युवं श्वेतं पेदव इन्द्र॑जूतमहिंहन॑मण्विनादत्तमश्व॑म्‌ | 
Sanat अभिभूतिमुग्रं संहस््रसां वृष॑णं वीड्वङ्गम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


a. Yuvam svetam pedava indrajutamahihanama- 
svinadattamasvam. Johutramaryo abhibhiti- 
mugram sahasrasam vrsanam vidvangam. 

Ashvins, for the traveller you give a brilliant, 
electrically powered, cloud breaking, heavily reinforced, 


excellent, victorious, tempestuous, multipurpose, highly 
productive and firmly structured mode of transport. 


ता at नरा स्वव॑से सुजाता हवामहे अश्विना नाध॑मानाः। 
आन उप वसुमता रथेन गिरो जुषाणा सुविताय यातम्‌।॥ ९० ॥ 
10. Ta vam nara svavase sujata havamahe asvina 


nadhamanah. A na upa vasumata rathena giro 
Jusana suvitaya yatam. 


Ashvins, powers of nature’s energy, leading 
lights of humanity, born of divinity and risen in blessed 


524 RGVEDA 


knowledge and noble actions, we invoke you, invite 
you and call upon you for our protection and 
advancement in the hour of need at the height of power 
and prosperity. Listen to our prayer, come riding your 
chariot of universal wealth and stand by us for our 
freedom and prosperity. 


आ श्येनस्य जव॑सा AeA ae नासत्या सजोषाः । 
हवे हि वामश्विना रातहव्यः शश्वत्तमाया उषसो 
व्युषटो ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. A Syenasya javasa niutanenasme yatam nasatya 
sajosah. Have hi vamasvina ratahavyah Sasvatta- 
maya usaso vyustau. 

Ashvins, highpriests of truth and reality, springs 
and harbingers of nature’s eternal power and energy, 
come by the speed and force of the eagle new and ever 
new with constant love. With offering in hand when 
the dawn is breaking bright, I invoke you both to come 
and bless. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 119 
Asvins Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 
आ वां रथं पुरुमायं म॑नोजुवं जीराश्वं यज्ञियं जीवसे' हुवे । 
सहस्त्रके तुं वनिनं wrasa श्रुष्टीवानं वरिवोधामभि 
प्रय॑ः neu 
il, A vam ratham purumayam manojuvam jirasvam 


yajniyam jivase huve. Sahasraketum vaninam 
Satadvasum srustivanam varivodhamabhi prayah. 


Ashvins, leading lights of nature and humanity, 
for the sake of a long life and full living and for the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 119 525 


desired aim of life, [invoke you and admire your chariot 
wonderfully made, quick as mind, drawn by swift 
horses, a vehicle for yajnic action, distinguished by a 
thousand flags, beautiful and luxurious, giver of a 
hundred kinds of wealth, superfast and a very home and 
treasure of divine bliss. (I love it for a heavenly ride for 
this existential journey.) 


ऊर्ध्वा धीतिः प्रत्य॑स्य प्रयांसन्यधांयि शस्मन्त्सम॑यन्त आ 
fest: । स्वदामि घर्मं प्रति यन्त्यूतय आ वामूर्जानी रथ॑मणश्वि- 
नारुहत्‌॥ २ ॥ 


2: Urdhva dhitih pratyasya prayamanyadhayi 
Sasmantsamayanta a disah. Svadami gharmam 
prati yantyutaya व vamurjani rathamasvinaru- 
hat. 


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, generous 
and brave, when your chariot moves forward, our mind 
and thought rises in admiration. The quarters of space 
are made small and the noblest people come together. I 
taste the sweets and beauties of the warmth of yajnic 
life. Accordingly protections and paths of progress open 
and expand. May heavenly light, wisdom and energy 
ride your chariot and rise on earth. 


सं यन्मिथः प॑स्पृधानासो अग्म॑त शुभे मखा silat जायवो 
रणे । युवोरहं प्रवणे चकिते रथो यद॑श्विना वह॑थः सूरिमा 
वरम्‌॥ ३॥ 

3: Sam yanmithah pasprdhanaso agmata subhe 


makha amita jayavo rane. Yuvoraha pravane 
cekite ratho yadasvina vahathah surima varam. 


Ashvins, brave and generous heroes of the 


526 RGVEDA 


chariot and tempestuous speed, when countless, great 
sacrificing, and victorious heroes excelling one another 
come together in the splendid battle for justice and 
progress, then surely your chariot in which you carry 
the noblest hero of valour and wisdom shines with 
distinction in its onward march. 


युवं भुज्युं भुरमाणं विभिर्गतं स्वयुंक्तिभिरर्निवह॑न्ता पितृभ्य 
आ। यासिष्टं वर्तिर्बषणा विजेन्यं¶ दिवोदासाय महिं चेति 
area: ४॥ 


4. Yuvam bhujyum bhuramanam vibhirgatam 
svayuktibhirnivahanta pitrbhya a. Yasistam 
vartirvrsana vijenyam divodasaya mahi ceti 
vamavah. 


Ashvins, brave and generous heroes, with your 
own powers and plans and with your chariots flying 
like birds, take a powerful force to the protector and 
defender of the nation gone to a state of isolation, rescue 
him and carry him home to the parental seniors and 
sustainers of the people. Your support and protection 
for the giver of light and knowledge, who is a servant 
of heaven, is great and well-known. 


युवोरश्विना age युवायुजं रथं वाणी येमतुरस्य शर्ध्यम्‌ | 
आ वां पतित्वं स॒ख्याय॑ जग्मुषी योषां वृणीत जेन्या। युवां 
Tat ५॥ 

2; Yuvorasvina vapuse yuvayujam ratham vant 
yematurasya Sardhyam. A vam patitvam sakhyaya 
Jagmust yosavrnita jenya yuvam pati. 

Ashvins, brave, generous and friendly heroes, 
to raise your dignity and grandeur, your voice controls 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 119 527 


and directs your own chariot and its power and force. 
And as the bright and beaming maiden of the morning, 
the dawn, victorious over the dark, desirous of your 
friendship and protection, opts to join you on the chariot 
as her lords, so does the bright and beaming nation select 
you as guardians and defenders of the land. 


युवं रेभं परिषूतेरुरुष्यथो feed घर्म परितप्तमत्रये । 
युवं शयोर॑वसं पिप्यथुर्गवि प्र दीर्घेण वन्द॑नस्तार्यायुंषा ॥ & ॥ 


6. Yuvam rebham parisuterurusyatho himena 
gharmam paritaptamatraye. Yuvam Sayorava- 
sam pipyathurgavi pra dirghena vandanastar- 
yayusa. 


You rescue the man of faith and prayer from all 
round oppression and relieve the thrice free man from 
blazing heat with the cool of snow. For the man in sleep 
you provide rest and security on earth and you help the 
man worthy of reverence to live a long and full life. 


युवं aad निऋतं जरण्यया रथं न द॑स्रा करणा 
समिन्वथः । क्षेत्रादा विप्रं जनथो विपन्यया प्र ama विधते 
दंसना! भुवत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


अ Yuvam vandanam nrrtam jaranyaya ratham na 
dasra karana saminvathah. Ksetrada vipram 
janatho vipanyaya pra vamatra vidhate damsana 
bhuvat. 


Ashvins, heroes of noble action, destroyers of 
suffering, with knowledge and admiration you 
reinvigorate the noble reverend scholar stricken with 
age and adversity as you would repair and recondition 
a chariot with your knowledge and expertise. With 


528 RGVEDA 


appreciation and praise regenerate and elevate the 
veteran of knowledge from his place of birth. Let your 
marvellous power and action be dedicated to the lord 
of humanity. 


अग॑च्छतं कृप॑माणं परावति पितुः स्वस्य त्यज॑सा 
निबाधितम्‌ । स्वर्वतीरित ऊतीर्युवोरह चित्रा अभीके 
अभवन्नभिष्टयः ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Agacchatam krpamanam paravati pituh svasya 
tyajasa nibadhitam. Svarvatirita utiryuvoraha 
citra abhike abhavannabhistayah. 


You go far to the person afflicted by separation 
and alienation from his or her own parents and praying 
for succour. Surely blessed and brilliant are your 
protections, wonderful and cherished, and instant and 
close at hand. 


उत स्या वां मधुंमन्मक्षिंकारपन्मदे सोम॑स्योशिजो हुवन्यति । 
युवं दधीचो मन आ विवासथोऽथा शिरः प्रतिं वामश्व्यं 
वदत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


9. Uta sya vam madhuman-maksikarapanmade 
somasyausijo huvanyati. Yuvam dadhico mana a 
vivasatho’tha Sirah prati vamasvyam vadat. 


Ashvins, that bee, seeker of honey, in a mood 
of ecstasy, hums in praise of you her song of search and 
celebration. So does Aushija, child of light and grace, 
invoke and celebrate you in the ecstasy of soma. Come 
both, enlighten and inspire the mind of Dadhicha, the 
sagely seeker of knowledge and Dharma, and then, at 
the head of the seers he would proclaim the Word of 
cherished wisdom and enlightenment. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 120 529 


युवं ted पुरुवारमश्विना स्पृधां श्वेतं तरुतारं दुवस्यथः | 
शर्यैरभिद्युं पृत॑नासु दुष्टरं चकुत्यमिन्द्रमिव च्ष॑णी- 
सहम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yuvam pedave puruvaramasvina sprdham svetam 
tarutaram duvasyathah. Saryairabhi-dyum prta- 
nasu dustaram carkrtyam-indramiva carsanisa- 
ham. 


Ashvins, masters of nature’s energy, develop and 
provide a brilliant mode of transport, communication 
and defence superfast as light, the choice of many, carrier 
of warriors across to victory, blazing with catalytic 
beams like arrows, invincible in wars, constantly active 
and unfailing as the thunderbolt of lightning, by which 
the people can challenge any enemy whatsoever 
anywhere. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 120 
Ashvins Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 


का रांधब्ोत्रांश्विना वां को at जोष॑ उभयो: 1 
कथा विंधात्यप्र॑ंचेताः ।॥ ९॥ 
1. Ka radhaddhotrasvina vam ko vam josa ubhayoh. 
Katha vidhatyapracetah. 
What call, Ashvins, leaders and commanders, 
would rouse you to action and victory? Who could, if 
he were ignorant and unintelligent, lead you to victory 


and win your pleasure, and how? (None of the ignorant 
and unintelligent.) 


fagratfeet: पृच्छेदविंदवानित्थाप॑रो अचेताः। 
नू fag मर्ते stat २॥ 


530 RGVEDA 


2: Vidvamsavid durah prcechedavidvanitthaparo 
acetah. Nu cinnu marte akrau. 


Let the ignorant man and the imperceptive 
unintelligent person ask the Ashvins, men of intelligence 
and wisdom, the way forward for progress. Similarly 
another, the intelligent and the learned person too in 
his own way should ask the way forward for further 
advancement. In any case, let them ask the way out and 
onward for the sake of the man who would otherwise 
stand still doing nothing, in the state of doubt and 
inaction. 


ता विद्वांसा हवामहे वां ता नो विद्वांसा मन्म॑ वोचेतमद्य | 
प्ार्चदय॑मानो युवाकुः ॥ ३ ॥ 

3. Ta vidvamsa havamahe vam ta 110 vidvamsa 
manma vocetamadya. Prarcad dayamano yuva- 
kuh. 


The same, Ashvins, harbingers of light and 
knowledge, we invoke. Both, we pray, universal teachers 
and benefactors, reveal to us the knowledge wanted and 
loved at heart today here and now. Invoking, yearning 
to join you and the knowledge earnestly desired, praying 
for sympathy and grace, may this humanity look up to 
you for guidance on the way forward. 


fa पूंच्छमि पाक्या ३ न देवान्वष॑ट्कृतस्याद भुतस्य दस्रा | 
पातं च सह्य॑सो युवं च रभ्य॑सो नः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Vi prcechami pakya na devan vasatkrtasyad- 
bhutasya dasra. Patam ca sahyaso yuvam ca 
rabhyaso nah. 


Ashvins, generous givers, and destroyers of 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 120 531 


want and ignorance, I ask you questions about the 
mysterious knowledge of analysis, integration and 
formulaic structure and formation of things in creation 
and science, brilliant veterans, dynamic and tolerant as 
well as enduring as you are, both scholars and teachers. 
May we offer you homage and reverence, and may you, 
we pray, guide and protect us. 


प्रया घोषे भृगवाणे न शोभे ययां वाचा यज॑ति पञ्चियो 
वाम्‌ । प्रैषयुर्न विद्धान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
Di Pra ya ghose bhrgavane na sobhe yaya vaca 
yajati pajriyo vam. Praisayurna vidvan. 
Ashvins, harbingers of light and knowledge, 
that voice which rings like the resounding proclamation 
of the brilliant visionary, by which the scholar does 
homage and reverence to you, the same voice and word, 


we pray, may the teacher speak to us like a scholar in 
search of food, energy and light for all of us. 


श्रुतं Mast तकवानस्याहं fates रिरेभाश्विना वाम्‌। 
आक्षी शुभस्पती SLUG 

6. Srutam gayatram takavanasyaham ciddhi 
rirebhasvina vam. Akst Subhaspati dan. 


Ashvins, eyes divine and harbingers of supernal 
bliss, I have heard your song of omniscience and 
redemption and, truly by your kindness and grace, I sing 
in ecstasy. 


युवं यास्तं महो रन्‌ aa a यन्िरत॑तंसतम्‌ । 
तानो वसू सुगोपा स्यातं पातं नो वृकादघायोः ॥ ७॥ 


532 RGVEDA 


in Yuvam hyastam maho ran yuvam va yannira- 
tatamsatam. Ta no vasu sugopa syatam patam no 
vrkadaghayoh. 


Ashvins, harbingers of wealth and universal 
shelter of all, you abide by us and bring the gift of 
abundance, and you bless with beauty and grace 
whosoever you choose. We pray, be our saviours and 
protectors, save us from the sinful hungry wolf. 


मा कस्मै धातमभ्यमित्रिणे नो माकुत्रा नो गृहेभ्यो eral 
गुः । स्तनाभुजो अशिश्वीः wen 

8. Ma kasmai dhatamabhyamitrine no 1114/1/11-त no 
grhebhyo dhenavo guh. Stanabhujo asisvih. 


Ashvins, hold us in protection but not for the 
man who is friendless and nobody’s friend. Let our cows 
be fertile, rich in milk and blest with calves. Let them 
not go off from our homes anywhere, let them not be 
barren, never without calves. 


वुहीयन्मित्रधिंतये युवाकुं राये च॑ नो मिमीतं वाजं॑वत्ये । 
इषे च॑ नो मिमीतं धेनुमत्यै ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Duhiyan mitradhitaye yuvaku raye ca no mimitam 
vajavatyai. Ise ca no mimitam dhenumatyai. 


Ashvins, let people dedicated to you take 
advantage of your generosity for the growth and 
prosperity of friends. Inspire us and let us grow to plenty 
of wealth with horses, speed and progress and have lot 
of food and energy with plenty of cows. 


अश्विनोरसनं रथ॑मनश्वं वाजिनीवतोः | 
तेनाहं भूरिं चाकन ॥ ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 120 533 


10. ASvinorasanam rathamanasvam vajinivatoh. 
Tenaham bhuri cakana. 


I pray: let me achieve and ride the horseless 
automotive chariot of the Ashvins, lords of knowledge, 
wealth and speed, so that I may advance and amply 
shine. 


अयं स॑मह मा तनूह्याते जनाँ अनुं। 
सोमपेयं सुखो रथ॑ः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ayam samaha ma tanuhyate janan anu. 
Somapeyam sukho rathah. 


Great and glorious is this chariot, comfortable 
and luxurious, by which the Ashvins, noble, generous 
and exceptional men of knowledge and power are 
transported to places of light and delight in the interest 
of the people. May this chariot help us too to rise in 
wealth and knowledge. 


अध स्वप्र॑स्य निर्विंदेऽभुंञ्जतश्च tad: | 
उभा ता बस्तिं AVA: WVU 


12. Adha svapnasya nirvide’bhunjatasca revatah. 
Ubha ta basri nasyatah. 


Let me get away from the dreaming slothful and 
the uncharitable rich because both of them soon come 
to their logical end (since they neglect the vibrancy and 
generosity of the Ashvins). 


534 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 121 


Vishvedeva and Indra Devata, Kakshivan 
Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 


कदित्था 4: पात्रं देवयतां stag गिरो अद्धिरसां तुरण्यन्‌ । 
प्रयदानडविश् आ हर्म्यस्योरु क्रंसते अध्वरे यजत्रः ॥ ९॥ 


| Kadittha nrn patram devayatam sravad giro 
angirasam turanyan. Pra yadanadvisa a harm- 
yasyoru kramsate adhvare yajatrah. 


O man, when would you be like Indra, a 
protector, ruler, saviour and friend of the people? When, 
in order to help and protect the people, you would hear 
the voices of the lovers of light and knowledge who are 
keen to rise to divinity, when running to join the people 
you would reach their homes over the wide earth, and 
when you would raise your voice and inspire them in 
their yajnic task of love, cooperation and creation as 
the performer of yajna yourself. 


स्तम्भीद्ध at स धरुणं प्रुषायदृभुर्वाजांय द्रविणं नरो गोः। 
अनुं स्वजां महिषश्चक्षत त्रां मेनामश्व॑स्य परि मातरं 
TH: WRU 


2 Stambhiddha dyam sa dharunam prusayadr- 
bhurvajaya dravinam naro goh. Anu svajam 
mahisascaksata vram menamasvasya pari 
mataram goh. 


Just as Indra, the sun, self-refulgent lord of light 
and sustainer of the earth, wields the heaven and showers 
the wealth and waters of life for the creation of food 
and energy, so should the ruler, luminant with the light 
of knowledge and justice and sustainer of the world 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 121 535 


system of the earth and environment, uphold Dharma, 
justice and rectitude and create the wealth and waters 
of stability and progress with nourishment and energy 
for the maintenance of the social order. And just as the 
mighty sun lights and watches its own creation, the 
dawn, beauteous glory of the solar system and nurse of 
mother earth, so should the ruler light up and watch the 
word of knowledge and the light of justice created by 
the social order itself which, in turn, would be the beauty 
of the system and sustenance of the order. 


नक्चब्दव॑मरुणीः पूर्व्य राट्‌ तुरो विशामद्धिरसामनु द्यून्‌ | 
dates नियुतं तस्तम्भद्‌ द्यां चतुष्पदे नयीय द्विपादे ॥। ३ ॥ 


3 Naksaddhavamarunih purvyam rat turo visam- 
angirasam-anu dyun. Taksad vajram niyutam 
tastambhad dyam catuspade naryaya dvipdade. 


Like the sun illuminating the brilliant dawn 
every day, let the ruler follow, illuminate and extend 
the brilliant ethics and policies of eternal value and 
shine, inspiring the best and dearest people, day by day. 
Let him have the armaments deployed, serviced and 
sharpened and, as the sun holds the regions of heaven, 
let him maintain the light of justice for the quadrupeds, 
bipeds and humans and all that concerns the humans. 


अस्य मदे स्वर्य' दा ऋतायापींवृतमुस्तरियांणामनीं कम्‌ 
ae प्रसर्गे त्रिक कुम्निवर्तदप द्रुहो मानुषस्य दुरो! वः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asya made svaryam da rtayapivrtam-usriyanam- 
anikam. Yaddha prasarge trikakum-nivarta-dapa 
druho manusasya duro vah. 


Just as the sun, in the excitement of the morning, 


536 RGVEDA 


releases the flood-light of its brilliant rays held up at 
night for the yajna fire of the day, and, pervading three 
quarters of space (leaving off the nether hemisphere of 
the earth), returns and stands firm in the battle of light, 
and breaks through the gates of the dark enemy forts, 
so should the ruler, for the joy and prosperity of the 
social order, release his resounding force of light and 
power held in reserve for the occasion to extend the 
yajna of justice and rectitude and, raising the resources 
of eloquent and brilliant teachers, preachers and 
scientists, should break down the strongholds of 
opposition in the battle for the development of cows 
for the white revolution. 


तुभ्यं पयो यत्पितरावनीतां wel: सुरेतस्तुरणे धुर ण्यू। शुचि 
यत्ते रेक्ण आय॑जन्त सबर्दुघायाः पय॑ उस्तरिया॑याः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Tubhyam payo yat pitaravanitam radhah sureta- 
sturane bhuranyu. Suci yat te rekna ayajanta 
sabardughayah paya usriyayah. 


O man, when for your sake yajnic people offer 
oblations of pure milk and ghrta of the all-blessing cow 
as the wealth of their choice, then for you, O living and 
vibrant humanity, the brilliant heaven and earth, both 
generous givers of health and nourishment like mother 
and father, bring you showers of rain full of virility, 
fertility and all round success and fulfilment. 


अध प्र जज्ञे तरणिर्ममत्तु प्र रोच्यस्या उषसो न सूर॑ः | 
इन्दुर्योभिराष्ट स्वेदुहव्यैः Gaul सिञ्चञ्जरणाभि धाम॑ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Adha pra jajne taranirmamattu pra rocyasya 
usaso na surah. Induryebhirasta sveduhavyaih 
sruvena sincanjaranabhi dhama. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 121 537 


Let Indra, the noble soul, self-redeemer from 
suffering, arise, rejoice and shine like the rising sun close 
upon the heels of the dawn. Blest with grace like the 
beauty of the moon, sprinkling the vedi with ladlefuls 
of holy offerings and singing songs in praise of Divinity 
by which you attain to the city celestial, let the soul 
rise, rejoice and shine. 


स्विध्मा यद्‌ वनधितिरपस्यात्सूरों अध्वरे परि रोधना गोः। 
ae प्रभासि कृत्व्यां अनु द्यूननर्विशे पश्विषे तुराय ue i 


{+ Svidhma yad vanadhitirapasyat suro adhvare pari 
rodhana goh. Yaddha prabhasi krtvyan anu 
dyunanarvise pasvise turaya. 


Noble soul, brave and shining, whatever famous 
you have done, whatever preservation of forests or cow 
protection you have achieved, you shine thereby. Now 
whatever further you wish to do for the sake of transport, 
animal husbandary or superfast travel try to do for the 
value of love, non-violence and yajna day in and day out. 


अष्टा Wel दिव आदो हरीं इह द्युम्नासाहमभि योधान Seat । 
हरिं ad मन्दिनं दुक्षन्वृधे गोर॑भसमरद्विभिर्वाताप्य॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asta maho diva ado hari iha dyumnasahamabhi 
yodhana utsam. Harim yat te mandinam duksan 
vrdhe gorabhasam-adribhir-vatapyam. 


Indra, O ruler, the rays of the sun pervading the 
great heaven, reaching here on earth, churn and absorb 
the delicious, vitalising fragrances of yajna, soma 
strengthened with cows milk and reinforced by the 
earth’s energy, and then, swelled up by the wind and 
fighting with the clouds rain down showers of wealth 


538 RGVEDA 
for your growth and advancement. 


(So does the yajnic ruler and the pious creative 
soul absorb the yajnic production of the earth and society 
and returns the same through hundred and thousandfold 
production and creation adding thereby to the wealth 
and beauty of life.) 


त्वमायसं प्रतिं वर्तयो गोर्दिवो अश्मांनमुप॑नीतमृभ्वां। 
कुत्साय यत्रं पुरुहूत वन्वज्छष्णंमनन्तैः प॑रियासिं वधेः ॥ ९॥ 


0. Tvamayasam prati vartayo gordivo asmanam- 
upanitam-rbhva. Kutsaya yatra puruhuta vanvan- 
chusnam-anantaih pariyasi vadhaih. 


Indra, lord of light, power and justice, you go 
round earth and heaven, wielding the thunderbolt made 
from steel and stone and tempered with heat and 
electricity procured and refined by Rbhu, master of 
metals, speed and range. Invoked and invited by all for 
the defence of the sagely man of wisdom, you go about 
with the fatal weapon striking countless blows upon 
the wicked and destructive demons. Lord of light and 
force, having used the weapon and achieved the aim, 
be gracious and call it back. 


पुरा यत्सूर स्तम॑सो अपीतेस्तमद्रिवः फल्विगं हेतिमस्य । 
शुष्णस्य faut fed यदोजो! दिवस्परि सुग्रथितं 
तदादः ॥ १०॥ 

10. = Pura yat suras-tamaso apites-tamadrivah phali- 
gam hetimasya. Susnasya cit parihitam yadojo 
divaspari sugrathitam tadadah. 


Indra, brilliant sun, brave ruler of the world, lord 
of mountains and the clouds, as earlier, before the 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 121 539 


elimination of darkness, you struck the thunderbolt and 
broke the cloud of darkness, so now strike the same 
thunderbolt, destroy the power and darkness of the 
demon that covers the world unto the borders of heaven, 
and restore the light that is blissful and enduring across 
the heavens and the farthest quarters of space. 


अनुं त्वा पदी पाज॑सी अचक्रे द्यावाक्षामा मदतामिन्द्र | 
त्वं वृत्रमाशयानं सिरासु महो aston सिष्वपो वराहम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Anu tva mahi pajasi acakre dyavaksama mada- 
tam-indra karman. Tvam vrtramaSaya-nam sirasu 
maho vajrena sisvapo varahum. 


Indra, may the great, protective and irresistible 
heaven and earth rejoice with your exploits. With your 
mighty thunderbolt of sun-rays you break the inert cloud 
of darkness in showers and make it flow in streams of 
water as it has been hoarding vapour and then flowing, 
earlier. 


त्वमिन्द्र नर्यो याँ अवो नृन्तिष्ठा वातस्य सुयुजो वदिं्ठान्‌। 
यं ते काव्य उशाना मन्दिनं दाद्‌ daect पार्य' ततश्च 
व्र॑म्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tvamindra naryo yan avo nrn tistha vatasya 
suyujo vahisthan. Yam te kavya usSana mandi-nam 
dad vrtrahanam paryam tataksa vajram. 


Indra, first of men, guide and leader of the social 
order, manage, protect and abide by those men who, 
like children of the wind, are cooperative carriers of 
the burdens of the state, and protect and abide by that 
impassioned lover of Dharma, son of the wise and poetic 
creator, who creates, sharpens and gives to you the 


540 RGVEDA 


thunderbolt, that invincible weapon of defence and law, 
which helps you destroy the enemies of light and leads 
you to the delight of victory. 


त्वं सूरो हरितो रामयो नृन्भरच्यक्रमेत॑शो नायमिन्द्र | 
प्रास्य॑ पारं न॑वतिं नाव्यानामपि कर्तम॑वर्तयोऽ य॑ज्यून्‌।॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Tvam suro harito ramayo nrn bharaccakra- 
metaso nayamindra. Prasya param navatim 
navyanamapi kartamavartayo’yajyun. 


Indra, bright and brave like the lord of 
sunbeams, keep the creative yajnic people happy, 
wielding and moving the wheel of the nation like the 
moving chariot of the sun. And take the uncreative and 
non-yajnics, across the ninety navigable streams and 
engage them in labour jobs like digging of wells and 
canals. 


त्वं al अस्या इन्द्र दुर्हणायाः पाहि व॑चिवो दुरितादभीके | 
प्र नो वाजाच्रथ्यो २ अश्वबुध्यानिषे य॑न्धि श्रव॑से 
सूनृतायै ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Tvam no asya indra durhanayah pahi vajrivo 
duritadabhike. Pra no vajan rathyo asvabuddh- 
yanise yandhi Sravase sunrtayai. 


Indra, lord of light, justice and glory, wielder of 
the thunderbolt and mover of the chariot wheels of the 
nation, we pray to you, protect us from this difficult 
army of evil and this sin in our battle of life and, for the 
sake of will and resolution, food and energy, honour 
and reputation, truth and justice, bless us with dynamic 
experts of motive power and velocity across the earth 
and the quarters of space. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 122 541 


मा साते अस्मत्सुमतिर्वि द॑सद्वाजंप्रमहः समिषो वरन्त । 
आ नो भज मघवन्गोष्वर्यो HRSA सधमादः स्याम ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Ma sa te asmat sumatirvi dasad vajapramahah 
samiso varanta. A no bhaja maghavan gosvaryo 
manhisthaste sadhamadah syama. 


Lord of energy and glory, admired by leading 
men among the great, lord of wealth and life’s lustre, 
may this wisdom and understanding of ours, by divine 
grace, never wear away and fade out from us. May all 
people have the best choice of will, food and energy for 
life. Lord of noble humanity, bless us with advancement 
with wealth of cows, land and the Word of knowledge. 
Lord of grandeur, may we ever enjoy the ecstasy of your 
love. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 122 


Vishvedeva Devata, Kaksivan Dairghatamasa 
Aushija Rshi 


Wa: पान्तं रघुमन्यवोऽ न्धो ast Sara Tosa wea । 
दिवो अस्तोष्यसुरस्य वीरैरिषुध्येव मरुतो रोद॑स्योः ॥ ९ ॥ 


il, Pra vah pantam raghumanyavo’ndho yajnam 
rudraya milhuse bharadhvam. Divo astosyasu- 
rasya virairisudhyeva maruto rodasyoh. 


All ye men of high spirit, vibrant as the winds 
of earth and skies, along with the brave, ever ready like 
the archers of the bow and arrow, bear and offer 
nourishing holy food and yajna in honour of Rudra, 
generous lord of life and joy. Offer the light of 
knowledge to the ignorant suffering in the dark. And 
with you all I offer homage to the lord of heaven and 


542 RGVEDA 
earth and the skies. 


पत्नीव पूर्वहूतिं वावृधध्या उषासानक्ता पुरुधा विदान | 
स्तरीर्नात्कं व्युतं वसाना सूर्य॑स्य श्रिया सुदूशी हिर॑ण्यैः ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Patniva purvahutim vavrdhadhya usasanakta 
purudha vidane. Starirnatkam vyutam vasana 
suryasya Sriya sudrsi hiranyaih. 


Let the dawn and dusk, light of day and peace 
of night, clothed in beauty of the sun, beatific with the 
rays of light, dressed like a lady of fulfilment in apparel 
of golden hue, bearing rich gifts of life and wealth, come 
in response to our invitation to yajna with a shower of 
light for our growth and enrichment. 


ममत्तु नः परिज्मा agel werd are! अपां वृष॑ण्वान्‌ । 
शिशीतमिनद्रापर्वता युवं नस्तन्नो विश्वे वरिवस्यन्तु 
देवाः ॥ ३॥ 


छ Mamattu nah parijma vasarha mamattu 1410 
apam vrsanvan. Sisitam-indraparvata yuvam 
nastanno visve varivasyantu devah. 


May the light of the sun and heat of fire, all 
radiating, all consuming and creating, give us joy. May 
the winds, harbingers of rain showers, give us joy. May 
Indra, cosmic energy, and the clouds, both, sharpen our 
intellect, and may He, the Lord Almighty, and all the 
generous divinities of nature and humanity bless us with 
the wealth and joy of life. 


उत त्या मे यशसां श्वेतनायै व्यन्ता पान्तौशिजो हुवध्यै | 
प्रवो नपांतमपां ured प्र मातरा रास्पिनस्यायोः ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 122 543 


4. Uta (त me yaSasa $vetanayai vyanta pantauSijo 
huvadhyai. Pra vo napatamapam krnudhvam 
pra matara raspinasyayoh. 


For honour and glory with reputable action, I, 
child of noble ambition, invoke the two, fire and wind, 
one the product, the other, the giver of waters, both 
universal and protective as well as promotive of life 
and humanity. And I call upon you all: create and 
promote the child of waters, the fire energy, and the 
mother of waters, the winds. 


आ al रुवण्युमौशिजो हुवध्यै घोषेव शंसमर्जुनस्य नंशे । 
प्र व॑ः पूष्णे दावन ओं अच्छ॑ वोचेय वसुतातिमग्नेः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Di A vo ruvanyumausijo huvadhyai ghoseva sam- 
samarjunasya namse. Pra vah pusne davana an 
accha voceya vasutatimagneh. 


Listen ye all, scholars of science and technology, 
I, son and disciple of the man of knowledge and noble 
ambition, call upon you and, like a voice from above, 
proclaim the admirable word of the gifts of the heat and 
light of Agni in resounding tones: its form and structure, 
analysis and break up, its creative re-structure for life- 
support and the gifts for the protection and promotion 
of life. 
श्रुतं मे मित्रावरुणा हवेमोत श्रुतं सद॑ने favad: dr 
श्रोतुं नः श्रोतुरातिः सुश्रोतुः सुक्षेत्रा सिन्धुंरद्धिः॥ ६॥ 


6. Srutam me mitravaruna havemota srutam sadane 
visvatah sim. Srotu nah sroturatih susrotuh 
suksetra sindhuradbhih. 


Listen ye Mitra-Varuna, friends, and all men of 


544 RGVEDA 


the chosen few, listen well to this invocation and 
exhortation, listen ye members of the yajnic assembly 
all round to this gift of wealth and well-being in the 
words of one who himself listened well to the voice 
Divine, and listen like the river receiving the waters of 
rain from above for the onward gift of life and growth 
to the fields and the farmers and so on for us. 


स्तुषे सा at वरुण मित्र Uttar yar पृक्षयामेषु UT | 
ate प्रियस्थे दधानाः सद्यः पुष्टिं निरुन्धानासो 
अग्मन्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Stuse sa vam varuna mitra ratirgavam Sata prksa- 
yamesu pajre. Srutarathe priyarathe dadhanah 
sadyah pustim nirundhanaso agman. 


Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and lord of water, 
friends and chosen comrades, I worship you, I honour 
you, for the gifts of your power and generosity. The 
gifts of your benevolence and hundred voices of the 
Divine and a hundred cows of milky nourishment in 
the battles of speed and progress are showered on those 
who ride and advance in stout chariots of the Divine 
Word and chariots of love and beauty, always and 
instantly bearing gifts of nourishment and growth, ruling 
out all negativities and nonsense. 


अस्य स्तुषे महिमघस्य राधः Gal सनेम Aa: सुवीरां: | 
जनो यः पत्रेभ्यो वाजिनीवानश्वावतो रथिनो महयं 
सूरिः॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Asya stuse mahimaghasya radhah saca sanema 
nahusah suvirah. Jano yah pajrebhyo vajiniva- 
nasvavato rathino mahyam surih. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 122 545 


I honour and admire the wealth and generosity 
of this man of power and prosperity, and pray, we join 
the noble man in a spirit of friendship, blest as we are 
with noble and brave progeny and friends. I wish the 
heroic man of knowledge and the chariot, possessed of 
fast conveyances, power and speed, and horses and 
horse-power were to share the secret for me. 


जनो यो मिंत्रावरुणावधिश्चुगपो न वां सुनोत्य॑श्ष्णया वुक्‌ । 
स्वयं स यक्ष्मं हृद॑ये नि ध॑त्त आप यदीं होत्राभितऋतावा।॥ ९ ॥ 


2 Jano yo mitravarunavabhidhrugapo na vam 
sunotyaksnayadhruk. Svayam sa yaksmam hrdaye 
ni dhatta apa yadim hotrabhirrtava. 


Mitra and Varuna, lords of friendship and liquid 
generosity, whoever hates you, whoever opposes you 
in crooked ways, whoever does not support you and 
life with nourishment and energy, such a man would 
himself wear the canker in his heart. But the man of 
truth and generosity supporting life all round with love, 
charity and sacrifice would be blest with peace and joy. 


स व्राध॑तो नहंषो दंसुजूतः शर्धस्तरो नरां गूर्तश्रवाः | 
faqeufaaifa बाव्हसूत्वा विश्वासु पृत्सु सद- 
fread: ९० ॥ 


10. Sa vraghato nahuso damsujutah sardhastaro 
naram gurtasravah. Visrstaratir-yati balhasrtva 
visvasu prtsu sadamicchurah. 


The man of love and generosity, the real man, 
inspired by the brave, of exceptional strength, of 
universal reputation among men of power and honour, 
giving in charity liberally, heroic in performance, always 


546 RGVEDA 


moves forward over the opponents fast in all the battles 
of life. 


अध ग्मन्ता नहंषो हवं सूरेः श्रोतां राजानो अमृतस्य मन्द्राः । 
नभोजुवो यच्निरवस्य॑ राधः प्रश॑स्तये महिना रथ॑वते ॥ ९९ ॥ 


11. Adha gmanta nahuso havam sureh srota rajano 
amrtasya mandrah. Nabhojuvo yanniravasya 
radhah prasastaye mahina rathavate. 


O Divinities of nature, generous powers of 
humanity, brilliant and joyous, flying across the skies 
with your own power and grandeur, listen to the prayer 
and invitation of the charitable man, brave and immortal 
of fame and honour, leave the wealth of the uncharitable 
and unprotective unprotected and let it pass on to the 
man of love and charity for noble causes. 


एतं ore धाम यस्य सृरेरित्य॑वबोचन्‌ दशं तयस्य नंशे । 
द्युम्नानि येषुं वसुताती रारन्विश्वे सन्वन्तु wag 
वाज॑म्‌।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Etam sardham dhama yasya surerityavocan 
dasatayasya namse. Dyumnani yesu vasutati 
raran visve sanvantu prabhrthesu vajam. 


O Lord, let me attain to the house of the man of 
tenfold knowledge of the Veda, Vedangas and yajnic 
liberality of which the wise and pious may say: This is 
the great house of the brave and generous man of fame 
wherein may all the wealths of the world abound and in 
whose rich oblations may all the divinities of nature 
and humanity rejoice and partake of the fragrant 
nourishment. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 122 547 


मन्दामहे दश॑तयस्य धासेर्दिर्यत्पञ्च बिभ्र॑तो a-erat | 
किमिष्टाश्व इष्टरश्मिरेत ईशानासस्तरुष ऋञ्जते 
नृन्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Mandamahe dasatayasya dhaserdviryat panca 
bibhrato yantyanna. Kimistasva istarasmireta 
1sanasastarusa rinjate nrn. 


We praise and celebrate the generous man of 
tenfold food and knowledge since people come and go 
receiving nourishment for body and mind from his 
house. And such a man blest with desired power and 
speed in life, well in control of his desired reins of power 
and prosperity, generous as the flood of the ocean, and 
such men as he, of power and discipline worthy of 
governance, bring the grace of culture and beauty to 
the people’s life. 


हिर॑ण्यकर्णं मणिग्रीवमर्णस्तिन्नो विश्वे वरिवस्यन्तु ear: | 
अर्यो गिर॑ः सद्य आ जग्मुषी रोस््राश्चांकन्तुभयेंष्वस्मे MN ९४ ॥ 


14. Hiranyakarnam manigrivamarnastanno visve 
varivasyantu devah. Aryo girah sadya a jagmu- 
strosrascakantubhayesvasme. 


May all the powers of nature and nobilities of 
humanity bless the man of oceanic generosity wearing 
gold and diamond in the neck and ear, and may they 
wide open the paths of progress for him and for us. And 
may the generous producer of wealth always try to create 
the knowledge of living languages of communication 
and the wealth of cows for himself and for us all. 


चत्वारो मा मश्ाणारस्य शिश्वस्त्रयो राज्ञ आय॑वसस्य 
जिष्णोः | रथों वां मित्रावरुणा दीघप्साः स्युम॑गभस्तिः 
सूरो नाद्यौत्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


548 RGVEDA 


15. Catvaro ma masarsarasya Ssisvastrayo rajna 
ayavasasya jisnoh. Ratho vam mitradvaruna 
dirghapsah syumagabhastih suro nadyaut. 


The four classes and the four orders of society 
and the three councils of the ruling order, destroyer of 
evil, prosperous and victorious may, I pray, protect and 
advance me. Mitra and Varuna, friendly ruling powers 
of our highest choice, may your chariot, far-reaching, 
bright and beaming like the rising sun, shine on and 
brighten us up in life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 123 
Usha Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 


ag रथो दक्षिणाया अयोज्यैनं sara अपरतांसो अस्थुः । 
कृ ष्णादुद॑स्थादर्या र विहांयाश्चिकिंत्सन्ती मानुषाय 
क्षयाय ॥ ९॥ 

| Prthu ratho daksinaya ayojyainam devaso 
amrtaso asthuh. Krsnadudasthadarya vihaya- 
Scikitsanti manusaya ksayaya. 

The great and wide chariot of the glorious dawn 
is ready, which the divine immortal powers of nature 
would ride. The great noble maiden is arisen from the 
dark, radiating health and freedom from disease for 
human settlements. 


पर्वा विश्व॑स्माद्‌ शुव॑नादबोधि जयन्ती वाजं बहती सनुत्री । 
उच्या व्य॑ख्यद्युवतिः पुनर्भूरोषा अगन्प्रथमा पूर्वहूतौ ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Purva visvasmad bhuvanadabodhi jayanti vajam 


brhati sanutri. Ucca vyakhyad yuvatih punarbhu- 
rosa agan prathama purvahutau. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 123 549 


The great and generous dawn wakes up before 
the world, winning, collecting, and carrying health, 
wealth and beauty. Ever young, rising again and again, 
watching us from far and above, she arrives in response 
to our earliest invocation. 


यदद्य भागं विभजासि नृभ्य sal देवि मर्त्यत्रा aa । 
देवो नो अत्रं सविता दमूना अनागसो वोचति सूयय ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Yadadya bhagam vibhajasi nrbhya uso devi 
martyatra sujate. Devo no atra savita damuna 
anagaso vocati suryaya. 


O Dawn, high-born of heaven, inspirer of 
humanity, whatever share of your generous gifts you 
bring here to-day for men, let the divine Savita, best of 
men among friends, brilliant giver of life, say of us to 
the sun: These are sinless people. 


(Swami Dayanand gives an applied inter- 
pretation of this mantra: Usha is the bride beautiful as 
the dawn, Savita is the groom, Surya is God, and the 
‘sinless’ are members of the family. This interpretation 
prevails through the whole Sukta.) 


गृहंगदमहना यात्यच्छ दिवेदिवे अधि नामा gear 
सिषासन्ती द्योतना शश्वदागादग्र॑मग्रमिद्ध॑जते वसूनाम्‌ ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Grhamgrhamahana ydatyaccha divedive adhi 
nama dadhana. Sisasanti dyotana Sasvadaga- 
dagramagramid bhajate vasunam. 


The light of the dawn radiates from home to 
home gracefully day by day clothed in the beauty and 
glory of her own name, inspiring and beatifying, shining 
bright, new as ever every day. She goes on and on from 


550 


RGVEDA 


place to place, sharing the joy of life. 


भग॑स्य स्वसा वरुणस्य जामिरुषंः सूनृते प्रथमा ज॑रस्व । 
पश्चा स दघ्या यो अघस्य धाता जयेम तं दक्षिणया 
रथेन ॥ ५॥ 

Bhagasya svasa varunasya jamirusah sunrte 
prathama jarasva. Pasca sa dadhya yo aghasya 
dhata jayema tam daksinaya rathena. 


Sister of glory, daughter of the highest light, O 


Dawn, lady of truth, first shine and brighten and be 
praised, and then hold him who is the supporter of sin 
and then we shall catch him with the gift of your light 
and win by the chariot. 


saat Gara उत्पुर॑न्धीरुदग्रय॑ः शुशुचानासो अस्थुः । 


स्पार्हा वसूनि तमसाप॑गूठ्नहाविष्कुण्वन्त्युषसो विभातीः ॥ ६ ॥ 
Udiratam sunrta ut purandhirudagnayah susu 
canaso asthuh. Sparha vasuni tamasapagulha- 
viskrnvantyusaso vibhatth. 


Let the ladies of high truth and generous 


munificence sing songs of Divinity. Let the fires of yajna 
shining and blazing stay and go on burning. The brilliant 
dawns light up and reveal the cherished wealths of life 
hidden in the dark. 


अपान्यदेत्यभ्य4न्यदेति विषुरूपे अह॑नी सं च॑रेते । 
परिक्षितोस्तमो अन्या गुहाकरद्यौदुषाः शोशुचता रथेन ॥ ७॥ 
Apanyadetyabhyanyadeti visurupe ahani sam 
carete. Pariksitostamo anya guhakaradyaudu-sah 
Sosucata rathena. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 123 551 


One goes away at dusk, the other comes over in 
the morning, thus the lights of the day-night cycle both 
different of form move together and coexist. Of these 
two cyclic coexistents of the world, the dark covers and 
hides things in the cave, the other, the dawn of light, 
reveals them in their true form with the beauty of its 
chariot. 


सदृशीरद्य सदृशीरिदु श्वो दीर्घं संचन्ते वरुणस्य are | 
अनवद्यास्तरिंशतं योजनान्येकैका क्रतुं परि यन्ति सद्यः ॥ ८ ॥ 


Gi Sadrsiradya sadrsiridu 5170 dirgham sacante 
varunasya dhama. Anavadyastrimsatam yojanan- 
yekaika kratum pari yanti sadyah. 


They are the same today as they will be 
tomorrow, and in the same manner together, both brave 
and beautiful, they go round in the region of the sun, 
each traversing thirty stages of its travel time ever and 
on in the yajnic cycle of their circulation. (Each stage 
of time is of twenty-four minutes.) 


We: प्रथमस्य ATA शुक्रा कृष्णादजनिष्ट श्विती ची | 
ऋतस्य योषा न मिनाति धामाह॑रहर्निष्कृतमाचरंन्ती ॥ ९ ॥ 


2, Janatyahnah prathamasya nama sukra krsnada- 
janista Svitict. Rtasya yosa na minati dhama- 
haraharniskrtamacaranti. 


She knows and reveals the first, morning, part 
of the day and its holiness. Pure and brilliant is she, 
risen from the darkness of night. Young and maidenly, 
following her daily chores fixed by nature day by day 
and hour by hour, she never relents in her observance 
of the Law of the Divine. 


552 RGVEDA 


कन्यैव das शाश॑दान एषि देवि देवमिय॑श्षमाणम्‌। 
संस्मयमाना युवतिः पुरस्तादाविर्वक्षांसि कृणुषे 
विभाती 200 


10. Kanyeva tanva sasadanan esi devi devamiya- 
ksamanam. Samsayamana yuvatih purasta- 
davirvaksamsi krnuse vibhati. 


Sweet and soothing beauteous, unique in form 
and figure of body as a virgin, O brilliant Dawn, you 
rise to meet the effulgent lord you love and desire, and 
then, charming bright in the splendour of youth, O 
maiden, smiling amorous, you stand before him and bare 
your bosom for love and adoration. 


सुसंकाशा ada Sa योषाविस्तन्वं कृणुषे दशो HAL | 
भद्रा त्वमुघो वितरं व्युच्छ न तत्ते अन्या sual 
नशन्त U ९९॥ 

11. Susankasa matrmrsteva yosavistanvam krnuse 
drse kam. Bhadra tvamuso vitaram vyuccha 
na tat te anya usaso nasanta. 


Glorious and comely in appearance, a bride as 
if anointed by the Mother, O youthful Dawn, you reveal 
the light of your beauty and majesty for the world’s love 
and adoration. Shine and radiate, O maiden, in all your 
glory, and may the sublimity of this glory never fade 
but ever abide as now in future manifestations also. 


अश्वांवतीर्गोमंतीर्विंशुववा'रा यत॑माना रश्मिभिः 
सूर्य॑स्य । परां च यन्ति पुनरा च॑ यन्ति भ॒द्रा नाप 
वह॑माना उषासः ॥ ९२ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 124 553 


12. ASvavatirgomatirvisvavara yatamana rasma-bhih 
suryasya. Para ca yanti punara ca yanti bhadra 
nama vahamana usasah. 


Riding the rays of the sun, commanding the 
beauties of the earth, inspiring the chants of the holy 
Word, dispelling the darkness without and within by 
the vision of sunlight, arousing universal love and 
adoration, bearing the name and spirit of Divinity, the 
blissful lights of the Dawn go round, ascending far 
above, descending again for the world, and in the end 
transcending the world of existence to nameless Eternity. 


ऋतस्य TRATES AMT URNS क्रतुमस्मासु धेहि। उषो 
नो अद्य सुहवा व्युंास्मासु रायो, म॒घव॑त्सु च स्युः ॥ ९३॥ 
13. Rtasya rasmimanuyacchamana bhadrambha- 
dram kratumasasu dhehi. Uso no adya suhava 
vyucchasmasu rayo maghavatsu ca syuh. 


O Dawn, going round by the light of Eternity in 
pursuit of the Law Divine, bring us the bliss of goodness, 
give us the vision of truth and beauty and the will to 
yajnic action. Listen to our invocation and prayer, shine 
and bring us the light. May the wealths of the world 
abide in us. May the wealths of existence abound in 
those who adore the wealth of Eternity. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 124 
Usha Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija Rshi 
उषा sea समिधाने अग्रा उद्यन्त्सूर्य उर्विया ज्योतिरश्रेत्‌। 
देवो नो अत्र॑ सविता न्वर्थं प्रासावीद्‌ द्विपत्प्र चतुष्प- 
दित्यै॥ ९॥ 


554 RGVEDA 


1. Usa ucchanti samidhane agna udyantsurya urviya 
Jyotirasret. Devo no atra savita nvartham pra- 
savid dvipat pra catuspadityai. 


The dawn is breaking, the fire is burning, the 
sun is rising, and light is radiating over heaven and earth. 
May Savita, lord giver of light and life, inspire the 
humans and animals to move to activity and create new 
wealth and new meaning and purpose in life. 


अमिनती cat व्रतानि प्रमिनती agen ar । 
ईयुषीणामुपमा शश्वतीनामायतीनां प्र॑थमोषा व्य॑द्यौत्‌ ॥ २॥ 


8 Aminati daivyani vratani praminati manusya 
yugani. ITyusinadmupama Sasvatinamayatinam 
prathamosa vyadyaut. 


Not violating the laws of Divinity, counting out 
the ages of humanity, shines the dawn, last picture of 
the dawns gone by, first of the dawns coming, an 
instance of the original and eternal Dawn recurring every 
morning. 


एषा दिवो दुहिता प्रत्य॑दशि ज्योतिर्वसाना समना पुरस्तात्‌ । 
ऋतस्य पन्थामन्वेति साधु प्र॑जानतीव न दिशो मिनाति ॥ ३॥ 


2: Esa divo duhita pratyadarsi jyotirvasana samana 
purastat. Rtasya panthamanveti sadhu praja- 
nativa na diso mindati. 


Yonder shines this daughter of heaven clothed 
in light, rejoicing at heart, following the path of nature’s 
law well like a lady of omniscience measuring as if but 
not overstepping the bounds of space. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 124 555 


उपो अदर्शि शुन्ध्युवो न वक्षो नो धाडवाविरंकृत प्रियाणि । 
staat ससतो बोधयन्ती शश्वत्तमागात्युन॑रेयुषींणाम्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Upo adarsi sundhyuvo na vakso nodha ivavira- 
krta priyani. Admasanna sasato bodhayanti 
Sasvattamagat punareyusinam. 


The Dawn, she appears to stand so close like 
the treasure chest of purest sunbeams, open, radiating 
and revealing the dearest things like the latest versatile 
scholar, giving the wake-up call to the sleeping partners 
living and eating together. It appears as if, of all the 
dawns coming and rising, she is the most real and 
original of the Eternal that has come this morning. 


ud अर्धे रज॑सो अप्त्यस्य गवां जनित्र्यकृत Wa | 
व्युं प्रथते वितरं वरीय ओभा पृणन्ती पित्रोरुपस्था ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Purve ardhe rajaso aptyasya gavam janitryakrta 
pra ketum. Vyu prathe vitaram vartya obha pr- 
nant pitrorupastha. 


Radiating the rays of light in the eastern half of 
the sky, the dawn has unfurled her banner of morning 
glory. And sitting as if in the lap of her parents, the 
heaven and the earth, she expands the noblest light of 
bliss showering on both. 


एवेदेषा पुरुतमा est कं नाजापिं न परिं वृणक्ति 
जामिम्‌। अरेपसा तन्वाई शाश॑दाना नाभवीष॑ते न 
महो विभाती ve 

6. Evedesa purutama drse kam najamim na pari 
vrnakti jamim. Arepasa tanva sasadana narbha- 
disate na maho vibhati. 


556 RGVEDA 


And this dawn most comely to the sight and 
blissful to the heart, neither precludes her own nor 
excludes the aliens. Similarly, shining unique and 
exceptional by her immaculate body of light, she neither 
ignores the small nor neglects the great, but shines bright 
and smiles equally on all, giving them the feel of bliss. 


अभ्रातेवं पुंस एति प्रतीची गर्तारुगिव सनये धनांनाम्‌। 
जायेव पत्य॑ उशती सुवासा उषा zea नि रिणीते 
अप्सः ॥ ७॥ 


Te Abhrateva pumsa eti pratici gartarugiva sanaye 
dhananam. Jayeva patya usati suvasa usa hasreva 
ni rinite apsah. 


Just as a brotherless woman returns to her man, 
just as a man reduced to aversity goes to the court to 
rejoin his money, just as a wife in all her finery, loving 
and passionate, opens her secret charms to her husband, 
so does the dawn in all her splendour reveal her beauty 
and majesty to the world everywhere. 


स्वसा स्वस्तरे ज्यायस्यै योनिंमारैगपैत्यस्याः प्रतिचक्ष्येव । 
व्युच्छन्ती रश्मिभिः सूर्यस्याञ्ज्यंद्धे समनगाइंव व्राः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Svasa svasre jyayasyai yonimaraigapaityasyah 
praticaksyeva. Vyucchanti rasmibhih suryasya- 
njyankte samanaga iva vrah. 


Just as a sister surrenders her place for her elder 
sister and having seen her vacates it for her and goes 
away, So does the dawn, with the rays of the sun, move 
her soothing brilliance from one place to another, of 
her own choice. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 124 557 


आसां पूवी सामह॑सु स्वसूंणामपंरा पूवी मभ्येति पश्चात्‌ | 
ताः प्रत्रवन्नव्य॑सीर्नूनमस्मे रे वदुच्छन्तु सुदिना उषासः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Asam purvasamahasu svasrnamapara purva- 
mabhyeti pascat. Tah pratnavannavyasirnuna- 
masme revaducchantu sudina usasah. 


Of all these sister dawns of the past age, the 
latter, the elder, follows after the former, the younger, 
in cyclic succession day after day. May all these dawns, 
each new one like the former, bring us happy days 
bearing the wealth of the world and illuminate our days 
with the light of the world. 


प्र बोधयोषः पृणतो म॑घोन्यबरंध्यमानाः gored: Ward 
रेवङ्च्छ मघवंद्धयो मघोनि रेवत्स्तोत्रे सूनृते जारयन्ती ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Prabodhayosah prnato maghonyabudhyama-nah 
panayah sasantu. Revaduccha maghava-dbhyo 
maghoni revat stotre sunrte jarayanti. 


O Dawn, abundant in light and wealth, wake up 
the generous and giving. The miserly and the ignorant 
lost in daily chores would sleep, wake up these too. 
Lady of light and wealth, let the wealth of the generous 
shine in charity. Mistress of Truth and Law, rousing and 
praising the singer of songs divinely blest with wealth, 
enlighten him, bless him. 


अवेयमंश्वैद्युवतिः पुरस्तांदयुङ्के गवामरुणानामनीकम्‌ 
वि नूनमुच्छादसति प्र केतुर्गृहंगुंहमुप॑ तिष्ठाते अथिः ॥ ९९॥ 
11.  Aveyamasvaid yuvatih purastad yunkte gavama- 


runanamanikam. Vi nunamucchadasati pra ketur- 
grham grhamupa tisthate agnih. 


558 RGVEDA 


This Dawn, young maiden, rises yonder in front 
from the east, yokes her team of crimson sun-rays and, 
fully self-assured, emerges, her banner blazing in the 
dark. And as she rises, yajna fire kindles in every home, 
giving the heat and light of life all round. 


उत्ते वय॑श्चिद्रसतेर॑पसन्नरश्च ये पितुभाजो व्युष्टौ । 
अमा सते व॑हसि भूरि वाममुषो देवि दाशुषे wets i ९२॥ 


12. Ut te vayascid vasaterapaptan narasca ye pitu- 
bhajo vyustau. Ama sate vahasi bhuri vamamuso 
devi dasuse martyaya. 


O Dawn, as you rise and shine, birds fly up from 
their nests and men move out in pursuit of food and 
sustenance for life. Brilliant lady of piety and sanctity, 
for the man of generosity and for the inmate of the home 
you strive to bear the holiest labours of love and joy. 


अस्तो्रं स्तोम्या ब्रह्म॑णा मेऽवींवृधध्वमुशातीरुषासः। 
युष्माकं देवीरव॑सा सनेम सहस्रिणं च शतिनं च 
वाज॑म्‌ ९३॥ 


13. Astodhvam stomya brahmana me’vivrdhadhva- 
musSsatirusasah. Yusmakam deviravasad sanema 
sahasrinam ca $atinam ca vajam. 


O Dawns, loving and inspiring, adorable lights 
of Divinity, with the holy voice of Vedic adoration, pray 
for me and help me grow in life and piety, and you grow 
too in brilliance and sanctity. May we all by your favour, 
prayer and grace achieve food for life, energy, progress 
and prosperity a hundredfold, thousandfold and more. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 125 559 


Mandala 1/Sukta 125 


Dampati Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa 
Aushija Rshi 


प्राता tat प्रातरित्वा दधाति तं चिंकित्वान्प्रतिगृद्या नि धंत्ते। 
तेनं प्रजां वर्धय॑मान आयू रायस्पोषैण सचते सुवीरं: ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Prata ratnam prataritva dadhati tam cikitvan 
pratigrhya ni dhatte. Tena prajam vardhaya- 
mana ayu rayasposena sacate suvirah. 


The morning bears and brings the jewels of 
wealth for us. That wealth, the man of knowledge and 
wisdom, rising early, receives, and having received 
keeps safe. And by that, this brave man, growing and 
advancing in health and age and progeny, lives well 
with wealth, nourishment and comfort. 


सुगुर॑ंसत्सुहिर्‌ ण्यः स्वश्वो! ged वय sat दधाति । 
यस्त्वायन्तं वसुना प्रातरित्वो मुक्षीजयेव पदिमुत्सि- 
नाति॥ २॥ 


Sugurasat suhiranyah svasvo brhadasmai vaya 
indro dadhati. Yastvayantam vasuna prataritvo 
mukstjayeva padimutsindati. 


He is blest with good cows, good gold and good 
horses, and Indra, lord of life and power, brings him 
liberal gifts of food and energy for body, mind and soul 
for a long life time, who, rising early, binds you, the 
needy and deserving man, in a bond of thanks with a 
gift of ample means and money, like a calf bound with 
a rope to the post, while you come to him for help and 
assistance. 


560 RGVEDA 


आयमद्य सुकृतं प्रातरिच्छ्चिषटेः पुत्रं aqua रथेन । 
अंशोः सुतं पायय मत्रस्यं श्चयद्वीरं वर्धय सूनृताभिः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Ayamadya sukrtam prataricchannisteh putram 
vasumata rathena. Amsoh sutam payaya matsa- 
rasya ksayadviram vardhaya sunrtabhih. 


Generous Indra, lord giver of every gift of life, 
nourishment, training and honour, by the most precious 
chariot I have come today early morning for the reason 
of an honest desire, wishing to have a son growing to 
be capable of noble yajnic deeds. I pray, nourish and 
promote the son born of the most delightful essence of 
my life, and with holy words of truth, wisdom and Law 
develop the young man to be a centre and shelter of the 
brave. 


उपं क्षरन्ति सिन्ध॑वो मयोभुवं ईजानं च॑ यक्ष्यमाणं च eral: 1 
पृणन्तं च पपुरिं च श्रवस्यवो! घतस्य धारा उप॑ यन्ति 
विश्वतंः ॥ ` ॥ 


4. Upa ksaranti sindhavo mayobhuva ianam ca 
yaksyamanam ca dhenavah. Prnantam ca papu- 
rim ca $ravasyavo ghrtasya dhara upa yanti 
visvatah. 


Streams of joy, peace and prosperity flow from 
all round to the man performing the yajna of social 
charity and divine dedication now and in the future. 
Cows for love of food and care stand round the man 
feeding and satisfying the needy. And streams of water, 
milk and ghrta flow to the charitable man incessantly 
from all round. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 125 561 


नाकस्य पृष्ठे अधिं तिष्ठति श्चितो यः gona स हं ead 
गच्छति । तस्मा आपो घृतमर्षन्ति सिन्धवस्तस्मा इयं दश्िंणा 
पिन्वते सदा ॥ ५॥ 


>. Nakasya prsthe adhi tisthati 57116 yah prnati sa 
ha devesu gacchati. Tasma apo ghrtamarsanti 
sindhavastasma iyam daksina pinvate sada. 


The man dedicated to knowledge abides in 
inviolable peace and joy. The man who feeds and 
maintains children and scholars moves with the noblest 
men of knowledge and divinity. For him the waters, 
rivers and the seas create showers of ghrta, and this earth 
with her generosity always creates the joy of fulfilment. 


दक्षिंणावतामिदिमानिं चित्रा दक्षिणावतां दिवि ett: 1 
दक्षिणावन्तो अमृतं भजन्ते दक्षिणावन्तः प्र तिरन्त 
आयुः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Daksinavatamidimani citra daksinavatam divi 
suryasah. Daksinavanto amrtam bhajante daksi- 
navantah pra tiranta ayuh. 


For the men of charity and yajna are these 
wonders of the world. For the men of honour, service 
and sacrifice shine the stars in heaven and abide. The 
men of knowledge, education and charity enjoy 
immortality beyond death, in life and after. And the men 
of courage, protection, fearlessness and charity cross 
the seas of suffering and slavery in their life of full age. 


मा पृणन्तो दुरितमेन आरन्मा जारिषुः Gea: सुव्रतासः | 
अन्यस्तेषां परिधिरस्तु कश्चिदपुंणन्तमभि सं य॑न्तु 
शोकाः ।। ७॥ 


562 RGVEDA 


te Ma prnanto duritamena aran ma jarisuh surayah 
suvratasah. Anyastesam paridhirastu kascida- 
prnantamabhi sam yantu sokah. 


May the generous never come to sin and 
suffering. May the brilliant people of holy vows never 
suffer the disabilities of old age. May the orbit of their 
Karma be something different from evil and pain, since 
sorrow and suffering is the lot of the ungenerous and 
selfish. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 126 


Vidvan Devata, Kakshivan Dairghatamasa Aushija (1-5), 
Svanaya Bhavayavya (6), and Romasha Brahma-vadini 
(7), Rshis 


अम॑न्दान्त्स्तोमान्प्र भ॑रे मनीषा सिन्धावधि क्षियतो 
भाव्यस्य । यो मे सहस्रममिमीत सवानतूर्तो राजा sta 
इच्छमानः ॥ ९॥ 


ik; Amandantstoman pra bhare manisa sindha-vadhi 
ksiyato bhavyasya. Yo me sahasramami-mita 
savanaturto raja Srava icchamanah. 


With honest mind and aclear conscience, I offer 
enthusiastic tributes of praise and approbation for the 
deserving ruler who, dedicated to honour and fame, has 
performed a thousand yajnic acts of generosity for me 
and the people on the river side without violence and 
opposition. 


शतं राज्ञो नाध॑मानस्य निष्काज्छतमश्वान्प्रय॑तान्त्सद्य 
आद॑म्‌। शतं कक्षीवाँ असुरस्य गोनां दिवि श्रवोऽजरमा 
त॑तान ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 126 563 


2. Satam rajno nadhamanasya niskan chatama-svan 
prayatantsadya adam. Satam kaksivan asurasya 
gonam divi Sravo’jarama tatana. 


I always accept and approve of the ruler’s ways 
of charity, a man glorious, generous as the cloud and a 
protector of the pranic energies of life, and I admire his 
gifts of a hundred golds, hundred horses fast and well- 
trained, and a hundred cows and pieces of land. Rightly 
the man who knows the various ways of knowledge 
and charity extends his immortal fame to the heights of 
heaven. 


उप॑ OT श्यावाः स्वनयेन दत्ता AAA SH TMA SILA: | 
षष्टिः weeny गव्य मागात्सन॑त्क क्षीवा! अभिपित्वे 
STAN ३॥ 

2: Upa ma syavah svanayena datta vadhumanto 


dasa rathaso asthuh. Sastih sahasramanu 
gavyamagat sanat kaksivan abhipitve ahnam. 


Let there be around me ten chariots bright as 
sunbeams drawn by bright mares, assigned by the 
commander. And may the man of knowledge be blest 
with the wealth of sixty thousand cows and receive 
welcome and hospitality for days and nights on his social 
rounds. 


चत्वारिंशंदशरथस्य शोणाः aaa श्रेणिं नयन्ति। 
मदच्युतः कृशानाव॑तो अत्यान्कक्षीवन्त उद॑मृक्षन्त 
प्राः ॥ ४॥ 

4. Catvarimsad dasarathasya sonah sahasrayagre 
srenim nayanti. Madacyutah krsanavato atyan- 
kakstvanta udamrksanta pajrah. 


564 RGVEDA 


Forty fiery horses of the commander of ten 
chariots march in formation in advance of a thousand. 
Golden decorated are they, camouflaged, a pioneer 
force, they challenge and break through the defences, 
clear the routes for the advance, and the forces move 
forward in multiformation. 


पूर्वामनु प्रयतिमा द॑दे वस्त्रीन्‌ युक्तां अष्टावरिधायसो गाः | 
सुबन्धवो ये विश्यांइव at अनस्वन्तः श्रव एेष॑न्त 
पाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


2; Purvamanu prayatima dade vastrin yuktan 
astavaridhayaso gah. Subandhavo ye visya iva 
vra anasvantah srava aisanta parjrah. 


Noble brethren, I accept and promote the 
tradition laid down earlier, and I accept and apply the 
three tier system of education, defence and economic 
organisation and the eightfold policy of defence, justice 
and administration, development, production and 
distribution, health and nourishment symbolized by the 
generous and fertile cows. I exhort you all who, strong 
and bold, united together like the inmates of a home, as 
one body, equipped with chariots, march forward for 
the sake of honour and glory. 


आगधिता परिगधिता या कशीकेव जङ्धंहे । 
ददाति मह्यं यादुरी याशूनां भोज्यां शाता ॥ ६॥ 
6. Agadhita parigadhita ya kasikeva jangahe. 
Dadati mahyam yaduri yasunam bhojya Sata. 
The most valuable policy of the state worthy of 


acceptance which is approved and followed and which 
is an inspirer of the people of action and advancement 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 127 565 


in important matters of the nation, like a goad, spurs 
me on to action and helps me get the sweetest delicacies 
of life, hundreds of them. 


उपोपमे परां मृश॒ मा मे दभ्राणि मन्यथाः | 
सर्वाहमस्मि रोमशा गन्धारीणापिवाविका ॥७॥ 


re Upopa me para mrsa ma me dabhrani manyathah. 
Sarvahamasmi romasa gandharinamivavika. 


Come close and closer to me and consult with 
me. Do not think that the little nameless things I say, 
advise and do are insignificant. One of the vigilant 
guards among the protective supporters of the nation, I 
am all over warm and protective like a golden fleece in 
winter cold. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 127 
Agni Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


sift होतारं मन्ये दास्वन्तं वसुं सूनुं सह॑सो जातवेदसं विप्र 
न जातवेदसम्‌। य Heda स्वध्वरो देवो देवाच्या कृपा | 
घृतस्य विभ्राष्टिमनुं वष्टि शोचिषाऽऽजुहयानस्य सर्पिष: ॥ ९ ॥ 


ll. Agnim hotaram manye dasvantam vasum sunum 
sahaso jatavedasam vipram na jatavedasam. Ya 
urdhvaya svadhvaro deva devacya krpa. Ghrtasya 
vibhrastimanu vasti Socisa’’ juhvanasya sarpisah. 


I worship, serve and meditate on Agni, lord of 
light and knowledge, spirit of life and heat and 
inspiration of noble action, yajaka, generous giver, 
treasure of wealth and universal shelter, inspirer and 
creator of courage and courageous action like the sun, 
omniscient lord of all that is born in existence, master 


566 RGVEDA 


of knowledge as the supreme scholar of the Veda, 
organiser of yajna with love and non-violence with 
divine knowledge and awareness, refulgent with 
heavenly light and power, loving and consuming with 
flames of fire and light the blaze of the purest and most 
powerful ghrta offered into the fire of yajna, physical, 
mental and spiritual all.’ 


यजिं त्वा यज॑माना gan ज्येष्ठ मदङ्धिरसां विप्र मन्म॑- 
भिर्विप्रेभिः शुक्र मन्म॑भिः। परिज्मानमिव द्यां होतारं 
चर्षणीनाम्‌ । शोचिष्केशं वृष॑णं यपिमा fast: प्राव॑न्तु 
जूतये fast: ॥ २॥ 


2. Yajistham tva yajamana huvema jyesthamangi- 
rasam vipra manmabhirviprebhih sukra manma- 
bhih. Parijmanamiva dyam hotaram carsaninam. 
Sociskesam vrsanam yamima visah pravantu 
jutaye visah. 

Agni, lord most worshipful, we the performers 
of this yajnic assembly, with all our heart and mind, 
together with all the saints and scholars with their earnest 
desire, invoke and invite you, wisest and senior-most 
of the scholar visionaries of Divinity, pure and 
immaculate, brilliant as the sun with your reach into 
the light of heaven, high-priest of humanity, lord of light 
knowledge, generous as rain showers, whom all these 
people accept, respect and approach with their desire 
and prayer for protection and self-fulfilment. 


स हि पुरू चिदोजसा विरुक्म॑ता दीद्यानो भवंति द्रुहन्तरः 
प॑र॒शुर्न gene: ae चिद्यस्य wad saga यत्स्थिरम्‌ | 
निष्षहंमाणो यमते नाय॑ते धन्वासहा नाय॑ते ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 127 567 


a Sa hi puru citodajasa virukmata didyano bhavati 
druhantarah parasurna druhantarah. Vilu cid 
yasya samrtau Sruvad vaneva yat sthiram. 
Nissahamano yamate nayate dhanvasaha nayate. 


He surely rises to shine very brilliantly with his 
own splendid valour and honour who, like the axe which 
cuts down the trees, mows down the enemies, in whose 
presence even the strong and firm like the dense forest 
burst asunder into pieces, and who, commanding brave 
warriors, dominates and directs the enemies and, like a 
mighty wielder of the bow and arrow, never wavers but 
advances in battle against the enemy forces. 


goa चिदस्मा अनुं दुर्यथा विदे तेजिं्ठाभिर रणिभि्दाछ्य- 
व॑सेऽग्रये दाछ्यव॑से । प्र यः पुरूणि Med cage शोचिषा । 
स्थिरा चिदन्ना नि रिणात्योजसा नि स्थिराणि चिदोजसा ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Drlha cidasma anu duryatha vide tejisthabhira- 
ranibhir-dastyavase’gnaye dastyavase. Pra yah 
puruni gahate taksad vaneva Socisa. Sthira 
cidanna ni rinatyojasa ni sthirani cidojasa. 


Just as the strong man of prosperity and spirit 
of service offers homage to the man of knowledge and 
wisdom, so does he offer oblations in yajna to Agni for 
the sake of protection and advancement. And Agni too, 
arising from the fiery potential of arani wood, gives 
protection and advancement to the yajaka. Just as fire 
overtakes many thick forests and reduces them to ash 
with its flames, so does the commanding yajaka reduce 
even strong enemies to naught, and just as the light of 
the sun ripens the grain with its energy, so does the 
yajaka ripen and strengthen the prosperity of the earth 


568 RGVEDA 
and humanity. 


तम॑स्य पृक्षमुपरासु धीमहि नक्तं यः सुदशतरो दिवांत- 
रादप्रायुषे feat आदस्यायुर््र॑भणवद्वीव्छु शर्म न 
सूनवे । भक्तमभक्तमवो व्यन्तो! अजरां अग्रयो व्यन्तो 
अजरां: ॥ ५॥ 


a: Tamasya prksam-uparasu dhimahi naktam yah 
sudarsataro divatarad-aprayuse divatarat. 
Adasyayur-grabhanavad vilu Sarma na sunave. 
Bhaktamabhaktamavo vyanto ajarad agnayo 
vyanto ajarah. 


Let us meditate on and do homage to that 
assiduous and uncompromising Agni, leading light of 
the world, in all directions, who shines brighter and 
stronger at night than in the day and, holding holy 
offerings in hand, let us honour and worship him. Just 
as a father provides a strong and happy home for the 
child so do the unaging leading lights of yajna and 
humanity bring us solace and protection with the 
gracious judgement of the dedicated and the 
undedicated. And thus, let us too, unageing and bright 
like the fire, live long and happy. 


a fe शर्धो न मारुतं तुविष्वणिरप्र॑स्वतीषूर्वरांस्विष्टनिरार्तना- 
स्विष्टनिः। आर्न्दरव्यान्याददिर्यज्ञस्य के तुरर्हणा!। अधं 
स्मास्य हर्षतो हृषीवतो विश्वे जुषन्त पन्थां at: शुभे न 
पन्थाम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ ति 

6. Sa hi Sardho na marutam tuvisvanir-apnasvati- 
survarasvistanir-artanasvistanih. Adaddhavya- 
nyddadir-yajnasya keturarhana. Adha smasya 
harsato hrsivato visve jusanta pantham narah 
subhe na pantham. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 127 569 


That Agni, daring and roaring as the wind, is 
admirably fearsome in raging battles, as he is worthy of 
honour and homage in yajnas in lands fertile as well as 
deserts and among families blest with lovely children. 
He receives offerings with love, readily consumes and 
uses the same for creative purposes. Indeed he is the 
triumphal banner of yajnas, most worthy of honour and 
worship. And of course all the people, joyous and 
emanating joy all round, follow in his footsteps, follow 
him on the path shown by him for the pursuit of 
goodness, beauty and joy of life. 


द्विता ad? कीस्तासो अभिद्यवो नमस्यन्तं उपवोच॑न्त arta 
मथ्नन्तो दाशा भृग॑वः | अथिरीशो वसूनां शुचिर्यो धर्णी- 
Yer प्रियां अंपिर्धीर्विनिषीष्ट मेधिर आ वनिषीष्ट 
मेधिरः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Dvita yadim kistaso abhidyavo namasyanta 
upavocanta bhrgavo mathnanto dasa bhrga-vah. 
Agnirise vasunam suciryo dharniresam. Priyan 
apidhinrvanisista medhira a vanisista medhirah. 


When the Bhrgus, dedicated seekers and 
worshippers, generous members of the community, 
brilliant scholars, faithfully take on Agni for study and 
meditation, two ways in theory and practice, vision and 
pursuit, speak of it in detail analysing and realising it, 
then Agni, pure and immaculate power, wise and 
intelligent, that rules the wealth of the world and is the 
very foundation of these, blesses the darling dedicated 
servants with beauty, wealth and success. 


570 RGVEDA 


विश्वासां त्वा विशां पतिं हवामहे सवीसां समानं दम्प॑तिं 
भुजे सत्यगिर्वाहसं wai अतिधिं मानुषाणां पितुर्न 
यस्यासया | अमी च विश्वे अमृतास आ वयो। हव्या देवेष्वा 
वय॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Visvasam tva visam patim havamahe sarvasam 
samanam dampatim bhuje satyagirvahasam 
bhuje. Athithim manusanam piturna yasyasaya. 
Ami ca visve amrtasa a vayo havya devesva 
vayah. 


We invoke, invite and do homage to you, Agni, 
lord protector of all the people of the world, for the 
light of life. We invoke and do homage to the lord 
protector of the home and family equally for all the 
people, for the joy of family life. We do homage to the 
lord of the voice of omniscience for the joy of 
knowledge. We do homage to the lord as the guest of 
honour and fire of yajna for all the people, in whose 
presence, as in the presence of the father, all these 
seekers of freedom and immortality hope for the food 
of life, and in whose honour they offer food and 
oblations to the brilliant and generous divinities of 
nature and humanity. 


त्वमग्रे सह॑सा सहन्तमः शुष्मिन्त॑मो जायसे Sam aS र यिन 
देवतातये । शुष्िन्त॑मो हि ते मदो द्युभ्निन्त॑म उत क्रतुः | 
अधं स्मा ते परि चरन्त्यजर श्रुष्टीवानो नाज॑र ॥ ९॥ 


9. Tvamagne sahasa sahantamah susmintamo 
jayase devatataye rayirna devatataye. Susmin- 
tamo hi te mado dyumnintama uta kratuh. Adha 
sma te pari carantyajara Srustivano najara. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 127 571 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, by 
courage most courageous of the brave and victorious, 
you rise most brilliant and fiery for the advancement of 
the noblest powers of nature and humanity, just as wealth 
is most effective for the service of the divines. Most 
brilliant is your light of joy, most abundant in the service 
of yajna. Lord of light immortal, servants of yajna most 
obedient and willing, serve you just as they would serve 
the Immortal Lord of life. 


प्र वो' महे सह॑सा सह॑स्वत उषर्बुधे पशुषे नाग्रये स्तोमो 
बभूत्वग्रये । प्रति यदी हविष्मान्‌ विश्वासु क्षासु जोगुंवे। 
अग्रे रेभो न ज॑रत ऋषूणां जूर्णिर्होत ऋषूणाम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. = Pravomahe sahasa sahasvata usarbudhe pasuse 
nagnaye stomo babhitvagnaye. Prati yadim 
havisman visvasu ksasu joguve. Agre rebho na 
jarata rsunam jurnirhota rsunam. 


May your song of praise in honour of Agni, 
victorious by virtue of great valour, light of the morning 
such as the dawn, be as it should be for the lord giver of 
life’s wealth. Just so it is that the yajnic faithful offers 
oblations to the eternal teacher of revelation anywhere 
in all lands, and how an admirer ever offers praise to 
the eminent among scholars, or an aged yajaka offers 
to the senior physician. 


स नो Aes ददुंशान आ un! देवेभिः सच॑नाः सुचेतुना 
महो रायः सुचेतुना । महिं शविष्ठ नस्कृधि सञ्चक्षे शुजे 
अस्यै । महिं स्तोतृभ्यो मघवन्त्सुवीर्यं मथीरुग्रो न 
शव॑सा ॥ ९९॥ 7 


572 RGVEDA 


11. Sano nedistham dadrsana a bharagne devebhih 
sacanah sucetuna maho rayah sucetuna. Mahi 
Savistha naskrdhi samcakse bhuje asyai. Mahi 
stotrbhyo maghavan tsuviryam mathirugro na 
Savasa. 


O Lord, Agni, watching, guiding and guarding 
us at the closest, with all the brilliant powers of nature 
and humanity, bear and bring us, most kindly and 
graciously, great, valuable and lasting wealths of the 
world. Mightiest Lord, make us great for the experience 
and enjoyment of this earth. Lord of wealth, power and 
grandeur, bring us, admirers and worshippers, great 
valour and honour, and as a fierce disciplinarian churn 
us to the essence of magnanimity and majesty of life 
that existence is in reality. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 128 
Agni Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


अयं जांयत मनुषो धरीमणि होता यजिं उशिजामनु 
aaah: स्वमनु व्रतम्‌। विश्वश्रुष्टिः सखीयते रयिरिव 
श्रवस्यते। अद॑ब्धो होता नि ष॑ददिक्स्पदे परिवीत 
इव्छस्पदे ॥ ९॥ 


ls Ayam jayata manuso dharimani hota yajistha 
usijamanu vratamagnih svamanu vratam. 
Visvasrustih sakhiyate rayiriva Sravasyate. 
Adabdho hota ni sadadilaspade parivita ilaspade. 


This man, this Agni, this Brahmachari, yajaka, 
most worshipful, arises and shines in his Dharma and 
behaviour in pursuit of his own discipline and in 
conformity with the laws and customs of the lovers of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 128 a7 3 


life and noble ambition. Agreeable and complaisant with 
the world, he loves to be friends with all as wealth is 
friendly with the man who loves and cares to value it. 
Inspiring the dauntless yajamana, soaked in knowledge 
and surrounded by the learned, he sits on the vedi of 
yajna in the world of action and abides in the knowledge 
and vision of Divinity. 


तं यंज्ञसाधमपिं वातयामस्यृतस्य पथा नम॑सा हविष्म॑ता 
देवताता हविष्मता । स न॑ ऊज्मुपाभृत्यया कृपा न जूर्यति | 
यं मातरिश्वा मन॑वे परावतो देवं भाः प॑रावतंः ॥ २॥ 


2. Tam yajnasadhamapi vatayamasyrtasya patha 
namasa havismata devatata havismata. Sa na 
urjamupabhrtyaya krpa na juryati. Yam matarisva 
manave paravato devam bhah paravatah. 


That Agni, divine treasure of the wealth of life 
and giver of success in yajnic endeavours, we, bearing 
holy offerings in divine service, kindle and fan to light 
and blaze, and serve along the path of Truth and natural 
Law with offers of food and reverence. And that lord of 
light and energy never tires of this divine grace, never 
fades out of this divine light and splendour, since this 
divine blaze and splendour, the wind and solar energy 
carries for humanity from a far distance, from the farthest 
imaginable distance. 


एवेन सद्यः पर्येति पार्थिवं मुहुर्गी tal वृषभः कनिं- 
क्रददधद्रेतः कर्निक्रदत्‌। शातं चक्षाणो अक्षभिर्देवो वनेषु 
तुर्वणिः । सदो दधान उप॑रेषु area: परेषु सानुषु ॥ ३ ॥ 
Evena sadyah paryeti parthivam muhurgi reto 
vrsabhah kanikradad dadhad retah kanikradat. 


Satam caksano aksabhirdevo vanesu turvanih. Sado 
dadhana uparesu sanusvagnih paresu sanusu. 


574 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of light, constantly goes by his path, 
pervading all that is in the world, celebrated in the voices 
of the divines, life of life, generous shower of vitality, 
roaring, wielding life and still roaring. The lord of 
brilliance, breaking and building in waves of energy, 
watching and illuminating the worlds with a hundred 
lights, holding, wielding and supporting the homes of 
life in the clouds, over the peaks, in the farthest regions 
of space on top, he goes on and on in the orbit along the 
circumference. 


स सुक्रतुः पुरोहितो दमेदमेऽ ग्रिर्यज्ञस्याध्वरस्य॑ चेतति Heat 
यज्ञस्य चेतति । क्रत्वा वेधा इषूयते विश्वां जातानि wear । 
यतो घृतश्रीरतिधथिरजांयत वदह्धिर्वेधा अजायत ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa sukratuh purohito damedame’ gniryajnasya- 
dhvarasya cetati kratva yajnasya cetati. Kratva 
vedha isuyate visva jatani paspase. Yato ghrtasri- 
ratithirajayata vahnirvedha ajayata. 


That Agni, lord of light, knowledge and fire, 
first agent of cosmic yajna, foremost and leader, inspires 
and lights the yajna, fragrant acts of creative love and 
non-violence, advances yajna by yajnic acts, issues forth 
like penetrative intelligence by the waves of yajnic 
energy and inspires all things in existence, and from 
the vedi arises with the glory, light of libations like a 
guest of honour at its own will, carrier, catalyser, 
penetrative, intelligent, illuminative for all. 


क्रत्वा यद॑स्य तविषीषु पृञ्चतेऽगरेरवैण मरुतां न 
भोज्येषिराय न भोज्यां। स हि ष्पा दानमिन्वति वसूनां च 
मज्मना । स न॑स्त्रासते दुरितादभिहुतः शंसादधाद॑धिहुतंः ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 128 575 


a. Krata yadasya tavisisu prncate’ gneravena 
marutam na bhojyesiraya na bhojya. Sa hi sma 
danaminvati vasunam ca majmana. Sa nastrasate 
duritadabhihrutah samsadaghada-bhihrutah. 


When a person joins the blazing flames and 
forces of this Agni with his gift of oblations and energy 
by the yajna of creative and defensive action, as you 
would enhance the energy of a vigorous man with 
refreshments or you augment the force of the winds, 
then Agni receives the gift and, with his force and power, 
blesses the givers, and he warns us of the crooked ways 
of the world, protects us against scandals of the envious, 
saves us from evil and redeems us from sin and fall off 
from Divinity. 


विश्वो faetar अरतिर्वसुर्दधे हस्ते दक्षिणे तरणिर्न 
शिंश्रथच्छवस्यया न शिश्रथत्‌ | विश्व॑स्मा इदिषुध्यते daar 
हव्यमोहिषे | विश्व॑स्मा इत्सुकृते वारमृण्वत्ययिद्वारा 
equate ig ॥ ति 


6. Visvo vihaya aratirvasurdadhe haste daksine 
taranirna srisrathacchravasyaya na Ssisrathat. 
Visvasma idisudhyate devatra havyamohise. 
Visvasma it sukrte varamrnvatyagnirdvara 
vyrnvati. 


Agni, universal lord of wealth, honour and 
grandeur, like a saviour and redeemer, holds the wealth 
of the world in his right hand for the man of endeavour 
for his honour and fame, and the gift never slackens, 
yes, it never slackens. Lord of brilliance and generosity, 
you bear and bring all the sacrificial riches for the man 
of martial action and prayer. For the man of yajnic action, 


576 RGVEDA 


you give all the choice gifts of the world, give them 
through open doors. 


स मानुषे वृजने शन्त॑मो हितो ई frag जेन्यो न विश्पतिः 
प्रियो यज्ञेषु, विश्पतिः । स हव्या मानुषाणासिव्ठा कृतानि 
पत्यते । स न॑स्त्रासते वरुणस्य धूर्तर्महो देवस्य धूर्तेः ॥ ७॥ 


re Sa manuse vrjane Samtamo hito ’gniryajnesu 
Jenyo na vispatih priyo yajnesu vispatih. Sa havya 
manusanamila krtani patyate. Sa nastraste 
varunasya dhurtermaho devasya dhurteh. 


That Agni, in the saving paths of human life, is 
most blissful, giver of fulfilment, and in yajnas he is 
like a victorious ruler and guardian of the people, yes, 
dear in yajnic projects and a saviour and protector of 
the world. He creates for humanity the materials for 
yajnic consumption and brings us the holiest words and 
actions of bliss. He guards us against the violence of 
nature and saves us from the ravages of misfortune. 


sii होतारमीव्छते वसुधितिं प्रियं चेतिष्ठमरतिं न्येरिरे 
हव्यवाहं न्ये रिरे । विश्वायुं विश्ववेदसं होतारं यजतं कविम्‌ | 
देवासो! र॒ण्वमव॑से वसूयवो गीर्भी रण्वं व॑सूयवंः ॥ ८ i 


8. Agnim hotaramilate vasudhitim priyam cetistha- 
maratim nyerire havyavaham nyerire. Visvayum 
visvavedasam hotaram yajatam kavim. Devaso 
ranvamavase vasuyavo girbhi ranvam vasuyavah. 


The devas, creative men of brilliance inspired 
with generosity, who search for light, knowledge and 
wealth of the world for the sake of power, protection 
and advancement, worship Agni, lord of light and 
omnipotent. They honour and admire Agni, leading 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 577 


scholar of light and energy. They study, raise and 
develop fire and energy, brilliant source of light and 
power, productive source of wealth, inspirer of 
intelligence to create wealth, dearest friend and generous 
power, energiser, arouser and mover of mind and soul, 
and generous giver of comfort, joy and bliss. They 
worship, honour and develop Agni, creator, harbinger 
and giver of holy materials for wealth, yes, they do 
worship, honour and raise Agni, lord, scholar and power, 
which is life of the world, omniscient and omnipresent 
with every atom of the world, great unifier and 
integrator, creative power of cosmic yajna at every stage, 
poetic creator of beauty, a source of delight and 
happiness. That power of truth, beauty and joy, the 
seekers of light, wealth, power and divine joy celebrate 
in holy words for the sake of protection, guidance and 
advancement. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 129 
Indra Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


यं त्वं votes मेधसांतयेऽ पाका सन्त॑मिषिर प्रणय॑सि 
प्रान॑वद्य॒ नय॑सि । सद्यङ्चित्तयभि्टये करो वश॑श्च वाजिन॑म्‌। 
सास्माकमनवद्य तूतुजान वेधसापिमां वाचं न वेधसाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ile Yam tvam rathamindra medhasataye’paka 
santamisira pranayasi pranavadya nayasi 
sadyas-cittamabhistaye karo vasasca vajinam. 
Sasmakam-anavadya tutujana vedhasamimam 
vacam na vedhasam. 


Indra, lord of light and knowledge, power 
beyond reproach, inspirer of life and people, whatever 
chariot you move for the purpose of yajna, that being 


578 RGVEDA 


faultless and immaculate, you move it fast forward and, 
favourable as you are to the yajaka, you instantly lead it 
and the master to success, to the desired object. Lord 
sung and celebrated, faster than light in motion and 
inspiration, faithful admirers we are all, elevate this song 
of ours to the height of the word of the wise and 
visionaries and graciously accept it as our homage of 
holiness. 


स श्रुधि यः स्पा पृत॑नासु कासु चिदक्चाय्य॑ इन्द्र at eat 
नभिरसि प्रतूर्तये af: va: शरैः <a: सनिता यो विद्रेर्वाजं 
dean तमीशानास इरधन्त वाजिनं पृक्षमत्यं न वाजि- 
न॑म्‌॥ २॥ : 


2. Sa srudhih yah sma prtanasu kasu cid daksayya 
indra bharahutaye nrbhirasi praturtaye nrbhih. 
Yah suraih svah sanita yo viprairvajam taruta. 
Tamisanasa iradhanta vajinam prksamatyam na 
vajinam. 

May Indra, lord of wealth and power, listen to 
our voice of prayer and suggestion, Indra who is an 
expert hero in the projects of social fulfilment in 
cooperation with the socially motivated people and an 
instant fighter in battles of defence and development 
with men of martial nature, who meditates on the 
heavenly light of the spirit and with the brave, intelligent 
and wise men is the creator and distributor of food and 
energy among people, and with whom the strong and 
powerful leaders love to work exactly as successful 
people love to take to a strong and fast horse to reach 
their destination, fast as he is and versatile in everything. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 579 


दस्मो fe ष्पा वृष॑णं पिन्व॑सि त्वचं कं चिंद्यावीरररु शूर 
मर्त्य" परिवृणष्चि vet इन्द्रोत तुभ्यं तदिवे तद्‌ Sart 
स्वय॑रासे | मित्राय॑ वोचं वरुणाय स॒प्रथ॑ः autre 
सप्रथ॑ः॥ ३॥ 


Di Dasmo hi sma vrsanam pinvasi tvacam kam cid 
yavirararum Sura martyam parivrnaksi martyam. 
Indrota tubhyam tad dive tad rudraya svayaSase. 
Mitraya vocam varunaya saprathah sumrlikaya 
saprathah. 


Indra, lord of power and wealth, justice and 
generosity, brave hero of wondrous deeds, you shower 
the generous and protective man with support and 
plenty, you strike off the destructive saboteur and root 
out the corrupt man. Great you are, broad of mind and 
deep in spirit. I say these profuse words of praise for 
you, Indra, ruler and leader, light of the nation, dispenser 
of justice, commanding honour and fame, friend of all, 
universal choice of hearts, inspirer of peace and bliss, 
great mind and spirit indeed! 


अस्माकं व इन्द्र॑मुश्मसीष्टये सखायं विश्वायुं प्रासहं युजं 
वाजेषु प्रासहं युज॑म्‌। अस्माकं ब्रह्मोतयेऽवा पृत्सुषु कासु 
चित्‌। नहि त्वा शत्रुः स्तर॑ते स्तृणोषि यं विश्वं शत्रं स्तृणोषि 
यम्‌॥ ४॥ ति ति ति 

4. Asmakam va indramusmasistaye sakhayam 
visvayum prasaham yujam vajesu prasaham 
yujam. Asmakam brahmotaye’va prtsusu kasu cit. 
Nahi tva Ssatruh starate strnosi yam visvam 
Satrum strnosi yam. 


For your good and ours, we love and celebrate 


580 RGVEDA 


Indra, friend, the very life breath of the world, patient 
and courageous, cooperative comrade, daring and 
victorious in battles, dedicated and meditative on life 
and Divinity. For our protection, O lord, protect and 
preserve our knowledge and Veda in all the battles. No 
enemy can overwhelm you. Whatever adversary you 
defeat, whatever world you win and cover with justice 
and protection, no enemy anywhere can overcome you. 


निषु नमातिमतिं कय॑स्य चित्तेजिंछठाभिरर्णिथिनेतिभिरु- 
ग्राभि॑रुग्रोतिभिः । नेषि णो sent पुराऽनेनाः शूर मन्य॑से | 
विश्वानि पूरोरप॑ पर्षि वहधिरासा वद्धिर्नो अच्छ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2): Ni su namatimatim kayasya cit tejisthabhir-ara- 
nibhir-notibhir-ugrabhirugrotibhih. Nesi no 
yatha pura’nenah sura manyase. Visvani puro- 
rapa parsi vahnirasa vahnirno accha. 


In all grace, bow down before the exceptional 
wisdom of the learned. And bring down the haughty 
pride of the notorious enemy, O fierce lord of raging 
power and rectitude, with your burning and brilliant 
methods and actions of defence and protection blazing 
like the radiant flames of the fire of arani wood. You 
know us all, O brave, heroic and sinless, lead us forward 
as before, wash off all sin and evil from the life of 
humanity. Bearer of the burdens of existence, harbinger 
of all that is good, like fire, burn off our evil and let us 
shine close to your presence. 


प्र तद्रोचेयं भव्यायेन्द॑वे हव्यो न य इषवान्मन्म रेज॑ति रश्चोहा 
मन्म रेज॑ति । स्वयं सो अस्मदा निदो वधैरजेत दुर्मतिम्‌। 
अवं स््रवेदघशंसोऽ वतरमवं क्षुद्रमिव स्रवेत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 581 


6. Pra tad voceyam bhavyayendave havyo na ya 
isavan manma rejati raksoha manma rejati 
Svayam so asmada nido vadhairajeta durmatim. 
Ava sravedaghasamso’vataramava ksudramiva sravet. 


I would speak words of appreciation and sing 
that song of praise for one who is worthy of reverence, 
brilliant, and like a divinity worthy of invocation, strong, 
dynamic and favourable, inspires like soma and shines 
like the moon, who shines at heart and destroys evil, 
who by himself, with blows, wards off the evil-tongued 
and the malicious, and who makes the evil go down the 
gutter and even lower just like worms of dirt. 


वनेम तब्दोत्र॑या चितन्त्या ae र चिं र॑यिवः सुवीर्य' रण्वं 
सन्तं सुवीर्यम्‌ । दुर्मन्मानं सुमन्तुभिरेमिषा पुंचीमहि। आ 
सत्याभिरिन्द्रं द्युम्नहूतिभिर्यजंत्ं दयुम्नदतिभिः ue 


7. Vanema taddhotraya citantya vanema rayim 
rayivah suviryam ranvam santam suviryam. 
Durmanmanam sumantubhir-emisa prcimahi. 
A satyabhir-indram dyumnahitibhir-yajatram 
dyumnahutibhih. 


Let us invoke Indra with most enthusiastic 
homage, pray and win his favour. O lord of wealth, let 
us win wealth, win noble strength, noble strength of 
body and mind abiding with holy joy of the spirit. Let 
us, with honest thoughts and earnest desire associate 
and be one with Indra who brooks no nonsense and 
negativity of mind and spirit. Let us offer prayers and 
homage to Indra, holiest of the holy, with truth of mind 
and spirit and the richest offerings, the richest that we 
have. 


582 RGVEDA 


प्रप्रां at अस्मे स्वय॑श्ोभिरूती dart इन्द्रो दुर्मतीनां 
दरींमन्दुर्मतीनाम्‌। स्वयं सा रिषयध्यै या न॑ उपेषे अत्रैः 1 
हतेम॑सन्न व॑क्षति farer जूर्णिर्न dette ui ८ ॥ 


8. Prapa vo asme svayasobhiruti parivarga indro 
durmatinam dariman durmatinam. Svayam sa 
risayadhyai ya na upese atraih. Hatemasanna 
vaksati ksipta jurnirna vaksati. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, by his own power 
and honour, is all for your protection and ours, and he 
is all out for the total destruction of the men of evil 
mind and intention. And may that force which is sent 
by our enemies for our destruction never reach us, but 
be routed on way as if destroyed of itself even if it is 
inspired and moved at the fastest speed. (It must be 
prevented and destroyed on the way itself by defence 
missiles). 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्र राया परीणसा याहि पथां अनेहसं पुरो 
याह्यरक्षसा | सच॑स्व नः पराक आ सचस्वास्तमीक आ। 
पाहि नो दूरादारादभिष्टिभिः Gat पाह्यभिष्टिभिः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Tvam na indra raya parinasa yahi pathan anehasa 
puro yahyaraksasa. Sacasva nah paraka a 
sacasvastamika a. Pahi no durad-aradabhistibhih 
sada pahyabhistibhih. 


Indra, lord of power, honour and glory, go 
forward, and come to us with abundant wealth by the 
paths of non-violence, no-wickedness and no-sin. Be 
with us and for us as a friend at the closest and at the 
farthest places. Protect and promote us from afar with 
all that is desired, give us fulfilment at the closest with 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 583 


love at heart, always be a friend and saviour with total 
protection and fulfilment. 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्र राया तरूषसोग्रं fear महिमा संश्चदव॑से महे 
fast नाव॑से। ओजिष्ठ त्रातरविता रथं कं चिदमर्त्य । 
sama Ra: कं चिदद्रिवो रिरिंश्चन्तं चिदद्रिवः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvanna indra raya tarusasogram cit tva mahima 
saksadavase mahe mitram navase. Ojistha tratar- 
avita ratham kam cidamartya. Anyamasmad 
ririseh kam cidadrivo ririksantam citadrivah. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, come with great 
and victorious wealth, honour and grace, Mighty and 
lustrous, may grandeur and dignity abide with you for 
protection like a friend as a mark of greatness. Lord 
most lustrous, saviour, protector, immortal by fame and 
honour, ride the chariot of glory. Lord of the clouds and 
mountains of the earth, if you are angry, even violent 
sometime, strike something other than our soul, 
whatsoever is violent and destructive, O lord of the 
clouds and mountains of the earth. 


ule न॑ इन्द्र सुष्टुत fee's वयाता सदमिहुर्मतीनां देवः 
सन्‌ दुर्मतीनाम्‌ । हन्ता पापस्य रक्षसस्त्राता विप्र॑स्य माव॑तः । 
अधा हि त्वां जनिता जीज॑नद्वसो रश्चोहणं त्वा जीजंन- 
दवसो ॥ VU 

11. Pahi na indra sustuta sridho’vayata sadamid 
durmatinam devah san durmatinam. Hanta 
papasya raksasastrata viprasya mavatah. Adha 
hi tva janita jijanad vaso raksohanam tva jijanad 
vaso. 


Indra, sung and celebrated for honour and 


584 RGVEDA 


graciousness, protect us from error, blunder and loss of 
faith. Always averting the envious and malicious, being 
brilliant and lustrous, you take the evil-minded down 
to the pit. Destroyer of the sinful and demonic killers, 
saviour of the pious and noble scholars and people like 
me, haven and home of the needy, may the lord creator 
of life rejuvenate you ever. Destroyer of sin and cruelty, 
shelter of the good, may the lord bless you ever with 
new life, energy and knowledge. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 130 
Indra Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


एन्द्र॑ aed नः परावतो नायमच्छा विदथानीव सत्प॑तिरस्तं 
राजैव सत्प॑तिः | हवामहे त्वा वयं प्रय॑स्वन्तः सुते सचां | 
पुत्रासो न पितरं वाज॑सातये Hes वाज॑सातये ॥ ९॥ 


lL. Endra yahyupa nah paravato nayamaccha 
vidathaniva satpatirastam rajeva satpatih. 
Havamahe tva vayam prayasvantah sute saca. 
Putradso na pitaram vajasataye manhistham 
vajasataye. 


Indra, lord of wealth and power, ruler of the 
world, come graciously from afar to us like this Agni 
who comes to the yajnic battles of life. Protector and 
promoter of truth and rectitude, friend and protector of 
the truthful and righteous, come to our home like the 
ruler. Joining you faithfully in this yajna of life, 
dedicated to holy action and endeavour, we invoke and 
invite you to join us. As children call upon the father to 
help them to food, sustenance and protection in their 
course of life and growth, so do we call upon you for 
safety and protection, great lord of power and prosperity, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 130 585 
for victory in our battle of life. 


foot सोम॑मिन्द्र सुवानमद्रिभिः asia सिक्तम॑वतं न 
वंस॑गस्तातृषाणो न वंसंगः। मदाय हर्यताय ते तुविष्ट॑माय 
धाय॑से | आ त्वा यच्छन्तु हरितो न सूर्यमहा विश्वेव 
सूर्यम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Piba somamindra suvanamadribhih koSsena 
siktamavatam na vamsagastatrsano na vamsa- 
gah. Madaya haryataya te tuvistamaya dhayase. 
A tva yacchantu harito na saryamaha visveva 
suryam. 


Just as a thirsty bull drinks the water of a pool 
augmented by the showers of a cloud, so you Indra, 
friend and fond of company, drink this soma prepared 
from herbs crushed with grinders and seasoned by the 
shower of the clouds for your delight, lord versatile and 
vibrant, sustainer of life, worthy of love and homage, 
and just as the rays of light and all the days bring up the 
sun for the world, so may they bring you to our vedi of 
yajna. 

अविन्दद्धिवो निहितं गुहां निधिं वेर्न गर्भं परिंवीतमश्म॑न्यनन्ते 
अन्तरश्मनि ast व्री गवामिव सिषांसन्नद्धिःरस्तमः। 
अपावृणोदिष इन्द्रः परीवृता द्वार इषः परीवृताः ॥ ३ ॥ 
Avindad divo nihitam guha nidhim verna garbham 
parivitamasmanyanante antarasmani. Vajram 
vajrl gavamiva sisasannangirastamah. Apavr- 
nodisa indrah parivrta dvara isah parivrtah. 
Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt of cosmic 


energy, most brilliant of the cosmic brilliancies, creates 
from the light of omniscience and divine omnipotence 


586 RGVEDA 


the wealth of existence hidden in the heart of mystery 
and opens out the materials and energies of cosmic 
evolution covered in the folds of sleep. He opens the 
closed doors of the wealth of existence as you deliver a 
foetus from the womb or an embryo from the egg or dig 
out a diamond from the heart of a stone lying in the 
depth of a mighty mountain or as the sun breaks open 
the waters of rain held in the cloud in the vast sky or as 
a cowherd opens the gates of a cow stall, wielding his 
staff to control their movements. Thus does Indra open 
the doors of the wealth of existence and control the order 
of evolution with his force of law. 


दादुहाणो वज्रमिन्द्रो गभ॑स्त्योः eta तिग्ममस॑नाय सं 
शर्यदहिहत्यांय सं श्य॑त्‌। संविव्यान ओज॑सा शवोभिरिन्द्र 
wa । aa वृक्षं वनिनो नि वृश्चसि परश्वेव नि 
वृंर्चसि॥ ॥ ` 


4. Dadrhano vajramindro gabhastyoh ksadmeva 
tigmamasanaya sam Syadahihatyaya sam Ssyat. 
Samvivyana ojasa Savobhirindra majmana. 
Tasteva vrksam vanino ni vrscasi parasveva ni 
vrscasi. 


Indra, firmly holding the thunder-bolt in hand, 
like a forceful jet of water or like a flood of penetrating 
rays of light to shoot, breaks the cloud and releases the 
waters of life. Similarly, one with your lustre and valour, 
like a wood cutter and carver, you fell the strongholds 
of evil like the trees of a forest, yes, uproot the wicked, 
striking the blows as with the axe. 


त्वं gal नय॑ इन्द्र सर्तवेऽ mal समुद्रम॑सृजो र्थीइव वाजयतो 
रथींइव । इत ऊतीर॑युञ्जत समानमर्थमक्षितम्‌ | धेनूरिव मन॑वे 
विश्वदोहसो जनाय विश्वदोहसः ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 130 587 


=) Tvam vrtha nadya indra sartave’ccha samudra- 
masrjo rathan iva vajayato rathan iva. Ita 
utirayunjata samanamarthamaksitam. Dhenur- 
iva manave visvadohaso janaya visvadohasah. 


Indra, you release the rivers at will to flow 
naturally well to the sea, they are like chariots loaded 
with food and energy, yes, replete with immense energy 
like chariots ever on the move. Thus, flow with this 
flow, you join the rivers with unrestricted wealth and 
modes of protection for all equally. And these rivers are 
like cows yielding all kinds of food and energy for the 
man of intelligence and for all people, for all, whole 
world indeed. 


इमां ते वाचं aged आयवो रथं न धीरः taut अतक्षिषुः 
सुम्नाय त्वाम॑तस्िषुः। शुम्भन्तो जेन्यं यथा वाजेषु विप्र 
वाजिन॑म्‌। अत्य॑मिव शव॑से सातये धना विश्वा धनानि 
सातये 1 ६ ॥ 


6. Imam te vacam vasuyanta ayavo ratham na dhi- 
rah svapa ataksisuh sumnaya tvamataksisuh. 
Sumbhanto jenyam yatha vajesu vipra vajinam. 
Atyamiva Savase sataye dhana visva dhanani 
sataye. 


Indra, vipra, lord of knowledge, this song of 
honour and celebration, for you, men of knowledge, 
patience, and noble action seeking wealth and power, 
have formed in the mind, as they have created the chariot 
for the sake of comfort and well-being, just like men of 
knowledge, culture and grace would love to have a fast 
horse in life’s battle flying to victory for the achievement 
of universal strength and power of wealth for 


588 RGVEDA 
everybody’s share and everybody’s enjoyment. 


चिनत्पुरों नवतिमिन्द्र पूरवे दिवोदासाय महिं दाशुषे नृतो 
वेण दाशुषे नृतो। अतिथिग्वाय शम्ब॑रं गिरेरुग्रो 


अवा'भरत्‌। महो धनानि दय॑मान ओज॑सा विश्वा 
धनान्योज॑सा ॥ ७॥ 


a Bhinat puro navatimindra purave divodasaya 
mahi dasuse nrto vajrena dasuse nrto. Atithigva- 
ya sambaram girerugro avabharat. Maho 
dhanani dayamana ojasa visva dhananyojasa. 


Indra, lord of the world, dancing with the joy of 
victory, you break down ninety strongholds of want and 
injustice for the sake of the people and for the great 
hospitable and philanthropist with your thunder-bolt of 
strength, power and energy. Lord of light and lustre, as 
the sun, you bring the cloud down in showers to the top 
of the mountain for the host, favourite of the visitors. 
Lord of sympathy and generosity, with your power and 
brilliance, you create great wealths of life, yes, and with 
your genius and philanthropy, bring up wealths of the 
world for universal benefit. 


इन्द्रः समत्सु aster प्रावद्विश्वेषु शतमूतिराजिषु 
स्व॑मीच्च्टेष्वाजिषुं। मन॑वे शासदव्रतान्त्वचं कृष्णामरन्धयत्‌ । 
दक्चन्न विश्वं ततृषाणमोषति न्य॑र्शसानमोषति ॥ ८॥ 


8. Indrah samatsu yajamanamaryam pravad visvesu 
Satamutirajisu svarmilhesvajisu. Manave Sasad- 
avratan tvacam krsnamarandhayat. Daksanna 
visvam tatrsanamosati nyarsasana-mosati. 


Indra, ruler of the world, master of a hundred 
modes and means of protection and promotion, should 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 130 589 


protect and advance the noble and creative yajamana in 
all the projects of public good, in all the programmes of 
heavenly light for the man of thought and pious intention 
and action. Let him correct and control the forces of 
indiscipline and lawlessness, overthrow the earth’s cover 
of darkness, and like the generous benefactor enlighten 
all the seekers thirsting for light and knowledge and 
cauterise all the festering wounds of humanity. 


सूर॑श्चक्र प्र वुंहज्नात ओज॑सा प्रपित्वे वाच॑मरूणो मुंषाय- 
तीशान आ मुंषायति । उशना यत्प॑रावतोऽ ज॑गन्नूतयें कवे | 
सुम्नानि विश्वा मनुषेव तुर्वणिरहा विश्वेव तुर्वणिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Surascakram pra brhajjata ojasa prapitve vaca- 
maruno musayatisana a musayati. Usana yat 
paravato ’jaganniutaye kave. Sumnani visva 
manuseva turvaniraha visveva turvanih. 


Indra, the sun, lord of crimson glory, rising from 
the vast spaces lights up the mighty wheel of the world, 
ravishes the imagination with its refulgence and inspires 
human speech to silence in adoration, and, ruling the 
world specially at the advance of the day and more in 
the northern solstice, it inspires as well as silences the 
speech with awe. O Poet divine, inspired with light, 
love and brilliance, come here on the earth from afar 
like a man divine, fast and faster, generous, all days 
every hour, and bring us the wealth and joys of the world 
for the protection and advancement of humanity. 


सनो नव्येभिर्वषकर्मनुक्थेः पुरां ad: पायुभिः पाहि शग्मैः | 
दिवोदासेभिरिन्द्र स्तवानो वावृधीथा अहोभिरिव द्यौः ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Sa no navyebhir-vrsakarmannukthaih puram 
dartah payubhih pahi sagmaih. Divodasebhir- 
indra stavano vavrdhitha ahobhiriva dyauh. 


590 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of light, might and power, ruler of 
the world, hero of generous and universal action, breaker 
of enemy strongholds, protect and promote us with the 
latest pious, admirable and blissful modes, means and 
actions of defence and development. Sung and 
celebrated by poets of enlightenment, you too rise and 
advance as the sun ascends high and higher day by day 
in heaven. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 131 
Indra Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


इन्द्राय हि द्यौरसुरो अनम्नतेन्द्राय मही परथिवी वरीमभिर्युम्न- 
साता वरीमभिः । इन्द्रं विश्वे स॒जोष॑सो देवासो दधिरे पुरः | 
इन्द्राय विश्वा सव॑नानि मानुषा रातानि सन्तु मानुषा ॥ ९ ॥ 


iB Indraya hi dyaurasuro anamnatendraya mahi 
prthivi varimabhir-dyumnasata varimabhih. 
Indram visve sajosaso devaso dadhire purah. 
Indraya visvad savanani manusa ratani santu 
manusa. 


The heavenly light of the sun and the cloud with 
all pranic energy do homage to Indra only. The mighty 
Prakrti and the earth, their best characteristic powers 
and virtues, do homage to Indra. All the divinities of 
nature and brilliancies of humanity together with 
unqualified love and faith do homage primarily to Indra 
as the Lord Supreme. May all the human work and 
wealth and the highest yajnic sessions be surrendered 
as gifts of homage to Indra, Lord Supreme of the 
universe. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 131 591 


विश्वेषु हि त्वा सवनेषु तुञ्जते समानमेकं वृष॑मण्यवः पृथक्‌ 
स्व॑: सनिष्यवः पृथ॑क्‌ । तं त्वा नावं न पर्षणि" शूषस्य॑ धुरि 
late. इन्द्रं न यज्ञैश्चितयन्त आयवः स्तोयेधथिरिन्द्र- 
मायवंः॥ २॥ 


2, Visvesu hi tva savanesu tunjate samanamekam 
vrsamanyavah prthak svah sanisyavah prthak. 
Tam tva navam na parsanim Susasya dhuri 
dhimahi. Indram na yajnaiscitayanta ayavah 
stomebhir-indram-ayavah. 


In all their yajnic projects of creation and 
development and in their acts of piety, all the liberal 
minded people and all seekers of heavenly bliss serve 
you and abide by you, sole one universal lord of 
existence, individually as well as together. To the same 
one lord we too belong, and we too love, meditate on 
and serve you, lord, with faith as the very centre of 
cosmic energy and as the saviour ship for crossing over 
the ocean of existence. All the people born and living 
on earth in their mortal existence and all the stars and 
planets in their songs and dance of adoration serve and 
worship the Lord as Indra, light of the world like the 
sun. 


fa त्वां ततस्ते मिथुना अवस्यवो! asret साता गव्य॑स्य 
निःसृजः सक्ष॑न्त इन्द्र निःसृज॑:। यद्‌ गव्यन्ता द्वा जना 
स्वत र्यन्ता समृह॑सि। आविष्करि्रद्‌ वृष॑णं सचाभुवं 
वज्र॑मिन्द्र सचाभुवम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 

ॐ; Vi tva tatasre mithund avasyavo vrajasya sata gav- 
yasya nihsrjah saksanta indra nihsrjah. Yad gav- 
yanta dva jana svaryanta samuhasi. Aviskari-krad 
vrsanam sacabhuvam vajramindra sacabhuvam. 


592 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of might and prosperity, wedded 
couples, keen for protection and advancement united 
with you and going out in pursuit of their efforts to 
promote the wealth of cows, development of land and 
related knowledge, extend your glory and eliminate their 
want and suffering, since you inspire and exhort both 
men and women going out and achieving the light and 
joy of life when you open out and wield for action the 
thunderbolt of justice and protection, so generous, 
promotive and friendly to you and the people. 


fagd अस्य वीर्यस्य पूरवः पुरो यदिन्द्र शारंदीर वातिरः 
सासहानो अवातिरः । शासस्तमिन्द्र मर्त्यमय॑ज्युं शवसस्पते । 
महीममुष्णाः पृथिवीपिमा अपो म॑न्दसान इमा अपः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Viduste asya viryasya puravah puro yadindra 
Saradiravatirah sasahano avatirah. 965051८ - 
mindra martyamayajyum Savasaspate. Mahima- 
musnah prthivimima apo mandasana ima apah. 


Indra, lord of power and management, the 
people would know and realise your usual power and 
valour when you, bold and challenging, would 
overcome the autumnal and wintry problems of life and 
society, reclaim the habitations, control the rivers, and 
restore total civic normalcy after rains, when, O lord of 
law and power, you tame the man who is selfish, 
possessive, uncreative, uncooperative and unyajnic, and 
when, happy at heart and creating the pleasure and joy 
of life, you release the great earth, release these waters 
and relieve these creative and cooperative people. 


sited अस्य वीर्यस्य चकर न्मदेषु वृषन्नुशिजो यदाविथ 
सखीयतो यदाविथ । चकर्थ कारमेभ्यः पृत॑नासु प्रव॑न्तवे | 
ते अन्यामन्यां नद्यं सनिष्णत श्रवस्यन्तः सनिष्णत ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 131 593 


> Adit te asya viryasya carkiran madesu vrsannu- 
5/0 yadavitha sakhiyato yadavitha. Cakartha 
karamebhyah prtanasu pravantave. Te anyama- 
nyam nadyam sanisnata $ravasyantah sanisnata. 


Indra, lord of generosity, people loving and 
dedicated to you in their moods of joy praise and 
celebrate this valour and justice of yours since you 
protect and promote them, yes, promote and advance 
them, so friendly to you and to all as they are. You work 
wonders for them in their battles of life and production 
for proper distribution and participation while they, 
desiring their share of food and wealth, rightfully hope 
to gain one thing after another of the flow of national 
wealth. 


उतो नो अस्या उषसो! जुषेत aie बोधि हविषो 
हवीं मधः eater हवीमभिः । यदिन्द्र हन्त॑वे मृधो gal 
वचिज्िकेतसि। आ में अस्य वेधसो नवीयसो मन्म॑ श्रुधि 
नवीयसः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uto no asya usaso juseta hyarkasya bodhi haviso 
havimabhih svarsata havimabhih. Yadindra 
hantave mrdho vrsa vajrifciketasi. A me asya 
vedhaso naviyaso manma $rudhi naviyasah. 


Indra, lord of light, now listen and accept this 
joyous celebration of ours of the light of the dawn, know 
this prayer and, O shower of light and joy, accept our 
invocation and holy offerings since, O wielder of the 
thunderbolt, lord of generosity, you keep awake for us 
for the elimination of violence. Listen to this newest 
prayer of mine made in full knowledge in worship, listen 
and accept this latest thought and petition. 


594 RGVEDA 


त्वं तमिन्द्र वावृधानो अस्पयुरमिच्रयन्तं तुविजात मर्त्यं वज्रैण 
शूर Hela जहि यो नो! अघायति श्रृणुष्व सुश्रव॑स्तमः | 
रिष्टं न यामन्नप भूतु दुर्मतिर्विश्वाप भूतु दुर्मतिः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Tvam tamindra vavrdhano asmayur-amitrayan- 
tam tuvijata martyam vajrena Sura martyam. Jahi 
yo no aghayati Srnusva susravastamah. Ristam 
na yamannapa bhutu durmatir-visvapa bhutu 
durmatih. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, ever exalting, 
friend of ours, universally famous, mighty bold, 
eliminate with the thunderbolt every man who entertains 
hate and enmity toward us and does sinful acts against 
us. Listen lord, since you are the closest listener. Let 
the man of evil intention be off from our way like one 
broken by evil. Let all evil intentions and evil designers 
be off and away from us. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 132 
Indra Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


wan वयं म॑घवन्पूर्व्येँ धन इन्द्र॑त्वोताः सासह्याम पृतन्यतो 
वनुयाम वनुष्यतः eS अस्मिनच्रहन्यधिं वोचा नु सुन्वते | 
अस्मिन्यज्ञे वि च॑येमा भरे कृतं वांजयन्तो भरं कृतम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Tvaya vayam maghavan purvye dhana indra 
tvotah. Sasahyama prtanyato vanuyama vanu- 
syatah. Nedisthe asminnahanyadhi voca nu 
sunvate. Asmin yajne vi cayema bhare krtam 
vajayanto bhare krtam. 


Indra, ruling lord of wealth and power, we pray, 
guided and protected by you and your power and 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 132 595 


potential, let us face the men in the very first encounter, 
love, tolerate or fight who wish to love, contest or fight, 
and let us win the encounter. On this day right now at 
the closest, speak to one and all of those who are 
conducting the yajna of the business of corporate living. 
In this yajna of full measure, while we are up and doing 
and winning all round, let us choose the best meritorious 
line of action and let us choose you as our guide, leader 
and protector. 


Taste भर॑ आप्रस्य वक्मन्युषर्बुधः स्वस्मिन्नञ्ज॑सि ऋणस्य 
स्वस्मिन्नञ्ज॑सि। अहन्निन्द्रो यथां विदे शीष्णाशीष्णोपि- 
ara: | अस्यत्र ते asta सन्तु रातयों war भद्रस्यं 
Waa: ॥ २॥ 


2. Svarjese bhara aprasya vakmanyusarbudhah 
svasminnanjasi kranasya svasminnanjasi. 
Ahannindro yatha vide Ssirsnasirsnopavacyah. 
Asmatra te sadhryak santu ratayo bhadra bha- 
drasya ratayah. 


In the yajnic battle for the winning of light and 
joy, in the chant of the Apri hymns for divine favour, in 
the holy performance of the person rising at dawn, in 
the instant action of the man of love and grace, Indra 
destroys the obstacles in the way of action and 
achievement for the man who knows the favours of the 
lord, and for these the lord is adorable for every one 
and for the best among us. Just as Indra is favourable 
thus, so we pray to the lord: With us and for us as you 
always are, may all your gifts be for our good. May 
your gracious favours be good to the noble humanity. 


596 RGVEDA 


तत्तु Wa: Waal ते शुशुक्वनं यस्मिन्यज्ञे वारमकुण्वत 
क्षय॑मृतस्य वारसि क्षय॑म्‌। वि तद्वो चेरधं द्विताऽन्तः प॑श्यन्ति 
रश्मिभिः स घां विदे अन्विन्द्रो गवेषणो बन्धुश्षिद्यों 
गवेषणः ॥ ३ ॥ ति 


छ Tat tu prayah pratnatha te susukvanam yasmin 
yajne varamakrnvata ksayamrtasya varasi ksa- 
yam. Vi tad voceradha dvita’ntah pasyanti rasmi- 
bhih. Sa gha vide anvindro gavesano bandhu- 
ksidbhyo gavesanah. 


Indra, that Word of yours, that gracious gift, as 
ever, is brilliant. You are the ocean of Rta, eternal light 
and law of the truth of existence, the very home from 
where it flows like a river, like the radiation of sunlight. 
Pray speak of that same Word, reveal it in the yajna 
where they have created the choicest altar for your 
presence. Surely the same light the dedicated yajnics 
see within by the divine rays within and without. And I 
too would know of it then and realise. Truly Indra is the 
giver of knowledge, the Word, the cows and earthly 
wealth. He is the giver of these for the lovers and friends 
of our brethren. (The seeker of these too is Indra among 
humanity.) 

नू इत्था ad uden च प्रवाच्यं यदद्धिःरोभ्योऽ वुंणोरपं 
व्रजमिन्द्र शिक्चन्नपं व्रजम्‌। teat: समान्या fests स्मभ्यं 
जेषि योत्सि च । सुन्वद्धधयो। रन्धया कं चिदव्रतं ह॑णायन्तं 
चिदव्रतम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Na ittha te purvatha ca pravacyam yadangiro- 
bhyo’vrnorapa vrajamindra siksnnapa vrajam. 
Aibhyah samanya disa’smabhyam jesi yotsi ca. 
Sunvadbhyo randhaya kam cidavratam hrnaya- 
ntam cidavratam. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 132 597 


Indra, surely the word which you thus reveal 
as before for the scholars dear as the breath of life, and 
the way you open the doors of knowledge and treasures 
of the world, teaching us the wisdom of eternity is worth 
admiration and celebration. You fight for us and win 
the victories in the same constant way for these and for 
us who distil the essence of things. Heat up and season 
those indisciplined and lawless people who are funny, 
angry, violent or thievish, yes, subject them to the 
crucibles of law and education and cleanse them to 
purity from culturelessness. 


सं यजनान्‌ क्रतुंधिः शुर ईक्षयब्दने हिते त॑रुषन्त श्रवस्यवः 
प्र य॑क्षन्त श्रव॒स्यव॑ः | तस्मा आयुः प्रजावदिद्‌ बाधे 
अर्चन्त्योजसा | इन्द्र॑ ओक्यं दिधिषन्त धीतयो देवां अच्छा 
न धीतय॑ः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Sam yajjanan kratubhih sura tksayaddhane hite 
tarusanta Sravasyavah pra yaksanta Sravasyavah. 
Tasma ayuh prajavadid badhe arcantyojasa. 
Indra okyam didhisanta dhitayo devan accha na 
dhitayah. 


When Indra, brave and fearless lord of power 
and glory, by virtue of his wisdom and noble actions, 
closely surveys the forces of the people at the call of 
battle, the people, keen for honour, in love with fame, 
overcome all opposition, worship him and serve him 
with all their valour and lustre in the hour of crisis. They 
augment his life and morale as the hero of a mighty 
nation. Firm of mind and full of confidence, they repose 
complete faith in him as in the divinities and find their 
haven and home in him. 


598 RGVEDA 


युवं तमिन्द्रापर्वता पुरोयुधा यो न॑: पृतन्यादप तन्तमिग्छ॑तं 
aa तन्तमिन्दं॑तम्‌ । दूरे चत्ताय॑ छन्त्सद्‌ Tet यदिन॑क्षत्‌ | 
अस्माकं शत्रून्‌ परिं शूर विश्वतो दर्मा adie विश्वत॑ः ue ॥ 


6. Yuvam tamindraparvata puroyudha yo nah 
prtanyadapa tamtamiddhatam vajrena tamtami- 
ddhatam. Dure cattayacchantsad gahanam 
yadinaksat. Asmakam Satrun pari Sura visvato 
darma darsista visvatah. 


You both, Indra and the forces, like lightning 
and the mountain, fighting in the forefront, destroy with 
the thunderbolt everyone whosoever come to attack and 
fight us, see that they are destroyed first to the last, 
whosoever it be, even running far away for cover or 
even if one has gone deep into the bunker. O lord of 
valour and lustre, router of the deadly forces, destroy 
our enemies all round, crush them everywhere. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 133 
Indra Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


उभे पुंनापि रोद॑सी ऋतेन gel दहापि सं महीरनिन्द्राः 1 
अभिव्कग्य यत्रं हता अमित्रां वैलस्थानं परि qa 
अशोरन्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Ubhe punami rodasi rtena druho dahami sam 
mahiranindrah. Abhivlagya yatra hata amitra 
vailasthanam pari trlha aseran. 


I purify the earth and heavens both by the light 
of truth and the fire and fragrance of yajna, creative 
and cooperative action. I subject the elements of hate 
and chaos to the heat and power of law and discipline 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 133 599 


and burn off the anti-Indra forces on earth to naught. 
And having thus seized and crushed the unfriendly 
elements wherever they happen to be active, and 
confirmed that they are dead and gone, I let them lie 
asleep in their grave. 


अभिव्कग्यां चिदद्रिवः शीर्षा य।तुमतीनाम्‌ । 
छिन्धि defor पदा महावटूरिणा पदा ui 

2. Abhivlagya cidadrivah Sirsa yatumatinam. 
Chindhi vaturina pada mahavaturina pada. 


Indra, lord of yajna, power and law, firm as rock 
and generous as cloud, having caught the lawless and 
the violent by the head of the evil-minded, crush them 
under the wide wide foot, crush them by the rising forces 
of the youth. 


अवासां wrasse शर्धो" यातुमतीनाम्‌ । 
वैटस्थानके अर्मके महावैलस्थे अर्मके ॥३॥ 

3 Avasam maghavanjahi Sardho yatumatinam. 
Vailasthanake armake mahavailasthe armake. 


Indra, maghavan, lord of world power and 
wealth, break down and destroy the force of the evil- 
minded and throw them out deep into the vault of 
darkness, into the hideous world of sin and death. 
यासां fra: प॑ञ्चाशतोऽभिव्ठ्वङ्कैरपाव॑पः | 
तत्सु तें मनायति तकत्सु a मनायति ui 

4. Yasam tisrah pancasato’bhivlangairapavapah. 
Tat su te manayati takat su te manayati. 


Indra, now that you have routed the three times 


600 RGVEDA 


fifty forces of those agents of hate and violence by your 
tactics of seizure and attack, that act excites holy 
admiration and celebration, hearty admiration and 
reverence. 


fasrqufearsyot पिशाचिमिन्द्र सं Yur । 
सर्व tant नि बर्हय ॥ ५॥ 


5. Pisangabhrstimambhrnam pisdcimindra sam 
mrna. Sarvam rakso ni barhaya. 


Indra, destroy the fierce ogres of the lance of 
red blood and root out the demons all over. 


अवर्मह इन्द्र दादृहि श्रुधी न॑: शुशोच fe eit: क्षा न sitar 
अद्रिवो घुणान्न sitet अद्रिवः । शुष्पिन्त॑मो हि शुष्पिभिर्वधे- 
सुग्रेथिरीय॑से। secs अप्रतीत शूर॒ सत्व॑भिस्तिसपै 

शुर सत्व॑भिः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Avarmaha indra dadrhi srudhi nah susoca hi 
dyauh ksa na bhisan adrivo ghrnanna bhisan 
adrivah. Susmintamo hi susmibhirvadhairu- 
grebhirtyase. Apurusaghno apratita Sura satva- 
bhistrisaptaih sura satvabhih. 


Indra, lord of earth and heaven, bring down that 
fierce demon and break him to pieces. Listen to our 
prayer. Purify and let the earth shine like heaven with 
tremendous light, lord of clouds and mountains, let the 
earth shine with the rule of law as by the blaze of light, 
lord of earth and heaven. Lord of highest power, you 
move on wielding the most powerful and lustrous 
weapons of law and punishment. Gracious and non- 
violent with noble humanity, quiet, unseen and brave, 
you move with thrice seven heroic purities of existence, 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 134 601 


O noblest lord, with the purest and holiest verities of 
life. 
वनोति हि सुन्वन्क्षयं परीणसः सुन्वानो हि war यजत्यव 
द्विषो' देवानामव द्विष॑ः। सुन्वान इत्सिषासति weer 
वाज्यवुतः। सुन्वानायेन्द्रो ददात्याभुवं रयिं द॑दात्या- 
भुव॑म्‌॥ ७॥ 


१ Vanoti hi sunvan ksayam parinasah sunvano hi 
sma. Yajatyava dviso devanamava dvisah. Sun- 
vana it sisasati sahasra vajyavrtah. Sunvana- 
yendro dadatyabhuvam rayim dadatyabhuvam. 


The yajamana who performs yajna and distils 
the soma prays for a home and gets one. Organising the 
yajna and the distillation of the soma of joy and 
prosperity, he drives away many envious enemies by 
yajna, drives the enemies of noble people away. The 
organiser of yajna, fast, intelligent and wise, open, free 
and fearless wants to create a hundred things, and Indra, 
lord of creation, power and generosity creates and gives 
blissful wealth for the yajnic people, yes, the lord blesses 
with the gift of wealth, peace and joy. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 134 
Vayu Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 
आ त्वा जुवों रारहाणा अभि प्रयो वायो वहन्त्विह पूर्वपीतये 
सोम॑स्य पूर्वपीतये । ऊर्ध्वां ते अनुं सूनृता मन॑स्तिष्ठतु जानती । 
नियुत्व॑ता रथेना याहि दावने वायो मरस्य॑ दावने ॥ ९॥ 


iF A tva juvo rarahana abhi prayo vayo vahantviha 
purvapitaye somasya purvapitaye. Urdhva te anu 
sunrta manastisthatu janati. Niyutvata rathena 
yahi davane vayo makhasya davane. 


602 RGVEDA 


Vayu, spirit of yajnic vitality, may the fast 
currents of cosmic energy with love and caress escort 
and bring you here for a drink up of soma first of all, 
drink of fragrance as ever before, and your consort, 
upward current on the circuitous wave, recognising you 
as her partner and offering herself as an oblation, join 
you in the cycle of yajnic transmission of fragrance. 
Come, yoke the horses to the chariot and fly with your 
gifts for the generous yajamana. 


मन्द॑न्तु त्वा मन्दिनो वायविन्द॑वोऽस्पत््राणासः सुकुता 
अभिद्यवो गोभिः क्राणा अभिद्यवः। यन्द क्राणा इरध्यै 
दक्चं सच॑न्त ऊतयः | सध्रीचीना नियुतो दावने धिय sat 
gaa ई धिय॑ः ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Madantu tva mandino vayavindavo’smat kra- 
nasah sukrta abhidyavo gobhih krana abhi- 
dyavah. Yaddha krana iradhyai daksam sacanta 
utayah. Sadhricina niyuto davane dhiya upa 
bruvata im dhiyah. 


And O Vayu, cyclic energy of nature divine, may 
the exhilarating vapours of our yajna, well-created and 
activated by our libations into the fire, brilliant as light, 
radiating with the waves of the earth energy and rising 
with the rays of the sun join and vitalise you. The 
dynamic people exerting for advancement achieve 
divine protection and success. Only the intelligent ones 
working together in unison with yajna and divine energy 
receive and reveal the power and wisdom for the 
generous yajamana. 


ara S teat वायुररुणा वायू रथे अजिरा धुरि वोक््ह॑वे 
afest धुरि वोक्ह॑वे। प्र बोधया पुरन्धिं जार आ संसतीमिंव | 
प्र dea रोद॑सी वासयोषसः श्रव॑से वासयोषसः ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 134 603 


a Vayuryunkte rohita vayuraruna vayu rathe ajira 
dhuri volhave vahistha dhuri volhave. Pra bo- 
dhaya purandhim jara a sasatimiva. Pra caksaya 
rodasi vasayosasah sravase vasayosasah. 


Vayu yokes the red and the orange red of nature’s 
powers such as fire and light, and it inspires the dawn 
and the sun. It uses all the dynamic sources of energy 
and power such as air and wind, fire and sunlight, the 
mind and senses, and the flow of water, all strongest 
and most impetuous for transport and communication. 
It awakens them and yokes them to the chariot of cosmic 
movement. O Vayu, come and wake up and energise 
life like a lover who wakes up and impassions a sleeping 
beauty. Light up the heaven and earth, light up the 
dawns. Light up the dawn of new life and let it rise to 
the top of glory. 


तुभ्य॑मुषासः शुच॑यः परावतत भद्रा वस्त्रां तन्वते ca tis 
चित्रा नव्येषु रश्मिषु । तुभ्यं धेनुः सबर्दुघा विश्वा वसूनि 
दोहते। अज॑नयो weal वक्षणाभ्यो दिव आ वश्च- 
णाभ्यः॥ ड ॥ 


4. Tubhyam-usasah sucayah paravati bhadra vastra 
tanvate damsu rasmisu citra navyesu rasmisu. 
Tubhyam dhenuh sabardugha visva vasuni 
dohate. Ajanayo maruto vaksanabhyo diva a 
vaksanabhyah. 


For you, O Vayu, Divine Energy, the purest and 
brightest blissful lights of the dawn in far off spaces 
wondrously weave the designs of world beauty in 
sunlight, in the newest colourful rays of light. For you 
the all generous cow produces all the milky wealths of 


604 RGVEDA 


food and energy, the divine voice of universal potency 
brings all the wealths of world knowledge. For you do 
the winds unborn drink up the vapours from the flowing 
streams of water and yajna fragrances, and then from 
heaven shower the rain of water, energy and bliss for 
the world. 


तुभ्यं शुक्रासः शुच॑यस्तुरण्यवो मदेषूग्रा इषणन्त भुर्वण्य- 
पापमिंषन्त भुर्वणि । त्वां त्सारी दसमानो waits तक्ववीये । 
त्वं विश्व॑स्माद्धुव॑नात्ासि धर्मणाऽसुयीत्पासि धर्मणा ॥ ५ ॥ 


2; Tubhyam sukrasah 57/८८)व51/7व11)14170 madesugra 
isananta bhurvanyapamisanta bhurvani. Tvam 
tsart dasamano bhagamitte takvaviye. Tvam 
visvasmad bhuvanat pasi dharmana’suryat pasi 
dharmana. 


The brilliant, pure and radiant, fast and zealous, 
and the blazing geniuses in the ecstasy of meditation, 
in the rapid flow of their karmas have desire only for 
you, have love but only for you in the intensity of their 
karma and devotion. The man of strength and generosity 
going by safest high ways worships you, lord giver of 
wealth and power of the world. You alone, by Dharma 
save from all the evils of the world, you alone help us 
cross through the world through Dharma. 


त्वं नो वायवेषामपूर्व्यः सोमानां प्रथमः पीतिमर्हसि । सुतानां 
पीतिमर्हसि । उतो विहत्म॑तीनां विशां व॑वर्जुषी णाम्‌ । विश्वा 
इन्त धेनवो, दुह आशिरं घृतं दुहत आशिर॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tvam no vayavesamapurvyah somanam pratha- 
mah pitimarhasi sutanam pitimarhasi. Uto vihut- 
matinam visam vavarjusinam. Visva it te dhenavo 
duhra asiram ghrtam duhrata asiram. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 135 605 


O Vayu, first, unprecedented and eternal lord, 
you alone deserve to drink of these soma essences 
distilled by us, you alone deserve to receive the offer of 
our acts of worship. You alone are the object of worship 
by purified intelligences and dedicated souls of the 
people. All dynamics of the world, lights of the suns, 
earths of the universe, divinities of nature and geniuses 
of humanity offer the milk of worship, they offer the 
ghrta of milky soma in the divine fire for you, only for 
you. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 135 
Vayu Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


स्तीर्ण बर्हिरुप नो याहि वीतये सहस्त्रेण नियुता! नियुत्वते 
शतिनीभिर्निंयुत्वते । तुभ्यं हि पूर्वपीतये देवा care येमिरे | 
प्रते सुतासो मधुमन्तो अस्थिर न्मदांय रत्वे अस्थिरन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


I Stirnam barhirupa no yahi vitaye sahasrena 
niyuta niyutvate Satinibhir-niyutvate. Tubhyam hi 
purvapitaye deva devaya yemire. Pra te sutaso 
madhumanto asthiran madaya kratve asthiran. 


Vayu, the assembly hall is ready, the holy seat 
is laid, come fast, come close, come for certain by the 
chariot drawn by a thousand horses, for rest and drink 
of soma reserved for the hero of a hundred forces. The 
devas, saints and sages brilliant all, have prepared and 
reserved the soma for you first by virtue of your divinity. 
May the honey drinks of distilled soma be sure and 
stable, reserved for your delight in the joint yajna of 
corporate action. 


606 RGVEDA 


तुभ्यायं सोमः परिपूतो sfetu: स्पार्हा वसानः परि 
कोरमर्षति शुक्रा वसानो अर्षति। तवायं भाग आयुषु 
सोमो eae हूयते। ad वायो नियुतो याह्यस्मयुर्जषाणो 
याह्यस्मयुः ॥ २॥ 


Tubhyayam somah paripiuto adribhih sparha 
vasanah pari kosamarsati Sukra vasano arsati. 
Tavayam bhaga ayusu somo devesu huyate. Vaha 
vayo niyuto yahyasmayurjusano yahyasmayuh. 


For you does this soma distilled and purified 
with soma-stones and filters, seasoned by clouds, 
coveted and brilliant, over flows the jar. Pure, brilliant 
and exciting, it flows and overflows. This soma share 
of yours, delightful and exciting, is loved and honoured 
among the youth and learned divines. For this you are 
invoked and invited. Go, with love, your chariot driven 
by the team of horses impetuous as the winds, come for 
us and take your share of the beauty and ecstasy of life. 


आ al frat: शतिनीभिरध्वरं defSuiiired are 
वीतये वायो gent वीतये । तवायं भाग ऋत्वियः सरश्मिः 
सूर्ये war अध्वर्युथिभरंमाणा अयंसत वायो! शुक्रा 
अयंसत ॥ ३॥ ति 


2. A no niyudbhih gatinibhiradhvaram sahasri- 
nibhir-upa yahi vitaye vayo havyani vitaye. 
Tavayam bhaga rtviyah sarasmih surye saca. 
Adhvaryubhir-bharamana ayamsata vayo sukra 
ayamsata. 

O Vayu, lord of power, force and tempestuous 


speed, come to our yajnic project of love and non- 
violence for protection and participation to enjoy our 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 135 607 


offerings and hospitality. Come by your chariot drawn 
by hundreds and thousands of horses. Here is your share 
of holy offerings in accordance with the time and season, 
reinforced with the energy of light radiating from the 
sun. It is prepared by our high-priests of yajna, stored 
and reserved by them and to be offered by them to you, 
O Vayu, an offering holiest pure and paradisal! 


आ वां रथों नियुत्वान्वश्चदव॑सेऽ भि प्रयांसि afar वीतये 
वायो! हव्यानि वीतये । पिब॑तं मध्वो अन्ध॑सः पूर्वपेयं हि वां 
हितम्‌। वायवा चन्द्रेण राधसा ग॑तमिन्द्र॑श्च राधसा 
ग॑तम्‌ ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. A vam ratho niyutvan vaksadavase’ bhi prayamsi 
sudhitani vitaye vayo havyani vitaye. Pibatam 
madhvo andhasah purvapeyam hi vam hitam. 
Vayava candrena radhasa gatamindra-Ssca 
radhasa gatam. 


O Vayu, may the chariot equipped with horses 
fast as winds bring both of you, Vayu and Indra, like 
ruler and commander, for our protection and for our 
choicest offerings prepared in faith with love, yes for 
your gracious acceptance of our gifts. Come and drink 
of the honey sweets of soma reserved as special drink 
for you first and exclusively. Vayu, come with the golden 
gift of wealth and power, and may Indra also come with 
the wealth of universal value and success. 


आ वां धियो ववृत्युरध्वरां उपेममिन्दुं मर्मृजन्त वाजिनं- 
माशुमत्यं न वाजिन॑म्‌। तेषां पिबतमस्मयू आ al गन्त- 
पिहोत्या। इन्द्र॑वायू सुतानापमद्विभिर्युवं मदांय वाजदा 
युवम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 7 व 


608 RGVEDA 


2; A vam dhiyo vavrtyuradhvaran upemamindum 
marmrjanta vajinamasumatyam na vajinam. 
Tesam pibatamasmayu व no gantamihotya. 
Indravayu sutanamadribhiryuvam madaya 
vajada yuvam. 


O Indra and Vayu, ruler and commander of the 
world, lords of intelligence and power, come close, and 
may your intelligence and power strengthen and vitalise 
our yajnic actions and inspire men of knowledge and 
wisdom, and may they refine and reinforce this soma 
and this wealth and honour and this dynamism of ours 
as a groom refines and refreshes a fleet and impetuous 
horse. May they come for our protection and 
advancement and drink of these soma juices prepared 
with stones and seasoned with the vapours of clouds 
for the gift of joy and excitement. O Indra and Vayu, 
givers of joy and strength and speed, come both for the 
joy of life for you and for ourselves. 


इमे वां dn अप्स्वा सुता इहाध्वर्युभिर्भस्माणा अयंसत 
वायो शुक्रा अंयंसत । एते वांमभ्यंस्श्चत तिरः पवित्र॑माशवंः | 
युवायवोऽ ति रोमाण्यव्यया सोमासो अत्यव्यया ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ime vam soma apsva suta ihadhvaryubhirbha- 
ramana ayamsata vayo Sukra ayamsata. Ete 
vamabhyasrksata tirah pavitramasavah. Yuva- 
yavo ’ti romanyavyava somaso atyavyaya. 


Vayu, these soma juices extracted and distilled 
here in yajnas, perfected by the priests, pure and 
exciting, may reach you, must reach you both, Vayu 
and Indra. These, flowing to you both in cross currents 
as if eager for you are created for you and flow to you. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 135 609 


These are of imperishable strength and vitality and have 
been filtered through woollen filters of permanent value. 
The inspiration is even more than permanent, beyond 
imperishment. 


अति वायो ससतो याहि शश्व॑तो यत्र ग्रावा वदति तत्रं 
गच्छतं गृहमिन्द्रश्च गच्छतम्‌। वि सून॒ता eat रीय॑ते घतमा 
पूर्णया नियुतां याथो अध्वरमिन्द्रश्च याथो अध्वरम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Ati vayo sasato yahi Sasvato yatra grava vadati 
tatra gacchatam grhamindrasca gacchatam. Vi 
sunrta dadrse riyate ghrtama purnaya niyuta 
yatho adhvaramindrasca yatho adhvaram. 


O Vayu, power of speed and knowledge, pass 
by the idle and the sleeping. Both of you, Indra and 
Vayu, go to the lovers of permanent values and 
knowledge, there to the house where the voice of soma 
chant is heard, where truth and universal law of the 
universe is celebrated in yajna, and where ghrta flows 
into the yajna fire. Go to the yajna both of you, to the 
house of yajna by the chariot drawn by a team of horses 
in full and perfect form. 


stare तद्वहेथे मध्व आहुतिं यम॑रुवत्थमुंपतिष्ठन्त जायवोऽस्मे 
ते स॑न्तु wed: | साकं गावः सुव॑ते पच्यते यवो नते 
वाय उप॑ दस्यन्ति धेनवो नाप॑ दस्यन्ति धेनवः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Atraha tad vahethe madhva ahutim yamasv- 
attham-upatisthanta jayavo’sme te santu jayavah. 
Sakam gavah suvate pacyate yavo na te vaya upa 
dasyanti dhenavo napa dasyanti dhenavah. 


O noble Vayu and Indra, breath and powers of 
omniscience and omnipotence, scholar and commander, 


610 RGVEDA 


bring us here that holy fragrance of knowledge and 
power to our social yajna by which the rising youth 
aspiring for victory, sitting round you like nestlings in 
the sacred peepal tree, may benefit and reach the goal 
of their ambition. Our cows, our lands, our voices bear 
fruit. Our grains ripen, our individual and collective 
endeavours mature and prosper. O Vayu, your gifts of 
creation never decrease, your words never go waste, 
nor are they ever stolen away. 


इमे येते सु aa बाह्योजसोऽ न्तर्नदी ते पतयन्त्युक्षणो 
महि व्राध॑न्त Sarat: | धन्व॑ज्चिद्‌ ये अनाशवो जीराश्चिद- 
गिरौकसः। सूर्यस्येव रश्मयो दुर्नियन्तवो हस्त॑योर्दु- 
्नियन्त॑वः॥ ९॥ 


9. Ime ye tu su vayo bahvojaso’ntarnadi te pataya- 
ntyuksano mahi vradhanta uksanah. Dhanvancid 
ye anasavo jirascidagiraukasah. Suryasyeva 
rasmayo durniyantavo hastayordur-niyantavah. 


These warriors of yours, strong of arm and virile 
they are. Generous and creative, they sanctify the earth. 
They fly in space between earth and heaven, and, 
themselves rising in glory, they add to the glory of earth 
and heaven. Rising to the stars like the winds they are 
steady and self-restrained. Impetuous as they are like 
the winds, their rest and home is beyond words. 
Untamable they are like the sunbeams, and awful to 
handle by the hands. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 136 611 


Mandala 1/Sukta 136 
Mitra- Varuna Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 
TEs निचिराभ्यां बृहन्नमो हव्यं मतिं भ॑रता मृव्छयद्धयां 
स्वादिष्ठं मृद्छयद्ध्याम्‌। ता सम्राजा! घृतासुती यज्ञेयज्ञ 
उप॑स्तुता। अथेनोः क्षत्रं न कुत॑श्चनाधुषे देवत्वं नू 
चिदाधृषे i ९॥ 


ie Pra sujyestham nicirabhyam brhannamo havyam 
matim bharata mrlayadbhyam svadistham 
mrlayadbhyam. Ta samraja ghrtasuti yajneyajna 
upastuta. Athainoh ksatram na kutascanadhrse 
devatvam nu cidadhrse. 


Take the best and amplest food, and songs and 
tributes of adoration, holy and most delicious, and offer 
to the eternal, beneficent and gracious lords Mitra and 
Varuna, universal friend and adored love of everybody’s 
choice. Brilliant are they, regaled, revered and 
worshipped in yajna after yajna of social and sacred 
programmes with ghrta which they love and consume 
with delight. Their rule and power of order none can 
challenge, their brilliance and divinity none can resist. 


अदंश गातुरुरवे वरीयसी पन्थां ऋतस्य सम॑यंस्त रज्मि- 
भिश्‌ चश्षुर्भग॑स्य रस्मिभिः | द्युक्षं मित्रस्य साद॑नमर्यम्णो 
वरुणस्य च । अथां दधाते बृहदुक्थ्यं 4 वय॑ उपस्तुत्यं बृहद्‌ 
aa: ॥ २॥ = ति 


2. Adarsi gatururave variyast pantha rtasya sama- 
yamsta rasmibhiscaksurbhagasya rasmibhih. 
Dyuksam mitrasya sadanamaryamno varunasya 
ca. Atha dadhate brhadukthyam vaya upastutyam 
brhad vayah. 


612 RGVEDA 


The great earth is lit for a wide range of activities 
for the day. The path of Rtam, divine truth of Law and 
yajna is revealed by the rays of the sun, bright as the 
rays themselves, as the eye of the lord of world’s wealth 
has opened with the sun. The heavenly seats of Mitra, 
Aryama and Varuna, lords of love, justice and freedom, 
are bright on high. The divinities of nature bear and 
bring for humanity admirable food, health and long age. 
The noblest of humanity bear and offer holy offerings 
to the divinities of yajna with faith and holy chants of 
Vedic hymns. 


ज्योतिष्पतीमदिंतिं धार यत्छिंतिं स्वर्वतीमा daa दिवेदिवे 
जागृवांसा! दिवेदिःवे। ज्योतिष्मत्‌ क्चत्रमांशाते आदित्या 
दानुनस्पती । मित्रस्तयोर्वरुणो यातयज्न॑नोऽर्यमा यात्‌ 
यज्न॑नः ।॥ ३॥ 


ai Jyotismatimaditim dharayatksitim svarvatima 
sacete divedive jagrvamsa divedive. Jyotismat 
ksatramasate aditya danunaspati. mitrasta- 
yorvaruno yatayajjano’ryama yatayajjanah. 


Mitra and Varuna, centripetal and centrifugal 
powers of cosmic energy, which are the Adityas, children 
of Aditi, infinite and inviolable power of the omnipotent 
Lord, sustain the beautiful and paradisal indivisible earth 
joined with the self-luminant heaven day by day 
constantly. Ever wakeful are they, day in and day out, 
without a wink of sleep. They are supporters and 
protectors of the generous and motivated people and 
they pervade, unite and maintain the grand order of the 
earth and the world. Aryama, cosmic dynamics, ordains 
and harmonises the powers of the two, Mitra and Varuna, 
inspires the human creation and impels the entire 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 136 613 
universe of the Lord’s creation. 


अयं fara वरुणाय शन्तमः सोमो भूत्ववपानेष्वाभ॑ंगो 
देवो देवेष्वाभगः । तं देवासो जुषेरत विश्वे अद्य सजोष॑सः। 
तथां राजाना करथो यदीमह ऋतावाना यदीम॑हे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam mitraya varunaya samtamah somo bhitva- 
vapanesvabhago devo devesvabhagah. Tam 
devaso juserata 1751८ adya sajosasah. Tatha 
rajana karatho yadimaha rtavana yadimahe. 


May this Soma, holy peace and brilliant justice 
of the social order, be most joyous and blissful for Mitra 
and Varuna, friendly and the best intelligent powers be 
harbinger of honour and good fortune among saints and 
sages and in the daily business and yajnic programmes 
of national activity. May all the noble powers today, 
observing the common universal Dharma, serve the 
same peace and justice. May the ruling powers, 
observing the universal law, accept and do what we ask 
for, what we, observing the universal law, suggest they 
ought to do. 


यो मित्राय वरुणायाविंधज्जनोऽ नर्वाणं तं परिं पातो अंह॑सो 
दाश्वांसं मर्तमंहसः । तमर्यमाभि रश्चत्यृजूयन्तमनुं व्रतम्‌ । 
उक्थ्यं एनोः परिभूषति ad स्तोमैराभूषति व्रतम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


a Yo mitraya varunayavidhajjano’narvanam tam 
pari pato anhaso dasvamsam martamanhasah. 
Tamaryamabhi raksatyrjuyantamanu vratam. 
Ukthairya enoh paribhusati vratam stomaira- 
bhusati vratam. 


The man who serves Mitra, lord protector and 
friend of all, and Varuna, lord supreme of love and 


614 RGVEDA 


justice, is generous, free from jealousy and irresistible. 
The lords save him from sin and protect him against 
evil and wickedness. Aryama, lord of universal law, 
gives him all round protection and promotion who is 
simple and honest in character and behaviour and 
submits to the divine law and discipline in word and 
deed, who honours the discipline of Mitra and Varuna 
with sincere words of thanks and praise and, in 
obedience to their law, abides by them in creative acts 
of yajna in regular seasonal performances. 


नमों दिवे dea रोद॑सीभ्यां मित्राय॑ वोचं वरुणाय teed 
सुमृव्टीकायं Heed । इन्द्र॑मग्रिमुप स्तुहि द्युक्षमर्यमणं भग॑म्‌। 
ज्योग्जीव॑न्तः प्रजया सचेमहि सोम॑स्योती स॑चेमहि ॥ ६॥ 


6. Namo dive brhate rodasibhyam mitraya vocam 
varunaya milhuse sumrlikaya milhuse. Indrama- 
gnimupa stuhi dyuksamaryamanam bhagam. 
Jyogjivantah prajaya sacemahi somasyoti 
sacemahi. 


We offer words of praise and homage in honour 
of the great heaven of light, the earth and the skies, 
Mitra, lord of universal friendship, Varuna, lord supreme 
of love and choice, generous, blissful and virile. O man, 
sing in praise of Indra, lord of power, Agni, lord of light 
and leadership, the lord of heavenly light, Aryama, lord 
of the stars, and Bhaga, lord of wealth and honour. O 
Lord, living long, we pray, may we be blest with good 
family and friends, may we enjoy the protection of 
Soma, lord of peace, light and joy of the world. 


ऊती देवानां वयमिन्द्रवन्तो मंसीमहि स्वय॑शसो were: 1 
अथिर्मित्रो atu: शर्म' यंसन्‌ तद॑श्याम मघवानो वयं 
चं॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 137 615 


7. Uti devanam vayamindravanto mamsimahi 
svayasaso marudbhih. Agnirmitro varunah Sarma 
yamsan tadasyama maghavano vayam ca. 


Blest with wealth and power, enjoying fame and 
glory, now our own, with youth vibrant as the winds, 
we Set our heart and mind on the protection of divinities 
and the best great powers of humanity. We pray may 
Agni, lord of light and energy, Mitra, the sun, and 
Varuna, the moon, grant us peace, comfort and joy of a 
happy home, and we resolve that, having that bounty 
and munificence of the divinities, we endeavour to do 
our Karma and achieve the same. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 137 
Mitra-Varuna Devata, Paruchhepa Daivodasi Rshi 


सुषुमा यांतमद्िथिर्गोश्रीता मत्सरा इमे सोमासो मत्सरा 
इमे । आ राजाना दिविस्पृशाऽस्यत्रा गन्तमुप नः। इमे वां 
मित्रावरुणा गवांशिर : सोमाः शुक्रा गवाशिरः ॥ ९॥ 


il, Susuma yatamadribhirgosrita matsara ime 
somaso matsara ime. A rajana divisprsa ’smatra 
gantamupa nah. Ime vam mitravarund gavasirah 
somah sukra gavasirah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, dear as the very breath of 
life and motion of our blood, friends of our darling 
choice, dazzling with splendour and soothing with 
beauty as the sun and the moon, touching the very 
heights of heaven in your character and action, come 
both, come close to us all and join us. You are ours, our 
saviours and protectors. We distill these soma drinks of 
life for you. They are refined with soma-stones and 


616 RGVEDA 


replete with the showers of the clouds, mixed with cows 
milk and ripened with sun-rays. Exciting are these, 
ecstatic with sensuous joy and sobering with spiritual 
peace and enlightenment. These soma gifts of life, 
lustrous and delicious essences of the foods of the earth 
and light of the sun are for you, Mitra and Varuna, 
darlings of our love and admiration in faith, constant 
companions as day and night. 


इम आ यातमिन्दवः सोमासो center: सुतासो दध्यां- 
शिरः । उत वामुषसो बुधि साकं सूर्य॑स्य रश्मिभिः | सुतो 
मित्राय वरुणाय पीतये चारुऋताय॑ पीतये ॥ २ ॥ 


pF Ima a yatamindavah somaso dadhyasirah sutaso 
dadhyasirah. Uta vamusaso budhi sakam sur- 
yasya rasmibhih. Suto mitraya varunaya pitaye 
carurrtaya pitaye. 


O Mitra and Varuna, bright friend as the day 
and highest lord of wisdom, broad as the sky and deep 
as the night, come, these nectar drops of soma mixed 
with curds, distilled at the break of dawn and matured 
with life-giving rays of the sun, are for you both, yes, 
distilled for the drink of Mitra and Varuna, matured for 
a soothing, inspiring and enlightening drink of the truth 
and essence of law of the world of existence for both 
our friends and wise teachers, ideals of our love and 
cherished choice and for the dearest lover of truth. 


तां वां धेनुं न वांसरीमंशं दुहन्त्यद्रिभिः सोमं दुहन्त्यद्िभिः। 
अस्मत्रा ग॑न्तमुप॑ नोऽ वञ्च सोम॑पीतये । अयं वां मित्रा- 
वरुणा नृभिः सुतः सोम आ पीतये सुतः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 138 617 


a Tam vam dhenum na vasarimamsum duhantya- 
dribhih somam duhantyadribhih. Asmatra 
gantamupa no’rvanca somapitaye. Ayam vam 
mitravaruna nrbhih sutah soma a pitaye sutah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, best of friends and highest 
order of the wise, our people extract and distil the soma 
drink for you from delicate shoots of soma plant crushed 
with soma stones and seasoned with showers, yes, they 
extract this soma as they milk a fertile generous cow. 
Saviours and protectors of us all, come here close to us 
upfront for a drink of soma and for protection of the 
soma joy of the people. Listen both of you graciously, 
Mitra and Varuna, these somas are distilled by all our 
people for you, for your drink, delightful drink of soma 
distilled for you. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 138 
Pusa Devata, Paruchepa Daivodasi Rshi 


प्रप्र॑ पृष्णस्तुविजातस्यं शस्यते महित्वम॑स्य तवसो न त॑न्दते 
स्तोत्रम॑स्य न त॑न्दते। अचीमि सुम्नयन्नहमन्त्युतिं मयोभुव॑म्‌। 
विश्व॑स्य यो मन॑ आयुयुवे मखो देव आयुयुवे मखः ॥ ९ ॥ 


5 Prapra pusnastuvijatasya Sasyate mahitvamasya 
tavaso na tandate stotramasya na tandate. Arcami 
sumnayannahamantyutim mayobhuvam. Visvasya 
yo mana ayuyuve makho deva ayuyuve makhah. 


The greatness and grandeur of this Pusha, lord 
of living power, protection and promotion, renowned 
among the strongest, resounds all round. None can 
violate his prowess, none can destroy his knowledge 
and fame. Dedicated to peace and well-being, I adore 


618 RGVEDA 


him, the very image of strength and protection, 
embodiment of peace and joy. Lord of social cohesion 
and holy union in yajna, he unites the minds of all 
humanity. Brilliant and generous, yajna itself, he joins 
everything together in existence as one integrated 
organismic whole. 


प्र हि त्वां पूषन्नजिरं न याम॑नि ere: कृण्व ऋणवो 
यथा मृध Set न पीपरो मृध॑: । हवे यत्त्वां मयोभुवं देवं 
सख्याय मर्त्यः | अस्माकमाङ्गूषान्‌ द्युम्निनस्कृधि वाजेषु 
दयुस्निन॑स्कृधि ॥ २॥ _ 


0.0 Pra hi tva pusannajiram na yamani stomebhih 
krnva rnavo yatha mrdha ustro na piparo mrdhah. 
Huve yat tva mayobhuvam devam sakhyaya 
martyah. Asmakamangusan dyumninaskrdhi 
vajesu dyumninaskrdhi. 


Pusha, lord of nourishment, health and 
protection, I celebrate you with songs of praise as a fast 
and intelligent traveller on the path of life. Just as 
warriors go to battle and win, just as camels cross the 
desert, so do you help us get over the battles of life. As 
Iam mortal, I invoke you and pray, lord of peace, indeed 
an embodiment of peace and joy, brilliant and generous, 
for help and friendship on the journey. Inspire our 
prayers and wise men with power and spiritual strength 
in the serious business of life, give us the wealth of 
victory in the battles of life. 


यस्य॑ ते पूषन्त्सख्ये विपन्यवः क्रत्वां चित्सन्तोऽव॑सा 
लुभुचिर इति क्रत्वा लुभुचिरे। तामनु त्वा नवीयसीं नियुतं 
राय ईमहे। अदहेव्छमान उरुशंस सरी भव वाजेवाजे ait 
भव ॥३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 138 619 


oF Yasya te pusantsakhye vipanyavah kratva cit 
santo ’vasa bubhuyjrira iti kratva bubhujrire. Tama- 
nu tva naviyasim niyutam raya tmahe. Ahelamana 
urusamsa sart bhava vajevaje sari bhava. 


Pusha, lord giver of health and joy, by virtue of 
your friendship, being strong of intelligence yajnic 
performance and self-protection, people enjoy a good 
self-image and self-esteem. And as thus they esteem 
themselves by their performance and enjoy life, we pray 
to you for the latest and countless forms of the wealth 
of life. Lord of health and joy, kind and favourable, 
universally adored, accept us as good friends and 
soldiers and be with us in every battle of life. 


अस्या ऊ षु ण sd ada भुवोऽ हैव्मानो that अजाश्व 
श्रवस्यतामजाश्व | ओ षु त्वां ववृतीमहि स्तोमेभिर्दस्म 
साधुभिः | नहि त्वौ पूषन्नतिमन्य sirqut न तें सख्यम॑- 
Ug ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asya u $" 11८ upa sataye bhuvo’helamano rarivan 
ajasva Sravasyatamajasva. O su tva vavrtimahi 
stomebhirdasma sadhubhih. Nahi tva pusannati- 
manya aghrne na te sakhyamapahnuve. 


Pusha, lord of nature and fastest motion, lord of 
goats and horses, we pray, be close with us for the gift 
of this wealth and intelligence, be kind and generous, 
richest of the masters of food, wealth and power. With 
our best and holiest songs of praise and prayer, O lord 
of riches and generosity, destroyer of suffering, we pray, 
we may always abide by you. Lord of light and showers 
of nourishment, we never offend your majesty, we never 
neglect or disregard your friendship. We are with you, 


620 RGVEDA 
pray be with us. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 139 


Vishvedeva, Mitra- Varuna, Ashvins, Indra, Agni, Maruts, 
Indragni, Brhaspati, Vishvedeva Devata, Paruchhep 
Daivodasi Rshi 


अस्तु श्रौष॑ट्‌ पुरो sift धिया द॑ध आ नु तच्छर्धो दिव्यं 
तंणीमह इन्द्रवायू duis | aed राणा विवस्व॑ति नाभां 
सन्दायि नव्य॑सी। sta aw ga उप॑ यन्तु धीतयो देवां 
अच्छा न धीतयः ॥ ९॥ 


iB Astu Srausat puro agnim dhiya dadha a nu 
tacchardho divyam vrnimaha indravayu vrni- 
mahe. Yaddha krana vivasvati nabha samdayi 
navyasi. Adha pra su na upa yantu dhitayo devan 
accha na dhitayah. 


May my voice be heard! I have realised the 
energy and power of Agni, light and fire, in full with 
my intellect and understanding. Then we opt for the 
divine force and power of nature and move on to the 
study and application of the power of wind and 
electricity which, active at the centre of the sun, give us 
the newest and latest form of energy and power. May 
all our intellectual efforts and intelligential vision reach 
the forces of nature and analyse and discover their 
energy and powers. Let us reach there well with all our 
intellect and imagination and let our efforts benefit the 
noblest humanity. 


ag त्यन्पिंत्रावरुणावृतादध्यांददाथे अनतं स्वेन॑ मन्युना 
दक्ष॑स्य स्वेन॑ मन्युना । युवोरित्थाधि सद्यास्वप्॑याम हिरण्य 
य॑म्‌। धीभिश्चन मन॑सा स्वेभिरक्षभिः सोम॑स्य wate 
रश्चभिंः॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 139 621 


2. Yaddha tyanmitravarunavrtadadhyadadathe 
anrtam svena manyuna daksasya svena manyunda. 
Yuvoritthadhi sadmasvapasyama hiranyayam. 
Dhibhiscana manasa svebhiraksabhih somasya 
svebhiraksabhih. 


O Mitra and Varuna, whatever you win and 
achieve by virtue of your love of goodness and 
dedication to Truth over untruth with your own valour 
and passion and with the expert’s own action and 
passion, we see over and above everything, the same 
way, shining like gold everywhere in your own homes, 
and we pray we too may win and achieve the same lustre 
of truth over untruth by virtue of our understanding, 
thought and vision and the imagination of Soma, lord 
lover of peace and beauty. 


युवां स्तोमेभिर्देवयन्तो अश्विनाऽऽश्रावयन्तइव yar - 
मायवों युवां हव्याभ्याई aad: । युवोर्विश्वा अधि भियः 
पृक्ष॑श्च विशूववेदसा । प्रुषायन्ते वां पवयो हिरण्यये रथं 
दस्रा हिरण्यये ॥३॥ ` 


६ Yuvam stomebhir-devayanto asvina’’sravayanta 
iva Slokamayavo yuvam havyabhyayavah. 
Yuvorvisva adhi sriyah prksasca visvavedasa. 
Prusayante vam pavayo hiranyaye rathe dasra 
hiranyaye. 


Ashvins, lords and harbingers of light and the 
light of wealth and knowledge, mortal men loving and 
dedicated to you, celebrating your divinity with words 
of praise and singing songs to you in your honour, do 
homage to you with holy offerings. Lords of universal 
knowledge, yours are the wealth and beauty and all 


622 RGVEDA 


resources of the world you rule over. Generous lords 
and protectors, graceful in your chariot, the golden 
wheels of the chariot shower and sanctify you with the 
golden beams of radiance. 


अचेति cen व्यु4नाकमरण्वथो युञ्जते वां रथयुजो 
दिविंशिष्वध्वस्मानो दिविष्टिषु । अधिं वां स्थाम॑ वन्धुरे रथं 
दस्रा हिरण्यये । पथेव यन्तांवनुशास॑ता रजोऽ ज्ज॑सा 
शासंता रजं: ॥ ४ ॥ ति 


4. Aceti dasra vyunakamrnvatho yunjate vam 
rathayujo divistisvadhvasmano divistisu. Adhi 
vam sthama vandhure rathe dasra hiranyaye. 
Patheva yantavanusasata rajo’njasa sasata rajah. 


Ashvins, lords of grace and destroyers of 
suffering, you travel by the paradisal paths of joy, it is 
universally known, Users of the chariot flying by paths 
of the skies on high join you, they fly in the sky without 
losing height. Generous lords of light, let us also join 
you on your golden and stoutly structured chariot. Going 
on high as on highways of the earth, you are rulers of 
the skies, you rule the skies with your strength and speed 
of motion. 


शचीभिर्नः शचीवसू दिवा नक्तं दशस्यतम्‌ aT वां Uhre 
दसत्कदा चनास्मद्रातिः कदां चन ॥५॥ 


5. Sacitbhirnah sacivasu diva naktam dasasyatam. 
Ma vam ratirupa dasat kada canasmad ratih kada 
cana. 


Ashvins, lords of noble action and givers of 
wealth by noble action, for the noble actions of ours, 
bless us with the gifts of wealth day and night. We pray, 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 139 623 


may your generosity never wear away from us. May 
our charity too never forsake us. 


वृष॑न्निन्द्र वृषपाणास इन्द॑व इमे सुता अद्रिषुतास उद्धि- 
दस्तुभ्यं'सुतासं उद्भिदः । ते त्वा मन्दन्तु दावने महे चित्राय 
राध॑से । गीर्भिर्गि्वाहिः स्तव॑मान आ ग॑हि सुमृव्टीको न आ 
-गंहि।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vrsannindra vrsapanasa indava ime suta adri- 
sutasa udbhidastubhyam sutasa udbhidah. Te tva 
mandantu davane mahe citraya radhase. Girbhir- 
girvahah stavamana a gahi sumrliko na a gahi. 


Indra, lord of power and honour, virile and 
generous, these sparkling draughts of soma worthy of 
the mighty generous and heroic, extracted with soma 
stones, distilled from the vapours of the clouds, bubbling 
and exciting they are, are distilled for you. May they be 
delightful to you, generous giver, great, wonderful, and 
thriving lord of accomplishment and success. Lord 
adorable in the holiest words, celebrated in song, giver 
of bliss, come, come to us and bless! 


sir yun sw sure त्वमीच्ठितो देवेभ्यो sata यज्ञियेभ्यो 
राज॑भ्यो यज्ञियेभ्यः । यद्ध त्यामङ्धिरोभ्यो धेनुं दैवा अद॑त्तन । 
वितां दुहे अर्यमा कर्तरी सच एष तां वेद मे सचां ॥ ७॥ 


7. O suno agne Srunuhi tvamilito Devebhyo bravasi 
yajniyebhyo rajabhyo yajniyebhyah. Yaddha tya- 
mangirobhyo dhenum deva adattana. Vi tam duh- 
re aryama kartari sacan esa tam veda me saca. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and leadership, 
lord adorable and adored, listen graciously to our word: 
you speak to the brilliant and revered men of knowledge 


624 RGVEDA 


and yajna, you speak to the illustrious men of 
governance and administration. Say this: O Devas, 
divine powers, whatever word of knowledge and life’s 
vitality you impart to the scholars of energy and the 
science of life, that very knowledge the specialist of 
mind, will and emotion, Aryama, has distilled for his 
co-worker, the man of action, and the same this friend 
and colleague of mine, the judge, knows for practical 
application. 


मो षु वो अस्मदभि तानि पौंस्या सना। भूवन्‌ द्युम्नानि मोत 
जांरिषुर स्मत्पुरोत जारिषुः | यद्‌ व॑श्चित्रं युगेयुगे नव्यं 
घोषादमर्त्यम्‌ | अस्मासु तन्म॑रुतो यच्च॑ दुष्टरं" दिधृता यच्च॑ 
दुष्टरम्‌ ue ति . ति 


8. Mo su vo asmadabhi tani paumsya sana bhuvan 
dyumnani mota jasisurasmat purota jarisuh. Yad 
vaScitram yugeyuge navyam ghosadamar-tyam. 
Asmasu tanmaruto yacca dustaram didhrta yacca 
dustaram. 


O Maruts, brave heroes of earth and space 
vibrant as waves of energy, may your ancient and eternal 
powers and potentials and ours, and our honour and 
fame never wear away outmoded, and never forsake 
us. Whatever is yours, wondrous and excellent, ancient 
and yet ever new from age to age, what is imperishable 
from the eternal Voice and your proclamations, fix that 
within us deep in the mind, so it is difficult to surpass, 
unchallengeable. 


दध्यङ्‌ हं मे जनुषं vat sist: प्रियमेधः कण्वो sires 


विदुस्ते मे ue मनुर्विदुः । तेषां देवेष्वाय॑तिर स्माकं तेषु 
नाभ॑यः । तेषां पदेन मह्या न॑मे गिरेन्द्राग्री आ न॑मे गिरा॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 139 625 


a. Dadhyan ha me janusam purvo angirah priya- 
medhah kanvo atrirmanurviduste me purve manu- 
rviduh. Tesam devesvayatirasmakam tesu nabha- 
yah. Tesam padena mahya name girendragni a 
name gira. 


Dadhyang, the ideal man of virtue who 
approaches men of knowledge and wisdom with 
reverence, Angira, the scholar of life-energy and science, 
Priyamedha, the visionary who loves intellectual 
advancement, Kanva, the high-priest of intelligence, 
Atri, the saint who has conquered threefold pain and 
suffering, Manu, the philosopher of thought and 
contemplation, all these perfect souls, realised souls of 
wisdom all, know my rebirth into the state of knowledge 
and refinement, yes, they know. Our reach is unto the 
centre of their holy presence, the centre hold of our 
identity is there. In their tradition, at every step, with 
every word I speak of exalted speech, I adore Indra and 
Agni, lord of honour and power, lord of light and 
knowledge, I bow in thought, word and deed. 


होता यक्षद्‌ व निनो! वन्त वार्य बृहस्पतिर्यजति वेन उक्षभिः 
पुरुवारेभिरुक्षभिः । जगृभ्मा दूरआदिशं शत्लोकमद्रेरध त्मना । 
अधारयदररिन्दानि सुक्रतुः पुरू सद्यानि सुक्रतुः go ul 


10. Hota yaksad vanino vanta varyam brhaspatir- 
yajati vena uksabhih puruvarebhiruksabhih. 
Jagrbhma dura adisam slokamadreradha tmana. 
Adharayadararindani sukratuh puru sadmani 
sukratuh. 


Let the performer of yajna offer oblations in 
honour of the divinities of nature and humanity. Let the 


626 RGVEDA 


brilliant man of knowledge honour and serve the 
virtuous man worthy of choice. Let Brhaspati, scholar 
of knowledge and master of the speech of knowledge, 
loving and kind, associate with generous and virtuous 
people and, with all these noble sacrificing people, 
engage in yajna, socially creative work. Let us all, with 
equal mind and soul, hear and internalise what words 
of truth are spoken even far away as we enjoy the sound 
of soma stones and the soothing showers of clouds. Let 
the man of holy intelligence and action enjoy the 
showers of peace, prosperity and joy, and may the man 
of noble yajna enjoy many many homes and havens of 
his choice. 


ये देवासो दिव्येकांदरा स्थ पंथिव्यामध्येकांदरा स्थ। 
अप्सुक्षितो महिनैकादश स्थ ते देवासो यज्ञमिमं जुष- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ye devaso divyekadasa stha prthivyamadhye- 
kadasa stha. Apsuksito mahinaikadasa stha te 
devaso yajnamimam jusadhvam. 


O divinities, brilliant and generous powers of 
the Divine, existing and active by your great power and 
potential, ten pranic life energies and the individual soul, 
abiding in the heavenly regions of light, and the same 
eleven existing on the earth, and the same eleven abiding 
in the waters and the skies, may all these universal 
powers come and join this yajna of our life, and help us 
to extend it wide and high. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 140 627 


Mandala 1/Sukta 140 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


वेदिषदे प्रियधामाय सुद्युते धासिमिव प्र भ॑रा योनिंमग्रयें | 
वस्त्रेणेव वासया मन्म॑ना शुचिं ज्योतीरथं शुक्रवर्णं 
तमोहनम्‌ ९॥ 


iP Vedisade priyadhamaya sudyute Dhasimiva pra 
bhara yonimagnaye. Vastreneva vasaya man- 
mana sucim jyotiratham sukravarnam tamo- 
hanam. 


As you bring holy food for the holy fire burning 
bright in the vedi, lovely seat of its choice, so for Agni, 
with a sincere mind and soul, prepare a happy home 
and a brilliant chariot of light, pure, blazing white 
dispelling darkness, and cover it safe as with a cloth, 
beautifully and fragrantly. 


अभि द्विजन्मा त्रिवृदन्न मृज्यते संवत्सरे वां वृधे जग्धमी oA: 1 
अन्यस्यासा जिह्यया जेन्यो वृषा न्यश्न्येन॑ वनिनो मृष्ट 
वारणः॥ २॥ 


2. Abhi dvijanma trivrdannamrjyate samvatsare 
vavrdhe jagdhami punah. Anyasyasa jihvaya 
jenyo vrsda nyanyena vanino mrsta varanah. 


To the twice born scholar threefold food of jnana 
(knowledge), karma (action) and Upasana (prayer and 
meditation) is brought and gifted which, received in the 
session and assimilated, grows manifold in the session. 
By the mouth and tongue (speech) of another, the 
teacher, and with the mouth and tongue of others (his 
colleagues), through discussion, the strong and 
victorious scholar warding off difficulties and 


628 RGVEDA 


challenges in the company of others refines and shines 
all those who love and admire him. 


कृष्णप्रुतौ वेविजे sear afar उभा त॑रेते अभि मातरा 
शिशुम्‌ । प्राचाजिह्वं ध्वसय॑न्तं तृषुच्युतमा साच्यं कुप॑यं 
वर्धनं पितुः ॥ ३॥ 


ध Krsnaprutau vevije asya saksita ubha tarete abhi 
matara sisum. Pracajihvam dhvasayantam trsu- 
cyutama sacyam kupayam vardhanam pituh. 


Both the mothers of this Agni, 1.e., the mother 
and the guru-mother of the scholar at school, both equal 
in ambition, rising to the clouds in hope, vibrate in 
ecstasy like the two arani woods which produce the fire, 
and look forward to the success of their child speaking 
boldly, destroying the darkness of ignorance and 
acquiring knowledge, being reborn fast, worthy of the 
company, joy and honour of his father, but carefully to 
be guarded at every critical step. 


मुमुक्ष्वो ३ मन॑वे मानवस्यते tage: कृष्णसीतास ऊ aa: । 
असमना अजिरासो रघुष्यदो वात॑जूता उप॑ युज्यन्त 
आशवः UY 


4. Mumuksvo manave manavasyate raghudruvah 
krsnasitasa u juvah. Asamana ajiraso raghusyado 
vatajuta upa yujyanta asavah. 


All lovers of liberation, dynamic pioneers, 
explorers of the unknown paths of the world, smartest, 
diverse minded, fast and wind-inspired, shooting to the 
goal at the speed of light join on the yajna vedi with the 
man of thought for the man of self-esteem and honour. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 140 629 


आद॑स्य ते ध्वसयन्तो वृथेरते कृष्णमभ्वं महि ad: 
करिक्रतः । यत्सी' महीमवनिं प्राभि मर्मशदभिश्वसन्त्स्तन- 
यन्नेति नान॑दत्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


a, Adasya te dhvasayanto vrtherate krsnamabhvam 
mahi varpah karikratah.Yat sim mahimavanim 
prabhi marmrsadabhisvasan tstanayanneti 
nanadat. 


When this Agni, mighty hero of light and power, 
goes forward blowing, roaring, thundering and striking, 
covering and vitalising this great earth all round, then 
those warriors of his, men of action, advance at will 
destroying the monstrous ways of darkness and creating 
mighty forms of life and social structure. 


भूषन्‌ न योऽ धिं बभ्रूषु नम्न॑ते वृषेव पत्नीर भयेति रोरुवत्‌ | 
ओजायमानस्तन्वश्च शुम्भते भीमो न erst दविधाव 
दुर्गृभिः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Bhusan na yo’dhi babhriusu namnate vrseva 


patnirabhyeti roruvat. Ojayamanastanvasca 
sumbhate bhimo na srnga davidhava durgr-bhih. 


Graceful among the old sages, he excels, doing 
reverence and homage bowing down. Like a virile 
husband going to meet his wife, he moves and speaks 
loud and bold among creative women dedicated to pious 
and holy yajna. Like a man of light and power, he 
appears in brilliant form. Like an awful lion difficult to 
overcome, he goes about majestically commanding all 
with his knowledge and power at the peak. 


स संस्तिरो विष्टिरः सं गभायति जानन्नेव जानतीर्नित्य आ 
श॑ये । पुनर्वर्धन्ते अपिं यन्ति देव्य॑मन्यद्‌ वर्प पित्रोः कुण्वते 
सचां ॥ ७॥ 


630 RGVEDA 


4 Sa samstiro vistirah sam grbhayati jananneva 
janatirnitya a Saye. Punarvardhante api yanti 
devyamanyad varpah pitroh krnvate saca. 


Covering or expanding, Agni, the brilliant 
scholar, covers and seizes things and subjects well, 
intensively as well as extensively, and vitalizes them. 
Knowing well, he always associates with those who are 
knowledgeable, and they, in association with him, 
growing higher and higher, assume a divine from and 
thus create a personality different from the personality 
of their birth. 


anya: केशिनीः सं हि tar ऊर्ध्वस्तिस्थुर्मम्रुषीः प्रायवे 
पुन॑ः । तासां जरां प्र॑मुञ्चन्नेति नान॑ददसुं परं जनय॑ ञ्जी वम- 
स्तुतम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tamagruvah kesinith sam hi rebhira urdhvas- 
tasthur-mamrusth prayave punah. Tasam jaram 
pramuncanneti nanadadasum param janayan- 
Jivamastrtam. 


The leading lights speak of Agni like flames of 
fire and sing of him, and if they ever go down weak and 
enervated, they look up to him for fresh life, and Agni, 
releasing them from their weakness and enervation and 
recreating a high order of fresh vitality and new life, 
helps them stay up on high as before and goes forward 
roaring and crackling as ever. 


अधीवासं परि मातू रिहन्नह तुविग्रेभिः सत्वभिर्याति वि 
wa: | वयो दध॑त्‌ पद्वते रेरि हत्‌ सदानु श्येनी सचते 
वर्तनीरह ।॥। ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 140 631 


र Adhivasam pari matu rihannaha tuvigrebhih 
satvabhiryati vi jrayah. Vayo dadhat padvate 
rerihat sada’nu Syent sacate vartaniraha. 


Touching and playing with the upper green 
garments of mother earth, going fast with resounding 
living beings, bearing foods and health and vitality for 
the moving multitudes on earth, always following the 
paths it came by, Agni goes on leaving behind a reddish 
white trail of its visit. 


अस्माकमग्ने मघवत्सु difaaa Vasa, वृषभो SAAT: | 
अवास्या शिशुमतीरदीदेर्वरमिव युत्सु परिजर्भुराणः ॥ Qo ॥ 


10. Asmakam-agne maghavatsu didihyadha svasivan 
vrsabho damunah. Avasya sisumati-radider- 
varmeva yutsu parijarbhuranah. 


Agni, shine among our great and powerful 
people, and then, breathing, panting, blowing and 
bellowing like a bull, overflowing with energy, 
commanding and restraining, dear to the families but 
blazing in the battles, protect women, children and the 
homes like an armour, throw out the enemy and shine 
and brighten up life all around. 


इदमग्रे सुधितं दुर्धितादधि प्रियाद्‌ चिन्मन्म॑नः प्रेयो अस्तु 
ते। यत्ते शुक्रं तन्वो ई रोच॑ते शुचि तेनास्मभ्यं वनसे रत्नमा 
त्वम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Idamagne sudhitam durdhitadadhi priyadu 


cinmanmanah preyo astu te. Yat te Sukram tanvo 
rocate Suci tenasmabhyam vanase ratnama tvam. 


Agni, may this mind and song of ours composed 
with love and dedicated in faith be dearer to you than 


632 RGVEDA 


the dearest song composed with the greatest effort for 
you, and may the splendour of your person which blazes 
pure and sacred be auspicious for us by which you bring 
us precious jewels of life. 


रथाय Araya नो गृहाय नित्यारित्रां पद्वतीं रास्यगे | अस्माकं 
वीरां उत नो मघोनो जनींश्च या पारयामच्छर्म या च॑ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Rathaya navamuta no grhaya nityaritram 
padvatim rasyagne. Asmakam viran uta no 
maghono janansca ya parayaccharma ya ca. 


Agni, lord of light, fire and knowledge, for our 
chariot-car and for our home, give us the power fitted 
with life-time mechanism for propulsion, steering and 
measuring the depth of water, a transport which may 
take our brave heroes, leaders of power and men of 
wealth, and the people across the rivers and seas and 
which may provide for peace, protection and a 
comfortable house. 


अभी al अग्र उक्थमिज्जुगुर्या द्यावाक्षामा सिन्ध॑वश्च 
स्वगुर्ताः। गव्यं यव्यं यन्तो Crates वरंमरूण्यो! वरन्त ॥ 23 ॥ 


Abhi no agna ukthamijjugurya dyavaksama 
sindhavasca svagurtah. Gavyam yavyam yanto 
dirghahesam varamarunyo varanta. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, accept our 
song and raise our sacred action so that the heaven and 
earth, the rivers and seas and the dawns, all self-moved, 
may be favourable to us and give us our choice wealth 
of cows and plenty of milk, lot of food grains and the 
best of jewels for long long days to come for a full and 
vibrant life. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 141 633 


Mandala 1/Sukta 141 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


afaen तद्‌ ade धायि दर्श॒तं देवस्य भर्गः सह॑सो यतो 
wre यदीमुप हरं ते साध॑ते मतिक्ऋतस्य धेना अनयन्त 
सस्तत: ॥ ९॥ 


I. Balittha tad vapuse dhayi darsatam devasya 
bhargah sahaso yato jani. Yadimupa hvarate 
sadhate matirrtasya dhena anayanta sasrutah. 


Truly thus, by the grace of Divinity, is radiated 
and received the wonderful splendour of Agni’s glory, 
and therein lies the seed, the birth, the very life of the 
strength and victory of our soul’s existence: therefrom 
is the light radiated and received for the beauty of our 
embodied soul so that even if our mind ever deviates 
from truth, the voices of Law and Truth of Eternity ever 
resounding, ever flowing with currents of nature’s light, 
call us back to the right path and, thus beatified, our 
mind achieves the success we want. 


पृक्षो वपुः पितुमान्नित्य आ शये द्वितीयमा सप्तशिवासु 
Ade | ततीय मस्य वृषभस्य दोहसे दशप्रमतिं जनयन्त 
योष॑णः ।॥ २॥ 


2. Prkso vapuh pituman nitya a Saye dvitiyama 
saptasivasu matrsu. Trttyamasya vrsabhasya 
dohase daSapramatim janayanta yosanah. 


The eternal Agni, which nourishes and matures 
the body of life with food, lives in the physical body (as 
vital heat and abides with the earth). The second form 
of it abides in the seven motherly forms of nature (which 
are the seven lokas bhuh, bhuvah, svah, maha, janah, 


634 RGVEDA 


tapah and satyam), which empowers seven grades of 
natural energy, and matures the seven grades of natural 
life. The third form of this generous divinity which 
matures and distils the essences of natural life abides in 
the sun. And the form which energises ten intelligential 
faculties (five senses of hearing, touch, sigh, taste and 
smell, mana or mind, buddhi or intellect, chitta or 
memory and imagination, ahankara or sense of identity 
consciousness, and the soul, the dynamic spirit), young 
mothers with love bring into the living world. 


निर्यदीं बुध्नान्महिषस्य वर्प॑स ईशानासः शव॑सा ced 
सूरय॑ः। यदीमनु प्रदिवो मध्व॑ आधवे गुहा सन्तं मातरिश्वा 
मथायति ॥ ३॥ 


3. Niryadim budhnanmahisasya varpasa isanasah 
savasa kranta surayah. Yadimanu pradivo madhva 
adhave guha santam matarisva mathayati. 


Brilliant scholars of commanding eminence 
from the middle regions of the light of the great sun 
collect the vitality and convert it into ripening waves 
for the maturity of grain. Similarly the vision of the 
yogis collects the spiritual vitality of the honey sweets 
of heavenly light unto itself in communion and the 
pranic energy churns the latent spirit in the depths of 
the soul to join it with the heavenly light. 


प्र यत्पितुः प॑र मान्नीयते पर्या पृक्षुधो वीरुधो da रोहति । 
उभा यद॑स्य जनुषं यदिन्व॑त॒ आदिद्यविंष्छो अभवद्‌ घृणा 
शुचिः ॥ ४ ॥ ति 
Pra yat pituh paramanniyate parya prksudho 
virudho damsu rohati. Ubha yadasya janusam 
yadinvata adid yavistho abhavad ghrna Sucih. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 141 635 


The food and nourishment which is collected, 
received and assimilated from the highest light of heaven 
and the middle regions wonderfully rises and grows into 
the hungry herbs and trees and vegetation. And when 
both nourish the yajamana and his progeny, the person 
grows most youthful, kind and compassionate, and 
brilliant and pure. 


आदिन्मातूराविंशद्यास्वा शुचिरहिंस्यमान उर्विया वि 
वावृधे | अनु यत्पूर्वं अरुहत्सनाजुवो नि नव्यसीष्ववरासु 
धावते ॥ ५९ ॥ 

5. Adinmatrravisad yasva Sucirahimsyamana urviya 
vi vavrdhe. Anu yat purva aruhat sanajuvo ni 
navyasisvavarasu dhavate. 


In the course of evolution, Agni, the vitality of 
life, which enters the mother forms of nature, now 
grows, pure, brilliant and unhurt, with the soil of its 
germination and generation, and then, the one which 
grew on the earlier one with the earlier forms of life, 
self-impulsive with the eternal will to live, now lives, 
vibrates and runs in the latest and most delicate mother 
forms. 


आदिन्दोतांरं वृणते दिविष्टिषु भग॑मिव agar ऋञ्जते | 
देवान्यत्क्रत्वा मज्मना पुरुष्टुतो ad शंसं विरूवधा वेति 
धाय॑से ॥ & ॥ ति 

6. Adiddhotaram vrnate divistisu bhagamiva papr- 
canasa rnjate. Devan yat kratva majmana puru- 
stuto martam samsam visvadha veti dhayase. 


Yajnic lovers, admirers and worshippers of 
Agni, light and life of the world, choose, invoke and 


636 RGVEDA 


invite this lord of life and yajnic evolution of nature 
and humanity in their cherished holy projects and offer 
hospitality and gifts of oblations to it as to the lord of 
world wealth and power. And then this lord, worshipped 
and favourable by pious acts and power joins the noble 
humanity in many many ways to the devas, divine and 
generous powers of the universe, for sustenance and 
progress under the divine eye. 


वि यदस्थाद्यजतो वात॑चोदितो हारो न वक्वां जरणा 
अनाकृतः | तस्य पत्मन्दक्षुषः कृष्णजंहसः शुचिजन्मनो 
रज आ व्य॑ध्वनः ।॥ ७॥ 


iP Vi yadasthad yajato vatacodito hvaro na vakva 
jarana anakrtah. Tasya patman daksusah krsna- 
jJanhasah sucijanmano raja a vyadhvanah. 


When Agni, light and fire of life, conducting 
the yajna of existence, inspired and impelled by winds, 
blazing eloquent like a poet singing in praise of his 
patron undisturbed, rises to a state of stability and 
omnipresence, then the path of this blazing power going 
over areas of darkness, pure and immaculate by birth 
shining everywhere across the wide ways of space is 
worthy of praise and following by all humanity. 


रथो न यातः शिक्व॑भिः कृतो द्यामङ्धभिररूषेभिंरीयते । 
आद॑स्य ते कृष्णासो! afer सूरयः शूर॑स्येव त्वेषथादीषते 
वय॑ः ॥ ८॥ ` - 

8. Ratho na yatah sikvabhih krto dyam-angebhir- 
arusebhiriyate. Adasya te krsnaso daksi surayah 
Surasyeva tvesathadisate vayah. 


As a chariot created by scientists and driven by 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 141 637 


expert drivers flies across the sky with the brilliant parts 
of the machine, so does Agni rise across space with its 
blazing flames of fire. Lord of life and light, enlighten 
the ignorant, light the paths of darkness, and strengthen 
your warriors because, otherwise, at the blaze of fiery 
violence like the terror of a demonic hero, life flies away. 


त्वया GA वरुणो धृतव्र॑तो मित्रः शाशद्रे stele Tala: | 
यत्सीमनु क्रतुना विश्वथां विभुर्‌ रान्न नेमिः प॑रिभू- 
रजायथाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Tvaya hyagne varuno dhrtavrato mitrah sasadre 
aryama sudanavah. Yat simanu kratuna visvatha 
vibhuraranna nemih paribhurajayathah. 


Agni, lord of light, life and power, it is by you 
that Varuna, the sea as the sky holds on to its law, Mitra, 
the sun, dispels the darkness, and Aryama, the abundant 
and dynamic nature and the philanthropic humanity are 
creative and generous. For the reason of your nature 
and divine action, you are universal, omnipresent, and 
omnipotent over all and you manifest as immanent and 
concurrent just like the rim of a wheel holding the spokes 
together running and working together. 


wand setae सुन्वते tet यविष्ठ देवतातिमिन्वसि । तं 
त्वा नु नव्यं सहसो युवन्वयं भगं न कारे म॑हिरल 
धीमहि॥ gon 


10. Tvamagne Sasamanaya sunvate ratnam yavistha 
devatatiminvasi. Tam tva nu navyam sahaso 
yuvan vayam bhagam na kare mahiratna dhimahi. 


Agni, ever young beyond age, for the creative 
man of active piety and worship, you bring the universal 


638 RGVEDA 


wealth of Divinity in meditation. Lord of power and 
youth, wealth and value of the universe, eternal and ever 
new, such as you are, in every act of our life we worship 
you as the lord and master of the power and glory of the 
universe. 


अस्मे रयिंन स्वर्थं दमूनसं भगं eat न प॑पृचासि धर्णसिम्‌। 
रश्मींररव यो यम॑ति जन्म॑नी उभे देवानां शंसमृत आ च॑ 
सुक्रतुः ॥ ९९॥ ति 

11. Asme rayim na svartham damunasam bhagam 
daksam na paprcasi dharnasim. Rasminriva yo 
yamati janmani ubhe devanam samsamrta a ca 
sukratuh. 


Bountifully you create and augment for us the 
wealth of life good enough for success and value with 
honour and discipline of mind and character. Give us 
the expert as well as the man of wealth and power to 
stabilize and maintain the balance of power and 
discipline, law and freedom, individual and society. Lord 
controller of both our life here and hereafter like the 
rays of light, you who hold the reins of our thought and 
action like the reins of a chariot, lord and master of all 
noble acts of yajna, pray come and accept the homage 
of worship of the dedicated people. 


उत न॑ः Geert जीराश्वो grat मन्द्रः शुंणवच्यन्द्रर॑थः | 
सनो नेषन्नेष॑तभैरमरोऽ frat सुवितं वस्यो अच्छ 112211 


12. Uta nah sudyotma jirasvo hota mandrah srna- 
vaccandrarathah. Sa no nesannesatamaira- 
muro’ gnirvamam suvitam vasyo accha. 


And Agni, lord of divine light, faster than light 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 142 639 


and omnipresent, generous giver and performer of 
universal yajna, blissful master of the golden chariot of 
existence may, we pray, listen to our song of celebration. 
May the lord omnipotent, inviolable, ever loving and 
lovable, lead us well to the good life and good fortune 
by the most virtuous thoughts and actions of faith and 
piety. 

अस्तांव्यथिः शिमींबद्धिरकैः साम्राज्याय wat दधांनः। 

अपी च ये मघवानो वयं च मिहं न सूरो अति निष्ट॑- 

तन्युः॥ ९३॥ 


13. Astavyagnih simivadbhirarkaih samrajyaya 
prataram dadhanah. Ami ca ye maghavano vayam 
ca miham na suro ati nistatanyuh. 


Thus is Agni, wielding power and splendour for 
world governance, praised with songs of success and 
thankfulness. And thus the yajakas and we, celebrants 
all blest with wealth and power by the Lord’s grace, 
raise our songs of adoration to the skies loud and bold 
as thunder of the clouds under power of the sun. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 142 
Agni and others Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
समिद्धो अग्र आ व॑ह eat अद्य aa । 
तन्तुं तनुष्व पूर्व्यं सुतसोमाय दाशुष ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Samiddho agna a vaha devan adya yatasruce. 
Tantum tanusva purvyam sutasomaya dasuse. 


Agni, light of life and life of the universe, the 
fire is burning. Bring the devas here and now, let the 
sages come and let nature bless the yajamana who has 


640 RGVEDA 


raised the ladle to offer the oblation. Expand and 
continue the ancient line of yajnic action and progeny 
for the generous yajamana who has distilled the soma 
for the sages and for you. 


घृतवन्तमुप मासि मधुमन्तं तनूनपात्‌ । 
यज्ञं विप्र॑स्य माव॑तः शमानस्य॑ दाशुषः ॥ २॥ 

pF Ghrtavantamupa masi madhumantam tanunapat. 
Yajnam viprasya mavatah sasamanasya dasusah. 


Agni, light and spirit of yajna, protector and 
preserver of the body, you are the measure of yajna and 
with your presence bless the ghrta-sprinkled honey- 
sweet fragrant yajna of the adoring generous sagely 
yajamana faithful like me. 


शुचिं: पावको अद्धतो मध्वां यज्ञं पिंपिक्षति। 
नराशंसस्त्रिरा दिवो देवो देवेषु यिय: ॥ ३ ॥ 

oF Sucih pavako adbhuto madhva yajnam mimiksati. 
Narasamsastrira divo devo devesu yajniyah. 


Agni, pure and purifier, wonderful of nature, 
character and action, is keen to sprinkle yajna thrice 
with honey-sweets of fragrance from the light of heaven. 
Adorable is he among men, brilliant and generous 
among the nobilities of humanity, worthy of company 
and honour at yajnas. 


stadt sty आ वहेन्द्रं चित्रमिह प्रियम्‌ | 
इयं हि त्वां मतिर्ममाच्छा सुजिह्व वच्यते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ilito agna दं vahendram citramiha priyam. 
Tyam hi tva matirmamaccha sujihva vacyate. 


Agni, leading light of life and the world, praised 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 142 641 


and prayed at yajna, bring us here and now Indra, 
wondrous, versatile and dear lord of honour and power, 
and bless us with wealth and prosperity. Lord of blissful 
voice and word, thus does my mind and understanding 
speak well of you and to you in adoration and prayer. 


स्तृणानासो यतस्रुचो atest स्वध्वरे । 
वृञ्जे देवव्य॑चस्तममिन्द्राय शर्म सप्रथः ॥ ५॥ 


a. Strnanaso yatasruco barhiryajne svadhvare. 
Vrnje devavyacastamam-indraya Sarma sapra- 
thah. 


The organisers of great yajnas of love and non- 
violence collect the holy grass, spread it on the vedi 
and hold the ladle in hand for the oblation in yajna in 
honour of Indra for the sake of power, wealth and 
knowledge. And they build the largest home for the 
scholars of divinity and, through yajna, divest 
themselves of misery and poverty. 


वि श्रयन्तामृतावृधः प्रयै देवेभ्यों महीः 1 
पावकासः पुरुस्पृहो द्वारो editavad: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Vi Srayantam-rtavrdhah prayai devebhyo mahih. 
Pavakasah purusprho dvaro devirasascatah. 

In order to rise to the brilliance of the sages and 
towards the heights of divinity, take recource to the 
veteran pioneers of Truth, pure purifiers of the spirit, 
and the great and distinctive voices of the sages 
universally loved and wanted, and join their paths of 
action like entering the doors of Divinity. 

आ भन्द॑माने उपाके नक्तोषासां सुपेशंसा | 
यही ऋतस्य मातरा सीद॑तां बर्हिरा सुमत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


642 RGVEDA 


fin A bhandamane upake naktosasa supesasa. 
Yahvi rtasya matara sidatam barhira sumat. 


Bright and blissful cyclic sisters, night and day, 
both beautiful, moving majestic, mothers of love and 
faith in Truth Divine may, we pray, come and grace our 
great house rejoicing, and bless our yajna with dignity 
and devotion. 


wate जुगुर्वणी ead cen कवी | 
aa नो यक्षतापिमं सिध्रमद्य दिविस्पृशम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Mandrajihva jugurvani hotara daivya kavi. 
yajnam no yaksatamimam sidhramadya divispr- 
sam. 


May the divine poets and visionaries, holy 
yajakas, soft and sweet of sacred speech and eloquence, 
come and join us today in this auspicious yajna of ours, 
the fragrance of which, with their chant, rises to the 
heavens. 


wridaattar होत्रां मरुत्सु भारती । 
Sal सर॑स्वती मही बर्हिः सीदन्तु यज्ियांः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Sucirdevesvarpita hotra marutsu bharati. 
Ila sarasvati mahi barhih sidantu yajniyah. 


Bright and pure, delivered and entrusted to the 
divine visionaries and dynamic Maruts, vibrations of 
universal mind and brilliant teachers, holy media of 
communication between the divine and human, Bharati, 
mother speech of the nation for sustenance, Ila, divine 
articulation of Omniscience, Sarasvati, everflowing 
Word of the Veda, and Mahi, mother spirit of the earth, 
all these, we pray, may grace our house of yajna for 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 142 643 
honour and adoration and for mutual discourse. 


तच्न॑स्तुरीपमद्‌भुतं पुरु वारं पुरु amt । 
त्वष्टा पोषांय वि ष्य॑तु राये नाभां नो STATA: QO 


10. Tannasturipamadbhutam puru varam puru 
tmana. Tvasta posaya vi syatu raye nabha no 
asmayuh. 


That wealth of life, knowledge, power and 
honour, ever flowing, all protective and self-preserving, 
which is the universal choice and conscientious love of 
all, may Tvashta, creator of life forms and human 
institutions, the very centre-hold of our life and society, 
lord our own, create for our sustenance, prosperity and 
progress. 


अवसृजन्नुप त्मना देवान्यक्षि वनस्पते । 
अभिर्हव्या सुषूदति देवो देवेषु मेधिरः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Avasrjannupa tmana devan yaksi vanaspate. 
Agnirhavya susudati devo devesu medhirah. 


Vanaspati, lord of light and sunbeams, with your 
heart and soul you join the devas, seekers of light and 
knowledge of divinity, giving them the enlightenment 
they love and desire, just as Agni, brilliant light and life 
of the universe, refulgent among the lights of nature 
and humanity, receives and refines the materials 
consumed and recreated in the yajnic evolution of nature 
and humanity. 


पूषण्वते मरुत्व॑ते विश्वदेवाय वायवे | 
स्वाहां गायत्रवेपसे हव्यमिन्द्राय कर्तन ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Pusanvate marutvate visvadevaya vayave. 
Svaha gayatravepase havyamindraya kartana. 


644 RGVEDA 


Homage of honour and adoration to the lord of 
nourishment, sustenance and advancement of life, to 
the lord of energy and movement onward, to the lord of 
the universe and ideal of humanity, and to Vayu, lord of 
the breath of life and spirit adorable. Do homage with 
offer of food and service to the saviour lord beatific of 
blessed form and to Indra, lord of honour, power and 
knowledge. 

स्वाहाकृतान्या wed हव्यानि वीतये । 
इन्द्रा ग॑हि श्रुधी हवं त्वां ह॑वन्ते अध्वरे ॥ ९३ ॥ 
13. Svahakrtanya gahyupa havyani vitaye. 
Indra gahi srudhi havam tvam havante adhvare. 

Indra, lord of light and life, knowledge, power 
and honour, come close to our yajna and receive our 
homage of worship and prayer, gifts and service in yajna 
for the sake of protection and well-being. Come lord, 
listen to the prayers and presentations made in faith. 
All the devotees invoke, invite and honour you in the 
yajna of love and non-violence and in their conduct and 
behaviour. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 143 

Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
प्र तव्य॑सीं नव्य॑सीं धीतिमय्रये वाचो मतिं सह॑सः gra 
भरे। अपां नपाद्‌ यो वसुभिः सह प्रियो होता पृथिव्यां 
न्यसीं द दूत्वियंः ॥ ९॥ 

1. Pra tavyasim navyasim dhitimagnaye vaco matim 
sahasah sunave bhare. Apam napad yo vasubhih 
saha priyo hota prthivyam nyasidadrtviyah. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 143 645 


I bear and offer the highest, latest, joyously 
celebrative and most sacred worshipful homage in words 
of adoration to Agni, created of might, who is the grand 
child of waters of the skies, dearest favourite with the 
Vasu order of scholars, receiver and performer in yajna 
corresponding to the seasons and abiding with the earth. 


स जाय॑मानः परमे व्योमन्याविरगिर॑भवन्मातरिर्व॑ने । अस्य 
क्रत्वा समिधानस्य मज्मना प्र द्यावा शोचिः पूंथिवी 
अरोचयत्‌ RU 


2. Sa jayamanah parame vyomanyaviragnira- 
bhavanmatarisvane. Asya kratva samidhanasya 
majmana pra dyava Socih prthivi arocayat. 


That refulgent Agni born of the highest cosmic 
space manifested itself in energy currents in the middle 
region of space in the skies. It is by the action and force 
of this blazing power that the heaven is lit bright and 
the earth shines on in beauty. 


अस्य त्वेषा अजरां अस्य ura: सुसंदृशः सुप्रतीकस्य 
Gee: । भात्वक्षसो अत्यक्तुर्न सिन्ध॑वोऽ गर रजन्ते अस॑सन्तो 
अजराः 3B 


3 Asya tvesa ajara asya bhanavah susamdrsah 
supratikasya sudyutah. Bhatvaksaso atyakturna 
sindhavo’gne rejante asasanto ajarah. 


The beams and brilliance of this holy light, clear 
and discerning of sight, beautiful of form and blazing 
with awe, are unaging, beyond decay. The waves of this 
mighty power of light flowing like rivers in flood are 
ever youthful, ever wakeful, they ever shine and dispel 
darkness as the dawn dispels the night. 


646 RGVEDA 


यमेरिरे भृग॑वो विश्ववेदसं नाभां पृथिव्या भुव॑नस्य मज्मना । 
sift तं गीर्भिर्हिनुहिस्वआदमेयएको वस्वो वरुणो न 
राजति usu 


4. Yamerire bhrgavo visvavedasam nabha prthivya 
bhuvanasya majmana. Agnim tam girbhirhinuhi 
sva a dame ya eko vasvo varuno na rajati. 


That Agni whom the Bhrgus, men of vision and 
knowledge, invoke and realise on the floor of the earth, 
in the centre of the world and in the depth of their 
consciousness with the power of their knowledge, spirit 
and prana, that omniscient Agni, light of the world, with 
your words of prayer, invoke and realise in your own 
heart and home, yes, Him who alone by Himself is lord 
of the wealth of the universe and shines over all as 
Varuna, supreme ruler. 


नयो ala मरुतामिव स्वनः Cla सृष्टा दिव्या यथाशनिः | 
अभिर्जम्भस्तिगितैर॑त्ति भर्व॑ति योधो न शत्रून्त्स वना 


न्युंञ्जते॥ ५ ॥ 
5: Na yo varaya marutamiva svanah seneva srsta 


divya yathasanih. Agnir-jambhais-tigitairatti 
bharvati yodho na Satruntsa vana nyrnjate. 


Agni is a mighty power which, like the roar of 
winds, like an awful force launched upon the enemy, is 
irresistible just like the thunderbolt of lightning in the 
sky. With its dreadful jaws, or crushing weapons, sharp 
and destructive, it eats up and destroys as a mighty 
warrior destroys the enemies, or as the conflagration 
burns up and reduces the forests to ash. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 143 647 


कुविन्नो अभिरुचथ॑स्य वीरसद्वसुंष्कुविद्वसुभिः काम॑मावर॑त्‌। 
चोदः कुवित्तुतुज्यात्सातये धियः शुचिप्रतीकं तमया धिया 
गुणो ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Kuvinno agnirucathasya virasad vasuskuvid 
vasubhih kamamavarat. Codah kuvit tutujyat 
sataye dhiyah sucipratikam tamaya dhiya grne. 


May Agni, lord of light and power, expand and 
heighten our song of praise and celebration. May the 
brilliant power, great and beneficent, accord, approve 
and accomplish our desire and ambition with comforts 
and well-being in life. Great inspirer is Agni. May the 
power sharpen and activate our mind and intellect to 
create new things with acquisition of success and 
victories. With the same mind and intellect we praise 
and celebrate the grandeur of Agni, mighty, versatile, 
brilliant, blazing and pure of form and action. 


घृतप्र॑तीकं व caret धुर्षद॑मथिं मित्रं न arrest ऋञ्जते | 
इन्धानो अक्रो विदथेषु दीद्य॑च्छु क्र वं्णामुदु नो यंसते 
धिय॑म्‌॥ ७॥ 


४ Ghrtapratikam va rtasya dhursadamagnim 
mitram na samidhana rnjate. Indhano akro 
vidathesu didyacchukravarnamudu no yamsate 
dhiyam. 


The scholar of brilliance and intelligence 
researches and develops agni for you, agni, a power 
rising with flames of ghrta, firmly active like a friend 
of light and truth, sitting and working for humanity 
against the forces of falsehood, darkness and 
lawlessness. Blazing unresisted, it shines in the yajnic 
projects of development, and inspires and sharpens our 


648 RGVEDA 
pure and transparent intelligence. 


अप्र॑युच्छन्नप्रयुच्छद्धिरगरे शिवेभिर्नः पायुभिः पाहि gre: 1 
अदंब्धेभिरदुपितेभिरिष्टे ऽ frets: परि पाहि नो 
जाः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Aprayucchann aprayucchadbhir agne Sivebhir- 
nah payubhih pahi Sagmaih. Adabdhebhir- 
adrpitebhir-iste’nimisadbhih pari pahi no jah. 


Agni, holy power, brilliant and blazing, ever 
wakeful, active and working relentlessly, protect us with 
good, protective and preservative, and blissful modes 
of life, by noble, protective and blissful people. Power 
dear, creator and giver of joy and comfort, protect, 
promote and advance us all round by sober, irresistible 
and intrepidable modes and people ever watchful and 
working without a wink of sleep. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 144 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


एति प्र होतां व्रतम॑स्य माययोर्ध्वां दधानः शुचिपेशसं धिय॑म्‌। 
अभि qa: क्रमते दक्षिणावृतो या ster धामं प्रथमं ह 
Fata ९॥ 


I; Eti pra hota vratamasya mayayordhvam dadha- 
nah sucipesasam dhiyam. Abhi srucah kramate 
daksinavrto ya asya dhama prathamam ha nim- 
sate. 


The yajaka who holds his clear and brilliant 
intelligence high with his will and power goes by the 
law and discipline of this Agni, light of the Divine power 
of the world. He moves forward to hold the sacred ladles 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 144 649 


dedicated to the service of yajna-fire and right 
circumambulation of the vedi, ladles which first and 
directly reach and take the yajamana to the sacred abode 
of Agni, light Divine. 


अभीमृतस्य det अनूषत aril देवस्य west परीवृताः | 
अपामुपस्थे विभूतो यदाव॑सदधं स्वधा अ॑धयद्या- 
भिरीय॑ते॥ २॥ 


2: Abhimrtasya dohana anusata yonau devasya 
sadane parivrtah. Apamupasthe vibhrto yadava- 
sadadha svadha adhayad yabhirtyate. 


Waves of fragrance, streams of nectar, dynamics 
of Truth and divine Law, returning, abiding, enveloped 
in light, going round Agni in the seat and home of the 
lord, the sun, do sing in adoration of the Divine. They 
nestle in the womb of the divine mother of waters, 
creativity of cosmic energy there held by the mother, 
and then the streams of nectar are distilled and rain down 
again in showers for the life of the earth and her children, 
joining, again with agni, electric energy. 


युयूषतः सव॑यसा afesd: समानमर्थ वितरित्रता पिथः। 
आदीं भगो न हव्यः समस्मदा dlaet र श्मीन्त्समंयंस्त 
सारथिः 30 


Yuyusatah savayasa tadid vapuh samanamartham 
vitaritrata mithah. Adim bhago na havyah sama- 
smada volhurna rasmin tsamayamsta sarathih. 


When two persons of equal age and equal mind 
wishing to cross over a common problem and achieve a 
common end, join together in body for mutual love and 
support, they accept, hold on and support each other as 


650 RGVEDA 


beauty and majesty and accept a tribute of love as fire 
accepts an oblation of yajna from us, or as a charioteer 
accepts and holds the reins of the horses. 


यमीं द्वा सव॑यसा सपर्यतः समाने योनां मिथुना समोकसा । 
दिवा न नक्तं पक्ितो युवांजनि पुरू चरन्नजरो मानुषा 
युगा॥ ४॥ 


4. Yamim dva savayasa saparyatah samane yona 
mithuna samokasa. Diva na naktam palito yuva- 
Jani puru carannajaro manusa yuga. 


When two persons of equal age, the wedded 
couple, living together, the two as one in the same one 
body, in the same one house, serve and worship the same 
Agni in love day and night, then the same old eternal 
Agni, ever vibrating in the human soul as the will to 
live and generate, unaging, for ages and ages, is reborn 
as new and young as ever in the human form. 


aut हिन्वन्ति धीतयो दश व्रिशो देवं मतीस ऊतये हवामहे। 
धनोरधि प्रवत आ स ऋण्वत्यथित्रजद्धिर्वयुना नवाधित ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Tamim hinvanti dhitayo dasa vriso devam mar- 
tasa utaye havamahe. Dhanoradhi pravata दव sa 
rnvatyabhivrajadbhirvayuna navadhita. 


All the human potentials such as thoughts, ideas, 
reflection, wisdom, will and understanding, intention, 
devotion, prayer and meditation, all ten senses of 
perception and volition, the five main pranic energies 
and five sub-pranas, though separate, yet jointly, invoke, 
enlight and serve the same one Agni as the ten fingers, 
though separate, yet jointly, nurse the same one baby 
with love and care. We all mortals serve, adore and 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 144 651 


worship the same eternal light of life, Agni. It moves 
ever so fast and hits its targets as an arrow shot from 
the bow, and ever new born and growing, young and 
youthful, it receives new knowledge from the sages on 
the move. Homage to the Lord for protection, 
promotion, peace and well-being! 


त्वं an दिव्यस्य राज॑सि त्वं पार्थिवस्य ugiga at | 
एनी त एते वुहती अंभिश्चिया! हिरण्ययी वक्व॑री बर्हि- 
रांशाते॥ ६॥ 


6. Tvam hyagne divyasya rajasi tvam parthivasya 
pasupa iva tmana. Eni ta ete brhati abhisriya 
hiranyayt vakvart barhirasate. 


Agni, light supreme and power, you light and 
rule the heavens. You enliven and rule the earth and the 
earthly like a master shepherd with love and care. And 
both of them, heaven and earth, move on, mighty, grand 
and graceful, golden rich and beautiful, rotating and 
revolving in their orbits, rushing on and participating 
in the cosmic yajna. 


अग्रै जुषस्व प्रतिं हयं तद्वचो मन्दर स्वधाव ऋत॑जात सुक्रतो । 
यो favad: प्रत्यङ्ङसि दर्शतो रण्वः संदृष्टौ faquiga 
क्षय॑ः ॥ ७॥ 


cr Agne jusasva prati harya tad vaco mandra 
svadhava rtajata sukrato. Yo visvatah pratyannasi 
darsato ranvah samdrstau pituman iva ksayah. 


Agni, be pleased, listen to our words of praise 
and prayer and respond, charming lord of light possessed 
of innate power, born of cosmic energy for the law and 
truth of existence, master of yajnic action, universally 


652 RGVEDA 


kind and favourable as you are, celestial beautiful to 
the sight, joyous and brilliant of word, and a haven of 
peace and comfort like a generous man of hospitality 
for all. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 145 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


तं पुंच्छ्ता स ज॑गामा स ae स चिकित्वाँ faa सा न्वींयते। 
तस्मिन्त्सन्ति प्रशिषस्तस्मिंच्चिष्टयः स वाज॑स्य शव॑सः 
शुष्मिणस्पतिः ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Tam prcchata sa jagama sa veda sa cikitvan tyate 
sa nviyate. Tasmin tsanti prasisastasminn-istayah 
sa vajasya Savasah susminaspatih. 


Agni is the lord of light, knowledge and power: 
of him they ask the questions, he goes all round, he 
knows, he has the wisdom and awareness and the 
knowledge of sciences, he reaches, yes, reaches 
anywhere he wants. In him lies the power of governance 
and law, in him lies the potential for all you want, and 
he is the master, ruler and commander of energy, strength 
and valour, and of the fiery forces of his dominion. 


तमित्पच्छन्ति न सिमो fa पृच्छति स्वेनेव धीरो मन॑सा 
यदग्र॑भीत्‌। न der प्रथमं नाप॑रं वचोऽ स्य क्रत्वा सचते 
अप्र॑दूपितः॥ २॥ 

2 Tamit prcchanti na simo vi prechati sveneva dhiro 


manasa yadagrabhit. Na mrsyate prathamam 
naparam vaco’sya kratva sacate apradrpitah. 


Agni is the lord of knowledge and self- 
realisation: of him the learned ask the questions where 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 145 653 


they miss the light, not all, everybody doesn’t ask him. 
Lord of peace and stability of mind as he is, whatever 
he realises or understands with his own mind is not 
subject to doubt either before or later. Everybody goes 
by the words and holy actions of this power of undaunted 
spirit and undisturbed mind free from arrogance. 


तमिद्रच्छन्ति जु स्तमर्वतीर्विश्वान्येकः शृणवद्वचांसि मे। 
पुरु प्रौ षस्ततुरिर्यज्ञसाधनोऽ च्छिद्रोतिः शिशुराद॑त्त सं 
रभ॑ः ॥ २॥ 


a Tamid gachanti juhvastamarvatirvisvanyekah 
Srnavad vacamsi me. Purupraisastaturiryajna- 
sddhano’cchidrotih sisuradatta sam rabhah. 


Just as ladles of ghrta reach agni, fire of yajna, 
so do youth of noble speech and blessed intelligence 
reach Agni, lord of brilliance and exalted soul, bearing 
questions and homage. May the lord, sole master of 
knowledge, unique and unparallelled, listen to my 
prayers and questions too, lord inspirer of many, instant 
saviour of the seekers, master of yajnic accomplish- 
ments, giver of faultless protection, dispeller of doubts 
and darkness, all-great and loving, gracefully receiving 
and acknowledging questions as well as the homage of 
yajna. 
उपस्थायं चरति SAAN सद्यो जातस्तत्सार युज्येंभिः। 
अभि श्वान्तं Ustad नान्द्य मुदे यदीं गच्छ॑न्त्युशातीर- 
पिष्ठितम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Upasthayam carati yat samarata sadyo jata- 
statsara yujyebhih. Abhi Svantam mrsate nandye 
mude yadim gacchantyuSatirapisthitam. 


654 RGVEDA 


When the devotee approaches this brilliant Agni 
with holy offerings, it instantly responds, rises, grows 
and expands with its flames. When the maidens with 
love and faith approach it, it provides soothing touches 
of caress and reflection for their peace and joy in a state 
of tranquillity. 


स ई मृगो stat वनर्गुरुपं त्वच्युपमस्यां नि धायि | 
व्य॑ब्रवीद्युना मर्त्येभ्यो ऽगिर्विद्रा ऋतचिद्धि सत्यः ॥ ५॥ 


2. ७9८ 777 mrgo apyo vanargurupa tvacyupamasyam 
ni dhayi. Vyabravid vayuna martyebhyo’ gnirvi- 
dvan rtaciddhi satyah. 


That Agni which is ever on the move like a deer, 
worthy of research and attainment, abiding in the waters, 
in the forests, in the sunbeams, in the woods, in the 
skin, and in the dark of the eye, which is a metaphor of 
omnipresence and universal eloquence of its presence 
for humanity, and similarly for the brilliant scholar 
dedicated to Agni, abiding for all everywhere, collecting 
the dynamic flow of knowledge and speaking of it to 
humanity — that is true, that is abiding: Agni, 
knowledge, scholarship, the flow, dynamics of 
existence, and living. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 146 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
त्रिमूर्धानं सपर॑श्मिं गृणीषेऽ नूनम पित्रोरुपस्थे | नि षत्त- 
म॑स्य चर॑तो श्चुवस्य विश्वा दिवो रोचनापप्रिवांसम्‌ i ९ ॥ 
ie Trimurdhanam saptarasmim grnise’nunamagnim 
pitrorupasthe. Nisattamasya carato dhruvasya 
visva divo rocanapaprivamsam. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 146 655 


Invoke and celebrate Agni, three-headed, seven- 
rayed, perfect, nestled in the lap of its parents, which 
pervades and fills the lights of this moving but stable 
heavenly solar system of the universe. 


(Agni is the life-energy of light and heat, born 
of akasha and vayu, cosmic space and cosmic energy; 
it abides on top of the three regions, earth, middle region 
of the skies, and the high and heavenly regions of the 
sun. It also abides in the three modes of nature, Prakrti: 
sattva, rajas and tamas. It is an integration, or call it the 
seed, of the seven rays of light-spectrum, and it energises 
all the moving but stable solar systems of the universe. 


Agni also is the vital spirit of the articulation of 
cosmic awareness in language form in the Veda, which 
is learnt from the opening word of the Rgveda. It abides 
on top of the three tenses and three persons of the verbs 
of the linguistic structure and in the seven vibhaktis, 
case endings, and sung in the seven metrical forms and 
seven notes of music. 


Agni thus is the divine attribute of the spirit at 
the individual as well as the cosmic level, and energises, 
inspires and illuminates the physical, mental and 
spiritual worlds in the spheres of matter, motion and 
mind.) 


sar Wet अभि व॑वक्ष एने अजरंस्तस्थावितऊतिक्रष्वः। 
उर्व्याः पदो नि द॑धाति सानौ रिहन्त्यूधो अरुषासो 
अस्य ।॥२॥ 

2 Uksa mahan abhi vavaksa eme ajarastastha- 
vitautirrsvah. Urvyah pado ni dadhati sanau 
rihantyudho arusaso asya. 


656 RGVEDA 


The mighty sun, far greater than the earth and 
other planets, generously radiating floods of light and 
waves of gravitational energy, holds the earth and skies. 
Ever young and awfully moving, it is stable, providing 
protection and stability to its family. On top, it maintains 
its degree and distance from the earth while its light 
rays touch and drink up the reservoirs of water. 


समानं वत्समभि संचरन्ती festa वि च॑रतः सुमेके | 
अनपवृज्याँ अध्व॑नो मिमाने विश्वान्केताँ अधिं महो 
दधांने।॥ ३॥ 


ध Samanam vatsamabhi samcaranti visvagdhenu vi 
caratah sumeke. Anapavrjyan adhvano mimane 
visvan ketan adhi maho dadhane. 


Two cows, the earth and the sun, beautiful and 
co-existent, tending the same calf, the day-night cycle, 
equally well, traversing their orbits without deviating, 
go round and round, sustaining and revealing the great 
banners of the identity of various objects in space. 


धीरांसः पदं कवयो नयन्ति AT हृदा रक्ष॑माणा अलुर्यम्‌। 
सिषासन्तः पर्य'पश्यन्त सिन्धुमाविरेभ्यो अभवत्सूर्यो 
नृन्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Dhirasah padam kavayo nayanti nana hrda 
raksamana ajuryam. Sisasantah paryapasyanta 
sindhumavirebhyo abhavat suryo nrn. 


Poets and scholars, wise and meditative, 
protecting and guiding people with their heart in many 
ways, lead them to positions of undecaying value. Keen 
to share the joy and generosity of life wide as the sea, 
they look round and the sun reveals itself to them. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 147 657 


दिदृक्षेण्यः परि araty जेन्य॑ ईव्टेन्यो महो अभीय जीवसे । 
पुसत्रा यदभ॑वत्सूररैभ्यो गर्भेभ्यो मघवा विश्वदर्शतः ॥ ५॥ 


+ Didrksenyah pari kasthasu jenya ilenyo maho 
arbhaya jivase. Purutra yadabhavat surahai-bhyo 
garbhebhyo maghava visvadarsatah. 


Agni, power of light and knowledge in life, so 
brilliant as to be admirable by the brilliant victorious 
all round in all directions, worthy of praise and 
reverence, life-giving to the small as well as to the great, 
abundantly creative and promotive to all these people 
and projects in the making, is the lord of wealth and 
power and universally admired and honourable. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 147 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


कथा A अग्ने शुचय॑न्त आयोर्ददाशुर्वाजिंभिराशुषाणाः । 
उभे यत्तोके तन॑ये दधाना ऋतस्य सामंत्रणय॑न्त देवाः ॥ ९॥ 


if Katha te agne Sucayanta ayordadasurvajebhira- 
susanah. Ubhe yat toke tanaye dadhana rtasya 
saman ranayanta devah. 


Agni, lord of light and life, how do your flames 
of fire, and brilliant scholars, blazing and purifying, 
givers of life with food, energy and knowledge to both 
children and grand children, and bearing food both for 
body and mind, rejoice and participate in the songs of 
Veda and the yajna of Truth, Law and divine knowledge? 


बोधा मे अस्य वच॑सो यविष्ठ महिं स्य प्रभंतस्य स्वधावः | 
पीय॑ति त्वो अनुं त्वो गृणाति वन्दारुस्ते तन्वं वन्दे अग्ने ॥ २॥ 


658 RGVEDA 


2: Bodha me asya vacaso yavistha manhisthasya 
prabhrtasya svadhavah. Piyati tvo anu tvo grnati 
vandaruste tanvam vande agne. 


Agni, lord of light, master of your own power 
of knowledge, youngest of the lights, listen to me, I 
pray, and know my word, highest and most powerful of 
mine ever borne: One drinks at the fount of your 
knowledge, and the other repeats your words according 
as you have directed. Iam your admirer and worshipper. 
I bow to your body, mind and soul. 


ये पायवो मामतेयं ते अग्ने पश्य॑न्तो अन्धं दुरितादरक्षन्‌ । 
Ta तान्त्सुकृतों विश्ववेदा दिप्सन्त इद्विपवो नाहं 
देभुः ॥ ३॥ 


9; Ye payavo mamateyam te agne pasyanto andham 
duritadaraksan. Raraksa tantsukrto visvaveda 
dipsanta id ripavo naha debhuh. 


Agni, lord of light, power and knowledge, the 
flames of your fire, brilliant teachers and warriors, are 
the guardians of humanity, seers and visionaries of the 
present and future generations, who guard the blind and 
the ignorant against evil and crime. O lord and master 
of world knowledge, protect all those who do good work 
so that even the deadly enemies of society may not be 
able to terrorize anyone. 


यो नो अगे अररिवाँ अघायुर॑रातीवा मर्चयति gat | 
मन्त्रो गुरुः पुन॑रस्तु सो अस्मा अनु मुश्चीष्ट तन्वं दुरुक्तैः Us 


4. Yo no agne ararivan aghayurardativa marcayati 
dvayena. Mantro guruh punarastu so asma 
anu mrksista tanvam duruktaih. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 148 659 


Agni, whoever be envious, sinful and non- 
giving and try to mislead us with evil words and double 
dealing in action, may the Agni mantra be our right guide 
and save us, and may the evil speaker and doer stew 
himself in his own juice and destroy himself with those 
very evil words. 


उत वायः सहस्य प्रविद्वान्‌ मर्तो ad? मर्चयति gat | ste: 
पाहि स्तवमान स्तुवन्तमग्ने माकिर्नो दुरिताय धायीः ॥ ५॥ 


क Uta va yah sahasya pravidvan marto martam 
marcayati dvayena. Atah pahi stavamana stuva- 
ntamagne makirno duritaya dhayth. 


O Agni, eminent power of knowledge, child of 
courage and valour celebrated by many, whoever be the 
man of advanced knowledge who enthralls men by way 
of right teaching and preaching, protect and promote 
him who praises you and teaches us. Let us never be 
seized by any evil or sinful person. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 148 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


मथीद्यदी' विष्टो मातरिश्वा होतारं विश्वाप्सुं विश्वदेव्यम्‌। 
नि यं दधुर्मनुष्यांसु विक्षु स्वतैर्णं चित्रं वपुषे विभाव॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 


ll, Mathid yadim visto matarisva hotaram visvapsum 
visvadevyam. Ni yam dadhurman-usyasu viksu 
svarna citram vapuse vibhavam. 


Let us study and develop this Agni, light and 
fire energy, which Matarishva, wind and electric energy, 
pervading the skies energises, and which the scholars 
adopt in human communities like the wonderful sun 
for enhancement of the beauty of form and health of 


660 RGVEDA 


body — Agni which exists in all forms of the universe, 
which gives the universe its cosmic form and which 
receives, consumes and recreates everything that is 
offered to it since it is the catalytic agent of the cosmic 
yajna. 


ददानमिन्न ददभन्त मन्माथिर्वरूथं मम तस्य॑ चाकन्‌। 
जुषन्त विश्वान्यस्य कर्मोपस्तुतिं भर॑माणस्य कारोः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Dadanaminna dadabhanta manmagnir-varutham 
mama tasya cakan. Jusanta visvan-yasya karmo- 
pastutim bharamanasya karoh. 


Enemies cannot injure or violate Agni, fire 
power and the learned scientist, because it is the giver 
and it loves and desires the supreme good of me and 
everybody. All people love and esteem the celebration 
of the scientific and artistic versatility of this power and 
benefit from all the arts and crafts of the artist of this 
generous source of energy and beauty. 


नित्ये चिन्नु यं सद॑ने जगृभ्र प्रश॑स्तिभिर्दधिरे यज्ञियांसः। 
प्रसू न॑यन्त THAT इष्टावश्वासो न CAN रारहाणाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Nitye cinnu yam sadane jagrbhre prasastibhir- 
dadhire yajniyasah. Pra su nayanta grbhayanta 
istavasvaso na rathyo rarahanah. 


Let the high-priests of yajna (in the field of 
science and meditation) take up Agni, fire energy, in 
the laboratory, workshop, the eternal space and the cave 
of the mind, develop it with laudable means for 
advancement, and harness it for desired purposes, going 
forward as by chariot drawn by trained horses. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 149 661 


पुरूणि दस्मो नि रिणाति जम्भैराद्रोचते वन आ विभावां। 
आद॑स्य वातो अनु, वाति शोचिरस्तुर्न श्यीमसनामनु 


द्यून्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Puruni dasmo ni rinati jambhairadd rocate vana 
a vibhava. Adasya vato anu vati Socirasturna 
Saryamasanamanu dyun. 


Agni, mighty power of light and fire, catalyses, 
destroys and creates many and, blazing in the light rays, 
shines in majesty. And then shining and blazing like a 
shooting star of the eternal archer, it releases stormy 
currents of energy every day, every minute, every 
moment. 


न यं रिपवो न रिषण्यवो asf सन्तं रेषणा रेषयन्ति । अन्धा 
अपश्या न द॑भन्रथिख्या नित्यांस ई प्रेतारो! अरश्चन्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5. Na yam ripavo na risanyavo garbhe santam 
resana resayanti. Andha apasya na dabhann- 
abhikhya nityasa im pretaro araksan. 


Existing as it is in the womb of Eternity, no 
enemies, no designers of evil, no destroyers, no attacks, 
can damage it. The blind and the ignorant hurt it not, 
they cannot suppress it. Those who know, those who 
love, value and cooperate, permanently protect and 
promote it. 

Mandala 1/Sukta 149 


Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
महः स राय एष॑ते पतिर्द्चिन इनस्य GA: पद आ । 
उप ध्रजन्तमद्रयो विधन्नित्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


0 Mahah sa raya esate patirdannina inasya vasunah 
pada a. Upa dhrajantamadrayo vidhannit. 


662 RGVEDA 


Agni! Mighty is he, lord and protector of wealth. 
Ruler of rulers, abundant and gracious giver of wealth, 
he comes to us to give us of his gifts. And when he 
comes near, mountains quake in fear and clouds shower 
in rain with reverence. 


सयो aot नरां न रोद॑स्योः श्रवोभिरस्ति जीवपीतसर्गः । 
प्रयः सस्राणः शिश्रीत योनौ ॥ २॥ 


2. Sa yo vrsa naram na rodasyoh Sravobhirasti 
jivapitasargah. Pra yah sasranah Sisrita yonau. 


Abundant and generous is he like the clouds of 
rain, who, in the midst of heaven and earth as amidst 
humanity, has drunk deep of the joy of creation, and, 
dynamically pervading the universe with his majesty, 
who abides at the centre of the form and identity of 
existence. 


आ यः पुरं नार्मिंणीमदींदेदत्य॑ः कविर्नभन्यो नावीं । 
सूरो न रुरुक्वाज्छतात्मां ॥३॥ 


3; A yah puram narminimadidedatyah kavirna- 
bhanyo narva. Suro na rurukvanchatatma. 


Agni, who has illuminated the celestial city of 
this imperishable soul, who is fast as the winds of space 
and faster than sunbeams, is the visionary creator of 
the worlds of eternity, blazing as the very soul of a 
thousand suns. 


अभि द्विजन्मा त्री रोचनानि विश्वा रजांसि शुशुचानो 
अस्थात्‌ । होता यजिष्ठो अपां सधस्थे ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Abhi dvijanma tri rocanani visva rajamsi Susu 
cano asthat. Hota yajistho apam sadhasthe. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 150 663 


Twice born and born of two, akasha and vayu, 
manifesting in universal nature and in every distinct 
form of nature, illuminating three lights, fire of the earth, 
lightning of the skies and lights of heaven, vitalising 
all the worlds of the universe, Agni abides all round 
everywhere. Worthiest universal yajaka, holding the 
worlds unto itself, it abides coexistent with the universal 
liquid energy of the cosmos. 


अयं स होता यो द्विजन्मा विश्वा दधे वार्यणि stare | 
मर्तो यो अस्मै सुतुको! ददाश! ॥ ५॥ 


5. Ayam sa hota yo dvijanma visva dadhe varyani 
Sravasya. Marto yo asmai sutuko dadasa. 


Such is this Agni, creative lord of cosmic yajna, 
wielder of the worlds, born of two and twice born, who 
holds the choicest foods, energies and honours of the 
universe. And the man who, self-sacrificing, twice born 
of natural mother and mother Sarasvati, blest with the 
richest gifts of food, energy and honour, with a noble 
family gives in homage and surrender to this Agni, he 
is the real man. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 150 
Agni Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
पुरु wal दाश्वान्वोँचेऽ RG तव॑ स्विदा। 
तोदस्येव शरण आ महस्य ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Puru tva dasvan voce ’riragne tava svida. 
Todasyeva Sarana a mahasya. 


Faithful and dedicated, giving in homage, I sing 
profusely in honour and celebration of you, and come 


664 RGVEDA 


in to you for shelter and protection, Agni, lord of light 
as the sun, great and glorious. 


व्य॑निनस्य॑ धनिनं: प्रहोषे Faatea: | 
कदा चन प्रजिग॑तो अदेवयोः ॥ २॥ 

2. Vyaninasya dhaninah prahose cidararusah. 
Kada cana prajigato adevayoh. 


And I would not care to join the company of the 
admirer of the rich not dedicated to the divinities and to 
the lord of light, Agni, even though he be otherwise 
non-violent. 


स चन्द्रो विप्र मर्त्यो महो व्राध॑न्तमो दिवि। 
wad अगे वनुषः स्याम ॥ ३॥ 


रः Sa candro vipra martyo maho vradhantamo divi. 
Prapet te agne vanusah syama. 


O lord of light and generosity, Agni, surely that 
mortal is blest and brilliant like the moon in the heavens, 
great and greater, ever rising most high, who is 
worshipful and gives in charity with thanks and divine 
admiration. May we, we pray, be dedicated to you, 
singing songs of devotion in admiration of the Divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 151 
Mitra-Varuna Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 

fast न यं शिम्या गोषु werd: स्वाध्यो विदथे अप्सु 
जीज॑नन्‌। अरेजेतां रोद॑सी पाज॑सा गिरा प्रतिं प्रियं aod 
जनुषामवः ॥ ९॥ 

le Mitram na yam Simya gosu gavyavah svadhyo 
vidathe apsu jijanan. Arejetam rodasi pajasa gira 
Prati priyam yajatam janusamavah. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 151 665 


Agni is dear as a friend and adorable (since it is 
the vigour and vitality of life in the human personality, 
in the animal world and in the earth and the 
environment). Let the people dedicated to the welfare 
and protection of humanity, who love the wealth of cows 
and milk products, who want to preserve the earth and 
the environment, and who value the vitality of their 
sense and mind, light and develop Agni, as a dear 
adorable friend, with noble acts in yajna and corporate 
action to inspire vitality in the cows, in the pranic 
energies, in the mind and senses, and in the earth and 
environment. And then the heaven and earth would 
vibrate with life and joy by virtue of their holy voice 
and the power of their songs of adoration. (Let the voice 
resound on earth and songs rise to heaven). 


यद्ध त्यद्वां पुरुमीव््हस्य सोमिनः प्र पित्रासो न द॑धिरे 
स्वाभुवः | अध क्रतुं विदतं गातुमर्चत उत श्रुतं वृषणा 
पस्त्यांवतः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Yaddha tyad vam purumilhasya sominah pra 
mitraso na dadhire svabhuvah. Adha kratum 
vidatam gatumarcata Uta §rutam vrsana pastya- 
vatah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, generous heaven and earth 
and the skies, listen to the voice of adoration which 
people of intelligence and innate virtue bear and offer 
as friends to you. Know the yajnic act of the blessed 
yajamana of prosperity holding rich libations of soma 
for the holy fire. Clear the path of progress for the 
worshipper and listen to the songs of the master of a 
happy home. 


666 RGVEDA 


आ वां yorardat जन्म रोद॑स्योः प्रवाच्यं वृषणा दक्ष॑से 
महे। यदीमृताय भरथो यदर्वते प्र होत्र॑या शिम्या वीथो 
अध्वरम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


A vam bhisan ksitayo janma rodasyoh pravacyam 
vrsana daksase mahe. Yadimrtaya bharatho 
yadarvate pra hotraya simya vitho adhvaram. 


Generous Mitra and Varuna, sun and cosmic 
waters, fire and sun, people living on earth admire your 
celebrated rise from heaven through the skies for the 
sake of spiritual greatness of honour and smartness of 
perfect performance, since on their invocation with holy 
action you reach their yajna of love and holiness of non- 
violence and bear all round fruits of yajna for the man 
of science and speed and for the man of truth and cosmic 
Law. 


प्रसा श्चितिरसुर या महिं प्रिय ऋतावानावृतमा घोषथो 
ged! युवं दिवो बहतो दक्च॑माभुवं गां न धुर्युप युञ्जाथे 
अपः॥ ४॥ 


4. Pra sa ksitirasura ya mahi priya Rtavanavrtama 
ghosatho brhat. Yuvam divo brhato daksama- 
bhuvam gam na dhuryupa yunjathe apah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, lords of the universal truth 
of being and action, wielders of the pranic energies dear 
as life, to the great earth which is so dear to you and to 
the people, proclaim the great and universal truth of 
life: Bring from the vast heaven of light, both of you, 
the mighty strength of being and the conviction of will 
and action, yoke the two like the driving force of a 
chariot, (like the ruler and the people of the world state), 
and join the march of life. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 151 667 


मही अत्रं महिना वार॑मरण्वथोऽ रेणवस्तुज आ सद्य॑न्धेनवंः | 
स्वर॑न्ति ता उपरताति सूर्यमा निम्रुच उषसस्तक्ववीरिव ॥ ५॥ 


Mahi atra mahina varamrnvatho’renavastuja a 
sadman dhenavah. Svaranti ta uparatati suryama 
Nimruca usasastakvaviriva. 


Mitra and Varuna, you come like sun and shower 
to the great earth here and bring choice gifts. Pure cows 
unsullied by dust, fertile and generous they are, come 
home lowing for their calves like the dawns returning 
with homage to the sun in the vault of heaven, or like 
the birds on the flight back to the nest. 


आ aga केशिनीरनूषत मित्र यत्र वरूण गातुमर्चथः | 
अव त्मना सृजतं पिन्व॑तं धियो! युवं विप्र॑स्य मन्म॑नामि- 
WITT: ॥ & ॥ 


6. A vamrtaya kesiniranusata mitra yatra varuna 
gatumarcathah. Ava tmana srjatam pinvatam 
dhiyo yuvam viprasya manmanamirajyathah. 


Mitra and Varuna, powers of love and justice of 
society, where the lights of knowledge and the flames 
of yajnic fire in action serve and augment you for the 
advancement of truth and rule of law, there your powers 
of love and friendship and your power of justice serve, 
protect and enrich the earth and the character and 
conduct of her children. O light and shower of life, love 
and justice, with your heart and soul, create, protect and 
strengthen the native intelligence and refine and raise 
the knowledge and wisdom of the noble saints and 
scholars. 


668 RGVEDA 


यो at यज्ञैः शंरामानो ह दाश॑ति कविर्होता यज॑ति 
मन्मसाधनः | उपाह तं गच्छ॑थो वीथो अध्वरमच्छा Ar: 
सुमतिं गन्तमस्मयू 19 ॥ 


vis Yo vam yajnaih sasamano ha dasati kavirhota 
yajati manmasadhanah. Upaha tam gacchatho 
vitho adhvaramaccha girah sumatim gantama- 
smayu. 


Mitra and Varuna, teachers, masters and eminent 
scholars inspired with love friendship and justice, 
whoever does honour and reverence to you and gives 
in charity and homage to divinity by yajnas, good 
reading, prayer, and noble company, whoever attends 
on you with reverence for service, the worshipful man 
who has mastered his subject or the poet of vision and 
imagination or the generous yajaka, or the man of 
knowledge for whom science and honest industry alone 
is the key to success, you go to him, I pray, meet him at 
his yajna of love, reverence and non-violence, and bless 
him with holy words, noble wisdom and discrimination. 


युवां यज्ञः प्र॑थमा RSs ऋतावाना मन॑सो न प्रयुक्तिषु | 
भरन्ति वां मन्म॑ना संयता गिरोऽदृप्यता मन॑सा रेवदां- 
शाथे॥८॥ 


8. Yuvam yajnaih prathama gobhiranjata rtavana 
manaso na prayuktisu. Bharanti van manmana 
samyata giro’drpyata manasa revadasathe. 


Mitra and Varuna, first and foremost lords of 
truth and rectitude, whoever approach you with respect 
and honour you with yajnas and noble words as the first 
choice of their heart and soul, and offer you tributes of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 152 669 


love and reverence with controlled words of honesty 
and sincerity, you bless them with the wealth of 
knowledge and honour with a mind and spirit free from 
the pride of learning. 


रेवद्वयो दधाथे रेवदाशाथे नरां मायाभिरितऊति मार्हिनम्‌। 
न वां द्यावोऽ grata सिन्ध॑वो न देवत्वं पणयो नान॑- 
शुर्मघम्‌॥ ९॥ 


9. Revadvayo dadhathe revadasathe nara maya- 
bhirita uti mahinam. Na vam dyavo’habhirnota 
sindhavo na devatvam panayo nanasur-magham. 


Mitra and Varuna, eternal lord of love and spirit 
of justice and rectitude, you bear and bring the wealth 
of health and age of the natural world. Immanent spirits 
of divinity in the world, leaders of humanity, with your 
innate powers of protection here on earth, you bring us 
immense wealth and honour of life. The lights of the 
day to-day or tomorrow reach not the immensity of that 
grandeur. The rolling seas swell not to the heights of 
that immensity. The human voices fail to touch the fringe 
of that power and that glory. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 152 
Mitra-Varuna Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


युवं centr पीवसा व॑साथे युवोरच्छिद्रा मन्त॑वो SAT: । 
अवांतिरतमनुतानि विश्व॑ ऋतेन मित्रावरुणा सचेथे ॥ ९॥ 
I. Yuvam vastrani pivasa vasathe yuvoracchidra 


mantavo ha sargah. Avatiratamanrtani visva 
rtena mitravaruna sacethe. 


Mitra and Varuna, like day and night, with your 


670 RGVEDA 


expansion over the world you reveal and cover the forms 
of things in existence and your revelations of the things 
are faultless. You rule out and overcome illusions and 
unrealities since you associate with what is real and true. 


एतच्यन त्वो वि चिकेतदेषां den मन्त्र॑ः कविशस्त 
ऋघावान्‌ । Bist हन्ति चतुरश्रिरुग्रो देवनिदो ह प्रथमा 
she ॥ २॥ 


2: Etaccana tvo vi ciketadesam satyo mantrah kavi- 
Sasta rghavan. Trirasrim hanti caturasrirugro 
devanido ha prathama ajuryan. 


This much, may be, one of these wise ones may 
know, one who knows the truth, thinks aright, and is 
recognised and praised by scholars of distinction as a 
man of vision and discrimination. The brilliant scholar 
of the four Vedas masters the three dimensions of 
knowledge: pure knowledge of Rks, applied knowledge 
of Yajus, and the meditative knowledge of sweet 
Samans, and, being the prime force and power of 
wisdom ever true, never out of date, defeats those who 
deny and dishonour the divinities of existence and 
eminence of knowledge. 


अपादेति प्रथमा पद्तीनां कस्तद्वां मित्रावरुणा चिंकेत। 
गर्भो भारं भ॑रत्या चिदस्य ऋतं पिपर्त्यनुतं नि तारीत्‌ ॥ ३॥ 
5 Apadeti prathama padvatinam kastad vam 


mitravaruna ciketa. Garbho bharam bharatya 
cidasya rtam pipartyanrtam ni tarit. 


Just as the dawn arises and radiates over the 
earth before moving humanity rises and goes out on 
business, so does the Original Knowledge of Revelation 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 152 671 


radiate whole before it is analysed into distinctive 
branches. Which of your scholars, O Mitra and Varuna, 
powers of vision and wisdom, knows that? Probably 
the man-treasure of knowledge bears the burden of it, 
maintains it and feeds it with detailed application and 
overcomes illusion and confusion. 


प्रयन्तमित्परि जारं कनीनां पश्यामसि नोप॑निपद्यंमानम्‌। 
अनवपृग्णा वित॑ता वसानं प्रियं मित्रस्य वरुणस्य 
ers i 


4. Prayantamit pari jaram kaninam pasyamasi 
nopanipadyamanam. Anavaprena vitata vasanam 
priyam mitrasya varunasya dhama. 


Just as we see the sun, lover of the maidenly 
dawns, gather up the lights and moving on, never 
resting, so do we see the scholar, treasure-home of 
knowledge, lover of rising generations, moving on in 
his pursuit of knowledge, never resting and rusting, but 
expanding far and wide the light of knowledge, wherein 
lies the favourite love of Lord Supreme, lord of light as 
well as of the bottomless deep of annihilation. 


अनश्वो जातो अनभीशुरर्वा कनिंक्रदत्पतयदृर्ध्वसानुः | 
अचित्तं ब्रह्म॑ जुजुषुर्युवानः प्र मित्रे धाम॒ वरूणे गृणन्तः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Anasvo jato anabhisurarva kanikradat patayad- 
urdhvasanuh. Acittam brahma jujusuryuvanah 
pra mitre dhama varune grnantah. 


The sun is arisen, up on the heights of heaven, 
rushing on, roaring, no horse, no reins. Bright young 
generations pay homage, singing hymns of Infinity, 
admiring the treasure love of the Lord for the sake of 
Mitra and Varuna, love, light and justice of existence. 


672 RGVEDA 


आ aaa! मामतेयमव॑न्तीर्ब्रह्यप्रियं पीपयन्त्सस्यिन्रुधन्‌ । 
पित्वो भिक्षेत वयुनानि विद्वानासाविवांसन्नदिंतिमुरुष्येत्‌ 1 ६ ॥ 


6. A dhenavo mamateyamavantirbrahmapriyam 
pipayantsasminnudhan. Pitvo bhikseta vayunani 


Just as cows feed their calves on milk from their 
udders, just as protective mothers breast-feed their 
darling child of love and promote him in his favourite 
studies of Divinity, so should the scholar of the ways 
and laws of the world ask for food and maintenance 
and, serving and shining, advance the study and 
knowledge of nature and eternity. 


आ वां मित्रावरुणा हव्यजुष्टिं नम॑सा देवावव॑सा ववृत्याम्‌ | 
अस्माकं ब्रह्य पृतनासु सह्या अस्माकं वृष्टिर्दिव्या सुंपारा ॥ ७॥ 


des A vam mitravaruna havyajustim namasa deva- 
vavasa vavrtyam. Asmakam brahma prtanasu 
sahya asmakam vrstirdivya supara. 


O Mitra and Varuna, brilliant and generous lords 
of love and justice, I pray, I may, with your protection, 
choose to worship you with the homage of love, 
dedication and sacrifice. Bless our songs of adoration 
among our people with wealth and honour of success 
and may our projects of action be holy and powerful, 
taking us across the high seas of life. Let our showers 
be showers of divinity and redemption. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 153 
Mitra-Varuna Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
यजामहे at महः astral gatuftfarason aah: 
yee te अध यद्वां मस्मे अध्वर्यवो न धीतिभिर्भरन्ति ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 153 673 


im Yajamahe vam mahah sajosa havyebhirmitra- 
varuna namobhih. Ghrtairghrtasnu adha yad 
vamasme adhvaryavo na dhitibhirbharanti. 


Mitra and Varuna, great, loving, rejoicing, 
friends of humanity, lords of love and justice, 
resplendent with flames of ghrta, we love, honour and 
worship you with salutations, service and oblations of 
high grades of ghrta, and the devotees, dedicated and 
worshipful, bring holy offerings with sincere prayers 
like high-priests of yajna for you and for us. 


प्रस्तुतिर्वां धाम न प्रयुक्तिरयामि मित्रावरुणा सुवृक्तिः | 
अनक्ति यद्वां विदथेषु होता! सुम्नं वां सूरि्वुंषणा- 
fader २॥ 


2. Prastutirvam dhama na prayuktirayami mitra- 
varuna suvrktih. Anakti yad vam vidathesu hota 
sumnam vam surirvrsanaviyaksan. 


Mitra, lord of love, and Varuna, lord of justice, I 
come to you as to my home and haven of peace, comfort 
and grace, having abandoned the storms of disturbance 
and temptation. My concentration is complete and my 
song of praise is divine. Lords of generosity, brave is 
the yajaka, come to join you in congregations of prayer 
and action, doing honour and homage to you, waiting 
for grace and comfort of well-being. 


पीपाय धेनुरदिंतिच्ऋताय saa मित्रावरुणा हविर्दे । हिनोति 
यद्वां विदथे सपर्यन्त्स रातह॑व्यो मानुषो न होता ॥ ३॥ 

Si Pipaya dhenuraditirrtaya janaya mitravaruna 
havirde. Hinoti yad vam vidathe saparyan- 
tsa ratahavyo manuso na hota. 


674 RGVEDA 


Mitra and Varuna, whoever the yajaka giving 
oblations in the yajna of love and charity to you like a 
noble human being, who invokes you and prays for help 
in his tasks of life, thanking you and serving you in 
gratitude, Mother Nature like a generous cow gives 
infinite blessings to that man of truth and sacrifice. 


उत वां विक्षु मद्यास्वन्धो गाव आपंर्च पीपयन्त देवीः। 
उतो नौ अस्य पूर्व्यः पतिर्दन्वीतं पातं पय॑स Sheena: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Uta vam viksu madyasvandho gava apasca 
pipayanta 4८171. Uto no asya purvyah patirdan 
vitam patam payasa usriyayah. 


Mitra and Varuna, friends, teachers and leaders 
of humanity, may the cows and the holy voices, 
consecrated holy waters and food and the juice of soma 
among the happy people surfeit you with delight. And 
may the ancient master of our yajna of education, 
governance and production giving us the fruits of 
holiness sustain the yajna, and may you too continue to 
enjoy the fruits of that yajna and drink the milk of the 
cow as well as the lights of dawn. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 154 
Vishnu Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 
विष्णोर्नु कं वीयीणि प्र ate यः पार्थिवानि विममे रजांसि। 
यो अस्कभायदुत्तरं सधस्थं विचक्रमाणस्त्रेधोरुगायः ॥ ९॥ 
ly Visnornu kam viryani pra vocam yah parthivani 
vimame rajamsi. Yo askabhayaduttaram sadha- 
stham vicakramanastredhorugayah. 


Let me well recite the grand acts of Vishnu, lord 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 154 675 


immanent, all pervasive, of the universe, who creates 
all worlds of the universe, who sustains the high regions 
of light in upper space and, having created, maintains it 
three ways, 1.e., as a system, as part of the cosmic system, 
and in relation to the other systems, the lord who is 
sung and celebrated everywhere. 


प्र तद्विष्णु: स्तवते वीर्येण मृगो न भीमः कुचरो MST: | 
यस्योरुषु त्रिषु विक्रम॑णेष्वधिक्षियन्ति भुव॑नानि विश्वा ॥ २॥ 


2 Pra tad visnuh stavate viryena mrgo na bhimah 
kucaro giristhah. Yasoyrusu trisu vikramanesva- 
dhiksiyanti bhuvanani visva. 


That Vishnu who is sung and celebrated by 
virtue of his might, is the lord who pervades the universe 
everywhere just as the awful lion, lord of the mountain 
cave, majestically moves around over the tortuous paths 
of the forest. In the vast three-fold acts of his mighty 
creation, i.e., the acts of projection, sustenance and 
withdrawal, reside the entire worlds of existence. 


प्र विष्णवे शूषमेतु मन्म॑ गिरिद्षित॑ उरुगायाय वृष्णे | 
य इदं दीर्घ प्रय॑तं सधस्थमेको विममे त्रिभिरित्पदेभिः ॥ ३॥ 


Pra visnave Susametu manma giriksita urugaydaya 
vrsne. Ya idam dirgham prayatam sadhastha 
meko vimame tribhirit padebhih. 


May this powerful song of celebration reach 
Vishnu, celebrated lord, great and generous, who holds 
in balance the heights of the universe of space and time 
and creates it just in three steps of sattva, rajas and tamas, 
1.e., mind, motion and matter, or the three regions of 
earth, sky and the heaven of light. 


676 RGVEDA 


यस्य त्री पूर्णां मधुना पदान्यक्षीयमाणा स्वधया मद॑न्ति। 
a3 frend पृथिवीमुत द्यामेको, दाधार्‌ भुव॑नानि 
विश्वां ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yasya tri purnad madhuna padanyakstyamana 
svadhaya madanti. Ya u tridhatu prthivimuta 
dyameko dadhara bhuvanani visva. 


The threefold worlds of his, earth, heaven and 
the middle regions, full and perfect in their own ways 
and character, honey sweet and undecaying, rejoice in 
the lord’s presence with their inmates by their innate 
power of sustenance. He, the sole lord, by himself, holds 
the entire worlds of existence including heaven and earth 
created of the three modes of Prakrti, sattva, rajas and 
tamas. 


तद॑स्य प्रियमभि पाथो अश्यां नरो यत्र॑ देवयवो मर्द॑न्ति। 
उरुक्रमस्य स हि बन्धुरित्था विष्णोः पदे परमे मध्व 
उत्सः ॥ ५॥ 


> Tadasya priyamabhi patho asyam naro yatra 
devayavo madanti. Urukramasya sa hi bandhu- 
rittha visnoh pade parame madhva utsah. 


May I rise to and follow that cherished path of 
lord Vishnu and reach that state of being wherein the 
noble people dedicated to Divinity live and rejoice in 
bliss. This lord of divine power and action is friend of 
the industrious men of relentless action, and there in 
his supreme presence flows the stream of divine love 
and bliss. 


तावां वास्तु्युश्मसि गमध्यै यत्र गावो भूरिंशुङ्क stare: । 
अत्राह तदुरुगायस्य वृष्ण॑ः परमं wena भाति भूरिं ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 155 677 


6. Ta vam vastunyusmasi gamadhyai yatra gavo 
bhurisrnga ayasah. Atraha tadurugayasya vrsnah 
paramam padamava bhati bhiuri. 


Men of dedication, yogis, teachers and 
preachers, scholars and scientists, wedded couples, for 
your rest and abiding residence where you should go 
and rest, we want those places where the sharp and 
penetrative rays of the divine sun should reach for 
enlightenment. Here only is the place, and we want your 
abode here, where the supreme abode of the generous 
and the omnipotent Vishnu shines with abundant light 
and bliss. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 155 
Vishnu Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


Wa: पान्तमन्धसो धियायते महे sata विष्ण॑वे चार्चत। 
या सानुनि पर्वतानामदाभ्या महस्तस्थतुरर्वं तेव साधुनां ॥ ९॥ 


1. Pra vah pantamandhaso dhiyayate mahe suraya 
visnave carcata. Ya sanuni parvatan-amadabhya 
mahastasthaturarvateva sadhuna. 


Of your delicious food and soma drink, offer in 
homage to the great and mighty Vishnu, lord of 
intelligence, and to Indra, bold and mighty lord of energy 
and power. Both stand on top of mountains and clouds 
and on top of heaven, firm and inviolable high, as the 
mountaineer stands firm on top of a mountain peak by 
the best and strongest equipment. 


(According to Swami Dayanand, the mantra may 
be applied to the teachers and scholars of a nation who 
reach on top of learning and knowledge by arduous 


678 RGVEDA 


efforts of mountainous degree and do their work freely 
and courageously.) 


त्वेषमित्था aru शिमीवतोरिन्द्राविष्णु सुतपा वामु- 
रूष्यति। या मत्यीय प्रतिधीयमानमित्कृशानोरस्तुरसना- 
desta: ॥ २॥ 


2 Tvesamittha samaranam Simivatorindravisnu 
sutapa vamurusyati. Ya martyaya pratidhiya- 
manam-it krsanor-astu-rasanam-urusyathah. 


Indra, lord of power such as lightning, and 
Vishnu, lord of light such as the sun, extend and expand 
the range and potential of the mighty shooting archer’s 
missile-fitted defence of humanity. And thus does the 
man of yajna, protecting, promoting and drinking the 
soma-joy of the nation, extend and expand the blaze of 
the battle of the mighty defender of the nation and thus 
does he glorify you both, Indra and Vishnu. 


ता ई' वर्धन्ति मह्य॑स्य Ute नि मातरां नयति रेत॑से भुजे। 
दधाति पुत्रोऽ at परं पितुनमिं तृतीयमधि रोचने दिवः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Ta im vardhanti mahyasya paumsyam ni matara 
nayati retase bhuje. Dadhati putro’varam param 
piturnama trttyamadhi rocane divah. 


Those oblations of yajna food and distilled soma 
augment the great creative power of this Vishnu, spirit 
of the universe, for procreative virility and divine 
enjoyment of the world of existence. He vests it in the 
mother powers of nature, 1.e., heaven and earth. Then 
the off-spring bears the name of the father, the one that 
is the ultimate, as the child of Divinity, and the other 
that is the worldly name of his family. The third the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 155 679 


Lord bears over and above the light of heaven. 


तत्तदिद॑स्य पौंस्यं गृणीमसीनस्य त्रातुरवृकस्य मीव्न्हुष॑ः । 
यः पार्थिवानि च्रिभिरिद्धिगांमभिरुरु ्रमि्टोरुगायायं 
जीवसे ।। ४ ॥ 


4. Tattadidasya paumsyam grnimasinasya tratura- 
vrkasya milhusah. Yah parthivani tribhirid 
vigamabhiruru kramistorugayaya jivase. 


That procreative virility of this lord Vishnu at 
every step of it, we celebrate in songs of joy, that 
creativity of the lord saviour and protector, generous 
and not rapacious who takes away nothing for himself, 
creator supreme and lord of cosmic fertility, who 
completes the creation of the natural universe in three 
steps of sattva, rajas and tamas — thought, energy and 
matter — for the delightful life of the soul, and then 
transcends the work of his own creation. 


द्वे इद॑स्य क्रम॑णे स्वर्दूशोऽ भिख्याय मर्त्यो भुरण्यति । 
तृतीयमस्य नकिरा द॑धर्षति वयश्चन पतयन्तः पतत्रिण: ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Dve idasya kramane svardrso’bhikhyaya martyo 
bhuranyati. Trttyamasya nakira dadharsati 
vayascana patayantah patatrinah. 


To know the grandeur of the lord seer of light 
and bliss across two steps of his creation, earth and the 
heavens of light, the human soul stirs in mind and 
intelligence. The third step no one can, or ought to, 
violate, overcome or ignore, not even people of the 
highest imagination, like birds of the strongest wings, 
can do so. 


680 RGVEDA 


चतुर्भिः साकं न॑वतिं च नाम॑भिश्चक्रं न वृत्तं व्यती~रवी- 
विपत्‌। बृहच्छरीरो विमिमान ऋक्व॑भिर्युवाकुमार्‌ : 
प्रत्येत्याहवम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Caturbhih sakam navatim ca namabhiscakram na 
vrttam vayatinravivipat. Brhacchriro vimimana 
rkvabhiryuvakumarah pratyetyaha-vam. 


Inspiring, moving, measuring four and ninety 
names of the passage of chronological time, circulating 
in the cosmic circle of eternal time, rotating, revolving, 
eternally recurring, the mighty cosmic bodied Vishnu, 
ever young, never a teenager, moves the universe, 
himself unmoved and unmoving, and transcendent, and 
he listens and attends to our invocations of yajna with 
the Rkvi hymns of praise and celebration. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 156 
Vishnu Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


भवां मित्रो न शेव्यो घृतासुंतिर्विभंतद्युम्न एवया उ aren: | 
अधां ते विष्णो विदुषा चिदर्ध्यः स्तोमो यज्ञश्च राध्यो 
हविष्प॑ता ।॥ ९॥ 


ie Bhava mitro na Sevyo ghrtasutirvibhutadyumna 
evaya u saprathah. Adha te visno vidusa cidar- 
dhyah stomo yajnasca radhyo havismata. 


O Vishnu, lord of universal knowledge, be like 
a friend, giver of peace and comfort, generator of the 
waters of life, lord of the wealth and honour of the world, 
instant mover and controller of protections, vast and 
expanding in influence and inspiration, and being so, 
worshipped by the wise and eminent scholars, served 
by the generous devotees of yajna, let the song of 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 156 681 


celebration and the fragrance of yajna in your honour 
rise to the skies. (The mantra is applicable to the teacher 
also). 


यः Gera वेधसे नवीयसे सुमञ्नांनये विष्णवे ददांशति। 
यो जातमस्य महतो महि ब्रवत्सेदु श्रवोभिर्युज्यं 
चिदभ्य॑सत्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Yah purvyaya vedhase naviyase sumajjanaye 
visnave dadaSati. Yo jatamasya mahato mahi 
bravat sedu Sravobhiryujyam cidabhyasat. 


One who lovingly and generously does homage 
to Vishnu, ancient and yet most modern lord of 
knowledge, one who creates and imparts new 
knowledge for the devotees of knowledge, one who 
speaks and communicates this great new message of 
the great lord of universal knowledge, and one who 
practices this applicable and useful knowledge with 
thanks and grateful offerings in yajna for charity and 
social service, he is the real man. 


ad स्तोतारः get wen विद ऋतस्य गर्भ जनुषा पिपर्तन । 
आस्य॑ जानन्तो नाम॑ चिद्विवक्तन weed विष्णो सुमतिं 
भ॑जामहे ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Tamu stotarah purvyam yatha vida rtasya 
garbham janusa pipartana. Asya jananto nama 
cid vivaktana mahaste visno sumatim bhajamahe. 


Admirers and worshippers of the ancient and 
eternal lord of knowledge, Vishnu, as much as you know 
the lord and his knowledge, please augment and advance 
that body of knowledge with your own growth and 
contribution, a process as hard as rebirth though it is. 


682 RGVEDA 


And knowing the lord and his knowledge, speak of the 
knowledge to the seekers in full confidence. O Vishnu, 
lord eternal and master of universal knowledge, all hail 
to you! We offer homage and worship to you in honour 
of your knowledge and wisdom. 


तम॑स्य राजा वरुणस्तमश्विना क्रतं सचन्त॒ मारुतस्य 
वेधसः । दाधार दक्ष॑मुत्तममंहर्विंदं व्रजं च विष्णुः सखिवाँ 
अपोर्णुते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tamasya raja varunastamasvina kratum sacanta 
marutasya vedhasah. Dadhara daksamuttama- 
maharvidam vrajam ca visnuh sakhivan apornute. 


Brilliant Varuna, lord of light and favourite 
choice of all, and the Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn 
of new knowledge, in unison, join that noble and yajnic 
act of the knowledge and revelation of Vishnu, lord of 
universal knowledge and instant controller of the 
Maruts, tempestuous heroes of action, for furtherance 
and application. Vishnu, commanding the force of his 
friends, wields the highest knowledge and expertise of 
action and opens the paths of action brilliant as day for 
humanity to follow and advance. 


आ यो विवायं सचथाय दैव्य इन्द्राय विष्णुः सुकृते 
सुकृत्तरः । वेधा अ॑जिन्वत्तरिषधस्थ आर्यमृतस्य भागे 
यज॑मानमाभ॑ंजत्‌॥ & ॥ 

2; A yo vivaya sacathaya daivya indraya visnuh 
sukrte sukrttarah. Vedha ajinvat trisadhastha 
aryamrtasya bhage yajamanamabhajat. 

Vishnu, generous and divine lord of knowledge, 
friend of all, brilliant hero of action, better and ever 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 157 683 


more blissful doer, established in the threefold virtue 
of knowledge, action and worship, goes forward to join 
Indra, lord ruler of the world, who does good to all, 
and, in the direction of truth and rectitude, protects and 
promotes men of virtue, culture and creativity, and with 
all help blesses the yajamana in the performance of his 
acts of love and non-violence for peace and progress. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 157 
Ashvins Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


अबोंध्यथिर्ज्मं उदेति सूर्यो व्युषाश्चन्द्रा मह्यावो अर्चिषां । 
आयुक्षातापण्विना यात॑वे रथं प्रासा'वीदेवः सविता 
जगत्य॒थक््‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Abodhyagnirjma udeti suryo vyusascandra 
mahyavo arcisa. Ayuksatamasvina yatave ratham 
prasavid devah savita jagat prthak. 


The fire of Agni awakes and stirs the world with 
life afresh. The sun is on the rise over the earth. The 
great and golden dawn wrapt in beauty waxes on the 
horizon with the splendour of her glory. The Ashvins, 
harbingers of new light and knowledge, harness their 
chariot for the daily round. And the generous lord of 
light and life, Savita, in his own gracious way, showers 
and sanctifies the moving world with sunlight and new 
inspiration for action. 


यद्युञ्जाथे वृष॑णमश्विना रथं Fort नो मधुना aH ATL | 
अस्माकं ब्रह्य पृत॑नासु जिन्वतं वयं धना शुरसाता 
भजेमहि ॥ २॥ 


684 RGVEDA 


2: Yad yunjathe vrsanamasvina ratham ghrtena no 
madhuna ksatramuksatam. Asmakam brahma 
prtanasu jinvatam vayam dhana Surasata 
bhajemahi. 


Ashvins, harbingers of new light and life, chariot 
leaders of the world, you harness and ride your chariot 
of might and victory and sprinkle and inspire the Kshatra 
order of our defence and governance with exciting spirit 
of life and honey sweets of power and prosperity. In 
our struggle for the joy of life, inspire and strengthen 
our Brahma system of research and education with new 
knowledge and self-confidence. We pray, may we 
achieve the prize of success and victory in our battles 
of the brave. 


state fact मधुवाहनो रथो sittral अश्विनोर्यातु 
asa: | त्रिवन्धुरो मघवा विश्वसौभगः शं न आ date 
द्विपदे चतुष्पदे ।॥ ३ ॥ 


A Arvan tricakro madhuvahano ratho jirasvo asvi- 
noryatu sustutah. Tribandhuro maghava visva- 
saubhagah sam na a4 vaksad dvipade catuspade. 


Here, may the three engined, three staged, honey 
carrier, superfast chariot of the Ashvins come, the chariot 
all-acclaimed, mighty, laden with wealth and splendours 
of the world, and may that chariot, we pray, bring us 
peace, prosperity and well-being for our humans and 
for our animal world. 


आ न wet’ वहतमश्विना युवं neue नः Hear 
मिमिश्चतम्‌ । प्रायुस्तारिष्टं नी रपांसि मृक्षतं सेधतं देषो भव॑तं 
सचाभुवा ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 157 685 


4. A na urjam vahatamasvina yuvam madhumatya 
nah kasaya mimiksatam. Prayustaristam ni 
rapamsi mrksatam sedhatam devso bhavatam 
sacabhuva. 


Ashvins, leaders of light, come, bring us food 
and energy, accelerate the nation’s march with the spur 
of ambition and action. Take the health and age of the 
people over and across the heights. Rub off and wash 
away the sins. Ward off hate and enmity. Be our friends 
and helpers in every field. 


युवं gue जग॑तीषु धत्थो युवं विश्वेषु भुवनेष्वन्तः | 
gaa च॑ वृषणावपश्च वनस्पतीरश्विनावैर॑येथाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Yuvam ha garbham jagatisu dhattho yuvam 
visvesu bhuvanesvantah. Yuvamagnim ca vrsa- 
navapasca vanaspatinrasvinavairayetham. 


Ashvins, leaders of humanity, harbingers of light 
and life, generous and brave, life of nature astir, you 
vest the moving spheres with living potentials for 
growth, you enrich all the living worlds of the universe 
with light and life. Come both of you, help and support, 
excite the fire, agitate the waters and inspire the herbs 
and trees of the nation with life anew, elevate, gear up 
and bring showers of fire and waters of action and 
ambition. 


युवं हं स्थो भिषजा भेषजेभिरथो ह स्थो र थ्या ३ TAP: | 
अथो ह श्त्रमधि धत्थ उग्रा यो वां हविष्मान्मनसा 
ददाश ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yuvam ha stho bhisaja bhesajebhiratho ha 51/10 


rathya rathyebhih.Atho ha ksatramadhi dhattha 
ugra yo vam havisman manasa dadaSa. 


686 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and life, teachers, 
scholars and healers of the nation of humanity, be the 
physicians for us all with curatives, tonics and sanatives, 
be leaders and drivers with superfast chariots and 
energies. Lords of blazing power, keep the social order 
of defence bright and high for the ruler who, with all 
his wealth and powers of yajnic action, offers you 
homage sincerely with his heart and soul. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 158 
Ashvins Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


ad रुद्रा Gaurd germ दशस्यतं नो वृषणावभिष्टौ | 
cel ह यद्रेक्ण॑ ओचथ्यो वां प्र यत्सस्राथे अकवा- 
भिरूती ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vasu rudra purumanti vrdhanta dasasyatam no 
vrsanavabhistau. Dasra ha yad rekna aucathyo 
vam pra yat sasrathe akavabhiruti. 


Ashvins, generous lords of light and power, 
loved and wanted, shelter and support of all, scourge of 
evil and enmity, universally respected, ever on the rise, 
give us, we pray, what we love and desire for our 
success, since the admirable wealth that is yours you 
bring us for sure with abundant protection, promotion 
and welfare for all, brave saviours as you are from want 
and suffering. 


को वां दाशत्सुमतये चिदस्यै ay यद्धेथे नम॑सा पदे गोः। 
जिगृतमस्मे रेवतीः पुरन्धीः कामप्रेणेव मनसा चर॑न्ता ॥ २॥ 
2. Ko vam dasat sumataye cidasyai vasu yad dhethe 


namasa pade goh. Jigrtamasme revatih puran- 
dhith kamapreneva manasa caranta. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 158 687 


Ashvins, lords of light and leadership, shelter, 
support and protection for all, ever on the move with a 
mind keen to fulfil the desire and ambition of all, who 
hold and rule the human habitations in villages, towns 
and rich cities with food and power on the face of the 
earth and relentlessly keep awake, vigilant for us all 
and for our protection. Who can give, and what, in 
appreciation and return for this love and generosity of 
your mind and consideration for us — what except 
thanks and gratitude in homage? 


युक्तो ह यद्वां dear tea मध्ये अणीसो धायि ws: | 
उप॑ amd: शरणं ग॑मेयं शूरो नाज्म॑ पतयद्भिरेवैः ॥ ३॥ 


3 Yukto ha yad vam taugryaya perurvi madhye 
arnaso dhayi pajrah. Upa vamavah saranam 
gameyam Suro najma patayadbhirevaih. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light, power and 
protection, that stout, protective and irresistible chariot 
of yours propelled by flying oars stationed in the midst 
of the sea in full harness is ready for the valiant warrior 
to take us across the waters. May I, a powerful navigator 
in the battle of the sea, come and join the force under 
your protective cover? 


उप॑स्तुतिरोचथ्यपुरुष्येन्मा मापिमे प॑तत्रिणी वि दुंग्धाम्‌। 
मा मामेधो दशतयश्चितो धाक्‌ प्र यद्वां बब्दस्त्मनि खादति 
क्षाम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Upastutiraucathyamurusyenma mamime pata- 
trint vi dugdham. Ma mamedho daSatayascito 
dhak pra yad vam baddhastmani khadati ksam. 


Ashvins, lords of light, power and holiness, may 


688 RGVEDA 


my celebrative invocation and prayer protect my self- 
confidence. May the day and night cycle never drain 
me out. May your tenfold fire, concentrated and blazing, 
never burn me off, which otherwise bound up in the 
soul as the fire of grief and despair eats up the very 
flesh of the body. 


न मां गरन्नद्यो मातृतमा दासा यदीं सुसंमुब्धमवाधुः । शिरो 
यद॑स्य त्रैतनो वितक्षत्स्वयं दास उरो अंसावपि ग्ध ॥५॥ 


a: Na ma garan nadyo matrtama dasa yadim 
susamubdhamavadhuh. Siro yadasya traitano 
vitaksat svayam dasa uro amsavapi gdha. 


Let the streams be most motherly and kind 
saviours to me, simple, natural and unhurtful person as 
I am. Let not the streams swallow me even if savages 
were to throw me down into the water. If a thrice 
torturous person were to try to cut the head of such a 
person, then may the evil intentioned person cut his own 
torso and his own shoulders. 


दीर्घ॑त॑मा मामतेयो Asay द॑शमे युगे । 
अपामर्थ' यतीनां wan भ॑वति सार॑थिः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Dirghatama mamateyo jujurvan dasame yuge. 
Apamartham yatinam brahma bhavati sarathih. 


The person lost in darkness of the deep, having 
fallen a victim to blind attachment, grows old and 
decrepit in ten years. The one dedicated to sages in 
pursuit of divine knowledge, yajnic action and 
meditative prayer becomes a Brahma, scholar of the 
Veda, and a master of the chariot of life. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 159 689 


Mandala 1/Sukta 159 
Dyava-Prthivi Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


प्र द्यावां aa: पुथिवी ऋतावृधा मही स्तुषे विदथेषु प्रच तसा । 
देवेभिर्ये देवपुत्रे सुदंस॑सेत्था धिया वार्यणि प्रभूष॑तः ॥ ९ ॥ 


if Pra dyava yajnaih prthivi rtavrdha mahi stuse 
vidathesu pracetasa. Devebhirye devaputre 
sudamsasettha dhiya varyani prabhusatah. 


I study, serve and admire the earthly sphere and 
the solar system, both great, born of the particles of 
matter and energy in the course of natural evolution, 
both suggestive of new and newer knowledge through 
our yajnas of scientific programmes. Both of them, 
creations of the Divine, highly generous and productive, 
in cooperation with other natural elements, powers and 
spheres, working by the immanent will and intelligence 
of nature, produce and adorn manifold things of beauty 
and value. 


उत म॑न्ये पितुरद्रुहो मनो मातुर्महि स्वत॑वस्तब्दवीं मभिः। 
सुरेत॑सा पितरा भूम॑ चक्रतुरुरु प्रजायां अमृतं वरीमभिः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Uta manye pituradruho mano maturmahi svata- 
vastaddhavimabhih. Suretasa pitara bhuma 
cakratururu prajaya amrtam varim-abhih. 


And with holy invocations in yajna, I study, 
investigate and meditate on the great and innate power 
and intelligence of my father and mother the sun and 
the earth, both free from hate and full of love for all. 
Both father and mother of the world, overflowing with 
life and virility, create and augment the great and 
universal nectar wealth of humanity with their expansive 


690 RGVEDA 
and abundant generosity. 


ते सूनवः स्वप॑सः सुदंससो मही Sata पूर्वचित्तये । 
स्थातुश्च सत्यं जग॑तश्च धर्म॑णि पुत्रस्य॑ पाथः पदमद्॑या- 
विनः॥ ३॥ 


2, Te sunavah svapasah sudamsaso mahi jajnur- 
matara purvacittaye. Sthatusca satyam jatagasca 
dharmani putrasya pathah padam-advayavinah. 


They are the children, sons and daughters in 
reality, heroic, noble and graceful of action, who for 
the first, essential and absolute knowledge of prime 
importance, collect the knowledge of the great parents 
of the world of existence: Ishwar and Prakrti, sun and 
earth, and father and mother of this human birth of ours. 
O Parents, protect and bless the true and firm 
establishment of the child, free from duplicity and 
double dealing, in the Dharma of the static and dynamic 
world. 


ते mf! ममिरे सुप्रचेतसो जामी सयोनी मिथुना 
समोकसा | नव्यंनव्यं तन्तुमा त॑न्वते दिवि समुद्रे अन्तः 
क॒वय॑ः सुदीतय॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Te mayino mamire supracetaso jami sayoni 
mithuna samokasa. Navyam-navyam tantuma 
tanvate divi samudre antah kavayah suditayah. 


Those are poets and scientists of brilliance and 
vision possessed of wondrous power and intelligence, 
of equal knowledge and interest, loving together and 
working together as a family team like brother and sister, 
who study and measure the depths and interior of the 
oceans of earth and the heavens of light, create the warp 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 160 691 


and woof of ever expanding new knowledge and find 
new paths over the seas and in the skies and space. 


तद्राधो अद्य सवितुर्वरेण्यं वयं देवस्य॑ प्रसवे म॑नामहे । 
अस्मभ्यं द्यावापृथिवी सुचेतुना! रयिं ध॑त्तं वसुमन्तं शत- 
ण्विन॑म्‌॥ ५॥ 


a, Tad radho adya saviturvarenyam vayam devasya 
prasave manamahe. Asmabhyam dyavaprthivi 
sucetuna rayim dhattam vasuma-ntam Satag- 
vinam. 


That gift of knowledge worthy of love and 
choice in the creation of self-refulgent Lord Savita’s 
cosmic yajna, we value and admire. May the heaven 
and earth, universal father and mother, blest with 
immanent will of Nature, bear, bring and reveal that 
body of knowledge which is rich in wealth and power 
and provides a hundred forms of prosperity with cows, 
fertile lands and the word of knowledge and divinity. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 160 
Dyava-Prthivi Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


ते हि द्यावापृथिवी विश्ुवशंभुव ऋतावरी रज॑सो 
धार यत्कवी । सुजन्म॑नी धिषणे अन्तरीयते देवो देवी धर्मणा 
सूर्यः शुचिं: ॥ ९॥ 

॥. Te hi dyavaprthivi visvasambhuva rtavari rajaso 
dharayatkavi. Sujanmani dhisane antariyate 
devo devi dharmana suryah sucih. 

The two, heaven and earth, givers of universal 


peace and comfort, abiding by the laws of universal 
Truth, holding their spheres, vested with immanent will 


692 RGVEDA 


and intelligence, nobly born of mother nature, stout and 
forbearing, are brilliant and of divine quality. The sun, 
pure and effulgent, goes on by the laws of its own 
existence between heaven and earth. 


उरूव्यच॑सा uel! असश्चता पिता पाता च भुव॑नानि 
रक्षतः। सुधृष्टमे वपुष्ये न रोद॑सी पिता यत्सीमभि 
रूपैरवासयत्‌ २॥ 


2. Uruvyacasad mahini asascata pita mata ca 
bhuvanani raksatah. Sudhrstame vapusye na 
rodasi pita yat simabhi rupairavasayat. 


The two, of mighty expanse, great and grand, 
each separate with its own distinct identity, the sun as 
father and the earth as mother, protect and sustain the 
worlds and people around. Very strong and forbearing, 
the heaven and earth are like two wondrous icons of 
Beauty itself, which the father sun has fully vested with 
form and colour. 


स वद्धिः पुत्रः पित्रोः पवित्र॑वान्‌ पुनाति धीरो भुवनानि 
मायया । धेनुं च पृश्निं वृषभं aida विश्वाहां शुक्रं पयो 
अस्य दुक्षत ॥ ३॥ 


ay Sa vahnih putrah pitroh pavitravan punati dhiro 
bhuvanani mayaya. Dhenum ca prsnim vrsabham 
suretasam visvaha Sukram payo asya duksata. 


That universal vital fire, carrier of light and life 
and yajna, child of its causal parents, Lord Supreme 
and Nature and then akasha and vayu, i.e., space and 
energy, universal agent of holy action, constant and 
resolute, purifies and sanctifies with its wonderful 
powers, it energises, fertilises and purifies the cow, the 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 160 693 


earth and the holy Word, enlightens the sun and skies, 
gives vitality to the virile bull and pranic energy and 
sustaining power to the life-giving sun, and it emanates 
purity and vitality to the seed of life in existence day 
and night. Men and women all, serve it and draw the 
milk of life energy from the holy, universal and constant 
energy of fire through the creative act of yajna. 


अयं देवानांमपसांमपस्त॑मो यो जजान रोद॑सी विषुवं भुवा | 
fa at ममे रज॑सी सुक्रतूययाऽजरेथिः स्कम्भनेधिः 
समानृचे ॥ ४॥ 


4. Ayam devanamapasamapastamo yo jajana rodast 
visvasambhuva. Vi yo mame rajasi sukratuyaya’ 
jarebhih skambhanebhih samanrce. 


Of all the lights of divinity and of all the acts of 
divinities, the Lord Supreme is the prime efficient cause 
of the acts of creation. Lord of bliss for the whole 
universe in existence, He creates the heaven and earth. 
With His divine omnipotence, He pervades and 
transcends the spaces and, with His imperishable powers 
of sustenance, stabilises the suns and the stars and the 
worlds that move. Homage in prayer and celebration to 
the Lord! 


ते नों गृणाने महिनी महि श्रव॑ः क्षत्रं द्यावापृथिवी धासथो 
ged येनाभि कृष्टी स्ततनांम विश्वहा पनाय्यमोजो अस्मे 
समिन्वतम्‌ & ॥ 


5. Te no grnane mahini mahi sravah ksatram 
dyavaprthivi dhasatho brhat. Yenabhi krstista- 
tanama visvaha panayyamojo asme saminvatam. 


May they, the great heaven and earth, thus sung 


694 RGVEDA 


and celebrated, bear and bring us abundant food and 
energy and create a grand social order for us, and may 
they infuse in us every day an admirable sense of honour 
and valour so that we may build a great nation of 
humanity across the globe. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 161 
Rbhus Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


किमु श्रेष्ठः किं यविष्ठो न आजगन्किमीयते gett 
कद्यदूचिम । न निन्दिम चमसं यो म॑हाकुलोऽ य भ्रातर्द्रुण 
इद्दूतिमूंदिम ॥ ९॥ 


1. Kimu Ssresthah kim yavistho na ajagan kimiyate 
dutyam kad yaducima. Na nindima camasam yo 
mahakulo’ gne bhratardruna id bhutim-udima. 


What best, what youngest or latest comes to us, 
or what message comes to us and from where, when do 
we speak of such things? Agni, brother dear, the high 
born who takes to the ladle of yajna or to the cloud, we 
never malign. Who ever is fast and dynamic, we praise. 
We speak of good fortune and of well-being only. 


एकं चमसं Gat: कृणोतन तद्रो देवा अब्रुवन्तद्व आग॑मम्‌। 
सौधन्वना यद्येवा करिष्यथ साकं देवैर्यज्ञियांसो भवि- 
ष्यथ ।॥ २॥ 


me Ekam camasam caturah krnotana tad vo deva 
abruvan tad va agamam. Saudhanvana yadyeva 
karisyatha sakam devairyajniyaso bhavisyatha. 


Create four ladles worth of yajnic materials out 
of one put in. Let the nobles speak to you of this. Create 
four clouds out of one, the scholars would speak to you. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 161 695 


And to that end I too would come to you. Men of the 
mighty bow, if you would but do this, then with the 
light of divinities and with the nobilities, you would be 
the real men of yajna. 


at दूतं प्रति यदब्र॑वीतनाश्वः creat रथ॑ उतेह कर्त्व । 
धेनुः कर्त्वी युवशा areal द्वा तानि भ्रातरनुं वः कृत्व्ये 
म॑सि।॥ ३॥ 


ce Agnim dutam prati yadabravitanasvah kartvo 
ratha uteha kartvah. Dhenuh kartva yuvasa kartva 
dva tani bhrataranu vah krtvyemasi. 


Agni, scholar, scientist, technologist, if you were 
to say about agni, the harbinger of fire and electric 
power: the horse power has to be developed, the chariot 
has to be designed and developed here and now, and 
the language has to be found and developed, and youth 
has to be developed and rejuvenated, and the horse and 
the cow have to be groomed and developed, then dear 
brother, we would follow you in action for both fire 
and electric power. 


pate ऋभवस्तदपृच्छत क्वेदभूद्यः स्य दूतो न आजंगन्‌। 
यदावाख्य॑च्यमसाञ्चतुरंः कृतानादित्त्वष्टा ग्रास्वन्तन्यी- 
नजे॥ SU 


4. Cakrvamsa rbhavastadaprcchata kvedabhid yah 
sya duto na ajagan. Yadavakhyaccamasancaturah 
krtanadit tvasta gnasvantar-nyanaje. 


O Rbhus, eminent scientists, technologists and 
engineers of the top-most intellectual order of vision 
and dynamic action, if that messenger of knowledge, 
light and fire energy were to come to us, ask him where 


696 RGVEDA 


the origin of that power is, and who the messenger is, 
since when Tvashta, analyst and maker of fine things, 
analysed one form of composite matter or compound 
such as the cloud or a ladleful of sacrificial input of the 
furnace-vedi into its four chemical components like 
earth, water, heat and vayu, wind energy of electric 
potential, then only was agni energy able to move things 
over and into the moving spheres such as earth. 


Saat इति त्वष्टा यदब्र॑वीच्यमसं ये देवपानमनिन्दिषुः | 
अन्या नामानि कृण्वते सुते wel अन्यैरेनान्‌ कन्या 
नाम॑भिः स्परत्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Hanamainan iti tvasta yadabraviccamasam ye 
devapanam-anindisuh. Anya namani krnvate sute 
sacan anyairenan kanya namabhih sparat. 


If Tvashta, master analyst and expert maker, 
were to say: “Let us reject these,’ about those who mock 
at the ladleful of yajnic input or the cloud, analysed, 
synthesised and restructured, then let us reject the undue 
criticism. And when the soma has been distilled, that is, 
when the result has been obtained from the scientific 
yajna, let us describe the achievement by other names, 
and let the delighted beneficiary too call the new product 
by other favourite names, the soma is worthy of the gods 
to drink. 


इन्द्रो al युयुजे avert रथं ब॒हस्पतिर्विंश्वरूपामुपांजत। 
ऋभुर्विभ्वा वाजो देवां अगच्छत स्वप॑सो यज्ञियं भाग- 
मतन ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Indro hari yuyuje asvina ratham brhaspatirvisva- 
rupamupajata. Rbhurvibhva vajo devan aga- 
cchata svapaso yajniyam bhagamaitana. 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 161 697 


Let Indra, master of energy, power and sunlight, 
use the knowledge of fire, electricity, radiation and 
gravitation. Let the Ashvins, masters of the chariot, 
prepare the car. Let Brhaspati, expert of the earth’s 
variety of objects and scientific language, create the 
formulae of analysis and structure. Let Rbhu, expert of 
the science of universal energy, with Vibhu, brilliant 
man of light and fire, and Vaja, expert of speed and 
control, all noble powers of great action, reach the divine 
sources of nature’s wealth and energy and enjoy their 
share of the gifts of corporate programmes of yajnic 
creation. 


निश्चर्मणो गाम॑रिणीत धीतिधिर्यां जरन्ता युवशा 
ताकुणोतन | सौध॑न्वना अश्वादश्व॑मतक्षत युक्त्वा रथमुपं 
देवां Sarat ॥ ७॥ 


(८ Niscarmano gamarinita dhitibhirya jaranta 
yuvasa takrnotana. Saudhanvana asvadasvama- 
taksata yuktva rathamupa devan ayatana. 


With dexterous use of your ideas, repair and 
enrich the surface of the earth like nourishing the holy 
cow emaciated to the skin, and rejuvenate those who 
are breaking down under the weight of aging and 
consumptive diseases. O warriors of the bow, create new 
vehicles of wondrous velocity from materials of 
magnetic energy and radiation. And then yoke your 
motive power to the chariot and reach the wealth of 
nature’s divinity. 


इदमुदकं पि॑बतेत्य॑ब्रवीतनेदं at घा पिबता qs 
सौधन्वना यदि तन्नेव हर्य॑थ तृतीये! घा सव॑ने माद- 
याध्वै।॥८॥ 


698 RGVEDA 


8. Idamudakam pibatetyabravitanedam va gha 
pibata munjanejanam. Saudhanvana yadi tanneva 
haryatha trtiye gha savane madayadhvai. 


Master experts of pharmacy and distillation of 
medicinal drinks, to the patients and admirers say: Taste 
and drink this tonic, or drink this one which has been 
purified and reinforced with munja grass, and if you 
choose to drink neither, then take this one prepared in 
the third distillation for purity and power and be happy. 


आपो भूयिष्टा इत्येको अब्रवीदगिर्भूयिंष्ठ इत्यन्यो अंब्रवीत्‌। 
वधर्यन्ती' बहुभ्यः प्रको! अब्रवीदूता वद॑न्तश्चमसों अपिं 
MANU 

9. Apo bhiuyistha ityeko abravidagnirbhiyistha 
ityanyo abravit. Vadharyantim bahubhyah praiko 
abravidrta vadantascamasan apimsata. 


One of the experts says: waters are the best and 
most efficacious. Another says: fire is the best and most 
efficacious. Out of all, one speaks of earth as the most 
powerful for life and against anti-life. Thus do you all 
speak of the existent elements of truth and reality and 
distinguish between one source of power and grandeur 
and another for yourself and develop the same. 


श्रोणामेकं उदकं Tease मांसमेकः पिंशति सूनया- 
yaa आ निम्रुचः शकृदेको अपाभरत्किं स्वित्पुत्रेभ्यः 
पितरा उपावतुः ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Srondmeka udakam gamavajati mamsamekah 
pimsati sunayabhrtam. A nimrucah sakrdeko 
apabharat kim svit putrebhyah pitara upavatuh. 


One takes water to the disabled cow, the other 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 161 699 


dresses the wound suffered from accidental hurt, yet 
another looks after the shed and removes the dirt the 
whole day till sunset. What would the parents expect of 
children to approve, more than this? 


उद्वत्स्व॑स्मा अकृणोतना तृणं निवत्स्वपः स्व॑पस्यया। नरः | 
अगोह्यस्य यदसस्तना गृहे ASSIA नानु गच्छथ ॥ ९९ ॥ 


11. Udvatsvasma akrnotana trnam nivatsvapah 
svapasyaya narah. Agohyasya yadasastana grhe 
tadadyedamrbhavo nanu gacchatha. 


All ye men and women, with all your desire and 
good action on higher ground, grow fodder for cows 
and other animals, and produce and store water in lower 
places. Do not destroy anything in the open home of 
even a carefree person and always follow wise and 
intelligent persons of noble and expert performance. 


संमील्य यद्भुव॑ना पर्यसर्पत ad स्वित्तात्या पितरां व 
आसतुः | अशपत यः करस्नं व आददे यः प्राब्रवीत्प्रो तस्मा 
अब्रवीत UVR UI 


12. Sammilya yad bhuvana paryasarpata kva svit 
tatya pitara va asatuh. Asapata yah karasnam va 
adade yah Prabravit pro tasma abravitana. 


Rbhus, experts of tempestuous action, join 
together with concentrated action, go round the worlds 
and know them, and take care where your progenitors 
then abide. Accost and face whoever holds up your hand, 
and thank and appreciate whoever approves your action 
with praise. 


700 RGVEDA 


Cis ऋभवस्तदंपृच्छ तागोद्य क इदं नो अबूलुधत्‌। 
श्वानं बस्तो बोधयितार'मब्रवीत्संवत्सर इदमद्या व्य॑- 
TATU ९३ ॥ 


13. Susupvamsa rbhavastadaprcchatagohya ka idam 
no abubudhat. Svanam basto bodhayitarama- 
bravit samvatsara idamadya vyakhyata. 


Sleeping Rbhus, like potential scholars and rays 
of the sun, ask that supreme lord of light such as sun 
who it is who wakes them up into light and life. He, the 
lord of light from whom nothing is hidden says: it is 
vayu, waves of divine energy, which wakes them up 
into life and light. The lord of light is the shelter home 
of all. It is now a year (cycle) when you awaken us and 
tell us of that to-day. 


(It is life waking up to self-consciousness at the 
dawn of creation after a ‘long year’ of sleep in Divinity 
during the long night of annihilation.) 


दिवा alfa मरुतो भूम्याथिरयं वातो अन्तरिक्षेण 
याति । अद्धिर्यीति वरुणः समुद्ररयष्मां इच्छन्तः शवसो 
नपातः॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Diva yanti maruto bhumya’ gnirayam 1610 
antariksena yati. Adbhiryati varunah samu- 
drairyusman icchantah Savaso napatah. 


Maruts, waves of universal energy of the winds, 
go with the light of the sun. The fire energy goes with 
the earth. Vata, the currents of wind go with the middle 
region of the sky. Varuna, water energy, goes with the 
vapours and the seas. You, indefatigable seekers of 
knowledge, go with the Rbhus, imperishable children 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 162 701 


of might and omnipotence. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 162 


Mitra, Ashva and others Devata, Dirghatama 
Auchathya Rshi 


(Ashva, the horse, here is a metaphor of the Nation) 


मानोमित्रो वरूणो अर्यमायुरिन्द्र ऋभुश्चा मरुतः परि ख्यन्‌ | 
यद्वाजिनो देवजातस्य aa: प्रवश््यामों विदथं वीयीणि ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ma no mitro varuno aryamayurindra rbhuksa 
marutah pari khyan. Yad vajino devajatasya 
sapteh pravaksyamo vidathe viryani. 


May Mitra, the friend, Varuna, lord supreme 
worthy of universal choice and homage, Aryama, lord 
of justice, Ayu, man of knowledge, Indra, lord of power 
and honour, Rbhuksha, man of intelligence and wisdom, 
and Maruts, dynamic men of creative action, never 
ignore us since we too admire and celebrate powerful 
acts of the mighty pioneer leader of war born of noble 
qualities, 1.e., acts performed in our yajnic battle of life. 


afaftren रेक्ण॑सा urdeaes रातिं गृभीतां azar 
नयं॑न्ति। सुप्राङजो मेम्यद्विश्वरूप इन्द्रापूष्णोः 
प्रियमप्येति पाथं: ॥ २॥ 


2. Yannirnija reknasa pravrtasya ratim grbhitam 
mukhato nayanti. Supranjo memyad visvarupa 
indrapusnoh priyamapyeti pathah. 


We are those who advance to the front the man 
of honour and generosity, leader blest with wealth and 
power earned by pure and sinless means, possessing 
universal virtues, capable of versatile roles, going 


702 RGVEDA 


forward leading and roaring, who achieves the cherished 
gifts of the dignity and prosperity of Indra and Pushan, 
lord of power and glory and the lord of light and plenty. 


एष wort: पुरो अश्वेन वाजिना पूष्णो भागो नीयते 
विश्वदेव्यः। अभिप्रियं यत्पुरो व्छाशमर्वता ware 
सौश्रवसाय जिन्वति ॥ ३॥ 


ai Esa cchagah puro asvena vajina pusno bhago 
niyate visvadevyah. Abhipriyam yat puroldasa- 
marvata tvastedenam sausravasaya jinvati. 


This undaunted horse blest with all noble 
quality, gift of nature’s generosity, is taken along with 
the fast war horse by the driver in advance for the 
training of the warrior’s favourite so that the expert 
cavalry trainer may prepare the loved grooming for the 
steed for his victory. 


यन्॑विष्य॑मृतुशो देवयानं त्रिर्मानुषाः पर्यश्व नय॑न्ति | stat 
पूष्णः प्र॑थमो भाग एति यज्ञं देवेभ्यः प्रतिवेदयन्नजः ॥ ¥ ॥ 


4. Yaddhavisyamrtuso devayanam trirmanusah 
paryasvam nayanti. Atra pusnah prathamo bhaga 
eti yajnam devebhyah prativedayannajah. 


When men take this horse out and around for 
grooming thrice according to the seasons, then this 
horse, prime gift of nature’s generosity, fit for the noblest 
heroes to ride to the yajna of the battle of rectitude, 
leading pioneer, goes forward first proclaiming its act 
of advance in the battle for the noble warriors to hear, 
here in the world. 


होतांध्वर्युराव॑या अगिपिन्धो ग्रावग्राभ उत शंस्ता सुविप्रः। 
तेन॑ यज्ञेन स्वरंकृतेन स्विष्टेन वक्षणा आ पुंणध्वम्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 162 703 


a. Hotadhvaryuravaya agnimindho gravagrabha 
uta samsta suviprah. Tena yajnena svaramkrtena 
svistena vaksana a prnadhvam. 


The man of yajna, the high-priest of love and 
non-violence, the faithful giver of oblations, the lighter 
of the holy fire, the grinder of soma, the singer of the 
hymns, and the noble scholar Brahmana, all ye yajakas 
in unison, light up the fire, and with that yajna gracefully 
completed with love, faith and expertise, fill the streams 
of life and the land with waters and prosperity. 


यूपव्रस्का उत ये यंपवाहाश्चषाट्टं ये अश्वयूपाय तक्ष॑ति | 
ये चार्वते पच॑नं संभर॑न्त्युतो तेषामभिगूर्तिर्न इन्वतु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yupavraska uta ye yupavahascasalam ye asvayu- 
paya taksati. Ye carvate pacanam sambharan- 
tyuto tesamabhigurtirna invatu. 


Those who cut the tree for the yajna flag post, 
those who transport the post to the yajnic arena, he who 
shapes the flag bearing part of the post, those who bear 
and bring in the holy food for the consecrated horse, 
symbol of the nation and its order of governance, and 
among all these the master of ceremonies and the 
coordination and cooperation of all these may, we wish 
and pray, oblige us with success. 


उप प्रागांत्सुमन्पेऽधायि मन्म॑ देवानामाशा sa 
dtads: | अन्वेनं विप्रा ऋष॑यो मदन्ति देवानां पुष्टे 
च॑कृमा सुबन्धुम्‌ ॥ ७॥ ति 

ह Upa pragat sumanme’dhayi manma devana-masa 
upa vitaprsthah. Anvenam vipra rsayo madanti 
devanam puste cakrma subandhum. 


704 RGVEDA 


Let the horse, symbol of the nation of humanity 
and the order of governance, come forward for us. Let 
it uphold the thoughts and values of the nation. Strong 
of back and body, let it fulfil the hopes and dreams of 
me and all the nobilities of humanity. In consequence, 
the scholars and the visionaries would enjoy themselves 
and celebrate its grandeur. Let us do our best in service 
for this noble order of brotherhood for the development 
and advancement of the noble people. 


यद्वाजिनो दाम॑ dare at या शीर्षण्या रशना रज्जुरस्य । 
यद्वा घास्य प्रभृतमास्ये तृणां सर्वां ताते अपि 
देवेष्व॑स्तु॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yad vajino dama samdanamarvato ya Ssirsanya 
rasana rajjurasya. Yad va ghasya prabhrtama- 
sye trnam sarva ta te api devesvastu. 


The law that controls the onward movement of 
this dynamic social order, symbolised by the foot-band 
of the mighty and tempestuous horse, is the law of self- 
restraint and Dharma. The reins and bridle which control 
it over the head and shoulders symbolise thought, 
wisdom and self-guidance. And the grass which is held 
in the mouth symbolises the nourishment and health of 
the nation. May all these be of holy nature and character 
fit for the divinities among humanity, and let all these 
be dedicated to the divinities that support life. 


यदश्व॑स्य क विषो मक्षिकाश यद्वा स्वरौ स्वधितौ 
रिप्तमस्ति । यन्दस्तंयोः शमितुर्यन्नखेषु सर्वां ता ते अपिं 
देवेष्व॑स्तु॥ ९॥ 

9. Yadasvasya kraviso maksikasa yad va svarau 


svadhitau riptamasti. Yaddhastayoh samiturya- 
nnakhesu sarva ta te api devesvastu. 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 162 705 


Whatever the fly eats of the sweat or ointment 
of the horse of rhythmic motion, 1.e., the nation on the 
march, or whatever smears the voice or sword of the 
nation, and whatever soils the hands and nails of the 
performers of national yajna, all these things should be 
under control of the brilliant and generous leaders of 
the nation for you, 1.e., the people and the nation. 


यदूव॑ध्यमुदर॑स्यापवाति य आमस्य क्रविषो गन्धो अस्ति | 
सुकृता तच्छमितार॑ः कृणवन्तूत मेधं शृतपाकं! पचन्तु ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Yaduvadhyam-udarasyapavati ya amasya kraviso 
gandho asti. Sukrta tacchamitarah krnvantuta 
medham srtapakam pacantu. 


Whatever the gaseous exudations or wastes from 
consumption in the national economy, whatever 
discharges from the bio-economic circulation of raw 
materials towards the output of finished products, all 
these wastes and by-products should be positively 
recycled by the expert managers of the economy who 
must also season whatever is ripe and ready for further 
refinement and sophistication. 


यत्ते गात्रांद्यिनां पच्यमानादभि vies Preaearaerafer । 
मा तद्भूम्यामा च्रिंषन्मा तृणेषु देवेभ्यस्तदुरद्यों रात- 
म॑स्तु।॥ ९९॥ ति 

11. Yat te gatrad-agnina pacyamanad-abhi sulam 
nihatasyavadhavati. Ma tad bhumyama Srisan- 
ma trnesu devebhyas-tadusadbhyo ratamastu. 


O nation on the march on the highway of 
progress, if from your personality-body subjected to the 
fire of discipline and self sacrifice, a cry of pain escape 


706 RGVEDA 


your lips or a tear flow down from the eye, let it not soil 
the holy ground of the motherland, nor let it be lost in 
the straw, but let it be a precious gift for the ambitious 
creators and leaders of vision to turn it into a clarion 
call or a beautiful pearl of divine grace. 


ये वाजिनं परिपश्य॑न्ति पक्वं य ईमाहुः सुर भिरर्निर्हुरेति। 
ये चार्व॑तो मांसभिक्षामुपासत उतो तेषांमभिगृर्तिनं 
इन्वतु ॥। ९२ ॥ 


12. Ye vajinam paripasyanti pakvam ya imahuh 
surabhir-nirhareti. Ye carvato mamsabhiksam- 
upasata uto tesamabhigurtirna invatu. 


Those who watch the nation’s food and 
prosperity grow to ripeness and perfection, and those 
who say: Ah yes! it is fragrant, harvest it, take it, export 
it too! and those who contribute their share to the 
nation’s prosperity and also wait for their share of the 
food and fragrance of yajna, and in addition, their 
coordination, cooperation and common voice of 
exhortation may, we pray, be for the good and growth 
of us all. 


यन्नीक्ष॑णं मांस्पचन्या उखाया या पात्राणि यूष्ण आसेचं- 
नानि । ऊष्पण्यांपिधाना चरूणामङ्काः सूनाः परि भू षन्त्य- 
रुव॑म्‌।॥ ९३॥ 

13. Yanniksanam mamspacanya ukhaya ya patrani 
yusna asecanani. Usmanyapidhana caruna- 
mankah sunah pari bhusantyasvam. 

Watchful stirring of the nation’s cauldron of 


prosperity on fire and careful preservation and 
enrichment of the earth’s fertility which gives fruits and 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 162 707 


other foods, all containers and reservoirs of juice and 
waters for irrigation, methods of heat and steam control, 
formations of clouds, known, controlled and created, 
and beauty spots and tourist resorts, these are marks of 
a nation’s march on top of beauty and culture. 


निक्रम॑णं निषदनं विवर्तनं यच्च पड्बीशमर्वतः । यच्च॑ पपौ 
यच्य॑ घासिं जघास सर्वां ता ते अपिं देवेष्व॑स्तु i ९४॥ 


14. Nikramanam nisadanam vivartanam yacca 
padbisamarvatah. Yacca papau yacca ghasim 
jJaghasa sarva ta te api devesvastu. 


The horse’s forward march, the nation launching 
on action on the highway, its halting and settling for 
rest on the way, the U-turn and circulation in 
progression, the fetter control of law and the centre- 
hold of values for stability, what it drinks for pleasure 
and excitement and what it eats for nourishment: all 
these should be under control of the men of vision and 
brilliance for you all. 


मा त्वाभिर्ध्वनयीद्‌ धूमग॑न्धिर्मोखा भ्राज॑न्त्यभि विक्त 
जधि':। इष्टं वीतमभिगूर्तं वष॑ट्‌ कृतं तं देवासः प्रतिं 
गृभ्णन्त्यश्वम्‌ ॥ १५॥ 


15. Ma tvagnirdhvanayid dhumagandhirmokha 
bhrajantyabhi vikta jaghrih. Istam vitamabhi- 
gurtam vasatkrtam tam devasah prati grbhnan- 
tyasvam. 


Let not the fire interfused with smoke and smell 
obliterate your vision, let it not extinguish your 
enthusiasm for life. Nor let the aromatic pan on blazing 
fire tip over and spill out the food. (Let the nation be 


708 RGVEDA 


ripened in the cauldron of hard discipline and yajnic 
action placed on the right degree of heat free of smoke 
and blaze both). The dynamic nation which is loved, 
happy and peaceful, active, and sanctified by yajna, is, 
like a trained horse, loved, accepted and owned by the 
most brilliant powers of the world. 


यदश्वाय वासं उपस्तृणन्त्य॑धीवासं या दिर॑ण्यान्यस्प | 
सन्दानमर्वन्तं पड्बीशं प्रिया देवेष्वा यांमयन्ति ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Yadasvaya vasa upastrnantyadhivasam ya 
hiranyanyasmai. Samdanamarvantam padbisam 
priya devesva yamayanti. 


Those who provide the decorative cover for the 
horse, i.e., the yajnic personality of the human nation 
on the march, and provide the over-cover as the air cover 
of fire for defence and onward march, and those who 
create the golden beauties for it, and the control of law, 
and the velocity of electric energy, and the brakes of 
equal power: all these people, cherished powers and 
beauties of the nation, raise the humans to the light of 
divinity. 

यत्ते सादे मह॑सा शुकुतस्य पाष्ण्यी वा कश॑या वा dare | 
ea ता हविषो अध्वरेषु सर्वां ता ते ब्रह्मणा सूद- 
यामि॥ ९७॥ 


17. Yat te sade mahasa sukrtasya parsnya va kasaya 
va tutoda. Sruceva ta haviso adhvaresu sarva ta 
te brahmana sudayami. 


On your being exhausted by excessive urging 
on, or by hurt with the spur or the whip, I relieve you of 
the hurt and exhaustion and refresh you in the yajnas of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 162 709 


love and non-violence by the fragrance of oblations 
offered with the ladle and chant of hymns. (The nation, 
after strain in a crisis, needs rest and repair.) 


चतुंस्िंशद्धाजिनो देवब॑न्धोर्वङ््रीरणश्व॑स्य स्वधितिः सपेति। 
अच्छिद्रा गात्रा वयुनां कृणोत परुष्परूरनुघुष्या वि 
शस्त ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Catustrimsad vajino devabandhor-vankrir- 
asvasya svadhitih sameti. Acchidra gatra vayuna 
krnota parusparur-anughusya vi Sasta. 


The innate energy of fire, electric, magnetic and 
of other forms, fastest form of energy co-existent with 
the forms and powers of nature such as earth, moves in 
waves in thirtyfour ways. Activate it part by part, 
proclaim the nature and character of each and realise 
the definite quality of its efficacy and application to 
parts of the material body with safety. 


एकस्त्वष्टुरश्व॑स्या विशस्ता द्वा Aa भवतस्तथं ऋतुः | 
याते गात्राणामृतुथा कृणोमि ताता पिण्डानां प्र 


werent ॥ ९९॥ 


19. = Ekastvasturasvasya visasta dva yantara bhava- 
tastatha rtuh. Ya te gatranamrtutha krnomi tata 
pindanam pra juhomyagnau. 


Of the dynamic energy of agni, two are the 
carrier currents, of which one is the active, positive agent 
that activates the connected objects. And I apply the 
power to the material forms of objects according to the 
needs of the seasons, and having done so I send it back 
into agni, thereby completing the yajnic circuit. 


710 RGVEDA 


मा त्वां तपत्प्रिय आत्मापियन्तं मा स्वधिंतिस्तन्व4 आ 
तिष्ठिपत्ते । मा ते गृध्नुरंविशस्तातिहायं छिद्रा गात्राण्यसिना 
मिथुं कः: ॥ २०॥ 


20. Ma tva tapat priya atmapiyantam ma svadhiti- 
stanva ठ tisthipat te. Ma te grdhnur avisastati- 
haya chidra gatranyasina mithi kah. 


Spirit and genius of the nation, while you are 
on your path of progress to divinity, may your soul never 
cause any sense of self-guilt, nor must your own power 
and pride nor external force strain or terrorize your mind 
and body. Nor must any greedy or malicious power or 
person, unmindful of the hurt and cruelty, wound or 
mutilate your body. 


नवा एतन्म्रियसे न रिष्यसि देवाँ इदेषि पथिभिः सुगेभिः | 
हरी ते युञ्जा पृष॑ती अभूतामुपांस्थाद्वाजी धुरि रास॑- 
भस्य ॥ २९॥ 


21. Na va u etan mriyase na risyasi devan idesi 
pathibhih sugebhih. Hari te yunja prsati abhuta- 
mupasthad vaji dhuri rasabhasya. 


Spirit of humanity, genius of the nation, soul of 
the individual, this you are, and such as you are, you 
shall not die, nor be hurt, nor hurt anyone, since you 
move in the direction of divinity by paths which are 
straight and sure. Two are the horses yoked to your 
resounding chariot: love of the Lord that attracts you, 
and Grace that holds you in stability. And the horse that 
is yoked to the centre-pole is faster than light and instant 
as the mind. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 163 711 


सुगव्यं नो वाजी स्वश्व्यं पुंसः gat उत विश्वापुषं te 
अनागास्त्वं नो अदितिः कृणोतु क्षत्रं नो अश्वों वनतां 
हविष्मान्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


22. Sugavyam no vaji svasvyam pumsah putran uta 
visvapusam rayim. Anagastvam no aditih krnotu 
ksatram no asvo vanatam havisman. 


May this lightning power of agni, this nation, 
this great order of governance give us rich wealth of 
cows, fertility of land and generosity of spirit. May it 
give us strong and powerful horses, speed of 
transportation and the spirit to go ahead, manliness and 
brave warriors, noble children and honest wealth for 
universal nourishment. May the imperishable Mother 
Nature inspire us to create holiness free from sinfulness 
of thought, word and deed, and may omnipotent Agni, 
lord of universal wealth, help us build a mighty social 
order of governance. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 163 
Ashva (Agni) Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 


यदक्रन्दः प्रथमं जाय॑मान उद्यन्त्स॑मुद्रादुत वा पुरीषात्‌। 
श्येनस्य पक्षा हरिणस्य are उपस्तुत्यं महिं जातं तें 


अर्वन्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ie Yadakrandah prathamam jayamana udyantsamu- 
draduta va purisat. Syenasya paksa harinasya 
bahu upastutyam mahi jatam te arvan. 


Arvan, divine racer, Agni, universal energy, first 
born of Lord Omnipotent, rising from the oceans of 
space, the sky and the sea, who roared with force at 
your very birth, your wings are like the wings of the 


712 RGVEDA 


celestial eagle that brings the showers of soma and the 
warmth of fire, and your arms are like the arms of the 
sun, the thunderbolt. Surely great is your birth from 
nature, worthy of admiration and homage. 


यमेन दत्तं त्रित एनमायुनगिन्द्र एणं प्रथमो अध्य॑तिष्ठत्‌। 
गन्धर्वो अस्य रश्ानाम॑गृभ्णात्सूरादश्वं वसवो निर॑तष्ट ॥। २॥ 


2: Yamena dattam trita enamayunagindra enam 
prathamo adhyatisthat. Gandharvo asya rasana- 
magrbhnat suradasvam vasavo niratasta. 


This energy is the gift of the universal controller 
Yama, a product of Vayu, the first elemental form of 
energy born of akasha, ether, in the process of primal 
evolution guided by the eternal law-giver, the creator. 
Let Trita, master of the three modes of nature, sattva, 
rajas and tamas, i.e., thought, energy and matter, plan 
the use of it in various ways. Let Indra, the electrical 
expert, use it as power first. Let Gandharva, specialist 
of earth sciences, hold the control of it in gravitational, 
magnetic and heat forms. And let the Vasus, graduate 
researchers of life sciences, extract this energy from the 
light of the sun. 


असि यमो अस्यादित्यो अर्वन्नसि त्रितो गृह्य न aes । असि 
सोमेन समया fades आहुस्ते त्रीणि। दिवि बन्ध॑नानि ॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Asi yamo asydadityo arvannasi trito guhyena 
vratena. Asi somena samaya viprkta ahuste trini 
divi bandhanani. 


Cosmic energy, Yama you are the mover, the 
condition and control of all dynamics. You are the light 
and the sun. You are the energy in use. You are Trita, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 163 713 


vitality, strength and power by virtue of your unseen 
and mysterious character. You are integrated with the 
life and joy of existence and yet you are distinct and 
exclusive. It is said that you are bonded with the regions 
of light in three ways. 


त्रीणिं त आहुर्दिवि बन्ध॑नानि त्रीण्यप्सु त्रीण्यन्तः AAS | 
उतेव मे वरुणश्छन्त्स्यर्वन्‌ यत्रां त आहुः प॑रमं जनित्र॑म्‌।॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Trini ta Ghurdivi bandhanani trinyapsu trinyantah 
samudre. Uteva me varunaschantsyarvan yatra 
ta ahuh paramam janitram. 


Three are your forms, they say, in the field of 
light, they are causal, subtle and gross. Three are in the 
sphere of the waters, and three are in the region of the 
skies in the winds, the same three. Just as you have three 
formal definitions so do I too, the causal body, the subtle 
body and the gross body. Tell me, mysterious power, 
where do they say your ultimate origin is. Mine too is 
there itself. 


इमा ते वाजिन्नवमार्ज नानीमा शफानां सनितुर्निधाना। | stat 
ते भद्रा र॑श॒ना अपश्यमृतस्य या अभिरक्षन्ति गोपाः ॥ ५॥ 


a. Ima te vajinnavamarjananima saphanam sanitur- 
nidhana. Atra te bhadra rasana apasyamrtasya 
ya abhiraksanti gopah. 


O Vajin, tempestuous power-input of the yajna 
of existence, these are the stages of your refinement, 
contentive concentrations of the applicable values of 
energy which are positive gifts of wealth and well-being 
for humanity. I wish and pray I may see those positive 
lines of natural and scientific developments of yours 


714 RGVEDA 


which observe, preserve and advance the process of 
life’s yajnic evolution. 


आत्मानं ते मन॑साराद॑जानामवो दिवा पतयन्तं CaS | 
शिरो अपश्यं पथिभिः सुगेभिररे णुभिरर्जेह॑मानं पतत्रि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Atmanam te manasaradajanamavo diva pata- 
yantam patangam. Siro apasyam pathibhih 
sugebhir-arenubhir-jehamanam patatri. 


Agni, O flying horse, with pleasure of my heart 
and soul and with the thrill of my knowledge, I see from 
afar and know your body flying up towards heaven and 
down like a bird. O flying bird of our creation, I see 
your head striving and soaring higher and higher by 
paths all straight and clear and wholly free from dust. 


stat ते रूपमुत्तममपश्यं जिगींषमाणपिष आ पदे गोः। 
यदा ते wat अनु भोगमानव्ादिद्‌ ग्रसिंछ ओष॑धी- 
रजीगः ॥ ७ ॥ 


४0 Atra te rupam-uttamam-apaSsyam Jigisamanam- 
isa a pade goh. Yada te marto anu bhogaman- 
aladid grasistha osadhirajigah. 


Agni, O vital fire and creativity of life, I have 
seen that higher form, spirit and character of yours which 
is eager to conquer, consume and create the food and 
energy on the floor of the earth since, when the mortal 
humanity blest with food and enjoyment, and as a result 
of your holy ambition, eats their fill, then, O consumer 
and creator, you beget the herbs and juices for 
rectification of the human faults and weaknesses. 


अनु त्वा रथो अनु मर्यो अर्वन्ननु गावोऽनु भग॑ः ANT 
अनु व्रातासस्तव सख्यमींयुरनुं देवा म॑मिरे वीर्य ते॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 163 715 


8. Anu tva ratho anu maryo arvannanu gdavo’nu 
bhagah kaninam. Anu vratasastava sakhyamiyu- 
ranu deva mamire viryam te. 


Agni, Arvan, energy and power of lightning 
motion, the chariot, the car and the flying birds of human 
creation depend on you and follow your laws. The 
mortal humanity admires and follows you. The cows 
and the maidens and their matrimony and joy depend 
on you. The wealth and honour of admirers depends on 
you. Devotees of sacred vows and yoga practices court 
your love and friendship. And divine personalities of 
nature and humanity both are keen to realise your energy, 
virility and creativity. 
fatvasrsis यों अस्य पादा मनोजवा अवर इन्द्रं आसीत्‌। 
देवा इद॑स्य हविरद्यमायन्यो अर्वन्तं प्रथमो अध्य- 
तिष्ठत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

9. Hiranyasrngo’yo asya pada manojava avara 
indra asit. Deva idasya haviradyamayan 
yo arvantam prathamo adhyatisthat. 


Golden headed and lustrous is this agni, energy 
and power of nature, with the wheels of metals of desired 
gravity for motion and speed. The noblest divinities love 
to win and enjoy the cherished gifts of this agni. Indra, 
constant, ancient and yet the latest lord of the speed of 
mind is the exceptional master who first of all rides and 
controls this dynamic energy of nature’s motive power. 


ईर्मान्तासः सिलिकमध्यमासः सं शूर॑णासो दिव्यासो 
अत्या: | हंसाइव श्रेणिशो य॑तन्ते यदाक्षिंषुर्दिव्यमचज्य- 
मश्वांः ॥ ९०॥ 


716 RGVEDA 


10.  Irmantasah silikamadhyamasah sam suranaso 
divyaso atyah. Hamsa iva sreniso yatante yada- 
ksisurdivyamajmamasvah. 


Arvan, universal energy in motion, sleek and 
sophisticated, vibrating with power, steadily 
accelerating, celestial birds of flight, like rows of cranes 
in formation, join, march and fly and rise over the 
heavenly paths of skies and space. Agni, lord of light 
and knowledge, Indra, lord of energy and power, such 
are the horses of your creation, these are your birds of 
power. 


तव शरीरं पतयिष्ण्वर्वन तव॑ चित्तं वात॑-इव ध्रजीमान्‌ । 
तव sit विष्ठिता पुरुत्रारण्येषु जर्भुराणा चरन्ति ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tava Sariram patayisnvarvan tava cittam vata iva 
dhrajiman. Tava srngani visthita purutraranyesu 
jarbhurana caranti. 


O Arvan, tempestuous energy of the universe, 
your body is ever eager and agitating to fly. Your mind 
is restless, adventurous and vibrating as the waves of 
winds. Your ambitions are high soaring, various, 
pioneering and ever on the move. Inspiring the minds 
of men, bright and blazing in the forests overtaken, your 
thoughts, ambitions and operations spread around and 
cover the worlds across the spaces. 


SUIT वाज्यवी देवद्रीचा मन॑सा दीध्यांनः। अजः 
पुरो नीयते नाभिरस्यानु, पश्चात्कवयो यन्ति रे भाः ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Upa pragacchasanam vajyarva devadrica 
manasa didhyanah. Ajah puro niyate nabirasya- 
nu pascat kavayo yanti rebhah. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 717 


Agni, warlike courser, impetuous on the wing 
goes forward. It goes by all, in advance of all, moving 
the worlds on the march, inspiring, enlightening, 
elevating the divinities, thinking, meditating, shining 
by the light of its own intelligence. Unborn eternal is 
the source and centre of its power by which it is ignited, 
geared and steered on the way, and when it moves, poets 
follow singing and celebrating the beauty of existence, 
the glory of Divinity in action. 


उप प्रागात्परमं यत्खधस्थम्वीं अच्छां पितरं मातरं च। अद्या 
देवाञ्जुष्टतमो हि गम्या अथा शास्ते दाशुषे वायीणि ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. 74 pragat paramam yat sadhastham-arvan 
accha pitaram mdataram ca. Adya devan- 
justatamo hi gamya atha Ssaste dasuse varyani. 


The same horse, Agni, mighty carrier of the 
universe, reaches the highest heaven and home of 
existence, and there joins the ultimate original and eternal 
mother, Prakrti, and father creator, the Lord Almighty. 
O mighty harbinger of life and joy, loved and blest and 
most admired, go and reach the divinities to-day upon 
this instant and bring the cherished gifts of life for the 
admirer and the generous giver performer of yajna. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 164 
Devata: Vishvedeva, Vak and Apah, Shaka-Dhuma and 
Soma, Keshins, Vak and Surya, Samvatsara, Sarasvati, 
Sadhyas, Surya, Parjanya or Agnis, Sarasvan or Surya. 
Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi 

अस्य वामस्य॑ पलितस्य होतुस्तस्य UIT मध्यमो STERIL: । 

तृतीयो श्रातां घृतपृष्ठो अस्यात्रापश्यं विश्पतिं! सस- 

पुत्रम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


718 RGVEDA 


1. Asya vamasya palitasya hotustasya bhrata 
madhyamo astyasnah. Trtiyo bhrata ghrtaprstho 
asyatrapasyam vispatim saptaputram. 


Of this splendid and hoary yajaka, Sun, giver 
of light and energy and receiver of the waters and 
essences of the earth and the skies, the second, younger 
and middling brother is vayu, wind and electricity 
abiding in the middle region of the skies, the energy 
being voracious and present everywhere. The third and 
youngest brother is Agni, fire, which is sprinkled with 
water and ghrta in yajna. It is the sustainer of living 
beings and it is blest with seven children, i.e., seven 
rays of light in the spectrum. I wish I could know this 
ancient, brilliant and sustaining power and friend of life. 


सप्त युञ्जन्ति रथमेकचक्रमेको अश्वो वहति सप्तनांमा। 
त्रिनाभि चक्रमजरमनर्वं यत्रेमा विश्वा थुवनाधिं तस्थुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Sapta yunjanti ratham-ekacakram-eko asvo 
vahati saptanama. Trinabhi cakram-ajaram- 
anarvam yatrema visva bhuvanadhi tasthuh. 


Seven enjoin the one-wheel chariot, drawn by 
one horse of seven names. The wheel, the wheel of time, 
unaging and automotive, has three sub-wheels with three 
naves and rims, and in the orbit of this time and space 
abide all the worlds of the universe. 


इमं रथमधि ये सप्त तस्थुः सप्तचक्रं सप्त व॑हन्त्यश्वांः । aa 
स्वसारो अभि सं न॑वन्ते यत्र गवां निहिता सप्त area nn ३॥ 
3 Imam rathamadhi ye sapta tasthuh saptacakram 


sapta vahantyasvah. Sapta svasaro abhi sam 
navante yatra gavam nihita sapta nama. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 719 


Seven are those who ride this chariot, seven 
motive powers (horses or rays of light) which draw this 
chariot of seven wheels, wheel within wheel. They are 
seven sisters who exult, roar and thunder together in 
reverence and worship of the father where in are hidden 
in depth seven names of the rays of light, the seven 
spheres and seven notes of language. (This is a highly 
mystical, symbolic, and at the same time scientific 
mantra. To understand the meaning and implication at 
different levels of correspondence we need knowledge 
of astronomy, cosmology, physics and astrophysics, 
language and grammar, music and mechanics. And still 
the meaning would remain open ended.) 


को cast प्रथमं जाय॑मानमस्थन्वन्तं यदनस्था fate | 
भूम्या असुरसृगात्मा ad स्वित्को विद्धांसमुप॑ गात्प्र्ं 
मेतत्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ko dadarsa prathamam jayamanm-asthana- 
vantam yadanastha bibharti. Bhumya asurasr- 
gatma kva svit ko vidvamsam-upa gat prastum- 
état. 


Who saw the first material form of the universe 
of flesh and bone being born, which the immaterial of 
no flesh and bone bears? What and where was the breath 
and blood and soul of the earth and cosmos? Who would 
reach the visionary of knowledge to ask all this of the 
first and last question about the mystery? 


पाकः पृच्छामि मनसाविंजानन्‌ carter निहिता war 1 
वत्से बष्कयेऽ fl ससर तन्तून्वि diet कवय ओतवा 
उ॥ ५॥ 


720 RGVEDA 


5: Pakah prcchami manasa-vijanan devanam-ena 
nihita padani. Vatse vaskaye’dhi sapta tantun 
vi tatnire kavaya otava u. 


Novice, ignorant but searching for knowledge 
and passing through the crucibles of heat and light of 
discipline, I ask with sincere mind and soul about these 
seven divine stages of the evolution of nature and life 
concealed in mystery, the seven-fold warp and woof of 
which visionary poets have traced and described in detail 
for the children of light to see and know and realise. 


अचिंकित्वाज्चिकितुष॑श्चिदत्र कवीन्पृच्छामि विदाने न 
विद्धान्‌ । वि यस्तस्तम्भ fear रजांस्यजस्य रूपे किमपि 
स्विदेकम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Acikitvan cikitusascidatra kavin prcchami vid- 
mane na vidvan. Vi yastastambha salima raja- 
msyajasya rupe kimapi svidekam. 


Not knowing what I would know here as a man 
of knowledge should know, I ask of the men of 
knowledge and poets of divine vision what that single 
principle of power could be in the form and nature of 
the one unborn and eternal Supreme which holds these 
six higher and lower spheres and atmospheres of the 
universe. 


इह ब्रवीतु adhe वेदास्य वामस्य Fife पदं वेः । शीर्ष्णः 
क्षीरं dea गावो! अस्य वत्रिं वसाना उदकं पदापुः ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. tha bravitu ya manga vedasya vamasya nihitam 
padam veh. Sirsnah ksiram duhrate gavo asya 
vavrim vasana udakam padapuh. 


Dear friend, here may speak to me he who well 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 721 


knows the power and presence of this glorious bird ever 
on the wing and omnipresent, which is concealed in 
mystery. The holy rays of it from above yield showers 
of milk and water for life, and, covered in brilliant beauty 
they drink up the waters as they come and touch the 
earth with their feet. 


माता fread आ ब॑भाज धीत्यग्रे मन॑सा सं fe जग्मे। सा 
बीभत्सुर्गर्भरसा निविब्दा नमस्वन्त इदपवाकमींयुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


of Mata pitaramrta a babhaja dhityagre manasa sam 
hi jagme. Sa bibhatsur-garbharasa nividdha 
namasvanta id-upavakam-tyuh. 


The proud and amorous mother seeks the 
company of father for the waters of life and joins him 
with love and her innate power of motherhood. Then 
she receives the rain showers of life and the children of 
nature receive the food for the body and Word for the 
mind with reverence and worship. 


युक्ता मातासींद्‌ धुरि afatoren अरतिं्ठद्‌ गर्भो वृजनीष्वन्तः | 
अमींमेद्‌ वत्सो अनु गाम॑पश्यद्‌ विश्वरूप्यं त्रिषु योज॑- 
नेषु ॥ ९॥ 


a Yukta matasid dhuri daksinaya atisthad garbho 
vrjanisvantah. Amimeda vatso anu gamapasyad 
visvarupyam trisu yojanesu. 


The mother, earth, is joined to the sun and held 
in orbit in circumambulation of the sun on its own axis. 
The productive power and the seed of life stays in the 
clouds within its atmosphere along with it in its motion 
in the three orbits, i.e., on its own axis, round the sun 
and in the galaxy, and when it matures it roars and 


722 RGVEDA 


showers, looking at mother earth of various colour and 
form like a calf looking at the mother cow. 


fret मातृस्त्रीव्पितृन्विश्रदेकं ऊर्ध्वस्तस्थौ नेमव॑ ग्त्ाप- 
यन्ति । मन्त्रयन्ते दिवो अमुष्यं पृष्टे विश्वविदं वाचमविंश्च- 
मिन्वाम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tisro matrstrin pitrn bibhradeka urdhvastasthau 
nemava glapayanti. Mantrayante divo amusya 
prsthe visvavidam vacamavisvaminvam. 


The one Supreme lord of the universe who 
abides over all sustains the three mothers, earth, sky 
and the heavens of light, and He sustains the three 
fathers, Agni, Vayu and Aditya, fire, wind and sun. These 
three couples tire Him not, they smear Him not. On the 
heights of the heaven of that lord Prajapati, they meditate 
on this voice of omniscience and recreate and replenish 
the life sustaining energy and the creative vitality and 
fertility of motherhood. 


द्वाद॑शारं नहि canta वर्वर्ति ash परि arya । आ 
पुत्रा aa मिथुनासो अत्रं wa शतानिं विंशतिश्च 
तस्थुः ULV 


11. = Dvadasaram nahi tajjaraya varvarti cakram pari 
dyamrtasya. A putra agne mithunaso atra 
sapta Satani vimSatisca tasthuh. 


The twelve-spoked wheel of time in existence 
that goes round and round the cosmic sun never ages. 
O Agni, light of humanity, the seven hundred and 
twenty-children of nature, i1.e., the three hundred and 
sixty day-night pairs or seven hundred and twenty forms 
of material composition remain till the end of 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 164 723 
chronological time. 


पञ्च॑पादं frat द्वाद॑शाकृतिं दिव आहुः ut अर्धः 
पुरीषिणम्‌। अथेमे अन्य उप॑रे feet सप्तचक्रे wet 
आहुरर्पितम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Pancapadam pitaram dvadasakrtim diva ahuh 
pare ardhe purisinam. Atheme anya upare vica- 
ksanam saptacakre salara ahurarpitam. 


Father time, they say, has five stages from the 
initial moment onward and twelve divisions in the round 
of the year of time extending over existence in the farther 
half of the universe beyond the region of light. These 
others speak of this other half visible this side above, 
below the sun, which has six spokes of the seasons in 
the yearly round and moves in seven rounds of wheels, 
wheel within wheel of time. 

(This concept of time space requires deep 
research into the nature and passage of time including 
the technique of measurement and calculation with 
reference to the visible world and the world beyond on 
the other side of the sun. Parardha, the other half, for 
example, is equal to 50 years of Brahma, his one day 
being equal to the age of the current world of existence. 
It is a mind boggling concept in ordinary terms of 
calculation.) 


पञ्चारे चक्रे प॑रिवर्त॑माने तस्मिन्ना त॑स्थुर्भुव॑नानि 
विश्वा । तस्य नाक्षस्तप्यते भूरिभारः सनादेव न शीर्यते 
सनाभिः ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Pancare cakre parivartamane tasminna tasthur- 


bhuvanani visva. Tasya naksastapyate bhuri- 
bharah sanadeva na Siryate sanabhih. 


724 RGVEDA 


Five are the spokes in the wheel of time-cum- 
prakrti, the temporal existence of physical world. 


(These are the five elements of prakrti, akasha, 
vayu, agni, apah and prthivi, and their internal changes). 
This wheel of prakrti in time is ever on the move. In 
that wheel of time and physical change abide all the 
worlds of the universe. The axis of that carries the 
immense weight of existence but it never gets heated. 
With its centre-hold on this axis it has been going on 
since eternity and it will go on till eternity, but it never 
wears away. It is never destroyed. (The axis of the 
physio-temporal wheel is the constant substratum, 
original Prakrti, and the centre-hold is the Lord 
Supreme. ) 


सनेमि चक्रमजरं वि वावृत उत्तानायां दशं युक्ता व॑हन्ति | 
सूर्य॑स्य चक्षु रजसैत्यावृतं तस्मिन्नार्पिता भुव॑नानि 
विश्वां ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Sanemi cakramajaram vi vavrta uttanayam dasa 
yukta vahanti. Suryasya caksu rajasaityavrtam 
tasminnarpita bhuvanani visva. 


Existent with its centre and circumference, the 
unaging wheel, the chariot, of the universe of physio- 
temporal nature goes on and on, round and round. In 
the expansive Prakrti, ten motive powers move it on 
(those ten being the pranic energies). The light of the 
sun suffused with rajas, energy of universal dynamics, 
goes on with the worlds. Indeed, all the worlds of 
existence abide in that light and energy. 


साकंजानां सप्तथ॑माहुरेकजं षच्छिद्यमा ऋष॑यो देवजा sta 1 
तेषापिष्टानि विहितानि धामशः स्थात्रे रेजन्ते विकुतानि 
रूपः ॥ ९५॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 725 


15. Sakanjanam saptathamahurekajam salid yama 
rsayo devaja iti. Tesamistani vihitani dhamasah 
sthatre rejante vikrtani rupasah. 


The seven simultaneously born of one-unborn, 
they call a septet, that is, seven-in-one or one-in-seven. 
Six of them are yamas, twin movers. They are rshis, 
mixers, born of devas, light and energy. Their properties 
and actions according to their place and character are 
created and ordained, and they, each in its form and 
character, move around for and in the unmoved mover. 


(These seven are the seven lokas: Bhuh, Bhuvah, 
Svah, Mahah, Janah, Tapah and Satyam. Sometimes the 
lokas are associated with seven Rshis. Sometimes they 
are described as seven senses and sometimes seven vital 
energies. All these refer, in fact point, to a theory of 
correspondences existing at the physical, mental and 
spiritual levels, or at the levels of matter, energy, thought 
and spirit. And this is a subject of high research and 
deep meditation.) 


fe: सतीस्ताँ उ मे पुंस sig: पश्यदक्षण्वान्न वि 
चेतदन्धः । कविर्यः पुत्रः स ईमा चिकेत यस्ता विजानात्स 
पितुष्पितासत्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Striyah satistan u me pumsa ahuh pasyada- 
ksanvanna vi cetadandhah. Kaviryah putrah sa 
mma ciketa yasta vijanat sa pituspitasat. 


Female they are, intelligent and educated, and 
though women, I am told rightly, they are male too. One 
who has eyes can see this, but one who is blind, even 
though he has eyes, doesn’t see this, doesn’t know. The 
son who has the vision of a poet knows this well, and 


726 RGVEDA 


one who knows this has an old head on young shoulders. 
In other words, he has the vision and knowledge of the 
father of fathers. 


अवः परेण पर एनावरेण पदा वत्सं विभ्रती गौरुद॑स्थात्‌। 
सा कद्रीची कं स्विदर्धं परागात्‌ ad स्वित्सूते नहि यूथे 
अन्तः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Avah parena para enavarena pada vatsam 
bibhrati gaurudasthat. Sa kadrict kam svidar- 
dham paragat kva svit sute nahi yuthe antah. 


Bearing and sustaining her child, as a cow bears 
and sustains her calf, this earth by her own motion goes 
down with reference to that farther side and goes up 
with reference to this nearer side in relation to the sun, 
and stays up stabilized in space in its own orbit. In what 
direction and to which remote region of space does she 
go? What does she impel and energise and how? Does 
she receive consecration of the sun in the midst of a 
crowd or not? 


अवः wor पित्रं यो shared पर एनावरेण | कवीयमानः 
क इह प्र वो चद्‌ देवं मनः कुतो अधि प्रजातम्‌ ९८ ॥ 


18. Avah parena pitaram yo asyanuveda para 
enavarena. Kaviyamanah ka iha pra vocad 
devam manah kuto adhi prajatam. 


Here who could be the man of poetic vision who 
knows this lower side of the earth with reference to that 
other higher side, and that higher side with reference to 
this lower side, and who further knows the father sun, 
lord sustainer of the earth, and who knows and who can 
say where from this brilliant and divine mind is born? 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 727 


ये अर्वाञ्चस्ताँ ड wes आहुर्ये पराञ्चस्ताँ उ state आहुः | 
इन्द्र॑श्च या चक्रथुः सोम तानि! धुरा न युक्ता रज॑सो 
वहन्ति ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Ye arvancastan u paraca ahur-ye-parancastan u 
arvaca ahuh. Indrasca ya cakrathuh soma tani 
dhura na yukta rajaso vahanti. 


Whatever objects are near, they say, are far off, 
and the objects far off, they say, are close at hand. (All 
objects are on the move and whether they are far or 
near is a matter of relativity. It is nothing absolute.) O 
Soma, Vayu energy, whatever you and the lord 
omnipotent, Indra, have formed as objects or clusters 
of objects, ever such as stars and galaxies, carry on the 
worlds of the universe as horses joined to the yoke and 
the pole draw the chariot of existence. 


द्वा सुंपर्णां सयुजा wala समानं वृक्षं oR षस्वजाते | 
तयोरन्यः पिप्प॑लं स्वाद्रतत्यन॑र्नन्नन्यो अभि चांक- 
ीति॥ २०॥ 


20. Dva suparna sayuja sakhaya samanam vrksam 
pari sasvajate. Tayoranyah pippalam svadva- 
ttyanasnannanyo abhi cakasSiti. 


Two birds of beautiful wings, the individual 
human soul and the Supreme Soul of the universe, both 
friends and companions, together nest on the same one 
tree of existence. Of the two, one, the individual human 
soul, eats the fruit with relish and enjoys as well as 
suffers the consequences. The other, the Supreme Soul, 
simply watches comprehensively all round without 
eating anything. 


728 RGVEDA 


यत्रां quot sradear aaa विदथाधिस्वर॑न्ति। 
इनो विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य गोपाः समा धीरः पाकमत्रा 
विवे ॥ २९॥ 


21. Yatra suparna amrtasya bhagam-animesam 
vidathabhisvaranti. Ino visvasya bhuvanasya 
gopah sa ma dhirah pakamatra viveSa. 


Where the blessed souls of noble action sing 
and celebrate their share of immortal joy in holy voice 
incessantly, therein, may, I pray, the constant 
imperishable sovereign Ruler, protector and sustainer 
of the entire universe, inspire and bless me, the honest 
soul in preparation for the consecration. 


यस्मिन्‌ वृक्षे मध्वदः quart निविशन्ते सुव॑ते चाधि faved | 
तस्येदाहुः पिप्प॑लं स्वाद्वग्रे तन्नोच्र॑शब्यः पितरं न वेद॑ ॥ २२॥ 


22. Yasmin vrkse madhvadah suparna nivisante 
suvate cadhi visve. Tasyedahuh pippalam 
svadvagre tannonnasadyah pitaram na veda. 


To that tree over and above the mortal world 
whereon the super-souls of beautiful wings of blessed 
action nestle in a state of consecration and taste the 
nectar honey of divine joy, whose taste of the fruit the 
ancients describe as super-sweet, to that tree of immortal 
taste and bliss they do not attain who do not know the 
father. 


यद्‌ गाय॒त्रे अधिं गायत्रमाहितं तरष्टुभाद्‌ वा तरष्टुभं निरतक्षत । 
यद्‌ वा जगज्जगत्याहितं पदं य sae विदुस्ते अं॑मृतत्व- 
TST: ॥ २३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 729 


23. Yad gayatre adhi gayatramahitam traistubhad va 
traistubham nirataksata. Yad va jagajjaga- 
tyahitam padam ya it tad viduste amrtatvama- 
nasuh. 


They attain to that immortal state of bliss who 
know and experience the Spirit which is the lord 
protector of the celebrants of Divinity immanent in the 
gayatri verses in their recitations, who rejoice in the 
divine presence above the trishbubh verses and actualise 
that presence in life without break, who rise to the height 
of Divinity and share the dynamic presence vibrating 
in the universe and revealed in jagati verses, and 
commune with that presence. 


(In scientific terms, the earth is gayatri. The fire 
of yajna is lit on the earth. Traishtubh is the sky. The 
wind is vibrant and operative there. Dyu is jagati, most 
dynamic. There aditya, the sun, reigns. Agni, fire is the 
vitality of the earth, wind is the energy of the sky, and 
the sun is the life of the heavens. Those who know these 
regions, their life and vitality and realise their vitality 
and the spirit of Divinity which informs them and their 
vitality attain to the state of immortal bliss.) 


गायत्रेण प्रतिं मिमीते अर्कमर्केण ara तरष्टु भेन वाकम्‌। 
वाकेन वाकं द्विपदा चतुष्पदा.ऽक्षरेण मिमते aa 
वाणींः॥ २४॥ 

24.  Gayatrena prati mimite arkamarkena sama 


traistubhena vakam. Vakena vakam dvipada 
catuspada’ksarena mimate sapta vanth. 


In gayatri metre the Rks are composed. With 
Rks, the Samans are composed. With trishtubh metre 


730 RGVEDA 


Vak, Yajus are composed. By Vak, Yajurveda, and further 
Vak, Atharva Veda, is composed and formed. And with 
two-pada and four-pada constituents of the eternal Word, 
all the seven forms of Vedic compositions in metric 
forms of verse, are composed. 


(In scientific terms, gayatri is Parameshthi 
Prana, universal energy at the highest level, from 
universal energy, specific forms of energy are created. 
One of these specific forms is Rk, rhythmic energy 
operative in thought consciousness. When pranic energy 
passes through a particular physical structure such as 
the reed or the larynx, sound is produced. When rhythm 
is added to sound, music is produced. When elements 
of sound are related to particular points of the speech 
mechanism, then phonemes, elements of sound in 
language forms, are produced. And when the elements 
of sound are joined in correspondence with thought, 
then language is produced. When feeling and emotion 
is added to language and expressed, then song is created 
and composed. Thus from Rks, thought energies of 
consciousness composed in language, joined to 
celebrative joy, Samans are created. When the music 
and songs of joy are joined to practical situations in the 
holy business of living, then Yajus are created as holy 
formations of life’s values. And then from thought, song 
and practical formulae in holy living the comprehensive 
body of Atharva hymns is created. The classification of 
Vedic knowledge is thus explained in terms of 
knowledge, Rgveda, song, Samveda, action, Yajurveda, 
and comprehensive message, Atharva-veda, which is 
also known as Brahma Veda. In this way, from the 
elements of energy, sound, thought, feeling and emotion 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 731 


in divine consciousness, specially love and joy, all 
language and linguistic compositions both divine and 
human, sacred and secular, are created.) 


जग॑ता सिन्धुं दिव्य॑स्तभायद्रथन्तरे सूर्य पर्यपश्यत्‌ । 
गायत्रस्य समिधस्तिस्र आहुस्ततो! wer प्र रिरिचे 
महित्वा ॥ २५॥ 


25. Jagata sindhum divyastabhayad rathantare 
suryam paryapasyat. Gayatrasya samidhastisra 
ahustato mahna pra ririce mahitva. 


The Lord establishes the ocean of energy in the 
Dyu, the region of light, by cosmic dynamics of Jagati 
hymns of omnipotence. In the Antariksha, He establishes 
the sun, generative and radiating source of light and 
energy. The blazing fire-woods of divine energy, they 
say, are three: the sun in the highest sky, lightning, wind 
and electricity in the atmosphere, and fire and magnetic 
energy in the earth, and by His grand and adorable 
omnipotence the Lord transcends all these. Of Gayatra, 
the Samidhas are said to be three: light, lightning and 
fire. 


उप॑ हये सुदुघां धेनुमेतां सुहस्तो गोधुगुत दोहदेनाम्‌ । श्रेष्ठं 
सवं सविता सांविषन्नोऽभी्ो घर्मस्तदु षु प्र वोचम्‌।॥ २६॥ 


26. Upa hvaye sudugham dhenumetam suhasto 
godhuguta dohadenam. Srestham savam savita 
savisanno’bhiddho gharmastadu su pra vocam. 


I invoke and call upon this generous mother cow, 
Gayatri, Mother Nature, mother Sarasvati of knowledge, 
directly at the closest. Only an intelligent and dexterous 
person can distil the essence and power of her 


732 RGVEDA 


generosity. May lord Savita, the creator, the sun, the 
teacher, create the soma of milk, honey and the light of 
knowledge for us and bless us. Lit up and blazing is the 
fire in the yajna-vedi. The same I speak of and celebrate 
in song. 


हिङ्कृण्वती dare वसूनां वत्समिच्छन्ती मन॑साभ्यागा।त्‌। 
दुहामश्विभ्यां पयो अघ्न्येयं सा व॑र्धतां महते सो भ॑- 
गाय ॥ २७॥ 


27.  Himkrnvati vasupatni vasunam vatsamicchanti 
manasabhyagat. Duhamasvibhyam payo aghnye- 
yam sa vardhatam mahate saubhagaya. 


Lowing and loving, this mother cow, sustainer 
of the breath and supports of life, caressing her children 
with her heart of tenderness, comes to bless us all round. 
May she, never never to be killed or hurt, distil the milk 
of life’s energy from the sun and wind and ever grow 
for the great good fortune and prosperity of life on earth. 


TNdwed वत्सं मिषन्तं मूर्धानं हिङ्ङकृणोन्मातवा उ। 
सृक्वाणं घर्ममभि वावशाना मिमाति मायुं पय॑ते 
पयोभिः ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Gauramimedanu vatsam misantam murdhanam 
hinnakrnonmatava u. Srkvanam gharmamabhi 
vavasana mimati mayum payate payobhih. 


The cow goes to the calf winking its eyes in 
loving expectation, lowing with love, and licks its head 
with caress. And lowing and loving more and more in 
response to the yearning affection of the calf, she 
overflows with milk. (The same is the response of 
mother earth and mother Sarasvati to the children 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 164 733 
yearning for love, nourishment and knowledge.) 


अयं स fg येन tieeiaa मिमाति मायुं ध्वसनावधि 
श्चिता। सा चित्तिथिर्निं हि चकार मर्त्य" विद्युद्धव॑न्ती प्रतिं 
वब्रिमौहत।॥ २९॥ 


29. Ayam sa Sinke yena gaurabhivrta mimati mayum 
dhvasanavadhi Srita. Sa cittibhirni hi cakara 
martyam vidyud bhavanti prati vavrimauhata. 


This is that cloud which roars and by which, 
covered and surrounded in the vapours, the earth 
reverberates in response. The earth, with her own 
feelings of kindness and generosity sustains the mortal 
children of hers, and her energy, being in the form of 
lightning, reveals and realises her own form and 
character. 


अनच्छये तुरगातु जीवमेज॑द्‌ Ys मध्य आ पस्त्यानाम्‌। 
जीवो मृतस्यं चरति स्वधाभिरमर्त्यो मर्त्येना सयोनिः ॥ ३०॥ 


30. Anacchaye turagatu jivamejad dhruvam madhya 
a pastyanam. Jivo mrtasya carati svadhabhir- 
amartyo martyenda sayonih. 


Living and breathing, moving at the speed of 
infinity yet constant and omnipresent, the Spirit of the 
Universe abides eternal, impelling the individual soul 
to move among the variety of material forms. And thus, 
the immortal spirit of mortal man moves around in love 
and company with the mortal forms of material beauty 
by virtue of its karma and self sacrifice. 


अप॑श्यं गोपामनिपद्यमानमा च परां च पथिधथिश्चरन्तम्‌। 
स सध्रीचीः स विषुंचीर्वसांन आ व॑रीवर्ति भुवनेष्वन्तः ॥ २९॥ 


734 RGVEDA 


31. Apasyam gopam-anipadyamanam-a ca para ca 
pathibhis-carantam. Sa sadhricth sa visuctr- 
vasana ठ varivarti bhuvanesvantah. 


I pray I may see and realise that universal 
protector of the world of nature and the mother powers 
of life, who, ever infallible and immaculate, is immanent 
and active over the nearest and the farthest paths of 
existence, and, pervading the centripetal and centrifugal 
waves of Prakrti, eternally rolls around in the worlds of 
the universe. 


Note: This mantra can be interpreted with 
reference to the individual soul: I wish and pray I may 
realise the essential nature of that presiding power over 
the mind and senses which, though in association with 
the mind and senses, never falls from its essence and 
moves over the paths and forms of existence far and 
near. The soul takes to the forms of Prakrti which, it 
feels, go with it, as well as to those forms which are 
various and disagreeable. And thus it goes round and 
round in and across the worlds of the universe, integrated 
with all living forms and yet essentially its own self. 


य ई' der न सो अस्य वेद्‌ य ई' ददर्शं हिरुगिन्नु तस्मा॑त्‌। 
स मातुर्योना परिवीतो अन्तर्बहुप्रजा निऋतिमा विवेश ॥ २३२ ॥ 


32. Ya im cakara na so asya veda ya im dadarsa 
hiruginnu tasmat. Sa maturyona parivito antar- 
bahupraja nirrtim-a vivesa. 


That One that creates this universe, the other, 
individual soul, knows not of. This other that sees this 
world of existence goes off from the essence, and, 
enveloped in the mothers womb, covered in the folds 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 735 


of material form within, it is born and enters the world 
of mortality for ages in birth after birth. 


द्यौर्मे पिता जनिता नाथिरत्र बन्धुर्मे माता परथिवी पहीयम्‌। 
उत्तानयोश्चम्बो ३ योनिर्‌ न्तरत्रा पिता ठुहितुर्गर्भ॑मा- 
ent ३२३ ॥ 


33. Dyaurme pita janita nabhiratra bandhurme mata 
prthivi mahiyam. Uttanayos’camvoryoniranta- 
ratra pita duhiturgarbhamadhdt. 


The heaven above is my father and creator, my 
centre-hold, my haven and home here, my brother 
support to stand by. And this great earth, this universe, 
this nature, is my mother. In the womb of these two 
great generative powers, heaven and earth, the mother 
of His own creation in here, the father of the universe 
sows the seed of life. 


पृच्छामि त्वा परमन्तं पृथिव्याः पृच्छापि यत्र भुव॑नस्य 
नाभिः । पृच्छापिं त्वा वृष्णो अश्व॑स्य रेत॑ः पृच्छामि वाचः 
परमं व्योम।॥३४॥ 


34. Prcechami tva paramantam prthivyah prcchami 
yatra bhuvanasya nabhih. Prcchami tva vrsno 
asvasya retah prcchami vacah paramam vyoma. 


What is the ultimate end of the earth? I ask you. 
Where is the centre and centre-hold of the universe? I 
ask you. What is the life-seed of the mighty generative 
force of infinitive power and speed? I ask you. What is 
the ultimate sound source from where the first boom of 
the Word arises? I ask. 


736 RGVEDA 


इयं वेदिः परो अन्त॑ः पृथिव्या अयं यज्ञो भुव॑नस्य TAA: 1 
अयं सोमो वृष्णो अश्व॑स्य tal ब्रह्मायं वाचः प॑र॒मं 
व्योम ॥ ३५॥ 


35. Iyam vedih paro antah prthivyad ayam yajno 
bhuvanasya nabhih. Ayam somo vrsno asvasya 
reto brahmayam vacah paramam vyoma. 


This vedi, creativity and productivity of the 
earth, is the ultimate end of the earth. This yajna, meeting 
of solar vitality and earthly productivity, is the centre- 
hold of life in the world. The vitality of the sun and the 
shower of soma is the life seed of the generative energy 
of the creator who is generous and infinite. And Brahma, 
immanent consciousness of the Lord is the ultimate 
home of the Word from where it incarnates in the world 
as Veda. 


सप्तार्धगर्भा भुव॑नस्य रेतो विष्णो'स्तिष्ठन्ति प्रदिशा 
विधर्मणि । ते धीतिधिर्मन॑सा ते विपश्चितं: परिभुवः परि 
भवन्ति faved: ॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Saptardhagarbha bhuvanasya reto 17510517 - 
sthanti pradisa vidharmani. Te dhitibhirmanasa 
te vipascitah paribhuvah pari bhavanti visvatah. 


Seven evolutes of Prakrti, i.e., five subtle 
elements, mind and senses (which evolve from 
Ahankara), and the Mahat-tattva, represent half of the 
divine process of creation (the other half being the 
creative seed or thought-sankalpa of Parameshthi 
Prajapati); they are half the womb of the universe the 
other half is the divine will. By the will of Vishnu they 
abide in Akasha, eternal space-and-time continuum with 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 737 


their distinct properties and power and comprehend and 
rule the entire worlds in existence. 


न वि जानापि यदिवेदमस्मि निण्यः संन॑द्धो मन॑सा चरायि। 
यदा मागन्‌ प्रथमजा ऋ्‌तस्यादिद्‌ वाचो अश्नुवे 
भागमस्याः ॥ ३७॥ 


37. Navijanami yadivedamasmi ninyah samn-addho 
manasa carami. Yada magan pratham-aja 
rtasyadid vaco asnuve bhagamasyah. 


I just do not know what I am like for sure, or 
what this world is. Self-imposed, self-bound, I move 
around with limited mind and understanding. But when 
the first evolutes of natural truth, 1.e., intelligence and 
understanding of awareness come to me, and when the 
revelations of this Divine Word of truth bless me, then 
I realise my share of knowledge of the reality of 
existence that it is. 


अपाङ्‌ ureta स्वधया गृभीतोऽ deaf मर्त्येना सयोनिः। 
ता शश्व॑न्ता विषूचीना वियन्ता न्य१ न्यं चिक्युर्न नि 
चिक्युरन्यम्‌ ॥ ३८ ॥ 


38. Apan praneti svadhaya grbhito’martyo martyena 
sayonih. Ta Sasvanta visucina viyanta nyanyam 
cikyurna ni cikyuranyam. 


The immortal soul coexistent with the mortal 
body goes back and forth. Both, body and soul, are 
eternal and imperishable, the body as Prakrti in the 
essence and the soul as spirit. Both are different and 
going apart. Those who know know one and the other, 
some know one but not the other, and those who don’t 
know know neither. 


738 RGVEDA 


ऋचो अक्षरे परमे व्योमन्यस्मिन्‌ देवा अधि विश्वे निषेदुः । 
यस्तन्न वेद्‌ किमूचा करिष्यति य इत्तद्विदुस्त इमे 


समासते ॥ ३९॥ 


39. (२८० aksare parame voyman yasmin deva adhi 
visve niseduh. Yastanna veda kimrca karisyati 
ya it tad vidusta ime samasate. 


The Rks, Vedas, exist in the omniscient supreme 
Spirit of existence, infinite and imperishable as the 
eternal and ultimate space-time continuum. In That, all 
the divine powers of existence subsist. If one does not 
know or acknowledge that, what would he or she 
achieve with mere words of the Rks? Those who know 
Him, reside with Him. 


सूयवसाद्धग॑वती हि भूया अथो वयं भग॑वन्तः स्याम । 
अद्धि तृण॑मघ्न्ये विश्वदानी पिब॑ शुब्धमु-दकमा- 
चरन्ती ॥ ४०॥ 


40. Suyavasad bhagavati hi bhuya atho vayam bhaga- 
vantah syama. Addhi trnmaghnye visvadanim 
piba suddhamudakamacaranti. 


Adorable lady of knowledge and wisdom, be 
great and illustrious with holy food for mind and spirit, 
and then, we pray, we too may have the honour and 
prosperity of knowledge and well-being. Holy and 
inviolable as the mother cow, living on pure food and 
drinking pure water, and conducting yourself with 
kindness and grace, bless us with the generous gift of 
universal knowledge and joy of life. 


गौरीर्मिमाय ase तक्षत्येकपदी द्विपदी सा चतुष्पदी | 
अष्टापदी नव॑पदी बभूवुषी ASEM ANT परमे व्योमन्‌ ॥। ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 739 


41. Gaurirmimaya salilani taksatyekapadi dvipadi sa 
catuspadi. Astapadi navapadi babhuvusi 
sahasraksara parame vyoman. 


The lady of light in spotless white of the Word 
in the highest heaven of eternal Omniscience, ever keen 
to reveal and grow, speaks loud and bold, stirring the 
stillness of space in waves of consciousness in the 
universal mind and in the pools of the seer’s minds, 
and thus reveals the Word in forms and stages for 
humanity: One Veda as the whole knowledge, two Vedas 
for knowledge and action, three Vedas for knowledge, 
action and prayer, four Vedas as one compendium of 
discrete forms, eightfold knowledge of four Vedas and 
four Upa-Vedas of practical knowledge such as health 
science, military science, etc., and nine-stage 
knowledge, the ninth being grammar, phonetics, 
astronomy, etc. Indeed, this is knowledge contained in 
countless thousand variations of the One Imperishable 
Word: AUM. 


तस्यां: समुद्रा अधि वि क्ष॑रन्ति तेन॑ जीवन्ति प्रदिश श्चत॑स्रः | 
तत॑: क्षरत्यक्षरं तद्विश्वमुप जीवति ॥ ४२॥ 


42.  Tasyah samudra adhi vi ksaranti tena jivanti 
pradisascatasrah. Tatah ksaratyaksaram tad 
visvamupa Jivati. 


The oceanic showers of that voice of eternal 
omniscience rain in torrents. With these showers the 
directions, all the four and their sub-directions, vibrate 
with life. Then from there the actual words reveal 
themselves to human vision and perception, and the 
entire world of humanity lives by that revelation with 
light, support and guidance. 


740 RGVEDA 


शकमयं धूममाराद॑पश्यं विषूवता पर ware yur । उक्षाणं 
पुञ्निंमपचन्त वीरास्तानि ध्मीणि प्रथमान्यांसन्‌॥ ४३ ॥ 


43. Sakamayam dhumamaradapasyam visuvata para 
enavarena. Uksanam prsnimapacanta virastani 
dharmani prathamanyasan. 


I have seen from close quarters the clouds of 
smoke and vapour laden with power. From this close 
by, I perceive the powerful catalytic agents of nature 
far off busy heating and creating the clouds of soma 
replete with vitality. These processes are the first 
operations of natural evolution and behaviour higher 
up in space. 


त्रय॑ः केशिनं ऋतुथा वि dart संवत्सरे व॑पत एकं एषाम्‌ | 
विश्वमेको अभि च॑ष्टे शचींधि्राजिरेकस्य cast न 
रूपम्‌ ॥ ४४ ॥ 


44. Trayah keSina rtutha vi caksate samvatsare 
vapata eka esam. ViSvameko abhi caste Sactbhir- 
dhrajirekasya dadrse na rupam. 


Three powers of nature with their distinct 
identities express themselves and operate according to 
the cycle of the seasons in the year. One of these, fire, is 
lit once in the year and generates and germinates the 
seeds of life. Another the sun, with its action and 
operations, illuminates the world. The third is wind, the 
force of it can be perceived but not its shape and form. 


चत्वारि वाक्परिमिता पदानि af विदुर्ब्राह्मणा ये 
म॑नीषिण॑ः । गुहा त्रीणि निहिता नेद्धयन्ति तुरीयं वाचो मनुष्यां 
वदन्ति ॥ ४५५॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 741 


45. = (वावान vak parimita padani tani vidurbr-ahmana 
ye manisinah. Guha trini nihita nengayanti 
turtyam vaco manusya vadanti. 


Four are the constituent parts of speech which 
the wise men of learning know. Three of them are hidden 
in the cave of the mind, they are neither analysed, nor 
defined, nor understood by ordinary speakers, only the 
fourth part of speech, or parole, they use in 
communication. 


(The four constituents of the structure of speech 
are: Nama or substantive, noun, Akhyata or roots of 
verbs, Upasarga or affixes, and Nipata or irregular 
accepted forms. These four are the subjects for 
grammarians and linguists. For the ordinary person, 
speech is the whole language, just what it is, and 
accepted without the understanding of structure and 
grammar. At a higher level, language is analysed in four 
layers of existence and consciousness: Para or 
transcendent language which is beyond thought and 
understanding. It may be regarded as the language- 
correspondence of the omniscience of God. The second 
is Pashyanti, one step close to us from Para. This may 
be understood to be the language existing in the 
unconscious layers of the mind. The third is Madhyama, 
another step closer to our consciousness. Let us say it 
exists in our sub-conscious mind. And the fourth is 
Vaikhari, existing at our conscious level of the mind. 
This is the language in use. Further, this language is 
analysed into four constituents: Nama, Akhata, 
Upasarga and Nipata. And of this language too the 
ordinary speaker uses the accepted form without 
knowing the structure and grammar. For the ordinary 
speaker, the language in use is only behaviour purely at 


742 RGVEDA 


the natural and social level. And in yet another way, 
language may be understood in the way of the Veda: 
Ila, the language of omniscience, Sarasvati, the language 
of Veda and learning, Mahi, the spoken language at the 
level of the earth, nation, region, family and the mother. 
Another name for this speech is Bharati. And one thing 
more at the end of this note: This analysis and study is 
for the learned and for the seekers of learning. It has no 
value for the ordinary speaker. He or she speaks what is 
spoken for the only reason that he or she speaks thus, 
and what is spoken is understood.) 


इन्द्रं fast वरुणमभरिमांहुरथों दिव्यः स quot गरुत्मान्‌ । 
एकं सद्विप्रा बहुधा deat यमं मातरिश्वानमाहुः ॥ ४६ ॥ 


46.  Indram mitram varunam-agnim-ahuratho divyah 
sa suparno garutman. Ekam sad vipra bahudha 
vadantyagnim yamam matarisvanam-ahuh. 


Reality is one, Truth is one, Ishvara is one and 
only One, not more than one. The learned and the wise 
speak of It in many ways. They say: It is Indra, glorious, 
Mitra, universal friend, Varuna, highest adorable, Agni, 
light of life, Divya, heavenly, Suparna, supreme 
beauteous, Garutman, supreme dynamic. They say: It 
is Agni, life and leader of existence, Yama, supreme 
controller, law and justice, and the judge, and 
Matarishva, supreme energy of the universe. 


कृष्णं नियानं हर॑यः सुपर्णा अपो वसाना दिवमुत्प॑तन्ति। 
त आवंवृत्रन्त्सदंनादूतस्यादिद्‌ घुतेनं पृथिवी व्युद्यते ॥ ४७॥ 

47. Krsnam niyanam harayah suparna apo vasana 
divam-utpatanti. Ta avavrtrant-sadanad-rtasya- 
did ghrtena prthivi vyudyate. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 743 


The brilliant and beautiful rays of the sun 
constantly touch the green earth held by the sun and, 
covered by vapours of water, and rise back to the region 
of the sun. They come down from the region of waters 
and the earth is soaked with the water of rain showers. 


द्वाद॑श प्रधयश्चक्रमेकं त्रीणि asa क उ तच्यिंकेत। 
तस्मिन्त्साकं त्रिता न ergs पिताः षष्टिर्न चल्ाचं॑- 
तासं: ॥ ४८ ॥ 


48. Dvadasa pradhayas-cakramekam trini nabhyani 
ka u tacciketa. Tasmintsakam trisata na sankavo 
*rpitah sastirna calacalasah. 


One full circle is the wheel going round. Twelve 
are the segments of the felly of the wheel. Three are the 
centres of the nave. Three hundred and sixty are the 
spokes fixed and yet on the move with the wheel. Who 
knows such a wheel? Rarely someone. 


यस्ते स्तन॑ः शशयो यो म॑योभूर्येन विश्वा gee वार्यीणि। 
यो tam वसुविद्यः सुदत्रः सर॑स्वति तमिह धात॑वे 
wh: USSU 


49.  Yaste stanah sasayo yo mayobhuryena visva 
pusyasi varyani. Yo ratnadha vasuvid yah 
sudatrah sarasvati tamiha dhatave kah. 


Sarasvati, divine mother of the wealth and 
knowledge of the world, that abundant and inexhaustible 
treasure of knowledge of yours which is blissful, with 
which you fill and replenish the cherished resources of 
the world, which holds the jewels of the earth and 
reveals and provides the wealths of existence, and which 
gives all the gifts and blessings of life: that treasure, O 


744 RGVEDA 


mother, pray open for your darling child, the seeker of 
nourishment for body, mind and soul. 


wart य॒ज्ञम॑यजन्त देवास्तानि धर्मीणि प्रथमान्यांसन्‌ । ते 
ह नाकं महिमानं: सचन्त॒ यत्र पूर्वे साध्याः सन्तिं 
देवाः ॥ ५० ॥ 


50. Yajnena yajnam-ayajanta devastani dharmani 
prathamanyasan. Te ha nakam mahimanah 
sacanta yatra purve sadhyah santi devah. 


The divinities, first evolutes of nature with the 
immanent will Divine, conducted the yajna of creation 
by yajna, yajnic inputs of self-sacrifice. They were the 
first sustainers, supporters of the divine laws, keepers 
of the rules of Dharma and carriers of the yajna further. 
They alone attain to grandeur and rise to the regions 
where the divine souls of the ancients dwell, who carry 
on the yajna and serve the Lord of Heaven. 


समानमेतडदकमुच्ैत्यव चाहभिः | भूमिं पर्जन्या जिन्वन्ति 
दिवं जिन्वन्त्यग्रय॑ः ॥ ५९॥ 


51. Samanam-etad-udakam-uccyaityava cahabhih. 
Bhumim parjanya jinvanti divam jinvantya- 
gnayah. 


Same is this water which goes up to the skies and 
comes down to the earth by days and nights. The clouds 
refresh and replenish the fertility of the earth, while the 
fires of yajna, electrical energies of the winds and 
sunrays serve the heavens with fragrance of the earth. 


दिव्यं सुपर्ण वायसं बृहन्तमपां wf दर्शतमोषधीनाम्‌ । 
अभीपतो वृष्टिभिंस्तर्पय॑न्तं सर॑स्वन्तमव॑से जोहवीमि ॥ ५२ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 145 


52. Divyam suparnam vayasam brhantam-apam 
garbham darsatam-osadhinam. Abhipato vrsti- 
bhis-tarpayantam sarasvantam-avase johavimi. 


For nourishment, protection and promotion of 
life on earth, I invoke, adore and constantly offer 
libations of homage and fragrant samits and havish to 
the heavenly, bright and blazing angel of cosmic wings, 
radiating centre of liquid energy and soothing ripener 
of herbs and greens, ever exuberant flood of generosity, 
which fills the thirsting earth with rain showers of 
fertility from the clouds of space. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 165 
Indra and Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


कयां शुभा VATA: सनींव्ठाः समान्या मरुतः सं मिमिक्षुः । 
कयां मती कुत एतास एतेऽ चन्ति शुष्परं वृष॑णो वसूया ॥ ९ ॥ 


i Kaya subha savayasah sanilah samanya marutah 
sam mimiksuh. Kaya mati kuta etasa ete’rcanti 
Susmam vrsano vasuya. 


With what noble and equal action do the Maruts, 
divine complementary energies, kindred powers of equal 
age and home, join together, mix the yajna materials 
for oblations and shower the earth with rain and 
fragrance? With what thought and intelligence, and 
coming from where do they, generous powers anxious 
for the wealth of life, value and refine strength and 
competence for the realisation of wealth? 


कस्य ब्रह्माणि जुजुषुर्युवानः को Heat मरुत आ व॑वर्त | 
श्येनांडव ध्रज॑तो अन्तरिश्चे केन॑ महा मन॑सा रीरमाम ॥ २॥ 


746 RGVEDA 


2: Kasya brahmani jujusur-yuvanah ko adhvare 
maruta a vavarta. Syenan iva dhrajato antarikse 
kena maha manasa riramama. 


Whose wealth do they, ever young, love and 
delight in? Who enjoins the Maruts to visit and join the 
yajna of love and non-violence? The Maruts traverse 
the spaces like eagles sweeping across the skies. With 
what great mind shall we serve and please them? 


कुतस्त्वमिन्द्र माहिनः सन्नेको यासि सत्पते किं त॑ seer 
सं पृच्छसे समराणः शुभानैर्वोःचेस्तन्नो' हरिवो यत्ते 
अस्मे ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Kutastvamindra mahinah sanneko yasi satpate 
kim ta ittha. Sam prcchase samaranah subhanair- 
vocetstanno harivo yat te asme. 


Indra, lord of might and grandeur, protector of 
truth and right, you are so great, unique, still you go all 
alone by yourself, without attendant, assistant or 
retinue? Wherefrom? Where to? This way? What does 
it mean? We ask you, friend and comrade, lord of 
sunbeams, whatever is in your mind for us, pray speak 
in good words. 


ब्रह्माणि मे मतयः शं सुतासः शुष्म॑ sate wat मे अद्रिः । 
आ शासते प्रति हर्यन्त्युक्थेमा हरीं वहतस्ता नो अच्छ॑ Ul  ॥ 


4. Brahmani me matayah sam sutasah Susma iyarti 
prabhrto me adrih. A sasate prati haryantyu- 
kthema hari vahatasta no accha. 


May the wealth and power, the people and ideas 
of the nation, and the noble achievements of peace and 
joy be for our good. The strength, the cloud and the 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 747 


thunderbolt deployed go forward for our good and 
peace. The songs of praise arise and celebrate us. May 
the horses of Indra, the energies of sunbeams and 
electrical energy, carry us onward. 


अतों वयम॑न्तमेभिर्युजानाः Tata Rea : शुम्भ॑मानाः | 
महोभिरेताँ उप॑ युज्महे न्विन्द्र स्वधामनु हि नो aya ।॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Ato vayam-antam-ebhir-yujanah svaksatrebhis- 
tanvah sumbhamanah. Mahobhiretan upa 
yujmahe nvindra svadhamanu hi no babhiutha. 


Thus possessed of our most intimate powers and 
the grandeur of our social order, raising the beauty and 
grace of our body politic, we may use these powers and 
energies of nature. Indra, lord of grace and power, be 
favourable to us in consonance with our own essential 
strength, power and virtue of character. 


क्व4 स्या al मरुतः स्वधासीद्यन्मामेकं समधंत्ताहि हत्ये । 
अहं ह्य ग्रस्त॑विषस्तुविष्पाग्विश्व॑स्य शत्रोरन॑मं aera: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Kva sya vo marutah svadhasid yanmamekam 
samaddhattahihatye. Aham hyugras-tavisas- 
tuvisman visvasya Satror-anamam vadhasnaih. 


O Maruts, tempestuous powers of knowledge, 
speed and energy, where is that essential strength and 
energy of yours which you placed in me to break the 
clouds of rain showers by myself alone? Bright, blazing 
and awful of power, I bow in homage to you with all 
my fatal weapons of defence against the enemies of the 
world and humanity. (The strength and energy is 
everywhere in nature, in fire, water and electric and 
magnetic force, and in the sunbeams. Let us exploit these 


748 RGVEDA 
with knowledge and scientific technique.) 


भूरि चकर्थ युज्येभिरस्मे समानेभिर्वृषभ पौस्येभिः | भूरीणि 
fe कृणवामा शविष्ठेन्द्र करत्वा मरुतो यद्वशाम ॥ ७॥ 


7. Bhuri cakartha yujyebhirasme samanabhirvr- 
sabha paumsyebhih. Bhurini hi krnavama 
Savisthendra kratva maruto yad vasama. 


Indra, lord of power and generosity, with 
nature’s energy harnessed for acts of general, universal 
and humane value, you have done us proud with many 
useful, equal and valorous acts of nobility. Indra, lord 
of highest valour and peace, and Maruts, heroes of 
tempestuous speed and performance, let us too do a lot 
of great things and achieve what we want with noble 
yajnic acts of love and generosity. 


वधीं qa म॑रुत इद्दियेणा स्वेन भामेन तविषो ब॑भूवान्‌ । 
अहमेता मन॑वे विश्वश्चन्द्राः सुगा अपश्चकर वचं - 
त्राहुः WS ॥ 

8. Vadhim vrtram maruta indriyena svena bhamena 


taviso babhuvan. Ahameta manave visvascandrah 
suga apascakara vajrabahuh. 
O Maruts, heroes of furious energy and power, 
I break the clouds of darkness with my own might, being 
powerful by my own passion for what is right, and, 
holding the thunderbolt in hand, I do these acts of 
universal wealth and beauty for the sake of humanity, 
acts which clear the paths for future progress. 


अनुत्तमा ते मघवन्नकिर्नु न caral अस्ति देवता विदांनः। 


न जाय॑मानो नशते न जातो यानिं करिष्या कृणुहि 
प्र॑वृब्द।॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 749 


9. Anuttama te maghavannakirnu na tvavan asti 
devata vidanah. Na jayamano naSsate na jato 
yani karisya krnuhi pravrddha. 


Lord of bounty, wealth and power, there is 
nothing initiated, inspired and made to move except by 
you. There is none like you who commands light, 
knowledge and generosity in abundance. There is none 
born or emerging into prominence who can attain to 
your grandeur. Lord thriving and exalted, do whatever 
things are to be done, for no one can rival you. 


एकस्य चिन्मे विभ्वप॑स्त्वोजो यो नु द॑धुष्वान्कृणवै मनीषा | 
अहं aint म॑रुतो विदानो यानि च्यवमिन्द्र इदीश 
एषाम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ekasya cinme vibhvastvojo ya nu dadhrsvan 
krnavai manisa. Aham hugro maruto vidano 
yani cyavamindra idisa esam. 


I am one and independent, may my vigour and 
splendour grow and spread all round since, bold and 
daring, whatever I do and want to do, I do with all my 
mind and soul. O Maruts, heroes of the winds and 
tempests, I am bright and lustrous, I am Indra, master 
of my own powers. I am knowledgeable, I know what I 
know. Wherever I move, whatever I achieve, surely I 
rule and govern. 


अम॑न्दन्मा मरुतः स्तोमो अत्र यन्मे नरः श्रुत्यं cal 
चक्र । इन्द्राय वृष्णो सुम॑खाय मद्यं सख्ये सखायस्तन्वे 
तनूभिः ९९॥ 

11. Amandanma marutah stomo atra yanme narah 


srutyam brahma cakra. Indraya vrsne sumakha- 
ya mahyam sakhye sakhayastanve tanubhih. 


750 RGVEDA 


Friends, leaders, Maruts, may the hymns of Veda 
and the song of praise which you have composed for 
me and offered here give me joy. May the song with its 
body of words and music be pleasing to me and my 
body and mind and to Indra, generous friend of all and 
performer of yajna. 


एवेदेते प्रतिं मा रोच॑माना अनेद्यः श्रव एषो दधानाः | 
संचक्ष्या मरुतश्चन्द्रव॑णां अच्छान्त मे छदयाथा च 
नूनम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Evedete prati ma rocamana anedyah srava eso 
dadhanah. Samcaksya marutascandravarna 
acchanta me chadayatha ca nunam. 


Thus may these friends, leaders and you, O 
Maruts, golden glorious all, loving and kind toward me, 
holding and commanding admirable foods, energies and 
noble desires, wealth, honour and holy songs, holding 
me in high esteem, happily disposed, overwhelm me 
with honour and joy. 


को न्वत्र मरुतो मामहे वः प्र यांतन सणखीरच्छां GST: 1 
मन्मानि चित्रा अपिवातयन्त एषां भरत नवेदा म ऋता- 
नाम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ko nvatra maruto mamahe vah pra yatana 
sakhinraccha sakhayah. Manmani citra apiva- 
tayanta esam bhuta naveda ma rtanam. 


O Maruts, pioneers of knowledge and science, 
who offers you tributes of praise and appreciation here 
now? Friends, go forward to those friends who love 
and honour you. Heroes of wonderful action, moving 
on to the completion of your programmes of knowledge, 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 751 


be aware of my projects of truth and natural laws and 
waters of space to fight out want and suffering. 


आ यदुवस्याहुवसे न कारुरस्माञ्चक्रे मान्यस्य॑ मेधा। ओ 
षु वत्तं मरुतो विप्रमच्छेमा ब्रह्माणि जरिता वों stefan ९४॥ 


14. A yad duvasyad duvase na karur-asmaicakre 
manyasya medha. O su vartta maruto viprama- 
cchema brahmani jarita vo arcat. 


Just as honour and celebration moves on from 
the honoured to the honourable in succession in the 
advancement of knowledge, so let the intelligence and 
expertise of the eminent scientist and technologist come 
to benefit us. O Maruts, leaders and pioneers of 
knowledge, turn in appreciation and recognition to the 
scholar expert, since the celebrant offers these hymns 
of praise, discovery and invention to you. 


एष वः स्तोमो! मरुत इयं गीमीन्दार्यस्यं ural cmt: 1 
एषा यासीष्ट तन्वे वयां विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Esa vah stomo maruta iyam girmandaryasya 
manyasya karoh. Esa yasista tanve vayam 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


O Maruts, leaders, pioneers, heroes of speed and 
power of progress, this song of celebration is for you. It 
is the voice of the lyric of the honourable artist, scientist 
and technologist. Come with desire and commitment to 
advance the science and the scholar further. And let us 
too achieve food and energy, strength and power, and 
life-giving victories. 


752 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 166 
Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


तन्नु वोचाम रभसाय जन्म॑ने पूर्व' महित्वं वुषभस्यं aaa | 
एेधेव याम॑न्मरुतस्तुविष्वणो युधेव॑ शक्रास्तविषाणि 
कर्तन ॥ ९॥ 


1. Tannu vocama rabhasaya janmane purvam mahi- 
tvam vrsabhasya ketave. Aidheva yaman maruta- 
stuvisvano yudheva sakrastavisani kartana. 


O Maruts, roaring heroes of the strength and 
speed of the winds, for a full life of courage and 
enthusiasm and the distinction of leadership and 
overflowing generosity, we sing and celebrate your 
ancient and original heroism. Blazing like fire, 
advancing like warriors, do wondrous deeds of valour 
worthy of admiration. 


नित्यं न सूनुं मधु बिभ्रत उप miaia mar विदथेषु 
घृष्व॑यः । नक्ष॑न्ति ear अव॑सा नमस्विनं न मर्धन्ति स्वत॑वसो 
हविष्कृत॑म्‌।॥ २॥ 


Ze Nityam na sunum madhu bibhrata upa krilanti 
krila vidathesu ghrsvayah. Naksanti rudra avasa 
namasvinam na mardhanti svatavaso haviskrtam. 


They bear the honey sweets of life for all as 
parents bring honey to their darling child. Heroes of 
courage and valour but sportive as ripples of a stream, 
they play their part in the battles of life. Ferocious and 
terrible like jaws of retributive justice, yet dear as breath 
of life, they come to the man of reverence and humility 
with love and protection and, with all their innate 
strength and power, they never hurt the man dedicated 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 166 753 


to yajna and charity. 


यस्मा ऊमांसो अमता अरांसत रायस्पोषं च हविषां ददाशुषे । 
उक्षन्त्यस्मै मरुतो हिता इव पुरू रजांसि पय॑सा मयो- 
भुव: ॥। ३ ॥ 


3. Yasma umaso amrta arasata rayasposam ca 
havisa dadasuse. Uksantyasmai maruto hita iva 
puri rajamsi payasa mayobhuvah. 


Just as imperishable protectors provide wealth 
and nourishment for the man who gives liberally in 
charity alongwith offerings of fragrant materials into 
the yajna fire, so do the Maruts, winds and other natural 
energies, kind and beneficent, like favourable helpers 
at the beck and call of a friend, overflow many regions 
of earth and skies with milk and water for the sake of 
the man of yajna. 


आ ये रजांसि तविंषीभिरव्य॑त प्र a wala: स्वय॑तासो 
अध्रजन्‌। भय॑न्ते विश्वा भुव॑नानि हर्म्या चित्रो वो यापः 
प्रयतास्वृष्टिषु ।। 1 


4. A ye rajamsi tavisibhiravyata pra va evasah 
svayataso adhrajan. Bhayante visva bhuvanani 
harmya citro vo yamah prayatasvrstisu. 


As you move on to reach the regions of your 
choice with your power and force and while your 
automotive and tempestuous rockets rush forth through 
the skies and spaces, then all the worlds and their towers 
shake with terror. Amazing is that mission of flight in 
the programmed and guided projects of yours. 


754 RGVEDA 


यत्त्वेषयामा नदयन्त पर्वतान्दिवो वा पृष्ठं Tal अचुच्यवुः | 
विश्वो at अज्म॑न्भयते वनस्पती रथीयन्तीव प्र जिहीत 
ओष॑धिः ॥ ५॥ 


2 Yattvesayama nadayanta parvatan divo va 
prstham narya acucyavuh. Visvo vo ajman bha- 
yate vanaspati rathiyantiva pra jihita osadhih. 


When the man-made meteors of rockets blazing 
through sky and space roar through mountains of earth 
and clouds of dust and vapour, making them reverberate, 
and thus reach the top of heaven, then all the bio-world 
on your way shakes in fear and celestial herbs like soma 
shake off from the root like astronauts floating from 
their seat in the control chamber. 


यूयं न॑ उग्रा मरुतः सुचेतुनाऽरिंटग्रामाः सुमतिं पिपर्तन | 
यत्रां वो दिद्युद्रदति क्रिविर्दती रिणाति पश्वः सुधितेव 
बर्हणा & ॥ 


6. Yuyam na ugra marutah sucetuna’ristagramah 
sumatim pipartana. Yatra vo didyud radati 
krivirdati rinati pasvah sudhiteva barhana. 


Maruts, powers young, dynamic and 
passionately enthusiastic, bright blazing and well- 
harnessed is your power of energy, held and controlled 
like a tempered sword, cutting, lighting, digging and 
driving. With this electric energy and your noble 
intelligence, assure and augment our understanding and 
development without damaging the country-life. 


प्र स्कम्भदेष्णा अनवश्राधसोऽ लातुणासो' विदथेषु 
सुष्टुताः । अर्चन्त्यर्कं Have पीतये विदुर्वीरिस्यं प्रथमानि 
पौस्यां ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 166 755 


7. Pra skambhadesna anavabhraradhaso ’latrnaso 
vidathesu sustutah. Arcantyarkam madirasya 
pitaye vidurvirasya prathamani paumsya. 


Givers of settlement and sustenance, sure and 
secure of their wealth and power of accomplishment, 
victorious over their opponents, highly applauded in 
the yajnic battles of life, honour and invite the brilliant 
and the wise for a drink of inspiring soma. They know, 
achieve and command the first, essential heroic powers 
of the brave and virtuous. 


शतभुजिभिस्तमभिहं तेर घात्पूरभीं tart मरुतो यमाव॑त | 
जनं यमुग्रास्तवसो विरणष्डिनः पाथना शंसात्तनयस्य 
पुष्टिषु ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Satabhujibhistamabhihruteraghat purbhi raksata 
maruto yamavata. Janam yamugrasta-vaso 
virapSinah pathana sam§sat tanayasya pustisu. 

O Maruts, young leaders and heroes, bright, 
powerful and generous, whoever you promote and 
protect in city life with a hundred ways of comfort and 
security, protect him from crime and damage, and in 
matters of the promotion and advancement of his 
children, save the man from sin and scandal. 


विश्वानि भद्रा म॑रुतो tay वो मिथस्पृध्येव तवि- 
षाण्याहिंता। अंसेष्वा वः प्रप॑थेषु खादयोऽक्षो वश्चक्रा 
समया वि वांवृते॥ ९॥ 


2 Visvani bhadra maruto rathesu vo mithaspr- 
dhyeva tavisanyahita. Amsesva vah prapathesu 
khadayo’kso vascakra samaya vi vavrte. 


O Maruts, heroic warriors like the winds, in your 


756 RGVEDA 


chariots are collected materials for universal good of 
the people, and on your shoulders and in the chariots 
are blazing weapons in position competing, as if, in 
effectiveness. In your paths are provided materials for 
food and advancement, and the axles and wheels of the 
chariots are well aligned and balanced for fast and 
rhythmic movement. 


भूरीणि भद्रा नर्येषु बाहुषु वक्ष॑ःसु रुक्मा VAT STS: । 
अंसेष्वेताः पविषु क्षुरा अधि वयो न पश्चान्‌ व्यनु श्रियो 
FAT ९०॥ 


10. Bhurini bhadra naryesu bahusu vaksahsu rukma 
rabhasaso anjayah. Amsesvetah pavisu ksura 
adhi vayo na paksan vyanu Sriyo dhire. 


In the arms of these heroes of the people there 
is abundant power for general good. On their chest are 
ornamented armours of strong and variegated design. 
On their shoulders are bows and arrows of lightning 
speed. On their thunderbolt is the sharpness of the 
razor’s edge. And they wear the dignity and grace of 
the wings of celestial birds. 


महान्तो मह्या विभ्वो ३ facet Neen ये दिव्याडव स्तृभिः । 
मन्द्राः सुंजिह्याः स्वरितार आसधथिः संमिश्त्या इन्द्र wed: 
परिष्टुभ॑ः॥ ९९॥ 

11. Mahanto mahna vibhvo vibhutayo duredrso ye 
divya iva strbhih. Mandrah sujihvah svaritara 
asabhih sammisla indre marutah paristubhah. 


Great are the Maruts with their own innate 
greatness, powerful, magnanimous, far-sighted, 
refulgent with brilliant stars which light the world, 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 166 757 


joyous and loved of all, sweet of tongue, true of the 
word of mouth, and they are sustainers of all in company 
with Indra, universal energy and power. 


ae: सुजाता मरुतो महित्वनं दीर्घ वों दात्रमदितेरिव व्रतम्‌। 
इन्द्रश्चन त्यज॑सा वि eunfa तज्जनाय यस्मै सुकृते 
अराध्वम्‌ 22 U 


12. Tad vah sujata maruto mahitvanam dirgham vo 
datram-aditeriva vratam. Indrascana tyajasa vi 
hrundati tajjanaya yasmai sukrte aradhvam. 


O Maruts, high-born and arisen you are, great 
is your glory, abundant is your generosity, and deep and 
inviolable is your discipline of vows as that of 
imperishable Aditi. Whatever you grant and bestow on 
the man of noble action, even Indra commanding the 
thunderbolt does not touch. 


तद्वो जामित्वं म॑रुतः परे युगे पुरू यच्छं स॑ममृतास्र आव॑त | 
अया धिया मन॑वे श्रुष्टिमाव्या साकं नरो दंसनैरा 
चिकित्रिरे ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Tad vo jamitvam marutah pare yuge puru 
yacchamsamam-amrtasa dvata. Aya dhiya 
manave Ssrustimavya sakam naro damsanaira 
cikitrire. 


O Maruts, immortal souls, that brotherhood of 
yours, that joy and suffering of yours in the last age, 
that high honour and reputation you earned and 
preserved, the same honour and reputation, protect and 
preserve with this intelligence and understanding of 
yours for humanity and further extend and preserve with 
your noble actions in company with men and leaders. 


758 RGVEDA 


येन॑ दीर्घ dea: शृष्शावाम युष्माकेन परीणसा तुरासः | आ 
यत्ततन॑न्वृजने जनास एभिरय॑ज्ञेभिस्तद भीष्ठिंमश्याम्‌॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Yena dirgham marutah susavama yusmakena 
parinasa turasah. A yat tatanan vrjane janasa 
ebhir-yajnebhis-tadabhistim-asyam . 


O Maruts, heroes of instant action and 
achievement, that abundance, expertise and heroism of 
yours by virtue of which we achieve great things of 
lasting significance, by which people expand in 
knowledge and win victories in their battles of life, that 
very cherished abundance, expertise and power of 
action, I pray, I too may achieve by these yajnic 
performances. 


एष वः स्तोमो! मरुत इयं गीमीन्दार्यस्यं urea cant: 1 
एषा यासीष्ट तन्वे वयां विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Esa vah stomo maruta iyam girmandaryasya 
manyasya karoh. Esa yasista tanve vayam 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


O Maruts, heroes of instant action, universal 
knowledge and abundant generosity, this is the song of 
celebration in honour of your action and achievement. 
This is the spontaneous voice of the happy and honoured 
poet artist. May it reach you for the manifestation of 
your form and image in existence for our benefit so that 
we may acquire food and energy for our body, mind 
and spirit, clear our paths of advancement and achieve 
abundance in life for a vibrant living. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 167 759 


Mandala 1/Sukta 167 
Indra-Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


Gee त इन्द्रोतयो नः सहस्रमिषो! हरिवो गृर्ततंमाः। 
सहस्त्रं रायो मादयध्यै सहस्तरिणा उप॑ नो यन्तु वाजाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Sahasram ta indrotayo nah sahasramiso harivo 
gurtatamah. Sahasram rayo madayadhyai 
sahasrina upa no yantu vajah. 


Lord of power and sustenance, Indra, thousands 
are your protections and ways of protection for us. Lord 
of sunbeams, thousand-fold are the foods and energies 
of the most admirable order. Thousands are your gifts of 
wealth for us to enjoy life. And thousands may be, we 
pray, the forms of knowledge, valour and victory for us. 


आ नोऽ वोभिर्मरुतों यान्त्वच्छा ज्येष्ठे भिर्वा बृहद्दिवैः 
सुमायाः । अध यदेषां नियुतं पर माः स॑मुद्रस्य॑ चिददधनय॑न्त 
पारे॥ २॥ 


2. A no’vobhirmaruto yantvaccha jyesthebhirva 
brhad divaih sumayah. Adha yadesam niyutah 
paramah samudrasya cid dhanayanta pare. 


May the Maruts, heroes of the winds, powers 
of vision and wonder as they are, come well to us with 
their modes of protection and senior-most scholars of 
brilliance, and then may follow those of their most 
efficient modes of transport which can cross the seas 
and skies for the acquisition of wealth. 


मिम्यश्च येषु सुधिता घुताची दहिरण्यनिर्णिगुप॑रा न ऋष्टिः | 
Tet चरन्ती मनुषो न योषां स॒भाव॑ती विदथ्येव सं 
वाक्‌ 3 ॥ 


760 RGVEDA 


Da Mimyaksa yesu sudhita ghrtact hiranyanirni- 
gupara na rstih. Guha caranti manuso na yosa 
sabhavati vidathyeva samvak. 


Seeker of knowledge, go and mix with those 
scholars and visionaries among whom exists that noble 
and comprehensive language which is fit for scientific 
yajnas of versatile purpose, which is fit for use in 
councils of governance, which is peacefully held like 
the dewy night by the sky, which is held like a golden 
sword by the warrior, which is held like lightning by 
the cloud, and which, like the youthful maiden of the 
human lover, moves in covert allays in search of the 
lover. (Such is living speech.) 


परा शुभ्रा अयासो यव्या सांधार ण्येवं मरुतो मिमिक्षुः | 
न रोदसी अपं नुदन्त घोरा जुषन्त वृधं सख्याय देवाः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Para subhra ayaso yavya sadharanyeva maruto 
mimiksuh. Na rodasi apa nudanta ghora jusanta 
vrdham sakhyaya devah. 


Distant but brilliant and powerful, moving at 
moderate speed, the Maruts shower the earth and sky 
with rain, but even when they are violent, roaring with 
lightning, they are not repulsive, they are only impulsive, 
not repelling the sky and the earth away but impelling 
them with new life and energy, because the divines love 
to mix and join in a spirit of commonalty for the sake of 
friendship and love the growth and expansion of all in 
power and potential. 


जोषद्यदीमसुयौ सचध्यै विषितस्तुका रोदसी THOT: | 
आ aaa विधतो रथं गात्त्वेषप्र॑तीका नभ॑सो नेत्या ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 167 761 


a Josad yadimasurya sacadhyai visitastuka rodast 
nrmanah. A suryeva vidhato ratham gat tvesa- 
pratika nabhaso netya. 


If the earth, source of pranic vitality and loving 
mother of mankind, were to serve the Maruts for the 
sake of waters, then she, with flowing hair like the lights 
of evening dawn, shining brilliant as child of the sun, 
would ride the chariot of the Lord Ordainer and 
sustainer, 1.e., the sun, and rise as if going to sky heights 
of progress and abundance. 


आस्थापयन्त युवतिं युवानः शुभे निर्मिंश्त्मां विदथेषु पाम्‌ | 
अको यद्वां मरुतो हविष्मान्गायद्राथं सुतसोमो दुव- 
स्यन्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Asthapayanta yuvatim yuvanah subhe nimislam 
vidathesu pajram. Arko yad vo maruto havisman 
gayad gatham sutasomo duvasyan. 

When the worshipper, rich in yajnic offerings, 
having distilled the soma, sings songs of praise zealously 
in honour of you, then, O Maruts, youthful powers of 
nature’s brilliance and force, you give him in marriage 
a young maiden, smart and dynamic, dedicated to yajnas, 
and a harbinger of happiness and bliss in life. 


प्रतं विवक्मि वक्म्यो य एषां मरुतां महिमा सत्यो sites । 
सचा यदीं वृषमणा अहंयुः स्थिरा चिज्ननीर्वह॑ते 
सुभागाः ॥ ७॥ 


0 Pra tam vivakmi vakmyo ya esam marutam 
mahima satyo asti. Saca yadim vrsamana 
ahamyuh sthira cijjanirvahate subhagah. 


That greatness and glory of the Maruts which is 


762 RGVEDA 


worthy of celebration, I celebrate. It is real and true, 
since he that is virile and proud of himself, Indra, in 
unison with this firm earth, sustains the many happy 
mothers and children of the world. 


पान्ति पित्रावरुणाववद्याच्यय॑त ईमर्यमो अप्र॑शस्तान्‌। उत 
च्य॑वन्ते अच्युता श्चुवाणि वावृध S मरुतो दातिवारः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Panti mitravarunavavadydccayata imaryamo 
aprasastan. Uta cyavante acyuta dhruvani 
vavrdha im maruto dativarah. 


Mitra and Varuna protect from sin and shame. 
Surely Aryama, lord of justice, raises the despicable. 
They shake off even the firm and fixed enemies of life. 
O Maruts, the gift of your generosity ever grows and 
grows. 


नही नु वो मरुतो अन्त्यस्मे आरात्ताच्िच्छव॑सो 
अन्त॑मापुः । ते धृष्णुना शव॑सा शृशुवांसोऽ रणो न द्वेषो 
धृषता परि ष्टुः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Nahi nu vo maruto antyasme arattaccicchavaso 
antamapuh. Te dhrsnuna Savasa susuvamso’rno 
na dveso dhrsata pari sthuh. 


O Maruts, neither from near nor from afar do 
they find the end of your power and force. Intrepidable 
and rising with inviolable strength and courage, they, 
i.e., the Maruts keep the enemies down and, vast as the 
ocean, they stay and abide far higher than jealousy and 
calumny of small minds. 


वयमद्येन्द्रस्य US! वयं श्वो वोचेमहि समर्ये । वयं पुरा महिं 
च नो अनु द्यून्तन्न॑ ऋशभुश्चा नरामनु ष्यात्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 168 763 


10. Vayamadyendrasya prestha vayam 510 vocemahi 
samarye. Vayam pura mahi ca no anu dyun 
tanna rbhuksa naramanu syat. 


We are the dearest children of Indra to-day. Let 
us be able to say the same thing tomorrow in the battles 
of life. And for the sake of this love and grace of Indra, 
let us first maintain our own greatness of character and 
performance day by day, and then, we pray, may Indra 
be kind and favourable day by day among men. Lord of 
thunderbolt He is. 


एष वः Sal मरुत इयं गीमीन्दार्यस्यं areal cat: 1 

एषा यासीष्ट तन्वे वयां विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Esa vah stomo maruta iyam girmandaryasya 

manyasya karoh. Esa yasista tanve vayam vidya- 
mesam vrjanam jiradanum. 

O Maruts, this is your song of celebration, this 

is the voice of the happy and honoured poet artist. May 

it reach you for the manifestation of your image and 


action for us. And may we, we pray, achieve food and 
energy, advancement in action and the joy of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 168 
Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


यज्ञाय॑ज्ञा वः समना तु॑तुर्वणिर्धियंधियं वो देवया उ दधिध्वे। 
आ ats afd: सुविताय रोदस्योर्महे क॑वृत्यामव॑से 
सुवृक्तिभिः ॥ ९॥ 

i Yajnayajna vah samana tuturvanir-dhiyam- 
dhiyam vo devaya u dadhidhve. A vo’rvacah suvi- 
taya rodasyormahe vavrtyamavase suvrktibhih. 


764 RGVEDA 


O Maruts, powers of enlightenment, generous 
action and well-being of the world, in every act of yajna 
one after another, let your will and performance be equal, 
fast and victorious. In every act of thought, reflection 
and planning, let your intelligence, understanding and 
imagination, and even your calculation be divinely holy. 
For the well-being of the earth and heaven, and for the 
sake of great and inviolable protection of life and life’s 
joy, with yajnic oblations and songs of praise and 
thankfulness, we pray, turn your attention this way for 
our good and well-being by straight and simple speed 
of motion. 


वव्रासो न ये स्वजाः tadera इषं स्व॑रथिजायन्त धूत॑यः 1 
सहस्ियांसो अपां नोर्मय॑ आसा गावो वन्द्यासो नोश्चण॑: ॥ २॥ 


Ze Vavraso na ye svajah svatavasa isam svarabhi- 
jayanta dhitayah. Sahasriyaso apam normaya 
asa gavo vandyaso noksanah. 


Come this way, Maruts! Powers ever on the 
move for protection and progress of us all, self-creative, 
self-strong, movers and shakers like a thousand waves 
of the rolling seas, they are born to provide nourishment, 
energy, light and happiness for others. Worthy of honour 
and reverence they are like generous cows who provide 
motherly milk for sustenance and growth, and like the 
sacrificing bullocks who carry the burdens of humanity. 
Admirable, worthy of thanks and praise with honest 
word of the mouth they are. 


सोमासो न ये Gargaivtat हृत्सु पीतासो दुवसो नासंते | 
एेषामंसेषु रम्भिणीव रारभे हस्तेषु खादिश्च कृतिश्च सं 
द॑धे॥३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 168 165 


a Somaso na ye sutastrptamsavo hrtsu pitaso 
duvaso nasate. Aisamamsesu rambhiniva rarabhe 
hastesu khadisca krtisca sam dadhe. 


Maruts, vibrant powers of enlightenment, 
nourishment and protection, like soma, with off-shoots 
spreading around, distilled and drunk to the last drop 
of the essence assimilated into the heart, abide with us, 
loved, honoured and admired as our own. I depend on 
their shoulders for support as a housewife depends upon 
the support of the head of family. And in their hands, 
the Maruts hold action in one and wear the band of 
victory on the other. 


अव tad दिव आ वृथां ययुरमंत्याः कश॑या चोदत 
त्मनां। अरे णवंस्तुविजाता अंचुच्यवु gaat चिन्मरुतो 
भ्राजंदुष्टयः॥ ४॥ 


4. Ava svayukta diva a vrtha yayur-amartyah (८5) व 
codata tmana. Arenavastuvijata acucyavur- 
dralhani cinmaruto bhrajadrstayah. 


Self-inspired, self-motivated and self-driven, 
Maruts descend from the heights of heaven freely, 
spontaneously and selflessly. Immortal are you, mighty 
heroes, inspire and excite the will to live with your heart 
and soul and use the will as a goal and an invitation to 
life. Pure and unsullied, born of energy and impetuous 
in motion, wielding weapons of light and lightning, O 
Maruts, you stir and move even the fixed and immovable 
mountains. 


को ats =a ea ऋष्टिविद्युतो रेज॑ति त्मना हन्वेव reat | 
धन्वच्युत इषां न याम॑नि पुरुप्रैषा अहन्यो ३ नैत॑शः ॥ ५॥ 


766 RGVEDA 


5: Ko vo’ntarmaruta rstividyuto rejati tnana han- 
veva jihvaya. Dhanvacyuta isam na yamani 
purupraisa ahanyo naitasah. 


O Maruts, wielders of arms blazing as light and 
lightning, who or what in you shakes and shines in you 
by itself like flames or waves of sound? Inspirers of 
many, augmenters of food, energy and love of life, who 
starts you on your mission of life like the cloud melting 
in the sky or like a fast horse on its daily round? 


ad स्विदस्य रज॑सो महस्परं क्वाव॑रं मरुतो यस्मिन्नायय | 
यच्च्यावय॑थ विथुरेव संहितं व्यद्रिणा पतथ त्वेष- 
म॑र्णवम्‌॥ ६ i 


6. Kva svidasya rajaso mahasparam kvavaram 
maruto yasminnayaya. Yaccyavayatha vithureva 
samhitam vyadrina patatha tvesamarnavam. 


O Maruts, what is the ultimate beyond this great 
region of the skies, and what is the ultimate this side 
wherein you move hither and shake the things 
concentrated here like precarious objects of no value, 
or fly down with the clouds to the shining seas? 


सातिर्न वोऽ म॑वती स्वर्वती त्वेषा विपाका मरुतः 
पिपिष्वती । भद्रा वों रातिः dort न दक्षिणा पृथुज्रयीं 
असुर्येव जञ्ज॑ती ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Satirna vo’mavati svarvati tvesa vipaka marutah 
pipisvati. Bhadra vo ratih prnato na daksina 
prthujrayt asuryeva janjati. 

Like your acquisition and distribution is your 


generosity and benevolence, powerful, blissful, lustrous, 
maturing and fruitful, abundant, auspicious, as the gift 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 168 767 


of a philanthropist yajamana, expansive and victorious 
like the breeze of life’s energy. 


प्रतिं ष्टोभन्ति सिन्ध॑वः पविभ्यो यदभथियां वाच॑मुदीरयंन्ति। 
अवं स्मयन्त विद्युतं: पृथिव्यां यदी! घृतं मरुतं: प्रुष्णु- 
aed eu 


8. Prati stobhanti sindhavah pavibhyo yadabhri- 
yam vacam-udirayanti. Ava smayanta vidyutah 
prthivyam yadi ghrtam marutah prusnuvanti. 


When the Maruts ride their chariots, the wheels 
rumble with thunder of the clouds and oceans pant and 
roll in awe, and when they shower torrents or rain on 
the earth, flashes of lightning flaunt with pride and lights 
of joy. 


असूत usted रणाय त्वेषमयासां मरुतामनीकम्‌ । ते 
संप्सरासोऽ जनयन्ताभ्वमादित्स्वधामिंषिरां पर्यपश्यन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


५ Asuta prsnirmahate ranaya tvesamayasam 
marutamanikam. Te sapsaraso’janayantabhva- 
madit svadhamisiram paryapasyan. 


Mother Nature creates the blazing force of the 
tempestuous Maruts for the great battle of the elements 
in the process of evolution, and they, moving and 
working together with the waves of creative energy, 
fashion forms earlier not in existence and watch the 
achievements of their own powers all round in the midst 
of the variety of creative materials. 


एष वः Sal मरुत इयं गीमीन्दार्यस्यं areal कारोः 1 
एषा यासीष्ट तन्वे वयां विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


768 RGVEDA 


10. Esa vah stomo maruta iyam girmandaryasya 
manyasya karoh. Esa yasista tanve vayam 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


This is the song of the Maruts in celebration of 
their work and power in the world of nature and 
humanity in evolution. This is the voice of the poet, 
happy and honoured artist, maker of beautiful forms. 
May this, with love and homage of the poet, reach the 
Maruts for their manifestation in form and image, and 
may we too achieve food and energy, vision and will to 
move on clear and simple paths of progress, and may we 
have the bliss of the breeze of freshness and light of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 169 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


महणश्चित्त्वमिन्द्र यत एतान्महश्चिदसि त्यज॑सो वरूता | 
स नो वेधो मरुतां चिकित्वान्त्सुम्ना वनुष्व तव हि प्रेष्ठां ।॥ ९ ॥ 


ik; Mahascit tvamindra yat etan mahascidasi tyajaso 
varuta. Sa no vedho marutam cikitvan tsumna 
vanusva tava hi prestha. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, destroyer 
of suffering, you are great and glorious indeed, since 
you accept and honour and protect these great saints 
and scholars for the reason of their selflessness and 
dedication. As such, you yourself a scholar among 
dynamic scholars and knowing what is dearest to you 
and the Maruts, fastest leaders of society, pray give us 
the peace and comfort of perfect well-being. 


अयुंज्न्त इन्द्र विरुवकुष्टीर्विदानासों निष्िधों मर्त्यत्रा । 
मरुतां पृत्सुतिर्हासंमाना स्व्मीव्ठहस्य प्रधनस्य सातौ ॥ २ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 169 769 


2. Ayujranta indra visvakrstir vidanaso nissidho 
martyatra. Marutam prtsutirhasamana svarmi- 
lhasya pradhanasya satau. 


Indra, lord of honour and glory, that dedicated 
force of yours consisting of the Maruts, intelligent, 
creative and war-like leaders among ordinary mortals, 
smiling, happy and joyful, may, we pray, join and engage 
entire humanity in the battle of creative production of 
wealth and well-being for the lord creator of paradisal 
bliss on earth. 


अम्यक्सा त॑ इन्द्र ऋष्टिरस्मे सनेम्यभ्वं मरुतो waar 
अभिश्चिद्धि ष्मातसे शुशुक्वानापो न द्वीपं दध॑ति 
प्रयांसि ॥ ३॥ 


Di Amyak sa ta indra rstirasme sanemyabhvam 
maruto junanti. Agnisciddhi smatase susukva- 
napo na dvipam dadhati prayamsi. 


May the fruits of that loving and generous 
creativity of yours, by which the Maruts create perfect 
joyous gifts of life from pre-existing causes, which gifts, 
like the blazing fire in the wood and waters in the open- 
ended flowing rivers and space, abide in nature, and 
which gifts, then, the living beings enjoy as the dearest 
gifts of life (by virtue of the creative dynamics of the 
Maruts). 


waa sad cf a ओजिष्ठया दक्षिणयेव रातिम्‌। 
स्तुत॑श्च यास्त चकन॑न्त वायोः स्तनं न मध्व॑ः पीपयन्त 
वाजैः usu 

4. Tvam tu na indra tam rayim da ojisthaya 
daksinayeva ratim. StutaSca yaste cakananta 
vayoh stanam na madhvah pipayanta vajaih. 


770 RGVEDA 


Indra, glorious lord of wealth, give us that 
wealth of life as a gift with the highest generosity of 
heart and magnanimity of mind which is honoured by 
the beneficiaries, that wealth and generosity of yours 
and the Maruts’ which all people love, and which, like 
the honey sweet milk of the mother’s breast, nourishes 
the child with food, energy and intelligence. 


त्वे राय॑ इन्द्र तोशत॑माः प्रणेतारः कस्य॑ चिदूतायोः। 
तेषु णो मरुतो मृ्छयन्तु ये स्मां पुरा गातूयन्तीव देवाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Tve raya indra tosatamah pranetarah kasya 
cidrtayoh. Te suno maruto mrlayantu ye sma pura 
gatuyantiva devah. 


Indra, in you and with you abide wealths and 
virtues of the world which are most satisfying saviours 
and redeemers, which help any lover of truth, piety and 
yajna keen to cross the oceans of existence to liberation. 
May the Maruts give us that peace and wealth. May the 
ancient and eternal nobilities eager to rise to divinity 
guide and bless us. 


प्रति प्र याहीन्द्र मीन्न्हुषो नून्महः पार्थिवे सद॑ ने यतस्व | 
अध देषां पृथुबुध्नास एतास्तीर्थे ard: पौँस्यांनि 
तस्थुः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Prati pra yahindra milhuso nrn mahah parthive 


sadane yatasva. Adha yadesam prthubudhnasa 
etastirthe naryah paumsyani tasthuh. 


Indra, lord of power, knowledge and action, go 
forward to the great, virile and generous people, fast, 
intelligent and vibrant as the winds, and try experiments 
on the floor of this great earth. And then, just as the 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 169 771 


powers and transports of the master stand ready at his 
service, so would the mighty and spacious flying 
machines like horses would stand ready for the heroes 
of the skies. 


प्रति घोराणामेतांनामयासां मरुतां शुण्व आयतामुपब्दिः | 
ये मर्त्य पतनायन्तमूमैऋणावानं न पतयन्त सर्गैः ॥ ७॥ 


a Prati ghoranam-etanam-ayasam marutam srnva 
ayatam-upabdih. Ye martyam prtanayan-tamu- 
mairrnavanam na patayanta sargaih. 


I hear the echoes of the roar of awful and 
impetuous Maruts reaching their target and returning— 
Maruts which, with the creation and release of fresh 
energy and modes of protection, exhort and accelerate 
the speed of humanity on way to progress like an army 
advancing to victory. 


त्वं मानेभ्य इन्द्र विश्वजन्या tal मरुद्धिः शुरुधो गोअग्राः | 
स्तवानेभिः स्तवसे देव देवैर्विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam manebhya indra visvajanya rada maru- 
dbhih surudho goagrah. Stavanebhih stavase deva 
devairvidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of light and power, adored by 
admirers of brilliance and generosity, for the sake of 
honour and prestige and in honour of the venerables, 
split and know the sun-light headed powers of nature 
such as waters and herbs with the help of the Maruts, 
catalytic, analytical and universally creative energy 
waves of nature, and let us know and acquire wealth of 
food, energy, onward progress and the breath and 
freshness of life. 


772 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 170 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


न नूनमस्ति नो श्वः कस्तद्वेद Gear । 
अन्यस्य चित्तमभि संचरेण्यमुताधीतं वि न॑श्यति ॥ ९॥ 


il Nanunamasti no svah kastad veda yadadbhu-tam. 
Anyasya cittamabhi samcarenyam-utadhitam vi 
nasyati. 


Nothing that is present is permanent, nor what 
shall be is constant. Who knows what, in truth, is 
mysterious: serial yet constant, and constant yet elusive? 
It is someone else’s mind and consciousness you should 
be with, otherwise what you know or think you know, 
that too would fade into the unknown. 


fe न॑ इन्द्र जिघांससि urett मरुतस्तवं। 
तेभिः कल्पस्व साधुया मा न॑: समरणे वधीः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Kim na indra jighamsasi bhrataro marutastava. 
Tebhih kalpasva sadhuya ma nah samarane 
vadhih. 


Indra, lord of earth and ocean, master of the 
skies, why do you wish to forsake us? The Maruts are 
your brethren, they are heroes of earth and ocean and 
the skies. With them, plan and act with noble intentions. 
Do not destroy us in the battle of life. 


fe नो भ्रातरगस्त्य सखा सन्नति मन्यसे । 
विद्या हिते यथा मनोऽस्मभ्यमिन्न दित्ससि ui ३॥ 


a: Kim no bhrataragastya sakha sannati manyase. 
Vidma hi te yatha mano’smabhyaminna ditsasi. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 170 773 


Brother Agastya, pioneer of vision, insight and 
foresight, you are our friend. Being a friend, why do 
you disdain us? Don’t you want to give us the secret of 
knowing your mind as it is? 


अरं कृण्वन्तु वेदिं समभिमिंनधतां पुरः। 
तत्रामृतस्य चेत॑नं यज्ञं A तनवावहै ॥ ४॥ 


4. Aram krnvantu vedim samagnim-indhatam purah. 
Tatramrtasya cetanam yajnam te tanavavahai. 


Indra, let the priests prepare and decorate the 
vedi and light the holy fire as before. And there in the 
vedi you and we all, teachers and disciples, would 
conduct and expand your yajna of the immortal spirit, 
knowledge and divine consciousness. 


त्वमीशिषे वसुपते agai त्वं पित्राणां मित्रपते ae: । 
इन्द्र त्वं मरुद्धिः सं व॑दस्वाध प्राशान ऋतुथा हवीषि ॥ ५ ॥ 


Tvamisise vasupate vasunam tvam mitranam 
mitrapate dhesthah. Indra tvam marudbhih sam 
vadasvadha prasana rtutha havimsi. 


Indra, spirit of the universe, master of the 
worlds, lord protector of the sustainers of life, highest 
wielder of the wealth of the world, you rule, govern 
and ordain the honour and grandeur of existence. Lord 
protector of friends and friends of life, you rule, govern 
and ordain all the powers and energies that protect, 
preserve and promote the evolution and onward march 
of life and humanity. Lord of knowledge and power, 
speak to the Maruts, dynamic powers of nature and 
humanity, accept our offers of oblations, consume them 
in the yajna fire, and create the life-giving vapours of 


7714 RGVEDA 


energy and showers of rain according to the seasons. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 171 
Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्रति व एना नम॑साहमेमि aed भिक्षे सुमतिं तुराणाम्‌। 
रराणता मरुतो वेद्याथिर्निं gel धत्त वि पुंचध्वम- 
र्वान्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Prati va ena namasadhamemi suktena bhikse 
sumatim turanam. Raranata maruto vedyabhirni 
helo dhatta vi mucadhvam-asvan. 


O Maruts, dynamic powers of nature and 
humanity, bearers of light, knowledge and power, with 
this homage and song of celebration and reverence, I 
come to you and pray for my share of noble thoughts 
and intelligence from the excellent priests and 
preceptors. O dynamic scholars of power and force, and 
of the light of life, keep you anger and passion aside 
and, exulting in the onward march of humanity, release 
the powers of progress by the freedom and initiative 
that comes with knowledge and conscious values of life 
and love. 


एष वः स्तोमो मरुतो नमस्वान्हृदा तष्टो मन॑सा धायि Sar: | 
उपेमा aa मन॑सा जुषाणा यूयं हि st नम॑स॒ इद्‌ 
aera: ॥ २॥ 
ps Esa vah stomo maruto namasvan hrda tasto 
manasa dhayi devah. Upema yata manasa jusana 
yuyam hi stha namasa id vrdhasah. 
O Maruts, vibrations of the divine in nature and 
humanity, this song of celebration and reverence is risen 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 171 175 


from the heart and crafted with love and beauty. O 
visionaries of divinity, take it with the same equal love 
with which it is offered. Take to the spirit of it with 
your heart and mind, come close bearing your gifts of 
life and energy, advance us onward, and stay with us, 
because you are the veterans of eminence and progress 
for the love of living with gifts of divinity. 


स्तुतासो! नो मरुतो मृ्छयन्तूत स्तुतो मघवा शंभ॑विष्ठः । ऊर्ध्वां 
न॑: सन्तु कोम्या वनान्यहानि विश्वां मरुतो जिगीषा ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Stutaso no maruto mrlayantiuta 51/16 maghava 
Sambhavisthah. Urdhva nah santu komya vana- 
nyahani visva maruto jigisa. 

O Maruts, veteran visionaries of life and 
divinity, powers of knowledge for advancement, 
admired and honoured as you are, pray give us peace 
and well-being. Indra, lord of honour and glory, listen 
to our prayer and worship, and bless us with peace and 
prosperity. Maruts, heroes of tempestuous speed and 
energy, let all our future days be distinguished by high 
ambition, cherished goals and love of victory. 


अस्मादहं त॑विषादीष॑माण इन्द्रद्धिया म॑रुतो रेज॑मानः। 
युष्मभ्यं हव्या निशि।तान्यासन्तान्यारे च॑कृमा yoat 
नः॥ ड॥ 


4. Asmadaham tavisadisamana indrad bhiya maruto 
rejamanah. Yusmabhyam havya nisitanyasan 
tanyare cakrma mrlata nah. 

O Maruts, heroes of energy, power and speed, 


shining with strength and power and, at the same time, 
conscious and moved by the awe of this blazing lord 


176 RGVEDA 


Indra and his law, I say, these holy materials of yajna 
are dedicated to you, these weapons and armaments are 
tempered and sharpened for you. We offer these right 
here. Accept these, we pray, and make us happy and 
comfortable with peace and well-being. 


येन मानांसश्चितय॑न्त Set व्युष्टिषु शव॑सा श्वं तीनाम्‌। 
सनो मरुद्धिर्वुषभ श्रवो धा उग्र satu: स्थविरः 
सहोदाः ॥ ५॥ 


2; Yena manasaSscitayanta usra vyustisu Savasa 
sasvatinam. Sa no marudbhirvrsabha sravo dha 
ugra ugrebhih sthavirah sahodah. 


By the strength and courage by which the 
veterans of knowledge and enlightenment instruct and 
educate the ancient and constant citizens of the ancient 
and constant republics in their ancestral habitations, by 
the same strength and courage, O Indra, ruler of the 
land, generous and valorous, bright and blazing, old 
and venerable, giver of strength and constancy, give us 
food, energy, power, and honour with the help of the 
Maruts, mighty and formidable leaders and warriors of 
the land. 


त्वं पाहीन्द्र सहीयसो नृन्भवां मरुद्धिरवयातहेव्ाः । 
सुप्रकेतेभिः सासहिर्दधानो विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ul & ॥ 


6. Tvam pahindra sahiyaso nrn bhava marudbhir- 
avayatahelah. Supraketebhih sasahirdadhano 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of power, honour and glory, ruler of 
the world, patient, constant and victorious, protect and 
promote the men of strength, courage and endurance. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 172 777 


With the help of the Maruts, lustrous guardians and 
watchful protectors of the people, be free from anger 
and disdain of impatience and despair. Wielder of power 
and presiding power of the social order as you are, let 
us have knowledge and enlightenment, strength and 
courage of will and morals, and the light and vision of 
the spirit of life and joy. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 172 
Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


चित्रो वोऽ स्तु यामश्चित्र ऊती सुदानवः | 
मरुतो अहिंभानवः॥ ९॥ 


९ Citro vo’stu yamascitra utt sudanavah. 
Maruto ahibhanavah. 


O Maruts, lights of the dark, breakers of the 
clouds, showers of soothing charities, may your progress 
be fast and wonderful, may your protections and 
promotions of society be wondrous, full of blessings. 


आरे सा a: सुदानवो मरुत ऋञ्जती शरः | 
आरे अश्मा यमस्य॑थ ॥ २॥ 


2. Are sa vah sudanavo maruta rnjati Saruh. 
Are asma yamasyatha. 


O Maruts, courageous brothers of charity, givers 
of bliss and protection like winds and lightning, may 
that missile of yours, which you throw like thunderbolt 
upon the destroyers, and the deadly double edged sword 
you wield against the powers of darkness, be far away 
from us for our protection against evil. 


778 RGVEDA 


तृणस्कन्दस्य नु विः परिं ae सुदानवः | 
areata: कर्तं जीवसे 3 


Trnaskandasya nu visah pari vrnkta sudanavah. 
Urdhvan nah karta jivase. 


Maruts, generous powers of charity and valour, 
spare the and protect men of straw, take to the rural 
settlements and raise us all to the heights of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 173 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


Traces नभन्यं4 यथा area तद्वावृधानं स्व॑र्वत्‌ i rat 
धेनवो बर्हिष्यद॑ब्धा आ यत्सद्यानं दिव्यं विवासान्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ly Gayat sama nabhanyam yatha verarcama tad 
vavrdhanam svarvat. Gavo dhenavo barhisya- 
dabdha a yat sadmanam divyam vivasan. 


Let the holy man sing spontaneous songs of 
joyous Sama like the song of the bird soaring to the 
clouds, and we shall join that resounding melody of 
music overflowing with divine ecstasy, when the rays 
of the dawn, generous like venerable holy cows, sacred 
and inviolable, fill the vault of the sky and celebrate 
the heavenly sun rising in splendour over the world and 
the generous cows stir around the stalls and sit on the 
holy grass around the yajnic area doing homage to Indra. 


अर्चद्‌ वृषा वृष॑धिः स्वेदुंहव्यैर्मगो नाश्नो अति यज्जुगुर्यात्‌ । 
प्र मन्दयुर्मनां dd होता भर॑ते मर्यो मिथुना यज॑त्रः ॥ २॥ 
me Arcad vrsa vrsabhih sveduhavyairmrgo nasno ati 


yajjuguryat. Pra mandayurmanam gurta hota 
bharate maryo muthuna yajatrah. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 173 7719 


Let the brilliant man of yajna, virile and 
generous, trying to reach his aim like a bounding deer 
at the fastest speed, with virile and generous yajakas, 
offer rich, fragrant yajnic offerings, to Indra. Let the 
mortal man, happy at heart with his life partner dedicated 
to yajna and social service, offer hymns of praise and 
fragrant oblations to Indra, lord of life, honour and glory. 


नक्षब्दोता परि cal मिता यन्भरद्र्भमा शरद॑: ufsrea: 1 
क्रन्ददश्वो नय॑मानो रुवद्रौर न्तर्दूतो न रोद॑सी चर द्राक्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


>: Naksaddhota pari sadma mita yan bharad gar- 
bhama saradah prthivyah. Krandadasvo naya- 
mano ruvad gaurantarduto na rodasi carad vak. 


Let the yajakas, Indra, fire and power, divine 
energy, receiver and giver, receive the oblations and rise 
by the vedi constructed in definite design and measure, 
bearing the essences of the earth’s produce the year 
round according to the seasons, and in return replenish 
the earth with fertility. Let the power arise and go over 
spaces roaring like a steed well guided, bellowing like 
a bull, and moving on the rounds like a messenger 
between heaven and earth, echoing the voice of divinity 
raised from the seats of yajna. 


ता कमषिंतरास्यै waiter देवयन्तो भरन्ते । 
जुजोषदिन्द्रो दस्मवर्चा नासत्येव सुग्म्यो रथेष्ठाः ॥ ४॥ 
4. Ta karmasatarasmai pra cyautnani devayanto 


bharante. Jujosadindro dasmavarca nastyeva 
sugmyo rathesthah. 


Those yajnic acts, cherished offerings, and 
mantras vibrating with energy, which the yajakas eager 


780 RGVEDA 


to please and empower the divinities of nature and 
humanity offer into the fire for Indra, may Indra, blazing 
catalytic power of Divinity, happily accessible, riding 
the chariot of sun-beams, along vibrations of the winds 
and waves of energy, receive with love and desire and, 
like the Ashvins, sun and moon, recreate, augment and 
return as blessings of Divinity for humanity. 


तमु ष्टुहीन्द्रं यो ह सत्वा यः शूरो मघवा यो र॑थेष्ठाः। 
प्रतीचश्चिद्योधीं यान्वृष॑ण्वान्ववन्रुष॑श्चित्तम॑सो विहन्ता ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Tamu stuhindram yo ha satva yah suro maghava 
yo rathesthah. Praticascid yodhiyan vrsanvan 
vavavrusascit tamaso vihanta. 


Praise be to Indra, celebrate Him in gratefulness. 
He alone is wholly pure and true. He is mighty and 
omnipotent. His is the power and the glory. He rides 
the chariot of the universe as the sole master. Right in 
front, He is in and with everyone and everything, the 
great fighter, shower of life and joy, and He is the Light, 
dispeller of the darkness that hides the truth. 


प्र यदित्था म॑हिना नृभ्यो अस्त्यरं रोद॑सी Hears नास्यैं। 
सं विव्य इन्द्रो वृजनं न भूमा भर्ति' स्वधाव ओपशमिव 
aris 


6. Pra yadittha mahina nrbhyo astyaram rodasi 
kaksye nasmai. Sam vivya indro vrjanam na 
bhuma bharti svadhavan opasamiva dyam. 


Indra who, thus with His omnipotence, is all in 
all self-sufficient for the sustenance of humanity, who 
keeps the heaven and earth and the middle regions in 
orbit but not for Himself, Indra who weaves the web 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 173 781 


and wields the entire worlds of existence together, each 
as on its own path, and then the mighty lord of His own 
power and Prakrti holds the high heavens up above as 
the pillar in the centre. 


समत्सु war शूर सतामुराणं प्र॑पथिन्त॑ंमं परितंसयध्यै | 
सजोष॑स इन्द्रं मदे क्षोणीः सूरिं चिद्यो अंनुमद॑न्ति वाजः ॥ ७॥ 


ve Samatsu tva Sura satamuranam prapathin- tamam 
paritamsayadhyai. Sajosasa indram made ksonth 
surim cid ye anumadanti vajaih. 


To decorate and honour you as a mighty hero, 
as a pioneer and leader in the battles of life, as the highest 
of the best, O sagely wise Indra, lord omnipotent and 
omniscient, the people of the world, friends, lovers, 
admirers and worshippers in excitement and ecstasy 
celebrate you and the worlds, and celebrate with you, 
with all their might and main and the homage of love 
and faith. 


एवा हि ते शं सव॑ना समुद्र आपो यत्त॑ आसु मद॑न्ति देवीः | 
विश्वां ते अनु जोष्या भूद्‌ गौः सूरींश्चिद्यदि धिषा वेषि 
जनान्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


om Eva hi te Sam savana samudra apo yat ta asu 
madanti devih. Visva te anu josya bhud gauh 
surinscid yadi dhisa vesi janan. 

O Indra, lord ruler of the world, all celebrations 
in your honour and all your celebrations of life and 
existence, thus, are for peace and well-being. Thus all 
waters in the oceans and all celestial waters in space 
and in these earths of the universe which celebrate you 
and rejoice in you are for peace and well-being. And 


782 RGVEDA 


when you inspire sagely people with conscious favours 
and divine intelligence, then all voices of the world in 
unison with you celebrate you and the joy of existence. 


असाम यथां aerara एन स्वधिष्टयो नरां न शंसैः 1 
असद्यथा न इन्द्रो वन्दनेष्ठास्तुरो न क्म नय॑मान 
उक्था॥ ९॥ 


9. Asama yatha susakhaya ena svabhistayo naram 
na samsaih. Asad yatha na indro vandanesthas- 
turo na karma nayamana uktha. 


Lord of knowledge, divine action and human 
progress, guide us the way we may be blest with good 
friends and allies, with noble aims and intentions as 
with good wishes and approbations of the people 
around, and the way that Indra, happy with our praise 
and worship, be with us always, taking us forward in 
action like a carrier rocket in the holy field of science 
and technology. 


विष्पर्धसो नरां न शंसैर स्माकांसदिन्द्रो वज्र॑हस्तः | मित्रायुवो 
न पूर्पतिं सुशिं्टौ मध्यायुव उप॑ शिक्षन्ति यज्ञैः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vispardhaso naram na samsair-asmakasad-indro 
vajrahastah. Mitrayuvo na purpatim susistauma- 
dhyayuva upa Siksanti yajnaih. 


As with the praise and prayers of people trying 
to excel and rise in life, so with our praise and prayers 
may Indra, lord of armaments and the thunderbolt, be 
with us as a friend and guide. Like men with desire for 
friends, and like people of experience at the middle of 
age who serve Indra, lord of the city, with yajnas and sit 
with him for the sake of auspicious learning, we too 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 173 783 


serve the lord with yajnic offerings, meditate and pray 
for learning in the field of science and administration. 


यज्ञो fe Wet कश्चि दून्धजञ्जुहुराणषश्चिन्मन॑सा परियन्‌ । 
तीर्थे नाच्छ तातृषाणमोको दीर्घो न सिध्रमा कुणो- 
त्यध्वां ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yajno hi smendram kascidrndhanjuhuranascin- 
manasa pariyan. Tirthe naccha tatrsanamoko 
dirgho na sidhrama krnotyadhva. 


Some yajna is good for success and glorifies 
Indra, social order of governance and the ruler. A 
tortuous path, though apparently yajnic and good, repels 
the seeker mentally and emotionally. A good home close 
by in a place of pilgrimage is good for the thirsty 
traveller, but a long and tortuous path is no use, it does 
no good toward success. 


Wy Ul इन्द्रात्र पृत्सु देवैरस्ति fe wal ते शुष्मिन्नवयाः | 
महश्चिद्यस्य diag went ह विष्म॑तो मरुतो वन्द॑ते 
गीः॥ १२॥ 


12. Mo su na indratra prtsu devairasti hi sma te 
susminnavayah. Mahascid yasya milhuso yavya 
havismato maruto vandate gith. 


Indra, lord of power and prosperity, you are with 
the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, never 
with the ungenerous. Pray, do not forsake us in the 
battles of life. Lord of light and grandeur, this praise 
and prayer is for you surely, this voice of unifying love 
and faith which celebrates the great, generous, creative, 
philanthropic and dynamic powers of the divine and 
human world is for you. 


784 RGVEDA 


एष स्तोम॑ इन्द्र तुभ्य॑मस्मे एतेन॑ गातुं ह॑रिवो विदो a: 1 आ 
नो ववृत्याः सुविताय देव विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Esa stoma indra tubhyamasme etena gatum 
harivo vido nah. A no vavrtyah suvitaya deva 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, thus our song of 
celebration and prayer is for you. Lord of lightning speed 
and force, by this song know, recognise and accept us 
and our ways of life and conduct. Lord of light, kind 
and generous, come and bless us constantly for our good 
and well-being so that we may be blest with food and 
energy, the right way of living and the inspiring spirit 
of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 174 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


त्वं राजेन्द्र ये च॑ देवा रक्षा नृन्पाह्य॑सुर AREAL! 
त्वं सत्प॑तिर्मघवां नस्तरुत्रस्त्वं सत्यो वस॑वानः सहोदाः ॥ ९॥ 


im Tvam rajendra ye ca deva raksa nrn pahyasura 
tvamasman. Tvam satpatirmaghava nastarutra- 
stvam satyo vasavanah sahodah. 


Indra, lord of light, you are the ruler, lord of life 
and giver of energy. You and those powers and 
personalities that are generous and brilliant in nature 
and humanity protect us and the people. You are the 
protector of truth. You are the lord of wealth and glory 
of the world. You are our saviour, you are the truth of 
existence. You are the shelter and support of all that is. 
You are the strength and the giver of strength and 
constancy. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 174 785 


दनो विशं इन्द्र मृश्चवांचः GH age: शर्म शारंदीर्द॑त्‌। 
ऋणोरपो अनवद्यार्णा यूने qa पुरुकुत्साय रन्धीः ॥ २॥ 


2. Dano visa indra mrdhravacah sapta yat purah 
Sarma saradirdart. Rnorapo anavadyarna yune 
vrtram purukutsaya randhth. 


You subdue and bring under rule the people who 
are violent in social discourse. You open the seven cities 
and the homes therein locked in winter snow. Lord 
adorable free from scandal, you break the cloud for rain 
showers and let the river waters flow for the sunny world 
of young humanity. 


अजा वृत॑ इन्द्र शूरं पलरर््या च येभिः पुरुहूत नूनम्‌। 
रक्षो अगिमशुषं तूर्वयाणं सिंहो न दमे अपांसि वस्तोः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Aja vrta indra surapatnirdyam ca yebhih puru- 
huta nunam. Rakso agnimasusam turvayanam 
sinho na dame apamsi vastoh. 


Immortal Indra, destroyer of suffering, elected 
and invoked by all, surely you drive high up to the lights 
of heaven with the Maruts, tempestuous powers of 
nature and humanity. With the same powers, like a lion, 
pray protect the brave women of the land. Preserve the 
inextinguishable fire that moves high speed vehicles to 
their destination. Keep the morning fires burning and 
let the waters of the home flow on and on. 


शोषन्नु त इन्द्र सस्मिन्योनौ प्रशस्तये पवीरवस्य महा । 
सृजदणस्यिव यद्युधा गास्तिष्ठब्री धृषता मष्ट वाजान्‌ ॥ ठ ॥ 
4. Sesan nu ta indra sasmin yonau prasastaye 


paviravasya mahna. Srjadarnamsyava yad yudha 
gastisthaddhari dhrsata mrsta vajan. 


786 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of war for humanity, for your honour 
and glory, let the enemies fall and go to sleep on the 
battle-field by the awful roar of your thunderbolt, while 
you ride the chariot and release the floods of attack with 
the force of action, destroy the resistance of opposition 
and then hold the lands in peace and security. 


ae कुत्स॑मिन्द्र्‌ यस्मिंञ्चाकन्त्स्युंमन्यू ऋज्रा वातस्याश्वा | 
प्र सूरश्चक्रं वुंहताद्भीकऽ भि स्पृधो यासिषदजर॑ बाहः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Vaha kutsamindra yasminscakan tsyumanyu rjra 
vatasyasva. Pra surascakram brhatadabhike ’bhi 
sprdho yasisad vajrabahuh. 


Indra, lord of world power, wielder of the force 
of thunder, keen for the reins and thirsting for the heart’s 
desire, take up the thunderbolt, ride the horses of the 
winds shooting straight to the target, and go to the battle 
you love to fight. So should the ruler, strong of arm and 
will, blazing as the sun, meet the contending enemies 
in battle and expand the wheel of the social order. 


जघन्वां इन्द्र मित्रेरूञ्चोदप्र॑वृब्दो हरिवो seis प्रये 
पश्य॑ननर्यमणं सचायोस्त्वया शूर्ता वह॑माना अप॑त्यम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Jaghanvan indra mitrerun-codapravrddho harivo 
adasun. Pra ye paSyannaryamanam sacayostvaya 
Surta vahamana apatyam. 


Indra, lord of love and justice, inspired and self- 
exalted, master of horses of the wind, is destroyer of 
the betrayers of friends and selfish exploiters. Lord of 
honour and glory, those who see you as lord of justice 
and generosity and as friend of humanity are blest with 
progeny and family and they are strengthened and 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 174 787 
confirmed as brave and heroic by you. 


रप॑त्कविरिन्द्रा्कसातौ क्षां दासायोपबर्हणीं कः । करत्तिस्रो 
मघवा दानुचित्रा नि दुर्योणे कुय॑वाचं मृधि श्रत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ds Rapat kavirindrarkasatau ksam dasayopabar- 
hanim kah. Karat tisro maghava danucitra ni 
duryone kuyavacam mrdhi Sret. 


In the distribution of food and land, let the man 
of knowledge and insight speak fully and freely, and 
then Indra, lord of land, should allot fertile land to the 
servant class. The lord of wealth and power should fix 
creative and productive duties and occupations for the 
other three, and him who is evil of tongue, he should 
take on in battle of arms or words in the open field. 


सना ता तं इन्द्र नव्या आगुः सहो नभोऽ विरणाय पूर्वीः । 
थिनत्पुरो न भिदो अदेवीर्ननमो वधरदेवस्य पीयोः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sana ta ta indra navya aguh saho nabho’viranaya 
purvih. Bhinat puro na bhido adevirnanamo 
vadharadevasya ptyoh. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, ruler of the 
world, let the latest poets and citizens know and sing of 
your famous acts of valour, justice and generosity with 
universal courage. You have suppressed the old 
established strongholds of violence for the elimination 
of war and establishment of peace. You have broken 
the dens of sin and crime like the citadels of ancient 
demons, and you have destroyed the deadly weapons 
of the terrorist enemies of humanity. 


त्वं धुनिरिन्द्र धुनिंमतील्ऋणोरपः सीरा न स्रव॑न्तीः । 
प्र यत्समुद्रमति शूर पर्षि पारया तुर्वशं यदुं स्वस्ति ॥ ९॥ 


788 RGVEDA 


9. Tvam dhunirindra dhunimatirrnorapah sira na 
sravantih. Pra yat samudramati Sura parsi 
paraya turvasam yadum svasti. 


Indra, lord of life and energy, you are a mover 
and shaker like the inspiration of soma and the speed of 
winds, shaking people out of lethargy and complacency. 
You set the waters aflow, shaking and overflowing the 
banks. Reach the people like roaring streams or like 
life-blood circulating through the veins of wealth and 
work. And, O lord of might and knowledge, if you swell 
the sea to the shores like the sun, then help the man of 
endeavour and the man of self-controlled speed and 
acceleration to cross the sea from shore to shore. 


त्वमस्माकमिन्द्र विश्वध स्या अवृकत॑मो नरां नुपाता। स 
नो विश्वासां स्पृधां deter विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदा- 
नुम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvam-asmakam-indra visvadha sya avrkatamo 
naram nrpata. Sa no visvasam sprdham sahoda 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of power and force, honour and glory, 
justice and generosity, be every way the most giving, 
most protecting and least wolfish greedy ruler of us all. 
And as such, be the giver of strength, courage and 
constancy in all our endeavour for the good life and 
joint competitive and cooperative living so that we are 
blest with food, energy and prosperity, the right path of 
living and the right spirit of life. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 175 789 


Mandala 1/Sukta 175 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


मत्स्यपायि ते महः पात्र॑स्येव हरिवो मत्सरो मदं: | 
वृषा ते वृष्ण इन्दुर्वाजी संहस््रसात॑मः॥ ९॥ 


i, Matsyapayi te mahah patrasyeva harivo matsaro 
madah.Vrsa te vrsna indurvajt sahasrasatamah. 


Indra, lord of energy and paradisal bliss, rejoice. 
You have drunk of the great and exhilarating soma, the 
divinity and ecstasy of life fresh from the very flask of 
existence. Vibrant lord of the knights of horse, that joy 
of the drink of life is exciting, the very thrill of being. 
Lord virile and generous, you are the shower of bliss 
and that soma is soothing like the moon, tempestuous 
as waves of energy, yes, and a thousand-fold invitation 
to live, the call of life, for you. (The call of life is the 
call of existence for the human soul too to be born into 
this wonderful world of beauty, joy and peace.) 


आ न॑स्ते गन्तु मत्सरो वृषा मदो ava: | 
सहाव! इन्द्र सानसिः पुंतनाषाक्छमंर्त्यः ॥ २॥ 

2. A naste gantu matsaro vrsa mado varenyah. 
Sahavan indra sanasih prtanasalamartyah. 


O for a draught of soma, that exciting, ener- 
gising, ecstatic, cherished, strengthening, invigorating 
and immortal nectar of yours, Indra, which leads us on 
to victory over all the antilife forces of the world! May 
it come to us in plenty! 


त्वं हि शूरः सनिता चोदयो मनुषो रथ॑म्‌ । 
सहावान्दस्युंमव्रतमोषः पात्रं न शोचिषा ॥ ३॥ 


790 RGVEDA 


छः Tvam hi surah sanita codayo manuso ratham. 
Sahavan dasyum-avratam-osah patram na socisa. 


Indra, ruler and protector of the world, great you 
are, valiant and generous, dispenser, disposer, giver and 
unifier. Inspire and accelerate the chariot of humanity. 
Heroic and courageous lord of challenges, burn the 
lawless brute with your light and lustre of justice as the 
blaze of fire burns an empty vessel on the hearth 
(because there is nothing in it except its empty self). 


मुषाय सूर्यः कवे चक्रमीशान ओज॑सा। 
वह शुष्णाय वधं कुत्सं वातस्याश्वैः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Musaya suryam kave cakramisana ojasa. 
Vaha susnaya vadham kutsam vatasyasvaih. 


Having taken over the wheel of earth’s 
government with your lustre like the blazing sun, O Lord 
of light, vision and wisdom, wield the thunderous 
sceptre of power and justice with honour and hold the 
system of law and punishment under your control, 
moving on by horses flying on the wings of winds. 


शष्िन्त॑मो हि ते मदो aferda उत od: | 
वृत्रश्ना व॑रिवोविदा' मंसीछा अश्वसातमः ॥ ५॥ 
a Susmintamo hi te mado dyumnintam uta kratuh. 


Vrtraghna varivovida mamsistha asvasatamah. 


Highly strengthening and most reassuring is 
your joy. Holiest and most blissful giver of wealth and 
prosperity is your action and conduct of government 
and administration. O destroyer of suffering and 
darkness, lord of speediest movement and communi- 
cation, giver of peace, freedom and security, think, 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 176 791 


reflect and know the mind and working of others with 
sympathy and self-confidence. 


यथा पूर्वेभ्यो Saal इन्द्र wal garat न तृष्य॑ते बभूथं। 
तामनु, त्वा निविदं जोहवीमि विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदां- 
नुम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yatha purvebhyo jaritrbhya indra maya ivapo na 
trsyate babhutha. Tamuna tva nividam johavimi 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of honour, power and glory, be like 
water to the thirsty. Be like peace and joy incarnate to 
the admirers of eternal knowledge and worshippers of 
the divine virtues of yours. In the tradition of ancient 
knowledge, I honour and celebrate you with this song 
of adoration by which, I hope and pray, we shall realise 
the objects of our heart’s desire, the right path of living 
and the spiritual light of being. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 176 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


मत्सि नो वस्य॑ इष्टय इन्द्रमिन्दो वृषा fast 
ऋघायमाण इन्वसि wana न विन्दसि ॥ ९॥ 


I, Matsi no vasya istaya indramindo vrsa visa. 
Rghayamana invasi Satrumanti na vindasi. 


Indra, lord of justice and peace blissful as the 
moon, rejoice and rise to honour and glory for our 
advancement to higher and higher wealth and power. 
Progressive lord, you advance upon the enemy and 
overpower him and prevent him even from approaching 
us. 


792 RGVEDA 


तस्मिन्ना वेशया गिरो य एकश्चर्षणीनाम्‌ 
अनुं स्वधा यमुप्यते यवं न चर्कुःषद्‌ वृषां ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Tasminna vaSaya giro ya ekascarsaninam. 
Anu svadha yamupyate yavam na carkrsad vrsa. 


Send up your voices of praise and prayer with 
reverence and homage to him who is powerful, 
generous, and unique among men, in whom words bear 
fruit as barley sowed in the field bears fruit, and who 
mows down the enemies as corn is harvested from the 
field. 

यस्य विश्वानि हस्त॑योः ase fart aa 
स्पाशय॑स्व यो अस्पश्ुष्दिव्येवाशनिजंहि॥ ३॥ 


3; Yasya visvani hastayoh panca ksitinam vasu. 
Spasayasva yo asmadhrug-divyevasanirjahi. 


Indra, lord of power and honour, in your hands 
is the wealth of the entire world, wealth of all the five 
classes of people, four of the regular classes, Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and the ancillary class and one 
class of miscellaneous people and professions anywhere. 
Lord of the world, whosoever is jealous of us and evil- 
disposed toward us, take hold of him and, like the 
flashing and blazing lightning, strike him down. 


असुन्वन्तं समं जहि दूणाशं यो न ते wa: 
अस्मभ्य॑मस्य वेदनं ake सूरिश्चिदोहते ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Asunvantam samam jahi dunasam yo na te mayah. 
Asmabhyamasya vedanam daddhi suriscidohate. 


One who is uncreative, unproductive and selfish, 
who is not a source and instrument of peace, comfort 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 176 793 


and joy for you and the society, and one who, being 
such, is difficult to change or eliminate, wipe out wholly 
and finally. Assign him to us, we shall find him and 
deal with him. Only the wise and generous carry the 
burdens of society and the world. 


आवो यस्य॑ द्विबर्हसोऽ केषु, सानुषगसत्‌ | 
आजाविन्द्र॑स्येन्दो प्रावो वाजेषु वाजिनम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


Avo yasya dvibarhaso’rkesu sanusagasat. 
Ajavindrasyendo pravo vajesu vajinam. 


Indra, lord of power, protection and progress, 
protect and promote the man who accords with all the 
praises and appreciations of the nation’s achievement 
and creates and grows in geometric progression. Lord 
of brilliance and bliss like the moon, in the plans and 
projects of Indra, honour and glory, progress and 
development, and in the battles for justice and freedom, 
protect and promote the man of courage, dynamism 
and dedication. 


यथा पूर्वेभ्यो wae इन्द्र मय॑ इवापो न तृष्य॑ते बभूथं। 
तामनु, त्वा निविदं जोहवीमि विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदां- 
नुम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yatha purvebhyo jaritrbhya indra maya ivapo na 
trsyate babhutha. Tamanu tva nividam johavimi 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, ruler of the world, be like water to the 
thirsty, a source of inspiration, incentive and comfort 
to the wise dedicated to the ancient and eternal 
knowledge and to the glory of the nation of humanity 
and divinity. In keeping with that tradition of knowledge 


794 RGVEDA 


and the glory of humanity and divinity, I offer my songs 
and prayers to you so that we may be blest with food 
and energy for body and mind, the right path of living 
and the light of life and spirit divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 177 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ चर्षणिप्रा वुंषभो जनानां राजां कृष्टीनां पुरुहूत 
इन्द्रः । स्तुतः श्र॑वस्यन्नवसोपः मद्रिग्युक्त्वा हरी वृषणा 
यादयर्वाङ्‌ ॥ ९॥ ति 

॥ A carsanipra vrsabho jananam raja krstinam 
puruhuta indrah. Stutah sravasyannavasopa 
madrig yuktva hari vrsana yahyarvan. 


First and foremost power among the people, 
virile and valorous, brilliant ruler of the living world, 
invoked, invited, honoured and worshipped by all, such 
is Indra, lord of honour, power and glory. O generous, 
strong and leading light of life, invoked, invited and 
celebrated as you are by us with song, reverence and 
worship, yoke the horses and come right here for the 
sake of our protection and your own self-fulfilment and 
covenant of Divinity. 


ये ते वृष॑णो वृषभास इन्द्र ब्रह्मयुजो वृष॑रथासो अत्याः । 
at आ fas तेभिरा agate हवामहे त्वा सुत इन्द्र 
सोमे nu 


2. Ye te vrsano vrsabhasa indra brahmayujo 


vrsarathaso atyah. Tan ठ tistha tebhira yahyarvan 
havamahe tva suta indra some. 


Indra, lord of light, energy and the honour of 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 177 795 


action and success, universal ruler and dispenser, come 
in response to our invocation. Ride what are your potent 
and excellent chariots responsive to the mantric word 
of command and control at the remotest distance, come 
with and come by the powers that move faster than even 
light and come here where we pray. The time is ripe, 
the soma is distilled and ready for celebration of the 
success and divine visit. 


आ fas रथं वृष॑णं वृषा। ते सुतः सोमः परिषिक्ता मधूनि | 
युक्त्वा वृष॑भ्यां वृषभ क्षितीनां हरिभ्यां याहि प्रवतोप 
aise ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; A tistha ratham vrsanam vrsa te sutah somah 
parisikta madhuni. Yuktva vrsabhyam vrsabha 
ksitinam haribhyam yahi pravatopa madrik. 


Indra, potent lord of fertility and universal 
generosity, ride your celestial chariot and come. Distilled 
is soma, seasoned and sprinkled with the sweetest honey 
around the vedi, ready for the celebration. O potent and 
generous lord of the people, yoke the two most energetic 
powers of motion to the chariot and come right here to 
us by the shortest route at the fastest speed. 


अयं यज्ञो देवया अयं पियेध॑ इमा ब्रह्यांण्ययमिन्द्र्‌ सोमः । 
स्तीर्ण बर्हिरा तु शक्र प्र यांहि पिवां निषद्य वि मुचा हरीं 
इह ।। ४ ॥ 

4. Ayam yajno devaya ayam miyedha ima brahma- 
nyayamindra somah. Stirnam barhira tu Sakra pra 
yahi piba nisadya vi muca hari iha. 

Indra, generous and powerful lord ruler of the 
world, this is the yajna that leads to divine heights of 


796 RGVEDA 


existential success. This is the yajna that grows by holy 
inputs of fragrant materials. These are the materials and 
mantric formulas of libation. And this is the soma of 
the celebration of success. The vedi is covered round 
with holy grass for seats. Lord of potency and generosity, 
come, release the horses, sit and drink of the soma of 
celebration and success. 


ओ सुष्टुत इन्द्र याद्यर्वाङ्प ब्रह्माणि मान्यस्य॑ cm: | 
विद्याम वस्तोरव॑सा गृणन्तो विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदा- 
नुम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5. O sustuta indra yahyarvanupa brahmani manya- 
sya karoh. Vidyama vastoravasa grnanto vidya- 
mesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of light and life, ruler of the world, 
thus happily invoked and celebrated, come here and 
appreciate the mantric secret and revelations of the artist 
and value the holy materials produced by him so that 
we too, singing songs of thanks and celebration, may 
progress with due protection day by day and be blest 
with food and energy, the right path of living and the 
breath and spirit of life and light divine. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 178 
Indra Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 
ae स्या त॑ इन्द्र श्रुष्टिरस्ति यया aya age ऊती । 
मानः कामं महयन्तमा afasal ते अश्यां प्यापिं 
आयोः॥ ९॥ 
1. Yaddha sya ta indra Srustirasti yaya babhiutha 


Jaritrbhya uti. Ma nah kamam mahayantama dhag 
visva te asyam paryapa ayoh. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 178 797 


Indra, lord of power and protection, all that 
reputable knowledge and wealth of yours by which you 
become the protector and promoter of the celebrants 
may not, we pray, scorch and burn our exalting ambition 
in life. May we, instead, achieve all your blessings of 
life and energy for our existence and progress. 


न घा राजेन्द्र आ Saal या नु स्वसारा कृणव॑न्त योनौ । 
आपश्चिदस्मै सुतुका अवेषन्गमन्न इन्द्रः स॒ख्या वय॑श्च ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Na gha rajendra a dabhanno ya nu svasara 
krnavanta yonau. Apascidasmai sutuka avesan 
gamanna indrah sakhya vayasca. 


May Indra, lord of life, action and success, we 
pray, suppress us not any way, nor negate what our 
sisters achieve in the home or in the yajna on the vedi. 
Instead, let the lord of the world, we pray, make the 
waters of life flow free for us, and let our achievements 
rise high for his sake. May Indra, we pray, bless us with 
health and the good life and grant us the favour of divine 
friendship. 


जेता नृभिरिन्द्रः पृत्सु शूरः श्रोता हवं नाध॑मानस्य कारोः | 
प्रभर्ता रथं aera उपाक उद्यन्ता गिरो यदि च त्मना 
भूत्‌ ।॥ ३ ॥ 


2. Jeta nrbhirindrah prtsu surah srota havam nadha- 
manasya karoh. Prabharta ratham dasusa upaka 
udyanta giro yadi ca tmana bhit. 


Great is Indra, mighty brave, victor in battles of 
life for progress, listener to the artists and scientists, 
demands and requests for grants and success, mover of 
the generous giver’s chariot loaded with gifts and 


798 RGVEDA 


replenishments, and high fructifier of the devotee’s 
prayers provided that everything is prayed for and 
pursued with sincerity of mind and soul. 


एवा नृभिरिन्द्रः सुश्रवस्या Ware: पृक्षो अभि मित्रिणो 
भूत्‌। समर्य इषः wad विवाचि सत्राकरो यज॑मानस्य 
शंसः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Eva nrbhirindrah susravasya prakhadah prkso 
abhi mitrino bhut. samarya isah stavate vivaci 
satrakaro yajamanasya Samsah. 


Thus Indra is great with human resources, lord 
of wealth, honour and high reputation, great consumer 
of materials and thereby producer of high energy, and 
he is always surrounded and assisted by friends and 
associates. In debates and discussions of variety he 
values food and energy as the basic wealth. He is a great 
organiser of sessions of yajnic conferences and 
appreciates and applauds the host of such sessions and 
conferences. 


waa वयं म॑घवन्निन्द्र शत्रंनभि wate महतो aaa 
त्वं त्राता त्वमु नो वृधे भूर्विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


Tvaya vayam maghavannindra Satriu nabhi syama 
mahato manyamanan. Tvam trata tvamu no vrdhe 
bhur-vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Indra, lord of honour, wealth and power, with 
you let us face and overcome our enemies, great and 
highly proud though they believe they are. You are our 
saviour and promoter. You alone, we pray, be here and 
everywhere for our growth and advancement. And with 
you alone, we pray, may we achieve food and energy, 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 179 799 


the right path of living and the breath and spirit of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 179 
Dampati Devata, Lopamudra (1-2) Agastya 
Maitravaruni (3-4), and Agastya disciple Brahmachari 
(5-6) Rshis 


पूर्वीरहं शरद॑: शश्रमाणा दोषा वस्तोरुषसो जरय॑न्तीः। 
मिनाति श्रियं जरिमा तनूनामप्यू नु पलीर्वृष॑णो जगम्युः ॥ ९॥ 


i Purviraham saradah sasramana dosa vasto- 
rusaso jarayantth. Minati Sriyam jarima tanuna- 
mapyu nu patnirvrsano jagamyuh. 


Working for the last many many years from 
dawn through the day until the dark late at night, tired 
and worn out, growing old and older, now old age 
destroys the health and beauty of the body of women. 
Therefore the young and virile husband should meet 
the wife only earlier when she is young and charming. 


ये fake पूर्व ऋतसाप आसंन्त्साकं देवेभिरवंदन्चृतानिं । 
ते चिदवांसुर्नह्यन्त॑मापुः समू नु पलरीर्वृष॑भिर्जगम्युः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Ye ciddhi purva rtasapa asan tsakam deve- 
bhiravadannrtani. Te cidavasurnahyantama-puh 
samu nu patnirvrsabhirjagamyuh. 


Those ancients who were masters and devout 
followers of truth spoke of the laws and truth of nature 
with men of divinity. They did procreate, but they too 
did not find the end of the mystery. Let the women go 
and meet their youthful and virile husbands. 


न मृषां श्रान्तं यदव॑न्ति देवा विश्वा इत्स्पृधो! अभ्य॑श्नवाव | 
जयावेदत्र शतनीथमाजिं यत्सम्यञ्चा मिथुनावभ्यजाव ॥ ३ ॥ 


800 RGVEDA 


छ Na mrsa srantam yadavanti deva visva it sprdho 
abhyasnavava. Jaydvedatra satanithamajim 
yat samyanca mithunavabhyajava. 


The vexations of the household are not vain 
since nature and the divines protect and bless it. Let us 
together face the problems and win the battles of the 
world. We shall win the hundredfold battles if we, the 
wedded couple, were to beget progeny and fulfil our 
duties of the household. 


weed मा रुधतः काम आगंल्ित आजातो अमुतः 
कुत॑श्चित्‌। लोपामुद्रा वृष॑णं नी रिंणाति धीरमधीरा धयति 
रुवसन्त॑म्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Nadasya ma rudhatah kama agannita ajato 
amutah kutascit. Lopamudra vrsanam ni rinati 
dhiramadhira dhayati $vasantam. 


Passion and desire arises in me like the waters 
of a river held up but rising in flood from here, there, 
anywhere, who knows? Hiding but not suppressing the 
passion, the amorous wife betakes to the husband 
breathing deep and calm and smothers him in embrace. 


इमं नु सोममन्तितो हत्सु पीतमुपं gen यत्सीमागश्चकृमा 
तत्सु Wad पुल्दुकामो हि मर्त्यः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Imam nu somamantito hrtsu pitamupa bruve. Yat 
simagascakrma tat su mrlatu pulukamo hi 
martyah. 


I have closely spoken of this soma of ecstatic 
passion from the inner reality of it, drunk and felt as it 
is in the depths of the heart. If I have committed a sin, 
please forbear and forgive. Man after all is subject to 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 180 801 


various passion, and desire (for self-fulfilment), mortal 
as he is. 


अगस्त्यः खन॑मानः खनित्रैः प्रजामपत्यं बलमिच्छमौनः। 
उभौ वर्णावृषिरुग्रः पुपोष सत्या देवेष्वाशिषो जगाम ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Agastyah khanamanah khanitraih prajama- 
patyam balamicchamanah. Ubhau varnavr- 
sirugrah puposa satya devesvasiso jagama. 


Agastya, the sagely man of vision, brilliance and 
resolution never goes astray. Digging into the mysteries 
of life with the instruments of intelligence and insight 
he longs for strength and children and a controlled 
family and community. He marries by choice and looks 
after and promotes the duad, both sexes in the 
community, and thus attains complete self-fulfilment 
among noble people dedicated to truth and Divinity. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 180 
Ashvins Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


युवो रजांसि सुयमासो अश्वा रथो agi पर्यणीसि daa 
हिर ण्ययां at पवयः प्रषायन्मध्वः पिब॑न्ता उषसः 
सचेथे ॥ ९ ॥ 


॥ Yuvo rajamsi suyamaso asva ratho yad vam 
paryarnamsi diyat. Hiranyayad vam pavayah 
prusayan madhvah pibanta usasah sacethe. 


Men and women all, wedded couples, Ashwins, 
when your well controlled and guided horses soar into 
the skies and the chariot shoots over oceans of earth 
and space, your golden wheels cut through the air and 
drip with vapour, then both of you enjoy the honey drink 


802 RGVEDA 
of the lights of dawn. 


युवमत्यस्याव नक्षथो यद्विप॑त्मनो नर्यस्य प्रय॑ज्योः | 
स्वसा agi विश्वगूर्ती भराति वाजायेद्ध मधुपाविषे च॑ i २॥ 


2: Yuvamatyasava naksatho yad vipatmano 
naryasya prayajyoh. Svasa yad vam visvagurti 
bharati vajayette madhupavise ca. 


Ashvins, men and women, universally 
admirable, enjoying the honey sweets of life and nature, 
when you take on to your horse flying over oceans of 
earth and space, so useful for humanity, then the sister 
community applauds you and the world adores you for 
energy, victory and success at the fastest speed. 


युवं ua उस्तरियांयामधत्तं पक्वमामायामव पूर्व्यं गोः | 
अन्तर्यद्वनिनो वाम्रतप्सु ह्वारो न शुचिर्यजते हविष्पांन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


3; Yuvam paya usriyayamadhattam pakvamama- 
yamava purvyam goh. Antaryad vanino vamr- 
tapsu hvaro na Suciryajate havisman. 


Ashvins, truth incarnate, feeding on rectitude 
and law of nature, you create the milk in the cow’s 
udders, you create the milk potential in the maturing 
cow. The sylvan sage, pure at heart, bearing fragrant 
materials like a patient kindly saint offers you homage 
and longs for your company. 


युवं हं घर्म मधुमन्तमत्र॑येऽ पो न क्षोदोऽ वृणीतमेषे | ast 
नरावश्विना पश्व॑डष्टी रथ्येव चक्रा प्रतिं यन्ति मध्व॑ः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yuvam ha gharmam madhumantam-atraye po na 
ksodo’vrnitamese. Tad vam naravasvind pasva- 
istt rathyeva cakra prati yanti madhvah. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 180 803 


Ashvins, leaders of men and women, you 
brighten up the day and create the flow of water 
invigorating as the breath of life, all sweet as honey for 
the man who longs for freedom from three-fold suffering 
of body, mind and soul. And thus the fruits of animal 
husbandry and sericulture, animal wealth and honey 
sweets of nature move on to you as freely as the wheels 
of your chariot. 


आ वां amra ववृतीय cer गोरोहंण dean न Rafa: 1 
अपः Brant स॑चते मार्हिना वां जूर्णो वामक्षुरंहसो यजत्रा ॥ & ॥ 


A vam danaya vavrtiya dasra gorohena taugryo 
na jivrih. Apah ksoni sacate mahina vam jurno 
vam-aksur-amhaso yajatra. 


Ashvins, adorable friends of all, like an old and 
worn out person, like a strong man among the strong, 
by virtue of the gifts of mother earth I come to you for 
the gift of strength and sustenance. By virtue of your 
greatness and generosity the earth has the rain showers. 
Friends and benefactors, let me be free from sin and 
suffering even when I am old and tired and be with you 
for long. 


नि यद्युवेथे fad: सुदानू sd स्वधाभिः सृजथः पुरन्धिम्‌ | 
प्रेषद्वेषद्वातो न सूरिरा महे द॑दे सुव्रतो न वाज॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ni yad yuvethe niyutah sudanu upa svadhabhih 
srjathah purandhim. Presad vesad vato na surira 
mahe dade suvrato na vajam. 


Ashvins, generous givers, when you join the 
materials which ought to be compounded, you create 
new knowledge with inputs into the fire. Let the bold 


804 RGVEDA 


scholar dedicated to the laws of nature and his own vows 
be happy. Let him go round like the winds, and I would 
receive the gift of knowledge, energy and speed for 
advancement and greatness. 


वयं fate वां जरितारः सत्या विपन्यामहे वि पणिर्हिता- 
ar अधां चिद्धि ष्पांश्विनावनिन्द्या पाथो fe ca 
वृषणावन्तिदेवम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


५ Vayam ciddhi vam jaritarah satya vipanyamahe 
vi panirhitavan. Adha ciddhi smasvinavanindya 
patho hi sma vrsanavantidevam. 


Ashvins, ever truthful, beyond calumny, mighty 
and generous, we are your admirers, in fact worshippers. 
We praise you as we praise a scholar among scholars 
who does good to all. And just as you protect and honour 
a scholar among scholars and worship God among 
divines, so may we too serve you and the divinities of 
nature and humanity. 


युवां fates ष्माश्विनावनु द्यून्विरुद्रस्य प्रस््रव॑णस्य सातौ । 
अगस्त्यो नरां नृषु प्रश॑स्तः काराधुनीव चितयत्सहस्रैः US ॥ 


8. Yuvam ciddhi smasvinavanu dyun virudrasya 
prasravanasya sdatau. Agastyo naram nrsu 
prasastah karadhuniva citayat sahasraih. 


O Ashvins, men and women brilliant as sun and 
moon, Agastya, excellent man on the path of virtue, 
highest of the best among people and leaders, every day 
celebrates you exclusively, in matters of the attainment 
of dynamic pranic energies of life in a hundred ways in 
resounding words of universal significance. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 181 805 


प्र यद्वहेथे महिना रथ॑स्य प्र स्य॑न्द्रा याथो मनुषो न होता । 
धत्तं सूरिभ्य॑ उत वा स्वश्व्यं नासंत्या रयिषाचः स्याम ॥ ९ ॥ 


Pra yad vahethe mahina rathasya pra spandra 
yatho manuso na hota. Dhattam suribhya uta va 
svasvyam nasatya rayisacah syama. 


Ashvins, dynamic powers of light, honour and 
prosperity, ever true and vibrating with energy, who 
advance by the might and majesty of your chariot and 
reach far forward like a yajnic hero among humanity, 
bear and bring, we pray, noble wealth and power of horse 
for the brave so that we too may be happy and 
prosperous. 


तं वां रथं वयमद्या gaa स्तोभरण्विना सुविताय नव्य॑म्‌। 
अरिं्टनेपिं परि द्यामियानं विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Tam vam ratham vayamadya huvema stomai- 
rasvina suvitaya navyam. Aristanemim pari 
dyamiyanam vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 
For the sake of peace and well-being and the 
beauty of life, O Ashvins, powers of progress and 
majesty, today we invoke and call for that latest chariot 
of yours which takes us far above the pain and suffering 
of the world and reaches the heights of heavenly light, 
and we pray we may attain food and energy, the right 
path of living and the light and peace of the soul. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 181 
Ashvins Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


कदु प्रे्ठाविषां र॑यीणाम॑ध्वर्यन्ता यदुन्निनीथो अपाम्‌। अयं 
वां यज्ञो अकृत प्रश॑स्तिं वसुधिती अवितारा जनानाम्‌ ९॥ 


806 RGVEDA 


I Kadu presthavisam rayinamadhvaryanta 
yadunninitho apam. Ayam vam yajno akrta 
praSsastim vasudhiti avitara jananam. 

Dearest Ashvins, source and wielders of the 
treasures of wealth, saviours and protectors of humanity, 
ever keen to organise and conduct the yajnic 
development of water, energy and wealth, when you 
advance to the non-violent projects of development, you 
take the results to the heights of success. This yajna 
does honour to you both. 


आ वामश्वांसः शुच॑यः पयस्पा वात॑रंहसो दिव्यासो अत्याः 1 
मनोजुवो वृष॑णो वीतपृष्ठा एह स्वराजो अश्विना 
वहन्तु ॥ २॥ 

pA A vamasvasah sucayah payaspa varatanhaso 
divyaso atyah. Manojuvo vrsano vitaprstha 
eha svarajo asvina vahantu. 


Ashvins, powers of might and majesty, may your 
horses, pure unsullied, living on drink of milk and water, 
moving as winds, brilliant and divine, fast as the speed 
of mind, strong and virile, carriers like the back of the 
earth, brilliant with their own lustre bear you here. 
आ वां रथोऽ वनिर्न प्रवत्वान्त्सृप्रवन्धुरः सुविताय गम्याः। 
वृष्ण॑ः स्थातारा मन॑सो जवीयानर्हपूर्वो य॑जतो धिष्ण्या 
SIU Bu 

2 A vam ratho’vanirna pravatvan tsrprabandhu-rah 
suvitaya gamyah. Vrsnah sthatara manaso 
javiyanahampurvo yajato dhisnya yah. 

Ashvins, benevolent powers of high standing, 
may your chariot firmly rushing on like the earth, 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 181 807 


strongly structured and beautifully adorned, faster than 
mind, fully programmed and self-directed, cooperative 
and inviolably un-interceptible reach us for our good. 


Bee जाता सम॑वावशीतामरेपसां a-ars नाम॑भिः स्वैः। 
जिष्णुवीमन्यः सुम॑खस्य सूरिर्दिवो अन्यः सुभगः पुत्र 
STUY 


4. Theha jata sam-avavaSsitam-arepasa tanva 
namabhih svaih. Jisnur-vamanyah sumakhasya 
surir-divo anyah subhagah putra the. 


Ashvins, pure geniuses unsullied by sin and evil, 
risen to universal recognition here, there, everywhere, 
be ambitious in accordance with your body and your 
own name and character. One of you is ambitious for 
victory and advancement. Another is a mighty scholar, 
a very child of the benevolent light of heaven. And yet 
another is an auspicious favourite of fortune, a saviour 
just like a son. I think and deliberate upon this variety 
and mystery. 


प्र वां निचेरुः ककुहो वशां अनुं पिशङ्करूपः सद॑नानि 
गम्याः । हरीं अन्यस्य॑ पीपयन्त॒ वाजैर्मथ्ना रजांस्यश्विना 
वि घोषैः ।॥ ५॥ 


Pra vam niceruh kakuho vasan anu pisangarupah 
sadanani gamyah. Hari anyasya pipayanta vajair 
mathna rajamsyasvina vi ghosaih 


Ashvins, tempestuous powers like sun-rays and 
winds, one chariot of yours, golden of form, goes round 
conquering the directions of space and reaching the places 
of your choice. The horses of the other shear through 
space churning the air with the force of their speed and 


808 RGVEDA 
fill the world with reverberations of their motion. 


wai शरद्वान्वृषभो न निष्षाट्‌ पूर्वीरिषश्चरति मध्व इष्णन्‌ | 
एवैरन्यस्य पीपयन्त वाजेर्वेष॑न्तीरूर्ध्वा नद्यो न आगुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra vam saradvan vrsabho na nissat purviri- 
sascarati madhva isnan. Evairanyasya pipayanta 
vajair-vesantir-urdhva nadyo na aguh. 


Ashvins, one of you, mighty like the sun, lord 
of the seasons and the year or like the autumn cloud, 
challenging the winds and vapours and loving the all- 
time sweets of earth, travels down with the rays of light 
and plays with the fruits and flowers. The other, 
consuming and growing by the motions and energies 
of another moving like upward streams of fire, brings 
us peace and comfort. 


stat वां स्थविरा वेधसा titatese अश्विना त्रेधा क्षर॑न्ती । 
उपस्तुताववतं नाधंमानं यामन्नयांमज्छणुतं हवं मे ॥ ७॥ 


a Asarji vam sthavira vedhasa girvalhe asvina 
tredha ksaranti. Upastutavavatam nadhama-nam 
yamannayaman-chrnutam havam me. 


Ashvins, most venerable lords of knowledge and 
wisdom, this ancient and expansive song of celebration 
flowing three ways over time for the sake of growth, 
physical, mental and spiritual, has been created in your 
honour. Sung and celebrated sincerely, listen to the voice 
of the celebrant while on the move or not on the move 
and redeem and protect the devotee. 


उत स्या वां रुशंतो वप्स॑सो गीस्त्रिबर्हिषि सद॑सि पिन्वते 
नून्‌। वृषा! वां मेघो वृषणा पीपाय गोर्न सेके मनुषो 
दशस्यन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 182 809 


of Uta sya vam rusato vapsaso gistribarhisi sadasi 
pinvate nrn. Vrsa vam megho vrsana pipaya 
gorna seke manuso daSasyan. 


And that voice celebrating the brilliant and 
charming form of your personality strengthens and 
energises the people performing yajna in the ceremonial 
hall of three sages seated on holy grass. And the same 
voice, holy and generous lords, while it blesses the 
people, may shower you with joy as showers of rain 
from the heavy clouds overflow the surface of the earth 
in the rainy season. 


युवां पूषेवाश्विना पुर॑न्धिर्‌ hrgat न ज॑रते हविष्मान्‌ | 
हवे यद्वां वरिवस्या dort विद्यायेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ९ ॥ 


9. Yuvam pusevasvina purandhir-agnim-usam na 
Jarate havisman. Huve yad vam varivasyd grnano 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Ashvins, powers of light, energy and generosity, 
just as the sun which sustains the world nourishes the 
earth and her children and the yajamana bearing 
oblations does homage to Agni and the Dawn, so does 
the poet bearing the gift of homage serve and celebrate 
you in song. And I, dedicated to you and celebrating 
you, pray that we may be blest with knowledge strength 
and energy and a long and happy life, bountiful and 
generous as you are. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 182 
Ashvins Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 
अभुदिदं वयुनमो षु भुंषता रथो वृष॑ण्वान्मद॑ता मनीषिणः | 
धि यंजिन्वा धिष्ण्यां fasuetag दिवो नपाता सुकृते 
शुचिव्रता ॥ ९॥ 


810 RGVEDA 


ly Abhiudidam vayunamo su bhusata ratho vrsanvan 
madata manisinah. Dhiyanjinva dhisnya vispa- 
lavasu divo napata sukrte sucivrata. 


Men of knowledge and wisdom, honour and 
adore those teachers and scholars and rejoice with them 
who give us this knowledge and create this mighty and 
versatile chariot of ours which is fit for the Ashvins to 
move at the speed of winds and light. They are the agents 
of intellectual and scientific evolution, strong and 
inviolable treasure-givers of health and wealth and 
home, keepers of the light of heaven on earth, and firmly 
committed to the paths of knowledge, action and 
progress along the lines of purity and rectitude. 


इन्द्र॑तमा हि धिष्ण्यां मरुत्त॑मा cen chest रथ्यां र॒थीत॑मा | 
पूर्ण रथं वहेथे मध्व आचितं तेन॑ दाश्वांसमुप याथो 
अश्विना ॥ २॥ 


2: Indratama hi dhisnya maruttama dasra damsistha 
rathya rathitama. Purnam ratham vahethe 
madhva acitam tena dasvamsamupa yatho asvinda. 


Ashvins, noble scholars, teachers and scientists, 
you are the most honourable heroes, most powerful, 
most dynamic and energetic, destroyers of poverty and 
suffering, masters of will and action, creators of chariots 
and the most daring pioneers of progress. You design, 
create and drive the chariot that is perfect and laden 
with the collection of the richest honey sweets of life. 
And with that you come to the man of the chariot and 
say: Take this, go round the worlds, and enjoy. 


किमत्र॑ cen कृणुथः किमासाथे जनो a: कश्चिदह॑विर्म- 
हीयते । afd क्रमिष्टं जुरतं पणेरसुं ज्योतिर्विप्राय कृणुतं 
वचस्यवे 113 ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 182 811 


a Kimatra dasra krnuthah kimasathe jano yah 
kascid-ahavir-mahiyate. Ati kramistam juratam 
panerasum jyotir-vipraya krnutam vacasyave. 


Marvellous Ashvins, brilliant powers of light 
and wisdom, generous preservers of life and destroyers 
of suffering, what are you doing here? Why stay here 
where anyone like nobody, miserly and selfish, non- 
giving, non-sacrificing is honoured and flaunts as great? 
Bypass the bargainer whose vision, judgement and 
pranic vitality is draining. Give light to the noble holy 
man in search of the holy Word and spiritual approval. 


werdauhrd राय॑तः शुनो ह तं मृधो विदथुस्तान्य॑श्विना | 
वाचंवाचं जरितू tied? कृतमुभा शंसं नासत्यावतं 
ममं ।॥ ४॥ 


4. Jambhayatam-abhito rayatah suno hatam mrdho 
vidathus-tanyasvina. Vacam-vacam jaritu 
ratninim krtamubha Samsam nasatyava-tam 
mama. 


Ashvins, crush all round those who bark like 
dogs. Eliminate the wars and war mongers. You know 
them. Richly fructify and reward every word of the 
devotees’ song of praise with the gift of jewels. Lords 
of truth, protect and promote my honour and my song 
of celebration. 


युवमेतं च॑क्रथुः सिन्धुषु प्तवमात्मन्वन्तं पञ्चिणं तौग्याय 
कम्‌। येन॑ देवत्रा मन॑सा निरूहथुः सुपप्तनी पेतथुः श्चोद॑सो 
महः WG 


812 RGVEDA 


4. Yuvametam cakrathuh sindhusu plavam-atman- 
vantam paksinam taugryaya kam. Yena devatra 
manasa niruhathuh supaptani petathuh ksodaso 
mahah. 


Ashvins, scholar of science and technologist of 
marine engineering and aeronautics, both create the safe 
and comfortable winged boat, self-powered and self- 
propelled, moving through and over the seas for the 
strongest man among the strong by which you, noblest 
among the noble people, with your science and skill, 
fly like birds and cross the wide seas. 


stdfaed तौग्र्यमप्स्ववैन्तरनारम्थभणे तम॑सि प्रविंब्दम्‌ । 
चतस्त्रो नावो जठलस्य जुष्टा उदश्विभ्यामिषिताः 
पारयन्ति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Avaviddham taugryam-apsvantar-narambhane 
tamasi praviddham. Catasro navo jathalasya justa 
udasvibhyam-isitah parayanti. 


Confined, surrounded and plunged in 
impenetrable darkness is the team of the mighty marine 
force. Four boats powered and driven by the Ashvins 
assigned for the mid-ocean operation rescue the team 
and safely bring it ashore. 


कः Raa वृक्षो निष्ठितो मध्ये अर्ण॑सो यं तौग्र्यो नाधितः 
पर्यषस्वजत्‌ | पणां मृगस्य पतरोरिवारभ उद॑श्विना ऊहथुः 
श्रोम॑ताय कम्‌॥ ७॥ 


7. Kah svid vrkso nisthito madhye arnaso yam 
taugryo nadhitah paryasasvajat. Parna mrgasya 
patarorivarabha udasvina uhathuh sromataya 
kam. 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 183 813 


Ashvins, pilots of the sea and sky, what sort of 
tree, post, is that standing in the midst of the deep sea 
to which the powerful but afflicted marine team holds 
on? What sailing and flying machine is that which like 
the wings of a soaring bird you work up and down for 
your honour and glory? 


तद्वां नरा नासत्यावनु ष्याद्यद्वां मानास उचथमवों चन्‌ । 
अस्मादद्य सद॑सः सोम्यादा विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


Tad vam nara nasatyavanu syad yad vam manasa 
ucatham-avocan. Asmadadya sadasah somyada 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Ashvins, leaders of light ever committed to truth 
and shunning untruth, whatever words of appreciation 
and celebration venerable people have said in your 
honour, may all that be auspicious to you, being true to 
your character and performance. And may we today 
from this yajnic hall of joy and bliss receive and carry 
away food and energy to our heart’s desire, knowledge 
and strength to live along the right path, and the breath 
and life of the mind and spirit. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 183 

Ashvins Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 
तं युञ्जाथां मन॑सो यो जवींयान्‌ त्रिवन्धुरो वुंषणा 
यस्त्रिचक्रः | येनोपयाथः सुकृतो दुरोणं त्रिधातुना पतथो 
fast पर्णौः॥ ९॥ 

1, Tam yunjatham manaso yo javiyan tribandhuro 
vrsana yastricakrah. Yenopayathah sukrto duro- 
nam tridhatuna patatho virna parnaih. 


814 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, mighty generous visionaries of 
science, technology and psychology, take to three-metal, 
three-turbine and three-stage chariot faster than the 
speed of mind by which you reach the house of sukrit 
Tvashta, holy designer and maker of chariots, 
armaments, implements and instruments, flying with 
wings like birds. 


(This is a mantra of various possibilities of 
interpretation in the context of Physics, Astrophysics, 
Aeronautics, Medicine and Meditation. The meaning, 
can be ‘seen’ and realised by an expert who would be 
of the order of a Rshi, a visionary of the dynamics of 
Nature in his own field, and better in the unified field 
of comprehensive reality.) 


सुवृद्रथो! वर्तते यन्नभि at यत्ति थः क्रतुमन्तानु पृक्षे | 
वपुर्वपुष्या सचतामियं गीर्दिवो दुहित्रोषसा सचेथे ॥ २॥ 


2. Suvrd ratho vartate yannabhi ksam yat tisthathah 
kratumanta nu prkse. Vapurvapusya sacatamiyam 
girdivo duhitrosasa sacethe. 


Ashvins, committed explorers in search of 
fragrance for your yajnic inputs, the chariot you ride is 
firmly wheeled and revolves round and round 
approaching the earth. Believe this message of mine, 
an exact description of your form in words: you look 
like the dawn, child of the sun on the rise descending 
over the earth. 


आ तिंछतं सुवृतं यो रथो ard व्रतानि वर्त॑ते हविष्मान्‌ | 
येन॑ नरा नासत्येषयध्यै वर्तिर्याथस्तन॑याय त्मने च ।॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 183 815 


a A tisthatam suvrtam yo ratho vamanu vratani 
vartate havisman. Yena nara nasatyesayadhyai 
vartiryathastanayaya tmane ca. 


Ashvins, leaders of humanity, committed to truth 
and exploration, well-structured, loved and accepted is 
the chariot you ride in pursuance of your vows of 
commitment and discipline which is richly loaded with 
wealth for the good life and by which go you over your 
path of exploration and come back home to inspire and 
fulfil the ambitions of humanity for themselves and for 
their children. 


मा वां वृको मा वृकीरा दधर्षीन्मा परि वक्तमुत माति धक्तम्‌। 
अयं वां भागो निहित इयं गीर्दस्राविमे वां निधयो 
मधूनाम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Ma vam vrko ma vrkira dadharsin ma pari var- 
ktamuta mati dhaktam. Ayam vam bhago nihita 
iyam girdasravime vam nidhayo madhunam. 


Let no wolfish thief or selfish devourer, man or 
woman, dare to challenge you or terrorise you off from 
your course. Destroyers of suffering and generous 
preservers of life, forsake us not, nor destroy us. This is 
your share set apart in reserve in homage. This is the 
voice of celebration in homage and gratitude. These are 
your treasures of honey sweets of honour and glory. 


युवां गोत॑मः Gedioet अत्रिर्दस्रा हवतेऽ aa हविष्मान्‌ । 
दिशं न दिष्टामुंजूयेव यन्ता मे हवं नासत्योप यातम्‌ WG 

Yuvam gotamah purumilho atrirdasra havate’ 
vase havisman. Disam na distamrjuyeva yanta me 
havam nasatyopa yatam. 


816 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, destroyers of want and suffering, 
preservers of health and happiness, lovers of truth and 
science, teachers, guides and philosophers, Gotama, the 
man of knowledge and wisdom, Purumeedha, the man 
blest with prosperity, and Atri, the progressive man free 
from threefold pain, invokes you with offerings of 
homage and oblations for the sake of protection and 
progress. Come and accept my homage too like leaders 
going and leading in the direction of truth marked as 
destination of nature and law. 


अतारिष्य aden प्रति वां स्तोमो! अणश्विनावधायि। 
एह यातं पथिभिवर्देवयानै विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Atarisma tamasas-paramasya prati vam stomo 
asvinavadhayi. Eha yatam pathibhir-devayanair- 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Ashvins, let us swim across this darkness of 
ignorance and suffering of the world. So we bear and 
offer this song of celebration and gratitude to you in 
homage. Come to us here by the paths of divinity so 
that by your guidance and leadership we may be blest 
with food and energy, path of rectitude and breeze of 
health and the good life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 184 
Ashvins Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 
ता alae तावपरं हविमो च्छन्त्यामुषसि वरधिरुक्थेः । 
नास॑त्या कुहं चित्सन्तावर्यो दिवो नपाता सुदास्तराय ॥ ९ ॥ 


Le Ta vamadya tavaparam huvemocchantyamusasi 
vahnirukthaih. Nasatya kuha cit santavaryo divo 
napata sudastaraya. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 184 817 


Ashvins, infallible children of the light of 
heaven, committed to the law of truth and right, today 
and also later we invoke and invite you both at the rise 
of the glorious dawn with songs of adoration. The fire 
is lit, the songs are sung. Wherever you be, come like 
the waves of light-rays to bless the man of masterly 
business and noble charity. 


अस्मे ऊषु door मादयेथामुत्यणीर्हितमूर््या मद॑न्ता | श्रुतं 
मे अच्छोक्तिभिरर्पतीनायेष्टा नरा निचेतारा च कर्णैः ॥ २॥ 


2. Asme iu su vrsana madayethamut paninrhatam- 
urmya madanta. Srutam me acchoktibhir- 
matinam-esta nara nicetara ca karnaih. 


Ashvins, mighty generous, leading lights of 
humanity, unfailing givers of knowledge, enjoy with 
rest and peace of the night in the revolving wheel of 
time with the fluctuations of existence. Rejoice with 
the celebrant for our sake and eliminate the miserliness 
of the petty trader. Loved and adored by people with 
noble words of adoration, listen to my prayers with 
attentive and sympathetic ears. 


fra पूषन्निषुकृतेव देवा arden वहतुं सूर्यायां: । वच्यन्ते 
वां ककुहा अप्सु जाता युगा Buta वरुणस्य भूरेः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Sriye pusannisukrteva deva nasatya vahatum 
suryayah. Vacyante vam kakuha apsu jata yuga 
jurneva varunasya bhureh. 


Ashvins, brilliant and generous givers of light 
and knowledge, strength and energy, dedicated to truth, 
in order to carry the light of the dawn, daughter of the 
sun, for the beauty and grace of the earth, your eminent 


818 RGVEDA 


carriers born of the waves and vapours of space, flying 
like arrows of light, are admired like the great and 
ancient horses of Varuna, born of the ocean of eternity. 
अस्मे सा वां माध्वी रातिरस्तु स्तोमं हिनोतं मान्यस्य॑ कारोः। 
अनु यद्वां श्रवस्यां सुदानू सुवीयीय चर्षणयो मद॑न्ति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Asme sa vam madhvi ratirastu stomam hinotam 
manyasya karoh. Anu yad vam Sravasya sudanu 
suviryaya carsanayo madaniti. 


Ashvins, givers of light and knowledge, may 
that generosity with all its gifts be sweet as honey to us. 
Receive and accept the song of celebration created by 
the venerable poet, O lords of generosity, since all people 
in search of honour and valour enjoy and celebrate life 
in accordance and harmony with your life and culture. 


एष वां स्तोमो! अश्विनावकारि मानेभिर्मघवाना सुवृक्ति | 
यातं वर्तिस्तन॑याय त्मने चागस्त्ये नासत्या मद॑न्ता ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Esa vam stomo asvinavakari manebhirmagha- 
vana suvrkti. Yatam vartistanaydaya tmane caga- 
stye nasatya madanta. 


Ashvins, lords of honour, valour and generosity, 
this is the worshipful song of homage and celebration 
created and presented by the dedicated devotees revered 
in society. Committed to the law of truth and rectitude, 
go on by the inviolable path of truth and right for 
yourself and the children, enjoying the beauty and 
ecstasy of life. 


अर्तारिष्य aden प्रति वां स्तोमो! अणश्विनावधायि। 
एह यातं पथिभिर्देवयानैर्विंद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 185 819 


6. Atarisma tamasasparamasya prati vam stomo 
asvinavadhayi. Eha yatam pathibhirdevayanair- 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Ashvins, lords of light and love, let us swim 
across this darkness and ignorance to light and 
knowledge. Hence this song of adoration is sung in 
homage to you. Come to us here by the paths of divinity 
and we would be blest with food for life, the right path 
and the light of Divinity to swim across to Eternity. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 185 
Dyavaprthivi Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


कतरा पूवीं कतराप॑रायोः कथा जाते कवयः को वि ae 1 
विश्वं त्मनां बिभृतो ag नाम वि वर्तेते अहनी चक्ि- 
येंव।॥ ९॥ 


1. Katara purva kataraparayoh katha jate kavayah 
ko vi veda. Visvam tmana bibhrto yaddha nama 
vi vartete ahani cakriyeva. 


Of the two, heaven and earth, which comes first? 
Which follows later? How were they born? O men wise 
and bold, who knows all this? Verily they hold this entire 
universe as it is by themselves and go round and round 
like days and nights as parts of a wheel. Answer: Ka, 
He the Lord Supreme, knows. 


भूरिं दे अचरन्ती चर॑न्तं used गर्भमपदी care | नित्यं न 
सूनुं पित्रोरुपस्थे द्यावा रक्ष॑तं पृथिवी नो अभ्वात्‌ 2 
2. Bhurim dve acaranti carantam padvantam 


garbhamapadi dadhate. Nityam na sunum 
pitrorupasthe dyava raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


820 RGVEDA 


The two, heaven and earth, undeviating from 
their nature, character, law and action, and keeping to 
their course without moving on legs, bear, nourish and 
sustain like a foetus this great, moving world of humans 
and animals. May the heaven and earth always protect 
us from sin and evil like a child in the lap of parents. 


अनेहो दात्रमदिं तेरनर्वं हुवे स्वर्वदवधं नम॑स्वत्‌ | तद्रोदसी 
जनयतं जरित्रे द्यावा रक्ष॑तं पृथिवी नो अभ्वांत्‌॥ ३॥ 


3 Aneho datramaditeranarvam huve svarvadava- 
dham namasvat. Tad rodasi janayatam jaritre 
dyava raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


I invoke Mother Nature’s boundless generosity 
and pray for her pure and sinless gift of inviolable, 
brilliant and blissful, indestructible and reverential 
abundance of wealth of mind and material which, I 
crave, may heaven and earth create for the mother’s 
adoring child. And, I pray, may the heaven and earth 
save us from the violence and monstrosity of a life of 
materialism and sinful opulence. 


stam अवसावन्ती अनुं ष्याम रोद॑सी देवपुत्रे 1 उभे 
देवानामुभयेभिरद्ां द्यावा रक्ष॑तं पृथिवी नो अभ्वात्‌ ॥  ॥ 


4. Atapyamane avasavanti anu syama rodast 
devaputre. Ubhe devanamubhayebhirahnam 
dyava raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


Free from sufferance, causing no pain, 
protective by inbuilt safeguards, both heaven and earth, 
children of Divinity and mothers of divinities, may, we 
pray, protect the noble powers of nature and humanity 
day and night along with all that is moving and non- 


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 185 821 


moving in existence. Let us be in harmony with them 
and may they be good to us. May heaven and earth, we 
pray, protect us from the ravages of nature and worldly 
misfortune. 


संगच्छमाने युवती सम॑न्ते crak जामी पित्रोरूपस्थें। 
अथिलिघ्रन्ती भुव॑नस्य नाधिं द्यावा रक्षतं पृथिवी नो 
अभ्वांत्‌॥ ५५ ॥ 


Samgacchamane yuvati samante svasara jami 
pitrorupasthe. Abhijighranti bhuvanasya nabhim 
dyava raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


Heaven and earth, going together, ever youthful, 
contiguous and simultaneous like twin sisters, coexistent 
and cooperative, nestled in the lap of mother Nature 
and Father Supreme of existence, taste the fragrance of 
the omnipresent contrehold of the universe. May the 
heaven and earth protect us from the sin of falling off 
from that all-pervasive fragrance of the Divine Presence. 


उर्वीं सद॑नी बह ती ऋतेन॑ हुवे देवानामवसा जनित्री । दधाते 
ये अमृतं सुप्रतीके द्यावा रक्ष॑तं पृथिवी नो अभ्वात्‌ & ॥ 


6. Urvi sadmani brhati rtena huve devanamavasa 
janitri. Dadhate ye amrtam supratike dyava 
raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


I invoke and celebrate in song the grand and 
vast heaven and earth, mother sustainers and shelter 
homes of the brilliant and generous divinities of nature 
and humanity with protection and the truth of universal 
law. Beautiful of form, they bear the nectar sweets of 
water and energy for life. May the heaven and earth 
save us from the sin of filial ingratitude. 


822 RGVEDA 


उर्वी पृथ्वी बहुले दूरेअन्ते sd qa नम॑सा aa अस्मिन्‌ । 
दधाते ये सुभगे सुप्रतूर्ती द्यावा रक्ष॑तं पृथिवी नो 
अभ्वांत्‌॥ ७॥ 


7. Urvi prthvi bahule dure-ante upa bruve namasa 
yajne asmin. Dadhdate ye subhage supraturti 
dyava raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


I invoke and adore the mighty heaven and earth, 
abundant and boundless far and wide, and sing in praise 
of them in this yajna of life with humility and offerings 
of fragrant oblations. Generous and overflowing with 
wealth and good fortune, bright and beatific in form 
and progress, they nourish and sustain the entire world 
of living beings. May the heaven and earth save me 
from the sin of sloth, greed and selfishness. 


देवान्वा aH कच्चिदागः Cae वा सदमिज्जास्पतिं 
वा। इयं धीर्भूया अवयानमेषां द्यावा रक्ष॑तं पृथिवी नो 
अभ्वांत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Devan va yaccakrma kaccidagah sakhayam va 
sadamijjaspatim va. Iyam dhirbhuya avayana- 
mesam dyava raksatam prthivi no abhvat. 


If we commit a sin to the generosities of nature 
by violence to the environment, or do an insult to the 
wise and brilliant people, or offend a friend, or ever 
violate the sanctity of a woman or dishonour her 
husband, then may this mind and intelligence of ours 
be the corrective and preventive antidote to such evil 
conduct. May heaven and earth give us good sense and 
save us from sin against nature and humanity. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 185 823 


उभा शंसा नयां माम॑विष्टामुभे मामूती अव॑सा सचेताम्‌ | 
भूरिं चिदर्यः सुदास्त॑रायेषा मद॑न्त इषयेम देवाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Ubha samsa narya mamavistamubhe mamiuti 
avasa sacetam. Bhuri cidaryah sudastarayesa 
madanta isayema devah. 


Both heaven and earth as father and mother, both 
adorable and kind to humanity, save me. Both, protective 
and preventive, be with me with all protections and 
security. O divinities of nature and humanity noble men 
and women who command the business of life and 
living, be amply generous to the man of charity and 
broad-mindedness, and may we all, rejoicing with food 
and energy in abundance, be blest with self-fulfilment. 


ऋतं दिवे तद॑वोचं पृथिव्या अंभिश्रावायं प्रथमं सुमेधाः | 
पाताम॑वद्याद्ुरि ताद्‌भीके पिता माता च॑ रक्षता- 
मवोधिः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Rtam dive tadavocam prthivya abhisravaya pra- 
thamam sumedhah. Patamavadyad duritadabhike 
pita mata ca raksatamavobhih. 


Blest with noble intelligence by heaven and 
earth, I pray I may speak the original Word of Truth and 
Divinity in honour of heaven and earth for the noble 
listener. May the heaven and earth, and father and 
mother, both loving and kind, both ever close-by, save 
me from calumny sin and evil and protect and promote 
me with their care, favour and kindness. 


इद द्यावापृथिवी waned पित्मातिर्यदिहोपंन्रुवे वा॑म्‌। 
भूतं देवानामवमे अवोभिर्विंद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ९९ ॥ 


824 RGVEDA 


11. Idam dyavaprthivi satyamastu pitarmatarya- 
dihopabruve vam. Bhutam devanamavame 
avobhirvidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


May this word and voice of mine, O heaven and 
earth, be true. O father and mother, may this word that 
I speak in this yajna of celebration be true and fruitful. 
O divinities, be ever close to the nobilities of humanity 
in their business of life with favours and protections. 
And may we, we pray, be blest with food and energy of 
body, mind and soul, move ahead on the right path, and 
enjoy the breeze of life and the bliss of Divinity. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 186 
Visavedeva Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ न sattufded सुशस्ति विश्वानरः सविता देव एतु। 
अपि यथां युवानो मत्स॑था नो विश्वं जगदभिपित्वे 
मंनीषा।॥ ९॥ 


Le Ana ilabhirvidathe susasti visvanarah savita deva 
etu. Api yatha yuvano matsatha no visvam 
jagadabhipitve manisa. 


May Savita, self-refulgent lord giver of life and 
light, universal guide, ever adorable and adored, come 
and bless us in our yajnic performance of life with all 
the gifts of food, energy and vision of the eternal Word 
of knowledge and Divinity, so that, O youth of the world 
and youthful energies of Nature, you too may join us in 
our open-door yajna, rejoice with us and, with your 
conscious intelligence and wisdom, make the whole 
world rejoice. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 186 825 


आ नो fava आस्क्रा गमन्तु देवा पित्रो अर्यमा वरुणः 
सजोषा: । भुवन्यथा नो विश्वे वृधासः करन्त्सुषाहां विधुरं 
न शव॑ः ॥ २॥ 


2. A no visva askra gamantu deva mitro aryama 
varunah sajosah. Bhuvan yatha no visve vrdhasah 
karantsusaha vithuram na Ssavah. 


Let all the divine powers of brilliance and 
generosity in the world, preservers of life against 
destruction, come to us. May Mitra, lord and friend of 
life and humanity, Aryama, lord and spirit of justice, 
and Varuna, lord supreme cherished of all, with love in 
unison for all come together so that they may be our 
preservers and promoters and, enduring and 
unchallengeable as they are, our courage and power no 
one may be able to destroy. 


प्रेष्ठं at अतिथिं गृणीषेऽ शिं शस्तिभिंस्तुर्वणि।: सजोषा: | 
असद्यथा नो वरुणः सुकीर्तिरिष॑श्च पर्षदरिगृर्तः सूरिः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Prestham vo athithim grnise’gnim Sastibhistur- 
vanih sajosah. Asad yatha no varunah sukirtir- 
isasca parsadarigurtah surih. 


With songs of adoration I invoke and celebrate 
Agni, universal and dynamic lord of power, heat, light 
and knowledge, dearest of all, loving and friendly, 
honourably welcome like a distinguished visitor and 
guest, so that Varuna, lord supreme of universal choice, 
bright and brave, destroyer of hate and enmity, be 
celebrated in action with honour and glory and bring us 
showers of wealth and food and energy for our body, 
mind and soul. 


826 RGVEDA 


उप॑ व एषे नम॑सा जिगीषोषासानक्ता सुदुघेव धेनुः । समाने 
अहन्विमिमानो अर्कं विषुरूपे पय॑सि सस्यिन्रुध॑न्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Upa va ese namasa jigisosasanakta sudugheva 
dhenuh. Samane ahan vimimano arkam visurupe 
payasi sasminnudhan. 


O divinities of earth and humanity, generous 
powers of nature, I come to you with homage and 
offerings of food and with the desire for victory day 
and night as the generous earth does homage to the sun 
every day constantly, praying for light and seeing in the 
multiform and multicolour waters of the sky various 
kinds of wealth like all kinds of wealth and nourishment 
in the milk contained in the cow’s udders. 


उत नोऽ दि्बुध्न्यो ३ मयस्कः शिशुं न पिप्युषीव वेति सिन्धुः । 
येन नपातमपां जुनाम मनोजुवो वृष॑णो यं वहन्ति ॥५॥ 


= Uta no’hirbudhnyo mayaskah Ssisum na pipyusiva 
veti sindhuh.Yena napadtamapam junama 
manojuvo vrsano yam vahanti. 


And let the cloud of the sky do us good. The 
river flows for us like the mother’s milk for the baby. 
Let us then control and bind the rain storm and the river 
flow, grand child of the spatial waters, which the 
lightning energies fast as mind bring to us, by which 
then we may produce and use heat and electric energy, 
child of earthly waters. 


उत न॑ ई त्वष्टागन्त्वच्छा स्मत्सूरिभिरभिपित्वे सजोषाः । 
आ वत्रहेन्द्र॑श्चर्षणिप्रास्तुविष्टमो नरां न॑ इह ग॑म्याः ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 186 827 


6. Uta na im tvasta gantvaccha smat suribhira- 


bhipitve sajosah. A vrtrahendrascarsanipra- 
stuvistamo naram na iha gamyah. 


May Twashta, divine creator of forms and maker 
of instruments, tools and implements, and chariots, dams 
and controls come well and enthusiastically with other 
sages and scholars, loving and kind, and bring us waters 
of various forms. Let Indra, breaker of the clouds, leader 
of men and fastest power of action come and bless this 
noble and joint yajnic project of all together among the 
people of the world. 


उत न॑ ई मतयोऽश्वयोगाः शिशुं न गावस्तरुणं रिहन्ति | 
तमीं गिरो जन॑यो न ceil: सुरभिष्टमं नरां न॑सन्त ॥ ७॥ 


a Uta na im matayo’svayogah sisum na gavasta- 
runam rihanti. Tamim giro janayo na patnith 
surabhistamam naram nasanta. 


All our people, masters of thought at high speed 
and knights of horse, all our love and understanding, 
honour and esteem, devotion and prayers, determination 
and resolutions centre round this youthful ruler, Indra, 
most fragrantly lovable among men, as cows love and 
caress a tender calf, and all our words of praise and 
appreciation concentrate or him in the hope of progress 
as husbands concentrate on the love of the wives 
yearning for progeny. 


उत न॑ ई ned! वृन्दसेनाः स्मद्रोदसी सम॑नसः सदन्तु । 
पृष॑दश्वासो ऽ वनयो न रथा रिशादसो मित्रयुजो न 
देवाः ॥ ८. ॥ 


828 RGVEDA 


8. Uta na im maruto vrddhasenah smad rodasi 
samanasah sadantu. Prsadasvaso’vanayo na 
ratha risadaso mitrayujo na devah. 


Just as winds carry waters of the skies, so may 
the Maruts, tempestuous young warriors of a high united 
mind, equipped with mighty fighting forces, be ours 
and enthusiastically reach over earth and heaven for 
us. And let these warriors of strong and varied horse, 
riding chariots like commanders of the defence of the 
earths, destroyers of hate and enmity, brilliant friends 
of friends and the loving, be noble and generous to us 
all. 


प्रनु सदेषां महिना चिकित्र प्र युञ्जते प्रयुजस्ते UAH | 
अध यदेषां सुदिने न शरुर्विश्वमेरिणं प्रुषायन्त सेनां: ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Pra nu yadesam mahina cikitre pra yunjate 


paryujaste suvrkti. Adha yadesam sudine na 
Sarurvisvamerinam prusayanta senah. 


When with their greatness and grandeur and 
dexterity they focus on the target and concentrate and 
use their forces, then their forces like a missile at the 
most strategic time burn off the entire tyranny of the 
world and shower the rain of bliss on the desert lands. 


प्रो अश्विनाववसे कृणुध्वं प्र पूषणं स्वत॑वसो हि सन्ति । 
अद्वेषो विष्णुर्वात ऋभुश्चा अच्छा सुम्नाय ववृतीय 
देवान्‌ ॥ Qo 

10. Pro aSsvinavavase krnudhvam pra pusanam 


svatavaso hi santi. Adveso visnurvata rbhuksa 
Accha sumnaya vavrtiya devan. 


All ye men and women of the world, for the 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 186 829 


sake of all round protection and advancement, take to, 
serve and honour the Ashvins, powers that give and take, 
teach and test. Take to, honour and value, and worship 
Pusha, agents of nourishment and growth. Self-potent 
are the divinities of nature and humanity, all free from 
hate and enmity, Vishnu, all-pervasive spirit of the 
universe, Vayu, universal breath of the living world, 
Rbhuksha, Indra, universal ruling lord of power, 
intelligence and expertise, and knowledge. Let us all, 
you and I, elect, select, choose, appoint, honour and 
consecrate our powers of humanity and divinity well 
for the sake of common good. 


इयं सा alt अस्मे Afetfacisat अपिप्राणी च सद॑नी च 
भूयाः । नि या देवेषु यत॑ते वसुयुर्विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीर- 
दानुम्‌।॥ ९९॥ 


11. व sa vo asme didhitiryajatra apiprani ca 
sadani ca bhuyah. Ni ya devesu yatate vasuyur- 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


O divinities and devotees of yajna and yajnic 
action, that brilliance and generosity of yours which is 
the treasure source of wealth for the world, which shines 
in and among the powers of divinity and which inspires 
the breath and power of life and living and creates the 
peace and prosperity of the home and family may, we 
pray, be ours too so that we may be happy, blest with 
food and energy for life, the path of rectitude and the 
gift of a long, healthy and dedicated life. 


830 RGVEDA 


Mandala 1/Sukta 187 
Oshadhis Annam Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


fad 4 स्तोषं महो धर्माणं तविंषीम्‌। 
यस्य॑ त्रितो व्योज॑सा qa विपंर्वमर्दय॑त्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


ly Pitum nu stosam maho dharmanam tavisim. 
Yasya trito vyojasa vrtram viparvam-ardayat. 


Constantly do I honour and adore food and 
energy, fuel of life and instruments of the observance 
of Dharma, and the source of strength, power and 
courage, by the force and splendour of which Indra, 
mighty energy of sun and electricity, breaks the cloud 
to the last drop of condensed vapour, and by which the 
man of power and courage too, with the exercise of 
thought, word and deed, acquires cherished wealth 
complete in every aspect of value. 


स्वादो पितो मधो! पितो वयं cal ववृमहे। 
अस्माकमविता भ॑व ॥ २॥ 


2 Svado pito madho pito vayam tva vavrmahe. 
Asmakamavita bhava. 


O the food of life! O the drink for life! Delicious 
are you! Honey sweet are you! We love and cherish 
you with thanks and gratitude to the Lord of life and 
giver of food and nourishment. Be our saviour, 
preserver, sustainer, protector and promoter. 


sd नः पित॒वा च॑र शिवः शिवाभिंरूतिभिंः। 
मयो भुर॑द्विषेण्यः सखा सुशेवो अद्व॑याः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Upa nah pitava cara Sivah sivabhirutibhih. 
Mayobhuradvisenyah sakha susevo advayah. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 187 831 


O Lord pervasive of food and nourishment, 
come and bless us. Kind and gracious as you are, bless 
us with the protections of your benign favours. Giver 
of peace and comfort, free from hate and anger, friendly, 
lover of lovers and devotees, free from duality, conflict 
or contradiction, come and be with us, forsake us not. 


तव त्ये feat रसा रजांस्यनु विष्ठिताः | 
दिवि वातांडव चिताः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Tava tye [710 rasa rajamsyanu visthitah. 
Divi vata iva Sritah. 

O Lord pervasive of food and nourishment of 
life, the taste, the pleasure, and the ecstasy of the 
experience of your presence is replete in the living 
worlds like the waves of energy and the winds and the 
air in the sky and the heavens. 


तव त्ये पितो दद॑तस्तव॑ स्वादिष्ठ ते पिंतो। 
प्र स्वाद्यानो रसानां तुविग्रीवा इवेरते ॥ ५ ॥ 


9, Tava tye [70 dadatastava svadistha te pito. 
Pra svadmano rasanam tuvigriva iverate. 


O spirit of life pervasive in food and drink and 
all other nutriments, you are the giver, you are the most 
delicious and inspiring. All those who taste of the 
pleasure and inspiration of your gifts of juices and vital 
essences move around with rightful pride, holding their 
head high and proclaiming their existence with self- 
confidence. 


त्वे पितो महानां देवानां मनो हितम्‌ । 
अकारि चारु केतुना तवाहिमवसावधीत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


832 RGVEDA 


6. Tve pito mahanam devanam mano hitam. 
Akari caru ketuna tavahim-avasavadhit. 


O spirit and power of existence, food of life, in 
you and with you abides the mind of great nobilities 
and divinities. By virtue of your power and presence 
great works are done. By your energy and rays of light 
the sun breaks the cloud and pours forth the rains. 


यददो पितो अजगन्विवस्व पर्वतानाम्‌ | 
stat चिन्नो मधो पितोऽरं भक्षाय गम्याः॥ ७॥ 
7. Yadado pito ajagan vivasva parvatanam. 
Atra cinno madho pito’ram bhaksaya gamyah. 


O spirit pervasive and food of energy in the 
process of nature’s metabolism, when the clouds move, 
be there in them, enrich and energise them and, then, O 
honey sweet food of life, come here down from the 
clouds and be with us for us to our heart’s desire. 


यदपामोषधीनां परिंशमारिशामहे arena पीव Sea ।॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Yadapam-osadhinam parimsam-arisamahe. 
Vatape piva id bhava. 


When to our heart’s content we have eaten of 
the gift of herbs and waters, then, O universal energy 
pervasive of food, be with us, kind and gracious, for 
our growth and advancement (not for corpulence). 


aa सोम॒ गवाशिरो यवाशिरो भजामहे । 
वातांपे पीव इद्॑व। ९॥ 


9. Yat te soma gavasiro yavasiro bhajamahe. 
Vatape piva id bhava. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 187 833 


O Soma, lord and spirit of nourishment, health 
and peace, whatever we eat and drink of what is prepared 
with cow’s milk and barley, let us enjoy and, O universal 
lord pervasive in food and energy, let that be for our 
growth and advancement. 


कर म्भ ओंषधे भव पीवो वृक्क उदार धिः। 
वातापे पीव Sa i ९०॥ 


10. = Karambha osadhe bhava [7170 vrkka udarathih. 
Vatape piva id bhava. 


Lord creator of herbs, nourishment and energy, 
let the herbs be delicious food, destroyer of ailment and 
disease, a sharpener of appetite and digestion and a tonic 
for mind and senses. Lord universal of health and life 
breath, let it be for our growth and advancement in health 
and intelligence for a long long age of joy and bliss. 


तं त्वां वयं पितो वचोंभिगविो न हव्या सुषूदिम । 
देवेभ्यस्त्वा सधमादमस्मभ्यं त्वा सधमाद॑म्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tam tva vayam pito vacobhirgavo na havya 
susudima. Devebhyastva sadhamadam-asma- 
bhyam tva sadhamadam. 


Lord giver of food and nourishment, spirit 
pervasive of health and energy, you are the giver of 
divine joy to the generous powers of nature and the 
generous nobilities of humanity. You are the giver of 
health and joy to us all. We praise you with words of 
gratitude for your gifts, and just as cows distil the 
essence of herbs and bless us with milky nutriments, so 
do we distil the essence of nourishment from the divine 
gifts of herbs and food, and express our gratitude in 


834 RGVEDA 


words and songs of celebration and service. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 188 


Apris Hymn, Mantrawise Devata, Agastya 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


समिंन्दो अद्य रांजसि देवो देवैः संहस््रजित्‌। 
दूतो हव्या कविर्वह ॥ ९॥ 


1. Samiddho adya rajasi devo devaih sahasrajit. 
Duto havya kavirvaha. 


Agni, lord of light, power and generosity, 
lighted, consecrated, bright and blazing, today rules and 
shines glorious with the brilliant powers of nature and 
humanity, having won a thousand foes. O lord of 
knowledge and wisdom, creative visionary and poetic 
maker of past, present and future as you are, receiver, 
mover and harbinger of the fragrances of life in the 
yajnic evolution of nature and humanity, accept our 
homage and lead us on the march of life. 


तनुंनपादुतं यते Heat यज्ञः TATA | 
दध॑त्सहुस्रिणीरिषंः ॥ २॥ 


2: Tanunapad-rtam yate madhva yajnah samajyate. 
Dadhat sasasrinirisah. 


Preserving and promoting the body politic, not 
allowing the system to slacken, the yajna of social and 
natural evolution goes forward on the path of truth and 
divine law for the man of action and endeavour with 
sweets of honey and wealth of soma joy, bearing and 
bringing a thousand gifts of food, energy and vitality. 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 188 835 


आजुह्छानो न geal देवाँ आ व॑क्षि यज्ञियान्‌ । 
अग्रे सहस्रसा असि ।॥ ३॥ 


Di Ajuhvano na idyo devan a vaksi yajniyan. 
Agne sahasras@ asi. 


Agni, adorable lord of light and knowledge, 
ruler of the world, invoked and invited to our creative 
endeavours, bring and proclaim the arrival of the 
brilliancies of humanity and gems of nature worthy of 
celebration and advancement by yajnic research and 
development. You are the creator, harbinger and giver 
of a thousand gifts of wealth and knowledge. 


प्राचीनं बर्हिरोजसा सहस्त्र॑वीरमस्तृणन्‌ | 
यत्रादित्या विराजथ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pracinam barhirojasa sahasraviram-astrnan. 
Yatraditya virajatha. 


That ancient and eternal seat of existence and 
knowledge wherein abide a thousand brave and 
mysterious divinities and where the suns with their 
blazing refulgence cover as well as reveal the face of 
Divinity, there, all ye men and women of the world, 
arise, reach and dwell. 


विराट्‌ सम्राङ्धिभ्वीः प्रभ्वीर्बह्ीश्च भूयसीश्च ar: | 
दुरो घृतान्यक्षरन्‌ & ॥ 

0 Virat samrad-vibhvih prabhvir-bahvisca bhu- 
yastsca yah. Duro ghrtanyaksaran. 


Infinite and various is the light and power of 
Divinity, yet unique, one whole together and indivisible 
is the rule and glory of the universal power and presence. 


836 RGVEDA 


Mightily wide and various, excellent and deep are the 
doors and paths to Divinity which reveal and release 
the flood gates of vision and the bliss of Eternity. 


सुरुक्मे हि सुपेशसाऽधिं श्चिया विराजतः | 
उषासावेह सीदताम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Surukme hi supesasa’dhi Sriya virajatah. 
Usasaveha sidatam. 
The dawn and dusk, the day and night, bright 
and beautiful of form and glory, shine with the splendour 
of Divinity. Let them come and grace our yajna of 
fragrance and vision of the Light Divine. 
प्रथमा हि सुवाच॑सा होतारा दैव्यां कवी। 
यज्ञं नो यक्षतायिमम्‌॥ ७॥ 

ds Prathama hi suvacasa hotara daivya kavi. 
Yajnam no yaksatamimam. 


May two Yajakas, old and ancient, first and best, 
masters of noble speech, divine of nature, scholars of 
poetic visionaries such as the Ashvins or the teacher 
and preacher, come and grace this yajna of ours unto a 
splendid completion. 


भार तीव्छे सर॑स्वति या वः सर्वं saga | 
ता न॑श्चोदयत ्चिये॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Bharatile sarasvati ya vah sarva upabruve. 
Ta nascodayata Sriye. 


Bharati, mother of scientific speech and 
knowledge, Ila, mother of eternal speech and 
knowledge, and Sarasvati, mother of the existential flow 


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 188 837 


of universal speech and knowledge, may you all whom 
I invoke to grace our yajna of learning and education, 
inspire us, I pray , to rise to the heights of glory and the 
beauty and grace of life and culture. 


wast रूपाणि fe प्रभुः पशुन्विश्वान्त्समानजे। 
तेषां नः स्फातिमा य॑ज।॥ ९॥ 

6 Tvasta rupani hi prabhuh pasun visvants- 
amanaje. Tesam nah sphatima yaja. 
Tvashta, lord creator, is the master maker of all 
the forms of existence. He has created all the living 
species of the universe. May the lord augment their 
growth and welfare and ours too. 
उप॒ त्मन्या वनस्पते पाथो! देवेभ्य: सृज I 
stderr सिष्वदत्‌ 20 0 

10. Upa tmanya vanaspate patho devebhyah srja. 
Agnirhavyani sisvadat. 


O Vanaspati, lord of herbs and trees and forests, 
create, produce and give the best of food and 
nourishments to the noble and virtuous people of virtue 
with the sincerity of your mind and soul, as fire helps to 
prepare the sweetest delicacies for entertainment of the 
divines. 


पुरोगा sifidart गायत्रेण aaa । 
स्वाहाकृतीषु रोचते ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Puroga agnirdevanam gayatrena samajyate. 
Svahakrtisu rocate. 


Agni, fire, is the leading power among the 


838 RGVEDA 


divinities of nature such as earth and sky, and it is lighted 
with the chant of Gayatri verses of the Veda to rise and 
shine in the holiest acts of human life. 


(So should the noble people rise and shine in 
life with the chant of holy verses and live for the service 
of Divinity and humanity for the sake of all life.) 


Mandala 1/Sukta 189 
Agni Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 


अग्ने नयं सुपथां राये अस्मान्विश्वानि देव वयुनानि विद्धान्‌ । 
युयोध्यपै स्मज्जहुराणमेनो भूयिष्ठां ते नम॑ऊक्तिं विधेम ॥ ९॥ 


1. Agne naya supatha raye asman visvani deva 
vayunani vidvan. Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno 
bhuyistham te nama uktim vidhema. 


Agni, light of life and lord giver of bliss to 
humanity, lead us to the wealth and joy of the world by 
the simple and straight path of rectitude. Brilliant and 
generous lord of power, you are the master of the 
knowledge of all the ways and laws of life and the world. 
Ward off all the sin and evil and crookedness from us. 
Bless us that we may always sing songs of homage and 
worship to you more and ever more. 


अग्न त्वं पारया नव्यो अस्मान्त्स्वस्तिभिरति दुर्गा णि विश्वां । 
yea पृथ्वी agen न॑ उर्वीं भवां तोकाय तन॑याय शं 
योः॥ २॥ 

१ Agne tvam paraya navyo asmantsvastibhirati 


durgani visva. Pusca prthvi bahula na urvi bhava 
tokaya tanayaya $am yoh. 


Agni, light of life, lord of knowledge, ever 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 189 839 


young and new, lead us far across the challenging 
problems of the world with success and victories of 
prosperity. Let our lands and cities be wide and abundant 
as earth and be the harbinger of peace and joy for our 
children and grand children. 


अग्ने त्वमस्मद्युयोध्यमीवा अनंभित्रा अभ्यमन्त कृष्टीः । 
पुन॑र स्मभ्यं सुविताय देव क्षां विश्वेभिर मृतेभिरर्यजत्र ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Agne tvam-asmad yuyodhyamiva anagnitra 
abhyamanta krstih. Punarasmabhyam suvitaya 
deva ksam visvebhir-amrtebhir-yajatra. 


Agni, lord of light and life, reduce and remove 
from us suffering and disease through yajna, since, O 
leading power of yajna fire, those who neglect the sacred 
fire suffer from ailments all round. And then, O lord of 
love and creative generosity, for our welfare, peace and 
prosperity, come with the sacred flames of holy fire and 
bless the earth with universal nectar sweets of good 
health and gifts of imperishable joy. 


पाहि at अग्ने पायुभिरजस्रैरुत प्रिये सद॑न आ शुशुक्वान्‌ | 
मा ते भयं जरितारं यविष्ठ नूनं विदन्मापरं संहस्वः॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Pahi no agne payubhir-ajasrairuta priye sadana 
a Susukvan. Ma te bhayam jaritaram yavistha 
nunam vidan-maparam sahasvah. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, protect and 
promote us with inviolable safeguards and relentless 
modes of protection, shining in our dear home with the 
glow of health and blaze of power. Most youthful and 
powerful lord of endurance and challenges, may fear 
never touch your admirer and worshipper or any other, 


840 
for sure. 


मानों अग्नेऽ व॑ सृजो अघाया।ऽविष्यवे Rua gare । 
मा द॒त्वते दश॑ते मादते नो मा रीष॑ते सहसावन्परा दाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Ma no agne’ava srjo aghaya’visyave ripave 
ducchunayai. Ma datvate dasate mddate no 
ma risate sahasavan para dah. 


Agni, lord of power and endurance, abandon us 
not, throw us not to the sinner, the irreligious, the enemy, 
the mischievous, the biter, the tearer, and the destroyer. 
Leave us not, put us not off from you. 


वि घ cara ऋतजात यंसद्‌ गृणानो Sh तन्वे ३ वरूथम्‌। 
विश्वाद्विरिक्षोरुत वां निनित्सोरभिह तामसि हि देव 
विष्पट्‌ ns ॥ 


6. Vi gha tvavan rtajata yamsad grnano agne tanve 
varutham. Visvad-ririksoruta va ninitsorabhi- 
hrutam-asi hi deva vispat. 


Agni, lord manifest in truth and Dharma, let your 
admirer and worshipper, sharing brilliance like yours, 
singing in praise and homage to you, give unto himself 
due protection for his body and mind. And then, O lord 
of light and power, you are the ultimate protector against 
all violent and hostile maligners since you break them 
down or teach them a lesson to correction. 


त्वं at sin उभयान्वि विद्वान्वेषि प्रपित्वे wet aa | 
अभिपित्वे मन॑वे शास्यो! भूर्मर्मजेन्यं उशिग्भिर्नाक्रः ॥ ७॥ 

ds Tvam tan agna ubhayan vi vidvan vesi prapitve 
manuso yajatra. Abhipitve manave sasyo bhur- 
marmrjenya usigbhirnakrah. 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 190 841 


Agni, lord adorable of light, protection and 
correction, you know them both, men good and evil, 
admirers as well as maligners, and reach them just at 
the right time to protect and to correct as well. Lord of 
law and discipline, be the teacher and ruler for the man 
approaching in faith or even turning away in hostility, 
adored or remembered by all, lovers or haters, with love 
or in fear, like a ruling power. 


अवोचाम निवचंनान्यस्मिन्मान॑स्य सूनुः संहसाने अग्रौ । 
वयं सहस्रमृषिभिः सनेम विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Avocama nivacananyasmin manasya sunuh 
sahasane agnau. Vayam sahasram-rsibhih 
sanema vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


In homage and worship to this Agni, mighty lord 
creator of honour and self-esteem and inspirer of the 
idea and sense of purpose in life, we speak and sing 
these words of adoration with reflection and holy 
thought in composition, and thereby we share with a 
thousand sages of vision and insight of knowledge food 
and energy for body, mind and soul, the path of Dharma 
and the spirit and joy of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 190 
Brhaspati Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi 
अन्वणिं वृषभं मन्द्रजिह्वं बृहस्पतिं वर्धया wet: | 
गाथान्यः सुरुचो यस्य॑ देवा आशुण्वन्ति नव॑मानस्य 
मती: ॥ ९॥ 
ip Anarvanam vrsabham mandrajihvam brhaspatim 


vardhaya navyamarkaih. Gathanyah suruco 
yasya deva asrnvanti navamanasya martah. 


842 RGVEDA 


Welcome, entertain and exalt with offerings of 
respectful good cheer and hospitality Brhaspati, a very 
embodiment of piety, knowledge, wisdom and virtue, 
an adorable scholar, irresistible, generous and sweet- 
tongued, a master of ancient as well as modern versions 
of universal knowledge, whose delightful tales of 
heroism old and new and virtue sacred and secular, 
noble, intelligent and brilliant people love to hear for 
reflection and meditation. Welcome and entertain such 
a holy visitor on the rounds, an atithi, chance guest like 
the holy fire of yajna, fragrant and blissful. 


तमृत्विया उप ara: सचन्ते wit न यो देवयतामसंजिं | 
बृह स्पतिः स ह्यञ्जो वरांसि विभ्वाभवत्समृते मात- 
रिष्वां॥ २॥ 


2 Tamrtviya upa vacah sacante sargo na yo deva- 
yatam-asarji. Brhaspatih sa hyanjo varamsi 
vibhvabhavat samrte matarisva. 


Words of meaning and power come to him at 
his command and serve him according to the season of 
time, place and the subject of discourse, Brhaspati as 
he is, high-priest of the Divine Word. Like an extension 
of the Lord’s creation, he makes divinities out of 
dedicated humanity and brings them gifts of their choice. 
Thus loved, graceful and powerful like the breeze of 
life, he rises in the affairs of life and Dharma by the 
grace of the Infinite Lord of the universe. 


उपस्तुतिं ane उद्य॑तिं च श्लोकं यंसत्सवितेव प्र बाहू । 
अस्य क्रत्वाहन्यो ३ यो अस्तिं मृगो न भीमो अ॑र क्षसस्तु- 
विंष्पान्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 190 843 


Upastutim namasa udyatim ca slokam yamsat 
saviteva pra bahu. Asya kratvahanyo yo asti 
mrgo na bhimo araksasas-tuvisman. 


Let this Brhaspati, man of piety, knowledge. and 
wisdom, acknowledge and reciprocate the respectful 
host’s salutation, obeisance and words of adoration with 
hands upraised in benediction like the rays of the 
inspiring sun. Loving and non-violent, surrounded by 
many admirers by virtue of his holy actions, he walks 
like a ruling lion on his daily rounds. 


अस्य शत्ोकों fede पृथिव्यामत्यो न यंसद्यक्चभुद्धिचेंताः | 
मृगाणां न हेतयो यन्ति चेमा बृहस्पतेरहिंमार्यो अभि 
द्यून्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Asya Sloko diviyate prthivyam-atyo na yamsad 
yaksabhrd vicetah. Mrganam na hetayo yanti 
cema brhaspater-ahimayan abhi dyun. 


The voice of this Brhaspati and his fame goes 
over earth and heaven like the waves of energy. 
Supporter of the man of yajna, master of exceptional 
knowledge and intelligence, let him continue to give 
knowledge. And then, these voices of Brhaspati, like 
the bounces of the deer, every day reach men of 
generosity such as clouds of rain. 


ये त्वां देवोखिकं मन्य॑मानाः पापा भद्रमुपजीवन्ति पजाः। 
न दूढ्ये अनुं ददासि वामं बृह॑स्पते चय॑स इत्पियारुम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


2: Ye tva devosrikam manyamanah papa bhadram- 
upajivanti pajrah. Na dudhye anu dadasi vamam 
brhaspate cayasa it piyarum. 


There are those rigid and sinful people who 


844 RGVEDA 


accept the wise man as brilliant and good, but in reality 
they exploit him to live by him for self-support as 
parasites do. O Brhaspati, you yield not to the man of 
crooked intelligence but choose the man of honest desire 
for the gift of knowledge. 


aad: सूयव॑सो न पन्थां दुर्नियन्तुः परिप्रीतो न fir: 1 
अनर्वाणो अभि ये चक्षते नोऽ पीवृता अपोर्णुवन्तो 
अस्थुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Supraituh suyavaso na pantha durniyantuh pari- 
prito na mitrah. Anarvano abhi ye caksate no’- 
pivrta apornuvanto asthuh. 


Brhaspati is like the guiding path of one who is 
well-provided with food and energy and one who wants 
to follow the simple and straight path of knowledge. 
He is like the all round loving friend of one caught up 
on a difficult highway. Men who are free from sin and 
every way look after us and who, with light and 
knowledge, uncover the ignorance of those covered in 
darkness, may, we pray, be our teachers. 


सं यं स्तुभोऽ वन॑यो न यन्ति समुद्रं न स्रवतो रोधचक्राः | 
स विद्धं उभयं चष्टे अन्तर्बह॒स्पतिस्तर आप॑श्च wet: ॥ ७॥ 


7: Sam yam stubho’vanayo na yanti samudram na 
sravato rodhacakrah. Sa vidvan ubhayam caste 
antar-brhaspatistara apasca grdhrah. 


Just as the satellites go round Brhaspati, the 
planet Jupiter, or as the flowing streams with whirlpools 
reach the sea, so that scholar whom all the praises of 
devoted admirers reach is Brhaspati, the divine teacher 
who knows both the inner reality of the spirit and the 


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 191 845 


outer reality of nature and who, keen to save his pupils, 
calmly watches both the waters of existence and the 
saving ark of knowledge. 


एवा महस्तुविजातस्तुविष्पान्ब॒ह स्पतिर्तृषभो धांयि ea: | 
स नः स्तुतो वीरव॑न्दातु गोमद्विद्यामेषं वृजनं जीरदानुम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Evamahas-tuvijatas-tuvisman brhaspatir-vrsabho 
dhayi devah. Sa nah stuto viravad dhatu gomad 
vidyamesam vrjanam jiradanum. 


Thus is Brhaspati, the great scholar, highly 
revered among the learned, commanding courage and 
strength of body and mind, generous and brilliant master 
of learning and pious sage honoured and acclaimed. May 
he, for us, be the teacher, maker of the brave and giver 
of the knowledge of science and Divinity so that we 
may be blest with food and energy, knowledge and 
power and the breath and joy of life. 


Mandala 1/Sukta 191 
Ap-Oshadhi-Surya Devata, Maitravaruni Agastya Rshi 


wed न कङ्कतोऽथो सतीनक॑ड्कतः | 
द्वाविति wot इति न्य¶ दष्टा अक्िप्सत ॥ ९॥ 


1. Kankato na kankato ’tho satinakankatah. 
Dvaviti plust iti nyadrsta alipsata. 


The poisonous as well as the slithering, and the 
essentially poisonous as well as the slightly poisonous, 
both bite and burn, and yet they both sprinkle and anoint 
as antidotes too, and both smear, bite and burn unseen, 
and they harbour the unseen. 


846 RGVEDA 


अदुष्टांन्हन्त्यायत्यथो' हन्ति परायती । 
अथो अवघ्नती हन्त्यथो पिनष्टि पिंषती ।॥ २॥ 


0.0 Adrstan hantyayatyatho hanti parayati. 
Atho avaghnati hantyatho pinasti pimsati. 


One medicine immediately starts destroying the 
poison as it is taken. Another destroys the poison while 
its activity seems to be subsiding. Yet another destroys 
it when its effect is extremely strong. And yet another 
reduces and destroys it when it is completely 
assimilated. 


शरासः कुश॑रासो eufa: at उत । 
मौञ्जा अदुष्टां वैरिणाः सर्वे साकं न्य॑लिप्सत ui ३॥ 


3 Saradsah kusaradso darbhasah sairya uta. 
Maunja adrsta bairinah sarve sakam nyalipsata. 


The parasitic seeds of poison lurk in the hollow 
of bamboos and in inferior reeds, in the darbha grass 
and in reeds and grasses round tanks, lakes and streams. 
Unseen they lurk in the munja roots and leaves and 
virina plants. Together they all stick to anything as 
parasites. 


नि गावो गोष्ठे असदन्नि areal अविक्षत । 
नि केतवो जनानां न्य दुष्टां अकिप्सत ॥ ४॥ 
4. Ni gavo gosthe asadan ni mrgaso aviksata. 
Ni ketavo jananam nyadrsta alipsata. 
Where the cows sit in the stalls or the forest 
beasts sit or hide in their habitat or humans live in the 


homes, and even in the brain and sense organs, the seeds 
of poison lurk and cluster unseen. 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 191 847 


एत उ त्ये प्रत्य॑दुश्रन्प्रदोषं तस्कराइव । 
अदुष्टा विशुव॑दुष्टाः प्रतिबुद्धा अभूतन ॥५॥ 


Eta u tye pratyadrsran pradosam taskara iva. 
Adrsta visvadrstah pratibuddha abhutana. 


All these come out astir like thieves at night, 
unseen as they are and yet seen by all and known to all. 
Therefore, all ye men and women, beware of them. 


दौर्वः पिता प्रथिवी माता सोमो भ्रातादितिः carat । 
अदुष्टा विश्व॑दुष्टास्तिष्ठ॑तेल्य॑ता सुकम्‌ ॥६॥ 


6. Dyaurvah pita prthivi mata somo bhrataditih 
svasa. Adrsta visvadrstas-tisthatelayata su kam. 


O seeds, parasites, insects and other carriers of 
poison such as bacteria and viruses, the heaven of light 
is your father, creator, the earth is your mother, feeder, 
soma is your brother and nature’s fertility is your sister 
(since both nectar and poison are born of the creative 
power of nature). Unseen and yet universally seen and 
known are you all. Why move, better be still for the 
sake of good and comfort? 


ये अंस्या ये sigan: सूचीका ये Waa: । 
अदुष्टाः किं चनेह वः सर्वे साकं नि ज॑स्यत ॥ ७॥ 


a: Ye amsya ye angyah sucitka ye prakankatah. 
Adrstah kim caneha vah sarve sakam ni jasyata. 


Those which creep or affect the shoulders, those 
which move or fly and affect all parts of the body, those 
which bite and burn, and those which are highly 
poisonous and painful, all those which are unseen or 
whatever, all together retire and exhaust yourselves of 


848 RGVEDA 
the bite and the poison, be eliminated all. 


उत्पुरस्तात्सूर्य' एति विश्वदुष्टो अदृष्टहा | 
अदुष्टान्त्सवीजञ्जम्भयन्त्सवीश्च यातुधान्यः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Utpurastatsurya eti visvadrsto adrstaha. Adrsta- 
ntsarvanjambhayantsarvasca yatudhanyah. 


There upfront rises the sun from the east, 
universally seen and showing the world, and destroying 
all that is unseen poisonous, eliminating all the 
negativities and all that is evil and invisible to the naked 
eye. 


उद॑पप्दसौ सूर्य पुरु विश्वानि जुर्वन्‌ । 
आदित्यः पर्वतेभ्यो विश्वदुष्टो अदुष्टहा ॥ ९॥ 


9. Udapaptadasau suryah puru visvani jurvan. 
Adityah parvatebhyo visvadrsto adrstaha. 

The sun rises there, lord of light, from behind 

the mountains and the clouds, showing to the entire 


world and destroying all the poisons on a large scale, 
invisible evils which thrive in the dark. 


wef विषमा स॑जापि दूतिं सुरांवतो गृहे। सो Fara न म॑राति 
नो वयं म॑रामाऽऽरे अस्य योज॑नं हरिष्ठा मधुं त्वा मधुला 
च॑कार ।॥ ९०॥ ति 
10. Surye visama sajami drtim suravato grhe. So 
cinnu na marati no vayam marama’’re asya 
yojanam haristha madhu tva mahula cakara. 


Just as liquor is contained in the cask in the 
house of a liquor maker, so do I collect the earth’s poison 
and evaporate it to join the sun so that neither the sun 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 191 849 


would die nor would we, since the poison would join 
the far away sun which would drink it up. O poison, 
then the honey sweet chemistry of nature may turn you 
to nectar honey. 


इयत्तिका शकुन्तिका सका ज॑घास ते विषम्‌। सो Fara 
म॑राति नो वयं म॑रामाऽऽरे ster योज॑नं हरिष्ठा मधु त्वा 
मधुला च॑कार ॥ ९९॥ 


11. (वद sakuntika saka jaghasa te visam. So cinnu 
na marati no vayam marama’’re asya yojanam 
haristha madhu tva madhula cakara. 


O man infested with poison, this little 
Shakuntika (kapinjali, partridge, blue jay) would 
consume your poison. That bird would not die, nor 
would we. The one that drinks up the poison unharmed 
would keep it far off. O poison, the life’s chemistry of 
nectar would turn you too to honey. 


त्रिः सप्त विष्पुलिङ्का विषस्य पुष्य॑मक्षन्‌। ताश्चिन्नु न 
म॑रन्ति नो वयं म॑रामाऽऽरे ster योज॑नं हरिष्ठा मधु त्वा 
मधुला च॑कार ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Trih sapta vispulingaka visasya puspamaksan. 
Tascinnu na maranti no vayam marama’’re asya 
yojanam haristha madhu tva madhula cakara. 


Twenty one little birds eat up and consume the 
flowers of poison. But they do not die for sure, nor 
would we. The one who would consume poison 
undisturbed would keep it far off. The honey-science 
of nature would turn the poison to honey. 


नवानां न॑वतीनां विषस्य restore | सवीसामग्रभं नामाऽररे 
अस्य योज॑नं हरिष्ठा मधुः त्वा मधुत्का च॑कार ॥ ९३॥ 


850 RGVEDA 


13. Navanam navatinam visasya ropusinam. Sarva- 
sam-agrabham namar’’e asya yojanam haristha 
madhu tva madhula cakara. 


Let me have the names of all the ninetynine 
lacerations of poison and of all the ninetynine antidotes. 
The man who can counter poison and calmly render it 
ineffective would keep its effects far off without danger 
or fear. O poison, the science of honey nectar would 
turn you to honey and nectar. 


fa: wa मयूर्यः wa स्वसारो sya: । 
तास्ते विषं वि ज॑भ्र उदकं कुम्भिनीरिव ॥ ee 


14. Trih sapta mayuryah sapta svasaro agruvah. 
Taste visam vi Jjabhrira udakam kumbhiniriva. 


May the twentyone peahens and seven sisterly 
streams and rivers flowing on and on collect and carry 
off the poison as female water carriers carry water in 
their jars. 


इयत्तकः कुषुम्भकस्तकं भिनद्म्यश्मना । 
ततो विषं प्र वावृते पराचीरनु Gad: ९५ ॥ 

15. = Lyattakah kusumbhakastakam bhinadmyasma-na. 
Tato visam pra vavrte pardaciranu samvatah. 


This little poisonous insect that comes to me, 
this little mongoose, that holds the poison, I strike with 
a gem stone. The poison flows, and I collect and isolate 
the poison from the area as an antidote. 


कुषुम्भकस्तद॑त्रवीद्‌ गिरेः प्र॑वर्तमानकः। 
वृश्चिकस्यारसं विषम॑र dita ते विषम्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 191 851 


16. Kusumbhakas-tad-abravid gireh pravartam- 
anakah. Vrscikasyarasam visamarasam vrscika 
te visam. 


The little mongoose coming down from the 
mountains tells me that the taste of the scorpion’s poison 
is dull. For this reason, on this expansive and practical 
basis I say, the poison of the scorpion is tasteless. 


Note: The mantras in this Sukta point to the 
possibilities of isolating all poisons, bacteria and viruses 
that cause disease. They also suggest the preparation of 
antidotes from those very poisons, bacteria and viruses. 
They also point out to the fact that in natural evolution 
poison and nectar are coexistent carriers of death and 
life. They are contradictory effects of the same one 
cause, but they can be converted into two 
complementary substances through chemical process — 
since all contradictions in nature are apparent, but 
essentially they are all complementary. 


The term ‘Madhula’ is suggestive of this 
chemical process in nature itself. Swami Dayanand 
interprets it as the science of converting poison into 
nectar for our purposes. Elsewhere as in Sayana or in 
Kaushika Sutra or by Satavalekara it is interpreted as a 
herb, which too is true. There is a herb on the hills, for 
example, the touch of which bites as scorpion, giving a 
burning poisonous sensation all over the body, for which 
reason it is called the scorpion herb. And immediately 
close to it is another herb the juice of which turns the 
burning sensation into a soothing sweet feeling. 


In fact every poison, it seems, carries its own 
antidote which has to be isolated, analysed and 


852 RGVEDA 


developed like all the vaccines in modern medicine and 
all the drugs in homeopathic medicine. The dose of the 
poison would depend upon the effect desired as in the 
case of all stimulants, intoxicants and painkillers. 


The myth of churning of the ocean by the Devas 
and Asuras (gods and demons) is an all-time symbol of 
the contradictions alias complementarities of nature, 
whichever way you want to put it. It shows that both 
nectar and poison are born of the ocean of nature and 
the power that consumes and assimilates the poison for 
the sake of the continuance of life and existence is Shiva, 
lord of nature’s justice and ferocity on the one hand, 
and lord of the saving grace of Divinity on the other. 
The word for this power of turning contradiction into 
complementarity, and turning the poison into honey- 
sweet nectar in this Sukta is ‘Harishtha’. For references 
to Madhu Vidya or the honey science of nectar we may 
turn to Yajurveda and the Upanishads specially 
Chhandogya Upanishad 3, 1-5, and Brhadaranyaka 
Upanishad, 2, 5, 1-19. 


इति प्रथमं AVS ॥ 


853 


MANDALA 2 


Mandala 2/Sukta 1 


Agni Devata, Angirasa Shaunahotra, Bhargava 
Shaunaka Grtsamada Rshi 


त्वमग्रे द्युभिस्त्वमाशुशुक्चषणिस्त्वम द्धयस्त्वमश्म॑नस्परिं I 
त्वं वनेैभ्यस्त्वमोष॑धीभ्यस्त्वं नृणां नुपते जायसे शुचिं: ॥ ९ ॥ 


ip Tvamagne dyubhis-tvamasusuksanis-tvam- 
adbhyas-tvamasmana-spari. Tvam vanebhyas- 
tvamosadhibhyas-tvam nrnam nrpate jayase 
Sucih. 

Agni, lord of light and knowledge, bright and 
blazing and ever enlightening, ruler and leader and 
sustainer of humanity, power of crystalline purity 
shining with splendour, you rise like vapours from the 
oceans and rain like showers from the skies. You ignite 
like sparks from stones and burn like fire from the 
forests. You thunder like lightning from clouds and 
overwhelm like lava from volcanoes. And you refresh 
like fragrance of flowers and rejuvenate like honey 
drinks of herbs as soma. 


dala होत्रं तव॑ पोत्रमृत्वियं ad नेष्टं त्वमथिदुंतायतः । तवं 
प्रशास्त्रं त्वम॑ध्वरीयसि aan चासिं गृहपतिश्च नो दे ॥ २॥ 

2: Tavagne hotram tava potramrtviyam tava 
nestram tvamagnidrtayatah. Tava prasastram 
tvamadhvariyasi brahma casi grhaspatisca no 
dame. 


854 RGVEDA 


Agni, light of life and leader of humanity, yours 
is yajna and the spirit of charity, yours is piety and purity, 
yours is the conduct and the organisation of holy plans 
and projects in time and seasons, yours is the message 
and the mission, yours is the truth and fiery knowledge 
of life and advancement, yours is the teaching, law, 
governance and administration, yours is love and the 
gift of charity for the growth of all, you are the high- 
priest and presiding presence of nature and humanity, 
and you are the life within and brightness of the happy 
family. Lord of light and life, we pray be the light within 
of the individual and protector and preserver of peace 
and joy of the family in the home for all. 


wang इन्द्रो वृषभः सताम॑सि त्वं विष्णुरुरुगायो न॑मस्य॑ः। 
त्वं aan रयिविद्‌ ब्रह्मणस्पते त्वं विंधर्तः सचसे पुर॑न्ध्या ॥ २ ॥ 


3. Tvamagna indro vrsabhah satamasi tvam 
visnururugayo namasyah. Tvam brahma rayivid 
brahmanaspate tvam vidhartah sacase puran- 
dhya. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord of light and life, you 
are Indra, lord of power and glory. You are Vrshabha, 
mighty and generous among the good and great. You 
are Vishnu, omnipresent spirit, adorable, worthy of 
homage by all. You are Brahma, high-priest of the 
universe who knows the wealth and value of existence. 
O Brahmanaspati, lord protector, preserver and promoter 
of knowledge of the Spirit and Nature, you are the 
treasure-hold of all that exists in the universe, and you 
abide by all humans and others with your knowledge, 
power and glory. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 855 


त्वम॑ग्ने राजा वरुणो sede मित्रो भ॑वसि दस्म ईड्य॑ः | 
wanda सत्प॑तिर्यस्य॑ सं भुजं wate विदथे देव 
भाजयुः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Tvamagne raja varuno dhrtavratastvam mitro 
bhavasi dasma idyah. Tvamaryama satpatir- 
yasya sambhujam tvamamso vidathe deva 
bhajayuh. 


Agni, lord of life and light of existence, you are 
the glorious ruler. You are Varuna, greatest and best lord 
of nature and humanity, upholder of natural truth and 
law of life. You are Mitra, the master, dear as friend and 
the very breath of life, adorable and worthy of homage 
and worship. You are Aryama, lord giver of love and 
justice, preserver and promoter of truth and sustainer 
of the lovers of truth and justice. Lord of light blazing 
as the sun, generous and blissful, in the grand yajnic 
system of life and living, you are the giver of every 
one’s rights and duties, actions and rewards, according 
to the law of Dharma and the Karmic dispensation. 


त्वमग्ने wast विधते सुवीर्यं तव ग्रावों मित्रमहः सजात्य॑म्‌। 
त्वर्माशुहेमां the स्वश्व्यं त्वं नरां शर्धो असि पुरूवसुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


9, Tvamagne tvasta vidhate suviryam tava gnavo 
mitramahah sajatyam. Tvamasuhema rarise 
svasvyam tvam naram sardho asi puruvasuh. 


Agni, heat and light of life, universal presence, 
you are Tvashta, breaker, maker and preserver of the 
forms of life. You bestow noble strength and courage 
upon the man of love and service. Lord of universal 
speech of love and truth, you are the greatest friend. 
Yours 1s real equality and brotherhood. You are the giver 


856 RGVEDA 


of instant inspiration calling men of action to duty and 
you give the noble speed of motion and advancement 
to the pioneers. You are the strength and power of the 
people, and you are the haven and home of all. 


त्वमं॑गे रुद्रो असुरो महो दिवस्त्वं शर्धो मारुतं gar ईशिषे | 
त्वं वातैररुणैर्यासि शंगयस्त्वं पूषा विधतः पासि नु 
त्मना ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvamagne rudro asuro maho divastvam sardho 
marutam prksa isise. Tvam vatairarunairyasi 
Sangayastavam pusa vidhatah pasi nu tmana. 


Agni, vital heat and light and fire of life, you 
are Rudra, shatterer of evil and terror for the wicked. 
You are vital as breath and generous as the cloud. You 
are the mighty blaze of the sun in heaven and essential 
force of the winds. You blow with the fiery waves of 
energy and bring peace and joy to the living. You are 
Pusha, food and sustenance of life, and with your heart 
and soul you protect and promote those who dedicate 
themselves to your service. 


want) द्रविणोदा अरंकृते त्वं देवः सविता रत्नधा असि । 
त्वं भगो नृपते वस्व॑ ईशिषे त्वं पायुर्दमि यस्तेऽ विंधत्‌॥ ७॥ 


7: Tvamagne dravinoda aramkrte tvam devah savita 
ratnadha asi. Tvam bhago nrpate vastva [57८ 
tvam payurdame yaste’vidhat. 


Agni, lord of light and creator of new life, you 
are the giver of wealth to the person who acts in faith 
and homage to you for the beauty and grace of life and 
culture. Self-refulgent lord of life, you are Savita, light 
and inspiration, the spirit of universal creation, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 857 


fertilisation, refreshment and rejuvenation. You hold the 
entire treasure jewels of the world of existence. Ruler 
and sustainer of all, you are Bhaga, power and glory of 
humanity. You rule and command and advance the 
wealth and beauty and splendour of the life-sustaining 
abodes of nature and humanity. You are the father, 
mother and sustainer of the person whoever observes 
the law of Dharma in the family and the home. 


त्वामग्रे दम आ विश्पतिं fasreat राजानं सुविदत्र॑मृञ्जते। 
त्वं विश्वानि स्वनीक पत्यसे त्वं सहस्राणि शता दश॒ 
प्रति।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tvamagne dama व vispatim visastvam rajanam 
suvidatramrnjate. Tvam visvani svanika patyase 
tvam sahasrani Sata dasa prati. 


Agni, lord of life, light and power of the world, 
the people in their home, in individual, familial and 
social discipline, do honour to you, ruler, sustainer and 
protector of humanity and generous giver of the wealth 
of life for all. Gracious lord of power and fighting force 
for the protection and advancement of humanity, you 
rule and sustain all alike with love and favour to tens 
and hundreds and thousands of the units of life and 
society — wherever they be. 


त्वामग्रे पितरमिष्टिभिर्नर स्त्वां भ्रात्राय शम्यां तनूरुच॑म्‌। त्वं 
पुत्रो भ॑वसि यस्तेऽ ferred सां aera: पास्याधृषंः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tvamagne pitaram-istibhir-narastvam bhratr-aya 
Samya tanurucam. Tvam putro bhavasi yaste’- 
vidhat tvam sakha susevah pasyadhrsah. 


Agni, lord of light and glory, ruler of the world, 


858 RGVEDA 


people come to you as father, sustainer and protector, 
and they do honour and homage to you with yajnic acts 
of creation and development. They come to you as 
brother with love and peace at heart for the sake of 
friendship and fraternity as they see in you the glow of 
health and grace of the body politic. You act as son of 
the mother earth and her people as saviour from want 
and suffering and protector against lawless bullies and 
destructive terrorists. O lord of law and power, friend 
of humanity, noble giver of peace and prosperity, 
whoever honours and obeys you and the law, you save, 
protect and advance in freedom, peace and prosperity 
against all fear and evil. 


THAT ऋभुराके न॑मस्यप स्त्वं वाज॑स्य क्षुमतो! राय ईशिषे । 
त्वं वि भास्यनुं दक्षि दावने त्वं विशिक्षुषरसि aa- 
मातनिंः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvamagna rbhurake namasyastvam vajasya 
ksumato raya iSsise. Tvam vi bhasyanu daksi 
davane tvam visiksurasi yajnamatanih. 


Agni, lord of light and ruler of the world, you 
are the master of knowledge and expertise close at hand, 
worthy of honour and homage. You are the ruler of 
knowledge, power and prosperity and all round wealth 
and glory of the world. You shine all that is good, and 
consequently, you burn all that is evil and destructive. 
You are the teacher and guide for the generous giver 
and the presiding power of expansive yajna in life and 
humanity. 


त्वमग्रे अदितिर्देव दाशुषे त्वं होत्रा भार॑ती वध्सि गिरा। 
त्वमिव्ठा शतदिमासि दक्ष॑से त्वं वुत्रहा व॑सुपते सर॑- 
स्वती ।॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 859 


11. Tvamagne aditirdeva dasuse tvam hotra bharati 
vardhase gira. Tvamila satahimasi daksase 
tvam vrtraha vasupate sarasvati. 


Agni, light of life and inspiration for the world, 
you are the light of heaven for the generous giver of 
knowledge and wisdom. You are Bharati, speech of 
communication, a clarion call to action and invitation 
to knowledge, which grows with inspiration from the 
voice of Divinity. You are Ila, omniscient vision of 
Divinity which reflects in the hundred years of the 
scholar’s awareness. O lord of the world’s wealth of 
knowledge and vision and wisdom, you are the 
everflowing stream of knowledge, mother Sarasvati, 
who dispels all darkness and destroys ignorance. 


wana qua उत्तमं वयस्तव स्पार्हे वर्णा आ संदुशि श्रियः 1 
त्वं वाज॑ः प्रतरणो बृहन्नसि त्वं रयिर्बहुलो विश्वतं- 
TIA: WRB 


12. Tvamagne subhrta uttamam vayastava sparhe 
varna a samdrsi Sriyah. Tvam vajah pratarano 
brhannasi tvam rayirbahulo visvatasprthuh. 


Agni, lord of glory and magnanimity, you are 
the highest wielder and upholder of great action. Highest 
are your lives and roles in performance. Lovely and 
wondrous are your graces in form and view. Mighty 
great are you, high your vision and knowledge, a saving 
ark across the seas of sin and suffering. High and 
plentiful are you in wealth and knowledge, all round 
great and greater, in measure immeasurable of all. 


860 RGVEDA 


rary आदित्यास आस्यं¶ त्वां जिह्यं शुच॑यश्चक्रिरे कवे। 
त्वां रातिषाचो अध्वरेषु सजश्चरे त्वे देवा हविर दन्त्या- 
हतम्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Tvamagna dadityasa asyam tvam jihvam sucaya- 
Scakrire kave. Tvam ratisaco adhvaresu saSscire 
tve deva haviradantyahutam. 


Agni, lord of the fire of life, knowledge and 
vision, poet of nature, humanity and divinity, the 
Adityas, devotees of light and learning brilliant as the 
sun in the zodiacs, listen to you as the mouthpiece of 
omniscience. Pure and innocent souls in search of truth 
regard you as the very tongue of divine will and vision. 
Liberal powers of fragrant favours and generosity seek 
and follow you in yajnas of love and non-violence. And 
while you are there, bright and blazing, the brilliancies 
of nature and humanity receive and enjoy the gifts of 
oblations offered into the fire. 


त्वे अग्रे विश्वे अमूर्तासो अद्रुह आसा देवा हविरं दन्त्याहुतम्‌। 
त्वया adda: स्वदन्त आसुतिं त्वं गर्भो वीरुधां जज्ञिषे 
शुचिं: new 


14. Tve agne visve amrtaso adruha asa deva havira- 
dantyahutam. Tvaya martasah svadanta asutim 
tvam garbho virudham jajnise Sucih. 


Agni, immortal spirit and vital power of life, by 
virtue of your presence and action, all the immortal souls 
and brilliancies of nature, full of love, free from hate 
and enmity, with their receptive organs receive their 
share of food through the oblations offered into the fire. 
By you only, the mortals among humanity receive their 
drink of soma for immortality. You are the essence and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 861 


vitality of the herbs and trees, and in them and through 
them, you manifest and rise ever pure and brilliant. 


त्वं तान्त्सं च प्रतिं चासि मज्मनाऽगं asia प्र च॑ देव Rea । 
पृक्षो यदत्र॑ महिना वि ते भुवदनु द्यावापृथिवी रोद॑सी 
SATU VEU 


15. Tvam tantsam ca prati casi majmana’ gne sujata 
pra ca deva ricyase. Prkso yadatra mahina vi te 
bhuvadanu dyavaprthivi rodasi ubhe. 


Agni, spirit of life in existence, light of the 
world, brilliant, generous and universally manifestive, 
by virtue of your power and grandeur, you are immanent 
and yet transcendent. You are with all forms of existence 
together and with each one of them separately, and yet 
you are distinct and superior and rise above them all. 
Whatever abundance of life and wealth is there, exists 
here and prospers by virtue of your power and grandeur. 
Even the heaven and earth and the intermediate regions 
of the skies are great and generous by virtue of your 
power and splendour. 


ये स्तोतृभ्यो गोअंग्रामश्व॑पेशसमग्रे रातिमुंपसजन्तिं Ga: | 
अस्माञ्च तांश्च प्र हि नेषि वस्य आ aegen विदथे 
सुवीरां ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Ye stotrbhyo go agram-asvapesSasam-agne 
ratimupasrjanti surayah. Asmanca tamsca pra hi 
nesi vasya a brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Agni, lord of light and life, to the brave and 
brilliant people who are keen for knowledge and come 
with receptive organs of perception and dynamic, 
responsive and brilliant intelligence with gifts of cows 


862 RGVEDA 


and leading horses to the masters of knowledge and 
singers of hymns, to these seekers, teachers and to us 
all, we pray, bring a peaceful and happy home for 
settlement so that we all, blest with the courage and 
knowledge of truth, sing in praise of your great gifts of 
light and generosity in our yajnic programmes. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 2 
Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi 


aarti वर्धत जातवेदसमयिं य॑जध्वं हविषा तनां गिरा । 
समिधानं सुप्रयसं स्व॑र्णरं gat होतारं वृजनेषु धूर्षदम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Yajnena vardhata jatavedasamagnim yajadhvam 
havisa tana gira. Samidhanam suprayasam 
svarnaram dyuksam hotaram vrjanesu dhursa- 
dam. 


By yajna, research and development, expand the 
power and gifts of Agni, treasure of knowledge and 
power. Ignited and shining, rich and beautiful, harbinger 
of wealth and comfort, brilliant, generous giver of gifts, 
energy and power, it moves the wheels of action on the 
paths of progress. Develop it with holy inputs offered 
with elaborate voices of vast and far-reaching meaning. 


अभि त्वा नक्तीरुषसो ववाशिरेऽ गर वत्सं न स्वसरेषु aad: | 
दिवडइवेद॑र तिर्मानुंषा युगा क्षपो! भासि पुरुवार संयतः ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Abhi tva naktirusaso vavaSire’gne vatsam na 


svasaresu dhenavah. Diva ivedaratirmanusa yuga 
ksapo bhasi puruvara samyatah. 


Agni, lord of light and power, master of 
knowledge and fire, as cows in the stalls eagerly call 
for their calves, so do the days and nights call upon you 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 2 863 


for action and success. Selected by many, disciplined 
and committed to programmes of work, you passionately 
shine day and night for ages of humanity, creating and 
giving wealth and power for progress. 


तं देवा बुध्ने रज॑सः adda दिवस्पुंथिव्योर॑रतिं न्येरिरे। 
रथमिव वेद्यं शुक्रशोचिषमयिं मित्रं न क्षितिषु प्रशंस्य॑म्‌॥। २॥ 


ah Tam deva budhne rajasah sudamsasam divaspr- 
thivyoraratim nyerire. Rathamiva vedyam sukra- 
Socisamagnim mitram na ksitisu prasamsyam. 


That fire power of Agni, admirable among 
humanity, worthy to be discovered and known as a 
friend, mighty rich in quantity and quality of power, 
bright and blazing with flames of light and waves of 
energy, brilliant and generous scholars find abundantly 
present in the depths of the earth and between earth and 
heaven in the midst of clouds and in the lower 
atmosphere, and they develop it and exploit it as a 
chariot of speed and success for progress. 


तमुश्चमाणां रज॑सि स्व आ दमे चन्द्रमिव सुरुचं हयार आ 
द॑धुः । पुरन्याः पतरं चितय॑न्तमक्षभिः पाथो न पायुं जन॑सी 
उभे अनु ॥ ४॥ 


4. Tamuksamanam rajasti sva a dame candramiva 
surucam hvara a dadhuh. Prsnyah pataram 
citayantamaksabhih patho na payum janasi ubhe 
anu. 


That energy of Agni, generous, creative and 
abundant, falling from space profusely in particles in 
waves of motion, concentrating in both heaven and earth 
through the skies, the scholars with their organs of 
perception, volition and intelligence collect like food 


864 RGVEDA 


for the journey of progress and store it, dear and lovely 
as gold, in the power homes of their own making and 
use it in circular and wavy motion for the production of 
power and vitality in simulation of both creative earth 
and heaven. 


स होता विश्वं परि भूत्वध्वरं ae हव्यैर्मनुंष ऋञ्जते गिरा । 
हिरिशिप्रो बधसानासु जर्भुर द्‌ द्यौर्न स्तृभिंज्चितयद्रोद॑ंसी 
अनुं ।॥ ५॥ 


2; Sa hota visvam pari bhutvadhvaram tamu hav- 
yairmanusa rnjate gira. Hirisipro vrdhasa-nasu 
jJarbhurad dyaurna strbhiscitayad rodasi anu. 


That Agni, self-refulgent lord of light and life, 
is the chief yajamana of universal yajna which He 
conducts, governs and transcends. Him too the whole 
humanity celebrates with songs of praise and they 
augment His yajna with holy offerings in the vedi. And 
He, voracious Agni, with a golden face and fiery mouth, 
receives, devours, burns and blazes, radiating and 
vibrating among the people advancing on their path of 
progress. May the Lord collect and radiate the light and 
vitality of life for us and spread it around by the shining 
stars, and let us too simulate and conduct the yajna in 
pursuance of heaven and earth. 


So also let the performer of scientific yajna 
conduct the holy project of research and development 
of light, energy and vitality on a universal scale. Him 
the people recognise, appreciate and applaud in words 
of praise and gratitude with holy offerings of support. 
Let this yajaka with a golden face radiate the light of 
knowledge, and, as an illuminating power among the 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 2 865 


people moving forward on the path of progress, let him 
shine as stars, collecting, developing and creating new 
light in pursuance of the generosity of heaven and earth 
at our level. 


al रेवत्संमिधानः स्वस्तये स॑न्ददस्वात्रयिमस्मासुं दीदिहि। 
आ न॑ः कृणुष्व सुविताय रोद॑सी अगं हव्या मनुंषो देव 
वीतये gu 


6. Sa no revat samidhanah svastaye sandadasvan 
rayim-asmasu didihi. A nah krnusva suvitaya 
rodasi agne havya manuso deva vitaye. 


Agni, such you are, shining bright, wealthy and 
abundant, generous and giving, create and bestow the 
light of knowledge and wealth of the world on us for 
our good. Just as heaven and earth create light and 
wealth and with it bless humanity, so you too create the 
wealth of existence for the grace and glory of life on 
earth and let the earth become a happy place fit for the 
divinities to come and dwell. 


(The mantra, according to Swami Dayanand, 1s 
applicable to the brilliant saintly and generous scholars 
and scientists.) 


ar at 3m बृहतो दाः संह स्तिणो दुरो न वाजं श्रुत्या अपां 
वृधि । प्राची द्यावापृथिवी ब्रह्मणा कृधि स्वर्णं शुक्रमुषसो 
fa दिद्युतुः wen 

4६ Dano agne brhato dah sahasrino duro na vajam 
Srutya apa vrdhi. Pract dyavaprthivi brahmana 
krdhi svarna sukramusaso vi didyutuh. 


Agni, give us liberally. Give us the grace and 
the glory a thousandfold. Reveal the light and, likewise, 


866 RGVEDA 


open the flood-gates of knowledge, wealth and power, 
and the velocity of light for the speed of progress. Let 
the heaven and earth be the eastern horizon of a new 
dawn and the dawns bring in brilliant days of holy light 
and creative vitality of life’s purity. 


स इधान उषसो राम्या अनु स्वर्णं दीदेदरुषेण भानुनां । 
होत्राभिर्‌ िर्मनुंषः स्वध्वरो राजां विशामतिथिश्चारु - 
Tadic ॥ 


8. Sa idhana usaso ramya anu svarna dideda-rusena 
bhanuna. Hotrabhiragnirmanusah svadhvaro 
raja visamatithiscarurayave. 

May the same Agni, bright and burning, radiate 
and illuminate us day and night with holy light. And 
may he, ruler of humanity, lovely and charming, high- 
priest of life’s yajna of love and non-violence, ever on 
the round like a beneficent visitor, with the rise of the 
morning sun, with holy offerings as well as gifts of food, 
energy and joy, add to the health, happiness and 
longevity of the people. 


एवा नो अग्रे अमतेषु पूर्व्यं धीष्पीपाय gefeag मानुषा | 
दुर्ाना धेनुर्वृजनेषु कारवे त्मना शतिनं पुरुरूपमिषणि ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Eva no agne amrtesu purvya dhispipaya brhad 
divesu manusa. Duhana dhenurvrjanesu karave 
tmana Satinam pururupamisani. 


Thus, Agni, ancient light of eternal vision, 
knowledge and wisdom, we pray, increase and advance 
for us among our people, immortal lovers and seekers 
of universal knowledge, versatile intelligence for our 
human purposes, and, with your sincere mind and soul, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 2 867 


impart a hundred fold specialist knowledge and 
expertise of various forms in various fields to the expert 
inventor, designer and worker according to the need 
and requirement of the situation among our dynamic 
people, knowledge and expertise from which may flow 
the wealth of food and honeyed prosperity like abundant 
milk of generous cow. 


वयमग्ने अर्व ता वा सुवीर्यं ब्र्हमणा वा चितयेमा Sat अति | 
अस्माकं द्युम्नमधि पञ्च॑ कृष्टिषूच्या स्वशरणं शुशुचीत 
दुष्टर॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Vayamagne arvata va suviryam brahmana va 
citayema janan ati. Asmakam dyumnamadhi 
panca krstisucca svarna susucita dustaram. 


Agni, leading light of life and humanity, let us 
acquire noble strength and power with speed and 
transport. Let us enlighten our people with knowledge 
to a higher than usual degree. May our honour and 
splendour be high over and among all the five classes 
of people. Lord of light, purify, sanctify and brighten 
our holy joy so that our strength, honour and happiness 
becomes difficult to challenge and grows inviolable. 


सनो बोधि सहस्य प्रशंस्यो यस्मिन्त्सुजाता इषय॑न्त at: । 
यमग्ने यज्ञमुं पयन्तिं वाजिनो नित्ये तोके दीदिवांसं स्वे 
दमे।॥ ९९॥ 

11. Sano bodhi sahasya prasamsyo yasmintsujata 
isayanta surayah. Yamagne yajnamupayanti 
vajino nitye toke didivamsam sve dame. 


Agni, adorable lord of life and majesty, leading 
light of humanity, mighty commander of challenge and 


868 RGVEDA 


victory, instruct and enlighten us in that struggle and 
endeavour for life, living in which the bright and brave 
aspire for success and arise nobly reborn and seasoned 
leaders. Temper us in that yajnic ordeal of fire, eternal 
and subtle, shining and burning in everyone’s own heart 
and home, which the warlike heroes enter and attain 
the life eternal. 


SHAT जातवेदः स्याम ते स्तोतारो ST सूरयश्च शर्मणि । 
वस्वो रायः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य भूय॑सः प्रजाव॑तः स्वपत्यस्य शग्धि 
नः॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ubhaydso jatavedah syama te stotaro agne 
surayasca sarmani. Vasvo rayah puruscandrasya 
bhuyasah prajavatah svapatyasya Sagdhi nah. 


Agni, Jataveda who know and govern all that is 
born in the world of existence, bless us that we may be 
both your admirers and worshippers and also shine 
bright and brave in the household. Help us Lord, and 
give us the competence to have a liberal share of your 
gifts of happy home, health and wealth, all round peace 
and divine grace, plenty and prosperity, a happy family 
and bright children. 


ये स्तोतृभ्यो गोअंग्रामश्व॑पेशसमगर ufos सूरयः । 
अस्माञ्च तांश्च प्र हि नेषि वस्य आ बृहद्धंदेम विदथे 
सुवीराः ॥ ९३॥ ति 

13. Ye stotrbhyo go-agram-asvapesasam-agne rati- 
mupasrjanti surayah. Asmanca tamsca pra hi nesi 
vasya a@ brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Those learned, bright and brave people who 
create and offer gifts in homage specially of quality cows 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 869 


and lands and handsome horses for the worshippers of 
Agni and developers of the science of fire, O lord of 
light and life, giver of peace and happy home, you 
advance all these and us in life, and bless us that we 
may, wise and brave, sing songs of praise to celebrate 
you in yajnic acts of life. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 3 
Agni Devata, Gritsamada Rshi 


atthe अथिर्निहिंतः पृथिव्यां were विश्वानि भुव॑नान्य- 
स्थात्‌। होता पावकः प्रदिवः सुमेधा देवो देवान्य॑जत्व- 
rea ९॥ 


॥. Samiddho agnirnihitah prthivyam pratyan visvani 
bhuvananyasthat. Hota pavakah pra-divah 
sumedha devo devan yajatvagnirarhan. 


Agni, light and fire of life and all existence, is 
established in action on and in the earth. It abides in 
and by all regions of the universe, each one of them, 
directly, immediately and positively. It is the sacred fire 
that carries on the yajna of the universe, giving, 
receiving and giving again in the cycle of cosmic 
dynamics. It is ‘pavaka’, refiner, purifier and sanctifier. 
It is bright and blazing, innately intelligent, guiding and 
directing the onward march of life. 


May Agni, in its own right of its nature and 
Dharma, bright and ever giving as the Divinity, abide 
by all the divinities of nature and humanity, holy powers 
all, and, together with them, carry on the cycle of life in 
existence. 


(Swami Dayananda interprets Agni symboli- 


870 RGVEDA 


cally, in an open-ended applied manner in the human 
context: Agni is the scholar, teacher, researcher, ruler, 
producer, worker, in fact any power human or natural, 
creatively working for life and helping humanity and 
the environment for the progress of all living beings in 
the service of God.) 


नराशंसः प्रति धार्मान्यञ्जन्तिस््नो fea: प्रतिं wet स्वर्चिः 1 
घृतप्रुषा मन॑सा हव्यमुन्दन्मूर्धन्यज्ञस्य सम॑नक्तु देवान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


(१ Narasamsah prati dhamanyanjan tisro divah prati 
mahna svarcih.Ghrtaprusa manasa havyamundan 
murdhan yajnasya mananaktu devan . 


Agni, lord of life and light of the world, adored 
by many people, self-refulgent with the light of his own 
flames, revealing the regions of the universe with his 
own knowledge and power and lighting the threefold 
fires of the sun in heaven, lightning in the sky and fire 
on the earth, including the three fires of the home, i.e., 
garhapatya, ahavaniya and daksinagni, replete with ghrta 
and brilliant with his own inner light of mind, receiving 
the offerings into the vedi and augmenting and returning 
them manifold in showers of bliss, may, we pray, bless 
and beatify the brilliant and generous yajakas of divine 
order seated at the head of yajna. 


ईव्ठितो अंगने मन॑सा नो अर्हन्देवान्य॑क्षि मानुंषात्पूर्वो अद्य । 
स आ de मरुतां शर्धो अच्युतमिन्द्रं नरो बर्हिषदं यज- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 

of Ilito agne manasa no arhan devan yaksi manusat 


purvo adya. Sa a vaha marutam sardho acyuta- 
mindram naro barhisadam yajadhvam . 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 871 


Agni, praised, adored and celebrated lord of 
light and power of knowledge, first and foremost friend 
of humanity, worthy of honour and pleased to listen and 
bless, we pray join the brilliant divinities and reward 
them with science and sacred knowledge now as ever. 
Lord, such as you are, bring us the speed and force of 
the Maruts, mighty winds, and the imperishable power 
and glory of Indra, showers of electric energy from the 
clouds. Come ye all members of humanity, join and 
honour Agni seated on the grass upfront on the holy 
vedi of your yajna of life. 


देव॑ बर्हिर्वर्धमानं सुवीरं स्तीर्ण राये सुभरं वेद्यस्याम्‌। 
घृतेनाक्तं व॑सवः सीदतेदं विश्वे देवा आदित्या 
यत्ञिर्यासः॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Deva barhirvardhamanam suviram stirnam raye 
subharam vedyasyam. Ghrtenaktam vasavah 
sidatedam visve deva aditya yajniyasah. 

Deva Agni, brilliant and generous lord of light 
and life, knowledge and bliss, come and grace this holy 
grass spread around the vedi manned by bright and brave 
young people and, with ghrta in the vedi, refine and 
reinforce the waters full of virility, holding power and 
prosperity and further expanding for the growth of life’s 
wealth and joy. And let the Vasu order of researchers, 
Aditya order of eminent scholars, all nobilities of the 
world and holy yajakas, the vitality of the Vasu sources 
and supports of life and the light of the sun on yearly 
rounds, too, join the programme and vitalise the waters. 


वि श्रयन्तामुर्विया दूयमाना द्वारो देवीः सुप्रायणा 
नमोभिः | व्यचंस्वतीर्विं प्र॑थन्तामलुर्यां वर्ण पुनाना 
यशसं सुवी-र॑म्‌॥ ५॥ 


872 RGVEDA 


5. Vi Srayantamurviya huyamana dvaro devih 
suprayana namobhih. Vyacasvatirvi prathanta- 
majurya varnam punana yasSasam suviram. 


Let the sacred doors of yajnic progress, wide, 
expansive and easy of access, open and welcome the 
performers. And let the performers, youthful and 
unaging, take recourse to these at the call of the wide 
wide earth and spread around with acts of humility and 
gratitude, purifying and sanctifying the integrity of their 
form and character, honour and grace, and the heroism 
of their young generation. 


साध्वपांसि सनता न sfara उषासानक्ता वय्येव रण्विते। 
wd ततं सरं वय॑न्ती समीची यज्ञस्य पेश॑ः सुदुघे 
पयस्वती ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sadhvapamsi sanata na uksite usasanakta 
vayyeva ranvite. Tantum tatam samvayanti samict 
yajnasya pesah sudughe payasvati. 


May the night and day going together in orbit, 
singing in unison, replete with the waters of peace and 
bliss, abundant in the milk of life and profusely giving, 
harmoniously shaping and advancing the beauteous 
form of nature’s vast yajnic evolution, like two 
companion women weaving the warp and woof of cloth, 
bless us with noble competence for holy yajnic actions 
performed with humility and gratitude to Agni, lord of 
light, yajna and advancement. 


(Like the night and day the husband and wife 
should act in unison and carry on the holy yajna of the 
family and the household as part of the vast yajna of 
life in existence.) 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 873 


दैव्या होतारा प्रथमा Paget ऋजु Aaa: समृचा ATEN | 
देवान्यज॑न्तावृतुथा समञ्जतो नाभां पृथिव्या अधि सानुषु 
त्रिषु॥ ७॥ 


7. Daivya hotara prathama vidustara rju yaksatah 
samrca vapustara. Devan yajantavrtutha 
samanjato nabha prthivya adhi sanusu trisu. 


The two divine yajakas, day and night, husband 
and wife, of prime nature and character, blest with innate 
intelligence, and handsome in form and stature, carry 
on the creative yajna sincerely and naturally with hymns 
of praise for the lord of existence. Carrying on the yajna 
in honour of the divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity according to the seasons on the vedi of the 
earth and over the three peaks of space, 1.e., the earth’s 
atmosphere, the middle region and the region of 
heavenly light, or doing their best in the first, second 
and third quarter of life for Dharma, artha and kama, 
they live and act together. 


सरस्वती साधयन्ती धियं न sat देवी भार्ती 
विष्वतूर्तिः । तिस्त्रो देवीः स्वधया बर्हिरिदमच्छिद्रं पान्तु 
शरणं निषद्य ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sarasvati sadhayanti dhiyam na ila devi bharati 
visvaturtih. Tisro devith svadhaya barhireda- 
macchidram pantu Saranam nisadya . 


Ila, the transcendent Infinity of Divine 
Omniscience, Sarasvati, dynamic universal knowledge 
revealed, recorded and envisioned in meditation, and 
Bharati, living human speech which holds the treasure 
of secular knowledge ever on the move in life onward 
like a tempest: may these three goddesses inspire our 


874 RGVEDA 


intelligence and, with their innate and essential power, 
come and grace our holy seat of yajna and bless it as 
our perfect haven and faultless home under protection 
of the divinities. 


पिश्ङ्घरूपः Gent वयोधाः श्रुष्टी वीरो जायते देवकामः 1 
प्रजां त्वष्टा वि ष्य॑तु नाभिमस्मे अथा देवानामप्येतु 
पाथंः॥ ९॥ 


9. Pisangarupah subharo vayodhah srusti viro 
jayate devakamah. Prajam tvasta vi syatu 
nabhimasme atha devanamapyetu pathah. 


The person who loves God and serves the 
divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity soon and 
sure grows handsome in form and personal splendour, 
generous and abundant in nature and habit, strong in 
health, virility and longevity, and bright and brave in 
performance. May Tvashta, lord creator and maker of 
life-forms, give us progeny, our sustenance and security 
for life, and then bless us with food and maintenance 
for the learned and the divines on way to the holy 
destination of life. 


ववनस्पतिंरवस्रजन्ुपं tarahreta: daarta प्र धीभिः । त्रिधा 
सम॑क्तं नयतु प्रजानन्देवेभ्यो दैव्य॑ः शमितोप हव्यम्‌ Qo 


10. Vanaspatiravasrjannupa sthadagnirhavih 
sudayati pra dhibhih. Tridha samaktam nayatu 
prajanan devebhyo daivyah samitopa havyam. 


May Agni, ruler and life-giver, Vanaspati, giver 
of vitality to vegetation, stand by us. May Vanaspati, 
trees and all vegetation, giving fruits, flowers and life- 
breath, stand by us. Agni, sun and fire, prepares for us 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 875 


the food for life and yajna. So also may Agni, the scholar 
specialist of the science of yajna, knowing his subject 
and aware of his duty, rising high in the light of holiness, 
divine of nature, creator and harbinger of peace, bring 
in for us yajnic materials mixed, refined and sanctified 
three ways by thought, word and deed for threefold 
purpose of the health of body, mind and soul for the 
divinities of nature and humanity. 


घृतं मिमिक्षे घतम॑स्य योनिर्घृते चितो घुतस्व॑स्य धामं। 
अनुष्वधमा de मादय॑स्व स्वाहाकृतं वृषभ वक्षि 
हव्यम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ghrtam mimikse ghrtamasya yonirghrte 5110 
ghrtamvasya dhama. Anusvadhama vaha mdada- 
yasva svahakrtam vrsabha vaksi havyam. 


I mix, prepare and offer ghrta into the fire. Ghrta, 
vitality, is the womb of fire energy. It (fire energy and 
vitality) exists in fertility, ghrta, which is its medium. 
And this ghrta, fertility, too abides in Ghrta, eternal 
creativity, Agni, Life Supreme, which is the ultimate 
abode of all existential energy, vitality, fertility, 
production and procreation. O Vrsabha, youthful and 
generous yajaka overflowing with the lustre and 
splendour of vitality, bring in the sanctified and 
dedicated materials committed to Svaha, the word of 
truth and sincerity of the oblation in yajna. Collect, 
prepare, commit, offer with faith and dedication, and 
rejoice in your act of creation. 


876 RGVEDA 


Mandala 2/Sukta 4 
Agni Devata, Somahuti Bhargava Rshi 


gad: सुद्योत्मानं सुवृक्तिं विशामभिमतिंधिं सुप्रयस॑म्‌। 
मित्रह॑व यो दिधिषाय्यो भूदेव आदेवे जने जातवेदाः ॥ ९॥ 


ly Huve vah sudyotmanam suvrktim visamagnima- 
tithim suprayasam. Mitra iva yo didhisayyo bhud 
deva adeve jane jatavedah. 


For you all, I invoke, adore and worship Agni, 
lord of light and giver of life and energy, blissfully 
shining, selflessly generous and abundant in food and 
wealth of the world, ever on the round among the people 
like a cherished guest of honour, who may, I pray, be 
the sustainer and protector of all like a friend, brilliant 
light giver for all the people who know and understand, 
omnipotent as he is in the world of existence, lord 
omniscient as he is of all that is born. 


इमं विधन्तो अपां सधस्थे fgarden inet विक्ष्वा ङयोः | 
एष विश्वान्यभ्यस्तु भूमा देवानामभिर॑र तिर्जीराश्व॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Imamam vidhanto apam sadhasthe dvita dadhur- 
bhrgavo viksvayoh. Esa visvanyabhyastu bhuma 
devanamagniraratirjirasvah. 


This fire energy, uniformly present in the midst 
of waters in the womb of space, the Bhrgus, specialists 
of heat energy, collect, bring down, reproduce, and place 
the part available among the people for their use in two 
forms, one that gives heat and light and the other that is 
motive energy. May this agni, fire energy, dynamic and 
strong, fastest in motion, be vastly and universally 
available to all as gift of the divinities of nature’s power 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 4 877 
and the brilliant scholars of the earth. 


afi देवासो arity विक्षु प्रियं धुः क्षेष्यन्तो न मित्रम्‌ । 
स दींदयदुशशतीरूर्म्या आ दश्चास्यो यो दास्व॑ते दम आ ॥ ३॥ 


3 Agnim devaso manusisu viksu priyam dhuh 
ksesyanto na mitram. Sa didayaduSatirurmya a 
daksayyo yo dasvate dama 4. 


Agni, heat and light energy, brilliant scientists 
living among human communities in the world produce 
and establish like a dear favourite friend in power 
homes. And that power, developed and exploited by 
experts, as a catalytic force burning in waves of light, 
brightens up the nights all round with love and joy for 
the man of generosity. 


अस्य र॒ण्वा स्वस्यैव पुष्टिः संदुष्टिरस्य हियानस्य दक्षोः | 
fa यो भरिश्चदोष॑धीषु जिह्वामत्यो न रथ्यो दोधवीति 
वारान्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Asya ranva svasyeva pustih samdrstirasya hiya- 
nasya daksoh. Vi yo bharibhradosadhisu jihva- 
matyo na rathyo dodhaviti varan. 


Joyous and beautiful is the growth of this fire, 
satisfying as one’s own. Delightful is the holy form of 
it as it rises to a bright and blazing stature. Brilliant and 
inspiring is it while it shines in herbs and trees, and 
awful is its form while it raises its flames of fire like the 
tongues of a voracious demon or shakes them like the 
mane and tail of a chariot horse. 


आ यन्मे अभ्वं वनदः पनन्तोशिग्भ्यो नापिंमीत adh 
स चित्रेण चिकिते रंसु भासा जुंजुवीं यो मुहुरा युवा भूत्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


878 RGVEDA 


5: A yanme abhvam vanadah panantosigbhyo 
namimita varnam. Sa citrena cikite ramsu bhasa 
jujurvam yo muhura yuva bhiut. 


That immensity and golden glory of Agni which 
the scholars and admirers fail to measure, comprehend 
and express for me and the worshippers, He himself, 
joyous and blissful, reveals directly by his glorious light 
in meditation and through its majesty in blaze, the same 
which, though aging since eternity, grows young again 
and again every moment of time. 


आ यो वना तातुषाणो न भाति वार्ण पथा tala स्वानीत्‌ | 
कृष्णाध्वा तपू रण्वश्चिकेत द्यौरिव स्मयमानो नभोभिः ॥ ६॥ 


6. A yo vana tatrsano na bhati varna patha rathyeva 
svanit. Krsnadhva tapu ranvasciketa dyauriva 
smayamano nabhobhih. 


Agni, bright as sun rays, flaming with light and 
love, shines, radiates and roars like a flood rushing on 
its way, or like a war horse on the highway. Bright and 
burning, it goes on dispelling darkness and leaving a 
trail of light on its path, blazing like the light of heaven 
and thundering like lightning. It can be known and 
realised with homage of service in humility and inputs 
of fine foods in yajna. 

स यो व्यस्थादभि cated usrifa स्वयुरगोपाः। अथिः 
शोचिष्पौं अतसान्युष्णन्कृष्णव्य॑थिरस्वदयन्न भूम ie 


५ Sa yo vyasthadabhi daksadurvim pasurnaiti 
svayuragopah. Agnih Socisman atasanyusnan 
krsnavyathirasvadayanna bhuma . 


That is Agni which stands by us all round, heats 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 4 879 


and lights the earth, and freely at will goes forward like 
the light of the eye or like a cow without the shepherd 
— Agni, shining, blazing and cleansing, heating and 
moving the particles of matter and energy, attracting, 
propelling and dispelling, breaking up, universal 
presence all knowing, as if tasting everything that exists. 


नू ते Gaearedat अधींतौ ada विदथे मन्म॑ शंसि । अस्मे 
अग्रे संयद्वीरं बृहन्तं क्षुमन्तं वाजं स्वपत्यं रयिं दाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nu te purvasyavaso adhitau trttye vidathe manma 
Samsi. Asme agne samyadviram brhantam 
ksumantam vajam svapatyam rayim dah . 


Agni, lord omniscient, teacher par excellence, 
in studies and in our third and highest order of yajnic 
ways of living you teach us the eternal science of all 
round protection and progress. Bless us, O lord, with 
bright and brave dedicated youth, immensely growing 
prosperity of food, knowledge and speed of 
advancement, noble progeny, and wealth, power and 
honour. 


त्वया यथां गृत्समदासो। अग्रे गुहा वन्वन्त SAT अचि ष्युः। 
सुवीरासो अभिमातिषाहः स्मत्सूरिभ्यो गृणते तद्यो 
धाः॥ ९॥ 


9. Tvaya yatha grtsamadaso agne guha vanvanta 
uparan abhi syuh. Suviradso abhimatisahah 
smat suribhyo grnate tad vayo dhah . 


Agni, lord of light and life, for the wise and the 
brave and for the teacher and the celebrant, bring that 
health and age by which the people, happy and 
enlightened, shining within with discriminative 


880 RGVEDA 


intelligence, blest with noble youth and fighting force, 
challenging hate and enmity, may, by your grace, rise 
high and ever higher. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 5 
Agni Devata, Somahuti Bhargava Rshi 


होर्ताजनिष्ट चेत॑नः पिता पितृभ्य॑ ऊतयें। 
प्रयक्षञ्जेन्यं वसु श॒केम॑ वाजिनो यम॑म्‌ 8 


|, Hotajanista cetanah pita pitrbhya utaye. 
Prayaksanjeyam vasu $akema vajino yamam. 


The yajaka, man of self, man of intelligence and 
self-awareness performing yajna, giving and 
cooperating with creative people, grows and is reborn 
as father, supporter, sustainer and protector for the elder 
generation and sustaining powers for the protection and 
advancement of life and society in general as part of 
the social and historical cycle, creating wealth, power 
and services worthy to be attained. Let us too, intelligent 
and progressive, be able to create an environment which 
may take us forward as a disciplined and organised 
society. 


आ यस्मिन्त्सप्त र॒श्मय॑स्त॒ता ast नेतरि। 
मनुष्वदैव्य॑मष्टमं पोता विश्वं तदि॑न्वति ॥ २॥ 
8 A yasmintsapta rasmayastata yajiiasya netari. 


Manusvad daivyam-astamam pota visvam tadin- 
vati. 


In the cosmic conduct of the universal yajna, 
the sun is the performer, and there are seven rays in the 
spectrum of light acting like seven priests. There is one 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 5 881 


more, eighth, just like the human agent in the socio- 
natural yajnic life of the world, and that is the divine 
performer, Agni, universal holy power, purifier, 
sanctifier and sustainer who pervades and sustains the 
entire world of existence. 


दधन्वे वा यदीमनु वोचद्‌ ब्रह्माणि वेरु तत्‌। 
परि विश्वानि काव्यां नेमिश्चक्रमिंवाभवत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Dadhanve va yadimanu vocad brahmani veru tat. 
Pari visvani kavya nemiscakramivabhavat . 


He holds and controls the waters of life, and He 
reveals the universal knowledge of existence, the Veda. 
And He knows that world of existence and comprehends 
the cosmic system and its working. Thus He holds and 
controls its working just as the centre-hold of the wheel 
and the rim hold the structure and control the movement 
of the wheel. 


साकं हि शुचिना शुचिः प्रशास्ता ्रतुनाज॑नि । 

विद्धां अस्य व्रता gat वयाइवानु, रोहते ॥ ४॥ 
4. Sakam hi Sucind Sucih prasasta kratundjani. 

Vidvan asya vrata dhruva vaya ivanu rohate. 

Surely he who, by the grace of the Divine Spirit 

of universal purity, grows pure, and, by the divine 
control and universal action of the Spirit of the universe, 
rises to a state of self-control and right action, he is 
reborn as the real man of knowledge, and, abiding by 
the immutable law and discipline of Divinity and nature, 
grows high and great in life like the branches of a tree 
(drawing and receiving the spirit and breath of life from 
the root at the centre of existence). 


882 RGVEDA 


ता steer adtargent नेष्टः सचन्त aa: | 
कुवित्तिस्भ्य आ वरं स्वसारो या इदं ययुः UU 


>. Ta asya varnamayuvo nestuh sacanta dhenavah. 
Kuvit tisrbhya ठ varam svasaro ya idam yayuh. 


And those girls and women who abide by the 
nature, law and self-willed action of the Omniscient 
Controller of existence, and, like sister streams flowing 
from the same source, receive abundant and cherished 
showers of life and light energy from the three worlds 
of earth, heaven and the middle regions of the skies, 
rise to the beauty, grace and generosity of the divine 
fire and waters and bless the world around like mother 
cows by virtue of their knowledge, performance and 
devotion. 


यदीं मातुरुप स्वसा धृतं भर न्त्यस्थि॑त। 
तासामध्वर्युराग॑तौ यवो वृष्टीव॑ं मोदते ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yadi maturupa svasa ghrtam bharantyasthita. 
Tasamadhvaryuragatau yavo vrstiva modate. 


If the mother and the sister bearing ghrta and 
water come and sit close around the vedi in yajna, then 
on their arrival the high-priest and the yajakas rejoice 
like herbs and grass and barley on the arrival of rain 
showers. 


स्वः स्वाय धाय॑से कृणुतामृत्विगृत्विजंम्‌। 
स्तोमं यज्ञं चादरं वनेमा ररिमा वयम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ae Svah svaya dhayase krnutamrtvigrtvijam. 
Stomam yajnam cadaram vanema rarima vayam. 


Let the priests and yajakas do their priest-like 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 6 883 


tasks for the sake of heavenly light and the self in the 
service of Agni, lord sustainer and controller of life and 
the universe. Let them offer songs of praise and yajnic 
action to the Lord. May we too, we pray, as participants 
of yajna, rejoice in the holiness and divinity of life and, 
with dedicated performance, attain the abundant wealth 
and waters of life and the spirit divine. 


यथां विद्धां अरं करद्विश्वेभ्यो यजतेभ्यंः | 
अयमग्ने त्वे अपि यं यज्ञं च॑कृमा वयम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yatha vidvan aram karad visvebhyo yajatebhyah. 
Ayamagne tve api yam yajnam cakrma vayam. 


O lord giver of light and life, Agni, what this 
man of knowledge and wisdom does holily and 
gracefully for all the saints and sagely performers of 
yajna, the same he does for you too in dedication. And 
so also whatever yajnic acts of life we perform, we 
dedicate to you. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 6 
Agni Devata, Somahuti Bhargava Rshi 


इमां मे अगे समिध॑पिमामुपसदं वनेः। 
इमा उ षु श्रुधी गिरः ॥ ९॥ 


i Imam me agne samidham-imamupasadam vaneh. 
Ima u su Srudhi girah. 


Agni, lord giver of light and knowledge, pray 
accept this holy fuel of mine offered with folded hands, 
accept this homage and allow the supplicants entry to 
the yajna of enlightenment, and listen graciously to these 
prayers of mine. 


884 RGVEDA 


अया तें अगे विधेमोर्जो नपादश्व॑मिष्टे। 
एना सूक्तेन सुजात ॥ २॥ 


pA Aya te agne vidhemorjo napadasvamiste. 
Ena suktena sujata. 


Agni, child as well as creator and preserver of 
energy and power, lover of speed and acceleration, 
brilliantly risen to eminence, with this offer and homage 
and by this song and celebration of light and fire, let us 
serve you and advance the yajnic development of 
knowledge and energy. 


तं cat गीर्भ्गिर्वणसं द्रविणस्यु द्रविणोदः। 
aud सपर्यवः ॥ ३॥ 


3; Tam tva girbhirgirvanasam dravinasyum 
dravinodah. Saparyema saparyavah. 


Agni, lord of wealth and power of existence, 
lover and creator of energy, power and wealth, giver of 
wealth and honour, with songs of love and praise, we, 
your lovers and devotees, are at your service with our 
homage and holy offerings — seekers and supplicants 
as we are. 


स बोधि ghar वसुंपते वसुंदावन्‌। 
युयोध्य१ स्मद्‌ द्वेषांसि ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Sa bodhi surirmaghava vasupate vasudavan. 
Yuyodhyasmad dvesamsi. 


Agni, lord of light, give us knowledge and 
enlightenment. Lord bright and brave of knowledge, 
power and honour, lord of wealth and grandeur, giver 
of wealth, power, honour and glory of the world, ward 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 6 885 


off all hate and jealousy of existence and cleanse us 
from within. 


wal aff दिवस्परि स नो वाज॑मनर्वाण॑म्‌। 
स न॑: सहस्त्रिणीरिषंः ॥ ५॥ 


र Sa no vrstim divaspari sa no vajamanarvanam. 
Sa nah sahasrinirisah. 


Agni gives us the rain showers from the regions 
of the sun and sky. Agni gives us the power and 
automotive speed of movement without the horse. Agni 
gives us a thousand forms of food and energy. 


ईव्छानायावस्यवे afas दूत नो गिरा। 
यजिष्ठ होत॒रा ग॑हि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ilanayavasyave yavistha dita no gira. 
Yajistha hotara gahi. 


Agni, lord of light and power, youngest and 
unaging, harbinger of safety and destroyer of evil, power 
adorable and generous giver, for the supplicant and the 
worshipper in need seeking protection and progress, 
come and listen to our prayers. 


ard a ईय॑से विद्धान्‌ जन्मो भयां कवे। 
दूतो जन्येव fad: ॥ ७॥ 

८ Antarhyagna tyase vidvan janmobhaya kave. 
Dito janyeva mitryah. 


Agni, omnipresent lord of light, you are ever 
present in the heart within. Lord of knowledge, poetic 
visionary of the universe, you know the birth and death 
of things past, present and future. Harbinger and giver 


886 RGVEDA 


of knowledge of life in existence, you are the friend of 
all living beings for the sake of entire humanity. 


स fast आ च॑ पिप्रयो यक्षि चिकित्व आनुषक्‌ | 
आ चास्मिन्त्स॑त्सि बर्हिषि ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sa vidvan a ca piprayo yaksi cikitva anusak. 
A casmintsatsi barhisi. 


Agni, lord of knowledge, loving and kind, you 
give whatever we need since you know and command 
the wealth of the world. And, omnipresent in the quarters 
of the universe, you come, manifest and bless our home, 
sit on our vedi of yajna, this same one where we pray. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 7 
Agni Devata, Somahuti Bhargava Rshi 


1S यविष्ठ भार ताऽ द्युमन्तमा भ॑र । 
वसो! पुसु स्पृहं रयिम्‌॥ ९॥ 


ie Srestham yavistha bharata’gne dyumantama 
bhara. Vaso purusprham rayim . 


Agni, most youthful spirit and ruling power of 
the world, Bharata, lord commander of abundance and 
prosperity, home of life’s joy and comfort and giver of 
whatever wealth whoever loves to have, come bearing 
that best and highest and most shining wealth which 
entire humanity loves and aspires to create and possess. 
Come and bless all. 


मानो अरातिरीरत देवस्य मर्त्य॑स्य च। 
पर्षि तस्यां उत द्विषः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 7 887 


2. Ma no aratirisata devasya martyasya ca. 
Parsi tasya uta dvisah. 


Agni, generous and brilliant lord ruler of the 
world of life, let no one who is selfish, ungenerous, 
uncreative and graceless rule over us, whether we are 
learned and bright or just simple ordinary folk living as 
children of nature. Liberate us from him, purge us of 
the hateful and the envious within and without, and 
purge him too of hate and enmity. 


विश्वां उत त्वयां वयं धारां उदन्याइव । 
अति गाहेमहि fea: ॥ ३॥ 


> Visva uta tvaya vayam dhara udanya iva. 
Ati gahemahi dvisah. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, brilliant 
ruling power of the world, let us all, with you and by 
your divine grace, plunge and penetrate into all forces 
of hate and enmity, explore and fight and cross over the 
evils as navigators cross over the turbulent waves of 
the sea. 


शुचिः पावक वन्द्योऽ गर gets रोचसे | 
त्वं घृतेभिराहतः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Sucih pavaka vandyo’gne brhad vi rocase. 
Tvam ghrtebhirahutah. 


Agni, pure and brilliant, burning, cleansing and 
creating, you are the power adorable, refulgent, shining 
bright, vast and mighty. And among us you are invoked, 
kindled, raised and fed and raised into flames of light 
and fire with profuse libations of ghrta in joint yajna. 


888 RGVEDA 


त्वं नो असि arcarsal बशाभिंरुश्चभिः। 
अष्टाप॑दीथिराहंतः ॥ ५ ॥ 

>. Tvam no asi bharata’gne vasabhiruksabhih. 
Astapadtbhirahutah . 


Agni, brilliant ruling lord of light and life, you 
are the holder and wielder of wealth and power for us 
by virtue of generous cows and virile bulls and with the 
generosity of our noble women and the industry of our 
brave and creative men. And you are invoked and adored 
with eightfold voices of holy chants in yajna. 


ada: सर्पिरासुतिः wat होता ava: | 
सहसस्पुत्रो STAT ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Dravannah sarpirasutih pratno hota varenyah. 


Sahasasputro adbhutah. 


Marvellous is Agni, child of courage and power, 
ancient and eternal. Fuel wood is its food and ghrta its 
drink. Creator, giver and receiver, it calls up everything 
to life and shines with light and heat, adorable, a darling 
of our choice. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 8 
Agni Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 
वाजयन्निव नू रथान्योगौ stired स्तुहि । 
यशस्त॑मस्य मीव्न्हुष॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vajayanniva nu rathan yogan agnerupa stuhi. 
Yasastamasya milhusah. 


Scientist of eminence, would you like to drive 
your chariots fast and far? Then tap, appraise and exploit 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 8 889 


agni, fire, in various uses and experiments. It is 
immensely powerful, replete with wealth and liquid 
energy and a blessing for humanity. So is water. 


यः सुनीथो द॑दाशुषेऽ Gat जरय॑न्नरिम्‌। 
चारुप्रतीकः आदतः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yah sunitho dadasu-se’juryo jarayannarim. 
Carupratika ahutah . 


Agni, brilliant and leading power of the world, 
is generous for the liberal investor. Inexhaustible itself, 
it destroys the negative forces inimical to life. Beautiful 
and blissful in nature and character, it is invoked and 
lighted for power and comfort in life. 


य उ चया दमेष्वा दोषोषसिं प्रशस्यते | 
यस्यं ad न मीय॑ते॥ ३॥ 


Ya u Sriya damesva dososasi prasasyate. 
Yasya vratam na miyate . 


Agni, power of heat and life of the world, is 
honoured and valued in the homes day and night, and 
its potential and function is never measured out. 


आ यः स्वधैर्णं भानुनां चित्रो विभात्यर्चिंरषा । 
अजञ्जानो अजररभि॥४॥ 


4. A yah svarna bhanuna citro vibhatyarcisa. 
Anjano ajarairabhi. 


Agni which gloriously shines and blazes for us 
with the light of the sun is wonderful and awe-inspiring 
with its beauty and splendour, manifesting itself through 
unaging forms, revealing them to our sight and 
experience. 


890 RGVEDA 


अत्रिमनु स्वराज्य॑मधिमुक्थानिं वावृधुः | 
विश्वा अधि feral दधे।॥ ५॥ 


त Atrimanu svarajyamagnimukthani vavrdhuh. 
Visva adhi Sriyo dadhe. 


Holy words of praise and appreciation advance 
and celebrate Agni, light and power of the world, self- 
refulgent, free and self-governing, which devours the 
offerings of yajna and yields the beauty and fragrance 
of life beyond all three kinds of physical, mental and 
spiritual ailments and discomfort. For that reason I bear 
and abide by it above all other wealth and beauty of the 
world. 


अग्नेरिन्द्रस्य सोम॑स्य दे वानामूतिभिवर्वयम्‌। 
अरिष्यन्तः wana ष्याम पृतन्यतः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Agnerindrasya somasya devanamutibhirvayam. 
Arisyantah sacemahyabhi syama prtanyatah. 


Agni, light and life of existence, prime power 
and energy of the world, may we ever abide and benefit 
by you by virtue of the light and protection of Indra, 
the sun, Soma, the moon, and the divinities of nature 
such as earth, and the brilliant geniuses of humanity 
who give us the knowledge of Agni, fire, energy and 
electric power. And may we, unhurt and inviolable, rise 
in life, building our defences and fighting the battles of 
our growth and progress. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 9 891 


Mandala 2/Sukta 9 
Agni Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


नि drat होतृषदने faatreant दीदिवो अंसदत्सुदश्चः | 
अदंब्धत्रतप्रमतिर्वसिं्ः सहस््ंभरः शुचिंजिह्छो अथिः॥ ९॥ 


i, Ni hota hotrsadane vidanastveso didivan asadat 
sudaksah. Adabdha-vratapramatir-vasisthah 
Sahasrambharah sucijihvo’ agnih. 


Agni, lord of light, life and knowledge, ever sits 
and abides as the chief of life’s evolution, invoking the 
divine powers, receiving, consuming and creating, and 
giving the wherewithal for life’s evolution. Let him sit 
in the home of the host of yajna, in and around the vedi, 
in the chariot, in the car, in the house of science and 
industry, wherever the yajna is carried on in nature and 
human society. He is fully knowledgeable and ever 
present, shining, radiating and illuminating the people 
around with knowledge, best creator of haven and home 
for peace and comfort, bearing a thousand forms of 
wealth and power, crystalline pure and bright of the rays 
of light and tongues of fire for the Word of knowledge 
and passion for action. Such is Agni, radiant and 
flaming, burning and blazing, devouring, creating, ever 
blessing. 


त्वं दूतस्त्वमु नः पर स्पास्त्वं वस्य वुंषभ प्रणोता। 
अगे तोकस्य नस्तने तनूनामप्रयुच्छन्दीद्य॑द्रोधि गोपाः ॥ २॥ 


pa Tvam diutastvamu nah paraspastvam vasya 
vrsabha praneta. Agne tokasya nastane tanuna- 
maprayucchan didyad bodhi gopah. 


Agni, lord creator and giver of light and life, 


892 RGVEDA 


high-priest of the yajna of knowledge and creative action 
for advancement, you are the messenger of inspiration 
and enlightenment, you are the saviour protector and 
pilot to guide us across the seas, you are our haven and 
home, leader and guide most generous and brave in the 
forward march, relentless in the continuation of the race, 
community, family and progeny and the expansion and 
advancement of our body and body-politic. Lord 
omniscient, you know. Giver of knowledge, enlighten 
us. Protector, preserver and advancer of our animal 
wealth and health of body, mind and senses, saviour 
and preserver of mother earth and her environment and 
animal world, help us to protect, preserve and advance 
ourselves and save the earth and her environment. 


fade ते परमे जन्म॑न्नग्ने विधेम स्तोमैरव॑रे सधस्थे । 
यस्माद्योनेरुदारिथा यजे तं प्र त्वे हृवींषिं Set SHS ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Vidhema te parame janmannagne vidhema sto- 
mairavare sadhasthe. Yasmad yonerudaritha yaje 
tam pra tve havimsi juhure samiddhe. 


Agni, lord of light, giver of life and leader of 
our yajnic progress and advancement, let us roam around 
in meditation in that highest heaven of freedom where 
you reveal your presence in living experience. Let us 
send up our holy chants of Vedic hymns to celebrate 
you in the regions of the skies this side of the heavens 
of light. Let us adore you with havan and homage here 
on earth where the learned and the wise offer oblations 
of ghrta into the vedi wherefrom you rise and manifest 
in fire and fragrance to bless the world around. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 9 893 


अग्ने यज॑स्व हविषा यजीयाज्छुष्टी देष्णमभि गुंणीहि eel: । 
त्वं ह्यसि रयिपती रयीणां त्वं शुक्रस्य वच॑सो मनोता ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Agne yajasva havisa yajtyanchrusti desnamabhi 
grnihi radhah. Tvam hyasi rayipati rayinam 
tvam Sukrasya vacaso manota. 


Agni, high-priest of cosmic yajna, perform the 
yajna of creation and evolution with the holiest materials 
in existence, go on with the performance, instantly as 
ever, receiving, offering, consuming and creating the 
wealth worthy and valuable as holy gift, and loudly 
proclaim the wealth you have created and the success 
you have achieved. Surely you alone are the lord of 
riches, creator as well as dispenser of the jewels of the 
earth. And you are the inspirer and proclaimer of the 
eternal Word of power, purity and truth. 


उभयं ते न श्चीयते वसव्यं feared जाय॑मानस्य दस्म। 
कृधि क्षुमन्तं aan कृधि पतिं स्वपत्यस्य रायः ॥ ५॥ 


Ubhayam te na (८९7341८ vasavyam divedive 
jJayamanasya dasma. Krdhi ksumantam jaritara- 
magne krdhi patim svapatyasya rayah. 


Both your creation and dispensation of wealth 
never end, never diminish. Day by day your creation 
grows and your gifting prospers, lord of charity and 
destroyer of suffering as you are. Agni, lord of universal 
yajna, promote the worshipper of Divinity dedicated to 
holy work, promote the man of wealth and charity, 
promote the father of noble children and the defender 
of holy tradition, and raise the potential of the master 
creator of yajnic wealth. 


894 RGVEDA 


सैनानीकेन सुविदत्रो अस्मे ast car आय॑जिष्ठः स्वस्ति। 
अदब्धो गोपा उत न॑: पर स्पा अग्न द्युमदुत रेवद्िंदीहि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sainanikena suvidatro asme yasta devan ayaji- 
sthah svasti. Adabdho gopa uta nah paraspa 
Agne dyumaduta revad didthi. 


Agni, lord of light, creator and commander of 
wealth, shine with this glory of yours, generous 
benefactor of ours, high-priest of cosmic yajna with the 
bounties of nature to the maximum for the good of 
humanity. Shine on, high-priest of yajna, fearless and 
inviolable, protector of the cow, mother earth and her 
children, our saviour and ultimate protector. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 10 
Agni Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


जोहूत्रो अभिः dem: पितेवेच्छस्पदे मनुंषा यत्समिब्दः । श्रियं 
वसानो अमृतो विचेता मर्मजेन्य॑ः श्रवस्य 4: स वाजी ॥ ९॥ 


il; Johutro agnih prathamah pitevelaspade manusa 
yat samiddhah. Sriyam vasano amrto viceta 
marmrjenyah Sravasyah sa vaji. 


Agni, heat and light of existence, first and 
primary power of yajnic applications, kindled and raised 
on earth in the vedi, both spiritual and material, is a 
source of comfort and protection as a paternal power. 
Wearing the spectral beauty of colour, indestructible, 
pure and purifying, it is a splendid power that can be 
used as fuel food for the production of energy, motion 
and speed like a horse. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 10 895 


gen shared मे विश्वांभिगीं भिरि मृतो विचेताः | 
श्यावा रथं वहतो रोहिता वोतारुषां चक्रे fasts: ॥ २॥ 


2 Sriya agniscitrabhanurhavam me visvabhir- 
girbhiramrto vicetah. Syava ratham vahato rohita 
votarusaha cakre vibhrtrah. 


Listen ye all to my call, proclamation and 
invitation to power made in universal words of science: 
Agni is a wonderful power that shines with the sun, 
indestructible, and a source of manifold knowledge, 
riding a chariot drawn by wave-like horses of rain-bow 
colours—dark brown, bay, reddish, dark red and violet, 
the horses bearing the two wheels forward in circuit. 


उत्तानायामजनयन्त्सुषुं तं भुव॑दभिः पुरुपेशासु गभ॑ | 
शिरिणायां चिदक्तुना महोभिरप॑रीवृतो वसति प्रचेताः ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Uttanayamajanayantsusutam bhudagnih puru- 
pesasu garbhah. Sirinayam cidaktuna mahobhi- 
raparivrto vasati pracetah. 


Conceived and nestled like an embryo in the 
many coloured herbs over the wide wide earth in the 
womb of night but, with its splendour not suppressed 
even by darkness of the night, it remains awake until it 
comes back to light again in the morning waking up all 
living beings. 


reba हविषां घृतेन प्रतिश्चियन्तं भुवनानि विश्वां । 
पृथुं तिरश्चा वय॑सा बृहन्तं व्यचिं्ठमन्ने रभसं दुशानम्‌॥ ठ ॥ 
4. Jigharmyagnim havisa ghrtena pratiksiyantam 


bhuvanani visva. Prthum tiraSca vayasa brhan- 
tam vyacisthamannai rabhasam drsanam. 


896 RGVEDA 


I light and sprinkle the fire with ghrta and 
fragrant oblations, fire, pervading all regions of the 
universe, vast, radiating in waves, expanding with life 
energy and splendour, extending and comprehending, 
mighty and impetuous with energy in velocity, beautiful 
and gracious with light and illumination. 


आ विश्वतः प्रत्यञ्चं जिघर्म्यरक्षसा मन॑सा तज्जुषेत । 
मर्यश्रीः स्पृहयद्वर्णो srt rast तन्वा जर्भुराणः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: A visvatah pratyaicam jigharmyaraksasa manasa 
tajjuseta. Maryasrih sprhayadvarno agnirnabhi- 
mrse tanva jarbhuranah . 


I light the fire and sprinkle it with ghrta all round 
as it pervades everything everywhere. I do so carefully, 
with specific knowledge and with a loving mind without 
hate or jealousy toward anyone. You too serve it, be 
with it, the same way. Agni is the wealth, beauty and 
grace of mortal humanity, lovely and splendid of form 
as it loves to be. Flaming, flickering and awfully 
vibrating, it brooks no touch by anyone. 


ज्ञेया भागं संहसानो वरेणा त्वादूतासो मनुवद्व॑देम | 
sre Wat वचस्या मंधुपृचं धनसा जोहवीमि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Jneya bhagam sahasano varena tvadiutaso 
manuvad vadema. Anunamagnim juhva vacasya 
madhuprcam dhanasa johavimi . 


Know and abide by your share of the beauty, 
power and prosperity of life by the grace of Agni. Be 
patient, challenging and victorious at the peak of your 
conduct and performance. Let us all, your messengers, 
eloquent and rich in wealth and fire-power, speak and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 897 


celebrate Agni as human power, preserver, protector and 
promoter of life. I invoke, enkindle, praise, serve and 
worship Agni, perfect power without a fault, replete with 
showers of honey-sweets. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 11 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


श्रुधी cats मा रिंषण्यः eared ते दावने ARAM | इमा 
हि त्वामूर्जो वर्धयन्ति वसूयवः सिन्ध॑वो न क्षर॑न्तः ॥ ९॥ 


if Srudhi havamindra ma risanyah syama te davane 
vasunam. Ima hi tvamurjo vardhayanti vasu- 
yavah sindhavo na ksarantah. 


Indra, ruler and commander of wealth, power 
and honour, listen to our prayer: May we, unhurt, well 
cared and confident seekers of wealth and honour in 
the world, ever be sure of the gift of your generosity 
and gracious favours. All these powers and energies of 
the world streaming forth your favours like the seas sing 
of your power and celebrate your grace. 


सृजो महीरिन्दर या अपिन्वः परिष्ठिता sifear शुर पूर्वीः 1 
अमर्त्यं Foard मन्य॑मानमवाभिनदुक्थेवीवृधानः॥ २॥ 


a: Srjo mahirindra ya apinvah paristhita ahina Sura 
purvih. Amartyam cid dasam manyama-nam- 
avabhinad-ukthair-vavrdhanah . 


Indra, lord of wealth and power, bright and brave 
hero of light, knowledge and freedom, release the 
ancient lands held up by the demon destroyer of 
freedom. Release the prime voices of truth suppressed 
under the dark clouds of ignorance. Release the lands 


898 RGVEDA 


and voices like the showers of rain released by the sun 
by breaking the cloud. Lord of truth, light and power, 
rising by songs of homage and applause, break down 
the demonic fiend who believes that he is not subject to 
death. 


उक्थेष्विन्नु शुर ae चाकन्त्स्तोमेष्विन्द्र Satya 
तुभ्येदेता यासु मन्दसानः प्र वायवे सिस्रते न शुभ्राः ।॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Ukthesvinnu Sura yesu cakan tstomesvindra 
rudriyesu ca. Tubhyedeta yasu mandasanah 
pra vayave sisrate na subhrah . 


Indra, bright and brave, heroic lord of light, 
action and generosity, all the citations of praise and 
appreciation of achievement and victory in which you 
delight, all these holy songs of gratitude to Divinity, 
Rudra, for the gifts of pranic vitality, power and majesty 
in which you rejoice, and all these brilliant acts of glory 
which shine and vibrate among people like waves of 
light energy : all these flow from us in thanks and 
gratitude to you who, in human words, are like the wind, 
tempestuous, ferocious, kind and creative, all in one, 
divine. 

शुभ्रं नु ते शुष्मं वर्धयन्तः शुभं वजरं areca: । शुभ्स्त्व- 
मिन्द्र वावृधानो अस्मे दासीर्विशः सूर्येण सह्याः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Subhram nu te susmam vardhayantah subhram 
vajram bahvordadhanah. Subhrastvamindra 
vavrdhano asme dasirvisah suryena sahyah. 
Indra, ruling lord of humanity, exalting your 


brilliant power and prosperity, holding radiant 
thunderbolts in their hands, our people, workers, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 899 


producers, administrators, warriors and teachers deserve 
your bounty. Lord of spotless and incorruptible virtue 
ever rising in power and majesty, raise their courage, 
valour and lustre by the light and splendour of the sun. 


गुहां हितं गुह्यं गृठ्न्हमप्स्वपीवृतं मायिनं श्ियन्त॑म्‌। 
उतो अपो द्यां त॑स्तभ्वांसमहत्रहिं शूर वीर्ये*ण।॥५॥ 


3. Guha hitam guhyam gulhamapsvapivrtam 
mayinam ksiyantam. Uto apo dyam tastabhvam- 
samahannahim Sura viryena . 


Indra, brilliant and fearless ruling power of the 
world, just as the sun breaks up the demoniac cloud which 
holds up the vapours of water and overcasts the light of 
heaven, so with your valour and blazing splendour break 
up and destroy the covert, mysterious, artful and 
manipulative social enemies living in the midst of the 
people but hidden deep in the recesses of society under 
the surface of national waters, paralysing the flow of 
national dynamics of development and progress. 


स्तवा नु तं इन्द्र पूर्व्या महान्युत स्त॑वाम नूत॑ना Haws | 
स्तवा व्रं बाह्योरुशन्तं स्तवा हरी सूर्य॑स्य केतु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Stava nu ta indra purvya mahanyuta stavama 
nutana krtani. Stava vajram bahvorusantam 
stava hari suryasya ketu. 


Indra, lord of power, majesty and glory, we 
praise your grand achievements of old. We celebrate 
your new acts of splendour and victory. We admire the 
thunderbolt of defence blazing in your hands. And we 
sing the glories of your majesty like rays of the sun 
doing homage to the sun’s power of sustenance of the 


900 RGVEDA 


solar system. 


हरी नु त॑ इन्द्र वाजय॑न्ता घृतश्चुतं स्वारमंस्वार्टाम्‌। 
वि समना भूमिरप्रथिष्टाऽरंस्त पर्वतण्चित्सरिष्यन्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


qd. Hari nu ta indra vajayanta ghrtascutam svara- 
masvarstam. Vi samana bhumiraprathista’- 
ramsta parvataScit sarisyan . 


Indra, lord of light and power, ruler of the world, 
the circuitous rays of your glory like two horses of the 
solar chariot radiating, moving, energising, vitalising, 
fertilising, giving and receiving, proclaim your grace 
and majesty replete with the waters of life. Let the earth 
expand and grow and prosper. Let the battles of life be 
fought and won in unison. Arise and rejoice flowing 
like streams from the mountain, showering like clouds 
of rain, from the heavens. 


नि पर्वतः साद्यप्र॑युच्छन्त्सं मात॒भि॑वविशानो start 
दूरे पारे वाणीं वर्धय॑न्त इन्द्रेषिता eat पप्रथत्नि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ni parvatah sadyaprayucchan tsam matrbhir- 
vavasano akran. Dure pare vanim vardhayanta 
indresitam dhamanim paprathan ni. 


Let Indra, ruler of the world, sit and reign settled 
as a mountain, showering as a cloud, shining with 
heaven and earth, revered and loved by mothers of the 
land, his voice resounding as thunder, his rule measured 
and assessed by intelligent experts who, raising the holy 
voice higher and farther beyond the seas may 
universalise the divine voice of omniscience revealed 
by Indra, lord omnipotent ruler of the universe. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 901 


इन्द्र महां सिन्धुमारायांनं मायाविनं वृत्रम॑स्फुर न्निः | अरेजेतां 
रोद॑सी भियाने कनिंक्रदतो वृष्णो! अस्य aati ९ ॥ 


9. Indro maham sindhumasayanam maydavinam 
vrtramasphurannih. Arejetam rodast bhiyane 
kanikradato vrsno asya vajrat. 


Indra is great, mighty heroic, creates, thickens 
and chases the wondrous cloud overcasting the wide 
and bottomless skies, so that when the cloud, falling in 
heavy showers, roars and thunders, the heaven and earth, 
stricken with fear by thunder and lightning, shake and 
rave under terror. (So should be the ruler and the law.) 


अरोरवीद्‌ aun! अस्य वज्रोऽ्मानुषं यन्मानुंषो निजुर्वीत्‌। 
नि मायिनो दानवस्य माया अपादयत्पपिवान्त्सुतस्य ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Aroravid vrsno asya vajro ’manusam yanmanuso 
nijurvat. Ni mayino danavasya maya apddayat 
papivantsutasya . 


Awfully roars and resounds the thunderbolt of 
this mighty Indra, beyond human imagination. It is the 
tempestuous shower of solar energy which humanity 
should exploit. So does the ruler with the blaze of his 
power and justice crush the mischief and malevolent 
force of the underworld and enjoy the peace and pleasure 
of a noble social order, creating it for himself and the 
people. 


पिबापिबेदिन्द्र शूर सोमं मन्द॑न्तु त्वा Hired: Gare: | 
पृणन्त॑स्ते कुक्षी वर्धयन्त्वित्था सुतः पौर इन्द्र॑माव ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Pibapibedindra Sura somam Mandantu tva 


mandinah sutasah. Prnantaste kukst vardhaya- 
ntvittha sutah paura indramava . 


902 RGVEDA 


Indra, mighty brave and resplendent lord of 
power and knowledge, ruler, scholar, physician, 
destroyer of evil and ill-health, drink and drink on the 
soma of peace, health and life’s joy. May the exhilarating 
essences distilled from life and nature transport you to 
ecstasy. May the invigorating spirits of life and nature 
like the drink of soma increase your creative power and 
the fertility of the land. O distinguished citizen and ruler 
of the land, thus regaled with peace, power and pleasure, 
preserve and promote the prosperity and honour of the 
earth and her children. 


त्वे इन्द्राप्य॑भूम विप्रा धियं वनेम ऋतया ada: 1 
अवस्यवो धीमहि प्रश॑स्तिं सद्यस्ते रायो दावने स्याम ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tve indrapyabhuma vipra dhiyam vanema rtaya 
sapantah. Avasyavo dhimahi prasastim sadyaste 
rayo davane syama. 


Indra, lord of light and power, mighty and 
gracious ruler of the world, may we too abide by you, 
cultivate our intellect and intelligence, dedicating our 
mind to truth and the laws of truth, nature and humanity, 
and thereby become noble scholars and learned 
professionals. Thus searching for self-protection and 
working for social progress, may we earn appreciation 
and praise for ourselves and our work, and may we 
speedily contribute to the honour, prosperity and glory 
of a generous ruler like you. 


स्याम ते तं इन्द्र ये तं ऊती अवस्यव Sol! वर्धयंन्तः। 
शष्िन्त॑मं यं चाकनाम देवाऽस्मे रयिं रासि वीर- 
ठ॑न्तम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 903 


13. Syama te ta indra ye ta uti avasyava urjam 
vardhayantah. Susmintamam yam cakanama 
deva’sme rayim rasi viravantam. 


Indra, generous and self-refulgent lord of light, 
power and honour, may we be yours, dedicated to you 
only, working for self-development and social progress 
under your kind protection and contributing to the 
energy and prosperity of the nation. Generous and 
gracious lord, you bless us with the wealth and honour 
which we love and cherish and which is distinguished 
by richest prosperity, fieriest energy and mightiest 
heroes of the world on the field. 


रासि क्षयं रासि पित्रमस्मे रासि शर्ध इन्द्र मारुतं नः। 
सजोष॑सो ये च॑ मन्दसानाः प्र वायवः पान्त्यग्र॑णी- 
तिम्‌॥ ew 


14. Rasi ksayam rasi mitramasme rasi Sardha indra 
marutam nah. Sajosaso ye ca mandasanah 
pra vayavah pantyagranitim. 


Indra, gracious ruler of the world, giver of power 
and prosperity, you give us a home, friends, and strength 
and force as that of the winds. And you give us also 
those who, united and acting in harmony, joyous and 
inspired, full of vigour and enthusiasm, follow the ways 
and values of policy, conduct and action far in advance 
of their time. 


व्यन्त्विन्नु ay मन्दसानस्तुपत्सोमं पाहि द्रह्यदिन्द्र | 
अस्मान्त्सु पृत्स्वा त॑रुत्राऽवर्धयो द्यां बृद्धि कः ॥ ९५ ॥ 
15. Vyantvinnu yesu mandasanastrpat somam pahi 


drahyadindra. Asmantsu prtsva tarutra’var- 
dhayo dyam brhadbhir-arkaih. 


904 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, ruler of 
the world, ruler of the self, the things and values in which 
wise and learned visionaries rejoice and find the very 
breath of life are those in which you too, settled, 
satisfied and rejoicing, find your haven and home for 
the joy of life for yourself and others. Therein protect 
and promote the beauty and joy of the soma-value of 
life. Promote us, we pray, help us advance in the battles 
of life, protector and saviour as you are, and extend the 
possibilities of life and life’s heavenly joy on earth as 
the sun illuminates the glories of heaven and augments 
them with its mighty rays and atomic fuel. 


बृहन्त इन्नु ये ते तरुत्रो क्थेभिरवां सुम्नमाविवासान्‌। 
स्तृणानासो बर्हिः पस्त्यावत््वोता इदिन्द्र वाज॑मग्मन्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Brhanta innu ye te tarutrokthebhirva sumnama- 
vivasan. Strnanaso barhih pastyavat tvota idindra 
vajamagman. 


Indra, gracious lord of power and ruler of the 
world, saviour from suffering and helping us all to cross 
the seas of existence, those who celebrate your glories 
with holy chants of the Veda, rising high, enjoy your 
favour and grace and, under your protection, achieve 
food, energy, speed and prosperity and, traversing the 
skies like their own home, rise to space heights. 


उग्रेष्विन्नु शुर मन्दसानस्तरिक॑द्ुकेषु पाहि सोम॑मिन्द्र । 
प्रदोध्युवच्छ्‌्मश्रुषु प्रीणानो याहि हरिभ्यां सुतस्यं 
पीतिम्‌॥ ९७॥ 

17. Ugresvinnu sura mandasanas-trikadrukesu pahi 


somamindra. Pradodhuvacchmasrusu prinano 
yahi haribhyam sutasya pitim. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 905 


Indra, lord of light and life of life, destroyer of 
pain and suffering, harbinger of the soma-joy of living, 
bright, blazing and rejoicing among the brilliant 
geniuses of the world, collect, create and fill soma in 
the three-fold vessels of our body, mind and soul. Move 
by the circuitous rays of the sun for a drink of the 
spirituous ecstasy of life and, happy at heart, vibrate in 
every cell through every pore of the body. 


धिष्वा शव॑ः शूर येनं वृत्रमवाभिंनदानुंमोर्णवा भम्‌ | 
अ्पावृणोर्ज्योतिरायीय नि स॑व्य॒तः सादि दस्युरिन्द्र ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Dhisva Savah sura yena vrtramavabhinad danu- 
maurnavabham. Apdavrnor-jyotir-aryaya ni 
savya-tah sadi dasyurindra. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, hold on 
that strength by which you break the dark cloud pregnant 
with waters covered as under the web of a spider. Reveal 
and release the light and power of the sun for the noble 
seekers of wisdom and virtuous life so that the wicked 
exploiter and demon of darkness is kept and crushed by 
the left wing of your law. 


सनेम ये त॑ ऊतिभिस्तर॑न्तो विश्वाः स्पृध आर्येण ee 
अस्मभ्यं तत्त्वाष्ट विष्वरूपमरन्धयः साख्यस्यं त्रिताय ।॥ ९९॥ 


19. Sanema ye ta utibhis-taranto visvah sprdha 
aryena dasyun. Asmabhyam tat tvastram visvaru- 
pam-arandhayah sakhyasya tritaya. 


Indra, lord of light, power and love, let us abide 
by those who, by your modes of protection and 
advancement, surpass and subdue all the dark and 
exploitative forces of hate, jealousy, enmity and wicked 


906 RGVEDA 


opposition with their strength of justice and virtue, and 
who form and structure for us that universal character 
and constitution of one world order of love and 
friendship which is inspired by Divinity for humanity 
free from physical, mental and spiritual want and 
suffering. 


अस्य dared मन्दिन॑स्ितस्य न्यर्बुदं वावृधानो अस्तः | 
अवंर्तयत्सूर्यो न चक्रं भिनदल्मिन्द्रो अङ्धिरस्वान्‌ ॥ २०॥ 


20. Asya suvanasya mandinas tritasya nyrbudam 
vavrdhano astah. Avartayat suryo na cakram 
bhinad valam-indro angirasvan. 


Let Indra, lord ruler of the world, settled and 
inspired, vibrating with energy, wind and power, 
developing and growing to splendour with the billion- 
fold nation of this mighty, joyous and free humanity, 
move like the sun his wheel of governance and dispel 
the dark and demoniac forces of evil and wickedness. 


नूनं सा a प्रति वरं जरित्रे दुहीयदिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनीं। 
शिक्षां स्तोतृभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो gegen विदथं 
सुवीराः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhiyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah . 


Indra, glorious lord ruler of light and life, mighty 
powerful, may that generous power and liberality of 
yours ever flow with the highest good for the admirer 
and worshipper of Divinity. Give knowledge and 
enlightenment to the singers and celebrants. Pray do 
not strain them, hurt them not, nor burn them to naught. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 907 


Bless us with unbounded wealth and honour. Bless us 
with brave and noble heroes. Inspire us to sing and 
celebrate the divine glory in our battles of life. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 12 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


यो जात एव प्र॑थमो मनंस्वान्देवो देवान्क्रतुना पर्यभुंषत्‌। 
यस्य शुष्माद्रोदसी अभ्य॑सेतां नुम्णस्य॑ मह्ना स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ ९॥ 


iF Yo jata eva prathamo manasvan devo devan 
kratuna paryabhusat. Yasya susmad rodasi 
abhyasetam nrmnasya mahna sa janasa indrah. 


Ye men and women of the world, Indra is the 
generous self-refulgent lord omnipotent and omniscient 
who, first manifested, creates and adorns the generous 
earth and brilliant stars. It is by the grandeur of his 
mighty wealth and power of action that the heaven and 
earth and the middle regions of the skies move around 
in orbit. 


यः पृथिवीं व्यथ॑मानामदूंहृद्यः पर्व तान्प्रकुपितां अर॑प्णात्‌। 
यो अन्तरि्चं विममे वरीयो यो द्यामस्त॑भ्नात्स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yah prthivim vyathamanamadrnhad yah parvatan 
prakupitan aramnat. Yo antariksam vimame 
vartyo yo dyamastabhnat sa janasa indrah. 


O people of the world, it is Indra, lord 
omnipotent, who establishes the moving earth in balance 
in orbit and silences the angry volcanoes and roaring 
clouds, who encompasses the vast skies and holds up 


908 RGVEDA 


the high heavens of light.(Such is Indra, universal 
energy.) 


यो हत्वाहिमरिंणात्सप् सिन्धून्यो गा उदाजदपधा ACH | 
यो अश्म॑नोर न्तर भ्रं जजान संवृक्समत्सु स ज॑नास इन्द्रः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Yo hatvahimarinat sapta sindhun yo ga udaja- 
dapadha valasya. Yo a’manorantaragnim jajana 
samvrk samatsu sa janasa indrah . 


People of the world, it is Indra who breaks the 
cloud into showers and makes the seven rivers and seven 
seas flow, who makes the moving stars and planets such 
as earth and satellites such as moon dance around in 
order, who wields and controls the entire energy of the 
universe, who creates the fire at the centre of the stone 
and the cloud and controls the making and breaking of 
the elements in the cosmic dynamics. 


येनेमा विश्वा च्यव॑ना कृतानि यो are वर्णमधरं गुहाकः | 
vada यो जिगीवां लक्षमाददर्यः पुष्टानि स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Yanema visva cyavana krtani yo dasam varnama- 
dharam guhakah. Svaghniva yo jigivan laksa- 
madadaryah pustani sa janasa indrah . 


Who makes all these moving objects of the 
moving world of existence, who conceives and fixes 
the emergent form deep in the cavern of the mind, who 
takes on the target like an unfailing hunter, all those in 
course of time which are created and nurtured by him: 
Such is Indra, O people of the world. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 909 


यं स्मा पृच्छन्ति कुह सेति घोरमुते्माहुर्नैषो अस्तीत्येनम्‌ । 
सो अर्यः पुष्टीर्विज इवा मिनाति श्रद॑स्मै धत्त स ज॑नास 
इन्द्र॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 


>. Yam sma prcechanti kuha seti ghoramutema- 
hurnaiso astityenam. So aryah pustirvija iva 
minati Sradasmai dhatta sa janasa indrah. 


Of whom they often ask: Where is he? He is 
terrible, say they. He is everywhere, say some. He is 
nowhere, say others. He is the master and lord of all, 
creates, evolves and devolves, elevates with a heave 
and, “like a victor” he shoots down the thriving ones: 
Such, O people, is Indra. Know him well in truth, and 
have faith. 


यो tere चोदिता यः कृशस्य यो ब्रह्मणो नाध॑मानस्य 
कीरेः । युक्तग्राव्णो योऽ विता सुशिप्रः सुतसोमस्य स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ & ॥ 


6. Yo radhrasya codita yah krsasya yo brahmano 
nadhamanasya kireh. Yuktagravno yo’vita 
susiprah sutasomasya sa janasa indrah. 


He is inspirer of the obedient worshipper, 
support of the weak and emaciated, promoter of 
knowledge and Veda, saviour of the poor and destitute, 
and strength of the celebrant; he is protector of the 
person who is dedicated to learning and soma-yajna, 
commands knowledge and creates the joy of soma in 
society: Such is Indra O people of the world. 


यस्याश्वासः प्रदिशि यस्य गावो यस्य ग्रामा यस्य विश्वे 
रथासः । यः सूर्यं य उषसं जजान यो अपां नेता स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ ७॥ 


910 RGVEDA 


fin Yasyasvasah pradisi yasya gavo yasya grama 
yasya visve rathasah. Yah suryam ya usasam 
jajana yo apam neta sa janasa indrah. 


His are the waves of energy pervading in the 
directions and sub-directions of space. His are the horses 
and the cows, his the earths and the rays of light. His are 
the habitations and all the starry chariots of the world. 
He creates the sun and the dawn, revealing them every 
day anew. He is the mover and guide of the waters and 
spatial energy. Such, O people, is Indra, universal energy. 


यं क्रन्द॑सी संयती fagaa परेऽ व॑र sat अमित्राः । समानं 
चिद्रध॑मातस्थिवांसा नानां हवेते स ज॑नास इन्द्र॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yam krandasi samyati vihvayete pare’vara 
ubhaya amitrah. Samanam cid ratham atasthi- 
vamsa nana havete sa janasa indrah. 


Whom the heaven and earth wheeling, whirling, 
humming the celestial music of the spheres together and 
vying each other in homage, invoke, whom the highest 
and farthest as well as lowest and nearest, all, friends 
and non-friends, worship alike as riding the same 
chariot, invoke and worship in various ways: that, O 
people of the world, is Indra, lord of power over all. 


यस्मान्न ऋते fasra=a जनासो यं aed अव॑से हव॑न्ते । 
यो विश्व॑स्य प्रतिमानं बभूव यो अ॑च्युतच्युत्स ज॑नास 
इन्द्र॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Yasmanna rte vijayante janaso yam yudhya-mana 
avase havante. Yo visvasya pratimanam babhiuva 
yo acyutacyut sa janasa indrah. 


Without whom the people win no victories, on 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 911 


whom the warriors depend for protection, who is the 
comprehending measure of the universe and the 
unmoved mover of the cosmic dynamics: he, O people 
of the world, is Indra. 


यः शश्व॑तो Fart दर्धानानम॑न्यमानाञ्छवी ward 1 यः 
शर्धते नानुददाति speat यो दस्योर्हन्ता स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yah Sasvato mahyeno dadhanan-amanyama-nan- 
charva jaghana. Yah sardhate nanudadati 
srdhyam yo dasyorhanta sa janasa indrah. 


He who holds and governs the eternal 
constituents of existence, who with his power of justice 
and punishment destroys the disreputables taking 
recourse to great sins and crimes, who disapproves, 
scotches and silences the evil tongue of the maligner, 
and who eliminates the wicked exploiter: such, O 
people, is Indra. 


यः शम्ब॑रं ue ay कियन्तं चत्वारिंश्यां sra-afa-ec 
ओजायमानं यो अहिं जघान दानुं शयानं स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yah sambaram parvatesu ksiyantam catvarim- 
syam Saradyanvavindat. Ojayamanam yo ahim 
Jaghana danum sayanam sa janasa indrah. 


He who finds the vapours of water hidden in 
the cloud on the fortieth day of autumn (or in the fortieth 
autumn) and breaks the cloud, heavy with water for 
showers yet sleeping like a giant, thus releasing the rain- 
showers: such, O people, is Indra, the mighty Sun. 


912 RGVEDA 


यः सप्र स्मिर्वृषभस्तुविंष्मानवासुंजत्सर्तवे wa सिन्धून्‌ । 
यो रौहिणमस्फुर दज्र बाहु््यामारोह॑न्तं स जनास इन्द्र॑ः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yah saptarasmir-vrsabhastuvismanavasrjat 
sartave sapta sindhun. Yo rauhinamasphurad 
vajrabahur-dyam-arohantam sa janasa indrah. 


Who shines bright with seven-colour rays of 
light, mightily generous, immensely full of energy and 
power, and, breaking the clouds to rain showers, releases 
the seven floods of water, rivers and seas rolling and 
flowing, and who energises the moon and the cloud 
ascending towards the sun under the Rohini asterism, 
that, dear people, is Indra, the Sun, mighty with his arms 
of thunder and adamant. 


drat चिदस्मै पृथिवी न॑मेते शरष्माच्यिदस्य पर्व॑ता भयन्ते। 
यः सोमपा निचितो वचर॑बादुर्यो वच्र॑हस्तः स ज॑नास 
इन्द्रः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Dyava cidasmai prthivi namete Susmaccidasya 
parvata bhayante. Yah somapa nicito vajraba- 
huryo vajrahastah sa janasa indrah. 


Heaven and earth bow to him in homage. Clouds 
cower and mountains quake for fear of his power. He is 
the creator, preserver and promoter of the soma nectar 
and ecstasy of life, knowledge concentrate and power 
both, thunder-armed for punishment and protection, 
flower-handed with kusha grass for blessing and 
benediction. Such is Indra, lord of light and might and 
life of life, O children of the earth. 


यः सुन्वन्तमवति यः पच॑न्तं यः steed यः शंङमानमूती । 
यस्य wal वर्धनं यस्य सोमो यस्येदं राधः स जनास 
इन्द्र॑ः ।॥ ९४॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 913 


14. Yah sunvantam-avati yah pacantam yah sam- 
santam yah sasamanam-iuti. Yasya brahma 
vardhanam yasya somo yasyedam radhah sa 
janasa indrah. 


He who protects the creative man of yajnic 
action, who promotes the man struggling for perfection, 
and who, with all his modes of protection and progress, 
advances the prayerful celebrant pilgrim on way to 
Dharma, piety and charity, He is Indra, know ye all 
children of the earth. The Veda glorifies him, the soma- 
joy of the world celebrates him, the beauty and 
perfection of this creation proclaims his art and presence. 
Such is Indra, dear children of Divinity. 


यः सुन्वते पच॑ते ge आ चिद्धाजं ad td स faolfa 
सत्यः । वयं d इन्द्र विश्वह प्रियासः सुवीरासो विदथमा 
वदेम ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Yah sunvate pacate dudhra a cid vajam dardarsi 
sa kilasi satyah. Vayam ta indra visvaha priyasah 
suviraso vidathama vadema . 


Indra, lord of light and life, potent and 
inviolable, you provide all power and protection with 
speed of advancement for the creative and struggling 
perfectionist, and you ward off all force of opposition 
from him. Lord of existence, surely you are the ultimate 
Truth, you are eternal. Lord giver of life and potency, 
we love you, we are your dear darlings. We pray that 
confident and brave, blest with noble progeny, we may 
always honour you with holy songs of celebration and 
creative action in yajna. 


914 RGVEDA 


Mandala 2/Sukta 13 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


ऋतुर्जनिंत्री तस्यां अपस्परिं मश्च जात आविंशद्यासु वर्धते । 
तदाहना अभवप्विप्युषी पयोंऽशोः पीयूषं प्रथमं AGATA ॥ ९॥ 


in Rturjanitri tasya apaspari maksu jata avisad yasu 
vardhate. Tadahana abhavat piyyust payom’soh 
ptiyusam prathamam tadukthyam . 


(There is a season for the birth of life, for 
everything.) The season is the mother’s womb. Whatever 
is born, the seed enters the waters of the womb, the 
season, and therein it grows. The receiving mother 
becomes the first recipient, taster and giver of the nectar 
of life to the seed, which nectar is the life-nursing energy 
of the sun. That nectar, that original essence of living 
energy, 1s worth knowing and celebration. 


सध्रीमा य॑न्ति परि बिभ्र॑तीः cal विश्वप्स्न्याय प्र भरन्त 
भोज॑नम्‌। समानो अध्वा प्रवतांमनुष्यदे यस्ताकुणोः प्रथमं 
सास्युक्थ्यः ॥ २ ॥ 


pn Sadhrima yanti pari bibhratih payo visvapsn-yaya 
pra bharanta bhojanam. Samano adhva prava- 
tamanusyade yastakrnoh prathamam sasyukth- 
yah. 


To the same one end flow the streams of life all 
round, holding the nectar of life for nourishment of the 
world, carrying food for everything living and growing. 
Similar and equal is the path of the streams so that they 
may flow for the same purpose. The one, the first 
original creator who created these streams of life, is 
worth knowing and celebration. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 13 915 


अन्वेको वदति यद्‌ ददाति तद्रूपा मिनन्तदंपा एकं ईयते | 
विश्वा एकस्य विनुदस्तितिक्षते यस्ताकृणोः प्रथमं 
सास्युक्थ्यः ॥ ३ ॥ 


2. Anveko vadati yad dadati tad rupa minantadapa 
eka tyate. Visva ekasya vinudas-titiksate yasta- 
krnoh prathamam sasyukthyah . 


Whatever that one lord of power, Indra, creates 
and gives solely by himself, the same he reveals by 
himself. He creates all the forms and he destroys them 
all. That’s the lord’s power and karma in which he is 
solely manifested. All these universal karmas of the one, 
the one manages by himself. That one sole lord, the 
first and original doer who does all these is he, Indra, 
and he is worth knowing and celebration. 


wana: पुष्टं विभजन्त आसते र यिमिंव पृष्ठं प्रभवंन्त- 
मायते। असिन्वन्दष्ैः पितुरत्ति भोज॑नं यस्ताकुणोः प्रथमं 
सास्युक्थ्यः ॥ ॐ ॥। 


4. Prajabhyah pustim vibhajanta asate rayimiva 
prstham prabhavantamayate. Asinvan dam-straih 
pituratti bhojanam yastakrnoh pratha-mam 
sasyukthyah . 


The house holders sit at the yajna working, 
serving and giving for the health, growth and 
advancement of the people, and while their wealth, 
property and possessions are rising in assets, they sit 
and abide by the yajna, sealing and securing the back 
bone of the nation, a firm foundation and a launching 
pad for the coming generations of humanity for further 
progress. And all the while the sagely scholar scientist 
visionary enjoys yajnic food musticating every particle 


916 RGVEDA 


of it with his teeth. Indra, it is you who plan, ordain and 
execute all these dispensations, you are adorable in 
words of celebration. 


अर्धाकृणोः पृथिवीं संदू दिवे यो धौतीनापंहिह॒न्नारिंण- 
aaa: तं त्वा स्तोमेभिरुदथि्न वाजिनं देवं देवा अंजन- 
न्त्सास्युक्थ्यंः ॥ ५ ॥ 


3. Adhakrnoh prthivim samdrse dive yo dhautina- 
ma-hihannarinak pathah. Tam tva stomebhir- 
udabhir-na vajinam devam deva ajanantsasy- 
ukthyah. 


And you develop the earth to a festival of lights 
for all to see and celebrate, O breaker of the cloud of 
rain showers of wealth, and you open the various 
channels of wealth for the streams to flow. Such as you 
are, Indra, lord of light, wealth and power, brilliant and 
generous, dynamic and tempestuous as wind and energy, 
brilliant scholars of the world anoint you with holy 
waters, and celebrate you with citations and 
presentations, and raise you to eminence. Adorable you 
are, indeed. 


यो भोज॑नं च दय॑से च वर्धनमार््रादा शुष्कं मधुंमहुदो्िंथ । 
स शोवधिं नि द॑धिषे विवस्वति विश्वस्यैकं ईशिषे 
सास्युक्थ्यः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yo bhojanam ca dayase ca vardhanm-ardrada 
suskam madhumad dudohitha. Sa sevadhim ni 
dadhise vivasvati visvasyaika tSsise sasyukthyah. 

Indra, lord of light, wealth and power, you are 


the one who organise and control consumption and 
production, growth and allotment and, with your liquid 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 13 917 


creativity and energising waters, convert the deserts into 
honeyed gardens to milk the wealth from the holy earth. 
O people of the earth, he holds the wealth of the world 
in the sun and rules the universe solely by himself, alone. 
Such as you are, O lord of creation and sustenance, you 
are worthy of celebration in song and yajnic action. 


यः पुष्पिणीश्च प्रस्व॑श्च धर्मणाञिध दाने व्यप वनीररधारयः। 
यश्चास॑मा अज॑नो दिद्युतो दिव उरूरूवीं अभितः सास्यु- 
क्थ्यः ॥ ७॥ 


i. Yah puspinisca prasvasca dharmana’dhi dane 
vyavaniradharayah. Yascasama ajano didyuto 
diva urururvan abhitah sasyukthyah. 


Who, with his law and power, in his profuse 
generosity, holds and sustains the various lands of 
flowers and fertility, who is vast and potent and creates 
the infinite variety of lights and blazing energies in their 
entirety, he, lord worthy of homage and celebration, is 
Indra. 


यो anit सहव॑सुं निहन्तवे gare च दासवेशाय चाव॑हः | 
ऊर्जयन्त्या अप॑रिविष्टमास्य॑मुतैवाद्य पुंरुकृत्सास्युक्थ्यंः ॥ ८ 1 


8. Yo narmaram sahavasum nihantave prksaya ca 
dasavesaya cavahah. Urjayantya aparivistam- 
asyamutaivadya purukrt sasyukthyah. 


Who for the elimination of antihuman forces, 
even though they might command wealth and power, 
and for the expansion of the powers of generosity and 
creativity and for the working forces, rules and provides 
the unbounded face of the fertile and energising mother 
earth, he is Indra, lord of manifold action and he is 


918 RGVEDA 
worthy of adoration today. 


शतं वा यस्य दशं साकमाद्य एकस्य श्रुष्टौ aes चोदमाविंथ। 
अर ज्नौ दस्यून्त्समुनब्दभीतंये सुप्राव्यो! अभवः सास्यु- 
क्थ्य॑:॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Satarn va yasya dasa sakamadya ekasya Srustau 
yaddha codamavitha. Arajjau dasyuntsamunab- 
dabhitaye supravyo abhavah sasyukthyah. 


Ten, hundred or thousands are with Indra, sole 
lord of the world, ready for service at his bidding, 
unbounded his favours and incentives, a thousand-ways 
his inspirations and exhortations, he knows. He binds 
the wicked exploiters, criminals and sinners with 
unfettered chains to break them down. Supreme 
protector is he just at hand everywhere. So is he adorable 
in holy chant. 


विश्वेदनु रोधना अस्य diet ददुर॑स्मै दधिरे para धन॑म्‌ । 
yee विष्टिरः usa dest: परि परो अभवः 
सास्युक्थ्यं: 11 ९० ॥ 


10. Visvedanu rodhana asya paumsyam dadura-smai 
dadhire krtnave dhanam. Salastabhna vistirah 
panca samdrsah pari paro abhavah sasyukthyah. 


All according to his will and law carry out the 
acts of his omnipotence for him. They hold the wealth 
and power of the universe for him, lord of action as he 
is. Lord of wide extensive power and presence, he 
commands the six seasons of the year and energises the 
five senses of perception. He encompasses all, he 
transcends all. The lord is worthy of homage and 
adoration in words of faith and piety. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 13 919 


सुप्रवाचनं तवं वीर वीर्य यदेकेन क्रतुना विन्दसे वसुं । 
जातूष्धिरस्य प्र वयः सह॑स्वतो या चकर्थ सेन्द्र favat- 
स्युक्थ्यं: ॥ ९९॥ 


12. Supravacanam tava vira viryam yadekena 
kratuna vindase vasu. Jatusthirasya pra vayah 
sahasvato ya cakartha sendra visvasyukthyah. 


Indra, mighty lord of light and life, noble and 
powerful is your eloquence, since with a single act of 
will and divinity you win and command the wealth of 
the world. Eternal and inviolable, ancient and ever 
youthful, patient yet potent and victorious, for all the 
acts of existence and creation you do, you are divine, 
supremely holy, and adorable in acts and words of piety. 


अर॑मयः सरपसस्तराय कं तुर्वीतये च वय्याय च eer 
नीचा सन्तमुदनयः परावृजं प्रान्धं श्रोणं श्रवयन्त्सास्यु- 
क्थ्य: ULM 


12. Aramayah sarapasas-taraya kam turvitaye ca 
vayyaya ca srutim. Nica santam-udanayah 
paravrjam prandham sronam sravayantsa- 
syukthyah. 


Indra, you change the dire discipline of holiness 
to a pleasure path for the sinners to cross the seas and 
leap to the freedom of Moksha. You accelerate the speed 
and success of the parent and teacher to continue the 
family line and the tradition of knowledge. You raise 
the fallen from the depth, you own and console the 
rejected and destitute, you give eyes to the blind and 
ears to the deaf with knowledge to the ignorant. As such, 
the celebrants adore you in songs of faith and joy. 


920 RGVEDA 


अस्मभ्यं तद्व॑सो दानाय राधः समर्थयस्व ag ते वसव्य॑म्‌। 
इन्द्र यच्चित्रं श्रवस्या अनु द्यून्बृहद्वदेम विदथं सुवीरा ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Asmabhyam tad vaso danaya radhah samar-thay- 
sva bahu te vasavyam. Indra yaccitram Sravasya 
anu dyun brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Indra, lord of light, power, honour and 
generosity, giver of peace, progress and prosperity, great 
and manifold is that wealth of yours which is your 
parental gift to us as a home and haven to live in joy. 
Give us the strength and capacity for charity and 
generosity like yours. Listening, celebrating, we pray, 
that brave and blest with brave heroic progeny, honoured 
and glorious, we may profusely praise and 
spontaneously celebrate your wondrous and heavenly 
gifts and glory day by day in song and yajna and justify 
your gifts of life and honour to humanity. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 14 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


अध्वर्यवो भर तेन्द्राय सोममामेत्रेभिः सिञ्चता मद्यमन्धंः। 
कामी हि वीरः सदमस्य पीतिं जुहोत वृष्णो तदिदेष 
वंष्टि॥ ९॥ 


Li Adhvaryavo bharatendraya somamamatrebhih 
sincata madyamandhah. Kami hi virah sadama- 
sya pitim juhota vrsne tadidesa vasti. 


High priest of the yajna of love and non-violent 
creation, bear potfuls of soma juice for Indra, brave and 
youthful hero of the world. Collect and serve exciting 
food and drink for him in celebration. Eminent, valiant 
and victorious is he and loves a drink of this soma. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 14 921 


Always call for and prepare the drink for the mighty 
hero. He loves to live the vigour and ecstasy of life, 
create the strength and rise in joy. 


अध्वर्यवो यो अपो वव्रिवांसं वृत्रं जघानाशन्यैव वृश्चम्‌। 
तस्मा एतं भ॑रत ART एष इन्द्रो अर्ह ति पीतिम॑स्य ॥ २॥ 


2 Adhvaryo yo apo vavrivamsam vrtram jaghana- 
Sanyeva vrksam. Tasma etam bharata tadvasa- 
yan esa indro arhati pitimasya. 


High priests of the yajna of life, just as a stroke 
of lightning breaks and shatters a tree into bits, so does 
Indra, solar hero of the world, break the dark cloud 
concealing and hoarding the waters of life and thereby 
releases the showers of rain and joy of life. For him, 
bear and bring this soma of joy and celebration. He loves 
it intensely, and this Indra deserves to drink of it to his 
heart’s content. 


अध्वर्यवो यो दूभीकं जघान यो गा उदाजदप हि aes a: | 
तस्मा एतमन्तरिंश्चे न वातमिन्द्रं सोभरोर्णत जूर्न वस्त्रः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Adhvaryayo yo drbhikam jaghana yo ga udaja- 
dapa hi valam vah. Tasma etamantarikse na vata- 
min-dram somairornuta jurna vastraih. 


Yajnic leaders of the people, Indra, lord ruler of 
humanity and the world, is he who, like the brilliant 
sun, dispels the forces of fear and darkness, develops 
the cows and animal wealth, preserves and replenishes 
the earth and her environment, opens up flood-gates of 
power and energy for you and, like the wind in the sky, 
drives life onward. Carry on this yajna and the creation 
of soma-joy and vigour for him, celebrate him like the 


922 RGVEDA 


wind in the sky, felicitate him with drinks of soma and 
honour him with robes of distinction as you would 
honour a veteran hero and senior scholar of eminence. 


अध्वर्यवो य उर॑णं जघान नव॑ चख्वांसं नवतिं च॑ बाहून्‌ । 
यो sand नीचा ब॑बाधे तमिन्द्रं सोम॑स्य भृथ 
हिनोत ॥ ४॥ 


4. Adhvaryayo ya uranam jaghana nava cakhvan- 
sam navatim ca bahun. Yo arbudamava nica 
babadhe tamindram somasya bhrthe hinota. 


High priests and participants of the progressive 
yajna of love and creative advancement, invoke, applaud 
and advance Indra, leader and commander of humanity, 
who exposes and punishes the hoarder, eliminates the 
saboteur, overthrows nine and ninety handed demons, 
and binds and chains down hundred millions of enemy 
forces. Honour him and celebrate with oblations of love 
and offer of soma for the creation of vigour and life’s 


JOY. 
अध्वर्यवो यः स्वश्नं जघान यः शुष्णमशुषं यो व्यंसम्‌। 
यः पिं नमुचिं यो रूधिक्रां तस्मा इन्द्रायान्ध॑सो जुहोत ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Adhvaryayo yah svasnam jaghana yah susnama- 
Susam yo vyansam. Yah piprum namucim yo 
rudhikram tasma indrayandhaso juhota. 


High priests of yajna, invoke, invite, honour and 
offer homage with food and love to Indra who breaks 
through the clouds of ignorance, who prevents the 
thriving social suckers and converts deserts into fertile 
fields, who breaks the shoulders of lawless powers, who 
fights and defeats the self-server and the persistent evil 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 14 923 


doer, and who brings to book those who cross the bounds 
of preventive law. Do him honour in the yajna of love 
and dedication. 


अध्वर्यवो यः शतं शम्ब॑रस्य पुरो विभेदाश्मनेव पूर्वीः | 
यो वर्चिनः श॒तमिन्द्र॑ः सहस्॑मपाव॑पद्धर॑ता सोम॑मस्मै ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Adhvaryayo yah satam Sambarasya puro 
bibhedasmaneva purvih. Yo varcinah satamin- 
drah sahasramapavapad bharata somamas-mai. 


High priests of yajna, offer soma yajna to Indra 
who shatters with a lightning stone blow a hundred well- 
established strongholds of the demon of darkness who 
arrests and prevents the joyous waters of life from their 
natural flow, Indra who digs out and uproots a hundred 
thousand sins and crimes of the blazing powers of evil 
and buries them for ever. Regale him with a drink of 
soma, the universal joy of life. 


अध्वर्यवो यः शतमा Geet Yt उपस्थेऽ व॑पजनघन्वान्‌ | 
कुत्स॑स्यायोर॑तिधिग्वस्य॑ वीरान्‌ न्यावुंणग्भर॑ता सोम॑- 
मस्मै 19 


५ Adhvaryayo yah satama sahasram bhumya 
upasthe’vapajjaghanvan. Kutsasyayoratithigva- 
sya viran nyavrnag bharata somamasmai. 


High priests of yajna, bring soma drinks 
in honour of Indra who sows the seeds and creates a 
hundred thousand heroes of yajna on the face of the 
earth, while on the other hand he destroys another 
hundred thousand warriors of evil and wards off the 
forces of the opponents of generosity and hospitality. 


924 RGVEDA 


अध्वर्यवो यन्न॑रः कामयाध्वे श्रुष्टी वहन्तो नशथा तदिन्द्र । 
गभ॑स्तिपूतं भरत श्रुतायेन्द्राय सोमं यज्यवो जुहोत ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Adhvaryavo yannarah kamayadhve srusti vahanto 
nasatha tadindre. Gabhastiputam bharata 
Srutayendraya somam yajyavo juhota. 


High priests of yajna, faithful performers, 
leaders of humanity, whatever you love and desire, 
whatever you achieve and attain, always with a will in 
obedience to Divinity carry that forward and hold it in 
the service of Indra, lord ruler of the world, and bear 
and bring it up soma, purified and sanctified by the rays 
of the sun, as an offering in homage to him who is 
universally heard, praised and celebrated. Enjoy the bliss 
and ecstasy of soma with him. 


अध्वर्यवः कर्त॑ना श्रुष्टिमस्मै वने Prod वन उन्नयध्वम्‌। 
जुषाणो हस्त्य॑म॒भि वावशे व इन्द्राय सोमं मदिरं 
wera ९॥ 


9. Adhvaryavah kartana srustimasmai vane niputam 
vana unnayadhvam. Jusano hastya-mabhi vavase 
va indraya somam madiram juhota. 


Leaders and participants of the yajnic 
developments of humanity, do your best willingly and 
spontaneously for this mighty and brilliant Indra. Do 
that and let it be sanctified and consecrated in the light 
and purity of the sun and raise the social order in the 
holy light. Join Indra and do his will, whatever he loves 
and desires of your art and industry. And when you have 
accomplished that with the expertise of your hand and 
imagination, then invoke, invite and honour him and 
celebrate the exciting pleasure and ecstasy of the soma 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 14 925 


of success. 


अध्वर्यवः पयसोधर्यथा गोः GAR पणता assy | 
वेदाहम॑स्य निभृतं म एतदित्स॑न्तं भूयो यजतण्चिंकेत ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Adhvaryavah payasodharyatha goh somebhirim 
prnata bhojamindram. Vedahamasya nibhrtam 
ma etad ditsantam bhiuyo yajatasciketa. 


High priests of the yajna of white revolution 
and herbal essences, let the streams of soma flow for 
health and joy and surfeit Indra, the mighty order of 
humanity. Let the order overflow with food and drink 
like the cow’s udders with milk. I know him and the 
wealth he holds for me. Join him, let everyone know 
and serve him for his creation and generosity, and let 
all carry on the effort in unison. 


अध्वर्यवो यो दिव्यस्य वस्वो यः पार्थिवस्य क्षम्य॑स्य राजां । 
तमूर्दरं न पणता यवेनेन्द्रं सोमेभिस्तदपो वो अस्तु ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Adhvaryavo yo divyasya vasvo yah parthivasya 
ksamyasya raja. Tamurdaram na prnata yavene- 
ndram somebhistadapo vo astu. 


High priests of yajnic action and advancement, 
citizens of the world, serve Indra who is ruler of the 
light of heaven, the wealth of earth and the sweets of 
love and tolerance. Fill his kingdom to overflowing as 
farmers fill the stores with food and drink. Let the life 
on earth sparkle with streams of soma and shine with 
the glow of health and joy. Let that be your karma of 
divine dedication. Let that be the dynamics of human 
society. 


926 RGVEDA 


अस्मभ्यं तद्व॑सो दानाय राधः समर्थयस्व ag ते वसव्य॑म्‌। 
इन्द्र यच्चित्रं श्रवस्या अनु द्यून्बृहद्वदेम विदथे सुवीराः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Asmabhyam tad vaso danaya radhah samartha- 
yasva bahu te vasavyam. Indra yaccitram Sra- 
vasya anu dyun brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Indra, lord ruler and master of the wealth of the 
universe, bless us with that wealth and honour, light 
and power, and strengthen us that we may be generous, 
tolerant and forgiving. Great and infinite is your power 
and glory of the worlds in existence. Wondrous and 
various is your wealth of life. May we, O lord, blest 
with that honour, power and splendour, brave and rising 
with the brave, every day and night sing of your glory 
and justify your gifts of yajna in our actions and 
endeavours. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 15 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


प्रघा न्व॑स्य महतो महानि सत्या सत्यस्य कर॑णानि वोचम्‌। 
त्रिक॑द्धुकेष्वपिबत्सुतस्यास्य मदे अहिमिन्द्रो जघान ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Pra gha nvasya mahato mahani satya satyasya 
karanani vocam. Trikadrukesvapibat sutasya- 
sya made ahimindro jaghana . 


I would set forth and sing in celebration of the 
great and true actions and achievements of this great 
and eternal lord Indra, ruler of the world, brilliant and 
blazing as the sun who drinks up the distilled essences 
of earth, heaven and the middle regions in three ways 
and radiates and matures exhilarating soma in three 
orders of nature, herbs of the earth, waters of the sky 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 15 927 


and light of the solar regions, and who, in the power 
and ecstasy of this soma process, strikes and breaks the 
dark cloud of showers for rain on the earth. 


अवंशे arta बृहन्तमा रोद॑सी अपृणदन्तरिक्षम्‌। 
स धारयत्पृथिवीं पप्रथ॑च्य सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्रश्चकार ॥। २ ॥ 


2. Avamse dyamastabhayad brhantama rodasi 
aprnadantariksam. Sa dharayat prthivim 
paprathacca somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


Indra, lord of existence, sustains the mighty 
heaven of light in space without a supporting column. 
He fills the heaven and earth and the skies of the middle 
regions with light and fertility for life and holds the 
earth in orbit. And thus the lord manifests his power 
and glory in the expansive universe across the spaces. 
In the ecstasy and Ananda of the soma of creation, the 
lord performs all these actions for life and humanity. 


wala प्राचो fa पिंमाय मानैर्वज्रेण खान्य॑त॒णन्नदीनाम्‌। 
वृथासृजत्पथिधिर्दीर्घयाथेः सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्र॑श्च- 
ITU ३॥ 


a Sadmeva praco vi mimdya manair-vajrena 
khanyatrnan-nadinam. Vrthasrjat pathibhir-dir- 
ghayathaih somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


Like a sacred house of prayer, Indra, lord creator, 
makes the worlds of existence since eternity with exact 
measures and perfect knowledge of their form, function 
and purpose. He splits open the upsurge of waters from 
river sources, digs the beds of flow with a natural and 
spontaneous stroke of the thunderbolt and releases the 
floods by paths deep and wide for us to move and 


928 RGVEDA 


navigate. Indra does all these in joy and ecstasy for his 
love of creation and for the soma pleasure of his 
children. 


स Vatoe dora दभीतेर्विश्वंमधागायुंधमिद्दे अग्रौ | 
सं गोभिरश्वैरसृजद्रथधिः सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्र॑श्चकार ।॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Sa pravolhrn parigatya dabhiter-visvam-adhag- 
ayudham-iddhe agnau. Sam gobhir-aSsvair-asrjad 
rathebhih somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


Having overcome all the weapons of violence, 
fear and terror, he burns them in the blazing fire of his 
cosmic yajna and creates modes of transport and 
communication with bullocks, horses, chariots and 
waves of energy and motive power. He does all these in 
his ecstasy of creativity for the joy of his creation. This 
is the glory of Indra. 


ae महीं धुनिमेतोररम्णात्सो अंस्नातृन॑पारयत्स्वस्ति। त 
उत्स्नाय रयिमभि प्र त॑स्थुः सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्र॑श्च 
CHITIN 


a: Sa im mahim dhunim-etor-aramnat so asnatrn- 
aparayat svasti. Ta utsnaya rayimabhi pra tasthuh 
somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


He gives motion to the waters, and the earth, in 
fact to all things on the move, and he controls, stabilizes, 
arrests and ultimately stills that movement to rest. He 
helps the uninitiates to move and cross the seas for their 
good, and they rise and, having bathed in the waters, 
abide in the wealth of divine bliss. Indra does all these 
in the ecstasy of creation for the joy of his creation. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 15 929 


सोद॑ञ्चं सिन्धुंमरिणान्पहित्वा वञ्चेणान॑ उषसः सं पिपेष । 
अजवसो जविनीभिर्विवृश्चन्त्सोम॑स्य ता मद इन्द्र॑शच- 
TNS Ul 


6. Sodancam sindhum-arinan-mahitva vajrenana 
usasah sam pipesa. Ajavaso javinibhir-vivrscan 
tsomasya ta mada indrascakara. 


With his blazing might he reaches and raises 
the rising sea. With his light he adorns the chariot of 
the dawn. Moving and shaking the motionless with his 
own forces of velocity, Indra goes on with his actions 
in the joy of his creation for the joy of his children. 


स fast stand कनीनामाविर्भवन्नुदतिष्ठत्परावृक्‌ । प्रतिं 
श्रोणः स्थाद्‌ व्यनग॑चष्ट सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्र॑श्चकार ॥ ७॥ 


ve Sa vidvan apagoham kaninam-avirbhavann- 
udatisthat paravrk. Prati Sronah sthad vyana- 
gacasta somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


He, self-refulgent lord of knowledge, removing 
the veil of darkness from the lights, manifests himself 
and stays high and above all. Listening to the prayerful, 
he abides by all, reveals himself and speaks to the 
faithful. Thus does Indra perform his actions of divinity 
in his own ecstasy of creation and for the created. 


fageafetkatourn वि पर्वतस्य दुंहितान्यैरत्‌। 
रिणग्रोधांसि कृत्रिमाण्येषां सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्र॑श्चकार ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Bhinad valam-angirobhir-grnano vi parvatasya 
drmhitanyairat. Rinagrodhamsi krtrimanyesam 
somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


Indra, blazing ruler of the world, proclaiming 


930 RGVEDA 


his power and presence, dispels the dark and distressive 
forces of life with the rays of his light and knowledge. 
He breaks open the deep caverns of mountains and the 
clouds and opens their gates for sun and shower. He 
shatters the artificial walls of division in humanity for 
their progress. These are the acts of Indra done in his 
ecstasy of soma for his people. 


स्वप्रैनाभ्युप्या चुमुरिं धुनिं च जघन्थ दस्युं प्र द भीतिमावः। 
रम्भी चिदत्र विविदे हिरण्यं सोम॑स्य ता मद्‌ इन्द्रश्च- 
कार॥ ९॥ 


2. Svapnenabhyupya cumurim dhunim ca jaghantha 
dasyum pra dabhitimavah. Rambhi cidatra vivide 
hiranyam somasya ta mada indrascakara. 


He alerts the man yawning with sleepy sloth, 
silences the agitator, destroys the robber, suppresses the 
fearful devil, and, under his rule, the honest worker gets 
his wages in gold. Such are the acts of performance 
which Indra accomplishes in the ecstasy of soma for 
the joy of the people. 
नूनं सा ते प्रति वरं जरित्रे दुंहीयर्दिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनीं । 
शिक्षा स्तोतृभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो बृहद्वदेम विदथे 
सुवीराः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhtyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of light and 
joy, may that magnificent generosity of yours award the 
highest fulfilment to the celebrant, and cherished 
knowledge to the worshipper. Lord of power and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 16 931 


splendour, may your glory shine and blaze for us but 
not burn our gifts of your magnanimity. And may we, 
brave and blest with the brave, celebrate your glory in 
our yajnic acts of piety and obedience to your will. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 16 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


प्र व॑ः सतां ज्येष्ठ॑तमाय सुष्टुतिमग्नाविव समिधाने हविर्भरे । 
इन्द्रमजुर्यं जरय॑न्तमु्चितं सनाद्युवानमव॑से हवामहे ॥ ९॥ 


| ¢ Pra vah satam jyesthatamaya sustutimagnaviva 
samidhane havirbhare. Indramajuryam jaraya- 
ntamuksitam sanad yuvanamavase havamahe. 


O worshippers and dedicated devotees of Indra, 
for your sake I offer the sweetest song of celebration in 
honour of the highest lord of life and energy as _ I bear 
and offer oblations of holy fragrant havish into the 
lighted fire of yajna. We invoke and serve Indra, unaging 
lord of imperishable energy, full of inexhaustible power 
and eternally youthful, consuming and converting matter 
into energy. We develop the lord’s energy for our 
protection and advancement. 


यस्मादिन्द्राद्‌ बृहतः किं aad विश्वान्यस्मिन्त्संभूताधिं 
वीयीं । जठरे सोमं तन्वी ३ सहो महो हस्ते a भर॑ति शीर्षणि 
क्रतुंम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Yasmadindrad brhatah kim canemrte visvanya- 
smintsambhrtadhi virya. Jathatre somam tanvi 
saho maho haste vajram bharati Sirsani kratum . 


Without this great lord Indra, eternal power and 
energy, there is nothing that is great, indeed anything at 


932 RGVEDA 


all. In this supreme presence are held all the courage, 
valour and virility. In his oceanic potential lies all the 
power, peace and pleasure. In his body, he holds 
challenge, patience and fortitude, grandeur and 
splendour, in his hand, thunder and lightning, in his 
head, vision, intelligence and noblest yajnic action. 


न क्षोणीभ्यां परिभ्वे त इन्ियं न dys: पर्व॑तैरिन्द्र ते 
रथ॑ः । न ते वज्जमन्व॑ङ्नोति कश्चन यदाशुधिः पत॑सि योज॑ना 
पुरु ॥ ३ ॥ 


Na ksonibhyam paribhve ta indriyam na samu- 
draih parvatairindra te rathah. Na te vajrama- 
nvasnoti kascana yadasubhih patasi yojana puru. 


Not by heaven and earth is your wealth and 
power contained, much less surpassed. Nor can your 
chariot be exhausted and out-distanced by the expansive 
seas and high mountains or even by the spatial clouds. 
Nor can any weapon even remotely approach the 
invincible terror of your thunderbolt. All this because 
you shoot like an arrow with the tempestuous rays of 
light and waves of energy and currents of winds many 
many miles and yojans distance instantly. 


विश्वे ह्य॑स्मै यजताय धृष्णवे क्रतुं भरन्ति वृषभाय सश्च॑ते । 
वृषा यजस्व हविषा विदुष्टरः पिबेन्द्र सोमं वृष॒भेण॑ 
भानुना ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Visve hyasmai yajataya dhrsnave kratum bharanti 
vrsabhaya sascate. Vrsa yajasva havisa vidusta- 
rah pibendra somam vrsabhena bhanuna. 


All bear noble thoughts and perform holy acts 
of yajna in honour of this lord Indra, cosmic yajamana, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 16 933 


bold and daring, overwhelming and generous, and 
universal friend and constant companion. Generous 
yajaka, you are very wise and highly knowledgeable. 
Offer yajna with homage and fragrant havis. O lord 
Indra, participate in our yajna alongwith the generous 
sun and like the sun, drink the soma of joy and grant us 
the bliss. 


तृष्णः कोरः पवते मध्व॑ ऊर्मिर्वृषभारत्राय वृषभाय urea | 
वृष॑णाध्वयुं वुंषभासो अद्रयो वृष॑णं सोमं वृषभाय 
सुष्वति ॥ ५ ॥ 


Vrsnah kosah pavate madhva urmirvrsa- 
bhannaya vrsabhaya patave. Vrsanadhvaryu 
vrsabhaso adrayo vrsanam somam vrsabhaya 
susvati. 


Treasure clouds of liquid energy explode from 
the sun and radiate all round, honey streams of light 
and power flow from the sun, in waves, for the 
nourishment and maturation of the vibrant life in 
existence as food and drink for the mighty humanity 
and other living beings. Roaring clouds rain down living 
waters for the health and joy of the children of earth. 
Generous high-priests of the yajna of love and non- 
violence press out soma and distil the exciting drink of 
life and ecstasy from the herbs and raise it in flaming 
waves of fragrance. 


aut ते ad उत ते वृषा रथो वृष॑णा हरी! वृषभाण्यायुंधा | 
वृष्णो मद॑स्य वृषभ त्वमींशिष इन्द्र सोम॑स्य वृषभस्य 
तुप्णुहि usu 


934 RGVEDA 


6. Vrsa te vajra uta te vrsa ratho vrsana hari vrsa- 
bhanyayudha. Vrsno madasya vrsabha tvamisisa 
indra somasya vrsabhasya trpnuhi . 


Indra, generous and potent lord of life and joy, 
mighty is your thunderbolt, tempestuous your chariot, 
fast as winds are your horses, and blazing are your arms 
and weapons of justice, reward and punishment. 
Generous and mighty lord, you create and govern the 
infinite treasures of life, vigour and joy. O lord of power 
and energy, drink of this invigorating soma of joy and 
give us too the drink of it to the depth of surfeit and 
heights of sobriety. 


प्रते नावं न सम॑ने वचस्युवं ब्रह्मणा यामि wary aretha: | 
कुविन्नो अस्य वच॑सो निबोधिषदिन्द्रमुत्सं न वसुनः 
सिचामहे ॥ ७ ॥ 


fe Pra te navam na samane vacasyuvam brahmana 
yami savanesu dadhrsih. Kuvinno asya vacaso 
nobodhisadindramutsam na vasunah sicamahe. 


Loud and bold in inspiration for the challenges 
of the business of living, with all my wealth of power 
and prayer I come to you, lord of light and knowledge, 
and take on to you as to a boat in the struggle for survival 
and success across the seas, eloquent as you are with 
the Word of the Veda and light of Divinity. Indra, lord 
of knowledge, listen to this word of prayer, know what 
we need and desire. We come to you, associate with 
you, serve you, and study and develop divine energy 
and power with you as a treasure-house of the wealth 
of the world. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 16 935 


पुरा संबाधादभ्या व॑वृत्स्व नो धेनुर्न वत्सं यव॑सस्य पिप्युषीं | 
सकृत्सु a सुमतिभिः शतक्रतो सं पलीधिर्नं वृषणो 
नसीमहि ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pura sambadhadabhya vavrtsva no dhenurna 
vatsam yavasasya pipyust. Sakrtsu te sumatibhih 
Satakrato sam patnibhirna vrsano nasimahi. 


Indra, lord of a hundred noble acts of yajna, by 
virtue of our ancient and eternal relation as father and 
son, mother and child, creator and creature, pervader 
and pervaded, teacher and disciple, come to us like the 
abundant mother cow overflowing with the milk of life 
for her darling calf on the pasture, and be with us always, 
never forsake us, lord, so that we too, with all noble 
thoughts and intentions, reach you and ever be with you 
like generous, loving and prayerful men abiding in the 
company of intelligent and life-sustaining wives and 
mothers. 


नूनं सा a प्रति वरं जरित्रे दुहीयदिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनीं। 
शिक्षां स्तोतृभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो gegen विदथं 
सुवीराः ॥ ९ ॥ 


2, Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhiyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Indra, lord giver of light and the wealth of life, 
may that magnificent bounty of yours flow and shower 
the desired excellence upon your singer and celebrant, 
sure, instantly and incessantly. May the light of 
knowledge and wealth of power given to the devotee 
ever shine for us but never blaze to excess, never burn, 
so that, bright and brave, blest with the brave, we may 


936 RGVEDA 


sing in praise and homage to you in our yajnic acts of 
life and the music may rise and ring across the spaces. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 17 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


तद॑स्मै नव्य॑मद्धिर स्वदर्चत शुष्मा यद॑स्य प्रलथो दीरंते | 
विश्वा यद्‌ गोत्रा सह॑सा परीवृता मदे सोम॑स्य दुंहितान्यै- 
र॑यत्‌॥ ९॥ 


bs Tadasmai navyam-angirasvad-arcata Susma 
yadasya pratnathodirate. Visva yad gotra sahasa 
parivrta made somasya drmhitanyai-rayat. 


Offer homage of praise in worship to this 
adorable lord Indra, light of the world, like the breath 
of life, since his powers operate in life as of old and 
eternally and who in his ecstasy of soma-yaga of 
creation, with a stroke of his omnipotence, opened forth 
and activated all the clouds of dark energies which lay 
asleep all round during the night of the universe. 


स भूतु यो हं प्रथमाय धाय॑स ओजो मिमानो महिमान- 
मातिरत्‌। शूरो यो युत्सु तन्वं परिव्यत॑ शीर्षणि द्यां म॑हिना 
प्रत्य॑मुञ्चत i २॥ 


2 Sa bhutu yo ha prathamaya dhayasa ojo mimano 
mahimanamatirat. Suro yo yutsu tanvam pari- 
vyata Sirsani dyam mahina pratyamuncata. 


May that Indra, lord creator, be good and kind 
to us, Indra who first for the creation and sustenance of 
the universe manifests his creative energy in Prakrti and 
then expands his own power and potential across the 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 17 937 


world of nature. Mighty is he who in the battlesome- 
interaction of the elements creates the grand structure 
of the universe and then, as the pervasive spirit of life, 
veils himself in the body of the universe. It is he who, 
by his own essential might raised the heaven of light on 
high and stayed it there. 


अर्धाकृणोः प्रथमं aie’ महद्यदस्यागरे ब्रह्मणा शुष्पभैर॑यः। 
रथेन हर्यश्वेन विच्युंताः प्र जीरयः सिस्रते खध्यष१क्‌ 
पृथ॑क्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


a Adhakrnoh prathamam viryam mahad yada- 
syagre brahmana susmamairayah. Rathesthena 
haryasvena vicyutah pra jirayah sisrate sadhryak 
prthak. 


And thereafter, first of all, he creates the prime 
universal fertility and creative vitality, mighty energy 
forces, which he with his omnipotence and omniscience, 
sets in motion. They, great lokas and regions of the 
universe, released and accelerated by Indra, master of 
the chariot as well as of the horses, roll and revolve and 
rotate youthfully, all together and separately too, each 
by itself. 
अधा यो विश्वा yet मज्मनेशानकृत्प्रव॑या अभ्यवर्धत । 
आद्रोद॑सी ज्योतिषा बद्धिरात॑नोत्सीव्यन्तमांसि दुधिता 
सम॑व्ययत्‌ ।॥। ४ ॥ 

4. Adha yo visva bhunabhi majmanesanakrt pravaya 
abhyavardhata. Ad rodasi jyotisa vahniratanot 
sivyan tamamsi dudhita samavyayat. 


Indra, lord creator, who is master controller and 
ruler of the worlds of the universe by his omnipotence, 


938 RGVEDA 


pervades the expansive universe, and, wielding and 
sustaining the creation, fills the heaven and earth with 
light and, binding and integrating the far off regions 
togehter, dispels the darkness from the regions and 
covers them with the light of divinity. 


स प्राचीनान्‌ पर्व॑तान्‌ दुंहदोज॑साऽधराचीनंमकृणोदपामप॑ः। 
अधारयत्पुथिवीं विश्वधायसमस्त॑भ्नान्मायया दद्याम- 
स्स: ॥ ५॥ 


2; Sa pracinan parvatan drmhadojasa-dharacinam- 
akrnodapamapah. Adharayat prthivim visvadha- 
yasamastabhnan-mayaya dyamavasrasah . 


He strengthens and firms up the ancient high 
clouds with his might and splendour and creates the 
lower ones this side of time and also creates the waters 
of the middle regions of the skies. He wields and sustains 
the earth mother of all the living life and holds and 
sustains with his marvellous power the heaven of light 
above, steady, secure, and extensive. 


area अरं बाहभ्यां यं पिताकुणोद्धिश्व॑स्मादा जनुषो 
वेद॑सस्परि । येना पृथिव्यां नि क्रिविं श॒यध्यै व्रण ह॒त्व्य- 
तंणक्तुविष्व्णिः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sasma aram bahubhyam yam pitakrnod visva- 
smada januso vedasaspari. Yena prthivyam ni 
krivim Sayadhyai vajrena hatvyavrnak tuvisvanih. 


That is for this: The sun which the father creator 
has created and fashioned forth in beauty with his own 
hands over all that is born and all that know, that mighty 
catalytic power by which he breaks and burns the atoms 
and, with a stroke of thunder and lightning, melts the 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 17 939 


cloud in rain showers to flow on earth and rest in the 
oceans. That sun is for this lord Indra and his pleasure. 
And the sun is for this darling Indra of the world of 
creation, the human soul which the father creator has 
fashioned forth in body and adorned with his own hands 
and which is over and above all that is born, by virtue 
of its knowledge and intelligence. And this darling child 
too, this humanity, is for the sun and earth and for the 
father creator to be ever in service for preservation of 
the earth and environment and for dedication to Divinity. 


अमाजूरिव पित्रोः wet सती संमानादा सद॑सस्त्वामिये 
भग॑म्‌। कृधि प्र॑केतमुप॑ मास्या भ॑र दच्ि भागं तन्वो ३ येनं 
मामः ॥ ७॥ 


ve Amajuriva pitroh saca ऽवा samanada sadastva- 
miye bhagam. Krdhi praketamupa masya bhara 
daddhi bhagam tanvo yena mamahah . 


Like a dedicated maiden abiding in the father’s 
home I pray: Le me rise from this physical house of life 
to the glory of divinity. Indra, lord of light and 
knowledge, raise me to knowledge. O Sun, bring me to 
light and lustre month by month. Bless me with the best 
that is mine, my share of life, by which I may rise to the 
highest that I can be, my own real self. 


भोजं त्वामिन्द्र वयं हुवेम ददिष्ट्रमिन्द्रापांसि वाजान्‌ । 
अवि इन्दर चित्रया न ऊती कृधि वुंष्चिन्द्र्‌ वस्य॑सो नः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Bhojam tvamindra vayam huvema dadistvamin- 
drapamsi vajan. Aviddhindra citraya na uti krdhi 
vrsannindra vasyaso nah. 


Indra, bountiful lord of the beauty and joy of 


940 RGVEDA 


life, we invoke you and pray: Lord of wealth, honour 
and power, give us the strength and courage to do our 
karma. Give us the light of your knowledge and vision. 
Lord destroyer of hate, jealousy and enmity, save us, 
protect us with your wondrous ways of protection. Lord 
of generosity, make us profusely rich and generous with 
the gifts of life. 

नूनं सा ते प्रति वरं जरित्रे दुंहीयर्दिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनीं। 

शिक्षा स्तोतभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो बृहद्वदेम विदथे 

wart: ९॥ 


च. Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhiyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah . 


Indra, lord of light and knowledge, power and 
glory, may that munificent generosity of yours, and may 
that knowledge and divine teaching of yours bring unto 
the singer celebrant and the disciples holy gifts of their 
heart’s desire for sure and at the earliest. Give us the 
strength and vision that we, brave and blest with the 
brave, be great celebrants of your glory in our holy and 
yajnic acts of life in your service. Let the light shine, let 
the fire blaze, but not burn any of the gifts of Divinity. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 18 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 
प्राता रथो नवो योजि सस्निश्चतुर्युगस्तिकशः सप्तर॑स्मिः। 
दशारित्रो मनुष्यः स्वर्षाः स इष्टिभिवर्मतिभी रंह्यो भूत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


Li Prataratho navo yoji sasniscaturyugastrikasah 
saptarasmih. Dasaritro manusyah svarsah 
sa istibhirmatibhi ranhyo bhit. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 18 941 


Let the latest new chariot be harnessed this 
morning, winsome, bountiful and strongly structured, 
four powered, three geared, seven steered, with ten 
propellers, manmade chariot for humanity, self- 
generative for power which may be navigable with 
inbuilt intelligence, controlled and monitored by men. 


सास्मा अरं प्रथमं स द्वितीय॑मुतो तृतीयं मनुषः स होतां। 
अन्यस्या गर्भ॑म॒न्य ऊ जनन्त सो safe: सचते जेन्यो 
aati 


2. Sasma aram prathamam sa dvittyamuto trttyam 
manusah sa hota. Anyasya garbhamanya u 
jananta so anyebhih sacate jenyo vrsa. 


That chariot is perfectly suitable and 
comfortable for this lord Indra, creator and ruler of 
power. Harbinger of knowledge, comfort and power for 
humanity, it covers the first stage of the earth, second 
stage of the sky, and the third stage of space. The product 
of one is taken over by others who move it further so 
that, victorious and highly productive, it joins with the 
other heavenly bodies. 


हरी नु कं रथ इन्द्र॑स्य योजमायै सूक्तेन वच॑सा नवेन । मो 
घु त्वामत्र॑ बहवो हि विप्रा नि रीरमन्यज॑मानासो अन्ये ॥ ३॥ 


2, Hari nu kam ratha indrasya yojamayai suktena 
vacasa navena. Mo su tvamatra bahavo hi vipra 
ni riraman yajamanaso anye. 


In this versatile chariot of Indra, lord of power 
and humanity, I use twofold power of electric energy in 
a circuit to move it according to the latest word of the 
formula of automotion. The many scholars and 


942 RGVEDA 


participants in the yajnic programme of research and 
science please and celebrate you, O creator, not the 
others. 


आ द्वाभ्यां हरिभ्यामिन्द्र याह्या चतुर्भिरा षडभिर्हूय्मानः। 
आष्टाभिर्दशभिंः सोमपेय॑मयं सुतः सुंमर मा मृध॑स्कः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A dvabhyam haribhyamindra yahya caturbhira 
sadbhirhuyamanah. Astabhirdasabhih soma- 
peya-mayam sutah sumakha ma mrdhaskah. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, come 
conducted by two, four, and six powers of motion, even 
by eight or ten for a drink of soma of success which, O 
high priest of noble yajna, is ready right here. Pray do 
not engage in any programme of violence and war. 


आ fasten त्रिंशता araatet चत्वारिंशता हरिंभिर्युजानः। 

आ पञ्चाशतं GLAST षष्ट्या GAA सोँमपेय॑म्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

3: A vimSatya trimSata yahyarvana catvarimsata 

haribhiryujanah. A pancasata surathebhirindra 
sastya saptatya somapeyam. 

Indra, come hither equipped with twenty, thirty, 


forty, fifty, sixty, seventy excellent horse powers of 
chariot for a drink of soma. 


आशीत्या न॑वत्या ataatet शतेन SRSA: | 
अयं हि ते शुनहोत्रेषु सोम इन्द्रं त्वाया URSA मदाय ॥ & ॥ 

6. Asitya navatya yahyarvana satena haribhiruhya- 
manah. Ayam hi te Sunahotresu soma indra tvaya 
parisikto madaya. 


Indra, come hither conducted by a chariot of 
eighty, ninety and a hundred horse power. Here is this 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 18 943 


soma distilled and sanctified for your pleasure in the 
auspicious programmes of yajna of your choice. 


मम ब्रहोन््र याह्यच्छा विश्वा हरीं धुरि धिष्वा रथ॑स्य | 
पुरुत्रा हि विहव्यो बभूथास्मिञ्छर सव॑ने मादयस्व I ७॥ 


a. Mama brahmendra yahyaccha visva hari dhuri 
dhisva rathasya. Purutra hi vihavyo bahhutha- 
sminchura savane madayasva . 


Indra, lord of power and honour, listen well to 
our song of praise and prayer. Take to the chariot, yoke 
the circuitous motive energies to the chariot pole and 
come post haste to receive our homage and yajna 
fragrance. Be responsive to the invocation and invitation 
of many, O generous lord, join in this auspicious 
celebration and rejoice with us. 


नम इन्द्रेण सख्यं वि योंषदस्मभ्य॑मस्य दक्षिणा दुहीत । 
उप ज्येष्ठे वरूथे गभ॑स्तौ प्रायेप्राये जिगीवांसः स्याम ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Na ma indrena sakhyam vi yosadasmabhyama- 
sya daksina duhita. Upa jyesthe varuthe gabha- 
Stau prayepraye jigivamsah syama. 

Never may my love and friendship with Indra 
be snapped, and may his kindness and generosity ever 
keep it flowing for us abundantly. And may we, closely 
under his high protection and divine light, be inspired 
for victory in every project of life at the very start of the 
expedition. 


नूनं सा a प्रति वरं जरित्रे दुंदीयदिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनीं। 
शिक्षां स्तोतृभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो gegen विदथं 
सुवीराः ॥ ९ ॥ 


944 RGVEDA 


9, Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhtyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Indra, generous lord of wealth and power, 
honour and victory, may that magnificent generosity and 
kindness of your grace ever flow abundantly for us and 
bestow upon the singer celebrant and the disciples sure 
gifts of their favourite choice. And may your teaching 
and knowledge and your grandeur ever shine for the 
admirers but never burn the love, desire and self- 
confidence of the devotees. And may we, brave and blest 
with the brave, ever celebrate your heavenly glory in 
our noblest yajnic projects of life. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 19 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


अर्पाय्यस्यान्ध॑सो मदाय मनीषिणः सुवानस्य waa: | 
यस्िच्निन्द्रः प्रदिवि वावृधान ओको दधे ब्र॑हयण्यन्त॑श्च 
नर॑: ॥ ९॥ 


iL Apayyasyandhaso madaya manisinah suvanasya 
prayasah. Yasminnindrah pradivi vavrdhane oko 
dadhe brahmanyantasca narah. 


Ye saints and sages all, masters of mind and 
thought, lovers of Divinity and leaders of humanity, you 
have tasted of the food and drunk deep of the honey 
sweets of nectar for the beauty and ecstasy of life at 
that fount of light divine where Indra, the Sun, ever 
abiding, rising and waxing, holds his place in the light 
of heaven! O for a draught of that nectar, a morsel of 
that food, a glimpse of that light! 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 19 945 


अस्य म॑न्दानो मध्वो वर॑हुस्तोऽ हिमिन्द्रो अर्णोवृतं fa 
asad प्र यद्वयो न स्वस॑राण्यच्छा प्रयांसि च नदीनां 
चक्रमन्त ॥ २॥ 


2. Asya mandano madhvo vajrahasto’himindro 
arnovrtam vi vrscat. Pra yad vayo na svasaran- 
yaccha prayamsi ca nadinam cakramanta. 


Tasting of the nectar sweets of this divinity in 
ecstasy, Indra, the Sun, armed with light and thunder, 
breaks open the clouds of darkness holding floods and 
oceans of water, and thence flow, flying like birds of 
life, bright days of light and sparkling streams of water. 


स माहिन इन्द्रौ अर्णो अपां प्रैर॑यदहिहाच्छ समुद्रम्‌ | 
अज॑नयत्सूर्य' विदद्रा अक्तुनाह्वां वयुनानि साधत्‌ 3 

SF Sa m@hina indro arno apam prairayad-ahihaccha 
samudram. Ajanayat suryam vidad ga aktuna- 
hnam vayunani sadhat. 


That great Indra, lord omnipotent, activates the 
waters in the midst of space and he, breaker of darkness 
into light and life, then creates the oceans. He creates 
the solar system, reveals the stars, planets and satellites, 
shows the days by nights and directs the daily round of 
world’s activities. 


सो studi मन॑वे पुरूणीन्द्रो दाशद्ाशुषे हन्ति aa! 
सद्यो यो नृभ्यो अतसाय्यो भूत्प॑स्पृधानेभ्यः सूर्यस्य 
सातौ।॥ ४॥ 

4. So apratini manave purunindro dasad dasuse 


hanti vrtram. Sadyo yo nrbhyo atasayyo bhut 
pasprdhanebhyah suryasya satau. 


946 RGVEDA 


The same omnipotent lord Indra who breaks the 
clouds of darkness bestows on the generous man of 
noble thought and meditation many gifts of 
immeasurable value. May the lord ever be friends with 
people who struggle forward in life for sun and shower 
of the light and peace of Divinity. 


स सुन्वत इन्द्रः सूर्यमाऽऽ देवो रिंणाङ्मत्यीय स्तवान्‌ | 
आ ast गुहद॑वद्यमस्मै भर दंशं नैत॑शो दशस्यन्‌ I 


= Sa sunvata indrah suryama’’devo rinanm-artyaya 
stavan. A yad rayim guhadavadyamasmai 
bhavadamsam naitaso dasasyan. 


That Indra, lord of universal energy, light and 
wealth, brilliant and generous, releases for the creative 
man of research and development the light and power 
of the sun in addition to songs of praise and appreciation 
and, bringing unknown and indescribable wealth for 
this man, never destroys the share that is his due. 


स र॑नधयत्सदिवः सार॑थये शुष्णमशुषं कुय॑वं कुत्साय | 
दिवोदासाय नवतिं च नवेन्द्रः पुरो व्यैरच्छम्बरस्य ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa randhayat sadivah sarathaye Susnam-asusam 
kuyavam kutsaya. Divodasaya navatim ca nave- 
ndrah puro vyairac chambarasya . 


Indra, lord of light and energy of the sun in 
heaven, for the good of the guide and leader of humanity 
and for the man of piety, charity and dedication to 
Divinity, breaks the intensity of drought and the 
pestilence of good harvest, overcomes ninety and nine 
defensive walls of the dark cloud for rain and converts 
drought into showers and famine into plenty and fertility. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 19 947 


Thus the lord accomplishes the purposes of Divinity 
for humanity. 


एवा त॑ इन्द्रोचथ॑महेम श्रवस्या न त्मना वाजयन्तः | 
अश्याम तत्साप्त॑माशुषाणा ननमो वधरदेवस्य पीयोः ॥ ७॥ 


ae Eva ta indrocatham-ahema sravasya na tmana 
vajayantah. ASyama tat saptam-asusana nanamo 
vadharadevasya ptyoh. 


Thus we, O lord Indra, on our way to Divinity 
by our mind and soul with speed and sincerity, may, we 
pray, hear the word of your glory and have a glimpse of 
your admirable action. And may we, acting and thus 
struggling, cross that seven stage path to Divinity 
whereby we may eliminate from within and without the 
words and weapons of the impious reviler and destroyer 
of faith and reach our destination. 


एवा ते गृत्समदाः शुर मन्मावस्यवो न वयुनानि तक्षुः | 
ब्रह्मण्यन्तं इन्द्र ते नवीय sonst सुश्चितिं सुम्नम॑श्युः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Eva te grtsamadah §ura manmavasyavo na 
vayunani taksuh. Brahmanyanta indra te naviya 
isamurjam suksitim sumnamasyuh. 


O lord of light and divine action, thus do your 
admirers and celebrants in ecstasy, like children seeking 
protection of the parent, sing in praise of your thought 
and marvellous actions. And thus may they, praying and 
working for the gifts of Divinity, attain the blessings of 
your eternal and ever new food and energy, peaceable 
haven and home, and joy and comfort in the shade of 
Divinity. 


०48 RGVEDA 


नूनं सा a प्रति वरं जरित्रे दुहीयदिन्द्र दक्षिणा मघोनीं। 
शिक्षां स्तोतृभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो gegen विदथं 
सुवीराः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhiyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah . 


Indra, lord of universal generosity, may that 
munificent hand of your liberality and grace deliver unto 
the celebrant the gift of his heart’s desire. O lord of 
glory, may your word of knowledge ever ring and shine 
for the disciples but never burn off their love and desire 
and the prosperity of us all. And may we, brave and 
blest with the brave, celebrate your glory in our holy 
yajnic actions. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 20 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


वयं ते वय॑ इन्द्र विद्धि षु णः प्र भ॑रामहे वाजयुर्न रथ॑म्‌ । 
विपन्यवो दीध्यतो मनीषा सुम्नमियंश्चन्तस्त्वाव॑तो 
नन्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


Li Vayam ta vaya indra viddhi su nah pra bharamahe 
vajayurna ratham. Vipanyavo didhyato manisa 
sumnam-iyaksantas-tvavato nrn. 


Indra, lord of life and ruler of the world, please 
to know us well. Like a fast driver, accelerating his car 
to the destination, we bear our homage of yajnic food 
and songs of praise to you. We come, lord, admirers, 
shining, with sincerity of mind and heart, joining and 
praying to powers human and divine as to you we come 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 20 ०49 


for peace of mind and all round comfort. 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्र त्वाभिरूती त्वायतो अंभिष्टिपासि Sar 
त्वयिनो दाशुषो वरूतेत्थाधींरभथि यो नक्ष॑ति car २॥ 


2. Tvam na indra tvabhiruti tvayato abhistipasi 
jJanan. Tvamino dasuso varutetthadhirabhi yo 
naksati tva. 


Indra, lord of love, power and protection, you 
are our own, protector of the life and interests of our 
people who are yours, you are committed to us with all 
your means of protection and advancement. You are the 
mighty lord and master, saviour and promoter of the 
man of charity and of anyone who approaches you 
sincerely in faith that you are the real and ultimate master 
and saviour. 


स नो युवेन्द्रो sites: erat शिवो नराम॑स्तु पाता। यः 
शंसन्तं a: शशमानमूती पच॑न्तं च स्तुवन्तं च प्रणेष॑त्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Sa no yuvendro johutrah sakha Sivo naramastu 
pata. Yah samsantam yah sasamanamuti 
pacantam ca stuvantam ca pranesat. 


Indra, lord of life, ever young, generous giver 
invoked and invited, our friend, giver of peace and bliss, 
may he be the guardian and protector of the people. 
May he guide and enlighten the admirer, zealous 
worshipper, self-developing devotee and the singer 
celebrant. 


तमु स्तुष इन्द्रं तं गंणीषे यस्मिन्पुरा वावृधुः शाशदुश्चं । 
स वस्वः कामं पीपरदियानो ब्र॑ह्यण्यतो नूत॑नस्यायोः ॥ ४ ॥ 


950 RGVEDA 


4. Tamu stusa indram tam grnise yasmin pura 
vavrdhuh sasadusca. Sa vasvah kamam pipara- 
diyano brahmanyato nutanasyayoh. 


O man, I worship that lord Indra, celebrate, in 
song, him in whose protective shade humanity has 
grown and advanced since eternity and fought out the 
evil and the wicked. He, reaching out to the lover of 
wealth, fulfils his desire and blesses the new initiate in 
search of Vedic knowledge and spiritual enlightenment. 


सो अर्धिरसामुचथा जुजुष्वान्ब्रह्या तूतोदिन्द्रो गातुमिष्णान्‌ | 
मुष्णन्नुषसः Gator स्तवानश्न॑स्य चिच्छिश्नथत्पूर्व्याणिं ॥ ५ ॥ 


त So angirasamucatha jujusvan brahma tutodin-dro 
gatumisnan. Musnannusasah suryena stavana- 
Snasya cicchisnathat purvyani . 


That same Indra, lord of light and power, 
delighting in the admirable wealth and knowledge of 
the people, watching and loving the wide earth, taking 
over the beauty of the dawn with the splendour of the 
sun, and silencing the roar of clouds, augments and 
advances the songs of the celebrants since eternity and 
releases them from their bonds. 


स हं श्रुत इन्द्रो नामं देव ऊर्ध्वो भुंवन्मनुंषे दस्मत॑ंमः। अवं 
प्रियमंर्शसानस्य॑ cased भरदासस्य॑ स्वधावान्‌ & ॥ 
6. Sa ha sruta indro nama deva urdhvo bhuvan- 


manuse dasmatamah. Ava priyam-arsasanasya 
sahvanchiro bharad dasasya svadhavan. 


Indra, omnipotent lord of light and generosity, 
is surely the supreme power heard and celebrated in the 
Revelation, self-refulgent giver, highest above all, who 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 20 951 


is the ultimate saviour and destroyer of suffering for 
humanity. Dear and loving to anyone who approaches 
him, bold and patient and tolerant, highest on top of the 
world of existence, commanding absolute power and 
sustenance, he brings total joy and fulfilment to his 
servant and supplicant. 


स dada: कृष्णयोनीः पुरन्दरो दासीरैरयद्वि । 
अज॑नयन्मनंवे क्षामपश्च सत्रा शंसं यज॑मानस्य तूतोत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


ah Sa vrtrahendrah krsnyonith purandaro dasirai- 
rayad vi. Ajanayan manave ksamapasca satra 
Samsam yajamanasya tiutot. 


Such is Indra, breaker of the clouds of rain 
showers. He opens up the wombs of energies, dark and 
deep, to let out the floods of existence into positive paths 
of generation, creating the earth mother and the waters 
of life for humanity. He is breaker of the walls of 
hoarders’ cities to release the flow of wealth in human 
history. May the lord raise the honour and wealth of the 
host of yajna by virtue, truth and creative generosity. 


wet aaa दायि सत्रेन्द्राय देवेथिरर्णीसातौ । प्रति 
यद॑स्य as area दस्यून्पुर आयंसीर्निं तारीत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tasmai tavasyamanu dayi satrendraya devebhir- 
arnasatau. Prati yadasya vajram bahvordhur- 
hatvi dasyun pura ayasirni tarit. 


To that omnipotent Indra, in the battles of 
creation for the waters of life and generation of the 
wealth of existence, mighty offerings are made into the 
fire of yajna in truth and sequence by the divine powers 
of nature and the noblest of humanity who hold on to 


952 RGVEDA 


their part in obedience and response to this wielder of 
the thunderbolt in arms who destroys the evil and the 
negatives to overcome the cities of gold and steel in 
existence. 


नूनं सा ते प्रति at जरित्रे दुहीयदिन्द्र afaton मघोनीं । 
शिक्षां स्तोतृभ्यो माति धग्भगो नो gegen विदथं 
सुवीराः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Nunam sa te prati varam jaritre duhiyadindra 
daksina maghoni. Siksa stotrbhyo mati dhag- 
bhago no brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Indra, lord of the universe and wealth of 
existence, may that oceanic generosity of your love bless 
the singer celebrant with the choicest gifts of his desire, 
and may your light of knowledge ever shine on the 
disciples but never burn our greatness and grandeur so 
that we and our children may boldly celebrate you in 
our yajnas. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 21 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


विश्वजिते धनजिते catia सत्राजिते नृजितं उर्वराजिते | 
अश्वजिते गोजिते stferd भरेन्द्राय सोमं यजताय 
हर्यतम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

1. Visvajite dhanajite svarjite satrajite nrjita urvara- 
Jite. ASvajite gojite abjite bharendraya somam 
yajataya haryatam. 

Ye men and women of the world, bear and bring 


the sweetest soma in honour of Indra, conquerer, ruler 
and controller of the universe, wealth and power of 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 21 953 


existence, joy beyond suffering, truth of life, humanity, 
earth and her fertility, horses, cows, and waters of the 
universe—Indra who carries on the yajna of the universe 
and, for his sake, bear the soma of joy in your lives too. 


अधिभुवेऽ भिभङ्कायं वन्वतेऽ ulsera सह॑मानाय वेधसे । 
तुविग्रये aga दुष्टरीतवे सत्रासाहे नम इन्द्रौय वोचत ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Abhibhuve ’bhibhangaya vanvate’salhaya saha- 
manaya vedhase. Tuvigraye vahnaye dustaritave 
satrasahe nama indraya vocata. 


Say, ‘Hail your worship’, bow and surrender in 
homage to Indra, all creator and conqueror, all destroyer, 
all lover and dispenser, unchallengeable, inviolable, all 
knower, universal teacher, sole bearer of the burdens of 
existence, unconquerable, upholder of truth and univer- 
sal law, the be-all and end-all of creation and existence. 


सत्रासाहो Sava ज॑नंसहश्च्यव॑नो युध्मो अनु जोषं - 
मुश्चितः । वृतंचयः सरहुरिरविश््वारित इन्द्र॑स्य वोचं प्र कृतानि 
वी्यी।॥३॥ 


GP Satrasaho janabhakso janamsahascyavano 
yudhmo anu josamuksitah. Vrtamcayah sahuri- 
rviksvarita indrasya vocam pra krtani virya. 


Let us celebrate the mighty actions and 
achievements of Indra, lord upholder of truth, adorable 
to people, patient lover of humanity, mover and 
promoter, warrior, giver of showers in response to 
prayer, integrative creator and organiser, tolerant and 
merciful, accessible to all people. 


954 RGVEDA 


अनानुदो वरंषभो दोध॑तो वधो eshte ऋष्वो अस॑मष्टकाव्यः | 
र श्चचोदः श्नथ॑नो वीच्ितस्पृथुरिन्द्रः सुयज्ञ उषसः tact 
ATU ४ ॥ 


4. Ananudo vrsabho dodhato vadho gambhira rsvo 
asamastakavyah. Radhracodah snathano vilita- 
sprthurindrah suyajna usasah svarjanat. 


Unmoved mover, mighty generous, destroyer of 
destroyers, deep and grave, instant inspirer to the 
sublime, beyond definition in poetry and himself the 
poet of Infinity, inspirer of the diffident and depressed, 
breaker of the stumbling blocks and the violent, versatile 
in virtue, vast in presence and performance, Indra is the 
highest high-priest of cosmic yajna who lights the daily 
fire with the heavenly light of the dawn. 


यज्ञेन॑ गातुमप्तुरों fafafat धियो' हिन्वाना उशिजों 
मनीषिणः । अभिस्वरा निषदा गा अवस्यव इन्द्र हिन्वाना 
द्रविंणान्याशत ॥ & ॥ 


> Yajnena gatumapturo vividrire dhiyo hinvana 
usijo manisinah. Abhisvara nisada ga avasyava 
indre hinvana dravinanyasata. 


Inspired pioneers, aspiring warriors and wise 
visionaries applying their thought, imagination and will 
in association, working with cooperation and united 
action in sustained yajna carve new paths of progress 
across the earth. Speaking together with a united voice, 
sitting together in assembly, acting together on the field 
for preservation and progress, exploiting natural energy 
and invoking the blessings of Indra in yajna, they 
reclaim lands of the earth and win wealths of the world. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 22 955 


इन्द्र श्रेष्ठानि द्रविणानि धेहि चित्ति cater सुभगत्वमस्मे | 
पोषंरयीणामरिष्टिं तनूनां स्वाद्यानं वाचः सुंदिनत्वमहय॑म्‌॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Indra 51-८510दा77 dravinani dhehi cittim daksasya 
subhagatvam-asme. Posam rayinam-aristim 
tanunam svadmanam vacah sudinatvamahnam. 


Indra, lord of the world, bless us with the best 
of strength and power, high intelligence and awareness, 
beauty and delicacy of art and expertise, abundance of 
wealth and prosperity, health and security of senses and 
body, sweetness of speech and style, and peace and 
brightness of days and nights. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 22 
Indra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


त्रिकद्रुकेषु महिषो यवाशिरं तुविशुष्म॑स्तृपत्सोम॑मपि- 
बद्विष्णुना सुतं यथाव॑शत्‌। स ई' ममाद महि कर्म कर्तवे 
महामुरुं सेनं सश्चदेवो देवं सत्यमिन्द्रं सत्य इन्दुः ॥ ९॥ 


| Trikadrukesu mahiso yavasiram tuvisusmas-trpat 
somamapibad visnuna sutam yathavasat. Sa tm 
mamada mahi karma kartave maham-urum 
Sainam sascad devo devam satyam-indram satya 
induh. 


The great and powerful sun drinks up the soma, 
essence of vital juices reinforced with herbal elixir, 
matured in three containers, 1.e., the earth, the sky and 
the heaven of light, and distilled by light and wind while 
it shines and energises the essences. 


He who delights in energising this sun, greatest 
of the great in nature, to do great things, who blesses 
and continues to bless this blazing power of light is the 


956 RGVEDA 


eternal, ever true, self-refulgent Lord Supreme, blissful 
as the moon. 


And he who would love to do great things vast 
and worthy of the great, he, true and bright as the moon, 
should serve and meditate on this lord of unbounded 
light and energy. 


अध त्विषीमां अभ्योजसा क्रिविं qerdaar रोदसी 
अपृणदस्य मज्यना प्र वावृधे | अध॑त्तान्यं Wet प्रेमरिच्यत 
सेनं सश्चदेवो देवं सत्यमिन्द्रं सत्य इन्दः ॥ २॥ 


2, Adha tvisitman abhyojasa krivim yudhabhavada 
rodasit aprnadasya majmana pra vavrdhe. 
Adhattanyam jathare premaricyata sainam 
sascad devo devam satyamindram satya induh . 


The mighty universal energy with its own 
electric force and its action fills up the heaven and earth 
with universal water vapours full like a reservoir, and it 
continues to grow by the omnipotence of the 
omnipresent lord Indra, the self-refulgent Indra. It holds 
within its womb the other, wealth of waters, releases 
the waters and stays larger and mightier. The lord self- 
refulgent who creates and blesses this mighty bright 
universal yajnic energy of electricity is Indra, eternal 
and ever blissful as the moon. 


साकं जातः क्रतुना Greater ववक्षिथ साकं वृद्धो 
वीर्यैः सासहिरमधो विचर्षणिः । दाता राध॑ः स्तुवते काम्यं 
वसु सैनं सश्चद्देवो देवं सत्यमिन्द्रं सत्य इन्दुः ॥ ३ ॥ 

a Sakam jatah kratuna sakamojasa vavaksitha 
sakam vrddho viryaih sasahirmrdho vicarsanih. 
Data radhah stuvate kamyam vasu sainam sascad 
devo devam satyamindram satya induh. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 22 957 


The jiva, individual soul, born in human form 
with the potential to know and act, courage and 
splendour, carries on the business of life and grows with 
vigour and valour, challenging, victorious and brilliant 
with vision and judgement. Indra, lord of life, all giver, 
provides whatever wealth and power is loved and valued 
by the pious and worshipful soul. May the soul of man, 
blessed and true as the moon, join and serve this supreme 
lord Indra, self-refulgent, eternal and true, in prayer, 
worship and meditation. 


तव त्यन्नर्य' नृतोऽ प॑ इन्द्र प्रथमं पूर्व्य दिवि प्रवाच्यं कृतम्‌। 


यदेवस्य शव॑सा प्रारिणा असुं रिणन्नपः | भुवद्धिश्वंमभ्या- 
दैवमोज॑सा विदादूर्ज' शतक्रतुर्विदादिष॑म्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Tava tyannaryam nrto’pa indra prathamam 
purvyam divi pravacyam krtam. Yad devasya 
Savasa prarina amsu rinannapah bhuvad 
visvamabhyadevamojasa vidadurjam Ssatakra- 
turvidadisam. 


Indra, lord of light, life and generosity, director 
of the cosmic dance of creation, that original, ancient 
act of yours admirable in the light and language of 
heaven performed for the sake of humanity which, by 
the omnipotence of Divinity, moves the pranic energies 
and causes the waters of life to flow may, we pray, with 
the power and splendour of Divinity, inspire the entire 
world of matter and energy, conquer impiety and bring 
us, O lord of a hundred yajnic gifts and actions, food 
and energy for body, mind and soul. 


958 RGVEDA 


Mandala 2/Sukta 23 
Brahmanaspati, Brhaspati Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


गणानां त्वा गणप॑तिं हवामहे कविं कवीनामुंपमश्र॑वस्तमम्‌। 
ज्ये छराजं ब्रह्म॑णां ब्रह्मणस्पत आ न॑ः शृण्वन्नूतिभिः सीद 
साद॑नम्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Gandnam tva ganapatim havamahe kavim 
kavinamupamasravastamam. Jyestharajam 
brahmanam brahmanaspata a nah srnvanniti- 
bhih sida sadanam . 


We invoke, invite and honour you Brahmana- 
spati, as lord president of all classes, nations and 
republics of the peoples of the world, as highest 
visionary of the men of supreme vision, most renowned 
of all beyond comparison and imagination, highest of 
the brilliant rulers, lord of the knowledge and 
commonwealth of the world in existence. Listen to our 
prayer, come with all powers of protection, preservation 
and promotion of the peace and prosperity of the world 
and grace the presidential seat in the hall of nations. 


देवाश्चित्ते असुर्य प्रचेतसो बृहस्पते aft भागमानशुः 1 
उस््राइव सूर्यो ज्योतिषा महो विश्वेषामिज्जनिता aetor- 
मसि WR 


8 Devascit te asurya pracetaso brhaspate yajniyam 
bhagamanasuh. Usra iva suryo jyotisa maho 
visvesamijjanita brahmanamasi. 


Lord of spirit and prana, ruler of the grand 
universal order, master of supreme knowledge, the 
divinities too of the world in your honour receive their 
share of the yajnic fragrance of life. As sun is the 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 959 


progenitor of sun-rays, so you are the great creator of 
all knowledge, wealth and grandeur of the universe with 
your light of omniscience. 


आ विवाध्यां परिरापस्तमांसि च ज्योतिष्मन्तं रथ॑मृतस्यं 
तिष्ठसि । बृहस्पते भीमममित्रदम्भनं रक्षोहणं गोत्रभिदं 
स्वर्विंद॑म्‌।॥ ३॥ 


2 A vibadhya parirapas-tamamsi ca jyotismantam 
ratham-rtasya tisthasi. Brhaspate bhimam- 
amitra-dambhanam raksohanam gotrabhidam 
svarvidam . 


Brhaspati, lord of the grand universe and light 
of the world, having chained all sin and darkness by 
the rule of light and law, you ride the chariot of the 
dynamics of nature and rectitude, blazing with light and 
fire, awful to the lawless, shatterer of the enemies, 
destroyer of the wicked, breaker of the clouds and 
bringer of the showers of rain and bliss. 


सुनीतिभिर्नयसि त्राय॑से जनं यस्तुभ्यं दाशान्न adel 
अश्नवत्‌ । ब्रह्यद्विषस्तप॑नो मन्युमीर॑सि बृह॑स्पते महि तत्ते 
महित्वनम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sunitibhir-nayasi trayase janam yastubhyam 
dasanna tamamho asnavat. Brahmadvisa-stapano 
manyumirasi brhaspate mahi tat te mahitvanam. 


You lead us by the right path and policy. You 
protect and save humanity. Whoever surrenders himself 
to you and gives in charity in your service is safe, sin 
and crime touch him not, nor hurt him ever. You are the 
scorcher of the haters of humanity, divinity and 
knowledge. You are the destroyer of hostile passion. 


960 RGVEDA 


Brhaspati, lord of this grand universe, great is that 
grandeur of yours, blazing with majesty. 


न तमंहो न दुरितं कुत॑श्चन नारातयस्तितिसर्न gare: 1 
विश्वा इद॑स्माद्‌ ध्वरसो वि atera यं सुगोपा रक्षसि 
ब्रहणस्पते ॥ & ॥ 


a: Na tamamho na duritam kutascana naratayasti- 
tirurna dvayavinah. Visva idasmad dhvaraso vi 
badhase yam sugopa raksasi brahmanaspate. 


Brahamanaspati, ruler of the mighty universe, 
saviour of the good and great, neither sin nor evil 
conduct from anywhere, nor enemies nor those who try 
to tread the parallel paths of good and evil at the same 
time can ever surpass or evade or escape you. You 
prevent and rule out all violence from him whosoever, 
O noble protector and saviour, you guide, guard and 
protect. 


त्वं a गोपाः प॑थिकृद्धिंचक्षणस्तवं व्रताय मतिभिर्जरामहे । 
बृह॑स्पते यो at अभि ह्रो दधे स्वा तं मर्मतुं दुच्छुना 
हर॑स्वती ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam no gopah pathikrd vicaksanastava vrataya 
matibhirjaramahe. Brhaspate yo no abhi hvaro 
dadhe sva tam marmartu ducchuna harasvati. 


You are our protector and saviour. You are our 
guide along the paths of right. You are the wise visionary, 
judge and teacher. We worship you with all our mind 
and intelligence so that we may abide by your divine 
rule of conduct. O lord of the great universe, whoever 
entertains and bears hate and enmity, anger and jealousy 
toward us may face the self-defeating forces of his own 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 961 


corrosive mind from within himself. 


Saat at at मर्चयादनागसोऽ रातीवा मर्तः सानुको Ta: | 
बृहस्पते अप तं व॑र्तया पथः सुगं a अस्यै देववीतये 
कृधि ॥ ७॥ 


ve Uta va yo no marcayadanagaso’rativa martah 
sanuko vrkah. Brhaspate apa tam vartaya pathah 
sugam no asyai devavitaye krdhi . 


And whoever seize us and injure us, innocent 
and sinless as we move on, whoever the man-wolf with 
a train of allies, enemies in the garb of fellow travellers, 
O Brhaspati, lord saviour of the great and protector from 
the awesome, remove all such from the path so that it is 
easy to follow for the attainment of our divine 
destination. 


Want त्वा तनूनां eames व॑स्पर्तरधिवक्तारंमस्पयुम्‌। 
वुरह॑स्पते देवनिदो नि dea मा दुरेवा उत्त॑रं सुम्नमुन्रशन्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Trataram tva tanunam havamahe’vaspartara- 
dhivaktaramasmayum. Brhaspate devanido ni 
barhaya ma dureva uttaram sumnam-unnasan. 


Brhaspati, lord of the universe, master of 
supreme knowledge, ruler and defender of the world, 
we invoke you, protector and preserver of our bodies, 
senses and minds, saviour and protector from sin and 
evil acts, our pilot across suffering, lord supreme of our 
own, teacher and supreme commander. Brhaspati, 
uproot the revilers of divinity, nobility, brilliance and 
generosity of people. Let not the evil doers destroy the 
future peace and well-being of humanity. 


962 RGVEDA 


त्वरयां वयं सुवृधा ब्रह्मणस्ते स्पार्हा वसु मनुष्या द॑दीमहि । 
या नो दूरे तच्छितो या अरातयोऽभि सन्तिं जम्भया ता 
stag: ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tvaya vayam suvrdha brahmanaspate sparha 
vasu manusya dadimahi. Ya no dure talito ya 
aratayo’bhi santi jambhaya ta anapnasah . 


Brahmanaspati, lord of the universe, promoter 
of life and knowledge, supreme power worthy of love 
and homage, may we, people of the world, with your 
care and protection, develop and promote the wealth of 
the world, and we pray, crush whatever forms of 
violence, adversity, frustration, malignity, meanness and 
fruitless efforts be there far or near or around us. 


wat वयमुत्तमं धीमहे वयो बृहस्पते पप्रिंणा सस्निना युजा | 
मा नो दुःशंसो अभिदिप्सुरीशत प्र सुशंसा मतिभि॑स्तारिषी- 
मरहि।॥ gon 


10. Tvaya vayam-uttamam dhimahe vayo brhaspate 
paprina sasnina yuja. Ma no duhsamso abhidi- 
psur-tSata pra susamsa matibhis-tarisimahi . 


Brhaspati, lord of the universe, ruler of the 
world, master of supreme knowledge, giver of 
fulfilment, purifier and sanctifier, ever helpful, may we, 
we pray, develop and promote the best life on earth. 
May no disreputable reviler or deceitful saboteur or 
destroyer rule over us. And may we, we pray, be 
righteous, faithful and honourable, and with our 
intelligent people swim across our problems of life. 


अनानुदो वुषभो जग्मिराहवं Hee wa पृत॑नासु सासहिः | 
असिं सत्य ऋणया ब्र॑ह्मणस्पत उग्रस्य चिदयिता वींद्छु - 
हर्षिर्णः॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 963 


11. = Ananudo vrsabho jagmir-ahavam nistapta Satrum 
prtanasu sasahih. Asi satya rnaya brahmanaspata 
ugrasya cid damita viluhar-sinah. 


Brahmanaspati, lord of universal knowledge and 
ruler of the grand social order, uncompromising, mighty 
generous, responsive to the call for action, subduer of 
the enemy, unyielding and victorious in battles, ever 
true, insistent on obligation and fulfilment, you are 
controller of the fierce and restrainer of the passionate 
carouser. 


अदे'वेन मन॑सा यो रिषण्यति शासामुग्रो मन्य॑मानो 
जिघांसति । बृह॑स्पते मा प्रणक्तस्य॑ नो वधो नि क॑र्म मन्युं 
दुरेवस्य शर्धतः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Adevena manasa yo risanyati Sasamugro manya- 
mano jighamsati. Brhaspate ma pranak tasya no 
vadho ni karma manyum durevasya Sardhatah. 


Whoever with a sinful mind injures or sabotages 
or wants to destroy the rulers, commanders, 
administrators, teachers and the devotees of Divinity 
and admirers of the human nation, fierce and proud 
though he be, O Brhaspati, lord of the realm, we pray 
and hereby determine, his weapon of attack must not 
reach us, nor shall the mean action of the evil minded 
ever bully and weaken our morale. 


भरेषु हव्यो नम॑सोपसद्यो गन्ता वाजेषु सनिता धनंधनम्‌ । 
विश्वा इदर्यो अभिदिप्स्वो ३ मृधो बरहस्पतिर्विं dae रथौ 
इव ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Bharesu havyo namasopasadyo ganta vajesu 
sanita dhanam-dhanam. Visva idaryo abhi-dipsvo 
mrdho brhaspatirvi vavarha rathan iva. 


964 RGVEDA 


In the battles of production, defence and 
progress, O lord, worthy of access, invocation and 
invitation with gifts of homage for participation, leader 
in the battles of advancement, and dispenser of wealth 
and reward in every field of activity, Brhaspati, lord of 
the realm, father of all, we pray, take on all the 
strongholds of the proud intimidators and rout them all 
like their chariots. 


तेलिंछया तपनी रक्षसस्तप ये त्वां निदे द॑धिरे दृष्टवीं्यम्‌। 
आविस्तत्कुष्व यदस॑त्त उक्थ्यं4 बृहस्पते वि dite 
अर्दय ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Tajisthaya tapani raksasastapa ye tva nide 
dadhire drstaviryam. Avistat krsva yadasat ta 
ukthyam brhaspate vi parirapo ardaya. 


Brhaspati, lord of the great realm, with the 
splendour of your blazing power, scorch those who take 
you on with malignant criticism and columny, although 
your honour and courage is proven. Proclaim openly 
what your commendable policy is and heat up, shake 
off and evaporate all those who are steeped in sin and 
crime. 


बृहस्पते अति यदर्यो ate द्युमद्विभाति ्रतुंमज्ननेषु । यद्‌ 
दीदयच्छव॑स ऋतप्रजात तदस्मासु द्रविणं धेहि चित्रम्‌ 24 I 
15. Brhaspate ati yadaryo arhad dyumad vibhati 


kratumajjanesu. Yad didayacchavasa rtaprajata 
tadasmasu dravinam dhehi citram. 


Brhaspati, lord of the great realm of life and 
nature, ruler and sustainer of the great, omnipotent 
master, lord of light by your own innate virtue, who 
shine among people while you do your acts of holiness 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 965 


and make others shine with your power and grandeur, 
lord manifested and manifesting in truth, rectitude and 
law, bless us too with that wondrous wealth of divinity 
by which you enlighten others. 


मा न॑ः स्तेनेभ्यो ये afr geeae निरामिणो, रिपवोऽ ay 
जागृधुः । आ देवानामोहते वि व्रयो हृदि बृह॑स्पते न परः 
साम्नो विदुः ॥ १६॥ 


16. Manah stenebhyo ye abhi druhaspate niramino 
ripavo’nnesu jagrdhuh. A devanamohate vi vrayo 
hrdi brhaspate na parah samno viduh. 


Save us, lord of the great world, right and 
universal law, from the thieves and enemies who hate 
all and delight in positions of power, who covet nothing 
but food and luxury, who hold nothing in their heart 
but disdainful superiority complex toward the learned, 
wise and virtuous and who know nothing of value 
beyond money and property. 


विश्वेभ्यो fe त्वा भुव॑नेभ्यस्परि त्वष्टाज॑नत्साम्न॑ःसाम्नः 
कविः । स ऋणचिदूणया ब्रह्मणस्पतिहहो हन्ता मह ऋतस्य 
धर्तरि ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Visvebhyo hi tva bhuvanebhyaspari tvastajanat 
samnah samnah kavih. Sa rnacidrnaya brahma- 
naspatir-druho hanta maha rtasya dhartari . 


Lord of the great world, master of the Veda, the 
omniscient maker, Tvashta, made you all round wise 
and visionary as a poet for the sake of the entire world 
of humanity across divinity and the world of materiality. 
You are consolidator of the public debt and the debt of 
gratitude to Divinity and the wise, and you fulfil the 
obligations of the debt. Established in the presence of 


966 RGVEDA 


the Lord Omnipotent, father sustainer of the great Law 
of social order, be the destroyer of hate, jealousy and 
enmity. 


तव॑ fra व्य॑जिहीत पर्वतो गवां गोत्रमुदसंजो यदंङ्धिरः। 
san युजा तम॑सा परीवृतं बृहस्पते निर्‌ पामौल्जो 
अर्णवम्‌ ॥ Ve ॥ 


18. Tava Sriye vyajihita parvato gavam gotramu- 
dasrjo yadangirah. Indrena yuja tamasa parivr- 
tam brhaspate nirapamaubjo arnavam. 


For your grace and glory, O lord and sustainer 
of the great world, does the cloud collect the flood of 
sun-rays which you, dear as breath of life, release. In 
association with Indra, the sun, O lord of the wide realm, 
open and release the oceanic flood of the waters of life 
suppressed and enveloped in darkness and let it flow 
freely. 


ब्रह्मणस्पते त्वमस्य यन्ता सूक्तस्य॑ बोधि तन॑यं च जिन्व । 
विश्वं तद्भद्रं यदर्व॑न्ति देवा बृहद्वदेम विदथे सुवीराः ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Brahmanaspate tvamasya yanta suktasya bodhi 
tanayam ca jinva. Visvam tad bhadram yadavanti 
deva brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Brahmanaspati, lord protector and sustainer of 
the universe, you are the hero as well as creator of this 
song of Divinity which you graciously know and accept 
as your very child, and bless your creation with life and 
joy, all that good of entire humanity and the world which 
the divinities protect and promote, so that we, brave 
and blest with the brave, in our acts of yajnic piety, may 
celebrate your gifts highly and ecstatically. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 967 


Mandala 2/Sukta 24 


Indra Brahmanaspati, Brhspati Devata, 
Grtsamada Rshi 


सेमामंविद्धि प्रभृतिं य ईशिषेऽ या विधेम नव॑या महा गिरा। 
यथां नो मीद्धान्त्स्तव॑ते सखा तव बृह॑स्पते सीष॑धः सोत नो 
मतिम्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Semamaviddhi prabhrtim ya 575८ "व vidhema 
navaya maha gira. Yatha no midhvantstavate 
sakha tava brhaspate sisadhah sota no matim. 


Brhaspati, lord and master of knowledge and 
the great realm of the earth which you rule and 
command, please to accept this offer of celebration 
which we dedicate with this great new voice of homage 
in honour of Indra so that he, our lord, generous as the 
sun and cloud, your friend, may enlighten our mind and 
intelligence. 


यो नन्त्वान्यन॑मल्योज॑सो तादर्दर्मन्युना शम्ब॑राणि वि। 
प्राच्यावयदच्युंता ब्रह्मणस्पतिरा चाविंश्द्वसुंमन्तं वि 
पर्व॑तम्‌ २॥ 


2, Yo nantvanyanamannyojasotadardar-manyuna 
sambarani vi. Pracyavayadacyuta brahmana- 
spatira cavisad vasumantam vi parvatam. 


Indra, lord ruler and sustainer of the mighty 
human race, is he who with his might and majesty bends 
those who deserve to be bent, who with his thunder and 
terror breaks and scatters the clouds into showers, who 
shakes the apparently unshakables, and who breaks open 
the mountain ranges of the treasure jewels of the earth. 


968 RGVEDA 


agar देवत॑माय कर्त्वमश्र॑थ्नन्दुक्हात्रंदन्त stad | Ser 
आजदभिंनद्‌ ब्रह्मणा वमगु-हत्तमो व्य॑चक्षयत्स्व॑: ॥ २॥ 


Sy Tad devanam devatamaya kartvamasrathnan 
drlhavradanta vilita. Ud ga ajadabhinad brah- 
mana valam-aguhat tamo vyacaksayat svah. 


That exceptional wonder of Karma is worthy of 
the most brilliant of the divinities of the universe, Indra, 
refulgent as the sun. He disarms the most obstinate, 
softens the hardest, releases the rays of light, breaks the 
cloud with his divine might, dispels the darkness, and 
reveals the light of heaven. 


अश्मास्यमवतं ब्रह्मणस्पतिर्मधुधारमभि यमोजसातुणत्‌। 
तमेव विश्वे पपिरे स्वरदुशो' बह साकं सिंसिचुरुत्स॑- 
मुद्वि्णम्‌॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Asmasyamavatam brahmanaspatir-madhudha- 
ramabhi yamojasatrnat. Tameva visve papire 
svardrso bahu sakam sisicur-utsam-udrinam. 


The lord of the universe and master of the 
universal Word breaks open the flood gates of the 
hanging cloud and the dark caverns of the mountain 
holding showers and streams of honey sweet waters. 
The same showers and streams all those who see the 
light and joy of heaven in the sun and water drink to 
their heart’s content with all living beings as a gift of 
the ocean, and the same they sprinkle around for the 
gift and growth of life in abundance. 


सना ता का चिद्‌ भुव॑ना भवीत्वा माद्धिः शरद्िर्दुरो वरन्त 
a: | अय॑तन्ता चरतो अन्यदन्यदिद्या चकारं वयुना 
ब्रह्मणस्पतिः ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 969 


a. Sana ta ka cid bhuvana bhavitva madbhih sarad- 
bhirduro varanta vah. Ayatanta carato anyada- 
nyadid ya cakara vayuna brahmana-spatih. 


The acts which Brahmanaspati, lord of the wide 
world, has performed and the knowledge which he has 
revealed open by months and years the doors of eternal 
light and the past and future worlds for you from which 
the people naturally benefit and spontaneously enjoy 
without any effort, all in their own ways. 


अभिनश्चन्तो अभि ये तमानशुर्निधिं प॑णीनां प॑रमं गृहा 
हितम्‌। ते fagia: प्रतिचश्ष्यानुता Gaeta उ आयन्तदुदी- 
युराविर॑म्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Abhinaksanto abhi ye tamanasur-nidhim paninam 
paramam guha hitam. Te vidvamsah pratica- 
ksyanrta punaryata u ayan tadudiyuravisam. 


Those saints and scholars who go forward all 
round in search of the treasures of admirable humanity 
hidden in the cavern of time find the jewel treasures of 
wealth and knowledge. But having seen the falsehood 
and untruth discovered there in the cave go back by the 
same door by which they came and then come again to 
propagate the truth and contradict and expose the 
untruth. 


ऋतावानः प्रतिचक्ष्यानुता पुनरात आ त॑स्थुः waa 
महस्पथः। ते बाहुभ्यां धपितमयिमश्म॑नि नकिः षो 
अस्त्यर॑णो जहुर्हि तम्‌॥ ७ ॥ 

ds Rtavanah praticaksyanrta punarata a tasthuh 


kavayo mahaspathah. Te bahubhyam dhamitam- 
agnimasmani nakih so astyarano jahurhi tam . 


970 RGVEDA 


Men of truth and rectitude, poets and visionaries, 
pioneers of action, having perceived, challenged and 
fought out untruth and evil, come and stand firm by the 
great paths of right and universal law. By force of arms 
they keep the fire burning on the rock, in the cave, over 
the cloud and in the sky. None is a man of truth and 
knowledge, nor brave, none of them who abandon the 
fire and desert the truth of life and rectitude. 


ऋतज्येन धिप्रेण ब्रह्मणस्पतिर्यत्र वष्टि प्र तद॑श्नोति धन्व॑ना । 
तस्यं साध्वीरिषवो याशभिरस्य॑ति नृचक्षसो दृशाये 
कर्णयोनयः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Rtajyena ksiprena brahmanaspatiryatra vasti pra 
tadasnoti dhanvana. Tasya sadhvirisavo yabhira- 
syati nrcaksaso drsaye karnayonayah. 


By the stretch of natural truth and justice and 
by instant action, the mighty lord of the realm wielding 
the bow and arrow of law and rectitude reaches wherever 
he wants and achieves whatever he targets. Accurate 
and unfailing are the arrows of this watchful ruler and 
guide of humanity, stretched unto the ear, reaching to 
the ear and taking the aim even by a whisper and 
vibration, which the lord shoots and by which he uproots 
the plants and plans of evil and crime, having seen what 
is right and what is wrong. 


स संनयः स विनयः पुरोहितः स सुष्टुतः स युधि ब्रहण- 
स्पतिः । चाक्ष्मो यद्वाजं भर॑ते मती धनाऽऽदित्सूर्य स्तपति 
तप्यतुर्वृ्थां ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Sa samnayah sa vinayah purohitah sa sustutah sa 
yudhi brahmanaspatih. Caksmo yad vajam bha- 
rate mati dhana’ ditsuryastapati tapyarurvr-tha. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 971 


Right and true are his policies, unassailable. 
Correct and firm are his paths of planning and 
leadership. Front leader is he, ever commanding, and 
elected first and foremost. Admired is he and admirable, 
adorable ruler, protector and promoter of the wealth of 
nations. Clear is his sight and vision, bold his voice 
and speech, by virtue of which he holds and rules energy 
and the speed of progress, intelligence and education, 
and the power and prosperity of the social order through 
the battles of life. He blazes as the sun and would 
naturally and without effort heat and season and temper 
the wastours and wrong-doers. 


विभु प्रभु प्र॑थमं मेहनावतो बृहस्पतेः सुविदत्राणि creat । 
इमा सातानि वेन्यस्य॑ वाजिनो येन जना उभये भुञ्जते 
fast: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vibhu prabhu prathamam mehanavato brha- 
spateh suvidatrani radhya. Ima satani venyasya 
vajino yena jana ubhaye bhunjate visah. 


Infinite, omnipotent and eternal, first and 
original is Brhaspati, lord of existence and knowledge. 
Noble and blissful are the gifts of this generous and 
powerful lord, givers of knowledge, competence and 
success, all. It is the gifts and blessings of this pervasive 
and warlike lord adorable by which all people of the 
world, high or low, simple or sophisticated, intelligent 
or illiterate enjoy life and its wealth. 


योऽ वरि वृजने विश्वथा विभुर्महामु र ण्वः शव॑सा aafater । 
स देवो देवान्प्रति पप्रथे पृथु विश्वेदु ता प॑रिभूर्ब्रह्य॑णा- 
स्पतिः ॥ ९९॥ 


972 RGVEDA 


11. Yo’vare vrjane visvatha vibhur-maham-u ranvah 
Savasa vavaksitha. Sa devo devan prati paprathe 
prthu visvedu ta paribhur-brahmanaspatih. 


Brahmanaspati, lord ruler and sustainer of this 
mighty universe, is immanent and transcendent, who 
by virtue of his own omnipotence pervades this world 
of creation, every particle of it, and is the most joyous 
and blissful over all the worlds of existence. By him 
only, try to abide and live. He, self-refulgent generous 
lord, vast and great, rules and expands all the divine 
abodes of life, pervades them and reveals his presence 
therein. 


विश्वं सत्यं म॑घवाना युवोरिदाप॑श्चन प्र arr व्रतं वाम्‌। 
अच्छेन्द्राब्रह्मणस्पती हविर्नोऽ t asta वाजिनां जिगा- 
तम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Visvam satyam maghavana yuvorid-apascana pra 
minanti vratam vam. Acchendrabrahmanas-pati 
harivno’nnam yujeva vajina jigatam. 


Indra and Brahmanaspati, lord ruler of majesty 
and lord ruler of the wealth of the nation, yours is the 
truth of the world and yours is the law. Not the actions 
of anyone, not even the flowing waters, can violate your 
law and discipline. Both ruler and the teacher of divinity 
may kindly grace our seat of yajna and, like the motive 
forces of the chariot of the nation, may accept our 
proffered homage. 


sats st श्वण्वन्ति aga: सभेयो विप्रो भरते मती 
धनां । वीद्युद्धेषा अनु वशं ऋ णमाददिः स हं वाजी समिथे 
ब्रह्य॑णस्पतिः ॥ ९३॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 973 


13. Utasistha anu $rnvanti vahnayah sabheyo vipro 
bharate mati dhana. Viludvesa anu vasa rnama- 
dadih sa ha vaji samithe brahmanaspatih. 


Fast driving forces of the nation listen carefully 
to the ruler and the people. The sagely scholar member 
of the council intelligently holds and manages the wealth 
and assets of the nation. A match for the strong and 
unruly, the collector collects the taxes according to law 
and discretion. Such is the dispensation of 
Brahmanaspati, lord ruler of the common wealth of 
humanity, fast, sensitive and instant of movement in 
the business of governance. 


ब्रह्मणस्पतेरभवद्यथावशं सत्यो मन्युर्महि कमी करिष्यतः | 
यो गा उदाजत्स दिवे वि चाभजन्पहीवं रीतिः शव॑सास- 
TAH ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Brahmanaspaterabhavad yathavasam satyo 
manyurmahi karma karisyatah. Yo ga udajat sa 
dive vi cabhajanmahiva ritih Savasasarat prthak. 


Let the righteous passion, even anger, of 
Brahmanaspati, lord of great action in governance, be 
true to the purpose of Dharma, and controlled according 
to the state of affairs, as it is he who directs the vibrations 
of the nation up and down in the light of heaven and, 
with his own strength and power, moves forward by 
himself and abides by custom, tradition and law like 
the earth in orbit. 


ब्रह्मणस्पते सुयमस्य विश्वहा रायः स्याम र थ्यो ड AACA: | 
वीरेषु वीरां उप॑ पृङ्धि नस्त्वं यदीशानो ब्र्हमणा वेषि मे 
हव॑म्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


974 RGVEDA 


15. Brahmanaspate suyamasya visvaha rayah syama 
rathyo vayasvatah. Viresu viran upa prngdhi 
nastvam yadisano brahmana vesi me havam. 


Brahmanaspati, lord protector of the wealth of 
the nation of humanity, master of the universal 
knowledge of existence, you are the hero of the chariot, 
knower and friend of the whole world. Ruler supreme 
as you are of the entire existence, come to us in response 
to my Vedic invocation and join the brave with the brave 
and eminent with the eminent so that we may be masters 
and protectors of well-begotten and life-giving wealth 
and develop it further by noble conduct and 
development. 


ब्रह्मणस्पते त्वमस्य यन्ता Ee बोधि तन॑यं च जिन्व । 
विश्वं तद्भद्रं यदव॑न्ति देवा बृहद्वदेम विदथे सुवीराः ui ९६ ॥ 


16. Brahmanaspate tvamasya yanta suktasya bodhi 
tanayam ca jinva. Visvam tad bhadram yadavanti 
deva brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Brahmanaspati, lord of the great world of 
humanity, you are the inspiration, guide, leader and hero 
of this holy song of celebration. Please to know its 
meaning, intention and purpose, and give life and joy 
to the child and the devotee. Give us all that good which 
the poets and divines preserve, protect and promote so 
that we, brave and blest with the brave, sing and 
celebrate you highly in our yajnic projects of life. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 25 975 


Mandala 2/Sukta 25 
Brahmanaspati Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


इन्धानो अगिं व॑नवद्वनुष्य॒तः HATA शूशुवद्रातहंव्य FA 
जातेन जातमति स प्र ada यंयं युजं कृणुते ब्रह्म॑णा- 
स्पतिः ॥ ९॥ 


iP Indhano agnim vanavad vanusyatah krtabrahma 
susuvad ratahavya it. Jatena jatamati sa pra 
sarsrte yam yam yujam krnute brahmanaspatih. 


Brahmanaspati, lord ruler, protector, and 
promoter of wealth and nature, maker of forms of food, 
energy and power, giver of yajnic materials and 
fragrances for natural and human activities of creation 
and production, lighting the fire and burning the 
requisite materials like forest wood, creates new forms 
with what it has already created and thus moves on in 
cyclic motion at electric velocity whatever it takes on 
as its friendly associate for the progress of humanity. 


वीरेभिंवीरान्व॑नवद्नुष्यतो गोभी रयिं प॑प्रथद्रोध॑ति त्मना | 
तोकं च तस्य तन॑यं च वर्धते यंयं युजं कृणुते ब्रह्मण- 
स्पतिः ॥ २॥ 


ps Virebhirviran vanavad vanusyato gobhi rayim 
paprathad bodhati tmana. Tokam ca tasya 
tanayam ca vardhate yamyam yujam krnute 
brahmanaspatih. 


Spending up one loving parental generation like 
forest wood and creating another like forest greenery, 
extending the community of the brave from the brave 
seeking immortality, expanding the community wealth 
with cows, lands and the light and power of energy, 


976 RGVEDA 


Brahmanaspati, lord of the evolution of existence, 
advances the race of humanity from father to son and 
from son to grandson. Who ever or whatever the lord 
takes up as his instrument and creative associate, he 
knows at heart with his very soul. 


सिन्धुर्न क्षोदः शिमीवाँ ऋघायतो वृषेव वर््ीरभि 
व्योज॑सा । अग्नेरिव प्रसिंतिर्नाह वर्तवे यंयं युजं कृणुते 
ब्रह्मणस्पतिः ॥ ३॥ 


Sindhurna ksodah Ssimivan rghayato vrseva 
vadhrinrabhi vastyojasa. Agneriva prasitirnaha 
vartave yam yam yujam krnute brahmanaspatih. 


Just as the deep sea receives and stills the 
impetuous river in flood, as the mighty man of action 
subdues the forces of violence, and as the strong and 
virile bull overthrows the old broken bullock with its 
strength, so does the man whom Brahmanaspati chooses 
as his friend and associate for his purpose overcome 
opposition with his valour and lustre. Like the rising 
flames of fire there is no looking back for him, no 
resistance against him. 


went अर्षन्ति दिव्या असश्चतः स सत्व॑भिः प्रथमो aire 
गच्छति । अनिंभृष्टतविषिर्हन्त्योज॑सा यंयं युजं कृणुते 
ब्रह्मणस्पतिः ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tasma arsanti divya asascatah sa satvabhih 


prathamo gosu gacchati. Anibhrstatavisirhan- 
tyojasa yam yam yujam krnute brahmanaspatih. 


To him and for him flow celestial powers and 
virtues pure and free. First and foremost, front leader, 
with his powers and intelligence he develops the cows, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 26 977 


goes over the lands and rises into the lights in the skies. 
With the irresistible blaze of his lustre and valour he 
smashes all opposition of the negatives. Such is the man 
whom Brahmanaspati chooses as his friend and 
instrument for the divine purpose. 


तस्मा इद्धिश्वे धुनयन्त सिन्धवोऽ च्छ्रा srt दधिरे पुरूणि । 
देवानां सुम्ने सुभगः स एधते यंयं युजं कृणुते ब्रह्म॑णा- 
स्पतिः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Tasma id visve dhunayanta sindhavo’cchidra 
sarma dadhire puruni. Devanam sumne subhagah 
sa edhate yam yam yujam krnute brahmanas- 
patih . 


For him the oceans roll, for him the rivers flow, 
boundless, incessant and universal across the world, 
bearing grace divine, cosmic energy and infinite joy of 
the heart. And he, happy and blest with fortune, grows 
on and on in peace and favour of the divinities of nature 
and humanity. Such is the man whom Brahmanaspati 
chooses for a friend and instrument for fulfilment and 
the divine purpose. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 26 
Brahmanaspati Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 
isa वनवद्वनुष्य॒तो देवयन्निददेवयन्तमभ्य॑सत्‌ | 
सुप्रावीरिद्वनवत्पृत्सु get यज्चेद्य॑ज्योरविं भ॑जाति भोजं- 
THU UU 
i, Rjuricchamso vanavad vanusyato devayannida- 


devayantam-abhyasat. supravirid vanavat prtsu 
dustaram yajvedayajyorvi bhajati bhojanam. 


978 RGVEDA 


Brahmanaspati, lord of the wide world and the 
wealth of life, let the man of simple, natural and faithful 
character, like the rays of the sun, be superior to the 
forces of violence. Let the man rising to piety and 
divinity face the powers that oppose the divine purpose. 
Let the brave warrior who protects and promotes light 
and life like the rays of the sun fight out formidable 
evil in the battles of life, because, ultimately, it is the 
man of yajna, dedicated to humanity, environment and 
Divinity who is the dispenser of the share of the selfish 
and uncreative. 


यज॑स्व वीर प्र विंहि मनायतो भद्रं मन॑ः कृणुष्व वृत्रतूर्य ॥ 
हविष्क णुष्व सुभगो यथास॑सि ब्रह्मणस्पतेरव आ 
तंणीमहे ॥ २॥ 


2. Yajasva vira pra vihi manayato bhadram manah 
krnusva vrtraturye. Haviskrnusva subhago yatha- 
sasi brahmanaspaterava a vrnimahe. 


Brave young man, do yajnic acts of creation and 
service, meet men of thought and wisdom, elevate your 
mind to goodness and virtue to fight out the forces of 
darkness and evil, prepare the fragrant oblations for 
yajna, be great and gracious as you should be. Let us all 
choose and pray for the protection of Brahmanaspati, 
lord of the world’s glory and wisdom. 


स sara स विशा स जन्म॑ना स पुत्रैर्वाजं भरते धना 
नभिः । देवानां यः पितस्मावि्वांसति श्रब्दाम॑ना हविषा 
ब्रह्मणस्पतिम्‌ ॥ २॥ 

a: Sa ijjanena sa visa sa janmana sa putrairvajam 


bharate dhana nrbhih. Devanam yah pitarama- 
vivasati §raddhamana havisa brahmanaspatim . 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 979 


He for sure bears and wields power, progress 
and prosperity of life with the people, with settlements 
of working communities, by birth and with children, 
and he creates and enjoys the wealth of life with his 
men who serves and lives with the maker of noble 
scholars and sages and who, faithful at heart, offers 
worship and sacrifice with fragrant oblations to 
Brahmanaspati, lord creator and sustainer of the world 
and its wealth of humanity. 


यो अस्मै हव्यै्घतवद्धिरविंधत्प्र तं प्राचा न॑यति aetor- 
स्पतिः । उरुष्यतीमंह॑सो रक्च॑ती रिषो ३ऽ होज्चिंदस्मा उरुच- 
क्रिरद्धंतः॥ ४॥ 

4. Yo asmai havyair-ghrtavadbhir-avidhat pra tam 
praca nayati brahmanaspatih. Urusyatim-anhaso 
raksati riso’h hoscidasma urucakrir-adbhutah. 

Who ever worships and honours the lord with 
oblations of fragrant materials seasoned with ghrta, 

Brahmanaspati advances him far ahead and high. He 

saves him from sin, protects him from the violent and 

safeguards him against the perpetrators of evil. 

Wondrous are the ways of Brahmanaspati, mighty and 

awful are his deeds on earth. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 27 

Aditya Devata, Kurma Gartsamada or Grtsamada Rshi 
इमा गिर॑ आदित्येभ्यो gore: सनाद्राज॑भ्यो Sel जुहोमि । 
श्रृणोतु मित्रो अर्यमा भगो नस्तुविजातो वरुणो दश्चो 
sist: ॥ ९॥ 

i Ima gira adityebhyo ghrtasnuh sanad rajabhyo 
jJuhva juhomi. Srnotu mitro aryama bhago na- 
stuvijato varuno dakso amsah . 


980 RGVEDA 


I offer these words of worship and prayer, 
adoration and admiration, sprinkled with the showers 
of ghrta from above dedicated to the Adityas, cosmic 
stars and children of Mother Infinity, self-refulgent like 
the sun in the zodiacs of his galactic round. I offer these 
words as ever with the ladle of love and whispers of 
faith into the fire of light and life. May the Adityas listen: 
Mitra, friend and darling companion of life, Aryama, 
lord of justice and dispensation, Bhaga, lord of glory 
and majesty, Tuvijata, lord manifest in power and 
splendour, Varuna, lord of light supreme of our choice, 
Daksha, lord of dexterity in the art of creation, and 
Ansha, divine reflection of Infinity in the world of 
existence, all for us all our own. 


इमं स्तोमं सक्रतवो मे अद्य पित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो जुषन्त | 
आदित्यासः शुच॑यो धारपूता अवुंजिना अनवद्या 
अरिष्टाः ॥ २॥ 


2 Imam stomam sakratavo me adya mitro aryama 
varuno jusanta. Adityasah Sucayo dharaputa 
avrjina anavadya aristah. 


This song of adoration may the lords of vision 
and holy action hear, accept and bless with love and 
favour: friendly Mitra, just Aryama, and Varuna, lord 
supreme of universal choice, Adityas all, reflections of 
the lights of omniscience, purifying and sanctifying 
showers of the holy voice of Divinity, free from the 
sins of negativities, irreproachable and inviolable all. 


त silfecara उरवो गभीरा अद॑ब्धासो दिप्स॑न्तो भूर्यक्षाः । 
अन्तः प॑श्यन्ति वृजिनोत साधु सर्वं राज॑भ्यः परमा 
चिदन्तिं।॥। ३॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 981 


a Ta adityasa uravo gabhira adabdhaso dipsanto 
bhuryaksah. Antah pasyanti vrjinota sadhu 
sarvam rajabhyah parama cidanti. 


The Adityas, children of light, are brilliant, 
profound, irrepressible. They brook no nonsense, no 
violence, no bullying or black-mail. With many many 
eyes all round they see within and without all that is 
good, or evil that must be rejected. Supremely good are 
they and their actions for the shining rulers for whom 
they stand ever at the closest. 


धारयन्त आदित्यासो saree देवा विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य 
गोपाः दीर्घाधियो रक्ष॑माणा असुर्य'मृतावानश्चय॑माना 
ऋणानि ।॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Dharayanta adityaso jagat stha deva visvasya 
bhuvanasya gopah. Dirghadhiyo raksamana 
asuryamrtavanascayamana rnani. 


Brilliant Adityas sustain the moving and the 
stable world of existence. Generously giving, they are 
preservers of the entire world of existence. Far-reaching 
is their intelligence, they love truth and rectitude, they 
protect the breath of life and they augment whatever or 
whoever extends the vision and knowledge of life for 
others. (Aditya-like should the teachers be.) 


विद्यामादित्या अव॑सो वो अस्य adefa-ea आ चिन्मयोभु। 
युष्माकं मित्रावरुणा प्रणींतौ परि श्वभ्रंव दुरितानि 
तृज्याम्‌॥ ५॥ 

Di Vidyamaditya avaso vo asya yadaryaman bhaya 


a cinmayobhu. Yusmakam mitravaruna pranitau 
pari Svabhreva duritani vrjyam. 


982 RGVEDA 


Adityas, powers of light and knowledge, 
Aryaman, lord of justice and dispensation, if ever I face 
a State of insecurity, then, in that state of fear, I pray, I 
may have the gift of this divine protection of yours, of 
this divine peace and comfort. O Mitra and Varuna, 
friends of humanity, dear and just, I pray, that under the 
protection of your ethics and guidance I may give up 
all evils and avoid them as dangerous pitfalls on the 
paths of life. 


सुगो fe वो अर्यमन्मित्र पन्थां अनृक्षरो व॑रुण साधुरस्ति | 
तेनादित्या अधिं वोचता नो यच्छ॑ता नो दुष्परिहन्तु 
शर्म ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sugo hi vo aryaman mitra pantha anrksaro 
varuna sadhurasti. Tenaditya adhi vocata no 
yachata no dusparihantu Sarma. 


Aryaman, lord of noble action, Mitra, friend and 
companion, simple and straight is your path, easy to 
tread. O Varuna, lord of our choice and best teacher, 
thornless and good is the path you show. Adityas, lords 
of enlightenment, teach us to follow and go forward by 
that path. And give us a home which is difficult to 
disrupt. 


fodd नो अदिती राजंपुत्राऽति द्वेषांस्यर्यमा सुगेभिः | 
बृहन्मित्रस्य वरुणस्य शर्मोप॑ स्याम पुरुवीरा अरिष्टाः ॥ ७॥ 

as Pipartu no ववा rajaputra’ti dvesamsyaryama 
sugebhih. Brhanmitrasya varunasya Sarmopa 
syama puruvira aristah. 


May Aditi, mother queen of inviolable unity and 
abundance with her brilliant children of regal character 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 983 


give us total fulfilment of life. May Aryama, just and 
judicious ruler, friend of the intelligent and the wise, 
lead us across and beyond the jealous and the hostile 
by simple and clear paths of action. May we all, mighty 
brave blest with vibrant progeny, ever live unhurt and 
happy by the great household of peace and well-being, 
a perpetual gift of Mitra, lord of friend-ship and 
fraternity, and Varuna, lord of freedom and justice. 


fret भूमीं्धारयन्त्रींरुत द्यूनत्रीणिं व्रता विदथे अन्तरेंषाम्‌। 
ऋतेनादित्या महिं वो महित्वं तदर्यमन्वरुण पित्र चारु ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tisro bhumirdharayan trinruta dyun trini vrata 
vidathe antaresam. Rtenaditya mahi vo mahitvam 
tadaryaman varuna mitra caru. 


Adityas, brilliant children of Aditi, radiant 
concentrations of indestructible energy, by the universal 
Law of Rtam, hold and sustain three terrestrial regions 
and three heavenly regions in the midst of which they 
observe threefold dynamics of existential energy in the 
field of karmic order. Aryaman, lord of action and 
justice, Varuna, lord of love and peace, and Mitra, friend 
of fraternity, that too is your holy grandeur and greatness 
in the mighty social order, threefold, three-level, for the 
body, mind and spirit of the human nation. 


त्री रोचना दिव्या धारयन्त हिरण्ययाः शुच॑यो धारपूताः | 
अस्व॑प्रजो अनिमिषा अद॑ब्धा उरुशंसा ऋजवे मत्यीय।॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Tri rocana divya dharayanta hiranyayah §ucayo 
dharaputah. Asvapnajo animisa adabdha urusam- 
Sa rjave martyaya. 


Three charming gifts of Divinity the Adityas, 


984 RGVEDA 


scholar celibates, hold for humanity. Golden great are 
they, blazing brilliant, sanctified in the showers of 
knowledge and piety. Ever wakeful, they never sleep, 
nor dream, nor even wink their eye for a moment. Firm 
and inviolable are they, adorable, for the simple, honest 
and pious order of humanity, holding and preserving 
the knowledge of Divinity, karmic dexterity and 
sincerity of worship for survival and fulfilment in the 
world of mortality. 


त्वं विश्वेषां वरुणासि राजा ये च॑ देवा star ये च et: 1 
शतं नो रास्व शरदों विचक्षेऽ श्यामायुंषि सुधितानि 
पूली ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Tvam visvesam varunasi raja ye ca deva asura 
ye ca martah. Satam no rasva sarado vicakse 
*Syamayumsi sudhitani purva. 

Varuna, spirit of life and breath of energy, first 
of love, choice and justice, you are the ruler of all, 
whether they are divine or ordinary mortals by nature. 
Give us a full hundred years of life for the vision and 
realisation of the light of Divinity and our own 
immortality. May we, we pray, enjoy a full and perfect 
span of life and age, sweet and satisfying as ever. 


न द॑क्चिणा वि चिकिते न Gear न प्राचीनंमादित्या नोत 
पर्चा । पारक्यां चिद्वसवो धीर्या चिद्युष्पानीं तो अभ॑यं 
ज्योत्तिरश्याम्‌॥ ९९॥ ति 

11. Na daksina vi cikite na savya na pracinamdaditya 
nota pasca. Pakya cid vasavo dhirya cid yusma- 
nito abhayam jyotirasyam. 


Ye Adityas, stars of the highest order of light, O 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 985 


Vasus, planets of the first order of life, I know not wholly 
what is on the right, or on the left, or in front, or behind, 
as the man of ripe intelligence and settled mind among 
scholars does. However, with his guidance and led by 
your light, leadership and generosity, I pray, may I attain 
freedom from fear and the light of knowledge. 


यो राज॑भ्य ऋतनिभ्यो ददाश यं वर्धयन्ति पुष्टयंश्च नित्याः | 
सरे वान्याति प्रथमो रथेन वसुदावां विदथेषु प्रशास्तः ॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. Yo rajabhya rtanibhyo dadasa yam vardhayanti 
pustayasca nityah. Sa revan yati prathamo 
rathena vasudava vidathesu prasastah. 


The ruler who liberally gives for the illustrious 
men of justice and for the leading lights of truth and 
righteousness, and whom strength and nourishment of 
body, mind and character constantly advance towards 
perfection, grows first in power and prestige and, well- 
provided with wealth and the spirit of generosity, 
admired and exhorted universally, moves forward in his 
chariot of fame as a leader in yajnic projects of humanity. 


शुचिर पः सूयवसा sider उपं क्षेति वृद्धवयाः सुवीरं: । 
नकिष्टं च्न्त्यन्तितो न que आदित्यानां भव॑ति 
प्रणीतौ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Sucirapah siyavasa adabdha upa kseti vrddha- 
vayah suvirah. Nakistam ghnantyantito na durad 
ya adityanam bhavati pranitau. 


The ruler, pure at heart, courageous and 
indomitable, who abides by the values, policies and 
guidance of Adityas, men of light, truth and justice, rules 
a long age, blest with noble children and followed by 


986 RGVEDA 


brave warriors, well-provided with plenty of food and 
water and doing noble acts of fame. None can hurt or 
damage or destroy him or his dominion either from far 
or near at hand. 


sida मित्र वरुणोत da यदो! वयं च॑कृमा कच्िदागंः। 
उर्वश्यापभ॑यं ज्योतिरिन्द्र मानो दीर्घां अभि न॑श्ञन्त- 
feet: ९४॥ 


14. = Adite mitra varunota mrla yad vo vayam cakrma 
kaccidagah. Urvasyamabhayam jyotirindra 
ma no dirgha abhi nasantamisrah. 


Aditi, Nature, mother earth and spirit of the 
human nation, Mitra, lord of love and friendship, 
Varuna, lord of justice, relent, be kind and gracious to 
us even if we happen to transgress and commit a sin of 
error. Indra, lord of power and ruler over the nation, 
grant us ample freedom from fear and lots of light and 
knowledge so that long nights of darkness, sin and 
suffering may never afflict us. 


उभे अस्मै पीपयतः समीची दिवो वृष्टिं सुभगो नाम पुष्य॑न्‌ | 
उभा क्षयौवाजयन्याति पृत्सूभावधौः भवतः साधू 
अस्यै ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Ubhe asmai pipayatah samici divo vrstim 
subhago nama pusyan. Ubha ksayavajayan yati 
prtsubhavardhau bhavatah sadhu asmai. 


Both the enlightened woman and the noble 
husband, the people and the noble ruler, conjoined in 
unison grow together for the sake of this Rashtra, the 
great social order of humanity, augmenting through 
yajna the showers of rain from heaven. Both live 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 987 


together and move forward, winning victories in the 
battles of life. Both are indispensable for the social order, 
complementing each other like two halves of a sphere 
in the interest of progress and prosperity for the sake of 
the family and the nation. 


या al माया sifraé यजत्राः पाशा आदित्या रिपवे 
faa: | अश्वीव at अति येषं रथेनारिष्टा उरावा 
शर्म॑न्त्स्याम ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Ya vo maya abhidruhe yajatrah pasa aditya 
ripave vicrttah. ASviva tam ati yesam rathena- 
rista urava Sarmantsyama. 


Adityas, powers of light and law, dedicated to 
yajnic advancement of life and nature, whatever your 
bonds of power and law, sinless and inviolable, spread 
across the earth, which are like chains of arrest and 
prisons of punishment for the lawless and the enemies 
of humanity, let me, I pray, cross them over with ease 
and pleasure by the chariot of knowledge and action 
like a knight of horse, so that we may live at peace in 
bliss on this vast earth, common home of the human 
family. 

ame Far वरुण प्रियस्य॑ vera आ fad शून॑मापेः। 
मा रायो राजन्त्सुयमादवं स्थां बृहद्वदेम विदथं सुवीराः ॥ ९५७॥ 
17. Maham maghono varuna priyasya bhuridavna a 


vidam Ssunamapeh. Ma rayo rajantsuyam-adava 
stham brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 
Varuna, lord of justice, highest and best of our 


choice, I pray I may attain to the progress and prosperity 
of a dear and generous man of wealth and dignity, but 


988 RGVEDA 


not to the swelling pride of a man of easy money. 
Brilliant lord ruler of the nation, may I never be deprived 
of wealth well-earned with honesty. And let us all, blest 
with noble progeny, speak well and highly in thanks 
and praise of the lord ruler of the world in all our yajnic 
performances. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 28 
Varuna Devata, Grtsamada or Kurma Gartsamada Rshi 


इदं कवेरादित्यस्यं स्वराजो favalf सान्त्यभ्य॑स्तु Wet । 
अति यो मन्द्रो यजथाय देवः सुंकीर्तिं भिक्षे वरुणस्य 
भूरे: ।॥। ९॥ 


1. Idam kaveradityasya svarajo visvani santya- 
bhyastu mahna. Ati yo mandro yajathaya devah 
sukirtim bhikse varunasya bhureh. 


This is the song of honour for Aditya, self- 
refulgent lord of light eternal and poetic vision of 
omniscience who, with his might, rules over and 
transcends all forms of existence and karma. Lord of 
brilliance and generosity is he, extremely kind and 
pleased with the liberal man of yajna. I pray for a vision 
of the glory of Varuna, magnificent lord of abundance, 
love and justice and crave for his mercy and pleasure. 


तवं ad सुभगासः स्याम स्वाध्यो वरुण Tare: | 
उपायन उषसां गोम॑तीनामय्रयो न जर॑माणा अनु द्यून्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


(५१ Tava vrate subhagasah syama svadhyo varuna 
tustuvamsah. Upayana usasam gomatina- 
magnayo na jaramana anu dhyun. 


Varuna, lord of knowledge and wisdom, law and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 28 989 


justice, may we, under your inviolable discipline, be 
blest with good fortune and all round prosperity and, 
singing in praise and admiration of Divinity, be rewarded 
with noble intelligence and scientific knowledge of 
existence. And when the dawns arise with their wealth 
of light rays and the cows stir in their stalls, let us, like 
holy fires of yajna, celebrate the glory of the morning 
sun every day. 


तव॑ स्याम पुरुवीस्स्य शर्मन्नुरुशंसस्य वरुण War: | 
यूयं न॑ः पुत्रा अदितेरदब्धा अभि क्ष॑मध्वं युज्याय देवाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Tava syama puruvirasya Sarmannurusamsasya 
varuna pranetah. Yuyam nah putra aditeradabdha 
abhi ksamadhvam yujyaya devah . 


Varuna, great leader of humanity, universally 
admired and followed by hosts of brave warriors, let us 
live in peace and bliss under your protection as in our 
heaven and home. And ye, all our children, be brilliant 
and generous, inviolable and indomitable, be strong and 
brilliant as children of eternity and prepare yourselves 
for action and cooperation in the service of the Lord. 


प्र सीमादित्यो अंस्रजद्विधर्ताः ऋतं सिन्ध॑वो वरुणस्य यन्ति। 
न श्राम्यन्ति न वि मुचन्त्येते बयो न प॑सू रघुया परिज्मन्‌ ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Pra simadityo asrjad vidhartan rtam sindhavo 
varunasya yanti. Na Sramyanti na vi mucantyete 
vayo na paptu raghuya parijman. 


Aditya, the sun, sustainer of the regions of the 
world, creates the waters all round and then the streams 
of Varuna, the cloud, shower down and flow. They tire 
not, nor ever stop. Like flying birds they flow all round 
on the earth at their top speed. 


990 RGVEDA 


वि मच्छ थाय रशनामिवाग ऋध्याम ते वरुण खामूतस्यं | 
मा तन्तुंश्कछेदि वय॑तो धियं मे मा arat शार्यपसंः पुर 
ऋतोः WE ॥ 


2; Vi macchrathaya rasanamivaga rdhyama te 
varuna khamrtasya. Ma tantuschedi vayato 
dhiyam me ma matra saryapasah pura rtoh. 


Like the chain of slavery, loosen the hold of sin 
and evil from me. O Varuna, lord of law and justice, let 
us prosper and promote the stream of virtuous living in 
your service. While I weave the web of my life, snap 
not the bond of nature and intelligence with my mother. 
Snap not my bond of karma before the time is ripe. 


अपो सु म्य॑क्ष वरूण भियसं मत्सम्राव्छतावोऽ नुं मा गृभाय। 
दामेव वत्साद्धि मुमुग्ध्यंहो नहि त्वदारे निमिषंश्चनेषशो ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Apo su myaksa varuna bhiyasam mat samralr- 
tavo’nu ma grbhaya. Dameva vatsad vi mumug- 
dhyamho nahi tvadare nimisascanese. 


Varuna, lord of love and justice, keep off fear 
from me. Illustrious ruler and defender of truth and 
rectitude, take me as your own for protection, and, as a 
calf is freed from the rope, release me from sin. Other 
than you no one far or near can rule over me even for a 
moment. 


मानों वधैर्वरुण ये तं इष्टावेनः कृण्वन्त॑मसुर श्रीणन्ति | 
मा ज्योतिषः प्रवसथानिं गन्म वि षु मृध॑: शिश्रथो जीवसे 
नः॥ ७॥ 

7: Ma no vadhairvaruna ye ta istavenah krnva- 


ntamsura bhrinanti. Ma jyotisah pravasathani 
ganma vi su mrdhah Sisratho jivase nah. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 28 991 


Varuna, lord of life and giver of pranic energy, 
save us from the blows which strike to punish those 
who commit sin against your yajnic law. Let us not go 
astray from light to the dens of darkness. For our life 
and holy living reduce and eliminate the forces of hate 
and violence. 


नम॑ः पुरा ते वरुणोत नूनमुतापरं तुविजात ब्रवाम | 
त्वे हि कं पर्व॑तेन ्चितान्यप्रच्युतानि दूव्छभ aa ie ॥ 


8. Namah pura te varunota nunamutaparam tuvijata 
bravam. Tve hi kam parate na sritanyapracyutani 
dulabha vratani. 


Lord unassailable and ever powerful of all, we 
raise our voice of homage and offer words of salutation 
to you in the past, at present and in the future. O Varuna, 
as herbs grow on the mountain and vapours rest in the 
cloud, so peace and comfort rest in you, and in you abide 
the imperishable laws of existence and inviolable rules 
of life’s discipline and conduct. 


परं ऋणा सावीरथ मत्कुतानि माहं राजन्नन्यकुतेन भोजम्‌। 
अबव्युं्टा sq भूयसीरुषास आ नो जीवान्वरुण तासु 
शाधि॥९॥ 

८ Para rna saviiradha matkrtani maham rajanna- 
nyakrtena bhojam. Avyusta innu bhuyasirusasa 
व no jivan varuna tasu Sadhi . 


Varuna, lord of light and law, acquit me of the 
highest liabilities, and obligations undertaken by me. 
Never let me live on the fruits of others’ labour. And in 
the many days of light not yet come, in which you would 
be there to protect us, teach us, all the living souls, to 


992 RGVEDA 
live the way we should. 


यो मे राजन्युज्यो वा सखा वा स्वप्रे भयं भीरवे मह्यमाह । 
स्तेनो वायो दिप्सति नो वृको वा त्वं तस्माद्वरुण 
पाह्यस्मान्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yo me rajan yujyo va sakha va svapne bhayam 
bhirave mahyamaha. Steno va yo dipsati no vrko 
va tvam tasmad varuna pahyasman . 


Varuna, lord of light and law, brilliant ruler, if a 
friend or companion threatens me with fear and I feel 
afraid in a state of sleep or wakefulness, or if a thief or 
a wolfish robber terrorizes us, save us from such fear 
and terror. 


ae wart वरुण प्रियस्य॑ ufera आ fad शून॑मापेः। 
मा रायो राजन्त्सुयमादवं स्थां बृहद्वदेम विदथं सुवीराः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Maham maghono varuno priyasya bhuridavna a 
vidam sunamapeh. Ma rayo rajantsuyama-dava 
stham brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Varuna, refulgent lord ruler of the world, I pray, 
I may never suffer the empty pride and morbid swelling 
from the wealth of a dear, prosperous, generous man of 
power and honour. Nor may I suffer the want of wealth 
well earned with honest labour. And, blest with noble 
progeny and brave warrior heroes, may we ever sing 
songs of thanks and praise for the Lord in all our yajnic 
performances. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 29 993 


Mandala 2/Sukta 29 


Vishvedevah Devata, Kurma Gartsamada or 
Grtsamada Rshi 


daa आदित्या इषिरा आरे मत्कर्त र हसूरिवागंः | श्रृण्वतो 
वो वरुण मित्र देवां भद्रस्य fast अव॑से हुवे वः॥ ९॥ 


rivagah. Srnvato vo varuna mitra deva bha- 
drasya vidvan avase huve vah. 


Ye lights of the world of life and spirit, brilliant 
as the suns, upholders of law and pious vows of 
discipline, dynamic masters of refreshing knowledge 
and wisdom, remove from me far and near sin and 
pollution like a fallen woman’s. Ye divine souls of the 
world, Varuna, lord supreme, Mitra, friend of life and 
humanity, brilliant scholar and teacher, all you who 
listen, I invoke and call upon you for the protection of 
truth and goodness in life. 


यूयं dar: प्रम॑तिर्यूयमोजो। यूयं द्वेषांसि सनुतर्युयोत । 
अभिक्षत्तारो अभि च श्चम॑ध्वमद्या च॑ नो मृव्छय॑तापरं च॑ it २॥ 


2. Yuyam devah pramatiryuyamojo yuyam dvesamsi 
sanutaryuyota. Abhiksattaro abhi ca ksam- 
adhvamadya ca no mrlayataparam ca. 


Ye divine spirits and noble personalities of the 
world, you uphold, protect and promote wisdom. You 
constantly advance the light and splendour of life. You 
quietly challenge and fight out hate and jealousy. All 
round shelters and protectors of the good, destroyers of 
evil, be kind and gracious, relent now, strengthen us 
and save us ever after. 


994 RGVEDA 


fey a: कृणवामापंरेणा किं सनन वसव आप्येन । 
यूयं नों मित्रावरुणादिते च स्वस्तिमिन््रामरूतो दधात ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Kimi nu vah krnavamaparena kim sanena vasava 
apyena . Yuyam no mitravarundadite ca svastimin- 
dramaruto dadhata . 


O Vasus, shelter homes of life and humanity, 
teachers and scholars generous as mother earth, what 
shall we do for you with our share of karma and 
competence now and whatever potential we might have 
later? O Mitra and Varuna, friends and lovers of 
humanity dear as the breath of life, Aditi, generous 
mother sustainer like earth and nature, Indra and Maruts, 
winds and vital energies of life, bear and bring us the 
good and best of life, intelligence and knowledge of 
existence. 


हये देवा यूयमिदापय॑ः स्थ ते Hod नाधमानाय मद्य॑म्‌ । 
मावो रथो मध्यमवाव्टृते भून्मा युष्मावंत्स्वापिषु 
श्रमिष्म ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Haye deva yuthamidapayah stha te mrlata nadha- 
manaya mahyam. Ma vo ratho madhyamavalrte 
bhunma yusmavatsvapisu Sramisma . 


Ye Devas, teachers and scholars, noble powers 
of the world and nature, you are our own, friends and 
kinsmen, the very soul of our virtues. Be kind and 
gracious to me, the seeker and the supplicant. May your 
chariot never move at slow or medium speed in yajnic 
projects on earth or in water. Nor must we tire or slacken 
in our service to you in virtuous and scholarly projects. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 29 995 


प्रव एको मिमय भूर्यागो यन्मां faded कितवं शंशास। 
आरे पाशा आरे अघानिं देवा मा माधि पुत्रे विमि॑व 
ग्रभीष्ट ॥ ५ ॥ 


>. Pra va eko mimaya bhuryago yanma piteva 
kitavam Sasasa. Are pasa are aghani deva 
ma madhi putre vimiva grabhista. 

Ye Devas, teachers, scholars, noble seniors, I 
am one, alone and helpless, but let me throw off all sin 
and evil since you teach and enlighten me as a father 
teaches and corrects a prodigal son. Let all snares of 
bondage be off! Let all sin and trespasses be off! A child 
as Iam of yours, seize me not as a hunter catches a bird. 
No one seizes a child. 


stratcat अद्या भ॑वता यजत्रा आ at हार्दि भय॑मानो 
व्ययेयम्‌ | त्राध्वं नो देवा निजुरो वृक॑स्य त्राध्वं कर्तादवपदो 
यजत्राः ॥ & ॥ 


6. Arvanco adya bhavata yajatra a vo hardi 
bhayamano vyayeyam. Tradhvam no deva nijuro 
vrkasya tradhvam kartadavapado yajatrah. 


Devas, noble and generous powers of the world, 
yajnic teachers and enlightened seniors, advance in 
knowledge and generosity, come, be kind and gracious 
right front. Obedient with awe and reverence, let me do 
what is dear to you at heart. Protect us against the violent 
wolf and the greedy robber. Worshipful and dedicated 
to yajna as you are, save us from evil time and violence. 


माहं मघोनो! वरुण प्रियस्य॑ yRera आ विदं शून॑मापेः | 
मा रायो राजन्त्सुयमादवं स्थां बृहद्वदेम विदथं सुवीराः 9 


996 RGVEDA 


fin Maham maghono varuna priyasya bhuridavna a 
vidam sunamapeh. Ma rayo rajantsuyamd-dava 
stham brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Varuna, lord of light, law and justice, let me 
never come to that state of sufferance when a dear, 
mighty generous man of honour and power either suffers 
from empty pride of easy achievement or suffers want 
and penury. O brilliant ruler and law-giver of the world, 
let me never suffer the want of well earned wealth of 
money and materials. And let us all, blest with noble 
children and followers, sing in praise of the Lord for 
his gracious gifts of righteous prosperity. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 30 


Indra, Indra-Soma, Sarasvati-Indra, Brhaspati, Maruts 
Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


ऋतं देवाय॑ कृण्वते सवित्र s-akenfee न tara आपः | 
अह रहयत्यिक्तुरपां कियात्या ders: af आसाम्‌॥ ९॥ 


im Rtam devaya krnvate savitra intrayahighne na 
ramanta apah. Aharaharyatyakturapam kiydatya 
prathamah sarga asam. 


The streams of the existential flow of divine 
action stop not, nor do they play for fun, for the creator 
of waters and the executor of laws, self-refulgent Savita, 
the sun who inspires Prakrti with life, nor for Indra who 
breaks the clouds for rain. The light of his actions 
radiates continuously day by day. When did the first 
flow of these actions of creation originate? (Let us 
know.) 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 30 997 


यो वृत्राय सिनमत्राभररिष्यत्प्र तं जनित्री fags उवाच | 
पथो रद॑न्तीरनु जोष॑मस्मै दिवेदिवे धुन॑यो यन्त्यर्थम्‌॥ २ ॥ 


2. Yo vrtraya sinamatrabharisyat pra tam janitri 
vidusa uvaca. Patho radantiranu josamasmai 
divedive dhunayo yantyartham . 


The one (sun) who for the cloud of darkness 
bears the food (of vapours) as well as the bond (of 
structure and formation), of him the mother Nature 
speaks to the man of knowledge. And in accordance 
with the will divine the streams of light and action flow 
to their destined goal carving out their paths of motion 
day by day. 


ऊर्ध्वो ह्यस्थादध्यन्तरिक्षेऽधां वृत्राय प्र वधं ज॑भार । 
मिहं वसान उप हीमवुद्रोत्तिग्मायुधो अजयच्छनरुमिन्द्र॑ः 13 ॥ 


2 Urdhvo hyasthadadhyantarikse’dha vrtraya pra 
vadham jabhara. Miham vasana upa himadudrot 
tigmayudho ajayacchatrumindrah. 


The sun abides high up in heaven far above the 
middle region of the sky. And then it bears, raises and 
strikes the deadly weapon of the thunderbolt upon the 
cloud and, taking the vapours on all round, it melts the 
waters to rain. Thus it is that Indra, sunny wielder of 
the lightning weapon, who conquers the adversary, the 
dark and deep cloud of rain. 


बृहस्पते तपुषाश्नैव विध्य वृकद्वरसो असुरस्य वीरान्‌। 
यथां जघन्थं धृषता पुरा Felder ज॑हि शर्रुमस्माकमिन्द्र MY ॥ 


4. Brhaspate tapusasneva vidhya vrkadvaraso 
asurasya viran. Yatha jaghantha dhrsata pura ci- 
deva jahi Satrumasmakamindra. 


998 RGVEDA 


Indra, destroyer of enemies, Brhaspati, lord 
sustainer of the vast world, just as with your mighty 
blazing thunderous weapon you broke through the front 
gates of the stronghold of the cloud and destroyed the 
forces of the demon of darkness and drought earlier, so 
now destroy our enemy (and throw open the gates of 
light and prosperity). 


अवं fara दिवो अश््मानमुच्या येन शत्रुः मन्दसानो निजू्वीः । 
तोकस्य॑ सातौ तन॑यस्य भूररस्मों अर्धं कुणुतादिन्द्र 
गोनाम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


3: Ava ksipa divo aSmanamucca yena satrum 
mandasano nijurvah. Tokasya satau tanayasya 
bhurerasman ardham krnutadindra gonam. 


Indra, lord of light and power, ruler of the world, 
admirable, joyous and fiery, hurl the thunderbolt from 
high up regions of light and destroy the enemy, the same 
thunderbolt by which you struck and broke the cloud, 
and for the progress and prosperity of our children and 
grand children and for the growth and development of 
our land and cows, grant us plenty of means and 
materials. 


प्रहि क्रतुं वृहथो यं व॑नुथो tera स्थो यज॑मानस्य चोदौ । 

इन्द्रासोमा युवमस्मां अविष्टमस्मिन्थयस्थे कृणुतमु 
HANS ॥ 

6. Pra hi kratum vrhatho yam vanutho radhrasya 


stho yajamanasya codau. Indrasoma yuvama- 
sman avistamasmin bhayasthe krnutamu lokam . 


Indra, lord of power, and Soma, lord of peace, 
expand the yajna of development and progress which 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 30 999 


you love. Abide as inspirers and promoters of the 
obedient worshipful yajamana. Favour us, protect and 
promote us, and in this land which is stricken with fear, 
create a social order free and fearless, full of joy. 


न मां ana श्र॑मन्नोत त॑न्द्र॒न्न वोचाम मा सुंनोतेति सोम॑म्‌। 
यो a quiet ददद्यो निबोधाद्यो मौ सुन्वन्तमुप 
गोधिराय॑त्‌॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Na ma tamanna sramannota tandranna vocama 
ma sunoteti somam. Yo me prnad yo dadad yo 
nibodhad yo ma sunvantamupa gobhirayat. 


Indra, who gives me fulfilment, who gives me 
wealth and happiness, who gives me enlightenment, and 
who blesses me with the gift of cows and health of mind 
and senses, while I offer homage to the lord, may, I 
pray, never vex me, nor tire me, nor make me feel 
languid with lassitude. And may we never (with 
ingratitude) say: “Do not offer homage of soma to the 
lord.” 


सर॑स्वति त्वमरस्मों stats मरुत्वती धृष॒ती Ae sre 
त्यं चिच्छर्धन्तं तविषीय्माणमिन्द्रों हन्ति वृषभं शण्डि- 
कानाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


Bi Sarasvati tvamasman aviddhi marutvati dhrsati 
jesi Satrun. Tyam cicchardhantam tavistyam- 
anamindro hanti vrsabham sandikanam. 


Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and divine 
speech, inspire and protect us. Loud and bold with a 
troop of stormy commandos you overthrow the enemies. 
Indra, ruling lord of light and power, too, destroys the 
defiant and violent intrepidable leader of the forces of 


1000 RGVEDA 


damage and darkness. 


यो नः सनुत्य उत at जिघलुरं थिख्याय तं तिगितेन॑ विध्य । 
बृह॑स्पत आयुधेर्जेषि vase रीष॑न्तं परि धेहि राजन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Yo nah sanutya uta va jighatnurabhikhyaya tam 
tigitena vidhya. Brhaspata ayudhairjesi Satrun 
druhe risantam pari dhehi rajan. 


Brhaspati, lord of knowledge and sustainer of 
the grand social order, expose and fix with pointed steel 
the surreptitious foe in hiding and the saboteur who 
plans to destroy us. O brilliant ruler, conquer the enemies 
with weapons of offence and defence, and surround and 
seal the force of the jealous and the destructive along 
with their counterparts. 


अस्माकैथिः सत्व॑भिः शूर et ्वीयी कृधि यानिं ते eet 
ज्योग॑भूवन्ननुंधूपितासो हत्वी तेषामा भ॑रा नो वसूनि ॥ १०॥ 


10. = Asmakebhih satvabhih Sura surairvirya krdhi yani 
te kartvani. Jyogabhuvannanudhupitaso hatvi 
tesama bhara no vasuni. 


O Indra, valiant hero and ruler of the world, with 
our resolute heroes of real mettle, do the deeds worthy 
of your character and majesty. And if there be 
adversaries long puffed up with pride and arrogance, 
break them down to their reality and hold and manage 
their assets and ours for the nation. 


तं वः शर्धं मारुतं सुम्नयुर्गिरोपं aa नम॑सा दैव्यं जन॑म्‌। 
य्था रयिं सर्व॑वीरं aster अपत्यसाचं श्रुत्यं दिवे- 
दिवे॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 31 1001 


11. Tam vah sardham marutam sumnayurgiropa 
bruve namasa daivyam janam. Yatha rayim 
sarvaviram nasamaha apatyasacam Srutyam 
divedive . 


That mighty manpower of yours, divine and 
stormy, I, seeker of peace and well-being, sing and 
celebrate in words of humility and reverence and address 
the song to you so that day by day we may attain wealth 
and honour which may be worthy of the valiance of all 
our heroes, the pride of our children, and worthy of 
celebration in song for the future generations. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 31 
Vishvedeva Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


अस्माकं मित्रावरुणावतं रथ॑ मादित्य esa fur: सचा- 
भुवा । प्र यद्वयो न पप्तन्वस्प॑नस्परिं श्रवस्यवो हषी!वन्तो 
वनर्षदः ॥ ९॥ 


iF Asmakam mitravarunavatam rathamdadityai 
rudrairvasubhih sacabhuva. Pra yad vayo na 
paptanvasmanaspari Sravasyavo hrsivanto 
vanarsadah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, brilliant light and life breath 
of the universe, friendly ruler and vibrant people of the 
world, vested with innate virtues, working with Adityas, 
scholars brilliant as yearly phases of the sun, Rudras, 
forces of strength vital as life breath, and Vasus, people 
generous as mother earth, come with all these, 
programme, protect, impel, drive and guide our chariot 
by which we, in search of food for knowledge and fame, 
joyous and inspired, rested in our sylvan home, may fly 
like birds flying freely from their nest. 


1002 RGVEDA 


अध स्मा न उद॑वता सजोषसो रथं देवासो अभि विक्षु 
वाजयुम्‌। यदाशवः पर््याधिस्तित्र॑तो रज॑: पृथिव्याः सानौ 
We ard पाणिभिः ।॥ २॥ 


a. Adha sma na udavata sajosaso ratham devaso 
abhi viksu vajayum. Yadasavah padyabhistitrato 

rajah prthivyah sanau janghananta panibhih . 
And now you, brilliant Devas, scholars and 
scientists working together as a team, direct our stormy 
and victorious chariot towards the people since the 
motive forces fast traversing the spaces by their paths 
are heading with their wings to the surface of the earth. 


उत स्य न इन्द्रो विश्वच्॑षणिर्दिंवः शर्धन मारुतेन सुक्रतुः । 
अनु नु स्थात्यवृकाभिरूतिभी रथं महे स॒नये वाजं- 
सातये ॥ ३ ॥ 


६ Uta sya na indro visvacarsanirdivah sardhena 
marutena sukratuh. Anu nu sthatyavrkabhiru- 
tibhi ratham mahe sanaye vajasdataye. 


And may that Indra, lord of power and the 
people, who watches the world and does noble acts of 
yajna with stormy powers of the winds for great wealth 
and victory across the skies, descend from the regions 
of space and, with safe and simple protective operations 
land and abide by our chariot. 


उत स्य देवो भुव॑नस्य सक्षणिस्त्वष्टा ग्राभः सजोषा 
जूजुवद्रथ॑म्‌। gar भगो लृहद्दिवोत रोद॑सी पूषा पुरंधिरण्वि- 
नावधा पतीं us ॥ ति 

4. Uta sya devo bhuvanasya saksanistavasta gna- 
bhih sajosa jujuvad ratham. Ila bhago brha- 
ddivota rodasi pusa purandhirasvinavadha pati . 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 31 1003 


And that refulgent generous Deva Tvashta, 
universal designer and maker of forms, co-existent and 
co-operative associate of all, may, we wish and pray, 
accelerate our chariot with divine voice of exhortation. 
And so may Ila, divine speech, Bhaga, lord of power 
and prosperity, Brhat, vast space, earth and heaven, 
Pusha, lord of vitality and sustenance, Purandhi, wielder 
of the ancient stars, and both the Ashvins, lord sustainers 
of health and vital energy, energise, sustain and 
accelerate our project of the chariot. 


उत त्ये देवी सुभगे मिथूदूरशोषासानक्ता Satara । 
स्तुषे यद्वां पृथिवि नन्य॑सा वच॑ः स्थातुश्च aaferdar 
उपस्तिरे ॥ ५ ॥ 


>, Uta te devi subhage mithudrsosasanakta jagata- 
mapijuva. Stuse yad vam prthivi navyasa vacah 
sthatusSca vayastrivaya upastire . 


And those two refulgent and generous divinities, 
dawn and night, twins in mutual sight, which inspire 
the moving and non-moving worlds of being, I praise, 
with new words of adoration when, O earth and heaven, 
I cover the vedi with three orders of holy grass and offer 
three orders of holy fragrance, praise, prayer and 
meditation. 


उत वः sierra मस्यदिर्बुध्न्यो ३ऽज एकपादुत | 
त्रित suet: सविता चनो। दधेऽपां नपादाशुहेमा धिया 
stn ६॥ ति 

6. Uta vah Samsamusijamiva smasyahirbudhn-yo ‘ja 
ekapaduta. Trita rbhuksah savita cano dadhe’ pam 
napadasuhema dhiya sami. 


1004 RGVEDA 


We love to adore you, O divine powers of nature 
and humanity, as those who love and are inspired. 
Ahirbudhnya, cloud of waters in the skies, Aja, unborn 
nature and the soul, Ekapat, constant powers of bliss, 
Ribhuksha, lord of universal art and artists, Savita, 
refulgent lord of creation and inspiration, and Apam 
Napat, infallible energy born of waters, bear the food 
of life for us. And I, Ribhuksha, in search of intelligence, 
strength and knowledge, with all effort of intellect and 
passion in holy action, growing fast and faster, receive 
the food for body, mind and soul. 


एता at वश्म्युद्यता यजत्रा अतक्षन्नायवो नव्य॑से सम्‌। 
श्रवस्यवो वाजं चकानाः सिर्न रथ्यो अहं धीतिमश्याः ॥ ७॥ 


ae Eta vo vasmyudyata yajatra ataksannayavo 
navyase sam. Sravasyavo vajam cakanah saptirna 
rathyo aha dhitimasyah. 


These acts and higher gifts of yours, O powers 
and performers of yajnic creation in love and 
association, I crave and pray for, which men of desire 
in search of knowledge and fame, progress and 
prosperity, beautifully refine and advance, and which 
progress in knowledge, power and piety, O man of 
devotion and endeavour, you too, like a pioneer of the 
chariot caravan of humanity, may attain. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 32 
Dyava-prthivi, Indra-Tvashta, Raka, Sinivali Devata, 
Grtsamada Rshi 
अस्य में द्यावापृथिवी ऋतायतो भूतमवित्री वच॑सः 
सिर्षासतः। ययोरायुः प्रतरं ते इदं पुर उप॑स्तुते वसूयुवीं 
महो द॑धे॥ ९॥ ति त 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 32 1005 


im Asya me dyavaprthivi rtayato bhutamavitri 
vacasah sisasatah. Yayorayuh prataram te idam 
pura upastute vasuyurvam maho dadhe. 


May the heaven and earth be saviours and 
protectors of this voice of mine, who follow the 
universal law of Dharma and crave their love in unison. 
Excellent and elevating is their power and action. Hence 
in search of food for body, mind and soul, I present this 
prayer since I hold them adorable as great blissful 
powers of Divinity. 


मानो wen Ro आयोरहन्दभन्मा न॑ आभ्यो रीरधो 
दुच्छुनाभ्यः। मा नो वि यौ: सख्या विद्धि तस्य॑ नः सुम्नायता 
मन॑सा तत्त्व महे ॥ २॥ 


2. Mano guhya ripa ayorahan dabhan ma na abhyo 
riradho ducchunabhyah. Ma no vi yauh sakhya 
viddhi tasya nah sumnayata manasa tat tvemahe. 


May the secret intrigues of hostile men never 
hurt us in the day or night, nor may the earth hurt the 
joy of humanity with calamities. Nor must anyone 
alienate us from our friends. Indra, know our friends 
and our friendships with a gracious mind. For this reason 
of peace, friendship, and well-being, we offer our 
worship and prayers to you, O lord of earth and heaven. 


sean मन॑सा शरुष्टिमा व॑ह दुहानां धेनु पिप्युषींमसश्चतंम्‌। 
पद्याभिराशुं वच॑सा च वाजिनं त्वां हिनोमि पुरुदूत 
विश्वहा ॥ ३ ॥ 

६ Ahelata manasa Srustima vaha duhanam dhenum 


pipyusimasascatam. Padyabhirasum vacasa ca 
vajinam tvam hinomi puruhuta visvaha. 


1006 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of light and power, with a kind and 
gracious mind bring us instantly a gift of that 
comprehensive speech of Divinity which, like the 
mother earth and generous cow and an imaginative mind 
and sense, gives us the milk of mental and spiritual 
nourishment. Every day, O lord universally invoked and 
adored, ruler of the dynamics of existence, with the holy 
Word and successive steps of meditation, I knock at 
your door. 


राकामहं सुहवां सुष्टुती ea श्रृणोतु नः सुभगा बोधतु 
त्मना । सीव्यत्वप॑ः सूच्याच्छिद्यमानया ददातु वीरं शतदाय- 
मुक्थ्य॑म्‌ MS ॥ 


4. Rakamaham suhavam sustuti huve srnotu nah 
subhaga bodhatu tmana. Sivyatvapah sucyacchi- 
dyamanaya dadatu viram satadayamukthyam. 


I call upon the beauteous moon-lit night, 
soothing and generous, with words of adoration. May 
she, luxuriously gracious, listen to us and, with her mind 
and soul, acknowledge and yield to our wish and desire. 
May she, with an uninterruptible needle, sew on our 
garments of action. May she bless us with praise-worthy 
progeny who may produce a hundredfold wealth of life 
for us. 


यास्ते राके Gada: सुपेशसो aaah दाशुषे TAP | 
ताभिर्नो अद्य सुमनां उपाग॑हि सहस्रपोषं सुंभगे ATT ॥ ५॥ 


> Yaste rake sumatayah supesaso yabhirdadasi 
dasuse vasuni. Tabhirno adya sumana upagahi 
sahasraposam subhage rarana. 


O Lady of the Moon, those visions of yours, of 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 32 1007 


wisdom and beauty, with which you bless the generous 
giver with the wealths of conjugal life, with all those 
today, O mistress of noble and lovely mind, harbinger 
of good fortune, overflowing with a thousand blessings, 
come close to us and bless. 


सिनीवालि प्रथुंष्टुके या देवानामसि carat । 
जुषस्व geared प्रजां देवि fafefs नः ॥ ६॥ 

6. Sinivali prthustuke ya devanamasi svasa. Jusasva 
havyamahutam prajam devi dididdhi nah. 


O Sinivali, lady of love and beauty, you are the 
sister of the gods of nature’s bounty. Accept and cherish 
the fragrance offered into the fire and, O lady of light 
and bliss, give us lovely progeny. 


या dare: स्वङ्गुरिः सुषूमा बहुसूव॑री | 
तस्ये विश्पत्न्यै हविः सिनीवाल्यै जुहोतन ॥ ७ ॥ 

7. Ya subahuh svangurih susuma bahusuvari. 
Tasyai vispatnyai havih sinivalyai juhotana. 


Her arms are beautiful, delicate, and lovely her 
fingers. Fertile and passionate is she and generous nurse 
of life. Mother of many and lovely lady of love and 
beauty, offer her the oblations of life into the fire. 


या गुङ्गृर्या Pastaret या राका या सर॑स्वती । 

इन्द्राणीमंह ऊतये वरुणानीं स्वस्तये nen 
8. Ya gungurya sinivali ya raka ya sarasvati. 

Indranimahva utaye varunanim svastaye. 


She is the first night of the new moon, cooing 
with amour, she is lovely and passionate, she is night of 


1008 RGVEDA 


the full moon, she is the mistress of exuberant speech 
and noble knowledge, she is the lady of power and 
prosperity, and she is the love of my first choice. I invoke 
her, I solicit her, I love her for safety, security and all 
round well-being. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 33 
Rudra Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


आ ते पितर्मरुतां सुम्नमेतु मा नः सूर्य॑स्य Geet युयोथाः 1 
अभि नो वीरो अर्वति क्षपेत्‌ प्रजायेमहि रुद्र प्रजाभिः ॥ ९॥ 


i A te pitarmarutam sumnametu ma nah suryasya 
samdrso yuyothah. Abhi no viro arvati ksameta 
pra jayemahi rudra prajabhih. 


Rudra, lord of the laws of nature for universal 
health, justice and punishment, father sustainer of the 
people, may your blessings of well-being ever come to 
us. Deprive us not of the light and benign eye of the 
sun. May our brave children be strong on horse back to 
challenge the enemies. May we rise and advance with 
our future generations. 


त्वाद॑त्तेभी रुद्र शंत॑मेभिः शतं हिमां अशीय भेषजेभिः 1 

ल्यगैस्मद्‌ द्वेषो वितरं व्यंहो व्यमींवाश्चातयस्वा विषुंचीः ॥ २ ॥ 

0.0 Tvadattebhi rudra Samtamebhih satam hima aSstya 

bhesajebhih. Vyasmad dveso vitaram vyamho 
vyamivascatayasva visucth. 

O Rudra, lord of health and well-being, with 

your soothing and invigorating herbs given by you, may 


we live a full hundred years. May hate and jealousy and 
sinful actions be off from us so that we may be free 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 33 1009 
from all chronic diseases. 


sal जातस्य रुद्र यासि तवस्तमस्तवसां वज्रवाहो । पर्षि 
णः पारमंह॑सः स्वस्ति favat अभीती रप॑सो युयोधि ॥ ३॥ 


2: Srestho jatasya rudra Sriyasi tavastamas-tavasam 
vajrabaho . Parsi nah paramanhasah svasti visva 
abhiti rapaso yuyodhi. 


Rudra, lord of adamantine arms by virtue of your 
own knowledge and power, you are the best of the world 
of humanity and strongest of the strong. Take us across 
the seas of sin and disease to our good and well being. 
Fight out all the roads to infirmity and block them 
against ill-health. 


a cat Ss चुक्रुधामा नमोधिर्मा दुष्टुती वृषभ मा Get | 
sal वीरो sida भेषजभिर्थिषक्तमं त्वा धिषजां शुणोमि ॥ ४ 1 


4. Ma tva rudra cukrudhama namobhirma dustuti 
vrsabha ma sahuti. Unno viran arpaya bhesaje- 
bhirbhisaktamam tva bhisajam srnomi. 


Rudra, O physician, mighty brave and generous, 
may we never irritate or provoke you by neglect or 
turning away, or by disappraisal, or by pestering you. 
With herbs and tonics raise a generation of brave, heroic 
young people. I hear that you are the most eminent 
physician among physicians. 


हवींमभिर्हव॑ते यो हविर्भिरव स्तोमेभी es दिंषीय। 
ऋदूदरः सुहवो मा नो अस्यै ay: सुशिप्रो रीरधन्मनाय ॥ ५ ॥ 


Havimabhirhavate yo havirbhirava stomebhi 
rudram distya. Rdudarah suhavo ma no asyai 
babhruh susipro rirandhanmanayai. 


1010 RGVEDA 


The physician who helps, inspires and advances 
us with exhortations, herbs and tonics, him I serve and 
please with offers of presents and appreciation. And he 
too, soft and kind at heart, invited with reverence, 
benevolent and pleasant of manners, should not, in the 
interest of the patient’s mind and morale, hurt us. 


उन्मा ममन्द वृषभो परुत्वान्त्वक्षीयसा वय॑सा ATA I 
quia च्छायामरपा अशीयाऽऽ विवासेयं exe 
सुम्नम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Unma mamanda vrsabho marutvan tvaksityasa 


vayasa nadhamanam. Ghrnivacchayamarapa 
astya’’vivaseyam rudrasya sumnam. 


And the divine physician, Rudra, bold and 
generous, commanding the energies of the elements, 
restores me, poor patient in need of strength, to glowing 
health and energy and I, like one taking shelter in the 
shade from the scorching heat, feel relieved, and I pray 
that I may continue to enjoy Rudra’s gift of comfort 
and joy free from sin and disease. 


क्व१ TAA रुद्र मृछयाकुर्हस्तो यो अस्ति भेषजो जत्पर॑षः। 
अपभर्ता रप॑सो दैव्य॑स्याभी नु मा वृषभ चक्षमीथाः ॥ ७॥ 


i. Kva sya te rudra mrlayakur-hasto yo asti bhesajo 
jalasah . Apabharta rapaso daivyasyabhi nu ma 
vrsabha caksamithah. 


O Rudra, divine physician, where is that 
merciful hand of yours which is the healing balm (for 
the restoration of health), which is an antidote to the 
ravages of the elements of nature? O lord, potent and 
generous, save me, spare me, and bless me with 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 33 1011 
immunity. 


प्र बभ्रवे gaurd श्वितीचे महो महीं सुं्ुतिमीरयामि | 
नमस्या कल्मलीकिनं नमोभिर्गणीमसि त्वेषं सद्रस्य नाम॑ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pra babhrave vrsabhaya Svitice maho mahim 
sustutimirayami. Namasya kalmalikinam namo- 
bhir-grnimasi tvesam rudrasya nama. 


I offer the highest of the high songs of praise in 
honour of Rudra, potent, generous and brilliant sustainer 
of health and life. Celebrate and serve this illustrious 
Rudra with salutations and presentations. We invoke 
and praise the name and splendour of Rudra with honour 
and reverence. 


स्थिरेथिरदधैः पुरुरूपं उग्रो ay: gente: fatter हिरण्यैः। 
ईशानादस्य भुव॑नस्य भूरेर्न वा उ योषद्ुद्राद॑सुर्यम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Sthirebhir-angaih pururupa ugro babhruh 
Sukrebhih pipise hiranyaih. Isanadasya bhuvan- 
asya bhurerna va u yosad rudradasuryam. 
Rudra, divine physician, brilliant sustainer of 
versatile form and character, shines forth with his sturdy 
constitution and purest golden virtues. May his essential 
vitality and life-giving power never part from this Rudra, 
universal and versatile ruler of this world. 


अर्हन्विभर्षिं साय॑कानि e-ard feb aad विश्वरूपम्‌ । 
अर्हन्निदं daa विश्वमभ्वं न वा ओजीयो रुद्र त्वदं- 
स्ति॥ १०॥ 

10. Arhan bibharsi sayakani dhanvarhan niskam 


yajatam visvarupam. Arhannidam dayase 
visvamabhvam na va ojtyo rudra tvadasti. 


1012 RGVEDA 


Rudra, potent and illustrious lord of the world, 
scourage of the evil and the wicked, in your own right 
with your own essential power, you wield the bow and 
arrows. Rightfully you bear and hold the adorable gold 
of universal form and lustre. With your essential strength 
and power, you protect this grand and mighty universe. 
O Rudra, never and none is greater than you in might 
and majesty. 


स्तुहि श्रुतं गर्तसदं युवानं मृगं न भीममुंपहलुमुग्रम्‌। Feet 
ज॑रित्रे रुद्र स्तवानोऽ न्यं त अस्मन्नि व॑पन्तु Sat: ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Stuhi Srutam gartasadam yuvanam mrgam na 
bhimam-upahatnum-ugragm. Mrla jaritre rudra 
stavano’nyam te asmanni vapantu senah. 


O Rudra, scourge of the evil and the wicked, 
praise and cherish the eminent young man of action 
seated in the war chariot, fearful as a tiger, destroyer of 
enemies and illustrious of merit. Be kind and gracious 
to the admirer and worshipper who sings in praise of 
you. And let your forces throw off from us the others 
who are ungrateful and negative. 


कुमारश्चिंत्पितरं वन्दमानं प्रतिं नानाम रुद्रोपयन्तम्‌। 
भूरेर्दातारं सत्पतिं गृणीषे स्तुतस्त्वं VAST रास्यस्मे ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Kumarascit pitaram vandamanam prati nanama 
rudropayantam. Bhurerdataram satpatim grnise 
stutastvam bhesaja rasyasme. 


Rudra, lord giver of good health and joy, just as 
the son bows to the father worthy of reverence and 
adoration while the father approaches, so do I praise 
and offer obeisance to you, generous giver and leader 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 33 1013 


and sustainer of the good and the truthful, and as we 
offer reverence and obeisance, you bless us with healing 
cures for health and joy. 


या वो भेषजा म॑रुतः शुचीनि या शन्त॑मा वृषणो या मयोभु | 
यानि मनुरवृंणीता पिता नस्ताशं च योश्च॑ रुद्रस्य 
aA ९३॥ 


13. Yavo bhesaja marutah sucini ya Samtama 1154110 
ya mayobhu. Yani manurvrnita pita nasta Sam ca 
yosca rudrasya vasmi. 


O Maruts, energies of the winds and vital breath 
of prana, whatever your healing powers, pure, purifying 
and without adverse effects, O powers of rain and water, 
whatever your cures most sanative and tranquillising, 
which Manu, the wise and imaginative scholar, father 
figure, collects, selects and refines for us, all those 
sanative cures and restoratives of benevolent Rudra’s I 
love and desire. 


Uk णो हेती रुद्रस्य॑ वृज्याः oR त्वेषस्य दुर्मतिर्मही गात्‌। 
अव॑ स्थिरा waders मीद्रंस्तोकाय तन॑याय 
WSU ९४॥ 


14. Parino € rudrasya vrjyah pari tvesasya durma- 
tirmahi gat. Ava sthira maghavadbhyas-tanusva 
midhvas-tokaya tanayaya mrla. 


May the stroke of fatal illness stay far from us. 
May the serious error of judgement of the brilliant 
specialist be far from us. Ward off and remove the 
chronic diseases from the people of wealth and power. 
O potent and generous lord of health and power, be kind 
and gracious to our children and our grand children. 


1014 RGVEDA 


एवा ब॑भ्रो वृषभ चेकितान यथा देव न ह॑णीषे न fe । 
हव नश्रुन्नो रुद्रेह बोधि gegen विदथे सुवीराः ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Eva babhro vrsabha cekitana yatha deva na 
hrnise na hamsi. Havanasrunno rudreha bodhi 
brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Rudra, lord sustainer of the world with health 
and life, mighty potent and generous, lord of knowledge 
and enlightenment, brilliant and illustrious, be kind and 
gracious so as not to deprive us of our comfort and joy 
nor to strike us with illness or untimely death. O lord 
listener to our invocation and prayer, enlighten us here 
and now, enlighten us so that, blest with brave and noble 
children, we sing and celebrate your mighty 
magnificence in our battles of yajnic life. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 34 
Maruts Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


धारावरा wed yuatsat मृगा न भीमास्तविंषी- 
भिरर्चिन॑ः। saat न शुशुचाना ऋजीषिणो भृमिं धम॑न्तो 
अप गा अंवृण्वत ॥ ९॥ 


1. Dharavara maruto dhrsnvojaso mrga na bhimas- 
tavistbhir-arcinah. Agnayo na $usucana rjisino 
bhrmim dhamanto apa ga avrnvata. 


Maruts, pioneers of humanity on top of the 
wave, sharp as razor’s edge and vibrant as the winds, 
irresistible with might and majesty, terrible as the tiger, 
bright with light and culture, blazing as flames of fire, 
soft and sophisticated at heart and fond of soma to the 
last drop, blow off the whirlwinds of time and 
circumstance and open out the light and language of 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1015 
Divinity for the progress of humanity. 


द्यावो न स्तृभिंज्चितयन्त खादिनो व्य4भिया न द्यतयन्त 
qed: | रुद्रो यद्वो मरुतो रुक्मवक्षसो Farsi पृश्न्याः 
शक्र ऊर्धनि ॥ २॥ 


2 Dyavo na strbhiscitayanta khadino vyabhriya na 
dyutayanta vrstayah. Rudro yad vo maruto 
rukmavaksaso vrsajani prsnyah sukra udhani. 


Ye Maruts, tempestuous pioneers of the world, 
blest with a heart of gold with light and love, be bright 
like the heavens with stars and, with the blaze of honour 
and distinction on your person, shine and roar like 
thunder and lightning of the clouds, since Rudra, bold 
and generous lord of justice, generous as showers of 
rain, generated you from the holiest womb of earth and 
the rays of heaven’s light. 


उक्षन्ते अश्वां ste sara नदस्य कर्णै स्तुरयन्त 
आशुभिः । हिरण्यशिप्रा मरुतो दविध्वतः get याथ 
पृष॑तीभिः समन्यवः ॥ ३॥ 


a Uksante asvan atyan ivajisu nadasya karnai- 
sturayanta asubhih. Hiranyasipra maruto davi- 
dhvatah prksam yatha prsatibhih samanyavah. 


Maruts, passionate heroes of action, shining in 
golden helmets, ride and goad their horses in battles 
like rockets in constant motion and shoot forward like 
sailors conquering the waves of the sea with instant oars. 
O Maruts, commanders of the winds, shaking and 
storming the adversaries in battle contests, go forward 
and achieve your cherished goal, fast like wind shears 
shaking, ripping and scattering the clouds. 


1016 RGVEDA 


पृक्षे ता विश्वा भुव॑ना ववक्षिरे मित्राय वा सद्मा 
जीरदानवः। पृष॑दश्वासो अनवश्रराधस ऋलिप्यासो न 
वयुनेषु yaa: ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Prkse ta visva bhuvana vavaksire mitraya va 
sadama jiradanavah. Prsadasvaso anavabhra- 
radhasa rjipyaso na vayunesu dhursadah. 


As the battles of action are won and the earth is 
sprinkled with showers of peace, all the regions of the 
world grow strong and powerful as one restful home 
for a friendly humanity. And Maruts, brilliant and 
generous heroes of victory and givers of nourishment 
and the breath of fresh life, possessed of mighty means 
of advancement, without diminishing the wealth of 
nations, shooting up straight to their goals and values, 
sit steadfast on the helm of affairs along the simple paths 
of peace and progress. 


इन्ध॑न्वधिरर्धेनुभीं रष्छादूधभिरथ्वस्मभिंः पथिभिर्चज- 
दुष्टयः। आ हंसासो न स्वस॑राणि गन्तन मधोर्मदाय मरुतः 
समन्यवः ॥ ५॥ 


2; Indhanvabhir-dhenubhi rapsad-udhabhir-adhva- 
smabhih pathibhir-bhrajadrstayah. A hamsaso na 
svasarani gantana madhormadaya marutah 
samanyavah. 


The Maruts, leaders and pioneers, impassioned 
with enthusiasm and love of life, bright and blazing with 
arms and words pregnant with meaning, advance on 
inviolable paths of peace and progress, like swans flying 
to their own resorts of water, for celebration of the 
boundless ecstasy of the honey sweets of success and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1017 
victory. 


आ नो ब्रह्माणि मरुतः समन्यवो नरां न sia: सव॑नानि 
गन्तन । अश्वमिव पिप्यत धेनुमूध॑नि कर्तां धियं जरित्र 
वाज॑पेशसम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. A no brahmani marutah samanyavo naram na 
Samsah savanani gantana. ASvamiva pipyata 
dhenumiudhani karta dhiyam jaritre vdajape- 
Sasam. 


O Maruts, heroes of mankind, impassioned with 
the will to act and equanimity of mind to think, come 
and grace our sessions of yajnic celebrations, admired 
universally as you are among people. Come for the 
development of wealth and prosperity. Develop the mare 
for speed as well as the cow for plenty of milk. And for 
the admirer and celebrant, create and award ample 
wealth of intelligence and knowledge with noble 
language and competence for karma with precious gifts. 


तं नो दात मरुतो वाजिनं tal आपानं ब्रह्य चितयंदिवेदिवे। 
इषं स्तोतृभ्यो वृजनेषु कारवे सनिं मेधामरिष्टं get 
सह॑: ॥ ७॥ 


ts Tam no data maruto vajinam ratha apanam 
brahma citayad divedive. Isam stotrbhyo vrjanesu 
karave sanim medhamaristam dustaram sahah. 


O Maruts, heroes dear as breath of life, give us 
that power and speed for our nation’s chariot, that wealth 
and vitality of life and that universal knowledge which 
may awaken and enlighten us day by day. Give us that 
food and energy for the admirers and celebrants in the 
yajnic programmes of development which is 


1018 RGVEDA 


inexhaustible, and, for the poet, singer, scientist, 
technologist and the architect of the human nation, bring 
ample reward of fulfilment, high intelligence, freedom 
from sin and ill-health and inviolable courage, patience, 
and fortitude. 


यद्युञ्जते मरुतो रुक्मवंश्चसोऽ श्वात्रथेषु भग आ सुदानवः | 
धेनुर्न शिश्वे स्वस॑रेषु पिन्वते जनाय रातह॑विषे मही- 
मिष॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yad yunjate maruto rukmavaksaso’s$van rathesu 
bhaga a sudanavah. Dhenurna Sisve svasaresu 
pinvate janaya ratahavise mahimisam. 


Maruts, leaders with heart of gold and brilliant 
person, generous givers of knowledge and advancement, 
as they yoke the power and horses to the chariots of the 
nation, and as success in progress and prosperity is 
achieved, then, every day for every home, like the 
mother cow overflowing with milk for the calf, they 
provide and augment ample food and freshness for high 
fulfilment of the people who give and have given their 
share of service and self-sacrifice in the national yajna. 


यो नो! मरुतो वृकतांति मर्त्यो रिपुर्दधे व॑सवो रक्ष॑ता Ra: | 
adaa तपुंषा चक्रियाभि तमव॑ रुद्रा अशसो हन्तना 
aa: eu 


9. Yo no maruto vrkatati martyo ripurdadhe vasavo 
raksata risah. Vartayata tapusa cakriyabhi 
tamava rudra asaso hantana vadhah . 


Whoever be the person who, like a wolfish thief 
or robber or deadly enemy, targets us with anger and 
torture, O Maruts, shelter home for all and universal 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1019 


saviours, protect us against the violence of the enemy. 
Whosoever raises the fatal weapon upon us, bind and 
seal him with punishment and circle him round with 
vigilance. O Rudras, scholars of the middle order, 
defenders of law and scourage of the lawless, hurt not, 
destroy not, those who are non-violent, peace loving 
and law abiding. 


चित्रं तद्वो मरुतो याम॑ चेकिते पृश्न्या यदूधरप्यापयो दुहुः | 
यद्वा निदे नव॑मानस्य रुद्रियास्तितं जराय जुर्‌ ताम- 
दाभ्याः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Citram tad vo maruto yama cekite prsnya yadu- 
dharapyapayo duhuh. Yad va nide navamad-nasya 
rudriyastritam jaraya juratamadabhyah. 


Maruts, defenders and pioneers of the social 
order, friends of humanity, wondrous is that yajnic 
exploit of yours so well known, when from heights of 
the skies and depths of the earth you churn out and distil 
the nectar of life which again, O friends of Rudra, lord 
of light and justice, and indomitable warriors, becomes 
a fatal antidote against the maligners of your celebrants 
and the weary weakness of the aging. 


तान्वो! महो ded waaral विष्णो रे षस्यं प्रभृथे ह वामहे | 
हिरंण्यवर्णानन्ककु हान्यतस्तरुचो ब्रह्मण्यन्तः शंस्यं राधं 
इमहे ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tan vo maho maruta evayavno visnoresasya 
prabhrthe havamahe. Hiranyavarnan kakuhan 
yatasruco brahmanyantah samsyam radha imahe. 


Such as you are, O great Maruts, who thus 
venture out to exploit the earth and the skies in search 


1020 RGVEDA 


of knowledge and life’s energy, we invoke and exhort 
you for the fulfilment of the omnipresent lord Vishnu’s 
love and desire for the progress and prosperity for his 
children. And thus do we, having raised our ladles of 
yajna as our share in our effort for piety, honour and 
prosperity, pray for the gifts of the Maruts, heroes of 
the golden hue great and, marvellous in their own right. 


ते दश॑ग्वाः प्रथमा यज्ञमंहिरे ते नो हिन्वन्तूषसो व्युष्टिषु | 
उषा न रापमीररुणैरपो्णुते महो ज्योतिषा शुचता गो- 
अर्णसा ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Te dasagvah prathama jajnambhire te no hinva- 
ntusaso vyustisu. Usa na ramir-arunair-apornute 
maho jyotisa Sucata goarnasa. 


They, the Maruts, masters of their mind and ten 
senses of perception and action, first in intelligence and 
imagination, organise the yajna and take it to success. 
May they, we pray, give us the clarion call with the light 
of the dawn, and, like the lady of light which removes 
the veil of darkness from over the restful night with 
radiant rays of the sun, may they, we pray, remove our 
veil of darkness and ignorance with the great and sacred 
light of the rising sun of divine knowledge. 


ते क्षोणीभिररुणेधिनग्िभीं रुद्रा ऋतस्य सदनेषु वावृधुः | 
निमेघ॑माना अत्येन पाज॑सा सुश्चन्द्र वर्णा" दधिरे सुपेर्श- 
सम्‌।॥ ९३॥ 7 

13. Te ksonibhir-arunebhir-nanjibhi rudra rtasya 
sadanesu vavrdhuh. Nimeghamana atyena pajasa 
suscandram varnam dadhire supeSasam. 


Those Rudras, stormy winds and roaring clouds, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1021 


tempestuous pioneers of humanity, leaders of science 
and knowledge, act and grow within the dynamics of 
the laws of nature alongwith the earths, planets and the 
atmosphere, with the golden light of dawn and the 
various beauties of nature, and, showering gifts of living 
energy and wearing the grace of the full moon and 
majesty of form, they grow and advance with the 
strength and speed of the brilliance of light. 


at इयानो महि वरूथमूतय उप घेदेना नम॑सा गृणीमसि | 
त्रितो न यान्पञ्च॒ होतुंनभिष्टय आववर्तदव॑राञ्चक्रिया- 
aan ९४॥ 


14. Tan iyano mahi varutham-utaya upa ghedena 
namasa grnimasi. Trito na yan panca hotrn- 
abhistaya avavartad-avaran-cakriyavase. 


Wanting a great home for the sake of safety, 
security and advancement, we praise and, with humble 
salutations, do homage to those great and noblest 
yajakas, 1.e., five pranic energies, which Trita, the man 
commander of those five yajakas, deploys for his safety, 
security and good fortune, since they are ever fresh, 
dynamic and ever on the move like a wheel in constant 
motion. 


यया रध्रं पारयथात्यंहो यया निदो मुञ्चथ॑ बन्दितार॑म्‌। 
अर्वाची सा म॑रुतो या व॑ं ऊतिरो षु वाश्रेव सुमतिर्जि- 
MAN ९५॥ 


15. Yaya radhram parayathatyanho yaya nido 
muncatha vanditaram. Arvaci sa maruto ya va 
utiro su vasreva sumatirjigatu. 


O Maruts, pioneering guides of humanity, divine 


1022 RGVEDA 


powers of knowledge and holy intelligence, that virtuous 
mind and power of protection by which you save the 
devotee from the taint of sin and let him cross the ocean, 
by which you save the celebrant from the calumny of 
maligners, may that power of protection, that noble 
intelligence, like a loving mother, come hither to me 
and bring me divine grace. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 35 
Apam-napat Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


उपेमसृक्षि वाजयुर्वचस्यां चनो दधीत नाद्यो गिरो मे। अपां 
नपादाशुहेमा कुवित्स सुपेशंसस्करति जोषिंषद्दि।॥ ९॥ 


Le Upemasrksi vajayurvacasyam cano dadhita 
nadyo giro me. Apam napadasuhema kuvit 
sa supesasaskarati josisaddhi. 


Close to the waters in search of food, energy, 
vitality and fast speed of action, I create this song related 
to water energy and subsequent water wealth. May these 
holy words of mine, loud and bold, flowing like a stream, 
be delightful and bear fruit and fulfilment. May that 
divine energy born of waters, instant and imperishable, 
be in accord with the holy voice and help us create many 
beautiful forms of life and various wealth for us. 


इमं स्व॑स्मै हृद आ ads at ares कुविदस्य वेद॑त्‌। 
अपां नपादसुर्यस्य महया विश्वान्यर्यो भुव॑ना जजान ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Imam svasmai hrda a sutastam mantram vocema 
kuvidasya vedat. Apam napad-asuryasya mahna 
visvanyaryo bhuvana jajana. 


Let us chant this mantra conscientiously created 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 35 1023 


and composed from depths of the heart in honour and 
celebration of this magnificent power. May the great 
lord of the wide world know of it. Indeed this mighty 
energy born of the waters, replete with wealth and 
power, with the great omnipotence of divine nature, 
creates the entire worlds of existence. 


समन्या यन्त्युप॑ यन्त्यन्याः Parade नद्यं: पृणन्ति | 
तमू शुचिं शुच॑यो दीदिवांसमपां नपातं परि तस्थुरापः ॥ ३ ॥ 


2: Samanya yantyupa yantyanyah samanamurvam 
nadyah prnanti. Tamu sucim Sucayo didivamsam- 
apam napatam pari tasthurapah. 


Some of these streams of water and currents of 
energy flow together. Some others flow close by them, 
and all of them together join and flow into the ocean to 
fullness. And these clear and purest streams of water 
and water energy all round abide by that pure, bright 
and blazing child of the waters, imperishable agni, fire 
and electric energy of the water power. (This mantra 
describes the dynamic circuit flow of energy and its 
imperishable form in the state of conservation.) 


तमस्मेरा युवतयो युर्वानं मर्मज्यमानाः a aed: | 
स शक्रिः शिक्व॑भी रेवदस्मे दीदायानिध्मो घुतनिं्णि- 
TET WS 
4. Tamasmera yuvatayo yuvanam marmrjyamanah 
pari yantyapah. Sa sukrebhih sikvabhi revadas- 
me didayanidhmo ghrtanirnigapsu. 
Just as young maidens in crystalline purity of 


body and mind and fragrant modesty anxiously yet 
bashfully approach the youthful man, feeding his fire 


1024 RGVEDA 


and receiving the shower of life and love, so do 
crystalline streams of water murmuring with exciting 
energy approach from all round that Apam-napat, fiery 
energy of the essence of waters, and he, overflowing 
with vitalising energy, fertilises their thirst for life and 
creativity. May that, the eternal elan vital distilled from 
waters by nature, bright and blazing like flames of fire 
fed with ghrta in yajna, shine on by itself in the waters 
of life for us. 


अस्मै तिस्त्रो अव्यथ्याय नारीर्दवाय॑ देवीर्दिंधिषन्त्यन्नम्‌। 
कृ्ताइवोप हि प्र सरसे अप्सु स पीयूषं धयति पूर्वसूनाम्‌।॥। ५ ॥ 


a: Asmai tisro avyathyaya narirdevaya devirdidhi- 
santyannam . Krta ivopa hi prasarsre apsu sa 
ptyusam dhayati purvasunam. 


For this Apam-napat, liquid and fiery energy of 
waters, brilliant, generous and inviolable divinity, three 
brilliant and generous streams of dynamic energy, Ila, 
Sarasvati, Mahi, eternal, universal and specific forms 
of divine energy, flow and bear food for his sustenance 
and growth. They move like young maidens 
approaching their man for the continuance of life and 
vital energy. They move on and on like three divinities, 
reflections of the divine will in the cosmic oceans of 
time and space, and he, the fiery creative energy, drinks 
the milk of life from the three motherly powers. 


अश्वस्यात्र जनिमास्य च elder रिषः संपृच॑: पाहि सूरीन्‌। 
आमासु पूर्षु परो अप्रमृष्यं नारातयो वि न॑ान्नानु तानि ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Asvasyatra janimasya ca svardruho risah sampr- 
cah pahi surin. Amasu pursu paro apramrsyam 
nardatayo vi nasannanrtani. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 35 1025 


In the dynamics of water, fire and vital energy 
lies the source of virility, fertility and generation of the 
species. Herein lies the source of pleasure and happiness. 
O brilliant lord of generosity, protect the good and the 
pious people from the hateful, violent and destructive 
associates and encounters. It is perfect, beyond all stages 
short of ripeness in nature. Nothing false, opposed or 
negative can pollute or destroy it. 


स्व आ दमे सुदुघा यस्य॑ धेनुः स्वधां पीपाय सुभ्वन्नमत्ति | 
सो अपां नर्पादृजंयंन्नप्स्वप न्तर्व"सुदेयाय विधते वि 
भाति ॥ ७॥ 


7. Sva a dame sudugha yasya dhenuh svadham 
pipaya subhvannamatti. So apam napadurjayann- 
apsvantar-vasudeyaya vidhate vi bhati. 


He whose home is blest with a fertile cow, 
abundant holy speech in communication, and noble 
knowledge, drinks holy water and eats consecrated food. 
He, inviolable in pranic energies, enveloped in the folds 
of nature’s vitalities is ‘apam-napat’, as such he grows 
for the sake of the generous man of charity, wields power 
and prosperity, and shines with might and majesty. 


यो अप्स्वा शुचिना दैव्येन ऋतावाजस्र उर्विया विभाति। 

तया इदन्या भुव॑नान्यस्य प्रजायन्ते वीरुधश्च प्रजाभिः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yo apsva $Sucina daivyena rtavdjasra urviya 

vibhati. Vaya idanya bhuvananyasya pra jayante 
virudhasca prajabhih. 

Abiding in the holy waters of nature’s liquid 


bounty, dedicated to nature’s law and blest with her 
consecrating power, vast and constant with the earth, 


1026 RGVEDA 


he shines with immaculate purity of character and the 
majesty of light divine. The other regions of the world 
are like the branches of his family tree where, too, 
further, grow the trees with their own farther branches. 


अपां नपादा हयस्थादुपस्थं framigest विद्युतं वसानः | 
तस्य ज्येष्ठं महिमानं वहन्तीर्हिर॑ण्यवणां: परि यन्ति 
यह्वीः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Apam napada hyasthadupastham jihmanamur- 
dhvo vidyutam vasanah . Tasya jyestham mahima- 
nam vahantir-hiranyavarnah pari yanti yahvih. 


Apam-napat, essential energy born of the waters 
of space, wearing the mantle of lightning power, 
electricity, abides close above the wavy and curvy 
motions of the clouds. And streams of energy, wearing 
the lustre of gold, carrying its highest power, flow all 
round. 


faves: स हिर॑ण्यसन्दूगपां नपात्सेदु हिरण्यवर्णः | 
हिरण्ययात्परि योनेर्निषद्या हिरण्यदा द॑दत्यन्नमस्मै 1 ९०॥ 


10. Hiranyarupah sa hiranyasamdrg-apam napat 
sedu hiranyavarnah. Hiranyayat pari yonerni- 
sadya hiranyada dadatyannam-asmai. 

Golden of form, Apam-napat, the child of 
waters, golden eyed revealing its gold, golden coloured, 
abides higher than the golden seat of its origin, and the 
golden feeder energies of physical existence provide 
the food for its growth. 


तदस्यानीकमुत चारु नामापीच्यं वर्धते नसुर पाम्‌ | 
यमिन्धते युवतयः समित्था हिर॑ण्यवर्णं घृतमन्न॑मस्य It ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 35 1027 


11. TYadasyanikamuta caru namapicyam vardhate 
napturapam. Yamindhate yuvatayah samittha 
hiranyavarnam ghrtamannamasya. 


That lustrous power of this child of the waters 
and its essential name arising from its innate properties 
is beautiful, and it grows while the youthful maidens 
raise it in its golden glory like the flames of fire with 
ghrta, ghrta being its favourite food. 


अस्मै ब॑हूनाम॑वमाय सख्ये यज्ञर्विंधेम नम॑सा हविर्भिः 1 
सं सानु मारि दिधिषामि बिल्पैर्दधाम्यन्नैः परिं वन्द 
ऋग्भिः ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Asmai bahunam-avamaya sakhye yajnair- 
vidhema namasa havirbhih. Sam sanu marjmi 
didhisami bilmair-dhamyannaih pari vanda 
rgbhih. 


We serve this Apam-napat, golden energy, with 
yajnas and feed it with food and sacrifices in the midst 
of many powers of nature for the good of our closest 
friends. I refine it in the vedi, sustain it by degrees with 
fuel, feed it with food and sacrifices and celebrate it 
with exalting songs of Rks. 


स ई वृर्षाजनयत्तासु गर्भ स ई शिशुर्धयति तं रिहन्ति। सो 
अपां नपादन॑भिम्तातवर्णोऽ न्यस्येवेह तन्वां विवेष ।॥। ९३ ॥ 

13. Saimvrsdajanayat tasu garbham sa im Sisurdha- 
yati tam rihanti. So apam napad-anabhimlata- 
varno ’nyasyeveha tanva vivesa. 


That potent and generous Apam-napat, vital heat 
of life, creates the fetus in the waters. The same baby 


1028 RGVEDA 


sucks the same vitality of the waters. The same water 
energies then kiss and caress the baby. The same, then, 
in bright, unfaded effulgence shines in the youthful body 
as it shines in other body forms too. 


अस्मिन्पदे प॑र॒मे त॑स्थिवांस॑मध्वस्मभिवर्विंश्वहां difearay । 
आपो नप्त्रे घृतमन्नं वहन्तीः स्वयमत्कै : परि दीयन्ति 
यह्वीः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. = 45777777 pade parame tasthivamsam-adhvasma- 
bhir-visvaha didivamsam . Apo naptre ghrtama- 
nnam vahantth svayamatkaih pari diyanti yahvih. 


Mighty streams of cosmic energy, with their own 
imperishable velocity, flow all round bearing ghrta and 
anna-food for their grand child, Apam-napat, abiding 
all-time effulgent in this highest state of existence. 


अयांसमग्ने सुक्चितिं जनायायांसमु मघवंद््रयः सुवृक्तिम्‌। 
विश्वं तद्भद्रं यदव॑न्ति देवा बृहद्वदेम विदथे सुवीराः ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Ayamsamagne_ suksitim janayayamsamu 
maghavadbhyah suvrktim. Visvam tad bhadram 
yadavanti deva brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Agni, vital spirit of life in existence, I pray, may 
I attain a blessed home for the people. May I receive a 
glorious hymn of divine worship for our people of power 
and honour from our poets of power and imagination. 
May we attain all that good and glory which Devas 
protect and promote. And may we, blest with the brave, 
sing songs of Divinity in our yajnic projects. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 36 1029 


Mandala 2/Sukta 36 


Indra-madhu, Maruts-madhava, Tvashta-shukra, Agni- 
shuchi, Indra-nabha, Mitra- Varuna nabhasya Devatah, 
Grtsamada Rshi 


तुभ्यं हिन्वानो व॑सिष्ट गा अपोऽधुक्षन्त्सीमविंधिरद्विधिर्नरः। 
पिबेन्द्र स्वाहा प्रहुतं वष॑ट्कृतं होत्रादा सोमं प्रथमो य 


ईशिषे ।॥। ९॥ 


१. Tubhyam hinvano vasista ga apo’dhuksantsimavi- 
bhir-adribhir-narah. Pibendra svaha prahutam 
vasatkrtam hotrada somam prathamo ya 7574९. 


Indra, yajnapati, first and prime power who rule 
the world, let the person invoking you and rising in life 
settle down in peace and security for your sake. May 
the people like children of Aditi, mother Earth, receive 
the best of cows, lands and the holy Word and the best 
of water and energy with protective showers of the 
clouds. Indra, drink up the libations of soma, offered 
with dedication with the words ‘Svaha’ and ‘vashat’ 
from our yajna. 


यज्ञैः diver: पृष॑तीभिऋष्टिभिर्यामंज्छु भ्रासो! अच्जिषु 
प्रिया sai आसद्या बर्हिर्भरतस्य सूनवः पोत्रादा सोमं 
पिबता दिवो नरः॥ २॥ 


2. Yajnaih sammislah prsatibhir-rstibhir-yaman- 
chubhraso afijisu priya uta. Asadya barhir- 
bharatasya sunavah potrada somam pibata divo 
narah . 


Maruts, children of the Lord sustainer of the 
world, powers natural and divine, leaders of humanity 
united by yajna, moving by the right path at the right 


1030 RGVEDA 


time by speed of the winds, creating and achieving the 
objects of desire, crystalline pure and lovely in colours of 
beauty, seating yourselves on the holy grass of the vedi, 
drink the soma distilled from the purest light of heaven. 


sma नः सुहवा आ हि गन्त॑न नि बर्हिषि सदतना रणिष्टन | 
अथा मन्दस्व जुजुषाणो अन्ध॑सस्त्व्टर्दवेधिर्जनिधिः 
सुमद्रणः॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Ameva nah suhava @ hi gantana ni barhisi sada- 
tana ranistana. Atha mandasva jujusano andha- 
sastvastar-devebhirjanibhih sumadga-nah . 


Maruts, invoked and invited with love and 
respect, come to us as to your own home, ride the skies 
and raise the voice of victory. Tvashta, lord maker of 
forms and institutions, leader of the republics, 
commanding high intelligence and wisdom, come with 
the brilliant creators and experts of production, taste 
the sweets of our yajnic food and celebrate the victory 
with us. 


आ afar ear इह विप्र afat चोरन्हो तर्नं var arg 
fag afd वीहि wield सोम्यं मधु पिवाग्रीधात्तवं भागस्यं 
तुप्णुहि ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. A vaksi devan iha vipra yaksi cosan hotarni sada 
yonisu trisu. Prati vthi prasthitam somyam madhu 
pibagnidhrat tava bhagasya trpnuhi. 


Agni, ‘vipra’, brilliant lord of the dynamics of 
nature and human society, speak of the laws of nature 
and psycho-social dynamics and inaugurate and direct 
the yajna of creation and production here. Inspired and 
passionate for holy action, be seated on the vedi, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 36 1031 


establish yourself in the three fields of earth, sky and 
space and be sure and specific on description, 
application and valuation of knowledge human and 
divine with prayer and gratitude to the Lord Omniscient. 
Achieve the planned targets of blissful creativity and 
development, taste the sweets of yajnic success and be 
happy that you have played your part of life’s action for 
your people. 


एष स्य ते तन्वो नृम्णवर्धनः सह ओजः प्रदिवि area: 1 
तुभ्यं सुतो म॑घवन्तुभ्यमाभूंतस्त्वमंस्य ब्राह्मणादा qu- 
Feta ५॥ 


5, Esa sya te tanvo nrmnavardhanah saha ojah 
pradivi bahvorhitah. Tubhyam suto maghavan 
tubhyamabhrtas-tvamasya brahmanada trpat 
piba. 


Indra, lord of wealth and power, ruler of the 
world, this soma is such that it would strengthen and 
augment the wealth and power of your body and soul. 
It is the very patience and fortitude and the lustre of 
your personality, as broad and clear as daylight, collected 
and consecrated in your very arms. It is distilled, 
seasoned, preserved and served for you only. Drink of 
it as a gift from the Brahmana, expert of science and 
bio-technology, and be happy. 


जुषेथां यज्ञं बोध॑तं हवस्य मे सत्तो होता निविदः yeat 
अनुं । अच्छा राजाना नम॑ एत्यावृतं प्रशास्त्रादा पिबतं सोम्यं 
meg ॥ 

6. Jusetham yajnam bodhatam havasya me satto 


hota nividah purvya anu. Accha rajana nama 
etyavr-tam praSsastrada pibatam somyam madhu. 


1032 RGVEDA 


O brilliant Mitra and Varuna, friendly lord of 
the rule of law, administrators and people of the earth, 
join and participate in my yajna for the nation in honour 
of the Lord. Listen and appreciate the revealing voices 
of knowledge gifted by the saints and scholars old and 
new. Just as the yajaka seated and established in yajnic 
acts of creation and development receives the gifts of 
food and sustenance from yajna well-preserved, so you 
too receive the gifts of peace and prosperity from the 
scholars of Shastras and enjoy the honey sweets of the 
good life. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 37 
Dravinoda, Ashvins, Agni Devatah, Grtsamada Rshi 


मन्द॑स्व होत्रादनु जोषमन्धसोऽध्वर्यवः स पूर्णा व॑छ्या- 
सिच॑म्‌। तस्मा एतं भ॑रत agent ददिदोत्रिात्सोमं द्रविणोदः 
foal ऋतुभिः ।॥ ९॥ 


Es Mandasva hotradanu josamandhaso’dhvar-yavah 
sa purnam vastyasicam. Tasma etam bharata 
tadvaso dadirhotrat somam dravino-dah piba 
rtubhih. 


O lord giver beatific, rejoice and thrive on the 
food of libations to your heart’s desire. O yajakas, he 
loves the libations, full and profuse, offered with love 
in faith. Bear this sacred ‘havi’ and offer it liberally to 
him. He is loving and kind, eagerly awaiting the offering, 
and he is the abundant giver. O lord giver of the wealth 
of existence, drink up the fragrant soma from the fire of 
yajna in accordance with the seasons. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 37 1033 


यमु पूर्वमहुवे तमिदं ea सेदु coal ददिर्यो नाम पत्य॑ते। 
stead fur: प्रस्थितं सोम्यं मधुं पोत्रात्सोमं द्रविणोदः पिबं 
ऋतुभिः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yamu purvamahuve tamidam huve sedu havyo 
dadiryo nama patyate. Adhvaryubhih prasthitam 
somyam madhu potrat somam dravinodah piba 
rtubhih. 


Whom I ever invoke and worship, him alone I 
invoke and serve and worship now. He alone is the giver, 
he alone is the master, he alone is the ruler, he alone for 
sure is the lord worthy of invocation, invitation, service, 
yajna and worship. O lord giver of the wealth of life, 
abundant and infinite, receive and drink this honey sweet 
of soma prepared and refined by the loving, faithful 
and non-violent priests according to the seasons. Take 
it from the sacred cup and drink to your heart’s desire. 


मेद्य॑न्तु ते बह्वयो येथिरीयसेऽ रिंषण्यन्वीव्ठयस्वा वनस्पते | 
आयूया धृष्णो अधिगर्यां त्वं नेष्टात्सोमं द्रविणोदः fra 
ऋतुभिः ॥ २॥ 


3. Medyantu te vahnayo yebhiriyase’riganyan vila- 
yasva vanaspate. Ayuya dhrsno abhigurya tvam 
nestrat somam dravinodah piba rtubhih. 


May they be happy and may they prosper with 
whom you go, whom you support, who bear your 
burdens and carry forward your programmes for you. 
O lord controller of light and growth, wanting nothing 
for yourself and hurting none, be strong and firm, make 
your devotees strong and firm. Joining all, acting all 
round, lustrous, intrepidable and inviolable, please to 


1034 RGVEDA 


accept the soma yajna of all seasons from the hand of 
the yajakas, drink and rejoice with love and for 
beneficence. 


अ्पाद्दोत्रादुत पोत्राद॑मत्तोत Aste जुषत प्रयो हितम्‌ । तुरीयं 
पात्रममरक्तममंर्त्य द्रविणोदाः पिबतु द्राविणोदसः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Apaddhotraduta potrad-amattota ntestrad- 
ajusata prayo hitam. Turtyam patram-amrktam- 
amartyam dravinodah pibatu dravinodasah. 


May the lord giver receive the food brought by 
the yajaka and offered from the ladle and the vedi and 
may the lord relish and rejoice and shower the yajaka 
with love. And may the lord giver of wealth and bliss 
bless the yajaka’s fourth estate of existence and protect 
his bowl of bliss unhurt and immortal. 


अर्वाञ्चंमद्य यय्यं Jere ut रथं युञ्जाथामिह at विमोच॑नम्‌। 
Us हवींषि मधुना हि कं गतमथा सोमं पिबतं वाजिनी- 
TING 


> Arvancam-adya yayyam nrvahanam ratham 
yunjathamiha vam vimocanam. Prnktam havimsi 
madhuna hi kam gatamatha somam pibatam 
vajinivasu . 

Ashvins, agents of nature for the lord of 
omnipotence, leaders of humanity and pioneers of peace 
and prosperity for the people, start your chariot and 
direct it hitherward to us, the chariot which transports 
you to our yajna and takes us to the land of freedom 
and bliss. Come to the land of joy, season our havi with 
honey, and drink the soma of immortal bliss. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 38 1035 


जोष्यग्ने समिधं जोष्याहृतिं जोषि ब्रह्म जन्यं जोषि सुष्टुतिम्‌ | 
विश्वेभिर्विश्वौ ऋतुना वसो मह उशन्देवां Sera: पायया 
हविः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Josyagne samidham josyahutim 1047 brahma 
jJanyam josi sustutim. Visvebhir-visvan rtuna vaso 
maha usan devan uSsatah payaya havih. 


Agni, lord of light, leader of humanity, giver of 
life’s vitality, accept the fuel offered, receive the havi 
offered in oblations, accept the creative chant of holy 
mantras, accept the praise and prayer. With all the 
powers of nature, serve the generous divinities. Lord 
giver of haven and home and the wealth of life, great, 
happy and rejoicing, yourself eager for the food of yajna 
and excitement, let all other great divinities, eager for 
food and fulfilment, receive and enjoy the offerings 
according to the seasons. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 38 
Savita Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


उदु ष्य देवः सविता सवाय शश्वत्तमं तद॑पा afarearc | 
नूनं देवेभ्यो वि हि धाति रल्नमथाभंजदीतिहोत्रं स्वस्तौ ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Udu sya devah savita savaya SasSvattamam tadapa 
vahnirasthat. Nunam devabhyo vi hi dhati 
ratnamathabhajad vitihotram svastau. 


That self-refulgent lord Savita, creator and 
inspirer of the universe, omnipotent lord of action, holds, 
rules and sustains the universe and abides supreme over 
the eternal Prakrti. Indeed, he alone wields, orders and 
sustains the magnificent universe for the sake of living 
beings and carries on the sacred yajna of creation for 


1036 RGVEDA 
the well-being of all. 


विश्व॑स्य fe sea देव ऊर्ध्वः प्र बाहवा पृथुरपाणिः सिसंतिं। 
आप॑श्चिदस्य aa आ faut अयं चिद्धातों रमते 
परिज्मन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Visvasya hi Srustaye deva urdhvah pra bahava 
prthupanih sisarti. Apascidasya vrata ठ nimrgra 
ayam cid vato ramate parijman. 


For the good of the world alone the generous 
and self-refulgent lord Savita of long and mighty arms 
abides over all and extends his rays of light across the 
spaces. The waters too, pure and purifying, flow within 
his rule of law, and so do the winds play around every 
where under the same law. 


आशुभिंश्चिद्यान्वि सुंचाति नूनमरीरमदत॑ंमानं चिदेतोः | 
अह्यर्षूणां चिल््य॑यां अविष्यामनु ad स॑वितुर्मोक्या- 
गात्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


A ASsubhiscidyan vi mucati nunam-ariramad- 
atamanam cidetoh. Ahyarsunam cinnyayan 
avisyamanu vratam saviturmokyagat. 


Savita, lord of light, the Sun, with its radiant 
rays releases the moving planets from the shadow of 
another planet as it removes the shadow of darkness 
and causes the planet to shine. And for the sake of 
protection it also controls the movement of the winds 
coming to the clouds as also other serpentine movements 
either freakish or destructive. Thus the night and release 
from darkness comes according to the rule and 
movement of the Sun’s light, and that is the divine law. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 38 1037 


पुनः सम॑व्यद्धित॑तं वय॑न्ती मध्या कर्तोन्यधाच्छक्य धीरः । 
उत्संहायांस्थाद्‌ व्युधैतरंदर्धररम॑तिः सविता देव आगात्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Punah samavyad vitatam vayanti madhya kartor- 
nyadhac-chakma dhirah. Ut samhayas-thad 
vyrtunradardhar-aramatih savita deva agat. 


The earth, traversing the wide wide space, 
revolves again and again in orbit in the solar region 
wielding her force and power to do the rounds assigned 
to her, and, leaving one place, moving on, comes back 
to the same and remains stable in the orbit. The constant 
and sleepless lord Savita, the Sun, self-refulgent and 
divine, creates the seasons of the year in the distinct 
order. 


नानौकांसि दुर्यो विश्वमायुर्विं तिं्ते प्रभवः शोको! अग्नेः | 
ज्येष्ठं माता सूनवे भागमाधादन्व॑स्य केत॑मिषितं सवित्रा ॥ ५ ॥ 


9 Nanaukamsi duryo visamayurvi tisthate prabha- 
vah soko agneh. Jyestham mata sunave bhaga- 
madhadanvasya ketamisitam savitra. 


Many are the forms and abodes of life, many 
doors, exits and entrances, where universal life abides, 
the light and life of Agni, the birth and death of the 
flame, the lustre, the desire and passion of the will divine 
to live and to be. The mother bears the highest share of 
it for the son, the flower in bloom inspired by Savita, 
father creator in accordance with his law of existence. 


समाववर्ति विषितो जिगीषुर्विश्वेषां कामणश्चर॑ताममाभूंत्‌। 
श्वं अपो विकुतं हित्व्यागादनुं ad स॑वितुर्दैव्य॑स्य।॥ ६ ॥ 


1038 RGVEDA 


6. Samavavarti visthito jigisur-visvesam kamas- 
caratamamabhut. Sasvan apo vikrtam hitvya- 
gadanu vratam saviturdaivyasya. 


Happy is the man who is well settled in the 
home, prays for the well-being of all living beings and 
is fast and eager to win the battles of life. Such a man 
shuns all crooked ways of living and keeps to the pious 
ways of living in accordance with the laws and discipline 
of the brilliant and generous lord Savita, creator and 
ruler of the world. 


त्वया हितमप्यमप्सु भागं धन्वान्वा म्र॑गयसो वि dey: 1 
वर्नानि विभ्यो नकिरस्य तानिं व्रता देवस्य सवितुर्मि- 
aia ७॥ 


de Tvaya hitamapyamapsu bhagam dhanvanva 
mrgayaso vi tasthuh. Vanani vibhyo nakirasya 
tani vrata devasya saviturminanti. 


O lord creator and ruler of existence, by you is 
created and provided life-giving energy in the waters. 
By you is created the sky, by you the forests, for the 
birds and the deer to fly, to roam and play. Those rules 
and laws of divine Savita they never violate, who can? 
No one does. 


याद्राध्यं वरुणो योनिमप्यमनिंशितं निमिषि जर्भराणः। 
विश्वो! मार्ताण्डो व्रजमा पशुगीत्स्थशो जन्मानि सविता 
व्याक॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yadradhyam varuno yonim-apyam-anisitam 
nimisi jarbhuranah . Visvo martando vrajama 
pasurgat sthaso janmani savita vyakah. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 38 1039 


Savita, lord creator of the universe, sustaining 
it in the succession of moments in the time continuum, 
creates various forms for various births of the souls 
according to their state of karma, and the same lord as 
Varuna, lord of love and justice, assigns the form desired 
and deserved by the soul the moment its eye is closed 
on death. Thus do all living beings under the sun come 
back to their ultimate home from where they had gone 
out on their existential journey. 


न यस्येन्द्रो वरुणो न पित्रो व्रतमर्यमा न पिनन्ति सुद्रः। 
नारातयस्तमिदं स्वस्ति हुवे देवं सवितारं नमोभिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


४. Na yasendro varuno na mitro vratamaryama na 
minanti rudrah. Nardatayas-tamidam svasti 
huve devam savitaram namobhih. 


None can violate, nor circumvent the law and 
justice of Savita, Supreme Lord Creator: Neither Indra, 
the sun and cosmic electric force, nor Varuna, the waters, 
nor Mitra, the winds, nor Aryama, life breath of air, nor 
even Rudra, the soul by itself or in alliance with any 
power of nature, no enemies, that is, any imaginable 
counter forces can violate the divine law. This Lord 
Savita, for well-being and salvation, do I invoke with 
homage and salutations. Self-refulgent is He, generous 
and gracious. 


भगं धियं वाजयन्तः पुरन्धिं नराशंसो ग्रास्पतिं्नो अव्याः। 
आये वामस्य॑ aga tatu प्रिया देवस्य सवितुः 
स्याम॥९०॥ 

10. Bhagam dhiyam vajayantah purandhim nara- 
Samso gnaspatirno avyah. Aye vamasya sangathe 
rayinam priya devasya savituh syama. 


1040 RGVEDA 


Glorious is Savita, worthy of thought and 
meditation, sustainer of the universe, celebrated by 
humanity, lord protector of all. We know the lord and 
do homage to Him with prayer, submission and yajna, 
and we earnestly wish that in our battles of life and in 
our success in the achievement of the wealth of life we 
may ever be blest with His love and grace. 


अस्मभ्यं तददिवो अद्रयः पुंथिव्यास्त्वयां ठत्त काम्यं राध 
आ गात्‌। शं यत्स्तोत॒भ्य॑ आपये भर्वात्युरुशंसाय सवितर्ज- 
Ran ९९॥ 


11. Asmabhyam tad divo adbhyah prthivyastvaya 
dattam kamyam radha व gat. Sam yat stotrbhya 
apaye bhavatyurusamsaya savitarjaritre. 

O Lord, whatever wealth has been given to us 
by you from the regions of light and the enlightened 
people, from the waters and the generous people, from 
the earth and motherly figures, whatever desired be 
achieved, may all that be good and blissful for the 
celebrants, the learned, the praiseworthy and, O Lord 
Savita, for the worshipful. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 39 
Ashvinau Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 
ग्रार्वाणेव तदिदर्थ' जरेथे Wa gat निंधिमन्तमच्छं। 
ब्रह्मणैव विदथ उक्थशासा दूतेव हव्या जन्यां पुरुत्रा ॥ ९ ॥ 


ily Gravaneva tadidartham jarethe grdhreva vrksam 
nidhimantamaccha. Brahmaneva vidatha uktha- 
Sasa duteva havya janya purutra. 


Ashvins, harbingers of life’s heat and light, 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 39 1041 


breath of being and energy, spirit of passion and action, 
complementary currents of the circuit of existence, you 
approach the earth like two clouds of rain to augment 
her wealth. You come like two eager birds and sit on 
the tree of life laden with fruit to enjoy yourselves to 
the full. In the yajna of development, you are two priests 
who chant the hymns of celebration and prayer. And in 
life in general, you are like two welcome harbingers 
who create and help us create the abundance of earth. 


प्रातयर्वाणा रथ्येव वीराऽजेवं यमा वरमा dearer | 
मेनेंडव तन्वा ई शुम्भ॑माने दम्प॑तीव क्रतुविदा जनेषु ।॥ २ ॥ 


2 Prataryavana rathyeva vira’jeva yama varama 
sacethe. Mene iva tanva Sumbhamane dampativa 
kratuvida janesu. 


You come like two heroic warriors of the chariot 
in the morning. You join us like two leaders of the flock 
to lead us on in the right direction. You descend like 
two fairies of celestial form full of bliss. And you are 
like a wedded couple who know their sacred obligations 
among the people. 


ssa नः प्रथमा ग॑न्तमर्वक्छिफाविंव जर्भुराणा तरोभिः। 
चक्रवाकेव प्रति वस्तोरुस्नाऽ्बाञ्चा यातं रथ्येव 
ाक्रा॥३॥ 

3 Srngeva nah prathama gantamarvak chaphaviva 


jJarbhurana tarobhih. Cakravakeva prati vasto- 
rusra’rvanca yatam rathyeva ईवत. 


You come first and foremost for us like horns 
of defence, like bright war horses panting for action, 


1042 RGVEDA 


with strength and patience for victory, like the 
chakravaka bird couple which are harbingers of light 
and love every morning. Thus mighty and powerful, 
you move and lead us forward like the pioneers of battle. 


ada नः पारयतं युगेव नभ्येव न उपधीव प्रधीवं । श्वानेव 
नो अरिषण्या तनूनां खृग॑लेव विस्रस: पातमस्मान्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Naveva nah parayatam yugeva nabhyeva na 
upadhiva pradhiva. Svaneva no arisanya tanunam 
khrgaleva visrasah patamasman. 


Take us across like a boat, like two chariot 
horses; hold us strong and stable like the nave, the axle 
and the chassis of the chariot; keep us wide awake like 
watch dogs for the safety of our body and society and, 
like the coat of mail, save us from falling down battered 
and broken. 


वातेवाजुर्या नद्यव रीतिरक्षी इव चक्षुषा यातमर्वाक्‌ । 
हस्ताविव तन्वे शंभ॑विष्ठा पादेव नो नयतं वस्यो 
अच्छ ॥। ५५ ॥ 

2: Vatevajurya nadyeva ritiraksi iva caksusa yata- 
marvak. Hastaviva tanve sambhavistha padeva 
no nayatam vasyo accha. 


Unaging like winds, ever flowing like river 
waters, watchful as with open eyes, come upfront and, 
like the hands giving protection and security to the body, 
and like the feet, take us forward to the holy wealth of 
life. 

ओष्ठाविव मध्वास्त्रे वद॑न्ता स्तनाविव पिप्यतं जीवसे नः। 
नासेव नस्तन्वो रश्चितारा कणीविव सुश्रुता भूतमस्मे ॥ & ॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 39 1043 


6. Osthaviva madhvasne vadanta stanaviva pipya- 
tam jivase nah. Naseva nastanvo raksitara karna- 
viva susruta bhutamasme. 


Like the lips, speaking honey sweet for the 
mouth, help us to be sweet. Like the mother’s breast, 
nourish and sustain us to live. Like the nostrils, sustain 
our body with the breath of life. And like the ears, be 
listeners for us to give us the voice divine. 


peda शक्तिमभि d-adt नः क्षामेव नः सम॑जतं रजांसि। 
इमा गिरो अश्विना युष्पयन्तीः श््णोत्रेणेव स्वधितिं सं 
शिंशीतम्‌॥ ७॥ 


de Hasteva saktimabhi samdadi nah ksameva nah 
samajatam rajamsi. Ima giro asvina yusmayan- 
0/1 ksnotreneva svadhitim sam Sisitam. 


Like the arms, give us noble strength. Like the 
earth, give us wide spaces for expansion. These words, 
O Ashvins, addressed to you, may, like a whetstone, 
energise and sharpen our communication and raise it to 
the voice of thunder. 


एतानि वामश्विना वर्धनानि ब्रह्य स्तोमं गृत्समदासो Ser | 
तानिं नरा जुजुषाणोप॑ यातं बृहद्वदेम विदथं सुवीराः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Etani vamasvina vardhanani brahma stomam 
grtsamadaso akran. Tani nara jujusanopa yatam 
brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


These words of homage, this holy song of 
celebration, the seekers of life’s joy and excitement offer 
to you. Ashvins, O leaders of humanity, accept these 
with love and grace, and come to bless us so that, blest 
with the brave, we speak and celebrate you highly and 


1044 RGVEDA 


advance far ahead in our projects of life. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 40 
Soma, Pusha and Aditi Devatah, Grtsamada Rshi 


सोमापूषणा जन॑ना रयीणां जन॑ना दिवो जन॑ना पृथिव्याः 1 
जातौ विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य गोपौ देवा अकृण्वन्नमृतस्य 
नाभिम्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Somapusana janana rayinam janana divo janana 
prthivyah. Jatau visvasya bhuvanasya gopau deva 
akrnvannamrtasya nabhim. 


Soma and Pusha, universal energies of peace 
and stability and nourishment and growth, are creators 
of all forms of wealth, creators of light and creators of 
earth. Born as complementary powers, they are 
protectors of the entire universe. O Devas, divinities of 
nature, scholars and leaders, feed, know and reveal this 
creative centre and power of immortality. 


इमौ देवौ जाय॑मानौ जुषन्तेमौ तमांसि गृहतामजुंष्टा । 
आभ्यामिन्द्रः पक्वमामास्वन्तः सोमापूषभ्यां जनदुस्ति- 
यासु ॥२॥ 


2. Imau devau jayamanau jusantemau tamamsi 
guhatamajusta. Abhyamindrah pakvamama- 
svantah somapusabhyam janadusriyasu. 


All divinities of nature serve and feed these two 
powers ever since they come into existence. Together, 
these two, Soma and Pusha, like the moon and the herbs, 
dispel the disagreeable forces of darkness and ignorance. 
With the same two, Indra, the Sun, nature’s power of 
light and energy, creates the generative maturity and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 40 1045 


ripeness in the developing fields of generation such as 
earth, cows and women. 


सोमापूषणा रज॑सो विमानं सप्तचक्रं रथमविंश्वमिन्वम्‌। 
विषूवृतं मन॑सा युज्यमानं तं जिन्वथो वृषणा पञ्च॑ - 
रश्मिम्‌॥ ३॥ 


2: Somapusana rajaso vimanam saptacakram 
rathamavisvaminvam. Visuvrtam manasa 
yujyamanam tam jinvatho vrsana pancarasmim . 


Soma and Pusha, fire and air, all-invigorating 
powers, create, animate and refresh that aerial chariot 
with seven chakras (circles and centres of energy) and 
five controls for the people it traverses the spaces and 
goes all over in all directions but is not perceived 
everywhere and it can be controlled with the mind. 


दिव्यवैन्यः सद॑नं चक्र उच्या परंथिव्यामन्यो अध्यन्तरिश्चे। 
तावस्मभ्यं पुरुवारं पुरुक्षुं रायस्पोषं वि ष्य॑तां नाभि 
मस्मे ॥ ४॥ 


4. Divyanyah sadanam cakra ucca prthivyamanyo 
adhyantarikse. Tavasmabyam puruvaram 
puruksum rayasposam vi syatam nabhimasme . 


One of them as sun has made his home high up 
in heaven, the other on the earth and over in the sky as 
generative heat and electric energy. May the two create 
for us wealth and growth loved and admired universally, 
and may they strengthen the natural bond between 
themselves and us like the natal cord between mother 
and child. 


1046 RGVEDA 


विश्वान्यन्यो भुव॑ना जजान विश्व॑मन्यो sitfirerertor wher 
सोमापूषणाववतं धियं मे युवाभ्यां विश्वाः पृत॑ना 
जयेम ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Visvanyanyo bhuvana jajana visvamanyo abhi- 
caksana eti. Somapusanavavatam dhiyam me 
yuvabhyam visvah prtana jayema. 


One of them creates the entire worlds of 
existence, and the other goes on and on watching the 
world and watched and admired by the world. O Soma 
and Pusha, I pray, protect and promote my intelligence. 
We pray that with the help and kindness of both of you 
we may help and promote the entire humanity and win 
the battles of life. 


धियं पूषा जिन्वतु विश्वमिन्वो र॒यिं सोमो! रयिपतिर्दधातु | 
अवंतु देव्यदितिरनर्वा बृहद्वदेम विदथं सुवीराः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Dhiyam pusa jinvatu visvaminvo rayim somo 
rayipatirdadhatu. Avatu devyaditiranarva brhad 
vadema vidathe suvirah. 


May Pusha, all-pervading spirit of growth and 
refinement, inspire our will and intelligence. May Soma, 
lord of wealth, bless us with wealth. May mother Aditi, 
divine intelligence, moving in unseen currents, inspire 
our intelligence. And may we, blest with brave warriors 
and noble children, sing ecstatic songs of thanks and 
praise in celebration of Soma and Pusha. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1047 


Mandala 2/Sukta 41 
Vayu, Indra-Vayu, Mitra- Varuna, Ashvins, Indra, 
Vishvedeva, Sarasvati, Dyava-Prthivi, or Havirdhane 
Devatah, Grtsamada Rshi 


वायो ये तें सहस्रिणो रथासस्तेभिरा ग॑हि । 
नियुत्वान्त्सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९॥ 


I, Vayo ye te sahasrino rathasastebhira gahi. 
Niyutvantsomapitaye. 


Vayu, tempestuous power of divine nature, 
intelligence of the learned, commanding a thousand 
chariots and laws of motion, come with all those powers 
and laws to drink of the soma of life’s joy. 


नियुत्वान्वायवा ग॑ह्ययं शुक्रो अयामि ते। 
गन्तासि सुन्वतो गृहम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Niyutvan vayava gahyayam sukro ayami te. 
Gantasi sunvato grham. 


Vayu, scholar of the dynamics of the winds, self- 
controlled with your disciplined mind and senses, drying 
up the mists of ignorance and confusion with the brilliant 
light of knowledge, come to the brilliant light of 
knowledge, come to the house of the yajamana who 
has distilled the soma. Universally moving you are, I 
invite you come in person. This soma is for you. 


शुक्रस्याद्य गवांशिर इन्द्र॑वायू नियुत्व॑तः। 
आ यातं पिब॑तं नरा॥ ३॥ 


ध Sukrasyadya gavasira indravayu nuyutvatah. 
A yatam pibatam nara . 


1048 RGVEDA 


O Indra, O Vayu, power dynamic as electric 
energy, scholar vibrant as wind, sages dedicated to love 
and Dharma, come to the yajamana, pure, brilliant, 
disciplined and dedicated, and drink of the soma distilled 
and prepared. 


अयं वां मित्रावरुणा सुतः सोम॑ ऋतावृधा । 
ममेदिह std हव॑म्‌॥  ॥ 

4. Ayam vam mitravaruna sutah soma rtavrdha. 
Mamediha srutam havam. 

O Mitra and Varuna, dear as breath of life and 
soothing as morning mist, eminent in dedication to truth 
and law, the soma of life is distilled and prepared for 
you. Listen to this call and invitation of mine and come 
here and now. 

राजानावनभिद्रुहा ya सदस्युत्तमे | 
सहस्त्र॑स्थूण आसाते ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Rajanavanabhidruha dhruve sadasyuttame. 
Sahasrasthuna as€ate. 


Indra and Vayu, power and progress, Mitra and 
Varuna, love and justice in freedom of choice, all 
embracing and hating none, abide in the house of 
inviolable peace and stability firmly resting on a 
thousand pillars. 


ता सम्राजा घृतासुती आदित्या दानुं नस्पतीं | 
सचेते अन॑वह्वरम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ta samraja ghrtasuti aditya danunaspati. 
Sacete anavahvaram. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1049 


The brilliant Adityas, inviolable ruling lords of 
light and peace, the sun and moon of the world, who 
distil the very essence of life like ghrta and aqua pura, 
protect and promote the generous charitable people who 
follow the simple, straight and natural paths of life free 
from crookedness. 


Tg षु नांसत्याऽश््वावद्यातमश्विना । 
वतीं रुद्रा नृपास्य॑म्‌॥ ७॥ 


hi Gomadu su nasatya’$vavad yatamasvind. 
Varti rudra nrpayyam. 


Ashvins, complementarities of nature and 
humanity, spirits of love and justice, dedicated to truth 
and Dharma, rich and prosperous with cows and horses, 
that is, plenty of wealth and enlightenment and speed 
of progress, you are Rudras, wielding the sceptre of law 
and power and the rod of punishment, come to bless all 
by simple and straight paths of naturalness which are 
protective and promotive for all people. 


न यत्परो नान्त॑र आदधर्ष'द्‌ वृषण्वसू | 
दुःशंसो मर्त्यो रिपुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Na yat paro nantara adadharsad vrsanvasu. 
Duhsamso martyo ripuh. 


Generous are the Ashvins’ showers of wealth, 
joy and protection, so strong that no mortal man, no 
maligner, no enemy internal or external, dare challenge, 
much less hurt, violate or surpass and overcome them. 
(Let us all abide by them.) 


तान आ वोंव््हमणश्विना रयिं पिशङ्धसन्दुम्‌ | 
धिष्ण्यां वरिवोविद॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 


1050 RGVEDA 
9. Ta na a volhamasvina rayim pisangasamdr- 
sam. Dhisnya varivovidam. 
Ashvins, pious and resolute lords of generosity, 
fire and air of life in existence, bring us that wealth of 


golden hue which creates further wealth and gives us 
freedom and space for progress and expansion. 


इन्द्रो अङ्क महद्धधयमभी षदप॑ aera 
सहि स्थिरो विचर्षणिः gon 


10. Indro anga mahad bhayamabhisadap cucya- 
vat. Sa hi sthiro vicarsanih. 


Indra, light of life, dear as breath of vitality, 
mighty great, blazing as the sun which is stable in its 
orbit and enlightens and watches us all as it moves, may, 
we pray, remove all fear and give us freedom. 


इन्द्र॑श्च मृक्यांति नो न न॑: पश्चादघं न॑रत्‌। 
भद्रं भ॑वाति नः पुरः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Indrasca mrlyati no na nah pascadagham nasSat. 
Bhadram bhavati nah purah . 


May Indra, lord omnipotent, and the sun bless 
us with peace and comfort, and may sin and evil, we 
pray, never touch us either before or after, and may good 
alone be our share and fortune for all time. 


इन्द्र आशाभ्यस्परि सर्वीभ्यो अभ॑यं करत्‌। 
जेता शत्रून्विचर्षणिः॥ ९२॥ 


12. Indra asabhyaspari sarvabhyo abhayam karat. 
Jeta Satrun vicarsanih. 


May Indra, lord omnipotent beyond all fear and 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1051 


violence, grant us freedom from all quarters of space. 
He watches all and he is the supreme victor over all 
enemies and contrarieties. 


fava cara आ ग॑त श्रुणुता म॑ इमं हव॑म्‌। 
एदं बर्हिर्नि tea ९३॥ 


13. Visve devasa व gata Srnuta ma imam havam. 
Edam barhirni sidata. 


All brilliant greats of the world, divinities of 
nature and humanity, sages and scholars, listen to this 
voice and prayer of mine: come and grace the holy seats 
of our yajna. 


तीव्रो वो मधुमां अयं शुनहोत्रेषु मत्सरः | 
एतं पिबत काम्य॑म्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Tivro vo madhuman ayam sunahotresu matsarah. 
Etam pibata kamyam . 


Intense, honey sweet and exhilarating is the 
pleasure gifted by saints and scholars in our soma-yajna 
for the promotion of science. It is for you, divinities of 
the world. Come and drink of this pleasure to your 
heart’s content. 


इन्द्र॑ज्येष्ठा मरुद्रणा देवासः Gera: | 
विश्वे मम॑ श्रुता हव॑म्‌ ॥ १५॥ 

15. _Indrajyestha marudgana devasah pusaratayah. 
Visve mama Ssruta havam. 


Indra supreme, ruling light and power of the 
world, and all those divinities whose presiding priest is 
he, republics of the people, saints and sages, and all 
those people and organisations who generously 


1052 RGVEDA 


contribute to and for the advancement of science and 
culture, listen to this call and prayer of mine and come. 


staan नदीतमे देवितमे सर स्वति। 
अप्रशस्ता इव स्मसि प्रश॑स्तिमम्ब नस्कृधि ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Ambitame naditame devitame sarasvati. 
AprasSasta iva smasi prasastimamba naskrdhi. 


Sarasvati, mother dearest, most fluent and 
eloquent giver of vision and wisdom, liberal and most 
brilliant, eternal fount of knowledge and speech, we 
are just like simple, natural, innocent, unknown children. 
Mother spirit of nature and humanity, give us the light 
of knowledge and culture with the grace of Divinity 
and make us worthy of acceptance, appreciation and 
rightful praise. 
त्वे विश्वा सरस्वति श्चितायूंषि देव्याम्‌ । 
शुनहोत्रेषु मत्स्व प्रजां देवि दिदिद्धि नः ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Te visva sarasvati 51117157 devyam. 
Sunahotresu matsva prajam devi dididdhi nah. 

In you, O generous mother giver of vision and 
wisdom, lie all the health and age and wealth of 
knowledge for the world. Come brilliant mother 
Sarasvati, grace our yajna of education and science, 


rejoice and create for us a new generation of healthy, 
educated and refined children. 


इमा ब्रह्म सरस्वति जुषस्व वाजिनीवति । 
याते मन्म॑ गृत्सम॒दा ऋतावरि प्रिया देवेषु जु हति ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Ima brahma sarasvati jusasva vajinivati. Ya te 
manma grtsamada rtavari priya devesu juhvati. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1053 


Sarasvati, mother of universal knowledge and 
speech, commanding the food, energy and speed of the 
advancement of humanity moving on the paths of truth 
and rectitude, listen to these chants of homage and 
accept with delight and homage these your favourite 
oblations of scientific knowledge which the ecstatic 
performers in the yajna of education offer to you in 
honour of the bounties of nature, divinity and humanity 
for the benefit of the faithful seekers. 


प्रेतां यज्ञस्य॑ शं भुवां युवामिदा quire | 
shi चं हव्यवाह नम्‌।॥। ९९॥ 


19. Pretam yajnasya sambhuva yuvamida vrni- 
mahe. Agnim ca havyavahanam. 


Dyavaprthivi, heaven and earth, generative 
treasures of yajnic wealth, creators and givers of peace, 
prosperity and well-being, come and grace our yajna. 
We opt for you and invoke and invite you. And we 
invoke and invite Agni who carries the fragrance of the 
holy yajna offered into the fire. 


द्यावा नः पृथिवी इमं सिध्रमद्य दिंविस्प॑म्‌। 
यज्ञं देवेषु यच्छताम्‌ Ro ॥ 


20. Dyavanah prthivi imam sidhramadya divisprsam. 
Yajnam devesu yacchatam. 


Heaven and earth, teachers enlightened as the 
sun and generous as mother earth, let this perfect yajna 
of ours, this planned yajnic programme of education 
and enlightenment, which touches the skies and the 
regions of light now rise high to the divinities and reach 
the saints and scholars of brilliance across the earth. 


1054 RGVEDA 


आ वांमुपस्थ॑मद्रुहा देवाः सींदन्तु यज्ञियाः | 
इहाद्य सोम॑पीतये ॥ २९॥ 


21. A vam-upasthamadruha devah sidantu yajni- 
yah. Ihadya somapitaye. 


Dyava-prthivi, heaven and earth, enlightened 
and generous teachers and scholars of eminence, who 
love all and hate none and who are easily accessible 
and blissfully companionable, may the noble and 
brilliant seekers of knowledge dedicated to creative and 
yajnic programmes of learning and education come to 
you and sit with you for the attainment of the pleasures 
of knowledge, power and prosperity, and honour and 
dignity of life here and now. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 42 
Indra (in metaphor) Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


क्निंक्रदज्जनुषं waar इयति वाच॑मरितेव नाव॑म्‌। 
सुमद्कलश्च शकुने भवासि मा त्वा का चिंदधिभा fergeat 
विदत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i Kanikradajjanusam prabruvana iyarti vaca- 
mariteva navam. Sumangalasca sakune bhavasi 
ma tva ka cidabhibha visvya vidat . 

Speaking loud and bold, addressing humanity, 
you take the Word forward like a mariner who takes his 
vessel forward on the waters. O master of the Word, 
flying like the eagle, you are the harbinger of good 
fortune. No superior force from any quarter whatsoever 
would approach you to disturb your mission. 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 43 1055 


मा त्वां श्येन उद्वधीन्मा सुपर्णो मा त्वां विददिषुंमान्वीरो 
अस्ता । पिच्यामनु प्रदिशं कनिंक्रदत्सुमङ्कलो भद्रवादी 
aes 


2. Ma tva Ssyena uda vadhinma suparno ma tva 
vidadisuman viro asta. Pitryamanu pradisam 
kanidradat sumangalo bhadravadi vadeha. 


May none like the hawk smite you, nor like the 
vulture violate you. Nor must the hunter with the bow 
shoot you down with the arrow. Reverberating with your 
voice loud and bold across the lands of your forefathers, 
harbinger of good fortune, speak to us here of the good 
things to come. 


अवं क्रन्द दक्षिणातो गृहाणां gaged भद्रवादी शकुन्ते | 
मा न॑ः स्तेन ईशत माघशंसो बृहद्वदेम विदथे सुवीराः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Ava kranda daksinato grhanam sumangalo bha- 
dravadi Sakunte. Ma nah stena isata maghasamso 
brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Speak aloud, proclaim from the house tops on 
the right the good things to come. Speak of good fortune, 
man of power and the Word as you are. May no thief 
rule over us, no sinner, no maligner boss over us. And 
we would all, blest with the brave, sing aloud in praise 
of you and celebrant. 


Mandala 2/Sukta 43 
Indra (in metaphor) Devata, Grtsamada Rshi 


प्रदक्षिणिदभि गृणन्ति कारवो वयो वद॑न्त ऋतुथा 
श॒कुन्त॑यः । उभे वाचौ' वदति सापगा इव गायत्रं च तरैष्टुभं 
चानुं राजति ॥ ९॥ 


1056 RGVEDA 


1. Pradaksinidabhi grnanti karavo vayo vadanta 
rtutha sakuntayah. Ubhe vacau vadati samaga iva 
gayatram ca traistubham canu rajati. 


Going round clockwise from left to right in 
obeisance, poets and artists sing in homage to Indra, 
lord of light and power. So do birds of beauty and 
majesty sing in praise of the lord according to the 
seasons. So does Indra, poet of power, like a Soma- 
singer chant the Word of both material and spiritual 
significance as he chants and reveals the significance 
of other mantras in Gayatri, Tristubh and other metres. 


उद्रातेव॑ शकुने साम॑ गायसि ब्रह्मपुत्र इव सव॑नेषु शंससि । 
ada वाजी शिशुमतीरपीत्यां सर्वतो नः शकुने भद्रमा 
वंद विश्वतो नः शकुने पुण्यमा dan २॥ 

2. Udgateva sakune sama gayasi brahmaputra iva 
savanesu Samsasi. Vrseva vajt Sisumatirapitya 
sarvato nah sakune bhadrama vada visvato nah 
Sakune punyama vada. 


Shakuni, poet of power and homage to Indra, 
like the Sama-singer in yajna, you sing the songs of 
ecstasy. Like the disciple of a Vedic scholar Brahamana, 
you sing in homage to the lord in holy rites. Like a virile 
and passionate bull approaching youthful females, speak 
to us with enthusiasm of all round good things. All 
round, speak to us of noble and blissful things. 


आवदस्त्वं श॑कुने भद्रमा व॑द तूष्णीमासीनः सुमतिं 
चिंकिद्दि नः। यदुत्पतन्वदसि कर्करिर्यथा बृहद्वदेम 
विदथे सुवीराः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 43 1057 


a Avadanstvam sakune bhadrama vada tisnima- 
sinah sumatim cikiddhi nah. Yadutpatan vadasi 
karkariryatha brhad vadema vidathe suvirah. 


Shakuni, poet of power and imagination, while 
speaking, speak to us of good. Silent and sitting, 
enlighten our mind with noble thoughts. While flying 
on the wings of imagination, you speak of the way you 
do good. Let us then, blest with good and brave children, 
sing songs of high praise for the lord. 


इति द्वितीयं मण्डलकम्‌ ॥ 


1058 


MANDALA 3 


Mandala 3/Sukta 1 
Agni Devata, Gathina Vishvamitra Rshi 


सोम॑स्य मा तवसं वक्ष्य॑गरे ate चकर्थ विदथे यज॑ध्यै | 
देवँ अच्छा CATON अद्रि शमाये अग्रे तन्वं जुषस्व ॥ ९ ॥ 


ly Somasya ma tavasam vaksyagne vahnim cakartha 
vidathe yajadhyai. Devan accha didyad yunje 
adrim samaye agne tanvam jusasva. 


Agni, brilliant scholar and fiery leader, you 
speak to me of the strength and power of soma, the elixir 
of life. You have prepared me, like the fire that carries 
the fragrance of yajna from the vedi over earth and skies, 
to join and conduct the yajnic business of life and play 
my part in the battles of progress. Shining forth, I join 
the brilliant best of generous humanity and, as fire 
moves the cloud to break into showers, we move the 
nation to release its potential into showers of peace and 
prosperity. O leading spirit of life and humanity, Agni, 
protect, promote and sustain the body politic of the 
world community and move it forward. 


प्राञ्चं यज्ञं च॑कृम वर्धतां गीः ars hi नम॑सा दुवस्यन्‌। 
दिवः शशासुर्विदथा कवीनां गृत्साय चित्तवसे गातुमीषुः ॥ २॥ 


2 Prancam yajnam cakrma vardhatam gth samid- 
bhiragnim namasa duvasyan. Divah sasasurvi- 
datha kavinam grtsaya cit tavase gatumisuh. 


Joining all together, we carry the yajna forward. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1059 


Let the voices of celebration and joy of the people rise 
to the skies. Feeding the fire with fuel and fragrance, 
doing homage to the lord of light with salutations in 
dedication they conduct and control the yajna of social 
order by virtue of the vision and wisdom of the sages 
and the grace of Divinity. And they seek the highways 
of further advancement for the sake of safety, security 
and the joy of peace and enlightenment. 


nat दधे मेधिरः पूतदंश्चो दिवः सुबन्धुर्जनुषा पृथिव्याः | 
अविन्दन्नु दर्शतमप्स्व१न्तर्दवासो अग्निमपसि स्वसंणाम्‌॥ ३॥ 


Mayo dadhe medhirah putadakso divah suban- 
dhurjanusa prthivyah. avidannu darsatama- 
psvantardevaso agnimapasi svasrnam. 


Agni, the yajnic power, as also the man of clear 
vision, essentially pure and dedicated to yajna, by nature 
a friend and brother of heaven and earth, holds the 
treasure of comfort and joy. Brilliant and generous souls 
and the divine powers of nature discover this golden 
power, Agni, at the heart of currents of waters and 
vapours, in the flow of pranic energies, and in the sister 
streams of sparkling water flowing free, and the yajnics 
find it in their own karma and in the waters. 


अवर्धयन्त्सुभगं सस wet: श्वेतं ज॑ज्ञानम॑रुषं महित्वा । शिशुं 
न जातमभ्यास्रश्वां देवासो sift जनिंमन्वपुष्यन्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Avardhayantsubhagam sapta yahvih svetam 
jJajnanamarusam mahitva. Sisum na jatamabhya- 
rurasva devaso agnim janiman vapusyan. 


Seven flames of fire as seven streams of water 
with power and grandeur raise and elevate this glorious 


1060 RGVEDA 


effulgence emerging red and white in majesty. While 
this Agni arises assuming a wondrous form, high-priests 
of brilliance and generous ambition rush to develop and 
adorn it as a new born baby. 


शुक्रभिरङ्खै रज॑ आततन्वान्क्रतुं पुनानः कविभिः पवित्रः | 
शोचिर्वसानः पर्यायुरपां श्रियो मिमीते बृह तीरनुंनाः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


Sukrebhirangai raja Gtatanvan kratum punanah 
kavibhih pavitraih. Socirvasanah paryayur-apam 
Sriyo mimite brhatiranunah. 


Overspreading the vast spaces with beams of 
blazing heat and light, raising and sanctifying the holy 
programmes of yajnic development by poets and priests 
and visionary experts of purest mind and heart, clothed 
in purity and majesty, Agni as the brilliant yajaka goes 
round and round creating and showering great 
unbounded gifts of health, age and prosperity on all 
across the flow of life in the world of nature. 


aamt सीमनदतीरदब्धा दिवो यह्वीरवसाना अनंग्राः। सना 
अत्र युवतयः सयोनीरेकं गर्भ" दधिरे सप्त वाणीं: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vavraja stmanadatiradabdha divo yahviravasana 
anagnah. Sana atra yuvatayah sayonirekam 
garbham dadhire sapta vanth. 


Agni, light of the universe, takes to and abides 
in the subtle unconsuming, pure unhurt streams, close 
together, open yet not exposed, flowing unbroken from 
the Light Divine. These seven streams of light and 
speech flow here, constant, ever young, together and 
they hold but one eternal meaning like a fetus in their 
unfathomable womb. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1061 


(The mantra applies to light and Vak, Speech, 
flowing in seven streams of the spectrum.) 


स्तीर्णां अस्य ded! विश्वरूपा घृतस्य art wad 
मधूनाम्‌ । अस्थुरत्र धेनवः पिन्व॑माना मही दस्मस्य॑ मातरा 
समीची ॥ ७॥ 


(^ Stirna asya samhato visvarupa ghrtasya yonau 
sravathe madhunam. Asthuratra dhenavah 
pinvamana mahi dasmasya matara samict. 


Expansive yet covered, united yet universal and 
various are the gifts of this Agni abiding in the womb 
of the waters of life and abounding in the flow of the 
honey sweets of existence. The heaven and earth both 
one and together are the manifestive mothers of this 
lord of bliss and power. 


बभ्राणः सूनो सहसो व्य॑द्यौदर्धानः शुक्रा र॑भसा वपूषि। 
श्चोत॑न्ति धारा मधुनो घृतस्य वृषा सत्रं वावृधे काव्येन ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Babhranah suno sahaso vyadyaud dadhanah 
sukra rabhasa vapumsi. Scotanti dhara madhuno 
ghrtasya vrsa yatra vavrdhe kavyena. 


Agni, child of omnipotence, growing in power 
and generosity, bearing and wearing beautiful forms of 
versatility by virtue of passion and purity and the zeal 
of light and lustre you are ever expanding and advancing 
with equipoise. Wherever the honey streams of light 
and waters of life shower and flow, there the potent man 
of generosity grows in might and moves forward by the 
poetry of divinity created by poets of vision and 
imagination. 


O Man, child of Manu, you too watch, follow 


1062 RGVEDA 


and grow by the poetry of power and purity created by 
the poets of vision and imagination in honour of Agni. 


पितुश्चिदूध्॑जनुषां fade व्य॑स्य॒ धारां असजद्धि at: 1 
Tet चरन्तं सखिभिः शिवेभिर्दिवो agifert गुहा 
बभूव ।॥ ९॥ 


9. Pituscidudharjanusa viveda vyasya dhara asrjad 
vi dhenah. Guha carantam sakhibhih Sivebhir- 
divo yahvibhirna guha babhuva. 


Agni, light and vitality of life, knows the 
creator’s gift of life and life’s home by its very nature 
from the very birth, and that home is the cloud, the 
mother’s womb, the night’s darkness and the mother’s 
breast from where the streams of water, milk, speech 
and intelligence immediately flow. This Agni, living and 
growing in the cave of life, the mother’s womb, moving 
with its blessed companions and with the streams of 
energy flowing from heaven, doesn’t remain hidden in 
the cave. One who knows life moving as such knows 
the secret of life. One who doesn’t doesn’t. 


पितुश्च ef जनितुश्च बभ्र पूर्वीरेको अधयत्सीरप्यानाः | 
वृष्णे सपत्नी शुच॑ये सब॑न्धू उभे अस्मे मनुष्ये नि 
पाहि।॥ ९०॥ 

10. Pitusca garbham janitusca babhre purvireko 
adhayat pipyanah. Vrsne sapatni Sucaye saban- 
dhu ubhe asmai manusye ni pahi. 

Agni, spirit and vitality of life, nurses the one 
life-embryo of both father and mother, and the one 


receives nourishment from the mother as well as from 
other universal sources of nature, abundant and swelling 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1063 


all since time immemorial. Heaven and earth, father and 
mother, both bound by nature to life in the embryo, bear, 
nurse and support it to continue. O Agni, lord of life, 
light of the world, protect and support both, father and 
mother, heaven and earth, for the sake of this virile and 
sacred humanity, for the continuance of this holy life, 
this sacred humanity in the embryo. 


उरो महां अनिबाधे व॑वर्धाऽऽपों अगिं यशसः संहि 
पूर्वी । ऋतस्य योनावशयदमूंना जामीनामभिर पसि स्व- 
सूणाम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. 3 Uraumahan anibadhe vavardha’’po agnim yasa- 
sah sam hi purvih. Rtasya yonavasayad damuna 
jJaminamagnirapasi svasrnam. 


Agni, mighty spirit and vitality of life, grows in 
the lap of nature, vast and irresistible creative power of 
Divinity, where the streams of ancient waters flowing 
together feed it to bloom, expand and continue. Agni, 
the fire of life, lies in the womb of nature and her cosmic 
laws of evolution, assertive and inviolable yet subject 
to the laws, a darling of the karmic flow of the twin 
powers of heaven and earth, father and mother of the 
baby in the process of procreation. 


अक्रोन afu: dae महीनां feaeta: सूनवे भाऋजीकः | 
उदुस्रिया जनिता at जजानाऽपां गर्भो नृत॑मो यह्वो 
aft: १२॥ 

12. Akro na babhrih samithe mahinam didrkseyah 
sunave bharjikah. Udusriya janita yo jajana- 
*pam garbho nrtamo yahvo agnih. 


Agni, like an unbreakable wall of a fort is the 


1064 RGVEDA 


commander and defender of his mighty forces in the 
battles of life. Auspicious and blissful of sight he is self- 
refulgent and a simple and natural source of light for 
his children. Creator of the rays of light and knowledge, 
born of the womb of the currents of primordial energy, 
it manifests as the great sun and most human leader of 
humanity. 


अपां गर्भ" दर्शतमोषधीनां वनां जजान सुभगा विरूपम्‌। 
tanta सं हि जग्मुः पनिष्ठं जातं तवसं 
दुवस्यन्‌ ॥ 23 ॥ 


13. Apam garbham darsatamosadhinam vana jajana 
subhaga virupam. Devasascinmanasa sam hi 
jJagmuh panistham jatam tavasam duvasyan. 


The vital fire and light energy abiding in the 
waters and pranic vitality creates the woods of herbs 
and trees, and the clusters of wood such as arani generate 
this fire which is beautiful to see, full of wealth and 
power and versatile in form. Scholars of heat and light 
energy, conscientiously with their heart and soul, study 
it practically and comprehensively. It is highly valuable, 
manifest everywhere and a tremendous source of power. 


बृहन्त इद्दधानवो uasitennht संचन्त विद्युतो न शुक्राः | 
Wea वृन्दं सद॑सि स्वे अन्तर॑पार ऊर्वे अमृतं दुहानाः ॥ ९४ ॥ 
14. Brhanta id bhanavo bharjikamagnim sacanta 


vidyuto na sukrah. Guheva vrddham sadasi sve 
antarapara urve amrtam duhanah. 


Resplendent rays of light as dazzling flashes of 
lightning serve and derive their power from Agni, simple 
and natural refulgent power. They milk the nectar of 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1065 


immortal light energy in the midst of vast spaces of earth 
and heaven in the same way in which the individual 
soul draws its light and joy from the Supreme Soul 
immanent in the cave of the heart in the individual body 
itself. 


32 a at यज॑मानो हविर्भिरीष्टे सखित्वं सुमतिं Frente: 1 
देवैरवो मिमीहि सं BRA vert च नो Seta: 1 Vu UI 


15. Ile ca tva yajamano havirbhirile sakhitvam 
sumatim nikamah. Devairavo mimthi sam jaritre 
raksa ca no damyebhiranikaih. 


As a dedicated devotee performing yajna, I 
praise, worship and pray to you, Agni, light of life, with 
the offer of fragrant materials. With honest mind and 
sincere desire, I worship you and pray for friendship 
and comradeship and for holy understanding and vision. 
Lord of light and power, bring shelter and protection 
for the celebrant alongwith devas, brilliancies of nature 
and humanity. Save us all with the inviolable glory of 
your light and lustre. 


उपश्चेतार स्तव॑ सुप्रणीतेऽ गरे विश्वानि धन्या दर्धानाः। 
सुरेत॑सा श्रव॑सा तुञ्ज॑माना अभि ष्याम पृतनायूरदवान्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Upaksetarastava supranite’gne visvani dhanya 
dadhanah. Suretasa S$ravasa junjamana abhi 
syama prtanayunradevan. 


Agni, lord of light and life, noble leader pursuing 
right values in society, we are your devotees abiding by 
you, residing close to you. We hold and command all 
the wealth of food for sustenance and other materials. 
Virile we are and strong. We pray that in our battles of 


1066 RGVEDA 


life we may defeat and win over our impious adversaries 
and enjoy a happy and pious life. 


आ देवानामभवः ata मन्द्रो fasalf काव्यानि 
विद्धान्‌ । प्रति wa? अवासयो दमूना अनुं देवा््र॑थिरो 
यासि साध॑न्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. A devanamabhavah keturagne mandro visvani 
kavyani vidvan. Prati martan avasayo damuna 
anu devan rathiro yasi sadhan. 


Agni, lord of the light of knowledge, noble 
scholar, you are brilliant among the leading lights, happy 
and rejoicing, master of all the poetry of divinity and 
humanity. Be like a restful shelter for common humanity. 
Self-confident and self-controlled, master of your 
chariot and freedom of movement, you go forward to 
your goal in association with noble scholars and in 
conformity with the powers of nature and the 
environment. 


नि दुरोणे अमतो मत्यीनां राजां ससाद विदथानि साध॑न्‌। 
घृतप्रतीक उर्विया व्य॑द्यौदयिर्विंश्वानि काव्यानि 
विद्धान्‌ ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Ni durone amrto martyanam raja sasada 
vidathani sadhan. Ghrtapratika urviya vyadyaud- 
agnirvisvani kavyani vidvan. 

Immortal Agni, lord of light and ruler of the 
world, abides in the home of immortal humanity, guiding 
and directing their yajnic programmes to success. Fed 
with ghrta and rising high, he shines bright as far and 
wide as the earth. Agni, leader of the people, is lord of 
knowledge who knows the entire poetry of existence. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1067 


आ नो गहि सख्येभिः शिवेभिर्महान्पहीभिंरूतिभिः 
सर ण्यन्‌। अस्मे रयिं ब॑हुलं सन्त॑रुत्रं सुवाचं भागं यशसं 
कृधी नः॥ ९९॥ 


19. Ano gahi sakhyebhih Sivebhir-mahan mahibhiri- 
tibhih saranyan. Asme rayim bahulam samtaru- 
tram suvacam bhagam yasasam krdhi nah. 


Agni, lord of knowledge and power, come to us 
with friendly acts of grace and benevolence. Lord of 
universal movement and freedom, mighty great, come 
with grand provisions of protection and promotion. Lead 
us to honour and success and render us our share of 
abundant wealth and power, mutual and ultimate peace 
and saving grace worthy of poetic celebration. 


एता ते अग्ने arn सनानि प्र पूर्व्याय नूत॑नानि arerq 
महान्ति वृष्णो सव॑ना कृतेमा जन्मंजन्मन्नि्हिंतो जात- 
वेदाः ॥ २०॥ 


20. Etate agne janima sanani pra purvyaya nutanani 
vocam. Mahanti vrsne savana krtema janman 
janman nihito jatavedah. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and creative 
power, these are your various and universal 
manifestations in action old and new. Great are these 
acts of power and grace for the bold and generous 
humanity in every manifestation of yours which, O 
power immanent and omnipresent, I sing and celebrate 
in honour of your excellence and which, O lord, be 
gracious to hear. 


जन्मंजन्मन्निरहिंतो जातवेदा विश्वामित्रेभिरिध्यते sista: | 
तस्य॑ वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्याऽपिं भद्रे सौमनसे स्याम ॥ २९॥ 


1068 RGVEDA 


21. =Janman janman nihito jataveda visvamitrebhi- 
ridhyate ajasrah. Tasya vayam sumatau yajnya- 
sya’pi bhadre saumanase syama. 


Jataveda, Agni, immanent and omnipresent in 
every particle of creation, is constantly and eternally 
lighted, served and celebrated by the sagely friends of 
the world. We pray that we too may ever abide in the 
kind and gracious heart and mind of the venerable lord 
worshipped in yajna and social gatherings and ever 
enjoy the benefit of his benevolence. 


इमं यज्ञं संहसावन्त्वं al देवत्रा धेहि सुक्रतो रराणः 1 
प्र यंसि होतर्बूहतीरिषो नोऽग्ने महि द्रविणमा य॑जस्व ॥ २२॥ 


22. Imam yajnam sahasavan tvam no devatra dhehi 
sukrato raranah. Pra yamsi hotarbrhatiriso no 
*ene mahi dravinama yajasva. 


This yajna of ours, of celebration and worship, 
O lord of power and grandeur, send up unto nature’s 
powers of Divinity, and establish among the generous 
and brilliant celebrities of humanity, wise lord of holy 
acts of creation and development as you are, generous 
and rejoicing in the holy yajnic performances of ours. 
Agni, lord yajaka of the universe yourself, you give 
abundantly to the devotees. Give us generously of great 
food and energy and of extensive wealth and knowledge 
of life. 


sor पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः शश्वत्तमं हव॑मानाय साध । 
स्यान्नः सूनुस्तनयो विजावाऽगरे सा ते सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Ilamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo 
vijava’gne sa te sumatirbhutvasme. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1069 


Agni, lord of light and life and knowledge, bless 
the yajnic worshipper with a generous gift of Ila, that 
eternal and infinite speech of Divinity which reveals 
the knowledge of universal action and confirms him in 
the practice of it in universal action. Bless us with 
intelligent sons and grandsons specially to continue the 
family line. Agni, may your gifts of love and holy 
intelligence be showered on us. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 2 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Gathina Vishvamitra Rshi 


वैश्वा नराय॑ धिषणामृतावृधे घृतं न पूतमग्रये जनामसि | 
feat होतारं मनुषश्च वाघतो धिया रथं न कुशः 
समरंण्वति ।॥ ९॥ 


ie Vaisvanaraya dhisanamrtavrdhe ghrtam na [01114 - 
magnaye janamasi. Dvita hotaram manusasca 
vaghato dhiya ratham na kulisah samrnvati. 


Like refined and fortified ghrta offered in yajna 
to the fire of the vedi, we generate, refine and sharpen 
our courage and intelligence and compose hymns of 
praise in honour of Vaishvanara Agni, fiery ruler of the 
world and protector and promoter of the universal yajna 
of Truth and Law. And the people as well as the leading 
priest both join in developmental yajna and, with the 
application of intelligence and action, produce a refined 
version of the chariot and the thunderbolt and surrender 
it to Agni, divine high priest of the universal yajna of 
creation as a hymn of tribute and celebration. 


स रोचयज्जनुषा रोद॑सी उभे स मात्रोर॑भवत्पुत्र ईड्यं: | 
हव्यवाव्छथिर जर्‌ श्चनोंहितो gout विशामतिथिर्विभा- 
aa: २॥ 


1070 RGVEDA 


2: Sa rocayajjanusa rodasi ubhe se matrorabhavat 
putra idyah. Havyavalagnirajarascanohito 
dulabho visamatithirvibhavasuh. 


That Agni, Vaishvanara, fiery life of the world, 
by nature, illuminates both earth and heaven and rises 
as the darling admirable favourite of his motherly 
generators. He is the carrier of the fragrances of yajna, 
unaging treasure of food, energy and universal wealth, 
indomitable, brilliant sun and most welcome visiting 
guest of the people. 


क्रत्वा दक्ष॑स्य deat विधर्मणि देवासो अगिं ज॑नयन्त 
चित्तिभिः रुरुचानं भानुना ज्योतिषा महामत्यं न वाजं 
सनिष्यज्ुपं ga 3 


६ Kratva daksasya taruso vidharmani devaso agnim 
jJanayanta cittibhih. Rurucanam bhanuna jyotisa 
mahamatyam na vajam sanisyannupa bruve. 


With yajna, holy application of mind and will, 
and contribution with the spirit of yajna to the various 
dharmic programmes of the man of power and expertise, 
who is dedicated to the service of the divine saviour 
father, the creative pioneers of brilliance and generosity 
generate and develop Agni, heat and light energy, with 
organised planning and corporate action. And desiring 
to join this programme and have the benefit, I whisper 
and discuss, and invoke this Agni power shining with 
the light of the sun, great with its own light, and fast as 
the energy of nature itself. 


आ मन्द्रस्य॑ सनिष्यन्तो वरेण्यं वृणीमहे sa anmi- 
Area रातिं भगरंणामुशिजं कविक्र॑तुमभिं राज॑न्तं दिव्येनं 


on 


शोचिषा ।॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1071 


4. A mandrasya sanisyanto varenyam vrnimahe 
ahrayam vajamrgmiyam. Ratim bhrgunam- 
usijam kavikratu-magnim rajantam divyena 
Socisa. 

To share and enjoy the beauty, ecstasy and 
magnificence of life, we choose what is worthy of 
choice: Agni, lord and power of light, boldly free and 
abundant, tempestuous power revealed by the Rks, 
excellent gift of the Bhrgus, generous and celestial artists 
and scientists far reaching in poetic imagination, wisdom 
and creation, loving, and radiant with the light of heaven. 


sit सुम्नाय दधिरे पुरो जना वाज॑श्रवसपिह वृक्तलंर्हिषः। 
यतस्रुचः सुरुचं विश्वदेव्यं सद्र यज्ञानां साध॑दिष्िमप- 
सम्‌॥५॥ 


5. Agnim sumnaya dadhire puro jana vajasra- 
vasamiha vrktabarhisah. Yatasrucah surucam 
visvadevyam rudram yajnanam sadhadistim- 
apasam. 


For the attainment of peace and prosperity, 
people here since eternity have lighted the fire of Agni, 
rich in matter, mind and motion, lovely brilliant, radiant 
divine across the worlds, mighty just and corrective, 
leader of yajnic programmes to success and giver of 
karmic joy and satisfaction. Having collected the holy 
grass for the vedi and lighted the fire, they raise the 
ladle to feed the fire and open the secrets of the skies. 


पाव॑कशोचे तव हि aa परि होतंर्यजञेषु' वृक्तबर्हिषो 
नर॑: । अग्रे दुव॑ इच्छर्मानास आप्यपुर्पासते द्रविणं धेहि 
तेभ्य॑ः ॥ £ ॥ 


1072 RGVEDA 


6. Pavakasoce tava hi ksayam pari hotaryajnesu 
vrktabarhiso narah. Agne duva icchamanasa 
apyam-upasate dravinam dhehi tebhyah. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, infinite giver, having 
collected the grass and sitting around the vedi in yajnas, 
the performers are but seekers of service and lasting 
peace and they pray for a haven under your dominion 
only. O lord and presiding power of yajna, bless them 
with the wealth and well-being of their heart’s desire. 


आ रोद॑सी अपृणदा स्व॑र्महज्नातं यदेनमपसो अर्धारयन्‌। 
सो अध्वराय परि णीयते कविरत्यो न वाज॑सातये 
चनोहितः ॥ ७॥ 


a, A rodasi aprnada svarmahajjatam yaden- 
amapaso adharayan. So adhvaraya pari niyate 
kaviratyo na vajasataye canohitah. 


When people of yajnic karma take to this Agni 
for service, light up the fire, raise it and feed the rising 
power, then it fills the earth and skies and the vast and 
high heavens with light and fragrance of bliss. And thus 
this power and presence of Agni, lord of power and 
bliss, poetic omniscient, treasure home of food, energy 
and light, is extended far and wide across the universe 
for the speed and success of yajna, human acts of love, 
non-violence and creative self-sacrifice. 


waed हव्यदातिं स्वध्वरं दुवस्यत दम्यं जातवेदसम्‌ 
र थीऋतस्यं बहतो विचर्षणिर िर्देवानांमभवत्‌ पुरोहितः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Namasyata havyadatim svadhvaram duvasyata 
damyam jatavedasam. Rathir-rtasya brhato 
vicarsanir-agnir-devanam-abhavat purohitah. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1073 


Offer salutations and service in homage to Agni. 
Creator of food for yajna and enjoyment, leader of yajna 
to success, supreme giver, knower of all that is born, 
omnipresent lord ever on the move, watching and 
superintending the universal operation of law and yajna, 
Agni is the foremost high-priest of the dynamics of 
Divinity working through the forces of nature. 


fret geet समिधः परिज्मनोऽ गररपुनन्रुशिजो sacra: | 
तासामेकामदंधुर्मत्ये भुज॑मु लोकमु द्वे उप॑ जामिमीयतुः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tisro yahvasya samidhah parijmano’ gnerapu- 
nannusijo amrtyavah. Tasam-ekam-adadhur- 
martye bhujamu lokamu dve upa jamimiyatuh. 


Three are the flames of mighty Agni shining 
everywhere, beautiful are they and immortal, purging, 
purifying and sanctifying everything. One of these they, 
the immortal powers of Divinity, place in the world of 
the mortals for their sustenance: this one is the fire and 
magnetic energy. The other two, electric energy and 
light, they carry up above to the heights of the twins, 
sky and the region of light and place them there. 


विशां कविं विषुपतिं मानुषीरिषः सं सींमकृण्वन्त्स्वधिंतिं 
न तेज॑से । स उद्वतो निवतो याति वेविंषत्स गर्भेषु भुव॑नेषु 
दीधरत्‌ UN ९०॥ 

10. Visam kavim vispatim manustrisah sam simakrn- 
vantsvadhitim na tejase. Sa udvato nivato yati 
vevisat sa garbhamesu bhuvanesu didharat. 


The oblations of fragrant food offered by yajnic 
people into the fire intensify and sharpen like razor’s 
edge the catalytic and creative power of Agni, protector 


1074 


and promoter of the people and the imaginative 
visionary among them, for the refinement of their valour 
and brilliance. The same Agni as the fire and passion of 
virility goes up and down everywhere, inspires every 
heart and, in these worlds, bears the fetus in the womb 
of existence for continuance. 


स जिन्वते जटरषु प्रजज्ञि वान्वृर्षां चित्रेषु नान॑दज्न fae: | 
वैश्वानरः पृथुपाजा अमंत्योँ वसु tal दय॑मानो fa 
दाशुषे ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sa jinvate jatharesu prajajnivan vrsa citresu 
nanadanna sinhah. Vaisvanarah prthupaja 
amartyo vasu ratna dayamano vi dasuse. 


That Agni grows in the vital fire of living beings, 
germinating, evolving, mighty virile in various 
wonderful forms, roaring for expression like the 
irrepressible lion as Vaishvanara, immanent as the vital 
heat of living energy, fiery leader, illustrious, immortal, 
treasure home of life’s wealth and will to live, all round 
giving the jewels of existence to the generous person 
of yajnic performance. 

वैश्वानरः प्रलथा नाकमारुहदिवस्पृष्ठं भन्द॑मानः सुम- 
न्म॑भिः। स पूर्ववज्ननयंञ्जन्तवे धनं समानमज्यं पर्येति 
जागुंविः॥ ९२॥ 

12. Vaisvanarah pratnatha nakamaruhad divas- 
prstham bhandamanah sumanmabhih. Sa 
purvavajjanayanjantave dhanam samanamaj- 
mam paryeti jagrvih. 


Vaishvanara, vital fire of life and immanent will, 
ancient and eternal, rises to paradisal bliss over the 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1075 


heights of heaven sung and celebrated by poets of faith 
and imagination. Creating as ever the wealth of life for 
living beings, the illustrious leader goes all round by 
the highways of existence ever awake, without a wink 
of sleep. 


ऋतार्वानं यज्ञियं विप्र॑मुक्थ्य१मा यं दधे मातरिश्वां दिवि 
aay तं चित्रयामं हरिकेशमीमहे सुदीतिमयिं सुविताय 
नव्य॑से VB Ul 


13. Rtavanam yajniyam vipramukthyama yam dadhe 
matarisva divi ksayam. Tam citrayamam hari- 
kesamimahe suditimagnim suvitaya navyase. 


That Agni, Vaishvanara, universal fire of life, 
going by the ways of Truth and universal Law, 
venerable, intelligent, admirable, existing and operating 
in the lights of spaces, which is held and sustained by 
the universal Vayu energy, that same Agni, wonderful 
in movement and achievement, bright in flames, radiant 
with holy light, we love, admire and worship for the 
sake of latest success and well-being. 


शुचिं न याम॑न्निषिरं cadet केतुं feat रोचनस्थामुंषर्बध॑म्‌। 
अरिं मूर्धानं दिवो अप्रतिष्कुतं तमीमहे नम॑सा वाजिनं 
aged ॥ ९ ख i 

14. Sucir na yamannisiram svardrsam टा divo 
rocanastham-usarbudham. Agnim murdhanam 


divo apratiskutam tamimahe namasa vajinam 
brhat. 


We invoke, admire, worship and pray with 
homage and oblations to that Agni which is pure and 
purifying, vigorous and lovely, brilliant as light of the 


1076 RGVEDA 


sun, banner of heaven, established in beauty, rising as 
the dawn, shining on top of heaven, irresistible and 
impetuous lord of majesty. We follow this lord as a torch 
bearer over untrodden paths of infinity to the Sublime 
and the Divine. 


मन्द्र होतारं शुचिमद्वयाविनं दमूनसमुक्थ्यं विश्वचर्षणिम्‌ | 
रथं न चित्रं वपुंषाय दतं मनुर्हितं सदयिद्राय ईमहे ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Mandram hotaram sucimadvayavinam damuna- 
samukthyam visvacarsanim. Ratham na citram 
vapusdaya darsatam manurhitam sadamid raya 
imahe. 


Emanating the ecstasy of Ananda, universal 
yajna, purest power, clarion call to life unambiguous, 
self-controlled and all-controlling, adorable, all 
watching eye, infinitely various in colour and motion 
yet constant as light and steady as a chariot, beauty 
crystallized in form, inexhaustible fount of bliss for 
humanity, the ultimate haven of peace, the real treasure 
of existence: that is Agni, that we worship with homage 
and yajnic offerings. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 3 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
वैश्वा na पृथुपाजंसे विपो tat विधन्त धरुणेषु गात॑वे | 
sifafé देवां अमृतो दुवस्यत्यथा धर्मौणि सनता न 
दूंदुषत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


il, Vaisvanaraya prthupajase vipo ratna vidhanta 
dharunesu gatave. Agnirhi devan amrto duva- 
syatyatha dharmani sanata na dudusat. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 3 1077 


To move forward on heavenly paths of progress 
on firm ground, the wise offer the best of jewels as 
offering in the service of Vaishvanara Agni, brilliant 
light and blazing fire pioneer of the world and leader of 
the most potent order. It is Agni alone, constant and 
immortal power, which honours and inspires the 
excellencies of nature and humanity so that the eternal 
order and laws of existence may not be vitiated. 


अन्तर्दूतो रोद॑सी दस्म ईयते होता निष॑त्तो wae: पुरोदितः। 
क्षयं बृहन्तं परि भूषति द्युभिवर्देवेभिरभिरिंषितो धिया- 
aa: neu 


2: Antarduto rodasi dasma tyate hota 11754110 
manusah purohitah. Ksayam brhantam pari 
bhusati dyubhir-devebhir-agnirisito dhiyavasuh. 


Agni, magnificent and powerful, moves around 
as a messenger of energy in heaven and earth. Creative 
performer and consecrated leader of humanity, it 
beautifies and beatifies the wide world with rays of light. 
It is loved and honoured by the brilliancies of nature 
and humanity as the very treasure home of light and 
intelligence. 


केतं यज्ञानां विदथ॑स्य साध॑नं विप्रासो अगिं dear 
चित्तिभिः | अपांसि यस्िन्नरधि। सन्दधुगिरि स्तस्पिन्त्सुम्नानि 
यज॑मान आ च॑के 3 0 त 

2. Ketum yajnanam vidathasya sadhanam vipraso 
agnim mahayanta cittibhih. Apamsi yasminn-adhi 
samdadhur-girastasmint-sumnani yajam-ana a 
cake. 


Pious scholars and wise yajakas praise and 


1078 RGVEDA 


celebrate Agni as the symbol of yajnas and yajnic 
success of all creative and constructive programmes of 
life with their thoughts, devotion and acts of worship. 
They dedicate their holy chants and their holy acts to 
Agni and the yajamana realises his ambitions of success 
and well-being in it and through it. 


पिता यज्ञानामसुरो विपश्चितां विमानंमयिर्वयुनं च 
वाघताम्‌। आ विवे रोद॑सी भूरिवर्पसा पुरुप्रियो भ॑न्दते 
धाम॑भिः कविः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Pita yajnanamasuro vipascitam vimanamagnir- 
vayunam ca vaghatam. A vivesa rodast bhirivar- 
pasa purupriyo bhandate dhamabhih kavih. 


Agni is the father, generator and promoter of 
yajnas. It is life breath of the wise and motive power of 
the stars and planets. It is the aerial car of the scholars 
and path to bliss for the celebrants. It pervades and 
energises heaven and earth in many forms and, as 
universal favourite and illuminative light of the 
imagination, it is sung and celebrated in worship by 
virtue of its own might and majesty. 


asa चन्द्रर॑थं हरिव्रतं वैश्वानरमप्सुषदं स्वर्विंद॑म्‌। 
विगाहं तूर्णी तविषीभिरावृतं भूर्णिं देवास इह सुश्रियं 
दधुः GU 


> Candramagnim candraratham harivratam 
vaisvanaram-apsusadam svarvidam. Vigaham 
rurnim tavistbhir-avrtam bhurnim devasa tha 
susriyam dadhuh. 


Devas, mighty powers of nature, bear Agni, and 
holy yajakas light and establish it here: Agni that is 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 3 1079 


beautiful as the golden orb of the moon, majestic in 
bearing, splendid in its own law and function, 
omnipresent in the world, abiding in the waters and 
breath of air, all penetrative, instantly and constantly 
moving, covered in its own rays of light and lustre, all 
sustaining, pure crystalline concentration of beauty and 
wealth of existence. 


अगरि्टेविभिर्मनुंषश्च जन्तुभिस्तन्वानो यज्ञं पुंरूपेश॑सं धिया । 
रथीरन्तरीयते साधंदिष्टिभिर्जीरो दमूना अभिशस्ति- 
चात॑नः॥ £ ॥ 


6. Agnir-devebhir-manusasca jantubhis-tanvano 
yajnam purupesamam dhiya. Rathir-antartyate 
sadhad-istibhirjiro damuna abhisasticatanah. 


Agni goes on and ever in the world on the chariot 
of time conducting and expanding the yajna of existence 
by the powers of nature and pious human beings with 
their karma and intelligence executing its auspicious 
commands. It is tempestuous, self-controlled and all- 
controlling, driving off opposition, calumny and 
negative criticism. 


अग्ने जर॑स्व स्वपत्य आयुंन्यूर्जां पिन्वस्व समिषो! दिदीहि 
नः। वयांसि जिन्व बृह॒तश्च॑ जागृव उशिग्देवानामसिं 
सुक्रतुंर्विपाम्‌॥ ७॥ 
fF Agne jarasva svapatya ayunyurja pinvasva 
samiso didthi nah. Vayamsi jinva brhatasca jagrva 
usigdevanamasi sukraturvipam. 
Agni, lord giver of light, life and energy, come 
and bless our young progeny with full age and let them 
abound in strength and overflow with vigour and energy. 


1080 RGVEDA 


Let us all shine with plenty to our heart’s desires. Inspire 
our life and age to fullness and grandeur. O lord ever 
wakeful and watchful, you are the darling of the brilliant 
and the wise for veneration and worship and the lord of 
yajnic good works for the scholars. 


विश्पतिं aenfdfal नर : सदा यन्तारं धीनामुशिजं च 
वाघर्ताम्‌। अध्वराणां चेत॑नं जातवेदसं प्रशंसन्ति नम॑सा 
जूतिभिरर्वृधे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vispatim yahvamatithim narah sada yantaram 
dhinamusijam ca vaghatam. Adhvaranam ceta- 
nam jatavedasam pra Samsanti namasa jutibhir- 
vrdhe. 


For the sake of elevation and exaltation, with 
food and homage, abandon and ecstasy, people praise, 
admire and worship Agni, lord of the common wealth 
of humanity, great, honourable and welcome like a 
learned visitor, guide and leader, inspirer of the wise 
and worshipful performers of the yajna of love and non- 
violence, eminent among the learned and the lord who 
knows all that is born and exists. 


विभावा देवः सुरणः UR क्चितीरभगिर्ब भूव शव॑सा सुमद्रथः 1 
तस्य॑ ब्र तानि! भूरिपोषिणो वयमुप भूषेम दम आ 
सुवृक्तिभिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


र. Vibhava devah suranah pari ksitiragnirbabhuva 
Savasa sumadrathah. Tasya vratani bhuriposino 
vayamupa bhusema dama ठ suvrktibhih. 


Agni, lord refulgent and generous, happy- 
warrior riding a magnificent chariot rules over lands 
and people by virtue of his might and majesty. We wish 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 3 1081 


and pray that with our acts and conduct in the home, 
sustained by him, we may honour and obey the rules 
and laws of his making in the land ruled and sustained 
by him in every way. 


वैश्वानर तव धामान्या च॑के येभिः स्वर्विदभ॑वो विचश्चषण | 
जात आपुंणो भुव॑नानि रोद॑सी अग्ने ता विश्वा परिभूरसि 
त्मना ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vaisvanara tava dhamanya cake yebhih svarvi- 
dabhavo vicaksana. Jata aprno bhuvanani rodasi 
agne ta visva paribhurasi tmana. 


Vaishvanara Agni, lord of light omnipresent, I 
love and pray for your light and splendour by which, O 
lord of omniscient vision, you rise to be the lord of bliss 
and freedom. As you rise to manifestation, you fill up 
and pervade the regions of earth and heaven. Agni, by 
virtue of your own power and presence, you are the 
lord supreme of all the worlds. 


वैश्वा नरस्य दंसनाभ्यो बृहदरिंणादेकः स्वपस्यया कविः | 
उभा पितरा महय॑न्रजायताथिद्याविापृथिवी भूरिरेतसा ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Vaisvanarasya damsanabhyo brhadarinadekah 
svapasyaya kavih. Ubha pitara mahayannaja- 
yatagnirdyavaprthivi bhuriretasa. 


By one’s earnest desire to act and rise freely, 
anyone of poetic vision and creative imagination attains 
the infinite light of heaven by virtue of the gracious 
power and actions of Vaishvanara, light and life of the 
world, anyone by the self alone, independent. Agni, lord 
of light and power, doing honour to both his parents 
and generators, rises and manifests, radiating and filling 


1082 RGVEDA 


both earth and heaven with abundant light and expansive 
vitality. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 4 
Apris, Graces, Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


समित्स॑मित्सुमना बोध्यस्मे शुचाशचा सुमतिं रासि aed: | 
आ दव देवान्यजथाय वश्चि सखा सखीन्त्सुमनां यक्ष्यग्ने ॥ ९ ॥ 


iF Samitsamit sumana bodhyasme Sucasuca suma- 
tim rasi vasvah. A deva devan yajathaya vaksi 
sakha sakhintsumana yaksyagne. 


Agni, fire of life, lord of light, master of 
knowledge, guide and leader, kind and benevolent at 
heart, rise for us with every piece of sacred fuel offered, 
rise with every libation from the ladle, shine with every 
flame of fire and purity, and bless us with life’s wealth 
and generous disposition of mind and heart. Lord of 
brilliance and benevolence, you call the divine powers 
of nature and brilliant people to the yajna to meet and 
cooperate in creative and constructive action. You are a 
friend, we are friends, come with your heart and soul, 
join us in the yajna, and raise us to the light divine. 


यं देवासस्तरिरहंन्नायजंन्ते दिवेदिवे वरुणो पित्रो sift: 1 

सेमं यज्ञं मधुमन्तं कृधी नस्तनूनपाद्‌ घतयोनिं विधन्तम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Yam devasas-trirahannayajante divadive varuno 

mitro agnih. Semam yajnam madhum-antam krdhi 
nastanunapad ghrtayonim vidhantam. 

That yajna of ours, performed with reverence 


in faith and rising with the libations of ghrta, which the 
best of humanity and divinities of nature join thrice in 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 4 1083 


the day and which Varuna the moon, Mitra the wind, 
and Agni the fire of life bless every day with peace, 
power and light, that same yajna, O Tanunapat, lord 
protector of physical and material world, raise to the 
honey sweetness and fragrance of love and kindness in 
society. 


प्र दीधिंतिर्विशववारा जिगाति होतारमिन्छः dent यजध्यै । 
अच्छा नमोभिर्वृषभं वन्दध्यै स देवान्यंक्षदिषितो यजीं- 
यान्‌॥ ३॥ 


Pra didhitirvisvavara jigati hotaramilah pratha- 
mam yajadhyai. Accha namobhirvr-sabham 
vandadhyai sa devan vaksadisito yajtyan. 


That universal Agni, inspiration of awareness 
and reflection for action, first arises in the cosmic yajaka, 
lord creator, and then flows in streams of awareness, 
universal intelligence and divine speech, to the first 
yajakas on earth to join in holy yajna and to worship 
the generous omnipotent creator with homage and yajna 
in faith. May that Agni, light of universal awareness, 
intelligence and the holy Word, conducting the cosmic 
yajna, loved and prayed for, flow and bless the noble 
humanity. 


ऊर्ध्वो वां गातुरध्वरे stenretfeat शोचींषि प्रस्थिता रजांसि । 
दिवो वा नाभा न्य॑सादि erat स्तणीमरहि देवनव्य॑चा वि 
afe: ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Urdhvo vam gaturadhvare akaryurdhva Socimsi 
prasthita rajamsi. Divo va nabha nyasadi hota 
strnimahi devavyaca vi barhih. 


The singer is appointed in your creative yajna 


1084 RGVEDA 


of love and non-violence, and the path upward is 
selected and taken. The flames of fire rise and touch 
the skies. The yajaka is seated in the centre of the vedi 
by the life string of heaven clothed in light and fragrance. 
The light and fragrance spread over the spaces and fill 
the divine planes of nature. 


सखस होत्राणि मन॑सा वृणाना इन्वन्तो विश्वं प्रतिं aaa | 
नृपेसो विदथेषु प्र जाता अभीडमं यज्ञं वि च॑रन्त 
पूर्वीः ॥५॥ 


2; Sapta hotrani manasa vrnana invanto visvam 
prati yannrtena. Nrpesaso vidathesu pra jata 
abhimam yajnam vi caranta purvih. 


Seven rituals of yajna consciously and 
judiciously selected spread out, go round and round and 
fill up the world with the light of truth and cool of 
vapours. Born of nature in yajnas with human vitality, 
ancient as ever, they emanate from the vedi and roam 
around at their own freedom giving fresh life to yajna. 


आ भन्द॑माने उषसा sale उत स्म॑येते तन्वा विरूपे । 
यथां नो पित्रो वरुणो जुजोषदिन्द्रो मरुत्व उत वा 
महोभिः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A bhandamane usasa upake uta smayete tanva 
virupe. Yatha no mitro varuno jujosadindro maru- 
tvan uta va mahobhih. 


Loved and greeted by all, the twins, night and 
day, though different in form, come and manifest in their 
smiling beauty, so that Mitra, vibrations of air, Varuna, 
waves of water, and the mighty Indra, currents of energy, 
with their acts and qualities of nature, give us the 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 4 1085 


pleasure of experience, (soothing, energising and 
exciting, but all enlightening). 


दैव्या STANT प्रथमा Asst सप्त Yara: स्वधय। मदन्ति | 
ऋतं शंसन्त ऋतमित्त आहुरनु व्रतं त्र॑तपा दीध्यानाः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Daivya hotara prathama nyranje sapta prksasah 
svadhaya madanti. Rtam samsanta rtamit ta ahu- 
ranu vratam vratapa didhyanah. 


I celebrate the first and foremost divine 
highpriests of nature in the universe, the sun and the 
fire. The seven ministering priests of yajna, too, together, 
with offers of ghrta and fragrant materials, feed and 
propitiate the same two. Praising and celebrating the 
universal Law of Nature and the waters of life, they 
proclaim the Law and the joy of life and, observing the 
rules of the Law and shining in accordance with the 
Law and the Truth, they exult with heavenly joy. 


आ भार॑ती भार॑तीभिः सजोषा sat caer: 1 
सर॑स्वती सारस्वतेभिरर्वाक्‌ तिस्त्रो देवीर्बर्हिरेदं स॑दन्तु ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A bharati bharatibhih sajosa ila devairma- 
nusyebhiragnih. Sarasvati sarasvatebhirarvak 
tisro devirbarhiredam sadantu. 


Come Bharati, speech bearing knowledge and 
education, loving and kind, with all forms of living 
languages and lessons for learning; come Ila, Eternal 
Speech Divine, the inner Light Divine, with potential 
knowledge of all attributes of divine and human 
existence; come Sarasvati, universal stream of the 
existential flow of eternal awareness with all the 
knowledge of existence. Come all three divine modes 


1086 RGVEDA 


of Word and Knowledge and grace the sacred vedi of 
our yajna. Come here and now, threefold mother of 
human knowledge and speech. 


तन्नस्तुरीपमध पोषयिलु देवं caste tert: स्य॑स्व । यतों 
वीरः कर्मण्यः सुदक्षो युक्तग्रावा जायंते देवकामः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tannasturipamadha posayitnu deva tvastarvi 
raranah syasva. Yato virah karmanyah sudakso 
yuktagrava jayate devakamah. 


O Tvashta, lord maker and refiner of forms in 
existence, brilliant and generous divinity, rejoicing in 
acts of creation and development, give us and internalise 
in us instant and developmental forms of that yajna 
which gives us the vitality of life and the science of 
development and sustenance through which is born a 
generation of youth, brave men of practical action, 
creative and generous, dedicated to yajnic programmes 
and the love of Divinity. 


वन॑स्पतेऽवं Usid camtiefa: शमिता स्तंदयाति | सेदु 
होता सत्यतरो यजाति यथां देवानां जनिमानि वेद॑ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vanaspate’va srjopa devanagnirhavih samita 
sudayati. Sedu hota satyataro yajati yatha 
devanam janimani veda. 


O Vanaspati, O sun, lord of light and preserver 
of forests, release the lights of brilliance, let the showers 
of light, energy and freshness come close to us and the 
powers of nature. Agni is the giver of peace and ripeness. 
It matures to fullness the sacred materials of yajna. It 
truly is the yajaka and the clarion call. It is true and 
truer to the divine law and integrates with all objects of 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 5 1087 


creation since it knows the origin and character of all 
the bountiful powers of nature and humanity. 


आ ata समिधानो अर्वाङिन्द्रेण देवैः सरथं Tey: | 
बर्हिनं आस्तामदितिः सुपुत्रा स्वाहां देवा अमृतां माद- 
यन्ताम्‌ ९९॥ 


11. A yahyagne samidhano arvanindrena devaih 
saratham turebhih. Barhirna astamaditih suputra 
svaha deva amrta madayantam. 


Agni, lord of light and fire and knowledge, guide 
and leader, come to us bright and blazing at the speed 
of energy with Indra, lord of might, and the devas, divine 
virtues of spirit and character on the chariot powered 
by sun-rays. Stay firm on our holy seats unshaken like 
space. Let mother earth be blest with noble children of 
noble action. Let the bright scholars of immortal spirit, 
knowledge and action rejoice with holy chant of divine 
speech. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 5 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


प्रत्ययिरूषसश्चेकितानोऽ बोधि fad: पदवीः कवीनाम्‌। 
प॒थुपाजां देवयद्भिः सपिन्दोऽप द्वारा तम॑सो वद्धिरावः॥ ९॥ 

I. Pratyagnirusasascekitano ’bodhi viprah padavih 
kavinam. Prthupaja devayadbhih samiddho’pa 
dvara tamaso vahniravah. 


Just as Agni, fire divine, light of the dawn, 
awakes, arises and awakens every morning, so does the 
man of knowledge, dynamic scholar, attaining to the 
positions of the men of light and vision, rise high and 
higher day by day and awaken the sleeping humanity. 


1088 RGVEDA 


Agni, mighty powerful, lighted and raised in the 
vedi by lovers of divinity, throws open the doors of light 
against darkness. So does the scholar, bearer and 
harbinger of the light of knowledge, dispel the darkness 
of ignorance and reveal the light of knowledge to a 
nation in slumber. 


wefrdtad स्तोमेभिर्गीर्भिंः स्तोतुणां न॑मस्य॑ sae: | 
पूर्ी्हतस्यं सन्दुशंश्चकानः सं दूतो अंद्यौदुषसो विरोके ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Predvagnirvavrdhe stomebhirgirbhih stotrnam 
namasya ukthaih. Purvirrtasya samdrsascakanah 
sam duto adyaudusaso viroke. 


Just as the adorable Agni grows in heat, light 
and power by the chant of songs and celebration of the 
devotees and then this harbinger of light adorns the 
morning with the bright and beautiful light of the dawn, 
so does the sagely scholar, dedicated to the light of 
eternal truth, shine in the lovely light of Revelation as 
the messenger of light and life divine for the people. 


अ्धाय्ययिर्मानुंषीषु faeaqut wat मित्र ऋतेन साधंन्‌। 
आ हर्यतो aaa: सान्व॑स्थादभूदु विप्रो weal मती- 
नाम्‌॥ U 

Adhayyagnirmanusisu viksvapam garbho mitra 
rtena sadhan. A haryato yajatah sanvasthada- 
bhudu vipro havyo matinam. 


Agni, heat and light of life, concentration of the 
power of action, born of the waters of space and currents 
of cosmic energy, friendly saviour, leader and guide to 
success by the laws of Truth and flow of the will to 
live, is established in the heart of human communities. 
Bright and beautiful, loved and adored, it abides on top 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 5 1089 


of values in human history. It is the sagely scholar and 
the dynamic leader worthy of homage and reverence 
for all intelligent people. 


मित्रो sifefafa acattical मित्रो होता वरुणो जातवेदाः । 
मित्रो अंध्वर्युरिंषिरो दमूना मित्रः सिन्धुंनामुत पर्व॑ता- 
APTS 


4. Mitro agnirbhavati yat samiddho mitro hota 
varuno jatavedah. Mitro adhvaryurisiro damuna 
mitrah sindhunamuta parvatanam. 


Agni rises as a friend when it is lighted and 
raised. As a yajaka conducting the yajna of evolution 
and development it is a friend. As the omniscient lord 
of existence and as presiding power of justice it is a 
friend. As the highpriest of the yajna of love and non- 
violence it is a friend, and as the power of inspiration 
and self-control it is a friend. And it is a friend as it 
flows with the rivers and rolls with the oceans. And 
finally it is a friend as it sits on top of mountains and 
sustains their steadiness. 


पातिं प्रियं रिपो अग्रं पदं वेः पाति aerator weer 
पाति नाभा सप्तशींर्षाणयमयिः पाति देवानामुपमादं- 
शन्तः ॥ ५९ ॥। 

0 Pati priyam ripo agram padam veh pati yahva- 
§caranam suryasya. Pati nabha saptasirsa- 
namagnih pati devanam-upamadam-rsvah. 

Agni protects the friend and favourite, it protects 
the amplitude of the earth in orbit, and the flight of birds. 


Mighty powerful, it protects the rainbow colours of light 
in space and the orbit of the sun in the galaxy. Noble, 


1090 RGVEDA 


elevated and sublime, it protects the pleasure and 
amusement of the noble people who are brilliant and 
generous. 


ऋभुश्च॑क्र dea चारु नाम विश्वानि देवो वयुनानि विद्धान्‌ । 
ससस्य चर्म घूतव॑त्पदं वेस्तदिदग्री र॑श्चत्यप्र॑युच्छन्‌ & ॥ 


6. Rbhuscakra idyam caru nama visvani devo 
vayunani vidvan. Sasasya carma ghrtavat padam 
vestadidagni raksatyaprayucchan. 


Mighty and versatile lord of light, omnipresent 
in all facts, motions and laws of the universe, Agni 
creates the soothing and adorable fluents such as speech 
and waters, and guards them all wholly, without 
reservation, and without let up. And whether it is 
manifest or latent it shines charming in form like the 
liquid flow of water or the rising flames of ghrta from the 
vedi. 


आ योनिंमिर्घतव॑न्तमस्थात्‌ पृथुप्र॑गाणमुशन्त॑मुशानः। 
दीद्यानः शुचिंऋष्वः पावकः पुन॑-पुनर्मातरा नव्य॑सी कः ॥ ७॥ 


ae A yonimagnirghrtavantamasthat prthupraga- 
namusantamusanah. Didyanah Ssucirrsvah 
pavakah punah punarmatara navyasi kah. 


Loving and brilliant Agni, as the eminent 
scholar, blazing pure and radiating fire, abides in the 
seat since birth itself, overflowing with ghrta and 
celestial waters, worthy of extensive songs of praise 
and celebration, loving and glorious, and constantly, 
again and again, renews, refreshes and reinforces its 
generators, loving parents, earth and sky. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 5 1091 


सद्यो जात ओष॑धीभिर्ववक्चे यदी वर्धन्ति प्रस्वो! घृतेन॑ | 
आपंडव प्रवता शुम्भ॑माना उरुष्यदशिः पित्रोरुपस्थे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sadyo jata osadhibhirvavakse yadi vardhanti 
prasvo ghrtena. Apa iva pravata sumbhamana 
urusyadagnih pitrorupasthe. 


As soon as Agni is born, it is borne and grows, 
in, with, and by, the herbs which, like nursing mothers, 
increase it and themselves grow bright and green with 
the waters and sunrays flowing down. Thus does Agni, 
flowing like streams of life’s vitality, grow and evolve 
in the lap of its parents, earth and sky, the mother and 
the father, and thus does it preserve, protect and continue 
the onward flow of life. 


उदु ष्टुतः समिधा यहयो अद्यौद्र्ष्म treat अधि नार्भा 
पृथिव्याः | मित्रो अभथिरीड्यो' मातरिश्वा ऽऽदूतो 
वक्षद्यजर्थाय देवान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


ध Udu stutah samidha yahvo adyaud varsman divo 
adhi nabha prthivyah. Mitro agniridyo matari- 
sva’’duto vaksad yajathaya devan. 


Agni, mighty spirit of life, raised, praised and 
worshipped with holy food shines over heaven and earth 
raining in showers from heaven on the vedi of mother 
earth. Friend and saviour, adorable Agni breathes in and 
collects the vitality of life from nature’s currents of 
energy and, as the very messenger of Divinity, brings 
the light and virtues of nature’s bounties for the lover 
and performer of yajna. 


उद॑स्तम्भीत्समिधा नाक॑मृष्वो ३5 भिर्भवनरुत्तमो रोचनानाम्‌। 
यदी भृगुभ्यः परि मातरिश्वा war सन्तं हव्यवाहं 
समीधे ॥ Qo tl 


1092 RGVEDA 


10. Udastambhit samidha nakamrsvo’ gnirbhava- 
nnuttamo rocananam. Yadi bhrgubhyah pari 
matarisva guha santam havyavaham samidhe. 


Mighty Agni being the highest of luminaries, 
living, breathing, shining and abiding as the very breath 
of life in the middle regions of space, holds and sustains 
the heavenly regions of light and bliss with its blazing 
light and power, for the sake of the wise and brilliant 
scholars of science, art and technology. It abides in the 
heart of every soul and in the centre of every particle of 
matter and every wave of energy. I pray I may also light 
this power that brings all the fragrant bounties of life to 
its devotees. 


sor पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः शश्वत्तमं हव॑मानाय साध | 
स्यान्नः सूनुस्तन॑यो विजावाऽग्रे सा ते सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Jlamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo 
vijava’gne sa te sumatirbhitvasme. 


Agni, refulgent lord of light and universal breath 
of life, give us that transcendent vision and wisdom, 
that divine speech and power of action which makes 
everything possible in life. Give us ample land, 
knowledge and earthly speech of the Divine Word, most 
blissful which brings success to the devotee dedicated 
to yajna so that an exceptional generation of children 
and grand children may rise in the community. Agni, 
lord of light, we pray, such may be your favour, such 
may be your benign eye and goodwill toward us. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 6 1093 


Mandala 3/Sukta 6 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


प्रकारवो मनना वच्यर्माना देवद्रीची नयत देवयन्तः । 
दश्चिणावाड्‌ वाजिनी प्राच्येति हविर्भरन्त्यग्रये घृताची! ut ९ ॥ 


i. Pra karavo manana vacyamana devadricim 
nayata devayantah. Daksinavad vajini pracyeti 
havirbharantyagnaye ghrtact. 


Artists, scientists, workers and experts of yajnic 
work of creation and development, inspired by the voice 
of thought and deep reflection, dedicated to the bounties 
of nature and Divinity, take up the yajnic activity that 
would lead to the divine goal of your imagination. Take 
up the ghrtachi, the ladle of yajnic offering full of ghrta 
bearing the fragrant materials to be offered into the fire 
of yajna as inputs, let it be potent and procreative, the 
abundant giver of holy reward moving in full gear and 
take the project forward. 


आ रोद॑सी अपृणा जायमान उत प्र Raer अथ नु Wasa | 
feafsaen महिना पृथिव्या वच्यन्तां ते ada: सप्त- 
जिह्वाः ॥ २॥ 


2. A rodasi aprna jayamana uta pra riktha adha nu 
prayajyo. Divascidagne mahina prthivya vacya- 
ntam te vahnayah saptajihvah. 


O fire of cosmic yajna rising from the vedi, fill 
the heaven and earth with fragrance, fertility and 
prosperity. O yajaka, eliminate the weaknesses, exhaust 
the possibilities of excellence, and then retire and call 
it a day. And with the glory of heaven and majesty of 
the earth, the seven flames of fire with tongues of gold 


1094 RGVEDA 


would speak for you in words loud and bold ringing 
across the spaces. 


diva त्वा पृथिवी यज्ञियासो नि होतारं सादयन्ते दर्माय। 
यदी विशो मानुषीर्देवयन्तीः प्रय॑स्वतीरीव्छते शुक्र- 
मर्चिः॥ ३॥ 


3; Dyausca tva prthivi yajniyaso ni hotaram 
sadayante damaya. Yadi viso manusirdevayan- 
tth prayasvatirilate sukramarcih. 


When the human communities in pursuit of the 
service and bounties of nature and the divinities of 
heaven and earth, worship Agni, pure, powerful and 
radiant in their state of abundance, prosperity and 
generosity, then heaven and earth, and the divinities and 
the yajakas consecrate and dedicate the high-priest of 
the yajnic commonwealth to the law of peace and self- 
sacrifice. 

महान्त्सधस्थे ya आ निष॑त्तोऽ न्तर्यावा माहिन हर्यमाणः। 
आस्क्र सपत्नी अजरे अपरक्त Gada उरुगायस्य॑ धेनू ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Mahantsadhasthe dhruva a nisatto’ntardyava 
mahine haryamanah. Askre sapatni ajare amrkte 
sabardughe urugayasya dhenu. 


Agni, the high-priest of cosmic yajna, great and 
gracious, is happily and firmly established in his seat in 
the vast and joyous dominion between heaven and earth, 
which both, united and cooperative rivals, unaging and 
uninjured, yielding the nectar-milk of the world are his 
generous cows. 


व्रता d अग्ने महतो महानि तव रत्वा रोद॑सी आ त॑तन्थ । 
त्वं दूतो अभवो जाय॑मान स्त्वं नेता वूंषभ चर्षणीनाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 6 1095 


5. Vrata te agne mahato mahani tava kratva rodasi 
a tatantha. Tvam duto abhavo jayamanstvam neta 
vrsabha carsaninam. 


Agni, lord great and gracious, your laws and 
ordinances, your acts and self-discipline are greater than 
the greatest. By virtue of your creative and yajnic action 
the heaven and earth expand in glory and prosperity. 
Instantly on your rise you become the harbinger of 
peace, progress and happiness, messenger of bliss. Lord 
generous and potent, you are the guide and leader of 
the people of the world. 


waded वा केशिना योग्याभिवरघतस्तुवा रोहिता धुरि धिष्व । 
अथा व॑ह देवान्देव विश्वान्त्स्वध्वरा कुणुहि जातवेदः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Rtasya va kesina yogyabhirghrtasnuva rohita 
dhuri dhisva. Atha vaha devan deva 17514 - 
ntsvadhvara krnuhi jatavedah. 


And to the steer of your chariot of the flow of 
existence and the Law, yoke the flaming currents of 
energy with the operative reins of centrifugal and 
centripetal forces of nature, blazing with light, and thus, 
O Jataveda, lord of light, knowing as you do all that is 
born and exists, bring in all the devas, divinities of nature 
and nobilities of humanity together and make them 
participate in the yajnic programme of the world. 


दिवश्चिदा ते रुचयन्त रोका उषो वि॑भातीरनु भासि पूर्वीः | 
अपो यदग्र उशधग्वनेषु होतुर्मन्द्रस्य॑ पनयंन्त देवाः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Divascida te rucayanta roka uso vibhatiranu 


bhasi purvih. Apo yadagna usadhagvanesu 
hoturmandrasya panayanta devah. 


1096 RGVEDA 


Bright and blissful are your lights of heaven. 
You shine in the radiance of the eternal dawns of the 
morning. And as you blaze upon the forests with might 
and splendour and the vapours arise in steamy fragrance, 
divinities burst into song in praise of the cosmic 
sacrificer beaming with joy. 


उरौ वा ये अन्तरिश्चे मद॑न्ति feat वाये रोचने सन्तिं Sar: 1 
wut al ये सुहवासो यज॑त्रा आयेमिरे रथ्यो अग 
अश्वाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Urau va ye antarikse madanti divo va ye rocane 
santi devah. Uma va ye suhavaso yajatra ayemire 
rathyo agne asvah. 


And those who rejoice in the wide wide skies, 
or the shining ones who exult in the glory of the highest 
heavens of light, or those friendly, protective, adorable 
companions whose culture is cooperation and self- 
sacrifice, may they all, O lord of light and joy, Agni, 
direct their beams of light and chariot horses, like senses 
and intelligence, hitherward under full control. 


tia सरथं याद्ययर्वाङ्नानार थं at विभवो avat: 1 
पलीवतस्तिंशतं त्रींश्च॑ देवान॑नुष्वधमा ae मादयस्व ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Aibhiragne saratham yahyarvan nanaratham va 
vibhavo hyasvah. Patnivatastrimsatam trimsca 
devananusvadhama vaha madayasva. 


With these devas, come hither to us, Agni, Spirit 
of light and fire, knowledge and power and the ecstasy 
of life, come by one chariot or many. Exalted and 
omnipresent and expansive are your beams of light 
which transport your chariot over the quarters of space. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 6 1097 


Bring along the thirty-three devas, divinities of nature 
and spirit, all bountiful, with all their virtues and 
attributes and rejoice in the beauty of life with us. 


स होता यस्य रोद॑सी चिदुर्वी assaf वृधे गणीतः। 
प्राचीं अध्वरेव॑ं तस्थतुः सुमेके ऋतावरी ऋ तर्जातस्य 
सत्ये ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sahota yasya rodasi cidurvi yajnamyajnamabhi 
vrdhe grnitah. Praci adhvareva tasthatuh sumeke 
rtavari rtajatasya satye. 


He is Agni, the cosmic sacrificer in whose 
honour and for whose exaltation the vast earth and high 
heaven sing in celebration and prayer at every yajnic 
programme of evolution and progress. Prime powers 
of the universe, both of them, like two yajna-vedis of 
the yajna of love and non-violence, stay and abide 
beautifully established in the cosmic order dedicated to 
truth and overflowing with vitality in the universal law 
of the lord himself manifested in the truth and law of 
eternal mother Prakrti. 


sotan पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः रंश्वत्तमं हव॑मानाय साध | 
स्यान्नः सूनुस्तन॑यो विजावाऽग्रे सा ते सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Jlamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo 
vijava’gne sa te sumatir-bhitvasme. 


Agni, lord of heaven and earth, give us, we pray, 
the abundance of mother earth which overflows with 
possibilities of action and achievement. Give us liberal 
gifts of cows and the universal form of speech and 
knowledge and lasting wealth. Make it possible for the 


1098 RGVEDA 


performer of yajna. Bless us with brave and heroic 
children and grand children. Bless us with the favour of 
your kindness and benevolence under your benign eye. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 7 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


प्रय आरूः Pifageed धासेरा मातरां विविशुः aa वाणीः | 
परिक्षिता पितरा सं च॑रेते प्र dete दीर्घमायुः प्रयक्षे ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Pra ya aruh Sitiprsthasya dhasera matara vivisuh 
sapta vanth. Pariksita pitara sam carete pra 
sarsrate dirghamayuh prayakse. 


Seven penetrative currents of the golden fire of 
divine energy radiate carrying the seven streams of 
sound waves and fill their generative parents, all 
pervasive heaven and earth. Pervaded, the generators, 
heaven and earth, cooperate and, to keep on the fire 
and flow of the voice of cosmic yajna, they sustain the 
life and energy of the currents a long age without end 
for the devotee. 


दिवक्च॑सो धेनवो वृष्णो अश्वां देवीरा त॑स्थौ मधुंमदहन्तीः 1 
ऋतस्य त्वा सद॑सि श्चेमयन्तं पर्येका चरति वर्तनिं गौः ॥ २॥ 


0.0 Divaksaso dhenavo vrsno asva devira tasthau 
madhumad vahantth. Rtasya tva sadasi ksema- 
yantam paryeka carati vartanim gauh. 


The waves of sound, eternal Vak, voice of 
omniscience, pervade the spaces. The currents of energy 
of the generous and omnipotent lord, Agni, are 
omnipresent. The lord alone pervades the celestial 
streams of energy and speech carrying the honey sweets 


MANDAL - 3 / ऽ <^ -7 1099 


of meaning and life’s wealth. In this world of truth and 
eternal law, O lord protector of all life and light, Agni, 
one energy, like a cow or the earth, goes round and round 
in orbit doing homage to you. 


आ सींमरोहत्सुयमा भव॑न्तीः पतिश्चिकित्वात्रयिविद्रयी - 
णाम्‌। प्र नील्पृष्ठो अतसस्य॑ धासेस्ता अंवासयत्पुरुध- 
Udita: ३॥ 


a A simarohat suyama bhavantih patiscikitvan 
rayivid rayinam. Pra nilaprstho atasasya dhase- 
sta avasayat purudhapratikah. 


Agni, sustainer of life, lord of light and 
knowledge of the physical world, wielder of universal 
wealth, the sun, ruler of the day, rides the waves of light 
and energy well directed and controlled in the world of 
existence. And he of the blue back, the corona, 
multifarious of form and colour, sustains the various 
species of life and helps them to settle and enjoy 
themselves. 


मदि त्वाष्टमूर्जयंन्तीरजुर्य स्त॑भूयमानं वहतो! वहन्ति । 
व्यद्धेभिर्विद्युतानः सधस्थ एकामिव रोद॑सी आ विवेश ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Mahi tvastramurjayantirajuryam stabhuyama- 
nam vahato vahanti. Vyangebhirdidyutanah 
sadhastha ekamiva rodast 4 vivesa. 


Strengthening and refreshing the great, creative, 
shaping, unaging and sustaining power of the sun, 
lustrous bearer of the solar system, the currents of Agni’s 
energy flow. Radiant in the regions of light, illuminating 
and invigorating with its various powers, the sun 
operates in heaven and earth as in one united, integrated 


1100 RGVEDA 


organismic system in the cosmic body of the Lord 
Supreme. 


जानन्ति वृष्णो अरुषस्य Saya ब्रध्नस्य शास॑ने रणन्ति | 
दिवोरुचः सुरुचो रोच॑माना sar येषां गण्या माहिना 
गीः॥ ५॥ 


श Jananti vrsno arusasya $evamuta bradhnasya 
Sasane rananti. Divorucah suruco rocamana 
ila yesam ganya mahina gih. 


They know the peace, comfort and joy of living 
under the rule and order of the generous, radiant and 
mighty ruler of the world, and they rejoice and sing in 
ecstasy, whose songs of Divinity are great and 
worshipful, radiant and illuminative as the light of 
heaven, and sublime and deep as eternity. 


उतो पितृभ्यां प्रविदानु घोषं महो महद्धरयामनयन्त शूषम्‌ । 
उक्षा ह यत्र परि धानमक्तोरनु स्वं धाम जरितुर्ववक्ष us ॥ 


6. Uto pitrbhyam pravidanu ghosam maho maha- 
dbhyamanayanta susam. Uksa ha yatra pari 
dhanamaktoranu svam dhama jariturva-vaksa. 


And young people from adorable parents, 
teachers, heaven and earth receive the great wealth of 
light and joy of life and the Divine Word in response to 
their holy voice of knowledge and piety, when the 
generous lord of light bestows upon the celebrant his 
own vestment of light and glory when the veil of 
darkness is removed at the end of the night. 


अध्वर्युभिः पञ्चभिः aa faut: प्रियं ted निहितं पदं 
वेः । प्राञ्चो मदन्त्युक्षणो अजुर्या देवा देवानामनु हि व्रता 
गुः॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 7 1101 


7. Adhvaryubhih pancabhih sapta viprah priyam 
raksante nihitam padam veh. Pranco madantyu- 
ksano ajurya deva devanamanu hi vrata guh. 


Along with five highpriests, seven sages, 
divinely inspired scholars secure and maintain Agni’s 
dear and favourite place of worship on the vedi. The 
generous and powerful sagely performers, confident and 
untiring, facing the east, rejoice in the ritual and act in 
accordance with the laws and ordinances of the 
divinities of nature and humanity and the will of the 
lord of cosmic law. 


दैव्या STANT प्रथमा Asst सप्त Yara: स्वधय। मदन्ति | 
ऋतं शंस॑न्त ऋतमित्त अहरन्‌ व्रतं व्रतपा दीध्यानाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Daivya hotara prathama nyrnje sapta prksasah 
svadhaya madanti. Rtam samsanta rtamit ta 
ahuranu vratam vratapa didhyanah. 


I honour and reverence the two pioneer priests 
of divinity. Seven priests, sprinkling the vedi with water 
and ghrta, rejoice with the holy freedom and fragrance 
and their own ecstasy. Celebrating and speaking of the 
divine law of truth and nature, they say that the real 
version of law and truth is: know it, act it, this is It. And 
observing the law strictly in accordance with the dictates 
of law, rejoicing in the law, they shine in life, 
illuminating others too. 


वृषायन्ते महे stele पूर्वीर्वृष्णे चित्राय॑ र॒श्मय॑ः सुयामाः | 
देव॑ होतर्मन्द्रत॑रश्चिक्त्वान्महो caida एह afar ॥ ९ ॥ 
ee Vrsayante mahe atyaya purvirvrsne citraya 


rasmayah suyamah. Deva hotarmandratarasci- 
kitvan maho devan rodasi eha vaksi. 


1102 RGVEDA 


Eternal rays of light and bliss, controlled and 
well directed, rain in showers rising in power and 
generosity in homage to the lord sublime, transcendent, 
potent and most wonderful. O lord of light and wealth, 
high-priest of cosmic yajna, joyous and blissful, all 
aware and ever wakeful, bring us the light and glory 
and the bounties of heaven and earth here and now. 


पृक्षप्र॑यजो द्रविणः सुवाचं: Uda उषसो Tagg: | उतो 
चिदग्ने महिना often: कृतं चिदेनः सं महे द॑शस्य ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Prksaprayajo dravinah suvacah suketava usaso 
revadusuh. Uto cidagne mahina prthivyah 
krtam cidenah sam mahe daSasya. 


Munificent yajakas, blest with wealth of energy, 
blissfully vocal and highly expressive, refulgent with 
holy light, the dawns of divinity, rise and shine bearing 
the wealth of nature. And you, O lord of cosmic yajna, 
Agni, for the sake of the great earth and her children, 
with the mighty blaze of majesty, eliminate from the 
world whatever sin or crime or evil has ever been 
committed. 


son पुरुदसं सनिं गोः शश्वत्तमं हव॑मानाय साध। 
स्यान्नः सूनुस्तनयो विजावाऽग्रे सा ते सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Jlamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo 
vijava’gne sa te sumatirbhutvasme. 


The holy Word and vision of Eternity, all-giving, 
abundance of the earth, everlasting of value, O lord of 
light and might of the universe, Agni, create and bless 
upon the supplicant yajaka. May there arise for us a 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 8 1103 


generation of youth and children, dynamic and potent, 
and may we ever enjoy, we pray, the favours of your 
love and benevolence, living under your benign eye. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 8 
Vishvedeva Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


अञ्जन्ति त्वाम॑ध्वरे दैवयन्तो वन॑स्पते मधुना deals 
aged erst द्रविणेह ध॑त्ताद्यद्वा क्षयो मातुर स्या 
उपस्थे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Anjanti tvamadhvare devayanto vanaspate 
madhuna daivyena. Yadurdhvastistha dravi-neha 
dhattad yad va ksayo maturasya upasthe. 


Vanaspati, lord of sunbeams and earth’s 
greenery, aspiring lovers of divinity celebrate you in 
their yajnic programmes of education, governance and 
administration, and economic management and 
production, and they honour you with the celestial 
presentation of honeyed words in faith. Whether you 
abide higher up in the heavens or lie here nestled in the 
folds of this mother earth’s bosom, bear and bring, we 
pray, the riches of existence for the supplicants. 


समिंब्धस्य श्रय॑माणः पुरस्ताद्‌ ब्रहम वन्वानो अजरं सुवीरम्‌ | 
आरे अस्मदमतिं बाधमान उच्छ्रयस्व महते सौभ॑गाय ।॥ २॥ 


2. Samiddhasya s§rayamanah purastad brahma 
vanvano ajaram suviram. Are asmadamatim 
badhamana ucchrayasva mahate saubhagaya. 


Vanaspati, lord of light and wealth of greenery 
and earth’s fertility, staying firm forward and sharing 
the refreshing fragrance of the lighted fire, loving food 


1104 RGVEDA 


and energy growth and exaltation of the spirit, keeping 
off vitiation of mind and intelligence far away from us, 
abide by us, we pray, constantly for the bliss of great 
good fortune and all round prosperity. 


उच्छ्रयस्व वनस्पते वर्ष्मन्पृथिव्या अधिं। 
सुमिती मीयमानो वर्चो धा यज्ञवाहसे ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Ucchrayasva vanaspate varsman prthivya adhi. 
Sumiti miyamano varco dha yajnavahase. 


Guardian and protector of all round wealth of 
life, Vanaspati, generous giver of showers of rain and 
wealth of the world, abide by us, we pray, and stand 
guard high and firm on the earth, mapping, measuring, 
valuing noble intelligence, and bear and bring the light 
and lustre of life for the guardian and promoter of yajna. 


gat सुवासाः परिवीत आगात्स उ श्रेयान्भवति जाय॑मानः | 
तं धीरासः कवय उन्न॑यन्ति स्वाध्यो मन॑सा देव॒यन्त॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yuva suvasah parivita agat sa u Ssreyan bhavati 
jayamanah. Tam dhirasah kavaya unnayanti 
svadhyo manasa devayantah. 


Let the young graduate come back home, 
decently robed, graceful, brilliant as the rising sun, 
auspicious, reborn through education as a scholar. 
Eminent and sagely scholars, creative minds of sublime 
imagination, highly learned, seekers of divinity with 
sincere mind and soul may continue to guide and lead 
the scholar onward. 


जातो जायते सुदिनत्वे stat सपर्य आ विदथे वर्धमानः | 
पुनन्ति धीरा अपसों मनीषा देवया विप्र उदिंयतिं 
वाच॑म्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 8 1105 


a Jato jayate sudinatve ahnam samarya a vidathe 
vardhamanah. Punanti dhira apaso manisa 
devaya vipra udiyarti vacam. 


The one who is born and then reborn in the holy 
light of auspicious days rises to eminence in the yajnic 
programmes and conscientious battles of practical life 
in action. Noble leading lights, wise and grave, veterans 
of action, with thought, reflection and meditation, purify 
and sanctify the vibrant scholar, and he rises and attains 
to the life and meaning of the holy Word with dedication 
to the pursuit of divinity among humanity. 


यान्वो नरों देवयन्तो निपिम्युर्वन॑स्पते स्वधिंतिर्वां ततश्च । 
ते देवासः स्वर॑वस्तस्थिवांसंः प्रजावदस्मे दिधिषन्तु 
रत्न॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yan vo naro devayanto nimimyurvanaspate 
svadhitirva tataksa. Te devasah svaravasta- 
sthivamsah prajavadasme didhisantu ratnam. 


O leading lights of society, those pious people 
in pursuit of divine virtue who love you, honour and 
value you, and O Vanaspati, lord of light, those whom 
the shaping power of Divinity has refined with 
knowledge and culture, may all those magnificent 
scholars, self-luminous in their own words, balanced 
and firm in judgement and wisdom, blest with people 
and progeny, bear and bring the jewels of life for us. 


ये वृक्णासो अधि क्षमि Fae यतस्रुचः | 
ते नों व्यन्तु वार्य, देवत्रा क्षैत्रसाधंसः ॥ ७॥ 


qe Ye vrknaso adhi ksami nimitaso yatasrucah. 
Te no vyantu varyam devatra ksetrasadhasah. 


1106 RGVEDA 


Those who are exceptionally distinguished on 
the earth, masters of eternal and measured knowledge, 
devoted yajnics with the holy ladle upraised and 
successful in any field of knowledge and action — may 
those lovers of Divinity achieve and bring the most 
cherished wealth and values of life for us. 


आदित्या ear वस॑वः सुनीथा द्यावाक्षामा परथिवी अन्त- 
Rem स॒जोष॑सो य॒ज्ञम॑वन्तु देवा ऊर्ध्वं कुण्वन्त्वध्वरस्यं 
कतुम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Aditya rudra vasavah sunitha dyavaksama prthivi 
antariksam. Sajosaso yajnamavantu deva 
urdhvam krnvantvadhvarasya ketum. 


May the twelve Adityas, sun in the zodiacs, 
Rudras, ten pranic energies and the individual soul, and 
the eight Vasus, abodes and supports of life, heaven and 
earth, and the regions of the middle space, all wide and 
generous as earth, all divine powers of mother nature 
and agents of Divinity, protect and promote the yajna 
of life and raise our knowledge, practice and awareness 
of Dharma, love and non-violence. 


Sass श्रेणिशो यतानाः शुक्रा TAA: स्वर॑वो न आगुः । 
उन्नीयमानाः कविभिः पुरस्तादेवा देवानामपि यत्ति 
पाथंः॥९॥ 

9. Hamsa iva sreniso yatanah sukra vasanah sva- 
ravo na aguh.Unniyamanah kavibhih purasta- 
ddeva devanamapi yanti pathah. 

Just as hansa birds, pure white in beautiful 
plume, flying in line formation, singing and rejoicing, 
traverse the skies, so do the Devas, brilliant scholars 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 8 1107 


and generous yajna performers raised and guided by 
poetic teachers since ancient times, working, singing 
and rejoicing together, bless us and go forward by the 
paths of divines. 


शृद्घणी वेच्छङ्किणां सं ददृशो चषालवन्तः cava: 
प॒थिव्याम्‌। वाघद्धिंर्वां विहवे श्रोष॑माणा अस्मो अवन्तु 
TATA ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Srmganivecchrnginam sam dadrsre casdlavan-tah 
svaravah prthivyam. Vaghadbhirva vihave Srosa- 
mana asman avantu prtandajyesu. 


Like the horns of animals they look good and 
beautiful, protective. Enjoying many good things of life, 
hearing hymns of adoration, performing yajna with 
singing priests in the assembly, may holy men and 
distinguished scholars protect us in the battles of life 
on the earth. 


वनस्पते शतवल्शो वि Ve सहस्रवल्शा वि वयं रुहेम । यं 
त्वामयं स्वधिंतिस्तज॑ंमानः प्रणिनाय महते सोभ॑गाय ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Vanaspate satavalso vi roha sahasravalsa vi 
vayam ruhema. Yam tvamayam svadhitiste- 
jamanah praninaya mahate saubhagaya. 


Vanaspati, lord of sunbeams and greenery of the 
earth, yajnic scholar, generous giver, just as a tree grows 
into a hundred shoots and branches and then to a 
thousand, so may you grow a hundred-fold, and let us 
grow too into a thousand shoots and branches. And may 
this divine thunderbolt of fire and lightning power help 
you to rise and grow manifold in grandeur and all round 
prosperity. 


1108 RGVEDA 


Mandala 3/Sukta 9 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


Tatra ववृमहे देवं मतीस aaa । अपां नपातं सुभगं 
सुदीदिंतिं सुप्रतूर्तिमनेहसरम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ie Sakhayastva vavrmahe devam martasa Uutaye. 
Apam napatam subhagam sudiditim supratur- 
timanehasam. 


Agni, lord of brilliance, friends we are, human, 
mortals all. We choose you as our guide and leader for 
the sake of protection and victory. You are immortal, 
imperishable in the flow of existence and the flux of 
karma, treasure home of good fortune, auspicious flame 
of inspiration, faster than light and free from sin and 
violence. 


काय॑मानो वना त्वं यन्मातृरजंगत्रपः। 
न तत्ते अये प्रमृषे निवर्तनं यद्‌ दूरे सन्निहाभ॑वः॥ २॥ 


2: Kayamano vana tvam yanmatrrajagannapah. Na 
tat te agne pramrse nivartanam yad dure sanni- 
habhavah. 


Agni, lord and lover of light and knowledge, 
giver of light and knowledge, when you go to the waters, 
vibrant mother sources of light and energy, that going 
away is not to be endured, nor to be forgotten or 
neglected, because while you are away, you are still near 
at hand with your light. Hence I have the best that is 
worthy of love and value from you. 


अतिं तृष्टं व॑वक्चिथाथेव सुमना असि | 
प्रप्रान्ये यन्ति पर्यन्य आसते येषां सख्ये असिं चितः ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 9 1109 


a Ati trstam vavaksithathaiva sumana asi. Pra- 
pranye yanti paryanya asate yesam sakhye asi 
Sritah. 


The one who is very keen, thirsting for 
knowledge and other things of value, you speak to and 
bear across. Hence you are good at heart, happy and 
cheerful. Of those you sit with in a spirit of friendship, 
some go forward, others sit at peace and meditate. Yet 
others just sit still with you and do nothing else. 


ईयिवांसमति स्रिधः शश्व॑तीरति asad: । अन्वींमविन्द- 
fafertal अद्रहोऽ प्सु सिंहमिव श्चितम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. TIyivamsamati sridhah Ssasvatirati sascatah. 
Anvimavindan niciraso adruho’psu simhamiva 
Sritam. 


Extremely patient, deeply dedicated to eternal 
energies, O seekers, working together without a trace 
of jealousy, find the fire and electric energy existing 
vibrantly in the currents of waters and winds and 
vapours in space hidden like a lion in the forest. 


weatditra त्मनाथिमित्था तिरोहितम्‌ | ठेनं नयन्मातरिर्वां 
परावतो! देवेभ्यो मथितं परि ॥ ५॥ 


9 Sasrvamsamiva tmanda’ gnimittha tirohitam. Enam 
nayanmatarisva paravato devebhyo mathitam 
pari. 


Active by its very nature but hidden, this Agni- 
energy is thus present in space. Matarishva, mighty 
currents of celestial and terrestrial wind from far around 
churn and bring this fire and electric energy to the 
brilliant and dedicated scholars for noble humanity. 


1110 RGVEDA 


तं त्वा मती अगृभ्णत देवेभ्यो हव्यवाहन | विश्वान्यद्यजञों 
अंधिपासिं मानुष तव क्रत्वा यविष्ठ्य ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tam tva marta agrbhnata devebhyo havyavahana. 
Visvan yad yajnan abhipasi manusa tava kratva 
yavisthya. 


Such as you are, Agni, carrier and harbinger of 
holy materials for the good life, the mortals thus receive 
the power through yajnic scholars for yajnic humanity, 
and thus do you, O youthful energy, feed and promote 
all creative and productive yajnic programmes of 
humanity with your power and operation. 


dee तव॑ दंसना पाकाय चिच्छदयति। 
त्वां aan usta: स॒मास॑ते समिंब्दमपिशर्वरे ॥। ७॥ 


ce Tad bhadram tava damsana pakaya cicchadayati. 
Tvam yadagne pasavah samasate samiddhama- 
pisarvare. 


That is your holy action, precious gift, O power 
of fire, which gratifies and advances humanity to 
maturity and the good life, and as even the animals in 
winter nights come and sit round the burning fire for 
relief from the cold, so do humans, O brilliant and fiery 
scholar, come to you and receive the light of knowledge 
and warmth of life against the cold and dark winter 
nights of ignorance. 


आ जुंहोता स्वध्वरं शीरं पावको चिषम्‌। 
आशुं दूतम॑जिरं प्रलमीङ्यं श्रुष्टी देवं स॑पर्यत ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. A juhota svadhvaram Siram pavakaSsocisam. Asum 


dutamajiram pratnamidyam srusti devam sapar- 
yata. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 10 1111 


Invoke, enlight, adore and enthusiastically 
serve, and immediately receive the gifts of Agni, light, 
energy and power of nature and Divinity: loving, 
nonviolent and giving, latent and omnipresent energy, 
pure and purifying light and fire, instantly operative, 
universal carrier and messenger, fast as lightning, 
eternal, adorable and divine. 


त्रीणि शाता त्री सहस्राण्य त्रिंशच्च देवा नव॑ चासपर्यन्‌ । 
ओश्चन्धृतैरस्तुणन्वर्हिरंस्मा आदिन्दोतारं न्य॑सादयन्त ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Trini Sata tri sahasranyagnim trimsacca deva 
nava casaparyan. Auksan ghrtairastrnan barhi- 
rasma adiddhotaram nyasadayanta. 


Three hundred, three thousand, thirty, and nine 
Devas, principles of nature, serve this Agni. They 
sprinkle it with ghrta, cover the vedi with holy grass and 
then afterward consecrate this high-priest of cosmic yajna 
on the seat for the conduct and completion of the yajna. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 10 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


त्वामग्रे मनीषिणः सप्राजं चर्षणीनाम्‌। 
देवं adhe इन्धते सम॑ध्व॒रे ।॥ ९॥ 


iF Tvamagne manisinah samrajam carsaninam. 
Devam martasa indhate samadhvare. 


Agni, lord self-refulgent, benign and majestic 
ruler supreme of the world and her children, thoughtful, 
reflective and meditative people light, raise and worship 
you in their yajnic programmes of love and non-violence 
in the service of humanity and the environment. 


1112 RGVEDA 


त्वां यज्ेष्वृत्विजमग्ने होता।रमीच्छते। 
गोपा ऋतस्य दीदिहि स्वे द्मे ॥ २॥ 


2 Tvam yajnesvrtvijamagne hotaramilate. 
Gopa rtasya didihi sve dame. 


Agni, holy men, observers and guardians of 
Rtam, the cosmic law of truth, worship you in their yajna 
and celebrate you as the high-priest and performer of 
the universal yajna of creation. O lord, bless them to 
shine with the light of knowledge in the world which is 
the very home of the law of truth and rectitude. 


सघा यस्ते ददाशति समिधा जातवेदसे । 
सो अग्रे धत्ते सुवीर्यं स पुष्यति ॥ ३॥ 


5 Sa gha yaste dadaSsati samidha jatavedase. 
So agne dhatte suviryam sa pusyati. 


Agni, lord omnificent, that person alone for sure 
is blest with vital energy and lustrous power and rises 
all round in life who gives in yajnic acts in the service 
of lord omniscient of existence, with fuel kindled with 
knowledge and rising faith. 


स केतुरंध्वराणमयिर्देवेथिरा ग॑मत्‌। 
अञ्जानः सप्त होतुंभिर्हविष्म॑ते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa keturadhvaranamagnirdevebhira gamat. 
Anjanah sapta hotrbhirhavismate. 


Agni, that rising fire of the yajnas of love and 
non-violent creation, raised by seven divine performers, 
1.e., five pranas, one mind and one intellect, or, five 
priests and the yajamana couple, comes as a flaming 
messenger proclaiming the liberal gifts of yajna for the 
person who offers fragrant libations of holy materials 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 10 1113 


into the fire. Agni comes with gifts and the devas, 
divinities of nature and humanity. 


प्र होत्र पूर्व्य वचोऽग्रयें भरता बृहत्‌ । 
विपां ज्योतींषि fase न वेधसे ।॥ ५॥ 


Pra hotre purvyam 14८0 ’gnaye bharata brhat. 
Vipam jyotimsi bibhrate na vedhase. 


O wise saints and scholars, just as you offer 
fragrant oblations to Agni, lord ordainer of the world 
who wields the wide spaces and bears the lights of 
brilliant stars inspired with the spirit of divinity, so offer 
the gift of the supreme eternal voice of Divinity to the 
yajamana performer who bears in faith the lights of 
inspired sages. 


sift वर्धन्तु नो गिरो यतो जाय॑त उक्थ्यः 1 
महे वाजाय द्रविंणाय esta: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Agnim vardhantu no giro yato jayata ukthyah. 
Mahe vajaya dravinaya darsatah. 


For the sake of great energy and wealth of life, 
let our voices rise, and exalt and celebrate Agni, lord of 
light and omniscience, blissful vision of Eternity, 
whence arises the sagely scholar, admirable gift of 
Agni’s, whose very sight is holy and auspicious for the 
attainment of strength and real wealth of life. 


अग्ने यजिष्ठो अध्वरे देवान्देवयते aa | 
होता मन्द्रो वि राजस्यति fetal: ॥ ७॥ 


7. Agne yajistho adhvare devan devayate yaja. 
Hota mandro vi rajasyati sridhah. 


Agni, in the yajna, creative programme of love 


1114 RGVEDA 


and non-violence, you are the most adorable. Bring the 
devas, holy divinities, for the yajamana who loves to 
be with the divinities. You are the giver and performer, 
happy giver of happiness, over-shining and over- 
winning the stingy and selfish uncreators. 


स न॑: पावक दीदिहि द्युमदस्मे सुवीर्यं म्‌ । 
भवां स्तोतृभ्यो अन्त॑मः स्वस्तये ।॥। ८ ॥ 


8. Sa nah pavaka didihi dyumadasme suviryam. 
Bhava stotrbhyo antamah svastaye. 


Agni, fire of yajna, such as you are, give us the 
light and make us shine. Bring us valour and lustrous 
energy with the light of wisdom and knowledge. For 
the celebrants, be at the closest for the sake of well- 
being and the bliss of life. 


तंत्वा विप्रां विपन्यवो जागृवांसः समिन्धते | 
हव्यवाहममर्त्य aerate ९॥ 
9. Tam tva vipra vipanyavo jagrvamsah samin- 
dhate. Havyavahamamartyam sahovrdham. 
Thus do the sagely scholars, holy celebrants, 
ever wide awake, light, raise and exalt Agni, carrier and 
harbinger of holy fragrances of life and yajna, immortal 


power, creator and giver of greater and ever higher 
strength and courage and patience. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 11 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


sifvetat qifedtseacea विचर्षणिः 1 
स वेद यज्ञमानुषक्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 11 1115 


i, Agnirhota purohito’dhvarasya vicarsanih. 
Sa veda yajnamanusak. 


One who invokes, lights and raises the fire of 
yajna, leads the yajna with love for the welfare of all, 
closely watches the yajna free from violence, jealousy 
and ill-will, conducts the yajna continuously, and 
persistently, he knows the secret, mystery and benefits 
of yajna. He is Agni, brilliant, fiery, and a pioneer. 


स हव्यवाव्ठम्त्य उशिग्दूतश्चनोंहितः | 
अग्रिर्धिया समूण्वति ॥ २॥ 

2. Sa havyavalamartya uSsigdutascanohitah. 
Agnirdhiya samrnvati. 


He, carrier of holy yajnic offerings, immortal, 
charming, messenger of fragrance, lover of the food of 
yajna for all, Agni, moves forward by virtue of his own 
light and intelligence. 


अभ्रर्धिया स चेतति केतुर्यज्ञस्यं ged: | 
अर्थ ह्य॑स्य तरणिं ॥ ३॥ 

Agnirdhiya sa cetati keturyajnasya purvyah. 
Artham hyasya tarani. 

That Agni knows and is known by his own 
intelligence and action. He is the most ancient banner 
of yajna. His sole aim and purpose is to be a saviour, a 
redeemer. 

at a सनश्रुतं सह॑सो जातवेदसम्‌ । 
वद्धिं! देवा अकृण्वत ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Agnim sunum sanusrutam sahaso jatavedasam. 
Vahnim deva akrnvata. 


1116 RGVEDA 


All ye noble and brilliant sages and scholars, 
Agni is potent, child of courage and patience, famous 
of old, and he knows all that is born. Elect him as the 
leader, bearer of the yajnic business of the world to carry 
the fragrance of yajna all round. 


अदाभ्यः पुरएता विशामग्िमनिुंषीणाम्‌। 
तूर्णी रथः सदा नव॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 

॥ Adabhyah pura eta visamagnirmanusinam. 
Turni rathah sada navah. 


Irrepressible and indestructible, going forward 
in front of the people, fiery leader of the nation, instant 
starter, torch bearer of humanity and warrior, ever new: 
such is Agni, pioneer and leader. 


साह्वान्विश्वा अभियुजः ्रतुंर्दवानाममूंक्तः। 
अस्तु विश्र॑वस्तमः॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sahvan visva abhiyujah kraturdevanamamrktah. 
Agnistuvisravastamah. 

Patient yet most irresistible of all the front rank 
people, most enlightened of the noble and generous, 
inviolable, Agni is well read and most renowned leading 
light. 

अभि प्रयांसि वाह॑सा दाश्वां अश्नोति मर्त्य; । 
क्षयं पावकशोचिषः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Abhi prayamsi vahasa dasvan asnoti martyah. 
Ksayam pavakasocisah. 
By virtue of the leading light of Agni, the 


generous man who gives in yajnic action gets his objects 
of desire, and from the rising flames of holy fire as by 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 12 1117 


virtue of the scholar’s brilliance of knowledge, he gets 
a haven of peace. 
परि विश्वानि सुधिंतागेर॑श्याम मन्म॑भिः 1 
विप्रासो जातवेदसः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Pari visvani sudhitagnerasyama manmabhih. 
Vipraso jatavedasah. 
May we, inspired and enlightened yajakas, with 
sincere prayers, worship and do yajna to get all the 
benevolent and gracious gifts of Agni, lord omniscient 
of existence. 
अग्रे विश्वानि वार्या arty सनिषामहे । 
त्वे cara एरिरे॥ ९॥ 

५ Agne visvani varyda vajesu sanisamahe. 
Tve devasa erire. 

Agni, lord of light and yajna fire, may we receive 
and share, we pray, all the chosen objects of desire and 
wealth of the world in our battles of life. Holy men of 
knowledge and dedication inspire us to pray and worship 
you. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 12 
Indragni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
इन्द्रासी आ ग॑तं सुतं गीर्भिर्नभो वरेण्यम्‌ । 
अस्य पातं धियेषिता 2 


1. Indragni ठ gatam sutam girbhirnabho varenyam. 
Asya patam dhiyesita. 


Indra and Agni, lord of might and lord of light, 
brilliant and blazing like thunder and lightning, come 


1118 RGVEDA 


to this child worthy of love and choice, come with voices 
from the heavens and inspire the darling with 
intelligence and passion for action. 


इन्द्राग्री जरितुः सचा यज्ञो जिगाति aaa: 1 
अया पातमिमं सुतम्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2. Indragni jarituh saca yajno jigati cetanah. 
Ayd patamimam sutam. 

Indra, lord of wealth and power, Agni, lord of 
light and knowledge, friends of the supplicant celebrant, 
the child is yajna, worthy of love, dedication and 
consecration, sensitive and intelligent, and moves 


forward to learn. Nurture him with the holy voice and 
the Word. 


Sante क॑विच्छदां यज्ञस्य॑ जत्या वणे । 
ता सोमस्येह तुम्पताम्‌॥ २३ ॥ 

2 Indramagnim kavicchada yajnasya jutya vrne. 
Ta somasyeha trmpatam. 

I choose Indra and Agni, both patrons and 
promoters of poets, with holy enthusiasm such as the 
fire of yajna. May they both come here, have a drink of 
soma, and bless the child. 

तोशा चुंत्रहणां हुवे सजित्वानाप॑राजिता | 
इन्द्रागी बाजसात॑मा ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Tosa vrtrahana huve sajitvanaparajita. 
Indragni vajasatama. 
I invoke and invite Indra, commander of the 


forces, and Agni, leader of the enlightened, both 
promoters of knowledge, destroyers of evil, victorious, 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 12 1119 
unconquered, winners of the highest order of prizes. 


प्र ahre-afaert नीथाविदो! axa: | 
इन्द्रामरी इष आ वुंणे ॥ ५॥ 


a. Pra vamarcantyukthino nithavido jaritarah. 
Indragni isa a vrne. 


Indra and Agni, the singers of hymns, pioneers 
of highways and celebrants honour and worship you. I 
choose to celebrate you for the sake of sustenance, 
support and energy. 


इन्द्राग्री नवतिं पुरो दासप॑लीरधूनुतम्‌। 
साकमेकेन कर्मणा।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indragni navatim puro dasapatnirathunutam. 
Sakamekena karmana. 


Indra and Agni, shake up, inspire and arouse 
with a single clarion call the ninety fortresses yonder of 
the allied and supporting forces of the benevolent ruler 
of the republics. 


s-ahht अप॑सस्पर्युप प्र य॑न्ति धीतयंः। 
ऋतस्य पथ्या ३ अनुं ॥ ७॥ 


ध, Indragni apasasparyupa pra yanti dhitayah. 
Rtasya pathya anu. 


Indra and Agni, lord of power and lord of light 
and law, the pioneer forces of action and reflection go 
forward, all round, and close to the target, following 
the paths of truth and law of rectitude. (Swami Dayanand 
interprets Indra and Agni as wind and electric energy 
of space, and the movements of this energy in waves 
directed to the targets of purpose). 


1120 RGVEDA 


इन्द्राग्री तविषाणि वां सधस्थानि प्रयांसि च। 
युवोर पूर्य" हितम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Indragni tavisani vam sadhasthani prayamsi ca. 
Yuvorapturyam hitam. 
Indra and Agni, your forces, strategic 
concentrations of the forces deployed and collective 
resources, are well disposed, and integrated, and your 


zeal for making a move is instantaneous, everything 
being just at hand. 


इन्द्रा ्री रोचना fea: परि वाजेषु भूषथः | 
तद्वां चेति प्र वीर्यम्‌॥ ९॥ 

रः Indragni rocana divah pari vajesu bhusathah. 
Tad vam ceti pra viryam. 


Indra and Agni, you are the light and fire of 
heaven and you shine all round in the battles of life. 
And that brilliance proclaims your power and splendour. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 13 
Agni Devata, Rshabha Vaishvamitra Rshi 


yal cara af suai । 
गमं हेवेथिरा स नो यजिष्ठो बर्हिरा स॑दत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


in Pra vo devayagnaye barhisthamarcasmai. 
Gamad devebhira sa no yajistho barhira sadat. 


Offer honour and yajnic oblations in worship 
to Agni, this lord of light and knowledge, who pervades 
the spaces of the universe, so that he, the lord most 
adorable, may come with the bounties of nature for you 
and us all, and he may grace the seats of our yajna and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 13 1121 
help us rise to the heights of heavenly virtue. 


ऋतावा यस्य रोद॑सी cat सच॑न्त Heat: | 
हविष्म॑न्तस्तमींठ्ते तं संनिष्यन्तोऽव॑से ॥ २॥ 


ps Rtava yasya rodast daksam sacanta utayah. 
Havismantas-tamilate tam sanisyanto’vase. 


Devotees human and divine dedicated to the law 
of the universe, Rtam, and even the heaven and earth 
and protective forces of nature, obey and participate in 
the expertise and perfection of systemic existence. 
Hence the devotees bearing fragrant offerings for yajna 
and seekers of protection, all these, worship him, i.e., 
Agni, for favour of joy and fulfilment. 


स यन्ता fad एषां स यज्ञानामथा हि षः। 
aif तं al दुवस्यत दाता यो वनिता मघम्‌॥ ३॥ 
Sa yanta vipra esam sa yajnanamatha hi sah. 
Agnim tam vo duvasyata data yo vanita magham. 
All wise, Agni is the guide of all these seekers 
and devotees. And he alone is the guide of the yajnas 
and yajnic programmes of humanity, he is the giver of 
fulfilment. That Agni, all of you serve and worship. He 
only is the giver: his is the wealth of the universe, he 
gives the wealth of honour, prosperity and fulfilment. 
स नः शमीणि वीतयेऽ भिर्य॑च्छतु शन्तमा | 
यतो! नः प्ुष्णवद्धसुं दिवि क्चितिभ्यो अप्स्वा ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sa nah 541711का77 vitaye’gniryacchatu 5477114171द. 
Yato nah prusnavad vasu divi ksitibhyo apsva. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, peace and 


1122 RGVEDA 


bliss, may, we pray, lead us all to havens of peace for 
well being and the joy of life, to homes wherein and 
where from may flow for the people of the world 
showers of wealth all round abounding in the light of 
the sun, streams of waters, currents of energy in space 
and the vibrations of pranas. 


दीदिवांसमपूर्व्य वस्वीभिरस्य धीतिभिः । 
ऋक्वाणो अथिमिन्धते होतारं विरुपतिं विशाम्‌॥ ५॥ 


श Didivamsam-apurvyam vasvibhirasya dhitibhih. 
Rkvano agnim-indhate hotaram vispatim visam. 


Devotees of the Rks, divine revelations and 
human reflections of light and knowledge, with creative 
imagination and productive efforts in action, research 
into the gifts of Agni and light the fire, radiant energy, 
inexhaustible and ever new, master performer of cosmic 
yajna and sustainer of the people of the world. 


उत नो ब्रह्म॑न्नविष उक्थेषु! cagan: | 
शं न॑: शोचा मरुद्‌ वृधोऽ गँ सहस्रसातमः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta no brahmannavisa ukthesu devahutamah. 
Sam no Soca marudvrdho ’gne sahasrasatamah. 


Agni, lord and light of infinity, let us flow with 
infinity. Lord most invoked by brilliant people and 
adored by divine powers of nature, let us advance into 
celebrations and service of Divinity. Lord adored and 
exalted by the Maruts, dynamic people and the winds, 
let peace shine on us and let us shine in peace. Agni, 
you are the giver of a thousand blessings. 


नू नों रास्व सहस्त्र॑वत्तोकवंत्पुष्टिमद्वसु | 
gaan सुवीर्यं वर्धि ठ मनुंपञ्चितम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 14 1123 


7. Nu no rasva sahasravat tokavat pustimad vasu. 
Dyumadagne suviryam varsisthamanupaksitam. 


Agni, lord of a thousandfold energy, power, 
progeny, growth and wealth, and light of knowledge, 
give us manly vigour, valour and honour in showers of 
undiminishing abundance without reserve. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 14 
Agni Devata, Rshabha Vaishvamitra Rshi 


आ होता मन्द्रो विद्थान्यस्थात्सत्यो यज्वा कवित॑मः स 
वेधाः । विद्युद्र॑थः सहं सस्पुत्रो अभिः शोचिष्कैशः पृथिव्यां 
पाजो अश्रेत्‌।॥ ९॥ 


le A hota mandro vidathanyasthat satyo yajva 
kavitamah sa vedhah. Vidyudrathah sahasa- 
sputro agnih Sociskesah prthivyam pdajo asret. 
Versatile leader, messenger of joy, Agni sustains 
the projects of creation and production. Truest of the 
true, master of unifying applications, he is an 
imaginative thinker and a skillful creator. Child of 
energy itself, he travels by chariots run by electricity. 
His hair radiate fire and he brings the light of heaven to 
illuminate the planes of earth. 


अयामि ते नम॑उक्तिं जुषस्व ऋतावस्तुभ्यं चेत॑ते Gee: | 
fast आ व॑क्षि विदुषो नि ष॑त्सि मध्य आ बर्हिरूतयें 
यजत्र ॥। २॥ 


2. Ayami te namauktim jusasva rtavastubhyam 
cetate sahasvah. Vidvan a vaksi viduso ni satsi 
madhya a barhirutaye yajatra. 


O scholar of the laws of nature and natural 


1124 RGVEDA 


energy, lord of knowledge, power, courage and patience, 
I come to you, accept my homage and salutations. 
Venerable yajaka, you speak to the scholars, and you 
reach and stay in the midst of the skies for the sake of 
protection and progress. 


द्रव॑तां त उषसा वाजयन्ती अग्ने वातस्य पथ्याभिरच्छ। 
यत्सीं मञ्जन्ति पूर्व्यं हविर्भिरा वन्धुरेव तस्थतु्दुरोणे ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Dravatam ta usasa vajayanti agne vatasya 
pathyabhiraccha. Yat stmanjanti purvyam havir- 
bhira bandhureva tasthaturdurone. 


Agni, brilliant scholar, the lights of the dawn 
bearing fresh energy and power radiate to you by 
beautiful paths of the winds and shine in the house 
where, like experts of design and structure, with new 
materials, they refine the earlier model of the chariot 
for you. 


मित्रश्च तुभ्यं वरुणः सहस्वोऽ ग्रे विश्व मरुत॑ः GA 
यच्छोचिषां सहसस्पुत्र fast अभि क्षितीः प्रथयन्त्सूर्यो 
नृन्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Mitrasca tubhyam varunah sahasvo’gne visve 
marutah sumnamarcan. Yacchocisa saha- 
sasputra tistha abhi ksitth prathayantsuryo nrn. 


Agni, lord of might, child of energy, valour and 
patience, friends, best people of judgement and leading 
lights and powers of the world offer homage to you and 
wish you all well since, a very sun among humanity, 
raising regions of the earth to the heights and promoting 
the nations’ joy and welfare, you shine with your 
brilliance and abide with them, radiating light. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 14 1125 


वयं त अद्य ररिमा हि काम॑मुत्तानह॑स्ता नम॑सोपसद्य॑ | 
यजिष्ठेन मन॑सा afar carretera मन्म॑ना विप्रो अगे ॥ ५ ॥ 


Vayam te adya rarima hi kamam-uttanahasta 
namasopasadya. Yajisthena manasa yaksi deva- 
nasredhata manmana vipro agne. 


Agni, vibrant master of knowledge, with hands 
raised in respect and bearing cherished gifts of homage, 
we come and offer our reverence and adorations to you 
since you join the brilliant leaders and scholars of 
humanity with your reverential mind and share your 
unerring knowledge of arts and sciences with pleasure 
with all of them. 


wag Ua सहसो fa adidas यन्त्यूतयो वि वाजाः | 
त्वं देहि सहस्रिणं रयिं alssraur वच॑सा सत्यमंगरे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvaddhi putra sahaso vi purvirdevasya yantyu- 
tayo vi vajah. Tvam dehi sahasrinam rayim no 
*‘droghena vacasa satyamagne. 


From you alone, O lord sanctifier of the power 
of knowledge, flow all round eternal sciences, forces 
and ways of protection revealed by the Lord Omniscient 
and Omnipotent. And you give us, we pray, the real 
knowledge, sure and true, of a thousand things and 
values with words and a disposition of mind full of love, 
untouched by jealousy. 


तुभ्यं दक्ष कविक्रतो यानीमा देव udder अध्वरे अकर्म। 
त्वं विश्व॑स्य सुरथ॑स्य बोधि सर्व AAT अमूत स्वदेह ॥ ७॥ 


a Tubhyam daksa kavikrato yanima deva martaso 
adhvare akarma. Tvam visvasya surathasya bodhi 
sarvam tadagne amrta svadeha. 


1126 RGVEDA 


Immortal Agni, brilliant scholar, expert scientist, 
imaginative creator and master of pious action, whatever 
we mortal do and offer you in this holy yajnic 
programme of creation, construction and development, 
taste the pleasure of all that here and now. Awake, arise 
and know this entire world riding the beautiful chariot, 
and let all that be known to the entire world on the 
wheels of progress. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 15 
Agni Devata, Utkeela Katya Rshi 


fa पाज॑सा पृथुना शोशुचानो बाधस्व द्विषो रक्षसो 
अमीवाः । सुशर्मणो बहतः शर्मणि स्यामग्रेर हं सुहवस्य 
प्रणीतौ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vi pajasa prthuna sosucano badhasva dviso 
raksaso amivah. Susarmano brhatah sarmani 
syamagneraham suhavasya pranitau. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, radiant purifier with 
intense expansive heat and light of lustre, resist, repel 
and keep off all infections and cancerous evils of 
jealousy and destructive force of enmity, so that I may 
live at ease in comfort in a happy home under the blessed 
rule and order of the great lord of peace, protection and 
yajnic progress across the wide world. 


त्वं नो अस्या उषसो east त्वं सूर उदिते बोधि गोपाः। 
जन्मेव नित्यं तन॑यं जुषस्व स्तोमं मे अगे तन्वां सुजात ।॥ २॥ 


a. Tvam no asya usaso vyustau tvam sura udite bodhi 
gopah. Janmeva nityam tanayam jusasva stomam 
me agne tanva sujata. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 15 1127 


At the break of dawn and sun rise, let me awake 
into light and life anew, O lord protector and sustainer. 
Like a father and sustainer, ever love and protect the 
child as a baby at birth. Agni, blest of body-form, and 
nobly risen as you are, listen to my prayer and accept 
my song of praise and worship. 


त्वं नृचक्षा वृषभानु पूर्वीः कृष्णास्व॑गरे अरुषो वि atfE 
वसो नेषि च uff चात्यंहः: कुधी नो राय उशिजो 
यविष्ठ ।॥ ३ ॥ 


Tvam nrcaksa vrsabhanu purvih krsnasvagne 
aruso vi bhahi. Vaso nesi ca parsi catyanhah 
krdhi no raya uSijo yavistha. 


Agni, bright and benevolent in flames of fire, 
all watchful over humanity and their performance, 
radiant, virile and generous, shine in the darkest of the 
dark and enlighten even the most primitive children of 
nature. Lord most youthful in command of light and 
virtue who lead and purge us of sin and impurity, take 
the aspirants to the noblest wealth they love. 


अष्टो अगे वृषभो दिदीहि पुरो विश्वाः सौभगा 
संजिगीवान्‌। य॒ज्ञस्य॑ नेता प्र॑थमस्य॑ पायो्जातवेदो बृहतः 
सुप्रणीते ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asalho agne vrsabho didthi puro visvah saubhaga 
samjigivan. Yajnasya neta pratha-masya payor- 
jatavedo brhatah supranite. 


Invincible Agni, generous and brave, shine and 
be victorious, and let all the cities of good fortune and 
prosperity shine and proclaim your acts of glory, being, 
as you are, leader, conductor and guardian of the first 


1128 RGVEDA 


great, protective and promotive yajna of the 
Brahmacharya period of education and preparation for 
life, master of the knowledge of existence, teacher and 
pioneer of the noblest ways of living. 


अच्छिद्रा शर्म जरितः पुरूणि cat अच्छ दीद्यानः सुमेधाः | 
रथो न सस्नि भि व॑श्चि वाजमग्ने त्वं रोद॑सी नः सुमेके ॥ ५॥ 


Acchidra Sarma jaritah puruni devan accha 
didyanah sumedhah. Ratho na sasnirabhi vaksi 
vajamagne tvam rodasi nah sumeke. 


Agni, lover, admirer and worshipper of Truth, 
Divinity and virtues and divinities of existence, wise 
and shining with knowledge, just as the sun illuminates 
the earth and regions of space, so, like a well-built 
chariot, bring us the knowledge of science and speed 
and bless us with brilliant scholars and faultless homes 
of peace and prosperity. 


प्र पीपय वृषभ जिन्व amit त्वं रोद॑सी नः सुदोघें । 
देवेभिर्देव सुरुचा रुचानो मा नो मर्त॑स्य दुर्मतिः ak 
छात्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra pipaya vrsabha jinva vajanagne tvam rodasi 
nah sudoghe. Devebhirdeva suruca rucano ma 
no martasya durmatih pari sthat. 


Agni, generous lord of science and power, fill 
our life to the full, inspire our strength and vigour, speed 
and energy to overflowing just as the sun fills the heaven 
and earth with light. O lord of light resplendent with 
the stars, bless us with light so that no ill-will of the 
mortals, no dark intention and motive may ever touch 
us, much less abide with us. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 16 1129 


soln पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः sleet हव॑मानाय साध | 
स्यान्नः सूनुस्तन॑यो विजावाऽगरे सा ते सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ ७॥ 


१८ Ilamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah_ sunustanayo vija- 
va’gne sa te sumatir-bhutvasme. 


Agni, lord of light and power, wealth and vitality 
of existence, master of science and divinity, bless the 
celebrant yajaka with that divine speech and vision, and 
that abundant share of earthly prosperity which is 
versatile and of eternal value. Make that possible for us 
so that we may be blest with youthful and victorious 
generations of children and grand children and we may 
ever enjoy the favour of your benign eye and gracious 
disposition. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 16 
Agni Devata, Utkeela Katya Rshi 


अयमभिः सुवीर्यस्येशे' महः सौ भगस्य । 
राय ईशो स्वपत्यस्य गोम॑त ईशे वृत्रहथानाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ayamagnih suviryasyese mahah saubhagasya. 
Raya ise svapatyasya gomata 5८ vrtraha-thanam. 


Agni, the ruler, rules strength and power, heroes 
and warriors of the world, rules the greatness and 
grandeur of good fortune, rules the wealth of nations, 
rules the families blest with children of noble character, 
rules the master of cows, land, and knowledge and 
language, and rules and controls those who destroy the 
darkness of ignorance and hoarders of wealth. 


1130 RGVEDA 


इमं न॑रो मरुतः सश्चता वृधं aferara: शोवरधासः। 
अभि ये सन्ति पृत॑नासु दूढ्यो विश्वाहा शक्नुमाद भुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Imam naro marutah sascata vrdham yasmin 
rayah sevrdhasah. Abhi ye santi prtanasu dudhyo 
visvaha satrumadabhuh. 


Ye leaders of the good and noble citizens, heroes 
vibrant as winds and people of the land, join, serve and 
cooperate with this eminent and exalted ruler and 
support his order in which exist abounding wealths of 
the nation, and in which warriors unchallengeable in 
battle who rout and humiliate the enemies are ever 
standing on guard. 


सत्वं नो ua: शिशीहि digt अग्ने सुवीर्यस्य । 
तुविद्युम्न वर्षि्ठस्य प्रजाव॑तोऽ नमी वस्य॑ शुष्मिणः ॥ ३ ॥ 

3. Sa tvam no rayah 57/17 midhvo agne suvir- 
yasya. Tuvidyumna varsisthasya prajavato’na- 
mivasya Susminah. 


Agni, generous ruler, blessed lord of power and 
glory, increase, refine and govern the wealth and power 
of the virile, generous, powerfully manned, healthy and 
prosperous nation. 


चक्रिर्यो विश्वा भुव॑नाभि atafevatendercen ea: । 
आ देवेषु ada आ सुवीर्यं आ शंस॑ उत नृणाम्‌ ॥४॥ 
4. Cakriryo visva bhuvanabhi sasahiscakrirdevesva 


duvah. A devesu yatata @ suvirya a Samsa uta 
nrnam. 


The lord of action wields and governs all regions 
of the world, he is the adorable sustainer among all the 
divine powers, he inspires life and passion among the 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 16 1131 


noblest of humanity, and he is the object of admiration 
and the very life of the courage and valour of the people. 


ural srasdael मावीर॑तायै रीरधः । मागोतायै सहसस्पुत्र 
मा निदेऽ प द्वेषांस्या कुधि।॥ ५॥ 


5. Ma no agne’mataye maviratayai riradhah. 
Magotayai sahasasputra ma nide’pa dvesamsya 
krdhi. 


Agni, lord of light and power, abandon us not 
to poverty and intellectual disability, leave us not to 
cowardice, let us not suffer from debility of the senses, 
and subject us not to insult and calumny. Ward off all 
jealousy and enmity from us. 


शग्धि वाज॑स्य सुभग प्रजावतोऽ ग बृहतो अध्वरे | 
सं राया भूय॑सा सृज मयो भुना तुविद्युम्न यश॑स्वता ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sagdhi vajasya subhaga prajavato ’gne brhato 
adhvare. Sam raya bhuyasa srja mayobhuna 
tuvidyumna yaSsasvata. 


Agni, lord of knowledge, wealth and power, 
gracious and prosperous, rise high in extensive 
programmes for the growth of food and energy, and 
human and social development, and enable us too to 
rise and be strong. O lord of prosperity and honour, grace 
us with plentiful, honourable and blissful wealth and 
help us rise on and on. 


1132 RGVEDA 


Mandala 3/Sukta 17 
Agni Devata, Kata Vaishvamitra Rshi 


afer: प्रथमानु धर्मां समक्तुभिरज्यते विश्ववारः | 
शोचिष्केशो घूतनिंणिीक्पावकः सुयज्ञो अभिर्यजथांय 
देवान्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Samidhyamanah prathamanu dharma samaktu- 
bhirajyate visvavarah. Sociskeso ghrtanirnik 
pava kah suyajno agniryajathaya devan. 


Agni, the holy fire that purifies and sanctifies, 
lighted and raised in accordance with ancient original 
Dharma, served in conjunction with morning and 
evening, becomes universally adorable. And radiant in 
flames in shining robes of ghrta-light, splendid metaphor 
of yajna, it rises as a clarion call to the divine bounties 
of Nature. 


यथाय॑जो होत्रम॑गे पृथिव्या य्था दिवो जातवेदणश्चि- 
कित्वान्‌। एवानेनं हविषां यक्षि देवान्मंनुष्वद्यज्ञ प्र तिरे - 
AAT २॥ 


0. Yathayajo hotramagne prthivya yatha divo 
jatavedascikitvan. Evanena havisa yaksi devan 
manusvad yajnam pra tiremamadya. 


O universal fire of life, living light of cosmic 
intelligence, Agni, coexistent with everything that is 
born, O high-priest of yajna, as you enact the yajna and 
offer the havi to call and invite the bounties of earth 
and heaven, similarly by this offer of oblations call the 
bounties of heaven and earth and invite the brilliancies 
of humanity, and let this yajna of ours be accomplished 
as the yajna of a thoughtful and conscientious person. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 17 1133 


त्रीण्यायूंषि तव॑ जातवेदस्तिस्र आजानीरुषसस्ते अग । 
ताभिवर्दवानामवो' यशि विद्वानथ भव यज॑मानाय शां 
योः॥ ३॥ 


3. Trinyayumsi tava jatavedastisra ajanirusasaste 
agne. Tabhir-devanam-avo yaksi vidvan-atha 
bhava yajamanaya sam yoh. 


Agni, omnipresent lord of knowledge and life’s 
vitality, co-eval with existence, three are your lives: 
magnetic energy and fire on earth, electric energy and 
wind in the skies, and light in the solar region. You are 
the vital heat of the body, will, passion and thought of 
the mind, and vision and imagination of the soul. Three 
are your motherly seats of existence and operation: earth, 
sky and heaven of the cosmos, and the body, mind and 
soul of the individual. And three are the times of your 
operation: day and light, night and cold, and twilights 
of the morning and evening. With these orders of three, 
O master of knowledge, bring life and protection to the 
noble and generous people, and then be the harbinger 
of peace and joy to the yajamana. 


oe सुंदीतिं Geet गृणन्तो नमस्यामस्त्वेङ्यं जातवेदः | 
त्वां दूतम॑र तिं हव्यवाहं देवा अंकृण्वन्नमूत॑स्य नाभिम्‌ ॥। ठ ॥ 


4. Agnim suditim sudrsam grnanto namasya-mastve- 
dyam jatavedah. Tvam dutamaratim havyavaham 
deva akrnvannamrtasya nabhim. 


We celebrants and devotees of the lord of light 
and refulgence offer our homage and salutations to you, 
Agni, fire of cosmic yajna, splendid light, beautiful of 
form, adorable and coeval of all that is born 11 existence. 


1134 RGVEDA 


Noble, generous and brilliant sages and scholars reveal 
you, Agni, as the messenger of good news, harbinger 
of good fortune, carrier of the fragrance of life, and the 
very generative seat and sustaining column of the nectar 
of life and the freedom of Moksha. And the creative 
scholars and scientists recreate you as the power and 
energy source of wealth and the comfort and welfare of 
life. 

यस्त्वद्दोता पूर्वो अग्रे यजीयाद्िता च सत्ता स्वधया च 

शंभुः । तस्यानु धर्मं प्र य॑जा चिकित्वोऽर्था नो धा अध्वरं 

देववीतौ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Yastvaddhota purvo agne yajtyan dvita ca satta 
svadhaya ca sambhuh. Tasyanu dharma pra yaja 
cikitvo ’tha no dha adhvaram devavitau. 


O primeval fire, Agni, creative vitality of Prakrti, 
as the first Lord of bliss and well being, original and 
eternal Creator, performing the yajna of creation, 
manifesting as consort with you, at the cosmic vedi 
conducts the yajna, similarly, O intelligent sacrificer, 
in pursuance of the same creator’s law of Dharma, carry 
on the yajna and take it high to the state of divine beauty 
and joy of life for us. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 18 
Agni Devata, Kata Vaishvamitra Rshi 
भवा नो अग्ने सुमना उपेतौ सखेव सख्ये पितरैव साधुः । 
पुरुदधुहो हि facet जनानां प्रति प्रतीचीर्दहतादरातीः ॥ ९ ॥ 
1. Bhava no agne sumana upetau sakheva sakhye 


pitareva sadhuh. Purudruho hi ksitayo jananam 
prati praticir-dahatadaratth. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 18 1135 


Agni, master of yajna, sagely scholar, high-priest 
of social dynamics, be kind at heart to come to us, like 
a friend in company, good as a father and mother, and 
with the heat of love and creativity, burn off the 
negativities, contradictions and adversities of humanity, 
the various forces of jealousy and enmity acting against 
the people. 


तपो tay अन्त॑राँ अमित्रान्तपा शंसमररुषः परस्य । तपो 
वसो चिकितानो अचित्तान्वि ते तिष्ठन्तामजरा अयासं: ॥ २॥ 


2. Tapo svagne antaran amitran tapa Samsam- 
ararusah parasya. Tapo vaso cikitano acittan vi 
te tisthantam-ajara ayasah. 


Agni, bright and blazing lord of discipline and 
austerity, burn off the enemies within, season and purify 
the praise and appreciation of the non-violent devotee 
of higher order. O scorcher of evil and shelter of the 
good, lord of light and knowledge, arouse the unaware 
and ignorant, and may your dynamic yajakas live a long 
age strong and youthful. 


sey इच्छमानो ae जुहोमि हव्यं तरं से बत्य । 
यावदीशो ब्रह्मणा वन्द॑मान इमां धियं शतसेयाय 
देवीम्‌ BU 
2. Idhmenagna icchamano ghrtena juhomi havyam 
tarase balaya. Yavadise brahmana vandamanai- 
mam dhiyam Sataseyaya devim. 
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, desirous of 
having superlative strength of body, mind and soul, I 
offer libations of yajna with holy fuel and ghrta, singing 
in praise of the lord with holy mantras and praying, as 


1136 RGVEDA 


far as I can, for this divine light of intelligence for the 
attainment of a hundredfold good fortune. 


उच्छोचिषां सहसस्पुत्र स्तुतो Fess: शशमानेषुं धेहि । रेवदर 
विश्वामित्रेषु शं योर्म॑मुज्मा ते तन्वं १ भूरि कृत्व॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ucchocisa sahasasputra stuto brhad vayah 
sasamanesu dhehi. Revadagne visvamitresu Sam 
yor-marmrjma te tanvam bhuri krtvah. 


Agni, spirit of power and courage, holding 
immense wealth of life, rising with light and lustre and 
served and worshipped with divine verses, bear, bring 
and in-vest good health, long age and ample wealth, 
peace and freedom among the zealous celebrants and 
lovers and favourites of entire humanity. Lord of great 
action, we refine and brighten your form and potential 
more and ever more. 


कृधि रलं सुसनितर्धनानां स aes भवसि यत्समिंब्दः। 
स्तोतुर्दुःरोणे सुभगस्य रे वत्सप्रा करस्ना दधिषे वपूंषि ॥ ५॥ 


J Krdhi ratnam susanitar-dhananam sa ghedagne 
bhavasi yat samiddhah. Stoturdurone subhagas- 
ya revat srpra karasna dadhise vapumsi. 


Agni, lord of wealth, give us the jewel of wealth, 
generous giver as you are specially when lighted up in 
yajna. O lord of the wealth of existence, bearing a 
brilliant form in the house of the prosperous worshipper, 
you extend your generous hand to the supplicants. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 19 1137 


Mandala 3/Sukta 19 
Agni Devata, Gathi Kaushika Rshi 


अगिं होतारं प्र att fae aed कविं विंश्वविदममूरम्‌। 
स नो यक्षदेवताता asia वाजाय वनते मघानिं।॥ ९॥ 


I. Agnim hotaram pra vrne miyedhe grtsam kavim 
visvavidam-amuram. Sa no yaksad devatata 
yajiyan raye vajaya vanate maghani. 


In this yajna of creation and development I chose 
to elect Agni as the highpriest and guide yajaka, adoring 
worshipper, revolutionary thinker, eminent scholar, and 
wise, who, while organising the yajna, would invoke 
the brilliancies of humanity and bounties of nature and, 
for the seeker of wealth and knowledge, create and 
provide the wealth and prosperity desired. 


प्र त st हविष्प॑तीमियरम्यच्छा सुद्युम्नां रातिनी' घताचींम्‌। 
प्रदक्चिणिद्देवततिमुराणः सं रातिथिर्वसुभिर्यज्ञम॑श्रेत्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Pra te agne havismatimiyarmyaccha sudyum-nam 
ratinim ghrtacim. Pradaksinid devatatim-uranah 
sam ratibhir-vasubhir-yajnam-asret. 


Agni, lord and highpriest of yajna, I come 
forward to you in peace and faith and raise the holy 
ladle full of fragrant havi, rich and splendid, overflowing 
with ghrta, just as a faithful performer, extending divine 
service to expand nature’s bounties, takes to yajna going 
round the fire with excellent liberal offerings. 


स तेजीयसा मन॑सा त्वोत॑ उत tert स्वपत्यस्य शिश्चोः। 
अग्न रायो नृत॑मस्य प्रभूतौ भूयाम ते सुष्टुतयंश्च वस्व॑: ॥ २ ॥ 


1138 RGVEDA 


Di Sa tejiyasa manasa tvota uta siksa svapatyasya 
siksoh. Agne rayo nrtamasya prabhutau bhu- 
yama te sustutayasca vasvah. 


Lord of light, Agni, happy is the person that 
loves you, comes to you with a brilliant mind thirsting 
for knowledge and protection. Master of knowledge, 
impart the knowledge as to your own dear child. Lord 
of wealth, leader of the best people, may we live happy 
and prosperous, worshipfully under your kind 
dispensation. 


भूरीणि हि त्वे द॑धिरे अनीकाऽगं देवस्य यज्य॑वो जनांसः। 
स आ व॑ह देवताति यविष्ठ॒ शर्धो यदद्य दिव्यं यजासि ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Bhurini hi tve dadhire antka’ gne devasya yajyavo 
janasah. Sa a@ vaha devatatim yavistha sardho 
yadadya divyam yajasi. 


Agni, lord of light, many are the flames of fire 
which devout celebrants have raised in the vedi, many 
the fighting forces which dedicated followers have 
raised under your governance. As such, O lord most 
youthful, bear and bring that divine beneficence of 
protection and security for which today you call and 
conduct a yajnic team of scholars in pursuit of a noble 
force and power of defence. 


यत्त्वा aah aa निषादयंन्तो यजर्थाय देवाः | 
सत्वं नो अग्नेऽ face बोध्यधि श्रवांसि धेहि नस्तनूषुं ।॥ ५ ॥ 

6. Yat tva hotaramanajan miyedhe nisadayanto 
yajathaya devah. Sa tvam no agne’viteha bodhya- 
dhi Sravamsi dhehi nastanusu. 


Devas, noble people, consecrate you in your 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 20 1139 


rightful seat for the conduct of yajna and celebrate you 
as the highpriest and chief performer. So you, Agni, lord 
of light and knowledge, leader of the people, guide and 
protector, lead us to light and awakening, and bless us 
and our descendants with food, energy and channels of 
progress for our body, mind and soul. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 20 
Agni, Vishvedeva Devata, Gathi Kaushika Rshi 


अभ्रिमुषसमणश्विनां दधिक्रां व्यु्टिषु हवते arena: | 
सुज्योतिषो नः श्रृण्वन्तु देवाः स॒जोष॑सो अध्वरं 
वावशानाः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Agnimusasamasvina dadhikram vyustisu havate 
vahnirukthaih. Sujyotiso nah srnvantu devah sajo- 
saso adhvaram vavasanah. 


In the lights of the morning, Vayu, cosmic 
energy that holds the universe, calls up and awakens 
the fire of Agni, light of the dawn, the Ashvins, 
complementary currents of solar and lunar energy, and 
the gravitational force with songs of the morning hymns 
vibrating in spaces. So does the highpriest, conductor 
of morning yajna, invoke and serve Agni, divine fire, 
the lights of the dawn, pranic energies and the earth’s 
gravitation with hymns of the Veda. May the Devas, 
bounties of nature and brilliancies of humanity, all of 
holy light and knowledge, loving and shining the yajna, 
listen to our prayers. 


अग्ने ait ते वाजिना त्री षधस्था तिस््रस्ते fren ऋतजात 
पूर्वीः । तिस्र ॐ ते तन्वो! देववांतास्ताभिरर्नः पाहि गिरो 
अप्र॑युच्छन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


1140 RGVEDA 


2: Agne tri te vajina tri sadhastha tisraste jihva 
rtajata purvih. Tisra u te tanvo devavatastabhir- 
nah pahi giro aprayucchan. 


Agni, divine energy of the cosmos, three are 
your media: radiation, conduction and gravitation; three 
your seats: solar region, middle region and the earthly 
region (dyu loka, antariksha loka and prthivi loka); three 
your tongues: light, thunder and greenery; O power 
eternal, risen from the cosmic law of Rtam. Three are 
your forms: day, lightning and night, energised by 
nature; and three your sacred fuels: solar particles of 
energy, vapours and fertility of the earth. Agni, divine 
fire, protect and nourish our tongue and speech seriously 
without relent or reserve. 


Note: The allegory of cosmic fire energy is 
beautifully explained in Chhandogya Upanishad 5, 4- 
8, and in Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 6, 9-13. 


Swami Dayananda also interprets Agni as the 
sagely scholar whose three media of existence are jnana, 
gamana and prapti, i.e., knowledge, expression and 
movement, and attainment and acquisition. We might 
add in the same vein that his three seats of origin are 
the parental home of natural birth, the teacher’s home 
of educational and cultural birth and the family home 
of professional birth. Of course, after retirement his life 
is lived in an open social and universal home of no 
dimensions and no boundaries. 


sm भूरीणि ad जातवेदो देव॑ स्वधावोऽ मृत॑स्य नामं। 
याश्च॑ माया मायिनां विश्वमिन्व त्वे पूर्वीः सन्दधुः 
पुं्टलन्धो ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 20 1141 


a Agne bhurini tava jatavedo deva svadhavo’- 
mrtasya nama. YasSca maya mayinam visvam-inva 
tve purvih samdadhuh prstabandho. 


Agni, lord immanent manifest in all that is born 
in existence, generous and divine power, brilliant spirit 
of knowledge and enlightenment, possessing nectar 
foods and energies of life, immortal soul, countless are 
your names and attributes. O lord omnipresent in the 
universe, giver of the karmic dispensation of jivatmas, 
whatever the generations of living beings old or new, 
whatever the power and potential of these generations, 
all that is vested and neatly nestled in you. 


shrtar wiga fart दैवींनां देव ऋतुपा ऋतार्वा । 
स वुत्रहा सनयो विश्ववेदाः परषद्धिश्वाति दुरिता गृणन्तम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Agnirneta bhaga iva ksitinam daivinam deva 
rtupa rtava. Sa vrtraha sanayo visvavedah 
parsad visvati durita grnantam. 


Agni is the leader and mover, like the sun, of 
the living beings and the planets such as the earth and 
other regions of the universe. He is the lord of all divine 
powers and forms of existence. He is the ordainer and 
sustainer of the cycle of the seasons, and the creator, 
controller and sustainer of the laws of nature, truth and 
rectitude. He is the destroyer of darkness, ignorance and 
evil and eternal omniscient lord of existence. May the 
lord purge the celebrant worshipper of all the dirt of 
thought and action of the material world. 


दधिक्रामभिमुषसं च देवीं बृहस्पतिं" सवितारं च देवम्‌ । 
avert मित्रावरुणा भगं च वसूरा आदित्यां इह हुवे ॥ ५ ॥ 


1142 RGVEDA 


on Dadhikram-agnim-usasam ca devim brhaspatim 
savitaram ca devam. ASvina mitravaruna bhagam 
ca vasun rudran adityan iha huve. 


I invoke, celebrate and pray to Agni, divine spirit 
and energy which, like Time, transcends all stars and 
planets of the universe, brilliant dawn, Brhaspati, 
sustaining wind energy, Savita, creator and light giver 
of the universe, Deva, self-refulgent lord of love and 
might, Ashvins, complementary currents of life’s energy, 
Mitra and Varuna, prana and udana energy, Bhaga, lord 
of wealth and honour, Vasus, abodes of life such as earth, 
Rudras, vital energies of life, Adityas, moving stars of 
light in orbit. I invoke, celebrate and pray to the Lord 
for the light, wealth and honour of the world. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 21 
Agni Devata, Gathi Kaushika Rshi 


sual यज्ममरतेषु dior gear जातवेदो जुषस्व । स्तोका- 
area मेद॑सो घृतस्य होतः प्राशान प्रथमो निषद्य ॥ ९॥ 


1. Imam no yajnamamrtesu dhehima havya jatavedo 
jJusasva. Stokanamagne medaso ghrtasya hotah 
prasana prathamo nisadya. 


Agni, lord of light, accept this yajnic 
performance of our knowledge, action and meditation, 
charity and social action, take it high up and establish it 
among the immortals. O lord omniscient of all in 
existence, take and taste these offerings of ours and bless 
us. First, foremost and most excellent lord of knowledge, 
Agni, seated on the vedi, chief yajaka and generous 
giver, taste of the fragrance of the delicacies, ghrta and 
oils offered into the fire. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 21 1143 


घृतवन्तः पावक ते स्तोकाः श्चोतन्ति मेद॑सः | 
स्वधर्मन्देववीतये श्रेष्ठं नो धेहि वार्य॑म्‌ ue 


2. Ghrtavantah pavaka te stokah $cotanti medasah. 
Svadharman devavitaye srestham no dhehi 
varyam. 


Pavaka, purifying fire of yajna, the finest 
delicacies soaked in ghrta, tender and unctuous, stream 
forth and rise in fragrance. Taste these, bring us the 
loveliest gifts of our choice and let us be established in 
our universal Dharma for the company of the divinities 
of nature and humanity. 


तुभ्यं स्तोका घुंतश्चुतोऽगरे विप्राय सन्त्य । 
ऋषिः श्रेष्ठः समिध्यसे य॒ज्ञस्य॑ प्राविता भ॑व ॥ २॥ 


2. Tubhyam stoka ghrtascuto’gne vipraya santya. 
Rsih Sresthah samidhyase yajnasya pravita 
bhava. 


Agni, intelligent and vibrant scholar of 
distinction between truth and untruth, right and wrong, 
Dharma and adharma, Shraddha and ashraddha, yajnic 
delicacies sprinkled with ghrta trickle and stream forth 
for you. Seer, visionary diviner into the truth of Veda, 
best of scholars, you light the fire and are inspired by 
the fire. Be the saviour of yajna, take it to success for 
us. 


तुभ्यं शचोतन्त्यधिगो शचीवः स्तोकासो अग्ने मेद॑सो TT | 
कविशस्तो deat भानुनागा हल्या जुंषस्व मेधिर ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tubhyam scotantyadhrigo Sacivah stokaso agne 
medaso ghrtasya. Kavisasto brhata bhanunaga 
havya jusasva medhira. 


1144 RGVEDA 


Agni, seer of mantras, genius scholar of divine 
vision, for you stream forth the juices and fragrances of 
yajnic delicacies of ghrta and creams. Celebrated by 
poets, going by the sublimity of the sun, adorable in 
yajna, accept and taste the honey sweets of our yajna. 


ओजिष्ठं ते मध्यतो मेद्‌ उद्धरं तं wd वयं dame । श्चोत॑न्ति 
ते वसो स्तोका अधिं त्वचि प्रति तान्देवशो विहि ।॥ ५॥ 


a Ojistham te madhyato meda udbhrtam pra te 
vayam dadamahe. Scotanti te vaso stoka adhi 
tvaci prati tan devaso vihi. 


Agni, vital heat and support of life, we offer 
you in the centre of the vedi the most lustrous delicacies 
held high in care and esteem. The finest delicacies trickle 
and stream on your flames. Take these and raise them 
to the divine powers of nature wherever each should 
rise. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 22 
Purishya Agni Devata, Gathi Kaushika Rshi 


अयं सो अभिर्यस्मिन्त्सोममिन्द्रः सुतं दधे AR वावशानः। 
सहस्रिणं वाजमत्यं न सिं ससवान्त्सन्त्स्तुयसे जात- 
वेदः॥ ९॥ 


1. Ayam so agniryasmintsomamindrah sutam dadhe 
jathare vavasanah. Sahasrinam vajamatyam na 
saptim sasavantsantstuyase jatavedah. 


This is that Agni, vital electric energy, in which 
Indra, lord of power and passion, thirsting for the joy 
of living, concentrates soma, essence of peace, power 
and joy, distilled and placed in the heat of the stomach, 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 22 1145 


navel of the body system. O Jataveda, vital fire of energy 
present in everything that is born in the world of 
existence, holding and sharing a thousandfold power, 
moving and reaching anywhere like a tempestuous 
horse, you are loved and adored everywhere. 


अग्ने यत्ते दिवि वर्च: पृथिव्यां यदोष॑धीष्ठप्स्वा aa । 
येनान्तरिक्षमुवौ ततन्थं त्वेषः स भानुरं्णवो नृचक्षाः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Agne yat te divi varcah prthivyam yadosadhi- 
svapsva yajatra. Yanantariksamurvatatantha 
tvesah sa bhanurarnavo nrcaksah. 


Agni, lord of light and power, loving, emanating 
and sharing the life of everything in existence, your 
splendour that shines in the light of heaven, breathes 
on the earth, reflects in the greenery of the herbs, and 
rolls in the waters of space and oceans, and by which 
the skies and spaces grow far and farther, that splendour 
and glory is the blazing sun, the deep ocean and the 
light of the eye for humanity. 


अगन feat अर्णमच्छा जिगास्यच्छा cat ऊचिषे धिष्ण्या 
ये। या रोचने परस्तात्सूर्यस्य याश्चावस्तादुपतिष्ठन्त 
आप॑ः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Agne divo arnamaccha jigasyaccha devan ucise 
dhisnya ye. Ya rocane parastat suryasya yasca- 
vastad-upatisthanta apah. 


Agni, you move and magnificently pervade the 
particles of the light of heaven. You rise and do honour 
to the divinely pious and benevolent people and the 
generous powers of nature. And you pervade and 
energise the oceans of vapour in the light beyond the 


1146 RGVEDA 
sun and those oceans which are below in the sky. 


पुरीष्यासो अग्रय॑ः प्रावणेभिः aside: | 
जुषन्तां aaagels नमीवा sat महीः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Purisyaso agnayah pravanebhih sajosasah. 
Jusantam yajnamadruho ’namiva iso mahih. 
May the vital fires of fertility come together to 
the earth by straight paths, free from negativities and 


disease, and participate in the yajna and bless us with 
invigorating foods and energies of high order. 


solan पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः शश्वत्तमं हव॑मानाय साध | 
स्यान्नः सूनुस्तनयो fastrarsa सा तें सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ ५॥ 


5. Tlamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo vija- 
va’gne sa te sumatirbhutvasme. 


Agni, bless the supplicant yajaka with gifts of 
the holy Word, extensive lands and cows, and a noble 
tongue. Bless us with children and grand children, 
active, intelligent and discriminative, and may we ever 
remain in your good books under your benign eye in a 
state of prosperity and divine bliss. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 23 
Agni Devata, Devashrava Bharata and Devavata 
Bharata Rshis 
Frffera: सुधित आ सधस्थे युवां कविर॑ध्वरस्यं प्रणेता। 
जुर्य॑त्स्वथिर जरो वनेष्वत्रा दधे अमृतं जातवेदाः ॥ ९॥ 
||, Nirmathitah sudhita a sadhasthe yuva kavira- 


dhvarasya praneta. Juryatsvagnirajaro vane- 
svatra dadhe amrtam jatavedah. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 23 1147 


Well produced by friction, well kindled and well 
managed in the home of yajna, Agni, jataveda, treasure 
house of wealth, youthful and unaging, catalytic creative 
light, leader of yajna, visionary maker, may, we pray, 
on the velocity of light rays, bear and bring nectar-like 
vitality and energy and sustain our yajnic programme 
of love and creative production. 


अम॑न्थिष्टां भार॑ता tachi caster देववात: सुदक्ष॑म्‌। 
अग्ने वि dea बृह॒ताभि रायेषां नों नेता भ॑वतादनु द्यून्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Amanthistam bharata revadagnim devasrava 
devavatah sudaksam. Agne vi pasya brhatabhi 
rayesam no neta bhavatadanu dyin. 


May the Bharatas, the producer and the manager 
of mighty generous Agni, fire and electric power, 
treasure giver of wealth, inspired by vibrations of the 
imagination and listening to the noble senior scholars, 
produce, develop and manage the light, power and gifts 
of Agni. O lord of light, power and fire, Agni, look after 
us with a benign eye and with vast and abundant wealth 
and values of life, and be our guide and leader of the 
productive yajnas for food and energy every day as we 
advance in research and endeavour. 


दश fad: get सीमजीजनन्त्सुजातं मातृषु प्रियम्‌ । 
अगिं स्तुहि दैववातं देवश्रवो यो ज्नानामसंहशी ui ३ ॥ 
a Dasa ksipah purvyam simajijanantsujatam 


matrsu priyam. Agnim stuhi daivavatam deva- 
5774170 yo jananamasad vasi. 


Devashrava, scholar in conference with eminent 
pioneers of research, honour and advance the eternal 


1148 RGVEDA 


energy, agni, which ten rapidly successive movements 
of action, like the nimble fingers, ever generate. It is 
lovely and nobly born, latent in motherly sources such 
as wood and streams of water, produced and developed 
by sagely scholars, and under the management and 
control of the people. 


नि त्वादधे वर आ परंथिव्या इरव्वायास्पदे सुदिनत्वे stat 
zat मानुष आपयायां सर॑स्वत्यां Laan दिदीहि ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Ni tva dadhe vara ठ prthivya ilayaspade sudinatve 
ahnam. Drsadvatyam manusa apayayam sara- 
svatyam revadagne didthi. 


Agni, divine fire and holy light, I place you on 
the best altar of the earth in the best words of holy speech 
in the holy light of the days. O brilliant power, treasure 
home of abundant wealth, shine in the rocky streams of 
mountains, smooth flowing rivers of the plains and in 
the minds of reflective people. 


sola पुरुदंसं सनिं गोः vlyeratt हव॑मानाय साध | 
स्यान: सूनुस्तन॑यो विजावाऽगरे सा ते सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे ॥ ५ ॥ 


शः Ilamagne purudamsam sanim goh Sasvattamam 
havamanaya sadha. Syannah sunustanayo vija- 
va’gne sa te sumatirbhutvasme. 


Agni, brilliant lord of knowledge and fire power, 
provide for the dedicated man of yajna the eternal Word 
of divine knowledge, abundant power of versatile 
action, and abundant gifts of science and lasting 
economic wealth, so that, O lord of light, we may be 
blest with dynamic children and grand children under 
your benign eye and enjoy the favour of your love and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 24 1149 
approbation. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 24 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


अग्ने सह॑स्व पृत॑ना अभिर्मातीर्पास्य। 
दुष्टर स्तर्‌ ्रर॑तीर्वर्चो" धा यज्ञर्वाहसे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Agne sahasva prtana abhimatir-apasya. 
Dustaras-tarannaratir-varco dha yajnavahase. 


Agni, fiery hero of the light of life, defeat the 
enemy force, throw off the insidious opponents. 
Unconquerable you are, cross over depression and 
adversities, rise and bring light and lustre to the sustainer 
and promoter of yajnic well-being. 


अग्र॑ gat समिध्यसे वीतिहोत्रो अमर्त्यः 1 
जुषस्व सू नो अध्वरम्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2 Agna ila samidhyase vitihotro amartyah. 
Jusasva su no adhvaram. 

Agni, light of life, you shine by flames of fire, 
and flow with streams of the holy Word. Immortal you 
are, harbinger of peace, prosperity and joy. Join, enjoy 
to your heart’s content and bless our yajna of love, non- 
violence and good fellowship. 


at द्युम्नेनं arya सह॑सः सूनवाहुत । 
एदं बर्हिः सदो मम ॥ ३॥ 


a Agne dyumnena jagrve sahasah sunavahuta. 
Edam barhih sado mama. 


Agni, lord of light and lustre, ever awake and 
alert, child of omnipotence and destroyer of evil and 


1150 RGVEDA 


adversity, invoked and invited, come with wealth and 
honours of life and seat yourself on this holy grass of 
my yajna. 

अये विश्वेभिरग्िभिवर्दविभिर्महया fr: 1 

यज्ञेषु य ड चायवंः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Agne visvebhir-agnibhir-devebhir-mahaya girah. 

Yajnesu ya u cayavah. 

Agni, lover of light and master of knowledge, 

alongwith all the brilliant saints and sages of the world, 
love, respect and exalt the voices of Divine Revelation 


and honour those who abide by these with reverence 
and faith in yajnic acts of creation and self-sacrifice. 


अग्रे दा aera रयिं daa परीणसम्‌। 
शिशीहि न॑ः सूनुमत॑ः ॥ ५॥ 
= Agne da dasusae rayim viravantam parinasam. 
Sisthi nah sunumatah. 
Agni, lord of light and life of life, give to the 
man of charity and yajna wealth of the world in 
abundance and bless him with brave children. And, we 


pray, blest with children as we are, strengthen, sharpen 
and brighten us in our life. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 25 
Agni, Indragni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


अग्न दिवः सूनुर॑सि प्रच तास्तनां पृथिव्या उत विश्ववेदाः | 
ऋधंग्टवं इह य॑जा चिकित्वः ॥ ९॥ 


(४ Agne divah sunurasi pracetastana prthivya uta 
visvavedah. Rdhag-devan tha yaja cikitvah. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 25 1151 


Agni, brilliant lord of knowledge, you are a child 
of the light of heaven, wide awake and universally 
aware, future of the extensive earth, scholar of world 
knowledge. Master of encyclopaedic learning, bring 
together the eminent and generous scholars of the world 
and distinctively serve and develop each one of the gifts 
of nature. 


अभिः स॑नोति वीयीणि विद्वान्त्सनोति वाज॑ममृताय ya 
a al देवां एह व॑हा पुरुक्षो ॥ २॥ 


pa Agnih sanoti viryani vidvantsanoti vajamamrtaya 
bhusan. Sa no devan eha vaha purukso. 


O generous and versatile lord of light and 
knowledge, just as Agni provides valour and honour 
for creativity and, enlightening the world, provides the 
spirit and energy for the attainment of immortality, may 
you, we pray, bring us here the company and gifts of 
the brilliant, generous and wise sagely scholars. 


अगिद्यर्विापृथिवी fasan आ भाति देवी अमृते oraz: । 
क्षयन्वाजेः पुरुश्चन्द्र नमोभिः ॥ ३॥ 

3. Agnirdyavaprthivi visvajanye a bhati devi amrte 

amurah. Ksayan vajaih puruscandro namobhih. 

Agni, lord all wise, free from darkness and 

ignorance, giver of immense bliss, illuminates the 

heaven and earth, mother sustainers of the world, divine 


and immortal, providing food and sustenance, spirit and 
energy, and living space for the children of the earth. 


अग्र इन्द्र॑श्च दाशुषो दुरोण सुताव॑तो यज्ञमिदहोप॑ यातम्‌। 
अपर्धन्ता सोमपेयाय देवा ॥ ४ ॥ 


1152 RGVEDA 


4. Agna indrasca dasuso durone sutavato yajnam- 
thopa yatam. Amardhanta somapeyaya deva. 


Agni, lord and light of knowledge, you and 
Indra, lord of vigour and energy, noble and generous, 
both, guarding and promoting the yajnic human 
endeavours for creation and production, may, we pray, 
come to the house of the generous yajaka, creating the 
soma of joy and prosperity and sit at the yajna to enjoy 
the fragrance and flavour of the soma. Come, lords, 
without delay. 


sm अपां समिध्यसे दुरोणे नित्य॑ः सूनो सहसो जातवेदः | 
सधस्थानि म॒हय॑मान ऊती ॥ ५॥ 


=, Agne apam samidhyase durone nityah suno 
sahaso jatavedah. Sadhasthani mahayamana uti. 


Agni, lord of light, fire and power, child of 
omnipotence, destroyer of darkness, all wise and knower 
of things in existence, immortal immanent spirit, you 
shine and blaze in the midst of the oceans of space and 
currents of pranic energies adding light and grandeur 
to the homes of earth’s children. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 26 
Vaishvanara Agni, Maruts, Agni-Atma, Vishvamitra 
Upadhayaya Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
वैश्वानरं मन॑सायिं Frarat efastan अनुषत्यं career । 
सुदानुं देवं रथिरं व॑सूयवों गीर्भी रण्वं कुशिकासो हवा- 
AU ति 
Ls Vaisvanaram manasagnim nicayya havismanto 


anusatyam svarvidam. Sudanum devam rathiram 
vasuyavo girbhi ranvam kusikaso havamahe. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 26 1153 


We Kushikas, 1.e., teachers and researchers in 
search of the wealth and values of nature and life, 
bearing fragrant offerings for yajna and inputs for the 
programme, having analysed and determined the 
specific nature, character and action of Vaishvanara 
Agni, with our mind and reason, invoke, invite, enkindle 
and raise this global power, divine fire and life’s vitality 
of the earth and her children, universally operative in 
accordance with the laws of cosmic truth, source of 
infinite happiness and comfort, generous giver, brilliant 
light, fast as the bright-rays of energy, loud and bold, 
and delightful for any seeker to perceive, and we 
celebrate this Agni with our holiest voices of faith and 


joy. 
तं शु्रमथिमव॑से हवामहे वैश्वानरं मातरिर््वानमुक्थ्य॑म्‌। 
ब्रहस्पति मनुषो देवतातये विप्रं श्रोतार मतिंधिं रघुष्य- 
द॑म्‌॥२॥ 


2 Tam subhramagnimavase havamahe vaisvana- 
ram matarisvanamukthyam. Brhaspatim manuso 
devatataye vipram srotaramatithim raghusya- 
dam. 


We, people dedicated to research and yajnic 
meditation, invoke, enkindle, raise and develop Agni 
for the sake of divine virtues for noble humanity, Agni 
which is bright and blazing, vitality of the world, breath 
of the winds, worthy of celebration. It is Brhaspati, lord 
of mighty stars and planets. It is Vipra, vibrant voice of 
the universe: It is intelligent and omniscient, listening 
to prayers, worthy as a learned visitor, and it is ever in 
motion faster than the fastest. 


1154 RGVEDA 


अश्वो न ao: समिध्यते वैश्वानरः कशिकभि्यु - 
गेयुं गे। स नो अभिः सुवीर्यं स्वश्व्यं दधातु रल्न॑ममृतेषु 
जागुंविः॥ ३॥ 


Asvo na krandanjanibhih samidhyate vaisvanarah 
kusikebhir-yugeyuge. Sa no agnih suviryam 
svasvyam dadhatu ratnam-amrtesu jagrvih. 


Valuable and self-proclaiming radiant 
Vaishvanara Agni, vital fire of the world, ever awake in 
the immortal brilliancies of the world of existence, 
roused like a horse by the mates, is kindled and raised 
by holy celebrants from age to age, year by year. May 
this radiant energy bear and bring for us the jewels of 
heroic vigour and tempestuous speed of the winds. 


प्र य॑न्तु वाजास्तविंषीभिर ग्यः शुभे संमिंश्त्ाः पृष॑तीर- 
युश्चत। बृहदुक्चों मरुतो! विश्ववेदसः प्र वेपयन्ति पर्वताँ 
अर्दाभ्याः॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra yantu vajas-tavistbhir-agnayah subhe sam- 
mislah prsatir-ayuksata. Brahadukso maruto 
visvavedasah pra vepayanti parvatan adabhyah. 

Let the tempestuous fires go up with blazing 
flames, join and integrate with the rich vapours of water 
in the oceans of the skies, and then the indomitable 
winds blowing across in spaces, deeply rich in showers 
of fertility, shake up and drive the clouds for rain. 


sfufsral मरुतो विश्वकुष्टय आ त्वेषमुग्रमव ईमहे AAA | 
ते स्वानिनो' रुद्रिया वर्षनिर्णिजः सिंहा न हेषक्रतवः 
era: ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 26 1155 


=) AgniSsriyo maruto visvakrstaya व tvesamugramava 
imahe vayam. Te svanino rudriya varsanirnijah 
simha na hesakratavah sudanavah. 


Maruts, the winds, are blest with the beauty and 
vitality of fire. They are friends of humanity, turbulent, 
impetuous, laden with clouds of rain, roaring like lions 
and highly generous. We beseech them for light, lustre 
and our protection. 


व्रातंव्रातं tort सुष्टास्तिभिर गरेभमिं wears ईमहे । 
पृष॑दश्वासो अनवभ्रराधसो गन्तारो यज्ञं विदथेषु 
धीराः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vratamvratam ganamganam  suSastibhiragner- 
bhamam marutamoja imahe. Prsadasvaso 
anavabhraradhaso gantaro yajnam vidathesu 
dhirah. 


From time to time and stage to stage, from place 
to place and from one group to another of themes and 
programmes, we invoke and investigate with best of 
efforts and appraisals the nature of Agni and Vayu and 
realise the heat and light of Agni and the force and 
vitality of Vayu, the winds and air. Laden with clouds 
of rain, and rainbow coloured, are they, riding the cosmic 
waves of energy and yielding inexhaustible wealth. And 
patient and persistent are we, moving to the yajna and 
committed to the sacred programmes of life’s 
development. 


अभिर॑स्मि जन्म॑ना जातवेदा घृतं मे चक्षुर मृतं म आसन्‌। 
अकस्िधातु रज॑सो विमानोऽ set घर्मो हविरस्मि 
नामं ।। ७॥ 


1156 RGVEDA 


4 Agnirasmi janmana jataveda ghrtam me caksu- 
ramrtam ma asan. Arkastridhatu rajaso vimano’- 
jJasro gharmo havirasmi nama. 


I am Agni, by birth present in all that is born in 
existence. My eye is the light of yajna fed on ghrta, and 
my mouth is nectar as I speak the Word. I am the 
refulgence of the sun. I hold the earth and skies and the 
heavens and three principles of nature, Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas of Prakrti. I pervade and transcend the spaces. 
I am eternal, I am the heat and vitality of life, and I am 
the fragrant havi of the cosmic yajna (since I am in nature 
and nature is in me). 


त्रिभिः पवित्रैरपुंपोग्द्य१ क हृदा मतिं ज्योतिरनुं प्रजानन्‌ । 
वर्षिष्ठं रत्न॑मकृत स्वधाथिरादिद्‌ द्यावापृथिवी पर्य- 
Wade ॥ 


8. Tribhih pavitrairapupoddhyarkam hrda matim 
Jyotiranu prajanan. Varsistham ratnamakrta 
svadhabhiradid dyavaprthivi paryapasyat. 


With threefold cleansing of body, mind and soul, 
through the purity of thought, word and deed, by 
inculcation of right knowledge (jnana), right conduct 
(karma) and right prayer and meditation (upasana), I 
purify the holy light of the self, thereby lighting the 
flame of the spirit in the intelligence with honesty and 
sincerity of the heart, and with these foods and 
fortifications of the spirit, I redeem the diamond purity 
and generosity of the soul, and then watch the immensity 
of heaven and earth participating in the Infinity of the 
Supreme Self. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 27 1157 


शतर्धारमुत्समक्षीयमाणं विपण्चितं पितरं वक्त्वानाम्‌। 
मेक मद॑न्तं पित्रोरुपस्थे तं रोदसी पिपृतं सत्यवाचम्‌ ९॥ 


Satadharam-utsamaksiyamanam vipascitam 
pitaram vaktvanam. Melim madantam pitroru- 
pasthe tam rodasi piprtam satyavacam. 


O heaven and earth, fulfil the aspirations of that 
sagely person to perfection who is generous and 
inexhaustible in giving like a fountain of hundred 
streams, who is wise, protects and promotes the holy 
words, speaks loud and bold only what is true, and 
rejoices in the bosom of his parents. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 27 
Agni, Rtava Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


प्र वो वाजां अभिद्य॑वो ह॒विष्म॑न्तो gareat | 
देवाञ्जिगाति सुम्नयुः ॥ ९॥ 

1. Pra vo vaja abhidyavo havismanto ghrtacya. 
Devanjigati sumnayuh. 
Ye devout yajakas, your foods, energies, and 
excellencies are brilliant and overflowing with 
abundance of havi and ready with the ladle poised for 
the offer. And with these the yajakas eager for heavenly 
bliss goes to the divinities and celebrates. 
32 afi विपश्चितं गिरा यज्ञस्य सा्ध॑नम्‌। 
श्रुष्टी वानं धितावानम्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2 Ile agnim vipascitam gira yajnasya sadhanam. 
Srustivanam dhitavanam. 


With holy voice and song I celebrate Agni, lord 


1158 RGVEDA 


of light and knowledge, vision and wisdom and 
abundant giver of happiness and prosperity who leads 
the yajna to instant success. 


अग्नं श॒केम॑ ते वयं यमं caed aise: | 
अति द्वेषांसि तरेम ॥ ३ ॥ 


Agne Sakema te vayam yamam devasya vajinah. 
Ati dvesamsi tarema. 


Agni, lord of light and law, we pray, may we be 
able to go by the laws and discipline of rectitude of the 
brilliant, dynamic and scholarly leader of the nation so 
that we may swim across the seas of jealousy and 
turbulence. 


समिध्यमानो अध्वरे 3 sha: पावक ईड्य॑ः 1 
शोचिष्कैशटास्तमींमहे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Samidhyamano adhvare’ gnih pavaka tdyah. 
Sociskesastamimahe. 
Kindled, raised and rising in flames in the yajna 
of love and non-violence, Agni is lord of light and fire, 


adorable. Mighty and flaming are his locks of fire, and 
we praise and pray to him in words of homage. 


पृथुपाजा seit घृतनिरणि क्स्वाहुतः। 
अथिर्यज्ञस्यं हव्यवाट्‌ & ॥ 

5: Prthupaja amartyo ghrtanirnik svahutah. 
Agniryajnasya havyavat. 


Vastly powerful, immortal, adorned in flames 
of ghrta and vapours of water, invoked and celebrated, 
is Agni, carrier of the fragrances of oblations to their 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 27 1159 
destinations far and wide. 


तं सबाधो areata इत्था धिया asreal=a: 1 
आ चक्रुर्‌ गिमूतये।॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Tam sabadho yatasruca ittha dhiya yajnavan-tah. 
A cakruragnimiutaye. 


Those who ward off the impediments of yajna, 
raise the ladle of offering and hands in action truly with 
will and intelligence and dedicate themselves to yajna 
for the sake of protection and promotion, light the fire 
and raise it for well being and prosperity. 


होता देवो arated: पुरस्तादेति माययां । 
विदथानि प्रचोदय॑न्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


a Hota devo amartyah purastadeti mayaya. 
Vidathani pracodayan. 


The brilliant performers of yajna, immortal and 
indestructible, goes forward with his innate power and 
intelligence, inspiring, advancing and accelerating 
yajnic programmes of creative and productive corporate 
action. 


वाजी वाजेषु धीयतेऽध्वरेषु प्र uiterc | 
विप्रो यज्ञस्य साध॑नः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Vajt vajesu dhiyate’dhvaresu pra niyate. 
Vipro yajnasya sadhanah. 
Agni, tempestuous power and vibrant 
accomplisher of yajnic creation, is adopted, lighted and 


accelerated in top gear in scientific and technological 
programmes of friendly and cooperative nature. 


1160 RGVEDA 


धिया चक्रे वरेण्यो भूतानां गर्भमा द॑धे। 
दक्षस्य पितरं तना ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Dhiya cakre varenyo bhutanam garbhama dadhe. 
Daksasya pitaram tana. 


Agni, lord of our love and choice, as parent and 
teacher, bears the natural child, seed of evolving 
humanity, in protective and educational custody and, 
with expansive intelligence, completes the growth and 
accomplishment of the child to the future protector and 
promoter of human expertise and perfection through 
educational rebirth, into the full man as a ‘dvija’. 


fr cat eat वरेण्यं दक्च॑स्येव्ठा सहस्कृत | 
अग सुदीतिमुशिजंम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ni 11व dadhe varenyam daksasyelda sahaskrta. 
Agne suditimusijam. 


Agni, child of omnipotence, brilliant with 
intelligence, and passionate for action, home-coming 
graduate, darling of our love and choice, just as the 
Lord’s earth holds the divine heat of life, just as the 
vedi holds the sacred fire for growth to blazing heights 
of flame, so does Ila, divine word of the Lord, expertise 
of the fatherly teacher, mother earth, the cow, and the 
mother teacher of the school, these bear you upto your 
accomplishment and perfection to full humanity. 


at यन्तुर॑मसुर॑मृतस्य योगे TE: | 
विप्रा वाजैः समिन्धते 22 u 


11. Agnim yanturam-apturam-rtasya yoge vanusah. 
vipra vajaih samindhate. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 27 1161 


Intelligent and dynamic people with the desire 
to accomplish their objects of life light and raise Agni, 
instant and inspiring moving power, in their yajnic 
applications, in order to achieve their practical 
programmes in the pursuit of science and Truth with 
the best offerings of food and fuels for energy. 


ऊर्जो नर्पातमध्वरे दीदिवांसमुप ata | 
sta कविक्रतुम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Urjo napatam-adhvare didivamsam-upa dyavi. 
Agnimile kavikratum. 
In yajna, I worship indestructible Agni, child of 
cosmic energy shining upto the light of heaven, poetic 
power of refulgent vision and creativity. 
ईव्छेन्यो! नमस्य॑स्तिरस्तमांसि asta: | 
समगिरिध्यते वृषा ॥ 230 

13. Ilenyo namasyas-tiras-tamamsi darsatah. 
Samagniridhyate vrsa. 


Agni, worthy of worship, worthy of reverence 
and salutations, virile and generous, is beautiful, it 
conquers the darkness of the world and is lighted and 
raised in yajnas. 

aul sift: aftlzads vat न देववाहं नः। 
तं हविष्मन्त faa ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Vrso agnih samidhyate’svo na devavahanah. 
Tam havismanta ilate. 


Virile and generous, Agni is lighted and raised, 
it shines and blazes. It is the carrier of fragrance to the 


1162 RGVEDA 
divinities of heaven and earth. Devotees bearing sacred 
offerings worship it in yajna. 

वृष॑णं त्वा वयं वुंषन्वृष॑ंणः समिधीमहि । 

अगे दीद्य॑तं TEN १५ ॥ 
15. Vrsanam tva vayam vrsan vrsanah samidhi-mahi. 

Agne didyatam brhat. 

Agni, virile and generous as showers of rain, 

refulgent lord of light and yajna, we, overflowing at 


heart with faith and generosity, light the fire of yajna 
rising and shining across the vast spaces. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 28 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


अगर जुषस्व॑ नो हविः पुरोव्ठाशं जातवेदः | 
प्रातःसावे धि॑ंयावसो।॥ ९॥ 

il; Agne jusasva no havih purolasam jatavedah. 
pratah save dhiyavaso. 


Agni, lord of universal knowledge, wisdom and 
vision, inspiration for the refinement, expansion and 
elevation of intelligence, pray accept our homage of 
delicious food and fragrance in the morning session of 
yajna. 


पुरोव्ठा अग्रे पचतस्तुभ्यं वा घा UR: | 
तं जुंषस्व यविषछय ॥ २॥ 


0.9 Purola agne pacatastubhyam va gha pariskrtah. 
tam jusasva yavisthya. 


Agni, most youthful creative power of universal 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 28 1163 


energy and intelligence, purified, refined and matured 
is this offering of love and faith for you. Accept it, enjoy 
it, and let the fragrance rise and pervade the spaces. 


अग वीहि atrarsrared तिरोअंह्ययम्‌ । 
सह सः सूनुर॑स्यध्वरे हितः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Agne vihi purolasam-ahutam tiro-ahnyam. 
sahasah sunurasyadhvare hitah. 


Agni, light and power of life, accept this food 
of homage, prepared, seasoned, amply matured and 
offered in the first session of the day’s yajna. Spirit of 
omnipotence you are, invoked, invited, lover and 
diversifier of yajna. 


माध्यंदिने सव॑ने जातवेदः पुरोव्छा्शमिह कवे जुषस्व । 
अग्न यह्वस्य तव॑ भागधेयं न प्र मिनन्ति विदथेषु धीराः ux ॥ 


4. Madhyamdine savane jatavedah purolasamiha 
kave jusasva. Agne yahvasya tava bhagadheyam 
na pra minanti vidathesu dhirah. 


Agni, lord of vision and imagination, omniscient 
and omnipotent, ever vigilant on the move, come and 
share your part of the delicacies in the middle session 
of the day’s yajna. Yajakas of constant devotion never 
transgress their dedication and commitment to you, they 
never fail to make the offering. 


अगन तृतीये सवं ने हि कानिंषः पुरोव्ठाशं सहसः सू नवाहंतम्‌। 
अथा देवेष्व॑ध्वरं विपन्यया धा रल्नवन्तममृतेषु जागृविम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
>, Agne trttye savane hi kanisah purolasam sahasah 


sunavahutam. Atha devesvadhvaram vipanya- 
yadha ratnavantam-amrtesu jagrvim. 


1164 RGVEDA 


Agni, lover, inspirer and source of strength and 
vigour, please to accept this sacred offering of purodash 
in the third session of yajna and, with our sacred hymns 
of praise and prayer, carry this stimulating and exciting 
oblation and the whole yajna of love and non-violence 
overflowing with jewels of life, and reach it among the 
immortal divinities of nature and humanity. 


अगन वृधान आहुतिं पुरोव्छाशं"जातवेदः। 
जुषस्व तिरोअंह्नयम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Agne vrdhana ahutim purolasam jatavedah. 
Jusasva tiro-ahnyam. 
Agni, ever growing, rising and expanding 
creative power, intelligent, awake and pervading in all 
that manifests in existence, accept and enjoy this 


delicious purodash oblation, soma and prayer offered 
by the end of the day. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 29 
Agni Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
अस्तीदमंधिमन्थ॑नमस्ति प्रजननं ar | 
एतां fagaeitar aur म॑न्थाम gefert ॥ ९॥ 
in Astidamadhimanthanamasti prajananam krtam. 
Etam vispatnima bharagnim manthama purvatha. 


This is the arani-wood, churner of fire. This is 
the act of churning. And this is the fire generated. Hold 
on this apparatus of fire generation, sustainer of 
humanity, so that we may produce the fire as ever before. 


अरण्योर्निहितो जातवेदा गर्भंडव सुधितो गर्भिणीषु। 
दिवेदिव veut जागृवद्िर्हविष्मद्धिर्मनुष्येभिर भिः ॥ २ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 29 1165 


2. Aranyornihito jataveda garbha iva sudhito 
garbhinisu. Divediva idyo jagrvadbhir-havisma- 
dbhir-manusyebhiragnih. 


Agni, immanent in everything in existence, it is 
hidden in the two arani woods (the lower base and the 
upper churner), like the embryo neatly nestled in the 
womb of pregnant mothers. Agni is worthy of love and 
reverence, and it ought to be generated by people who 
are alert and awake and possess the right inputs and 
apparatuses in plenty. 


उत्तानायामव॑ं भरा चिकित्वान्त्सद्यः प्रवीता वृष॑णं जजान । 
अरुषस्तूपो रुश॑दस्य पाज इव्छ॑यास्पुत्रो वयुनैऽजनिष्ट ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Uttanayamava bhara cikitvan tsadyah pravita 
vrsanam jajana. Arusastupo ruSadasya paja 
ialayasputro vayune ’janista. 


O man of knowledge, specialist of fire and 
energy, put the upper arani on the lower properly 
positioned, churn, and, through friction, the lower one 
would produce the bright flame, current of energy, like 
a column of light. Mighty is its force and speed, which, 
like the child of earth and knowledge, takes birth and 
comes to life in the dark recesses of the earth mother’s 
womb and rises in the knowledge of man and human 
yajna. 

इव्ायास्त्वा पदे वयं नाभां पृथिव्या अधिं। 
जात॑वेदो नि धींमह्यगरे हव्याय वोक्छ्हवे।। ४ ॥ 


4. Ilayastva pade vayam nabha prthivya adhi. 
Jatavedo ni dhimahyagne havyaya volahave. 


Agni, immanent fire energy, we place you and 


1166 RGVEDA 


light you in the vedi on the floor of the earth in order 
that our oblations into the fire of yajna be carried across 
the globe and into the midst of the sky. 


मन्थ॑ता नरः कविमद्व॑यन्तं प्रचतसममूतं सुप्रतीकम्‌ | 
यज्ञस्यं केतुं प्रथमं पुरस्तादभिं न॑रो जनयता सुशेवम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Manthata narah kavimadvayantam pracetasam- 
amrtam supratikam. Yajnasya ketum pratha-mam 
purastadagnim naro janayata susevam. 


All ye leaders of humanity, explore and research 
into Agni full of latent possibilities of life, unique power, 
profusely revealing, indestructible, beautiful of form, 
lighthouse of yajnic production and immensely useful. 
O pioneers of science and fire power, generate this prime 
energy as your first priority of research and 
development. 


यदी मन्थ॑न्ति बाहुधिर्विं रोचतेऽ vat न वाज्यरुषो वनेष्वा | 
चित्रो न याम॑न्नश्विनोरनिवृतः परि वृणक्त्यश्म॑नस्तृणा 
दह॑न्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yadi manthanti bahubhirvi rocate’svo na vajya- 
ruso vanesva. Citro na yamannasvinoranivrtah 
pari vrnaktyasmanastrna dahan. 


When the yajakas churn the arani woods with 
their arms to produce Agni, it rises like a potent force 
and shines in flames, radiant as in the light waves of 
the sun and moon in circuitous motion, incessant and 
wondrous beautiful, and it burns the grass all round on 
earth, dislodges the stones on mountains and breaks the 
clouds in the sky. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 29 1167 


जातो अगरी रोचते चेकितानो वाजी fad: कविस्तः 
सुदानुः । यं dara ईड्यं विश्वविदं हव्यवाह मद्‌॑धुर- 
ध्वरेषु ।। ७ ॥ 


7. Jato agni rocate cekitano vajt viprah kavisastah 
sudanuh. Yam devasa idyam visvavidam havya- 
vaham-adadhur-adhvaresu. 


Arisen, Agni shines, warm and soothing and 
beautiful as flames of fire, illuminating as light, energy 
and strong horse power, travelling, reaching vibrant, 
sensitive and even bearing intelligence, rich with lovely 
gifts, sung and celebrated by wise visionaries: which 
sacred and universal power, carrier and creator of life’s 
fragrance, brilliant people serve, create and use in yajnic 
programmes of love and non-violence for the general 
good. 


सीद॑ होतः ta ड लोके चिंकित्वान्त्सादयां यज्ञं सुकृतस्य 
योनौ । देवा वीर्दैवान्हविषां ase बृहद्यज॑माने वयो 
धाः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sida hotah sva u loke cikitvantsadaya yajnam 
sukrtasya yonau. Devavirdevan havisa yajasya- 
gne brhad yajamane vayo dhah. 


High priest of yajna, expert performer, be seated 
in your own place of performance. Set up and conduct 
the yajna in the house of the man of noble creative 
action. Agni, lord of light and fire and energy you are 
the protector and promoter of good and benevolent 
people and you serve the powers of nature. Create and 
bring abundant gifts of food and energy, good health 
and long age, and bless the yajamana. 


1168 RGVEDA 


कृणोत॑ धूमं वृष॑णं सखायोऽ स्त्रैधन्त इतन GAAS | 
अयमभ्िः पंतनाषाट्‌ सुवीरो येन॑ देवासो असंहन्त दस्यून्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


9. Krnota dhumam vrsanam sakhayo’sredhanta 
itana vajamaccha. Ayamagnih prtandasat suviro 
yena devaso asahanta dasyun. 


Friends, comrades of yajna, create the clouds 
of vapours and steam, laden with rain showers of wealth 
and fertility, immediately, unerringly, enthusiastically. 
Move forward and rise to the heights of strength, energy 
and power. This fire of yajna is the winner of battles, 
heroic, by which good people challenge and win over 
the forces of evil. 


अयं ते योनिंऋत्वियो यतो जातो अरोंचथाः। 

तं जानन्नग्र आ सीदाथा नो वर्धया fir’: uv ९०॥ 
10. Ayam te yonirrtviyo yato jato arocathah. 

Tam janannagna a sidatha no vardhaya girah. 

Agni, master of knowledge, light and fire, and 

energy, this vedi, this fire, this arani wood, the deep 
dense earth, the laboratory, seat and source of energy, 
is your home and identity from where, according to the 
seasons, you arise and shine. Knowing that, come, sit 
on the vedi, and then let our hymns of divine adoration 
rise to the heights of heaven. 


तनूनपादुच्यते गर्भ॑ आसुरो नराशंसो भवति यद्विजाय॑ते | 
मातरिश्वा यदसिंमीत मातरि वात॑स्य सर्गो अभवत्सरी- 
मणि॥ ९९॥ 

11. Tanunapdaducyate garbha asuro narasamso 


bhavati yad vijayate. Matarisva yadamimita 
matari vatasya sargo abhavat sarimani. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 29 1169 


When Agni is pervasive and immanent in space, 
it is called ‘garbha’, the foetus in the womb of space. 
When it pervades and energises the wind, it is called 
‘Narashansa’ which rises as the object of admiration by 
the people. When it expands its power and presence in 
the sky, it is called ‘matarishva’, lying and breathing in 
the lap of the mother. And when it moves in fast motion, 
then it means ‘the blowing of the storm’. 


सुनिर्मथा निर्मधितः सुनिधा निहितः cafe: | 
sm स्वध्वरा कणु देवान्देवयते AAU eeu 


12. Sunirmatha nirmathitah sunidha nihitah kavih. 
Agne svadhvara krnu devan devayate yaja. 


Agni, brilliant light, fire and power, well 
produced with powerful tools and apparatuses, safely 
stored, well preserved in concentrations as in batteries, 
is a revolutionary illuminative power. O master of light 
and power of energy, Agni, develop and expand our 
yajnas of production and call up, advance, concentrate 
and conserve the wonderful powers of nature for the 
devotees of peace and progress. 


अजीजनन्नमृतं मत्य सोऽ Sarat तरणि" वीव्छुज॑म्भम्‌। दश 
स्वसारो अग्रुवः समीचीः पुमांसं जातमभि सं र॑भन्ते ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ajijanannamrtam martyaso’stremanam taranim 
vilujambham. Dasa svasaro agruvah samicth 
pumamsam jatamabhi sam rabhante. 


Men of science and technology produce the 
immortal, imperishable and forceful motive power of 
Agni, and ten moving streams of water, ten fingers of 
the hands, moving forward in nimble work, all working 


1170 RGVEDA 


together like ten sisters, welcome and advance this 
dynamic power for the good of humanity as it is 
produced. 


प्र सप्तहोता सनकाद॑रोचत मातुरुपस्थे यदशोचदूध॑नि। न 
नि मिषति सुरणो दिवेदिवे यदसुरस्य जठरादजायत ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Pra saptahota sanakadarocata maturupasthe 
yadasocadudhani. Na ni misati surano divedive 
yadasurasya jatharadajayata. 


Served by seven priests and seven pranic 
energies, Agni arises from its eternal cause and shines 
bright and beautiful in the lap of its mother source, earth, 
wind and sky, and the solar region, illuminant in the 
dark night as well, proclaiming itself as the victor of 
battles day by day, day and night, without a wink of let 
up, since it is born of a powerful mother source, Vayu, 
eternal energy of existence. 


अपित्रायुधो मरुतामिव प्रयाः प्र॑थम॒जा ब्रह्म॑णो विशुवमि- 
faq: । द्युम्नवद्‌ ब्रह्म कुशिकास एरिर एकएको दमे अथिं 
समीधिरे ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Amitrayudho marutamiva prayah prathamaja 
brahmano visvamid viduh. Dyumnavad brahma 
kuSikasa erira eka-eko dame agnim samidhire. 


Those who, like the forward forces of the winds, 
fight against the enemies, who are first born favourites 
of the Lord, and highly ambitious, who light the fire in 
the home, each one of them, and who know the whole 
world of the Lord’s creation : they are blest with the joy 
of wealth, power and honour in life. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1171 


यदद्य त्वां प्रयति यज्ञे अस्मिन्होत॑श्चिकित्वोऽवुंणीमहीह । 
ganar श्चुवमुताश॑मिष्ठाः प्रजानव्विद्धां उप॑ याहि 
सोम॑म्‌ ee 


16. Yadadya tva prayati yajne asmin hotascikitvo’- 
vrnimahtha. Dhruvamaya dhruvamutasamis-thah 
prajanan vidvan upa yahi somam. 


O master of the science of yajna, in this 
corporate programme of yajnic creation being organised 
to-day, we elect you to the office of the highpriest and 
chief yajaka. Be firm herein, and let peace and Dharma 
prevail all round firmly, and O scholar of eminence, 
creating the soma joy of life, come, enjoy the pleasure 
yourself. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 30 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


इच्छन्ति त्वा सोम्यासः सखायः सुन्वन्ति सोमं दध॑ति 
प्रयांसि । तितिक्षन्ते अभिशस्तिं जनानापिन्द्र त्वदा कश्चन 
हि प्र॑केतः॥ ९॥ 


1. Icchanti tva somyasah sakhayah sunvanti somam 
dadhati prayamsi. Titiksante abhisastim jana- 
namindra tvada kascana hi praketah. 


Indra, lord of honour, power and glory, friends 
and lovers of soma, excellence and joy of life, crave 
your love and friendship. They distil the soma, the very 
essence of life’s meaning and value, and command the 
honour and prosperity of living. They forbear the 
calumny, malignity and even the violence of society, 
for they know that none is wiser than you, nothing is of 


0 RGVEDA 
higher value than your love and friendship. 


नते दूरे dom चिद्रजांस्या तु प्र alfe हरिवो ear 
स्थिराय वृष्णो सव॑ना कृतेमा युक्ता ग्रावाणः समिधाने 
अग्रौ ॥ २॥ 


६ Na te dure parama cid rajamsya tu pra yahi 
harivo haribhyam. Sthiraya vrsne savana krtema 
yukta gravanah samidhane agnau. 


The farthest of spaces are not too far for you, O 
lord commander of the waves of super energy. Come 
by the circuit of the vibrations of light, instant carriers 
of yours. These yajnas are enacted for the lord 
omnipotent and omnificent on the move without motion, 
(being omnipresent, immanent and pervasive in every 
particle of matter, energy and thought). Come, the fire 
is kindled and blazing, the crush is ready for soma, and 
the clouds are laden with showers. 


इन्द्र॑ः सुशिप्रो मघवा तरुत्रो महाव्रातस्तुविकूर्मिंऋघावान्‌। 
यदुग्रो धा वाधितो मर्त्येषु क्व त्या ते वृषभ वीयीणि॥ ३ ॥ 


Indrah susipro maghava tarutro mahavrata- 
stuvikurmirrghavan. Yadugro dha badhito 
martyesu kvatya te vrsabha viryani. 


Indra, lord of honour and majesty, self-protected 
and strongly helmeted, abundant in wealth, saviour and 
pilot over the seas, commander of disciplined and 
committed soldiers, lord of instant action, destroyer of 
enemies, when opposed among mortals, you rise with 
blazing power and passion. O lord of valour and 
generosity, where are those acts and heroic powers of 
yours? 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1173 


त्वं fe ot च्यावयन्नच्युंतान्येको वृत्रा चर॑सि जिष्ठ॑मानः। 
तव द्यार्वापृथिवी पर्वतासोऽ नुं व्रताय Pree तस्थुः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tvam hi sma cyavayannacyutanyeko vrtra carasi 
Jighnamanah. Tava dyavaprthivi parvataso’nu 
vrataya nimiteva tasthuh. 


Indra, ruling lord of humanity, you roam around 
with dignity shaking and breaking firm and otherwise 
unshakable clouds, hoarders, strongholds of darkness and 
ignorance and other enemies of humanity all by yourself. 
The earth and heaven, clouds and mountains, all in 
measured movement devoutly committed to your law 
and discipline abide and act in obedience to your will. 


उताभ॑ये पुरुहूत श्रवोभिरेकों दुव्न्हम॑वदो वृत्रहा सन्‌। इमे 
चिदिन्द्र रोद॑सी अपारे यत्संगृभ्णा म॑घवन्काशिरित्ते ॥ ५॥ 


>. Utabhaye puruhuta sravobhireko drlhamavado 
vrtraha san. Ime cidindra rodasi apare yat sam- 
grbhna maghavan kasirit te. 


Also, O lord ruler of humanity and the world, 
Indra, invoked, invited and celebrated by many, in your 
glory, being free from fear, destroyer of demonic 
darkness and breaker of mountainous clouds all by 
yourself, whatever you firmly speak with your awful 
voice of thunder, and the way you hold and sustain these 
measureless earths and heavens, O lord of power and 
grandeur, is but a reflection of your majesty. 


प्रसू त॑ इन्द्र प्रवता हरिभ्यां प्रते ag: wy” शत्रून्‌ । 
जहि प्र॑तीचो अ॑नूचः पराचो विश्वं सत्यं कृणुहि fas- 
म॑स्तु॥ ६॥ 


1174 RGVEDA 


6. Pra si ta indra pravata haribhyam pra te vajrah 
pramrnannetu satrun. Jahi pratico anucah paraco 
visvam satyam krnuhi vistamastu. 


Indra, may your chariot going forward by the 
speed of winds and sunrays move on majestically. May 
your thunderbolt, destroying the enemies, shoot forward 
victorious. Destroy the opposition at the back, close at 
hand in secret, and upfront in action. Let truth reign in 
the world and let it prevail everywhere. 


यस्मै धायुरद॑धा मर्याया भ॑क्तं चिद्धजते ety सः। 
भद्रा त॑ इन्द्र सुमतिर्घुंताची! सहस्त्रदाना पुरुहूत रातिः ॥ ७॥ 


ध Yasmai dhayuradadha martyayabhaktam cid 
bhajate gehyam sah. Bhadra ta indra sumatir- 
ghrtact sahasradana puruhuta ratih. 


Indra, lord of abundance, wealth and honour, 
the mortal man, for whom you hold and bring the gifts 
of life and grace he has never had so far, gets and enjoys 
all that as his homely blessings of everyday. O lord 
invoked, served and celebrated by all people of the 
world, blissful is your love and kindness, abundant and 
overflowing your generosity, thousandfold your charity. 


सहदानुं used क्ियन्त॑महस्तमिनद्र सं पिंणक्कुणारुम्‌। 
अभि वृत्रं वर्धमानं पियारुमपाद॑मिन्द्र तवस जघन्थ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sahadanum puruhiuta ksiyantamahastamindra 
sam pinak kunarum. Abhi vrtram vardhamanam 
piyarum-apddam-indra tavasa jaghantha. 


Indra, lord of power, justice and majesty, 
universally invoked, served and celebrated, just as the 
sun, with its blaze, strikes the dark demon of the cloud, 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1175 


thundering, growing, flying with the winds, breaks it 
and crushes it into gladdening showers, so do you, with 
your power and justice, strike the dark hoarding demons 
of society coexisting camouflaged with the rich and 
liberal progressive people, vociferous, fattening, and 
scoffing at the poor, make them ineffective to grab with 
the hands and rush around robbing the innocent, break 
open the hoarded wealth and let it out in showers for 
the joy of general society. 


Faeries भूमि'महीम॑पारां सद॑ने ससत्थ | 
अस्त॑भ्नाद्‌ द्यां वुषभो अन्तरि क्चमर्षन्त्वापस्त्वयेह 
प्रसूताः ॥ ९ ॥ 

ध्र Ni samanamisiramindra bhumim mahimapa-ram 
sadane sasattha. Astabhnad dyam vrsabho anta- 
riksam-arsantvapas-tvayeha prasutah. 


Lord ruler of the world, seat yourself in the 
house of yajna on the dear green earth, abundant, 
peaceful, mighty and measureless. Indra, lord 
omnipotent and generous sustains the heavens of light 
and the middle regions of the skies. Let the waters 
created by you in heaven and skies reach here on the 
earth. O lord ruler, let the actions performed by you on 
the seat of yajna reach the skies and the heavens with 
the fragrance. 


STOTAUT वल इन्द्र व्रजो गोः पुरा हन्तोर्भय॑मानो व्यार | 
सुगान्पथो अकृणोन्निरजे गाः प्रावन्वाणीः: पुरुहूतं 
धम॑न्तीः ॥ 201 ति 

10. Alatrno vala indra vrajo goh pura hantorbha- 
yamano vyara. Sugan patho akrnonniraje gah 
pravan vanth puruhutam dhamantth. 


1176 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of the universe, omnipotent you are, 
destroyer of the enemies. You protect the cow stalls, 
the earth’s orbit and the flow of speech, and the enemy, 
stricken with fear, retreats even before the blow of the 
thunderbolt is struck. You create safe and straight 
highways for the cows to move, for the earths and stars 
to revolve and for the Divine Speech to flow in the 
vibrations of nature and the mind of humanity so that 
songs of celebration arise and resound in space in 
homage to the Lord invoked and worshipped by the 
universe. 


एको द्वे वसुमती समीची इन्द्र आ प॑प्रौ पृथिवीमुत द्याम्‌ । 
उतान्तरिक्षादभि न॑: समीक इषो रथीः सयुजं: शूर 
वाजान्‌ 221 

11. Eko dve vasumati samici indra व paprau prthi- 
vimuta dyam. Utantariksadabhi nah-samika iso 
rathih sayujah Sura vajan. 


Indra, lord of light, riding the chariot of glory, 
all by himself fulfils with his lustre both heaven and 
earth together full of wealth. May you, O lord of valour 
and lustre, and our friends bring us from the skies food 
and energy and wealth of knowledge all in one. 


fest: gat न मिनाति प्रदिष्टा दिवेदिवे हर्य॑श्वप्रसूताः 1a 

aera आदिदश्वैर्विमोच॑नं कृणुते तत्त्व॑स्य ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Disah suryo na minati pradista divedive harya- 

svaprasutah. Sam yadanaladhvana dadidasvair- 
vimocanam krnute tat tvasya. 

The sun traverses and illuminates the directions 


of space day by day indicated and roused to activity by 
the rays of light but does not transgress them, and when 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1177 


it reaches a particular stage of the journey, it withdraws 
the light and releases the region to rest for the night. 
This too is a reflection of the power and glory of Indra, 
Lord Almighty. 


fadara उषसो यामं॑न्नक्तोर्विवस्व॑त्या महि चित्रमनीकम्‌। 
विश्वे जानन्ति महिना यदागादिन्द्र॑स्य कर्मं सुकृता 
पुरूणि ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Didrksanta usaso yamannaktorvivasvatya mahi 
citramanikam. Visve jananti mahina yadagad- 
indrasya karma sukrta puruni. 


When the night is on the wayout, all the inmates 
of the living world love to see the great and glorious 
light of the dawn proclaiming the majesty of the rising 
sun, and, when the dawn arises, they realise the holiness 
and grace of Indra’s infinite acts of omnipotence. 


महि ज्योतिर्निहितं वक्षणास्वामा पक्वं च॑रति बिभ्र॑ती गौः। 
विश्वं vara संभतमुस्तरि्यायां यत्सीमिन्द्रो अद॑धाद्धोजं- 
ATAU ९४ ॥ 


14. Mahi jyotirnihitam vaksanasvama pakvam carati 
bibhrati gauh. Visvam svadma sambhrtamusri- 
yayam yat stmindro adadhad bhojanaya. 


The moving world moves on bearing the great 
and glorious light of the lord and whatever mature and 
maturing vitality is held in the flowing streams of 
nature’s matter and energy, and whatever delicious 
delicacies are treasured in the earth and in the cow’s 
udders, all these Indra creates and holds therein for the 
sustenance of life in existence. 


1178 RGVEDA 


इन्द्र Fel यामकोशा अ॑भूवन्यज्ञाय॑ Pyrat गृणते az: | 
दुर्मायवो। दुरेवा मत्यौसो निषङ्धिणो रिपवो हन्त्वांसः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Indra drhya yamakosa abhuvan yajnaya siksa 
grnate sakhibhyah. Durmayavo dureva martyaso 
nisangino ripavo hantvasah. 


Indra, lord giver of light, knowledge and the 
beauty and prosperity of life, be firm, advance and grow 
higher and stronger. There are treasures on the way, 
highways and byways, impediments and obstructions. 
Enlighten and warn friends and admirers about these 
for the sake of yajnic living and advancement. There 
are people crafty, malignant, armed robbers, enemies 
and killers in ambush. Warn of these and protect the 
disciple. 


सं घोष॑ः suds भैर मित्रर्जही न्येष्वशनिं तपिं्ठाम्‌ । वृश्चे- 
मधस्ताद्वि रुजा सह॑स्व जहि र्चो मघवच्रन्धयंस्व ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Sam gosah srnve’vamair-amitrair-jahi nyesva- 
Sanim tapistham. Vrscemadhastadd vi ruja sahasva 
jahi rakso maghavan randhayasva. 


Indra, lord of majesty, I hear the tumult of the 
covert enemies below. Strike on them the fieriest 
thunderbolt. Pluck them off from the root. Challenge 
and beat them down, destroy them, annihilate them, 
eliminate the demons. 


See tat: सहमूलमिन्द्र वृश्चा मध्यं प्रत्यग्रं श्रुणीहि । आ 
कीव॑तः सललूकं चकर्थ ब्रह्मद्विषे तपुषिं हेतिम॑स्य ॥ ९७॥ 

शि Ud vrha raksah sahamulamindra vrsca madhyam 
pratyagram srnthi. A kivatah salalu-kam cakartha 
brahmadvise tapusim hetimasya. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1179 


Indra, lord of power and justice, sustainer of 
life and its progress, pluck off the evil from the root, 
break it at the middle, nip it in the bud and at every 
shoot, and, having cast the fiery thunderbolt upon the 
saboteurs of truth and justice, life and law of existence, 
destroy their hate and enmity to the farthest end of their 
reach. 


स्वस्तये वाजिभिश्च प्रणेतः सं यन्महीरिष॑ं sree पूर्वीः | 
रायो वन्तारो बृहतः स्यामाऽस्मे अस्तु भगं इन्द्र प्रजा- 
aru ९८ ॥ 


18. Svastaye vajibhisca pranetah sam yanmahirisa 
asatsi purvih. Rayo vantaro brhatah syama’sme 
astu bhaga indra prajavan. 


Indra, discriminative leader and pioneer in the 
pursuit of truth and excellence, as for the good and well- 
being of life, with your warlike heroes and powers of 
science and technology, you sit on the seat of the earth’s 
yajna, preside over the wealth of the nations and guide 
the ambitions of humanity revealed and pursued of old. 
May we, we pray, be sharers in the vast wealth and 
prosperity of the world and may the blessings of 
generations of man power and honour, prosperity and 
excellence shower upon us all under your leadership. 


आ नो! भर भग॑मिन्द्र द्युमन्तं नि ते gourd धीमहि प्ररे के । 
adda पप्रथे कामों अस्मे तमा परण वसुपते वसूनाम्‌ ९९ ॥ 


19. A no bhara bhagamindra dyumantam ni te 
desnasya dhimahi prareke. Urva iva paprathe 
kamo asme tama prna vasupate vasunam. 


Indra, lord of wealth, honour and majesty, bring 


1180 RGVEDA 


us the honour and excellence of prosperity full of light 
and wisdom. Let us abide and persevere in the 
abundance of your grace and kindness. Let our 
aspirations rise high and higher like the flames of yajna 
fire. O lord ordainer of the wealth of existence, ruler 
and protector of our hearth and home, let our aspirations 
and ambitions for total fulfilment be realised. 


इमं कामं मन्दया गोभिरश्वैर्चन्द्रव॑ता राध॑सा पप्रथ॑ङ्च | 
स्वर्यवो! मतिधिस्तुभ्यं विप्रा इन्द्राय are: कुशिकासो 
अक्रन्‌ ॥ २०॥ 


20. Imam kamam mandaya gobhirasvaiscandravata 
radhasa paprathasca. Svaryavo matibhistu- 
bhyam vipra indraya vahah kusikaso akran. 


Let this prayer and aspiration be fulfilled in joy 
with the attainment of cows, lands and the light of words 
divine at the speed of light, and let it expand with the 
golden beauty of the moon and accomplishment of life’s 
end and aim, a prayer and aspiration such as lovers of 
joy, intelligent celebrants, with the best of their wit and 
imagination, construct and compose in poetry and 
express in loud voice for you, lord Indra. They are 
carriers of the divine message as we are, waiting for 
fulfilment. 


आ नो गोत्रा ¢dfe गोपते गाः समस्मभ्यं सनयो! यन्तु 
वाज: | feaert असि वृषभ सत्यशुष्मोऽ स्मभ्यं सु 
म॑घवन्बोधि गोदाः ॥ २९॥ 

21. Ano gotra dardrhi gopate gah samasmabhyam 
sanayo yantu vajah. Divaksa asi vrsabha satya- 
susmo’smabhyam su maghavan bodhi godah. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1181 


Indra, generous lord of honour and valour, 
protector and promoter of lands and cows, strengthen 
and advance our families, expand our lands and shine 
our speech. May knowledge of science and divinity, 
speed and power come to us peacefully as our share of 
good fortune. Lord of light and knowledge you are, virile 
and generous, commanding real strength, lord of power 
and prosperity, giver of lands and cows. Give us the 
light, give us the knowledge, let us awake into new life. 


शुनं gan मघ्वानमिन्द्र॑ मस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ २२॥ 


22. Sunam huvema maghavanam-indram-asmin 
bhare nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantam-ugram- 
utaye samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam 
dhananam. 


We invoke, sing and celebrate Indra, lord giver 
of light and wisdom, commander of honour and 
prosperity, highest guide and leader of humanity, in this 
battle of life. Instantly does he listen to our prayers, 
bright and blazing is he in the battles and contests of 
life for protection, killer where he must be, breaker of 
the clouds of darkness, ignorance and poverty, and he 
is the winner, collector and consolidator of the wealths 
of life. We invoke him for protection, progress and 
victory in our battles of life. 


1182 RGVEDA 


Mandala 3/Sukta 31 


Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina or Kushika 
Aishirathi Rshi 


शासद्वधिरदहितुर्नप्त्यं गाद्वद ऋतस्य दीधितिं सपर्यन्‌ | 
पिता यत्रं दुहितुः सेक॑मृञ्जन्त्सं Seas मन॑सा दधन्वे ॥ ९ ॥ 


le Sasad vahnirduhiturnaptyam gad vidvan rtasya 
didhitim saparyan. Pita yatra duhituh sekam- 
rhjantsam Sagmyena manasa dadhanve. 


Let the scholar dedicated to the cosmic law of 
solar radiation approach and study the morning rays of 
the sun, grand children of the sun, being children of the 
dawn which is the sun’s daughter, and let him study the 
light and communicate the knowledge to his disciples 
— even to control and apply the light in practical use. 
And just as a father clothes and beautifies his grand 
child, the daughter’s baby, and feels happy and proud 
at heart, so would the scholar augment the beauty and 
power of sun rays born of the sun, converting darkness 
into day light, and feel happy and proud. 


न जामये तान्वो रिक्थमरिक्चकार wef सनितुर्निधानम्‌। 
यदीं मातरों जनयन्त वहि मन्यः कतां सुकृतोरन्य 
ऋन्धन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

0.0 Na jamaye tanvo rikthamaraik cakara garbham 


sanitur-nidhanam. Yadi mataro janayanta vahni- 
manyah karta sukrtoranya rndhan. 


The son does not set apart the patrimony for the 
son-in-law, he prepares the sister and accomplishes her 
with education, culture and presents for his wife, the 
mother of his children. The parents give birth to children, 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1183 


son and daughter, one for the filial rites and duties for 
themselves and family, the other as beneficiary of the 
sanctities and accomplishments. 


Bass Tals रेज॑मानो महस्पुत्राँ ASI प्रयक्षे । 
महान्गर्भो मह्या जातमेषां मही Wares vat यज्ञैः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Agnirjajne juhva rejamano mahasputran arusa- 
sya prayakse. Mahan garbho mayha jatamesam 
mahi pravrddharyasvasya yajnaih. 


Agni arises in flames of fire fed with the ladle 
of ghrta in the service of the sun in order to press forward 
the children, 1.6., rays of the sun. Great is the offspring, 
1.e., the day, of this great power born of the refulgence 
of the rays, and great is the movement of the sun by 
virtue of the cosmic yajna. 


अभि जेत्रीरसचन्त want महि ज्योतिस्तमंसो निर॑जानन्‌ । 
तं जानतीः प्रत्युदायन्नुषासः पतिर्ग्वामभवदेक इन्द्रः ॥ ठ ॥। 


4. Abhi jaitrirasacanta sprdhanam mahi jyotista- 
maso nirajanan. Tam janatith pratyudayannu- 
sasah patir-gavam-abhavad-eka indrah. 


Victorious Maruts, currents of cosmic energy, 
join and serve the sun, fighting the forces of darkness, 
thereby manifesting the mighty light rising out of the 
night’s darkness. Similarly, manifesting the sun rise, they 
serve the dawns in consequence. And Indra, lord self- 
refulgent, the sun, is the generator of the dawns and the 
rays of light which bring about the day. 


वीव्ठो सतीरभि धीरां अतुन्दन्प्राचाहिन्वन्मन॑सा aa feat: । 
विश्वांमविन्दन्पथ्यामृतस्यं प्रजानच्ित्ता नमसा विवेश ॥ ५ ॥ 


1184 RGVEDA 


2: Vilau satirabhi dhira atrndan pracahinvan 
manasa sapta viprah. Visvamavindan pathya- 
mrtasya prajanannitta namasa vivesa. 


When the seven faculties of the mind and senses 
grow too strong and rigid in their natural carnality, then 
saints and sages of patience and courage, knowledge 
and wisdom, calling up their original strength of the 
spirit, control their senses, mind and intellect and 
recover their vision of the path to universal truth and 
the Divine Law. And the soul, with homage and humility, 
enters the cave of the heart and discovers the light of 
Indra, lord of the universe. 


विदद्यदी सर्मा रुग्णमद्रेर्महि पाथं पूर्व्य सश्य॑क्कः | 
अग्रं नयत्सुपद्यक्षराणामच्छा रवं प्रथमा जानती गात्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vidad yadi sarama rugnamadrermahi pathah 
purvyam sadhryakkah. Agram nayat supadya- 
ksaranamaccha ravam prathama janati gat. 


O lady of dynamic thought and action, assessor 
of the fast moving things of life, if you know the great 
but broken path of the mountain and have it repaired at 
once as carved by the ancients, if you know the breach 
of the cloud known to the ancients and bring it down in 
showers, if you realise the noble voice of the ancients’ 
words of divinity and lead it forward, you would be the 
first in knowledge and advancement. 


अग॑च्छदु विप्र॑तमः सखीयन्नसंदयत्सुकृते गर्भमद्विः । ससान 
मर्यो युव॑भिर्मरस्यन्नर्थाभवदङ्धिराः सद्यो ste ७॥ 
7. Agacchadu vipratamah sakhiyannasudayat sukrte 


garbhamadrih. Sasana maryo yuvabhirmakha- 
syannathabhavadangirah sadyo arcan. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1185 


Let the man of knowledge and wisdom, inspired 
for action go forward with friends and comrades and 
break the cloud to bring down the held up showers of 
rain for the people of yajnic action. Let the man, himself 
desirous of yajna, share life and action with the youth 
and, always loving and respecting others, be one with 
them like the life-blood flowing in the nation’s veins. 


स॒तःस॑तः प्रतिमानं पुरोभूर्विश्वां वेद afar हन्ति 
शुष्णम्‌ । प्र णो दिवः प॑दवीर्गव्युरर्चन्त्सखा सखीर- 
मुञ्चन्नि-र॑वद्यात्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Satah satah pratimanam purobhurvisva veda 
jJanima hanti susnam. Pra no divah padavir- 
gavyurarcantsakha sakhinramuncanniravadyat. 


The man on top, friend and comrade of the 
nation, first among all, who knows the models, equals 
and adversaries existing from moment to moment, who 
knows everything that is born on earth, who removes 
drought and poverty, who rises higher step by step to 
the light of heaven, who loves friends and respects 
seniors, may, we pray, save us from calumny, malignity 
and ill-will. 


नि ग॑व्य॒ता मन॑सा सेदुर कैः कुण्वानासों अमतत्वायं गातुम्‌ | 
इदं fag सद॑नं year येन मासाँ असिंघासन्नृतेन॑ । ९ ॥ 


9. Ni gavyata manasa sedurarkaih krnvanaso amrta- 
tvaya gatum. Idam cinnu sadanam bhuryesam 
yena masan asisasannrtena. 


Let those who carve a path to immortality for 
themselves sit on the holy seats of yajna with earnest 
desire and sincere mind offering hymns of praise and 


1186 RGVEDA 


prayer to Indra. For sure, this yajna is their expansive 
seat of action by which, through observance of right 
conduct and self-sacrifice, they can try to realise their 
year round objective of spirituality over the months in 
succession. 


संपश्य॑माना अमदन्नभि स्वं पय॑: प्रलस्य रेत॑सो दुघानाः | 
वि रोद॑सी अतपद्धोषं एषां जाते निःछामद॑धुर्गोषु 
वीरान्‌ ॥ १० ॥ 


10. Sampasyamana amadannabhi svam payah 
pratnasya retaso dughanah. Vi rodasi atapad 
ghosa esam jate nihsthamadadhurgosu viran. 


Watching and realising their own selves they 
rejoice, tasting the sweets of light and life eternal. The 
voice of the ecstasy of these settled celebrants rises and 
shines across earth and heaven and they confirm their 
faith in the world of Indra’s creation and install their 
faithful heroes on guard over earths and divine voices 
of love and faith. 


स जातेभिवर्ृत्रहा सेदु, हव्यैरुदुस्िया असरजदिन्द्रो अकैः | 
उरूच्यस्मै घृतवद्दररन्ती मधु स्वादं दुदुहे जेन्या गौः ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sa jatebhirvrtraha sedu havyairudusriya asrja- 
dindro arkaih. Urucyasmai ghrtavad bharanti 
madhu svadma duduhe jenya gauh. 


He, Indra, destroyer of darkness, dispeller of 
ignorance and breaker of the cloud, with simultaneous 
creations, yajnic materials and yajnic processes of 
consumption and formation, creates the rays of light in 
the solar region, planets in the firmament and cows on 
earth. The wide earth, a very generous mother cow full 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1187 


of wealth, bearing precious ghrta, water and honey 
sweets of herbs distils the nectar foods and other 
delicious materials from nature for this Indra in the 
service of living beings. 
पित्रे चिंच्यक्रुः सद॑नं सम॑स्मै महि त्विषींमत्सुकृतो वि fe 
ख्यन्‌। विष्कभ्नन्तः स्कम्भं नेना जनित्री आसीना ऊर्ध्वं 
tre वि मिन्वन्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Pitre ciccakruh sadanam samasmai mahi tvisimat 
sukrto vi hi khyan. Viskabhnantah skambhanena 
janitri asina urdhvam rabhasam vi minvan. 


Divine experts of cosmic action build for this 
father creator and ruler, Indra, a great home, bright and 
beautiful, illuminate it and proclaim it wide. Themselves 
sitting firm on the vedi, holding and supporting it as 
Prakrti, nature’s creative and sustaining force of cosmic 
gravity, they cast it up in orbit, measuring the force 
upward and the force of gravity. 


मही यदि धिषणां शिश्नथे धात्संद्योवृधं विभ्वं¶ Veet: | 
गिरो यस्पिंन्ननवद्याः स॑मीचीर्विश्वा इन्द्राय तविंघीर- 
नुत्ताः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Mahi yadi dhisana 551410८ dhat sadyovrdham 
vibhvam rodasyoh. Giro yasminnanavadyah 
samicirvisva indraya tavistranuttah. 


O seeker and celebrant of Indra, nature and 
divinity, if in the act of exploration, your great intelli- 
gence and penetrative vision were to hold on to the ever 
expansive spirit of heaven and earth, in which the entire 
light, words and vision of existence, irreproachable and 
invincible, lie embedded for Indra, then that is the state 
of sovereignty in research and meditation. 


1188 RGVEDA 


मह्या ते सख्यं व॑श्मि शक्तीरा daw नियुतो यन्ति पूर्वीः | 
महि' स्तो त्रमव आग॑न्म सृरेर स्माकं सु म॑घवन्बोधि 
THAT: W ९४ ॥ 


14. Mahya te sakhyam vasmi Saktira vrtraghne niyuto 
yanti purvth. Mahi stotramava adganma sure- 
rasmakam su maghavan bodhi gopah. 


Indra, lord of glory and majesty, I love and pray 
for your favour and friendship. O breaker of the cloud, 
dispeller of darkness and evil, all eternal powers and 
energies, divinely ordained, concentrate in you and 
emanate from you. O lord potent and universal protector, 
we offer our hymns of praise in your honour and pray 
for shelter under your protection. Give us the vision, 
give us the light, give us the knowledge. 


महि act पुरु श्चन्द्रं विंविद्धानादित्सखिभ्यश्चरथं समैरत्‌ | 
इन्द्रो नृभिरजनदीद्यानः साकं सूर्यमुषसं गातुमभिम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Mahi ksetram puruscandram vividvanadit 
sakhibhyascaratham samairat. Indro nrbhira- 
jJanad didyanah sakam suryamusasam gdatuma- 
gnim. 

Indra, lord refulgent, commanding knowledge 
and wisdom, brings for his devotees and friends vast 
field and opportunities for action, immense wealth of 
gold, knowledge and inspiration, movement and 
expansion. With men, leaders and the force of winds, 
he provides the light of the sun, beauty of the dawns, 
inspiration of the Divine Word, the passion of fire, and 
he creates the paths of progress for them. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1189 


अपण्चिंदेष fasats दमूनाः प्र सश्चीचीरसृजद्धिश्वश्च॑न्त्राः | 
मध्व॑ः पुनानाः कविभिः पवित्रैर्युभि्हिन्वन्त्यक्तुथिर्ध- 
at: wes 


16. Apascidesa vibhvo damunah pra sadhricirasrjad 
visvascandrah. Madhvah punanah kavibhih 
pavitrair-dyubhir-hinvantyaktubhirdhanutrih. 


And this lord omnipresent and infinite, fiery 
controller and guardian of human households, creates 
the waters and the world’s golden wealth of materials, 
knowledge and culture and joy all together. And these 
waters, honey sweet and purifying, highly productive 
of food and wealth and joy, inspiring poets with their 
purest streams, thereby inspire and excite the people 
day and night for advancement. 


(Swami Dayananda interprets ‘Apah’ 
metaphorically as intelligent, educated and cultured 
people of dynamic nature who inspire the nation with 
their knowledge and conduct.) 


अनुं कृष्णो वसुधिती जिहाते उभे सूर्य॑स्य मंहना ass । 
परि ad महिमानं वृजध्यै सखाय इन्द्र॒ काम्या 
ऋजिप्याः ॥ १७॥ 


17. Anu krsne vasudhiti jihate ubhe suryasya 
manhana yajatre. Pari yat te mahimanam vrja- 
dhyai sakhaya indra kamya rjipyah. 


The green earth and the bright heaven, holding 
the wealth of existence, mutually sustained by the force 
and grandeur of the sun, go round in concord like the 
dark night and bright day going on and on in unison, 
both doing homage to the sun. The same force and 


1190 RGVEDA 


grandeur, Indra, lustrous lord ruler of the world, your 
loving friends, going by the simple paths of truth and 
law, follow in order to collect the holy grass for cosmic 
yajna and avert untoward accidents and oppositions. 


पतिर्भव वृत्रहन्त्सूनृतानां गिरां विश्वायुर्वृषभो व॑योधाः | 
आ नो गहि सख्येभिः शिवेभिर्महान्मदीभिरूतिभिंः 
सरण्यन्‌ LE ॥ 


18. Patirbhava vrtahantsunrtanam giram visvayur- 
vrsabho vayodhah. A no gahi sakhyebhih Sivebhir- 
mahan mahibhirutibhih saranyan. 


Be the protector, sustainer, and promoter of the 
voices of truth and cosmic laws of existence, O dispeller 
of darkness, breaker of the cloud and destroyer of evil. 
You are great, life eternal, generous and virile, universal 
giver of good health and full age. Come, take us on, 
moving, reaching, inspiring, with friendship, kindness 
and benevolence, and bless us with divine modes of 
protection and progress. 


तमङ्धिर स्वन्नम॑सा सपर्यन्नव्यं कृणोपि सन्य॑से पुराजाम्‌। 
gat वि याहि agen अदेवीः स्व॑श्च नो मघवन्त्सातयें 
धाः॥ ९९॥ 


19. Tamangirasvannamasa saparyan navyam krnomi 
sanyase purajam. Druho vi yahi bahula adevih 
svasca no maghavantsataye dhah. 


That Indra, ruler of the world, ancient yet ever 
new, I honour and serve with homage and salutations 
in order to join him in the governance and administration 
of the common wealth. O lord of power, plenty and 
majesty, throw off and eliminate all hostile, impious and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1191 


uncreative elements of society, and bear and bring us 
peace, prosperity and joy for the sake of victory and 
progress. 


fae: पावकाः प्रत॑ता अभूवन्त्स्वस्ति न॑ः पिपृहि पारमासाम्‌। 
इन्दर त्वं रथिरः पाहि नो रिषो मक्षुम्॑षू कृणुहि गोजितो 
नः॥ २०॥ 


20. Mihah pavakah pratata abhuvantsvasti nah piprhi 
paramasam. Indra tvam rathirah pahi no riso 
maksumaksu krnuhi gojito nah. 


Showers of rain, pure and purifying, pour down 
and spread around far and wide. Take us across these, 
lead us to life’s well-being and total fulfilment. Indra, 
lord of the world, warrior of the chariot you are, protect 
us from violence, and at every step, at every moment, 
make us victors of lands and cows, sense-control and 
self-discipline with the voice divine. 


अदेदिष्ट वृत्रहा गोप॑तिर्गां अन्तः कृष्णां अंरुषैर्धामंभिर्गात्‌। 
प्र सूनृता दिशमान ऋतेन दुरश्च विश्वा अवृणोदप 
स्वाः॥ २९॥ 


21. Adedista vrtraha gopatirga antah krsnan arusai- 
rdhamabhirgat. Pra sunrta disamana rtena 
durasca visva avrnodapa svah. 


Just as the sun, lord of light and breaker of the 
cloud of darkness, shoots its rays of light with its power 
and splendour, penetrates to the centre of dark energy 
and dispels the darkness releasing the energy, similarly, 
O lord of light and power, commanding and revealing 
your own lights and words of knowledge and the truth 
of reality, open out all the doors and reveal the secrets 


1192 RGVEDA 


of universal knowledge with the power and force of 
universal law which sustains the world of existence. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाजसातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ २२॥ 


22.  Sunamhuvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugra-mutaye 
samatsu ghanantam vrtrani sanyitam dhananam. 


Fighting for victory in this battle of life, for the 
sake of defence, protection and advance in the 
engagements of action, we invoke and call upon Indra, 
auspicious lord of power and prosperity, first and highest 
among leaders, careful listener, fierce, passionate and 
noble winner of wealth and victory. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


इन्द्र सोमं सोमपते fran माध्यंदिनं सव॑नं चारु यत्ते । 
प्रप्रथ्या शिप्रे मघवन्नजीषिच्विमुच्या हरी! इह मादयस्व ॥ ९॥ 


le Indra somam somapate pibemam madhyam- 
dinam savanam caru yat te. Prapruthyd Sipre 
maghava-nnrjisin vimucya hari iha madayasva. 


Indra, creator giver of honour, excellence and 
prosperity, creator, preserver and promoter of the soma 
success of life, accept and enjoy this soma drink of 
homage which is your delicious share of the mid-day 
session of our yajna of struggle and success in creative 
action. Breathe deeply, rest your limbs, relax your 
muscles, lord of wealth and connoisseur of the purest 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1193 


delicacies. Unharness your horses and enjoy yourself 
here on the vedi. 


Talo मन्धिन॑मिन्द्र शुक्र Fran सोमं ररिमा ते मदाय | 
ब्रह्मकृता मारुतेना गणेन स॒जोषा सुद्रैस्तृपदा FAT ॥ २॥ 


2, Gavasiram manthinamindra sukram piba somam 
ratrima te madaya. Brahmakrta marutena ganena 
sajosa rudraistrpada vrsasva. 


Indra, destroyer of suffering and poverty, have 
a drink of this pure exhilarating soma, well churned, 
distilled and blended with milk and seasoned in sun. 
We offer it to you for your joy and exhilaration. Enjoy 
it to the full in the company of divine scholars and 
producers and refiners of gold, and scholars of the Rudra 
order. Drink and rejoice and be virile and generous as a 
cloud of showers. 


ये ते शष्पं ये तविंषीमवंर्धन्नर्चन्त इन्द्र मरुतस्त ओज॑ः | 
माध्यन्दिने सव॑ने वच्रहस्त frat रुद्रेभिः सग॑णः 
सुशिप्र ॥ ३॥ 


a Ye te Susmam ye tavistmavardhannarcanta indra 
marutasta ojah. Madhyamdine savane vajrahasta 
piba rudrebhih saganah suSipra. 


Indra, lord destroyer of evil, of impressive visor, 
holding the thunder-bolt in hand, those who augment 
your strength, your forces, and your lustre and valour, 
and those who admire and serve you to the degree of 
worship, are Maruts, heroes as tempestuous as the winds 
in storm. In the company of all these and with the Rudras 
who rout the wicked, drink the soma in the mid-day 
session of the national yajna of defence. 


1194 RGVEDA 


त इनल्व॑स्य मधुंमद्धिविप्र इन्द्र॑स्य शर्धो मरुतो य आसंन्‌। 
येभिवरवुत्रस्येषितो विवेदामर्मणो मन्य॑मानस्य मर्म॑ ॥ ॐ i 


4. Ta innvasya madhumad vivipra indrasya sardho 
maruto ya asan. Yebhirvrtrasyesito vivedamar- 
mano manyamanasya marma. 


Indeed the Maruts stir the honey sweets of soma 
for Indra, lord ruler and commander of the world, and 
they, heroic brave like the winds of storm, are his force 
who rouse his passion against the evil. Stirred by these 
he knows and reaches the fatal core of Vrtra, the demon, 
who believes he is invulnerable. 


मनुष्वदिनद्र सव॑नं जुषाणः fren सोमं शश्व॑ते वीयीय। स 
आ व॑वृत्स्व हर्यश्व aa: स॑रण्युभि॑रपो अणी सिसर्षि ॥ ५॥ 


2, Manusvadindra savanam jusanah piba somam 
Sasvate viryaya. Sa a vavrtsva haryasva yajnaih 
saranyubhirapo arna sisarsi. 


Indra, lord giver of honour and glory, eager for 
yajnic action and fond of yajnic gifts of fragrant 
delicacies, come like a man of thought and meditation, 
join our yajna and have a drink of soma for lasting 
strength and inspiration. You move the vapours and 
waters to the skies by performance of yajna and currents 
of wind and rays of the sun. As such, O rider of the 
horses of light and waves of energy, turn round and come 
to enjoy the fragrances. 


त्वमपो aes वृत्रं Ha-at stetiga प्रासंजः सर्तवाजौ । 
vraag चर॑ता ae afaara परि देवीरदे वम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tvamapo yaddha vrtram jaghanvan atyan iva 
prasrjah sartavajau. Sayanamindra carata 
vadhena vavrivamsam pari deviradevam. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1195 


Indra, when with the wielded weapon of the 
thunderbolt in battle, you destroy Vrtra, demonic cloud 
of darkness lying asleep in stolid state, covering and 
with-holding the blissful waters of vital rain showers, 
you release the waters of life and joy to flow, and the 
streams rush forth in freedom like horses released from 
the stables. 


यजाम इन्नम॑सा वृब्धमिन्द्रं बृहन्त॑मृष्वमजरं युवानम्‌ | 
यस्य॑ प्रिये ममतुर्यजिय॑स्य न रोद॑सी महिमानं ममाते ७॥ 


a Yajama innamasa vrddhamindram brhantamr- 
svamajaram yuvanam. Yasya priye mamatur- 
yajniyasya na rodast mahimanam mamate. 


We love, join and worship Indra, lord of glory 
and majesty, with homage and holy food: Indra, lord 
most ancient beyond calculation, great and sublime, 
unaging and ever youthful, the bounds of which Lord 
worthiest of reverence in yajna, no near and dear heaven 
and earth ever measure, nor can they ever measure or 
contain. 


इन्द्र॑स्य कर्म gam पुरूणि aah देवा न fara fava | 
arent यः पुंथिवीं द्यामुतेमां जजान सूर्यमुषसं सुदंसाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Indrasya karma sukrta puruni vratani deva na 
minanti visve. Dadhara yah prthivim dyamute- 
mam jajana suryamusasam sudamsah. 


Indra, Lord Almighty, His acts, innumerable 
gifts and graces, and His laws, none among the noblest 
humanity do ever violate, nor the mightiest powers of 
nature ever transgress: Indra, lord of generosity and 
holiest action, who sustains this earth and heaven, and 


1196 RGVEDA 


creates the sun and the dawn and the day. 


अद्रोघ सत्यं तव तन्म॑हित्वं सद्यो Saat अपिबो ह सोम॑म्‌। 
न द्याव॑ इन्द्र dade ओजो नादा न मासाः शरदों 
वरन्त ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Adrogha satyam tava tanmahitvam sadyo yajjato 
apibo ha somam. Na dyava indra tavasasta 
ojonaha na masah sarado varanta. 


Indra, lord of love free from jealousy, negativity, 
discrimination or hypocrisy, ever true, inviolable and 
eternal is that greatness and glory of yours, that sun 
which, as it arises, drinks up the soma of nature to 
recreate, augment and return it to nature. Neither the 
heavens of light, nor days, nor months, nor seasons, 
nor years can evade or prevent or exceed or transgress 
the might and majesty of yours, omnipotent as you are. 


त्वं सद्यो अपिबो जात इन्द्र मदाय सोमं परमे व्योंमन्‌। 
यद्द्‌ द्यावापृथिवी आविंवेशीर्थाभवः ged: कारु- 
धायाः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvam sadyo apibo jata indra madaya somam 
parame vyoman. Yaddha dyavaprthivi aviveSt- 
rathabhavah purvyah karudhayah. 


Indra, mighty lord of light and senses and mind, 
as soon as you arise and manifest, you drink up the soma 
vitalities of the holiest regions of life and nature for 
pleasure and growth, since then, you pervade the heaven 
and earth and then you grow to be the maker and 
sustainer of the artists of beauty and singers of divinity. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1197 


अहन्नहिं परिशयानमर्णौ ओजायमानं तुविजात त्व्यान्‌। न 
ते महित्वमनु, yaa द्यौ्य॑दन्यय। स्फिग्याडे क्षाम 
वंस्थाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ahannahim parisayanamarna ojayamanam 
tuvijata tavyan. Na te mahitvamanu bhudadha 
dyauryadanyaya sphigya ksamavasthah. 


Indra, potent lord of light universally manifest 
in existence and supremely generous, you break up the 
serpentine cloud of darkness waxing and overshadowing 
the oceans of air and vapours in the firmament and cover 
the earth with rain and light. Even the region of light 
cannot equal and contain your might because (while 
you strike the cover of darkness with the thunderbolt in 
one hand) with the other you hold and sustain the earth. 


यज्ञो हि त॑ इन्द्र वर्धनो भूदुत प्रियः सुतसोमो मियेध: | 
यज्ञन॑ यज्ञम॑व यज्ञियः सन्यज्ञस्ते वज्र॑महिहत्यं आवत्‌॥ १२ ॥ 


12. Yajno hi ta indra vardhano bhuduta priyah 
sutasomo miyedhah. Yajnena yajnamava yajniyah 
san yajnaste vajramahihatya avat. 


Indra, ruler of the world and giver of honour 
and excellence, your yajnic action, social and generous 
programme, is the mode of progress and promotion: It 
creates joy and prosperity, eliminates poverty and 
suffering, and promotes love and social cohesion. Be 
the leader of yajna, protect and promote yajna by yajna, 
and let your yajna protect and promote your thunder- 
arm in breaking the cloud of darkness for the rain 
showers of prosperity and joy in plenty. 


1198 RGVEDA 


यज्ञेनन्द्रमवसा ash salt सुम्नाय नव्य॑से ववृत्याम्‌ | 
यः स्तोमेभिर्वावृधे पूर्व्यभिर्यो म॑ध्यमेभिरुत नूत॑नेभिः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yajnenendramavasa cakre arvagainam sumnaya 
navyase vavrtyam. Yah stomebhir-vavrdhe 
purvyebhiryo madhyamebhiruta nutanebhih. 


The person who creates honour and excellence, 
peace and prosperity for humanity by yajna, creative 
action of the corporate community and promotes it by 
protection, preservation and further yajnic action, who 
rises by the appreciation and praise of the seniors, 
cooperation of the middle classes and the hopes, 
aspirations and dreams of the new generation, to sucha 
person let me turn as front leader, as Indra, ruler and 
law-giver for humanity. 


विवेष यन्मां धिषण। जजान स्तवै पुरा ureife-xue: | 
अंसो यत्र॑ पीपर द्यथा नो नावेव यान्त॑मुभये। हवन्ते Ul ९४ ॥ 


14. Vivesa yanma dhisana jajana stavai pura 
paryadindramahnah. Anhaso yatra piparad yatha 
no naveva yantamubhaye havante. 


When thought is stirred and words arise in me 
in praise of Indra before the end of the day with gratitude 
how he would take us over across the world of sin and 
evil, then people too on both sides of the flood call upon 
him as captain of the ship on the move to take them 
over the seas to the shores of life beyond. 


आपूर्णो अस्य कलशः स्वाहा सेक्तेव कोशं सिसिचे 
पिब॑ध्यै । समु प्रिया आव॑वृच्रन्र्दाय प्रदक्षिणिदभि सोमास 
इन्द्रम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1199 


15. Apurno asya kalasah svaha sekteva kosam sisice 
pibadhyai. Samu priya avavrtran madaya prada- 
ksinidabhi somasa indram. 


Full to the brim is the cup of life for Indra to 
drink, filled with the best of thought, perception and 
action, like the dense cloud of vapours poured in by the 
sun. Dear friends and admirers, lovers of the soma-joy 
of life, come close and stand round Indra in homage to 
join and celebrate the Lord’s gift of life. 


नत्वा गभीरः पुरुहूत सिन्धुर्नाद्रयः परि षन्तो वरन्त । इत्था 
सखिभ्य इषितो यदिन्द्राऽऽदुक्हं चिदरुजो गव्य॑- 
मूर्वम्‌॥ ९६॥ 


16. Natva gabhirah puruhuta sindhurnadrayah pari 
santo varanta. Ittha sakhibhya isito yadindra’’- 
drlham cidarujo gavyamurvam. 


Indra, mighty lord of light as the sun, invoked 
by one and all, neither the deep sea nor the dense clouds 
nor the high mountains all round can contain or hold 
you back when inspired by friends for friends you strike 
and break the formidable cloud, impenetrable except 
for the thunderbolt. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाजसातौ । 
श्रण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु wed वुत्राणिं संजितं et 

नाम्‌॥ ९७॥ ति ति 
17. Sunari huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iitaye 
samatsu ghanantam vrtrani sanyitam dhananam. 
For protection, victory and well-being, in this 
battle of life, we invoke Indra, auspicious lord of power 


1200 RGVEDA 


and prosperity, highest leader, careful listener, fierce 
fighter, destroyer of enemies, and winner of wealths. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 33 
Nadis, Streams, Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


प्र पर्वतानामुशती उपस्थादश्वेंडव विषिते हास॑माने | 
गावेव शुभ्रे मातरा रिहाणे विपाट्‌ छुतुद्री पय॑सा जवेते ॥। ९ ॥ 


ib Pra parvatanamusati upasthadasve iva visite 
hasamane. Gaveva subhre matara rihane vipat- 
chutudri payasa Jjavete. 


From the lap of mountains, arising brilliant and 
passionate like the dawn, laughing and sparkling, and 
bolting like a horse and mare, like two beautiful mother 
cows yearning to meet their calves, two streams, one 
expansive and divided (vipat), the other deep and 
concentrated, fast and overflowing the banks (shutudri), 
flow in unison rapidly to meet the sea with their water. 


Note: Swami Dayananda interprets this mantra 
as a metaphor of two brilliant women teachers issuing 
forth from a mighty source of learning and going to 
meet their disciples. He does not accept the 
interpretation that Vipat and Shutudri refer to two 
particular streams of these names. He does not accept 
the historical comparative method of Vedic 
interpretation which says that these mantras were 
composed on the banks of Vipat and Shutudri streams. 
On the contrary, he says that the words of the Veda 
should be interpreted etymologically as translated 
above. 


Why these names in the Veda then? That’s the 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 33 1201 


question. Swamiji says that words of the Veda are 
independent of history and geography. Particulars names 
in history such as Rama, Krishna, and others, for 
example, and names in geography such as Vipat and 
Shutudri and Ganga were taken from the Veda and not 
vice versa. There is no history nor geography of persons 
and places in the Veda. All such words, which appear to 
be name-words, should be interpreted etymologically, 
that’s the scientific method, just like the technical terms 
of science which are structured and interpreted 
etymologically. 


इन्द्रेषिते wad भिश्च॑माणे अच्छा समुद्रं रथ्येव याथः। 
समाराणे ऊर्मिभिः पिन्व॑माने अन्या वामन्यामप्येति 
शुभ्रे ॥ २॥ 


2 Indresite prasavam bhiksamane accha samu- 
dram rathyeva yathah. Samarane urmibhih 
pinvamane anya vamanyamapyeti 5110111९. 


Moved and inspired by Indra, lord of light and 
rain, sharing and receiving the impulse to grow, you 
flow with crystalline waters, like beautiful chariot mares, 
towards the sea. Meeting and growing together with 
rising waves, feeding the environs, brilliant and graceful, 
each of you meets and augments the other. 


(The metaphor of learned women, meeting, 
cooperating and beautifying the life around with 
education and the graces of culture continues to apply.) 


अच्छा सिन्धुं मातृत॑मामयास्ं विपाशमुर्वीं सुभगामगन्म | 
वत्समिव मातरा संरिहाणे संमानं योनिमनु संचरन्ती ॥ ३ ॥ 


1202 RGVEDA 


a Accha sindhum matrtamamayasam vipasam- 
urvim subhagamaganma. Vatsamiva matara 
samrihane samanam yonimanu samcaranti. 


I go to the river, I go to the sea, dearest mother 
generator and receiver of the rivers. 


We go to the river, free, wide and auspicious. 


The streams flow to the sea like mother cows 
hastening to the stalls to meet the calf, loving and 
caressing, reaching together in equal love and joy living 
together in one home. 


एना वयं पय॑सा पिन्व॑माना अनु योनिं देवकुलं चर॑न्तीः । 
न वर्तवे प्रसवः सर्गतक्तः किंयुर्विप्रो नद्यो जोहवीति ui ४ ॥ 


4. Ena vayam payasa pinvamana anu yonim deva- 
krtam carantth. Na vartave prasavah sargataktah 
kimyurvipro nadyo johaviti. 


We rivers rising with water and fertilizing the 
land move on by the same course appointed by the divine 
maker, never relenting in the flow, our birth itself and 
flow is never meant to stop. 


(The mantra refers to the stream of life, 
continuance of the race, the family and the tradition of 
education and culture.) 


रम॑ध्वं मे वच॑से सोम्याय ऋतावरीरुप मुहूर्तमेवैः | 
प्र सिन्धुमच्छां बृहती म॑नीषाऽवस्युरं ह कुशिकस्य सूनुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Ramadhvam me vacase somyaya rtavarirupa 
muhurtamevaih. Pra sindhumaccha brhati 
manisa’vasyurahve kusikasya sunuh. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 33 1203 


Bide a while, listen, pray consider and enjoy 
my word of peace, prayer and beauty. Relax, why rush 
on like a storm to the bottom mysterious deep. Son and 
disciple of a self-realised soul, I invoke and call upon 
the river and the sea from the core of my heart and mind, 
I need the vision and the protection. 


(The mantra points to the irresistible flow of 
existence and the soul’s cry for a moment’s vision of 
constancy against the flux of mutability.) 


इन्द्रो अस्मां अंरदद्वजर॑बाहुरपांहन्वृत्रं aR नदीनाम्‌ | 
देवोऽनयत्सविता सुपाणिस्तस्य वयं daa याम उर्वीः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indro asman aradad vajrabahurapahan vrtram 
paridhim nadinam. Devo’nayat savita supani- 
stasya vayam prasave yama urvih. 


Indra, lord of thunder, carved for us the paths 
we follow when he broke the ocean of dark energy in 
which the streams of existence lay confined. Into those 
channels the lord creator, Savita, cosmic sun of 
omnipotent arm, made us flow. In his channels we flow 
on and on, wide and deep, without rest. 


(Mutability does not stop. The flux goes on and 
on, but you can stop the flow of your experience of the 
flow.) 
प्रवाच्यं शश्वधा वीर्य. तदिन्द्रस्य कमम यदहिं विवृश्चत्‌। 
वि वज्रेण परिषदो जघानाऽऽयन्नापोऽयंनमिच्छमानाः ॥ ७ ॥ 

7. Pravacyam sasvadha viryam tadindrasya karma 
yadahim vivrscat. Vi vajrena parisado jaghana 
’yannapo ’yanamicchamanah. 


That omnipotence of Indra, that cosmic act by 


1204 RGVEDA 


which he breaks the dark energy of the state of 
annihilation (Pralaya) is worthy of song and celebration. 
With his voice of thunder he breaks the silence of the 
inert forces of Prakrti, and the waves and waters of 
cosmic energy flow into existence, in-vested with the 
divine will. 


एतद्वचो जरितर्मापि मृष्ठा आ यत्ते घोषानुत्तरा युगानि । 
उक्थेषु कारो प्रति नो जुषस्व मा नो नि कः पुरुषत्रा 
नमस्ते॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Etad vaco jaritarmapi mrstha a yat te ghosanu- 
ttara yugani. Ukthesu karo prati no jusasva ma 
no ni kah purusatra namaste. 


O singer and celebrant, neglect not, nor forget 
these holy words of yours which the ages to come will 
honour and resound. O poet of divinity, master maker 
and artist of eminence, love us and serve us with faith 
in your yajnic programmes. Be not arrogant to us or to 
noble people in general. Salutations to you! 


ओ षु. स्व॑सारः aad श्रृणोत ययौ वो दूरादनसा रथन | 
निषु नमध्वं भव॑ता सुपारा अधोक्षाः सिन्धवः 
स्त्रोत्याभिंः ॥ ९॥ 


2. O su svasarah karave srnota yayau vo dura- 
danasa rathena. Ni su namadhvam bhavata 
supara adho-aksah sindhavah srotyabhih. 


O sister streams of existence in cosmic flow, 
powers of dynamic action, listen to the prayer and 
exhortations of the artist maker and poet. He has come 
to you from afar by a fast moving chariot. Lower your 
depth and turbulence, flow below the axle of his chariot 
wheels, bow to him, and help him to cross the flood. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 33 1205 


आ तें कारो श्रृणवामा वचांसि ययाथ॑ दूरादन॑सा रथन | 
नि ते नंसै पीप्यानेव योषा मयीयेव कन्यां शश्वय ते it ९०॥ 


10. Ate karo srnvama vacamsi yayatha duradan-asa 
rathena. Ni te namsai pipyaneva yosa marydayeva 
kanya Sasvacai te. 


O poet artist and maker, we listen to your words, 
you come from afar with a cart and chariot, and we greet 
you with salutations eagerly as a woman overflowing 
with love meets her child, and a maiden meets her lover 
with embraces. 


यदङ्क wat भरताः सन्तरेयुर्ग्यन्ग्रामं इषित इन्द्र॑जूतः | 
अर्षादह प्रसवः सर्गतक्त आ वो वृणे सुमतिं यज्ञिया- 
नाम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yadanga tva bharatah samtareyurgavyan grama 
isita indrajutah. Arsadahah prasavah sargatakta 
a vo vrne sumatim yajniyanam. 


O dear streams of water and national economy, 
as the producers and managers of the nation may cross 
and manage you with your consent, so may the people 
of the settlement too, desirous of crossing you, when 
impassioned and inspired by Indra, ruling light of the 
world, cross and manage the waters. And then, for sure, 
may the flood rush on. O managers and planners of the 
nation’s yajna, worthy of love and reverence, I admire 
and pray for the vision and wisdom and the good-will 
of friends and creators like you. 


अतारिषुर्भरता गव्यवः समभ॑क्त fad: सुमतिं adr 
प्र पिन्वध्वमिषय॑न्तीः सुराधा आ वक्षणाः पणध्वं यात 
शीभ॑म्‌।॥ ९२॥ 


1206 RGVEDA 


12. Atarisurbharata gavyavah samabhakta viprah 
sumatim nadinam. Pra pinvadhvamisayantih 
suradha a vaksanah prnadhvam yata sibham. 


May the producers, managers and rulers seeking 
and developing lands, and cows, and animal husbandry 
manage water resources. Let the intellectuals study and 
share the secret of river power. O people of the land, 
develop the rich and productive streams and rivers and 
fill the fields and canals with water for irrigation. Come 
all, go far, be quick and effective. 


उद्व॑ ऊर्मिः श्यां हन्त्वापो योक्त्राणि मुञ्चत | 
मादुष्कृतौ व्येनसाऽघ्न्यो श्ूनमार॑ताम्‌॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Udvaurmih samya hantvapo yoktrani muncata. 
Maduskrtau vyenasa’ghnyau sunamaratam. 


O streams and rivers, may your flow, the waves, 
touch and sanctify the flagpole of yajna. May the waters 
relieve the yoke of bullocks. May the streams, fast, wide 
and free, never destructive but blissful, unhurt, protected 
and developed, auspicious as a boon, bring us peace, 
prosperity and joy. (Life is a flow, inspiring, energising, 
sanctifying. Manage it, develop it, live it as a divine 
gift.) 


Mandala 3/Sukta 34 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
इन्द्रः पूर्भिदातिर दास॑मर्कैर्विंदद्वसुर्दय॑मानो वि शत्रुन्‌ | 
ब्रह्मजूतस्तन्वा वावृधानो भूरिदात्र आपुंणद्रोदंसी उभे।॥ ९॥ 


I: Indrah purbhidatirad dasamarkairvidad vasur- 
dayamano vi Satrun. Brahmajutastanva vavr- 
dhano bhuridatra aprnad rodasi ubhe. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 34 1207 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, overcomes the 
hostile forces with light and thought and the power of 
persuasion. He opens and expands the cities bound in 
the dark and, abundant and charitable as he is, relieves 
and rehabilitates the helpless poor. Inspired by divinity 
and universal vision, rising and expanding in body and 
mind with plenty and prosperity, merciful and freely 
giving, he fills both heaven and earth with light and 
joy. 

Tera ते तविषस्य प्र जूतिमियर्मि वाच॑ममृताय wel 
इन्द्र क्षितीनाम॑सि मानुषीणां fast दैवीनामुत पूर्वयावा ॥ २॥ 


2. Makhasya te tavisasya pra jutimiyarmi vdca- 
mamrtaya bhusan. Indra ksitinamasi manusinam 
visam daivinamuta purvayava. 

Indra, lord of life and giver of light, I arise and 
receive the inspiration of the power and generosity of 
your yajna, glorifying the divine voice for the sake of 
immortality. Lord of power and ruler of the world, you 
are the leader and pioneer of the nations of the world, 
ordinary people, specialized groups and exceptional 
people of brilliance and generosity. 


इन्द्रो वृत्रम॑वृणोच्छर्ध नीतिः प्र मायिनाममिनाद्वर्पणीतिः। 
अहन्व्यंसमुशधग्वनेष्वाविर्धनां अकृणोद्राम्यार्णाम्‌॥ ३ ॥ 
3. Indro vrtramavrnocchardhanitih pra mayina- 


maminad varpanitih. Ahan vyamsamuSsadha- 
gvanesvavirdhena akrnod ramyanam. 


Indra, heroic warrior of exploits, master of 
tactics, overwhelms the demon of darkness and, 
passionate for action, counters the magical moves of 


1208 RGVEDA 


the crafty enemies and overthrows the crippled monster. 
Thus does he set free the cows confined in the forests, 
voices suppressed in silence, and the streams of water 
locked up in the cloud and sunrays. 


इन्द्र॑ः स्वर्षा जनयन्नहानि जिगायोशिग्थिः पृत॑ना अभिष्टिः 1 
प्रारोचयन्मनवे केतुमह्यामविन्दज्नयोति्बहते रणाय ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Indrah svarsa janayannahani jigayosigbhih 
prtana abhistih. Prarocayanmanave ketu-mahna- 
mavindajjyotirbrhate randaya. 


Indra, lord of the showers of joy, reveals and 
brightens the days, fights the battles alongwith his 
commandos, and comes out victorious. May he then 
unfurl the flag of the day’s light and victory and win 
the light for the mighty battle of life as a whole in the 
flow of existence. 


इन्द्रस्तुजो बर्हणा आ विवेश नुवदर्धानो नयीं पुरूणि । 
अचतयब्दियं इमा SRA प्रेमं वर्णीमतिरच्छक्रमांसाम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Indrastujo barhana a vivesa nrvad dadhano narya 
puruni. Acetayad dhiya ima jaritre premam var- 
namatiracchukramasam. 


Indra, like a manly hero, commanding 
overwhelming the forces of battle, blazing with the 
mighty thunderbolt, breaks through the thick of enemy 
lines. He enlightens these thoughts and minds for the 
celebrant and augments this pure and unsullied light of 
these within. 


महो महानि पनयन्त्यस्येन्द्र॑स्य कर्म सुकरता पुरूणि | 
वृजनेन वृजिनान्त्सं पिपेष मायाभिर्दस्यूरभिभूत्योजाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 34 1209 


6. Maho mahani panayantyasyendrasya karma 
sukrta puruni. Vrjanena vrjinantsam pipesa 
mayabhirdasyunrabhibhutyojah. 


Many great and good acts of this mighty Indra, 
ruler and warrior, are worthy of admiration. Lord of 
might and splendour, hero of victory, he crushes the 
guiles and evils of the wicked with his strength, and 
eliminates the thieves and robbers of society by the force 
of his tactics and intelligence. 


युधेन्द्रो मह्या वरिवश्चकार देवेभ्यः सत्प॑तिश्चर्षणिप्राः | 
विवस्व॑तः सदने अस्य तानि विप्रा उक्थेभिः कवयों 
गृणन्ति ॥ ७॥ 


+ Yudhendro mahna varivascakara devebhyah 
satpatiscarsaniprah. Vivasvatah sadane asya tani 
vipra ukthebhih kavayo grnanti. 


Indra, lover and favourite of humanity, protector 
and promoter of truth, reality and the good people, with 
his fight and force of strength and intelligence does great 
good deeds for the noble powers of nature and humanity. 
And those great exploits of his, brilliant poets and 
scholars celebrate with their songs of homage, the waves 
and echoes of which rise and resound in the house of 
the sun. 


सत्रासाहं वरेण्यं सहोदां स॑सवांसं स्व॑र॒पश्च॑ sat: | 
ससान यः पुंथि्वींद्यामुतेमामिन्द्रं मदन्त्यनु धीर॑णासः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Satrasaham varenyam sahodam sasavamsam 
svarapasca devih. Sasana yah prthivim dyamu- 
temamindram madantyanu dhiranasah. 


People of intelligence, patience and intelligence 


1210 RGVEDA 


may please and share the pleasure with Indra, lord of 
the world, who upholds truth and challenges untruth, 
who is worthy of choice, giver of strength and courage, 
who distinguishes between good and evil, and gives 
happiness, pranic energy and divine bliss, and who 
creates, gives and shares the gifts and beauty of this 
earth and heaven with us. 


ससानात्यौ उत सूर्यः ससानेन्द्रः ससान पुरुभोजसं गाम्‌ । 
हिरण्ययमुत भोगं ससान हत्वी cere बणीमावत्‌॥। ९ ॥ 


ध. Sasanatyan uta suryam sasanendrah sasana 
purubhojasam gam. Hiranyayamuta bhogam 
sasana hatvi dasyun praryam varnamavat. 


Indra gives us the horses and other modes of 
fast travel. He gives us the sun and enlightenment. He 
gives us the cow for milk, land and speech, and golden 
wealth for the sustenance of all. He destroys evil and 
the wicked and protects the good and virtuous people 
for the joy of all. 


इन्द्र ओषधीरसनोदहानि वनस्पर्तीर सनोदन्तरिक्षम्‌। 
बिभेद्‌ वल नुनुदे विवाचोऽथांभवदमिताभिक्रतूनाम्‌ ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Indra osadhirasanodahani vanaspatinrasano- 
dantariksam. Bibheda valam nunude vivaco’ tha- 
bhavad damitabhikratunam. 


Indra gives us herbs and tonics everyday. He 
gives us waters of the firmament. He opens up the 
sources of strength and energy. He stimulates the organs 
of speech and inspires articulation and the growth of 
various languages. And he is the controller of the men 
of impetuous action to a steady state of balance in 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 35 Van 
thought and will. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाजसातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. 9 Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


We invoke, invite and celebrate Indra, 
auspicious lord of wealth, honour and excellence, friend 
of the good and controller of the wicked. In this battle 
of life, we call upon him, best and highest of men and 
leaders, for victory. We call upon him in all our struggles 
for protection, promotion and progress, for he listens 
to us, destroys the evils of darkness and ignorance, and 
wins, preserves and promotes the wealth, honour and 
excellence of life and culture. Great is he, mighty 
lustrous, terribly irresistible, blazing, victorious. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 35 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


तिष्ठा हरी रथ आ युज्यमाना याहि वायुर्न नियुतो नो अच्छं | 
पिबास्यन्धो अभिसृष्टो अस्मे इन्द्र स्वाहा ररिमा ते 
मदाय।॥ ९॥ 

I; Tistha hari ratha a yujyamana yahi vayurna 
niyuto no accha. Pibasyandho abhisrsto asme 
indra svaha rarima te madaya. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, ride the chariot 
drawn by horse power of water and fire and come 
straight to us like the wind in all your glory in good 


1212 RGVEDA 


company. Come and partake of the holy food we offer 
in faith and truth of word and deed in homage for your 
joy and entertainment. 


उपाजिरा पुरुहूताय ससी हरी रथ॑स्य धूर्ष्वा युनज्मि । 
द्रवद्यथा dud विश्वतश्चिदुपेमं यज्ञमा वहात इन्द्र॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


De Upajira puruhitaya sapti hari rathasya dhursva 
yunajmi. Dravad yatha sambhrtam visvatasci- 
dupemam yajnama vahata indram. 


I yoke the fastest horses, fast as sun-rays, to the 
centre pole of the chariot of Indra, lord universally 
invoked, praised and called upon for action, so that they 
may rush, bear him and carry wealth and honour from 
all round and bring it to this yajna of knowledge and 
science. 


उपो नयस्व वृष॑णा aquidda त्वं वृषभ स्वधावः। 
ग्रसेतामश्वा fa मुचेह शोण। दिवेदिवे सदृशीरद्दि 
धानाः ॥ ३॥ 


3; Upo nayasva vrsana tapuspotemava tvam vrsabha 
svadhavah. Grasetamasva 17 muceha sona 
divedive sadrsiraddhi dhanah. 


Indra, bold and generous lord commanding food 
and energy, take the two mighty fiery steeds of sun- 
rays close together, protect and take water too, let the 
horses free, consume the food and fuel of flames, and 
you too consume the food prepared and seasoned by 
fire every day in the bowels of the earth. 


ब्रह्मणा ते aaa युनज्ि हरी eater सधमादं आजु । 
स्थिरं रथं सुखमिन््राधितिष्टन्प्रजानन्विदां उप॑ याहि 
सोम॑म्‌॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 35 1213 


4. Brahmana te brahmayuja yunajmi hari sakhaya 
sadhamada asu. Sthiram ratham sukhamindra- 
dhitisthan prajanan vidvan upa yahi somam. 


By word I yoke the horses which sense and obey 
the word of command. Friendly they are, extremely fast 
to reach the yajnic destination. Indra, lord of knowledge 
and power, riding the chariot which is steady and 
comfortable, knowing and discovering further, go close 
to the moon and bring the nectar of magical powers. 


माते हरी वृष॑णा वीतपृष्ठा नि रीरमन्यज॑मानासो अन्ये | 
अत्यायांहि शश्व॑तो वयं तेऽरं सुतेभिः कृणवाम सोभः ॥ ५॥ 

a. Ma te hari vrsand vitaprstha ni riraman yajama- 
naso anye. Atyayahi 5451410 vayam te’ram 
sutebhih krnavama somaih. 


Indra, may your motive chariot powers, of wide 
and extensive back never slacken, exhaust or stop. We 
are the other collaborators in your yajna, ever and 
constant, who do all for you with the distilled yajnic 
essences of what you need. Go far to the target and come 
back to us victorious. 


तवायं सोमस्त्वमेहयर्वाङ्शंश्वत्तमं सुमना अस्य पाहि । 
अस्मिन्यज्ञे बर्हिष्या निषद्या दधिष्वेमं जठर इन्दुमिन्द्र 1 ६ ॥ 


6. Tavayam somastvamehyarvan sasvattamam 
sumana asya pahi. Asmin yajne barhisya nisadya 
dadhisvemam jathara indumindra. 


Indra, this soma is yours, come you hither, happy 
at heart, partake of it, lasting and constant as it is in 
power and energy. Sit on the holy grass in this yajna 
and hold it in the strong interior of the chariot. 


1214 RGVEDA 


स्तीर्ण a बर्हिः सुत इन्द्र सोम॑ः कृता धाना अत्त॑वे ते 
हरिंभ्याम्‌। तदोकसे पुरुशाकाय वृष्णे मरुत्वते तुभ्यं राता 
हवींषि ॥। ७॥ 


vis Stirnam te barhih suta indra somah krta dhana 
attave te haribhyam. Tadokase purusakaya vrsne 
marutvate tubhyam rata havimsi. 


The liquid fuel, distilled and packed, is ready 
for you. The foods for the consumption of your motive 
forces are prepared and ready. All the inputs for you 
too are ready and reserved for the lord of the chariot, 
mighty helpful, creative and generous, lord of the wings 
of winds. 


इमं नरः पर्व तास्तुभ्यमापः समिन्द्र गोभिर्मधुंमन्तमक्रन्‌। 
तस्यागत्या सुमना ऋष्व पाहि प्रजानच्विद्वान्पथ्या ३ अनु 
स्वाः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Imam narah parvatastubhyamapah samindra 
gobhirmadhumantamakran. Tasyagatyda suma-na 
rsva pahi prajanan vidvan pathya anu svah. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, the best 
of men, mountains and clouds, waters and vapours in 
unison have prepared this nectar sweet of soma for you 
with currents of solar energy and treasures of the earth. 
Lord of glory, happy at heart, scholar and discoverer, 
take the soma, and protect and promote the product and 
your partners on the way. 


at आभ॑जो Wed इन्द्र GA ये त्वामवंर्धन्नभ॑वन्गणस्ते। 
तेभिंरेतं सजोषा वावशानो ३अगेः fia जिह्यया सोम॑- 
मिन्द्र॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 35 1215 


0. Yan abhajo maruta indra some ye tvamavar- 
dhannabhavan ganaste. Tebhiretam sajosa vava- 
sano’ gneh piba jihvaya somamindra. 


Indra, lord of knowledge, power and glory, the 
winds and men you engage in your soma project of 
science and development, who lead you to honour and 
advancement, and who become your force and allies : 
with them, celebrating in joy, shining and resounding, 
drink of the soma with the tongue of fire. 

इन्द्र पिब॑ स्वधया चित्सुतस्याऽग्रेवीौ पाहि Rreat यजत्र । 
अध्वर्योर्वा प्रय॑तं शक्र हस्ताद्ोतुर्वां यज्ञं हविषो! जुष- 
स्व।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Indra piba svadhaya cit sutasya’gnerva pahi 
Jihvaya yajatra. Adhvaryorva prayatam sakra 
hastaddhoturva yajnam haviso jusasva. 


Indra, glorious ruler of the world, drink of the 
soma distilled with the tongue of fire. O lord venerable, 
drink of it and protect it with your strength and power. 
Lord of power and honour, join and develop the yajna 
instituted and conducted by the yajamana and the 
highpriest with oblations of fragrant materials offered 
with their own hands. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
ATTN ९९॥ 


ट 


11. Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugr-amutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


For victory in this battle of life, we invoke, invite 


1216 RGVEDA 


and call upon Indra, lord auspicious of bliss, commander 
of honour, power and prosperity, and the best of men 
and leaders. For defence, protection, preservation and 
progress in the struggles of life for development, we 
look up to him, responsive listener, mighty lustrous 
destroyer of the demons of darkness and ignorance, and 
a winner of all round wealth of the nations. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 36 


Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina (1-9, 11) and Ghora 
Angirasa (10) Rshi 


इमामू षु प्रभति सातये धाः शश्व॑च्छश्वदूतिभिर्यादं- 
मानः। सुतेसुते वावृधे वर्धनेधिर्यः कर्मभिर्महद्धिः सुश्रुतो 
भूत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

॥ Imamu su prabhrtim sataye dhah sasvaccha- 
svadutibhiryadamanah. Sutesute vavrdhe vardha- 
nebhiryah karmabhirmahadbhih susruto bhut. 


Indra, O lord united with friends and devotees 
by continuous modes of protection, who rise by 
admirable acts of promotive generosity and advance in 
honour and reputation by greater and higher actions in 
one yajna after another, accept this praise and prayer 
for the gifts of success and acquisitions of value. 


इन्द्राय arat: प्रदिवो विदाना ऋभर्यभिर्वष॑पर्वां विहायाः 1 
प्रयम्यमानान्प्रति षु गभायेन्द्र्‌ पि वृष॑धूतस्य वृष्ण॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


१ Indraya somah pradivo vidana rbhuryebhir- 
vrsaparva vihayah. Prayamyamanan prati su 
grbhayendra piba vrsadhitasya vrsnah. 


Indra, the somas, essences of energy and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 36 1217 


enlightenment, are distilled from the heavens by 
enlightened people for advancement of the honour and 
excellence of life, by which Rbhu, master of intelligence 
and expertise in social affairs, grows strong in every 
aspect of development and destroys the evil which must 
be destroyed. 


Indra, lord ruler, drink of this powerful, 
inspiring, elevating vitality of strength and enlighten- 
ment, and hold and govern the elements under control 
for the protection, promotion and advancement of 
honour and excellence. 


पिबा वर्धस्व तवं घा सुतास इन्द्र सोमासः प्रथमा उतेमे। 
यथापिंबः पूव्यीं इन्द्र सोमा एवा पाहि पन्यो अद्या 
नवीयान्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


2. Piba vardhasva tava gha sutasa indra somasah 
prathama uteme. Yathapibah purvyan indra 
soman eva pahi panyo adya naviyan. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, drink of 
the soma and grow in honour and power. For sure, the 
somas distilled earlier as well as these new ones distilled 
today are yours. As you drank of the earlier ones, so 
drink the new ones today and protect the honour and 
excellence of life, admirable leader as you are. 


Wet staat वृजने विर ष््यु ग्रं शव॑: पत्यते धष्ण्वोजंः | 
नाह विव्याच पृथिवी चनैनं यत्सोमांसो wef pare ४ ॥ 


4. Mahan amatro vrjane virapSyugram Savah 
patyate dhrsnvojah. Naha vivyaca prthivi canai- 
nam yat somaso haryaSvam-amandan. 


Great, master of knowledge and power, 


1218 RGVEDA 


overwhelming in the battle of life and lord of terrible 
splendour, Indra possesses and commands informidable 
prowess and heroism. Even the whole humanity on earth 
does not comprehend the grandeur of this wondrous 
power commanding the winds whom the creators of 
soma, light of the sun, beauty of the moon and fragrances 
of yajna inspire and enlighten. 


महाँ उग्रो वावृधे वीयीय स॒माच॑क्रे वृषभः काव्येन । इन्द्रो 
भगो वाजदा अस्य गावः प्र जायन्ते दर्णा अस्य 
पूर्वीः ॥५॥ 


5. Mahan ugro vavrdhe viryaya samacakre vrsa- 
bhah kavyena. Indro bhago vajada asya gavah 
pra jayante daksina asya purvih. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, is great, illustrious, 
generous and gracious giver of honour and excellence 
of prosperity. He rises to valorous and virtuous action 
and achieves every success by the word and vision of 
Divinity. His lands, cows and lights of knowledge are 
creative and profuse, and his gifts are always blissful 
more and ever more. 


प्र यत्सिन्ध॑वः प्रसवं यथायन्नाप॑ः समुद्रं र थ्यव Ty: | 
अत॑श्चिदिन्द्रः सद॑सो वरीयान्यदीं सोम॑ः पृणति दुग्धो 
अंशुः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Pra yat sindhavah prasavam yathayannapah 
samudram rathyeva jagmuh. Atascidindrah 
sadaso variyan yadim somah prnati dugdho 
amsuh. 

Just as rivers originate and pursue their course 
to the sea, and as vapours rise to the firmament like 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 36 1219 


chariots going by highways to their destination, so does 
soma mixed with milk and seasoned in sunlight offered 
in homage to Indra, supreme power of earth and heaven, 
inspires, and Indra sits over the assembly as first and 
presiding power, cream of the nation, bright as sunrays. 


समुद्रेण सिन्ध॑वो याद॑माना इन्द्राय सोमं सुषुतं भर॑न्तः | 
अंशं दुहन्ति हस्तिनो! भरित्रैर्मध्व॑ः पुनन्ति धार॑या 
पवित्रैः ॥ ७॥ 


a. Samudrena sindhavo yadamana indraya somam 
susutam bharantah. Amsum duhanti hastino 
bharitrair-madhvah punanti dharaya pavitraih. 


Just as rivers join the sea bearing distilled soma 
from the essences of nature for Indra, lord of the world, 
so do the performers of yajna, men of generous hands, 
joining the scholars of oceanic depth of learning, distil 
the soma vitalities of nature and, with hands full of 
fragrant offerings, sanctify the honey sweets of life with 
streams of pure and holy showers of piety for honour 
and glory. 


हदाइव Hara: सोमधानाः समीं विव्याच सव॑ना पुरूणि । 
अन्ना यदिन्द्र॑ः प्रथमा व्यार वृत्रं जघन्वां अवृणीत 
सोम॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Hrada iva kuksayah somadhanah samim vivyaca 
savana puruni. Anna yadindrah prathama vyasa 
vrtram jaghanvan avrnita somam. 


Like lakes and mountain valleys are the 
generous treasure holds of the bearers of soma. Many 
are the yajnic processes of the creation and 
reinforcement of the soma nectars. Indra, lord of 


1220 RGVEDA 


knowledge and brilliance, when he creates the first foods 
and nourishments for life and tastes and approves of 
these, then he, breaker of the clouds, selects soma as 
the first and most invigorating power. 


आ तू भ॑र माकिरेतत्परिं sigan हि त्वा वसुपतिं agar । 
इन्द्र यत्ते माहिनं दत्रमस्त्यस्मभ्यं त्दर्यश्व ware i 


9. A tu bhara makiretat pari sthad vidma hi tva 
vasupatim vasunam. Indra yat te mahinam datra- 
mastyasmabhyam taddharyasva pra yandhi. 


Indra, lord of light and life, bear and bring us 
the soma, fill our treasures, fulfil us wholly. Let no one 
withhold it from us. We know you are the creator and 
protector of the wealths of life. O lord of the winds and 
velocities of energy, bless us with that which is the 
greatest and highest of your gifts. 


अस्मे प्र य॑न्धि मघवन्नजीषिच्निन्द्रं रायो विश्ववारस्य भूरेः । 
अस्मे शतं शरदो जीवसे! धा अस्मे वीराञ्छश्वत इन्द्र 
शिप्रिन्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Asme pra yandhi maghavannrjisinnindra rayo 
visvavarasya bhureh. Asme Satam Sarado 7145८ 
dha asme virancchasvata indra Siprin. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence of 
prosperity, lover of purity and excellence of naturalness, 
ruler and protector of the world, give us abundance of 
the wealth of universal character and value. O lord of 
grandeur and handsomeness, bear and bring for us a 
full life of hundred years, and bless us with an unbroken 
line of brave progeny. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 37 1221 


शुनं ean मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु wed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
ATTN ९९॥ 


11. Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


In this yajnic struggle of life for peace and plenty 
and the achievement of speed and excellence, we invoke 
and call upon Indra, lord of honour, power and 
innocence of naturalness, giver of joy and best of men 
and leaders, who listens to us, is lustrous and terrible, 
and destroys the demons of darkness in the battles for 
progress and who is the creator, protector and promoter 
of the wealths of universal value. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 37 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


वार््र हत्याय शव॑से पृतनाषाद्याय च। 
इन्द्र त्वा वर्तयामसि ॥ ९॥ 


I, Vartrahatyaya Savase prtanasahyaya ca. 
Indra tva vartayamasi. 


Indra, lord of honour and valour, commander 
of the forces of life and freedom, we pledge to abide by 
you and exhort you for breaking of the clouds of rain, 
for the destruction of darkness and evil, for rousing 
courage and valour, and for challenging and beating 
back the enemy in battle. And we pray, inspire and exhort 
us too with full power and preparation. 


अर्वाचीनं सु ते मन॑ उत चक्षुः शतक्रतो | 
इन्द्र॑ कृण्वन्तु वाघत॑:ः ॥ २॥ 


1222 RGVEDA 


2: Arvacinam su te mana uta caksuh satakrato. 
Indra krnvantu vaghatah. 


Indra, lord destroyer of evil and enemies, hero 
of a hundred acts of yajnic creation and development, 
may the sages of vision, imagination and effective 
communication refresh and update your mind and eye 
with foresight so that you face the challenges of the 
present time successfully. 


नामानि ते शतक्रतो विश््वाभिर्गीरभिरींमहे | 
इन्द्राभिमातिषाद्य ॥। ३ ॥ 


3: Namani te satakrato visvabhirgirbhirimahe. 
Indrabhimatisahye. 


Indra, lord ruler excellent and honourable, hero 
of a hundred acts of imaginative vision, with all our 
best words, thoughts and resolutions, we pray and exhort 
you to realise your names and attributes in action so 
that under your leadership we may face the challenges 
of the time successfully against the arrogant and proud 
enemies. 


पुरुष्टुतस्य धाम॑भिः शतेन॑ महयामसि । 
इन्द्र॑स्य चर्षणीधुतः us ॥ 


4. Purustutasya dhamabhih satena mahayamasi. 
Indrasya carsanidhrtah. 


We exhort and exalt Indra, universally admired 
ruler of the world and sustainer of his people, by 
hundredfold celebrations of his names, attributes and 
brilliant exploits of heroism. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 37 1223 


इन्द्रं वृत्राय हन्त॑वे पुरुहूतमुप aa | 
भरेषु वाज॑सातये ॥ ५॥ 


6. Indram vrtraya hantave puruhitamupa bruve. 
Bharesu vajasataye. 


I invoke Indra, invoked and worshipped by all, 
for the destruction of evil and victory in life’s battles 
for food, energy, prosperity and progress. 


वाजेषु सासहिर्भव carnitine शतक्रतो । 
इन्द्र॑ वृत्राय हन्त॑वे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vajesu sasahirbhava tvamimahe Satakrato. 
Indra vrtraya hantave. 


Indra, be the challenger, warrior and winner of 
battles for prosperity and progress. O lord of a hundred 
creative actions, we invoke, exhort and exhalt you for 
breakup of the cloud into rain and elimination of the 
demon of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty. 


ga पृतनाज्ये uray श्रव॑ःसु च। 
इन्द्र साक्ष्वाभिमातिषु ।॥। ७॥ 


ee Dyumnesu prtandjye prtsu tursu Sravahsu ca. 
Indra saksvabhimatisu. 


In the battles of forces in plans and programmes 
of development for prosperity and excellence, in the 
contests of forces positive and negative for good and 
evil, in the onslaughts of stormy troops of hostility, in 
the efforts for growth in food, energy and enlightenment, 
in the struggles for self-realisation against pride and 
arrogance, Indra, O spirit of the soul, voice of 
conscience, genius of the nation, and invincible strength 


1224 RGVEDA 


of character, tolerate, endure, challenge, fight and throw 
out the enemies of life’s light and joy. 


शुष्िन्त॑मं न add द्युम्निनं पाहि जागुं विम्‌ । 
इन्द्र सोमं शतक्रतो ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Susmintamam na utaye dyumninam pahi jagrvim. 
Indra somam satakrato. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, protector of life 
and humanity, leader of a hundred noble actions and 
master of knowledge, for our protection and progress, 
protect, defend, govern and promote the strongest and 
most prosperous, most brilliant and honourable, and the 
most wakeful and vigilant powers and people, and thus 
defend and safeguard the honour, happiness and 
excellence of the nation. 


इद्धियाणिं शतक्रतो या ते जनेषु पञ्चसु | 
इन्द्र तानिं त आ att ९॥ 


9. Indriyani Satakrato ya te janesu pancasu. 
Indra tani ta a vrne. 


Indra, ruler of the world, master of a hundred 
noble acts of governance, your powers and organs of 
perception operating among all the five classes of 
people, i.e., teachers and intellectuals, ruling powers 
and defence forces, producers and business men, 
ancillaries, and others, I accept and honour all these as 
powers and forces of yours. 


अग्निन्द्र sal बृहद्‌ द्युम्नं दधिष्व दुष्टरम्‌। 
उत्ते शुष्मं तिरामसि tl ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 38 1225 


10. Agannindra sravo brhad dyumnam dadhisva 
dustaram. Ut te Susmam tiramasi. 


Indra, ruler and protector of the world, the assets 
of the dominion are high and rising. Hold and govern 
this formidable wealth, honour and excellence of the 
nation. And let us all, we pray, raise and exalt your 
courage and power, honour and glory. 


statadl न आ गह्यथो! शक्र परावतं: | 
उ त्मोको यस्ते अद्रिव इन्द्रेह तत आ ग॑हि ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Arvavato na a gahyatho sakra paravatah. 
U loko yaste adriva indreha tata a gahi. 


Indra, lord of might, ruler of the clouds, wielder 
of the thunderbolt and refulgent as the sun, come to us 
from far and from near, wherever you are. And whatever 
or wherever your abode, from there come to us here 
and now. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 38 
Indra Devata, Prajapati Vaishvamitra, or Prajapati 
Vachya, or both, or Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
अभि asa दीधया मनीषामत्यो न वाजी सुधुरो जिहानः। 
अभि प्रियाणि मर्मृशत्पराणि क वीरिच्छामि सन्द 
सुमेधाः ॥ ९॥ 

1. Abhi tasteva कावद )व manisamatyo na vajt 
sudhuro jihanah. Abhi priyani marmrsat parani 
kavinricchami samdrse sumedhah. 

Just as a wood carver sculpts out a beautiful 


form of art from a piece of wood, so you shine and 
sharpen your intelligence, and, thinking and 


1226 RGVEDA 


contemplating the farthest favourite places of space, 
reach there like a ray of light well joined to the sun’s 
chariot. Such men of intelligence and poets of wisdom 
I wish to see, intelligent as I am by the grace of Indra. 


इनोत पृच्छ जनिमा कवीनां म॑नोधृतंः सुकृत॑स्तक्चत द्याम्‌ । 
इमा उ ते प्रण्योड वर्धमाना मनोवाता अध नु धर्म॑णि 
ग्मन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Inota precha janima kavinam manodhrtah sukr- 
tastaksata dyam. Ima u te pranyo vardhamana 
manovata adha nu dharmani gman. 


O seeker of knowledge and light divine, ask 
these men of vision and wisdom about the life and birth 
of the poets who possess a treasure of knowledge in 
their mind, do great noble deeds, create knowledge and 
fashion it forth in heavenly words. And then, may these 
favourite vibrations of your mind, rising and elevating 
you, explore and pursue the paths of higher knowledge 
and Dharma of the universal order. 


नि षीमिदच्र गुह्या दधाना उत श्चत्राय रोद॑सी सम॑ञ्जन्‌। 
सं मा्राभिर्मपिरे aged अन्तर्मही aaa धाय॑से धुः ॥ ३॥ 


Ni simidatra guhya dadhana uta ksatraya rodasi 
samanjan. Sam matrabhirmamire yemururvi 
antarmahi samrte dhayase dhuh. 


Bearing vibrations of the mysterious in their 
mind here itself in the world, going over the spaces 
between heaven and earth for the cosmic order, they 
visualise and measure the world with definitive 
operations of the imagination, go over and within the 
earth, and traverse the joining firmament and space 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 38 1227 


between heaven and earth, and realise the cosmic 
relations in the service of the supreme lord who wields 
all these together in law. 


आतिर्ठन्तं परि विश्वे अभूषच्छ्ियो वसानश्चरति स्वरोचिः | 
महत्तद्‌ वृष्णो असुरस्य नामा ऽऽविश्वरूपो अमृतानि 
तस्थौ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Atisthantam pari 1151 abhusancchriyo vasana- 
scarati svarocih. Mahat tad vrsno asurasya nama 
isvarupo amrtani tasthau. 


All the visionary sages realise and celebrate the 
one lord supreme, robed in his own glory, who pervades 
the world of existence. Great and glorious are his names 
and attributes: self-refulgent, omniform, generous and 
potent, life of life, who sustains the immortals of 
existence. 


असूत पूर्वो वृषभो ज्यायानिमा sea शुरुध: सन्ति पूर्वीः । 
feat नपाता विदथस्य धीभिः क्षत्रं राजाना प्रदिवो 
दधाथे॥ ५॥ 


Di Asuta purvo vrsabho jyayanima asya Surudhah 
santi purvih. Divo napata vidathasya dhibhih 
ksatram rajana pradivo dadhathe. 


Indra, first and eternal lord, supreme, generous 
and omnipotent, creates these forms of existence. These 
ancient forms of this world are life-inspired and life- 
giving. Two immortal powers, both ruling and brilliant, 
Indra and Varuna, Spirit and Energy, ruler and people, 
with their will and action from the light of heaven hold 
and sustain the divine yajnic order of nature and 
humanity and promote the light of knowledge. 


1228 RGVEDA 


त्रीणिं राजाना face पुरूणि परि विश्वानि भूषथः सदांसि। 
अपंर्यमत्र मन॑सा जगन्वान्त्रते गन्धर्वा अपि वायुकेशान्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Trini rajana vidathe puruni pari visvani bhu- 
sathah sadamsi. ApaSyamatra manasa jaganvan 
vrate gandharvan api vayukesan. 


O brilliant powers of divinity, Indra and Varuna, 
spirit and energy, ruler and the people, both of you 
sustain and adorn the three houses of the social order: 
Executive, Legislature, and Education (Rajarya Sabha, 
Dharmarya Sabha and Vidyarya Sabha), and you 
maintain all the various ancient values, forms and 
institutions of the society. Moving with thought and 
imagination here itself, I have seen the gandharvas, 
leaders gifted with speech and ideas flying on the wings 
of the winds, committed to the sanctity of duty in the 
holy social order of yajna, serving and sustaining the 
earth and her environment. 


तदिन््व॑स्य arr धेनोरा नाप॑भिर्ममिरे सक्म्यं गोः | अन्य- 
द॑न्यदसुर्य+ वसाना नि मायिनो! ममिरे रूपम॑स्मिन्‌॥ ७ ॥ 


ce Tadinnvasya vrsabhasya dhenora namabhir- 
mamire sakmyam goh. Anyadanyadasuryam 
vasana ni mayino mamire rupamasmin. 


Sages of vision and imagination measure and 
describe the nature, character and forms of the earth by 
the speech and words of this divine and generous Indra, 
lord of light and knowledge and speech. And these sages 
and poets, wondrous makers of forms in words and 
materials, watching the light and energy of divinity in 
different earthly forms, recreate and re-enact the forms 
in this social order on this earth. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 38 1229 


तदिल्व॑स्य सवितुर्नकिर्मे हिरण्ययीममतिं यामशिश्रेत्‌ । 
आ सुष्टुती रोद॑सी विश्वमिन्वे अपीव योषा जनिमानि 
वव्रे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tadinnvasya saviturnakirme hiranyayimamatim 
yamasisret. A sustutt rodasi visvaminve Apiva 
yosa janimani vavre. 


No one can deny nor destroy the light and beauty 
of the golden gifts of this lord Savita, creator of this 
beautiful world, or of my recreation of it in word or 
material or institutional form. Whoever takes to it for 
support or sustenance wins the showers of universal 
joy from all pervading heaven and earth just as a young 
mother receives the pleasure and bliss of the birth of 
her baby. 


युवं werd साधथो महो यदैवीं स्वस्तिः UR णः स्यातम्‌ | 
Tote तस्थुषो विरूपा विश्वे पश्यन्ति मायिनः 
कृ तानिं॥ ९॥ 


ध Yuvam pratnasya sadhatho maho yad daivi 
svastih pari nah syatam. Gopdajihvasya tasthuso 
virupa 1751८ pasyanti mayinah krtani. 


Both of you, Indra and Varuna, Spirit and energy, 
power and justice, ruler and people, bring us straight 
that great and celestial gift of joy and well being which 
is the gift of tradition and eternity. May that great and 
heavenly joy be ours from all sides. Wonderful artists 
of word and form see and realise all the creations of the 
constant lord of infinite forms who is the protector of 
eternal speech and divine consciousness. 


1230 RGVEDA 


शुनं ean मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
ATTN ९०॥ 


10.  Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


We invoke Indra, lord of power and majesty for 
protection and victory in this battle of life. Auspicious 
is he and blissful, and the best among men and leaders, 
for the achievement of food, energy and advancement 
of body, mind and soul for the individual and the nation. 
He listens. He rises lustrous and blazing at the call for 
defence and victory, destroys the demons of darkness, 
violence and poverty in the strifes, breaks the clouds of 
rain showers and collects the trophies of excellence and 
glory for his people. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 39 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


इन्द्रं मतिर्हद आ वच्यमानाऽच्छा पतिं स्तोम॑तष्टा जिगाति। 
या जागृविर्विदथे शस्यमानेन्द्र यत्ते जाय॑ते विद्दि तस्य॑ 2 


Le Indram matirhrda त vacyamana’ccha patim 
stomatasta jigati. Ya jagrvivrvidathe Sasyamane- 
ndra yat te jayate viddhi tasya. 


The song that arises from the heart, which is 
composed and sung in honour of Indra, father protector 
and sustainer of the world, reaches him well and directly. 
Indra, lord of power, love and majesty, accept that song 
of adoration raised in full consciousness, inspiring in 
the yajna of life and knowledge, and know it is the song 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 39 1231 
of a devotee. 


Indra, O worshipful soul, know the nature, 
character and actions of the Lord Supreme by this song. 


दिवश्चिदा geat जाय॑माना वि जागुंविर्विदथे शास्यर्माना। 
भद्रा वस्त्राण्यर्जु्ना वसाना सेयमस्मे सनजा पित्र्या 
at: meu 

2. Divascida purvya jayamana vi jagrvirvidathe 
Sasyamana. Bhadra vastranyarjund vasana 
seyamasme sanaja pitrya dhih. 


Coming from the light of Divinity, ancient and 
eternal, ever rising, ever wakeful and awakening the 
mind and soul into divine awareness, celebrated in yajna 
and the sacred ways of life, blessed and blissful, like 
the dawn, adorned in the purest garb of immaculate 
words and verses, coexistent with Divine consciousness 
and abiding with fatherly sages, may that holy light of 
the Vedic Word be ours. 


यमा चिदत्र यमसूर॑सूत जिह्याया अग्रं पतदा weet | 
वपूंषि जाता मिथुना स॑चेते तमोहना तपुंषो बुध्न एतां ॥ ३ ॥ 


cP Yama cidatra yamasurasuta jihvaya agram 
patada hyasthat. Vapumsi jata mithund sacete 
tamohana tapuso budhna eta. 


Just as cosmic energy creates the twin lights of 
the sun and moon, and just as the sun radiates the circuit 
of light energy that creates the Ashvins, which then bring 
forth the dawn, which inspires the tip of the tongue in 
adoration, and the twin flow of light currents dispelling 
darkness serves to reveal the objects of the world, so 


1232 RGVEDA 


does Indra, lord omniscient create the twins of 
Revelation, word and meaning of the Vedic speech, 
which both activate the tip of the tongue in spontaneous 
articulation and stay there. They both together, 
dispelling the darkness of ignorance in the light of 
knowledge, stay, serve the world of created objects and 
stay there in the memory. 


नकिरेषां निन्दिता मर्त्येषु ये अस्माकं पितरो गोषु योधाः | 
इन्द्र॑ एषां दुहिता मार्हिंनावानुद्‌ गोत्राणि ससृजे दंसना- 
art ४॥ 


4. Nakiresam nindita matryesu ye asmakam pitaro 
gosu yodhah. Indra esam drmhita mahinava- 
nud gotrani sasrje damsanavan. 


None among living humanity is reviler and 
maligner of those who are our ancestors, parents and 
teachers, who are veterans, warriors, in the battles of 
speech, knowledge and wisdom. Indra, lord of majesty, 
power and generosity, hero of divine actions, strengthens 
them with firmness of will and action and creates fortifi- 
cations for their traditions, institutions and familial lines. 


wal ह यत्र सखिंभिर्नवग्वैरभिज्वा सत्व॑भिर्गां अनुग्मन्‌ | 
सत्यं तदिन्द्रो दशधिर्दशग्वैः सूर्यः fade तम॑सि 
क्षियन्त॑म्‌॥ ५ ॥ 
> Sakha ha yatra sakhibhirnavagvairabhijnva 
satvabhirga anugman. Satyam tadindro dasabhir- 
dasagvaih suryam viveda tamasi ksiyantam. 
Where, in the human body, when the soul is 


anxious to know the mystery of truth and light divine, 
does it find the holy cows of the Lord Supreme, words 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 39 1233 


and meanings of ultimate reality, the light? Surely then, 
there in the body itself, with nine friendly faculties of 
freshest powers (five pranic energies and mind, intellect, 
memory and self-awareness), and with another team of 
ten friends (five pranic energies and five senses), 
following the path of truth in meditation, the soul 
discovers the sun, Light Divine, self-refulgent, existing 
in the depth of the self, otherwise covered under 
existential darkness of ignorance. 


इन्द्र मधु संभूंतमुस्त्रियायां पदद्धिवेद शफवन्नमे गोः । गुहां 
हितं गुह्यं गूढ््मप्सु eed दधे द्चिणो दक्षिणावान्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indro madhu sambhrtamusriyayam padvad 
viveda Saphavanname goh. Guha hitam guhyam 
gulhamapsu haste dadhe daksine daksinavan. 


Indra, the soul in pursuit of knowledge and 
meditation, discovers the honey sweets of the mystery 
of existence revealed in the light of divinity in the cave 
of the heart and in the Voice Divine voluble in the folds 
of memory. It discovers the secrets of motion and 
velocity and of production and generosity in the Word 
and in the Light. 


Let man bow in reverence, be humble and 
generous, and hold the secret, deeper than the deepest 
within, on the palm of the right hand. (No pride, no 
arrogance!) 


ज्योतिर्वृणीत तम॑सो विजानत्नारे स्याम दुरितादभीके । इमा 
गिर॑ः सोमपाः सोमवृब्द जुषस्वेन्द्र पुरुतमस्य कारोः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Jyotirvrnita tamaso vijanannare syama durita- 


dabhike. Ima girah somapah somavrddha jusa- 
svendra purutamasya karoh. 


1234 RGVEDA 


The man of knowledge discriminates and 
separates light from darkness. Let us be fearless, far 
from sin and evil. Indra, O man elevated by the light 
and inspiration of the spirit of divinity, O defender of 
truth and piety, listen and live by these words of the 
learned poet and artist. 


ज्योतिंर्यज्ञाय रोद॑सी अनुं ष्यादारे स्याम दुरितस्य ay: । 
भूरिं fate तुजतो मर्त्य॑स्य सुपारासों वसवो बर्हणा- 
वत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Jyotiryajnaya rodasit anu syadare syama duri- 
tasya bhureh. Bhuri ciddhi tujato martyasya 
suparaso vasavo barhanavat. 


Let there be light radiating from heaven to earth, 
and let the fragrance of fire rise from earth to heaven to 
join the three worlds for the yajna of human existence. 
Let us be far from sin prevalent around through the light 
of intelligence. And may the Vasus, sustainers of life 
on earth and the sages who command the light of 
knowledge as saviours and redeemers, be generous like 
celestial oceans with showers of bliss for the man of 
might and high charity. 


शुनं gan मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ९॥ 

9. Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 


nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


We invoke Indra, generous lord of light and 
majesty, and best of men and leaders, for success in this 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 40 1235 


battle of life. He listens to our call and prayer, rises 
lustrous and blazing, for our protection and progress, 
destroying the forces of darkness and winning us the 
wealths of light and prosperity in our struggles for 
excellence. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 40 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


इन्द्रं त्वा वृषभं वयं सुते aa हवामहे । 
स पाहि मध्वो अन्ध॑सः॥ ९॥ 


0 Indra tva vrsabham vayam sute some havamahe. 
Sa pahi madhvo andhasah. 


In this soma-yajna of the creative business of 
life when the time is ripe, O lord of honour and majesty, 
Indra, we invoke and invite you, lord of bliss, mighty 
brave and generous as rain showers. Come, grace the 
yajna, and protect and promote the honey sweets of food, 
energy and the joy of life. 


इन्द्र॑ क्रतुविदं सुतं सोमं हर्य पुरुष्टुत । 
पिला वुंषस्व तातुंपिम्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Indra kratuvidam sutam somam harya purustuta. 
Piba vrsasva tatrpim. 


Indra, lover of life and excellence, sung and 
celebrated by many, cherish the nectar-sweet of soma 
distilled and inspiring for the completion of yajna. Drink 
of the delight of life to the lees, to your heart’s content, 
grow strong and vigorous, and shower the blessings of 
divinity on the celebrants. 


1236 RGVEDA 


इन्द्र Won धितावानं यज्ञं विश्वे भिर्दवेभि॑ः। 
तिर स्त॑वान विश्पते ॥ ३ ॥ 


श Indra pra no dhitavanam yajnam visvebhirdeve- 
bhih. Tira stavana vispate. 


Indra, lord of might and majesty, ruler and 
protector of the people, celebrated defender of truth and 
rectitude, destroyer of darkness and evil, come with all 
the nobilities of humanity and promote and perfect this 
yajna of ours so that it overflows with the bounties of 
life and nature for all. 


इन्द्र सोमाः सुता इमे तव प्र य॑न्ति सत्पते | 
क्षयं चन्द्रास इन्द॑वः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Indra somah suta ime tava pra yanti satpate. 
Ksayam candrasa indavah. 


Indra, lord of knowledge, protector of truth and 
lovers of rectitude, all these soma essences of nature, 
distilled, seasoned and reinforced, soothing sweet and 
inspiring, trickling in drops and flowing in streams, 
come to your abode. 


दधिष्वा जठर सुतं सोम॑मिन्द्र वरेण्यम्‌ ॥ 
तवं द्युक्षास इन्द॑वः ॥ ५ ॥ 

=: Dadhisva jathare sutam somamindra varenyam. 
Tava dyuksasa indavah. 


Indra, lover of life and health a long age, the 
soma distilled drop by drop in sunlight is selected for 
you. Take it, bear it in the stomach, and it will give you 
the vigour and joy of a full life. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 40 1237 


गिर्व॑णः पाहि न॑ः सुतं मधोर्धारिंभिरज्यसे । 
इन्द्र त्वादातमिद्यशः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Girvanah pahi nah sutam madhordharabhir- 
ajyase. Indra tvadatamid yasah. 


Indra, lord of honour, excellence and majesty, 
honoured by songs of celebration, served and pleased 
with streams of sweet soma in homage, pray protect 
and promote our soma-yajna of life and endeavour. By 
you alone is acknowledged the honour, joy and value 
of life and karma. 


अभि द्युम्नानि वनिन इन्द्रं सचन्ते sifatar 
पीत्वी सोम॑स्य वावृधे ॥ ७॥ 


Te Abhi dyumnani vanina indram sacante aksita. 
271 somasya vavrdhe. 


Seekers and celebrants, serve Indra and pray for 
honour, excellence and prosperity of imperishable value, 
and as I drink of the soma of his grace, so he too waxes 
in divine joy as he accepts our homage. 


अर्वावतो न आ ग॑हि परावतंश्च aae | 
इमा जुंषस्व नो गिरः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Arvavato na व gahi paravatasca vrtrahan. 
Ima jusasva no girah. 


Indra, lord destroyer of the clouds of darkness, 
giver of the showers of joy and prosperity, come to us, 
dynamic celebrants of life and divinity, come from far 
and near, receive, acknowledge and cherish these songs 
of ours offered in homage. 


1238 RGVEDA 


यदन्तरा परावतमर्वावतं च हूयसें। 
इन्द्रेह तत आ ग॑हि ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Yadantara paravatamarvavatam ca huyase. 
Indreha tata a gahi. 


Indra, lord giver of prosperity, invoked from 
within, from far and from near, come from there, 
anywhere, take us and bless us with grace. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 41 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
at तू न॑ इन्द्र मद्रय॑ग्धुवानः arate | 
हरिभ्यां याह्यद्रिवः ॥ ९॥ 
1. A tu na indra madryagghuvanah somapitaye. 
Haribhyam yahyadrivah. 


Come lord of clouds and mountains, Indra, 
illustrious as the sun, invoked and invited, come straight 
to us, wholly without reserve, come for a drink of soma 
by horses fast as wings of the winds. 
सत्तो होतां न ऋत्वियस्तिस्तिरे बर्हिरानुषक्‌ | 
अयुंजन्प्रातरद्र॑यः॥ २॥ 

pa Satto hota na rtviyastistire barhiranusak. 
ayujran prataradrayah. 

The yajaka is seated for our yajna according to 
the season, the seats are fixed and spread in order, the 
stones have been used for the morning libations. 

इमा ब्रह्य ब्रह्मवाहः क्रियन्त आ बर्हिः die 
वीहि शुर पुरोव्छाशम्‌॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 41 1239 


a Ima brahma brahmavahah kriyanta ठ barhih sida. 
Vihi Sura purolasam. 
These hymns are sung in honour of Divinity. O 
Spirit Divine, come and grace the sacred grass. O lord 
of power and majesty, come and enjoy the delicious 
offering. 


रारन्धि सव॑नेषु ण एषु स्तोमेषु वृत्रहन्‌ । 
उक्थेष्विन्द्र गिर्वणः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Rarandhi savanesu na esu stomesu vrtrahan. 
Ukthesvindra girvanah. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, destroyer 
of darkness and evil, breaker of clouds and harbinger of 
showers, celebrated in song, abide and rejoice in these 
celebrations of the season’s prosperity in our yajnas, in 
these hymns of divinity and in these holy chants of 
mantras. 


aed: सोमपामुरुं रिहन्ति शव॑सस्पतिम्‌। 
इन्द्रं वत्सं न मातरः ॥ ५॥ 
9, Matayah somapamurum rihanti Savasaspatim. 


Indram vatsam na matarah. 


Intelligent people love Indra, great and broad 
minded, lover of soma and protector of honour and 
prosperity, and commander of strength and power, just 
the same way as cows love their calf. 


स म॑न्दस्वा ह्यन्ध॑सो राध॑से तन्वां ae | 
न स्तोतारं निदे करः॥ ६॥ 


6. Sa mandasva hyandhaso radhase tanva mahe. 
Na stotaram nide karah. 


1240 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord lover of soma and commander of 
power, rejoice at heart with your whole personality for 
the realisation of food, energy and wealth of life. Let 
not your devotee and celebrant face an occasion of 
embarrassment, blame, insult or contempt. 


वयमिन्द्र त्वायवो! हविष्मन्तो जरामहे । 
उत त्वमस्मयुर्वसो ॥ ७ ॥ 

ds Vayamindra tvayavo havismanto jaramahe. 
Uta tvam-asmayurvaso. 


Indra, lord of love and power, we, your devotees 
and admirers, bearing gifts of homage, sing and 
celebrate your honour. And you love us too, our very 
shelter and home. 


मारे अस्मदि मुमुचो हरिंप्रियार्वाङ् atte । 
इन्द्र॑ स्वधावो मत्स्वेह ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Mare asmad vi mumuco haripriyarvan yahi. 
Indra svadhavo matsveha. 


Indra, lord lover of speed and progress, forsake 
us not, leave us not, go not far away, come hither close 
to us. Lord self-sufficient and self-refulgent, be here 
with us. Rejoice. 


अर्वाञ्चं त्वा सुखे रथे वह॑ तामिन्द्र केशिना । 
gare बर्हिरासदे ॥ ९॥ 


9. Arvancam tva sukhe rathe vahatamindra keSina. 
Ghrtasnu barhirasade. 


May two carriers with flames of fire, fed on 
clarified and bright burning fuel, carry you forward, up 
and down, in a comfortable car and reach you to the 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 42 1241 


heights of the sky. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 42 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


उप॑ नः सुतमा ग॑हि सोम॑मिन्द्र गर्वाशिरम्‌। 
हरिभ्यां यस्ते अस्पयुः ॥ ९॥ 
i, Upa nah sutama gahi somamindra gavasiram. 
Haribhyam yaste asmayuh. 
Indra, lord of power and honour, come hither to 
our soma yajna and taste our soma seasoned with cow’s 


milk. Come by your chariot drawn by horses, self- 
programmed to reach us. 


तमिन्द्र मदमा ग॑हि बर्हिष्ठां ग्राव॑भिः सुतम्‌ । 
कुविन््वस्य तुप्णवंः ॥ २॥ 

2. Tamindra madama gahi barhihstham gravabhih 
sutam. Kuvinnvasya trpnavah. 


Indra, lord of power, honour and prosperity, 
come taste this pleasure of soma floating in the skies 
and distilled by the clouds. Great are the virtues of this 
soma, highly soothing, satisfying and inspiring. 
इन्द्रमित्था गिरो ममाच्छागुरिषिता ga: | 
आवृते सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३॥ 

Indramittha giro mamacchagurisita itah. 
Avrte somapttaye. 


Let my words of adoration thus inspired rise up 
from here and reach across the sky beyond the clouds 
to share the ecstasy of soma with Indra. 


1242 RGVEDA 


इन्द्रं सोम॑स्य पीतये स्तोमैरिह ह॑वामहे | 
उक्थेभिः कुविदागम॑त्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Indram somasya pitaye stomairiha havamahe. 
ukthebhih kuvidagamat. 


We invoke and invite Indra, lord of energy and 
knowledge, here, with songs of adoration and words of 
sacred speech, to have a drink of soma, and we pray he 
may come again and again. 


इन्द्र सोर्माः सुता इमे तान्द॑धिष्व शतक्रतो | 
wet वाजिनीवसो ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Indra somah suta ime tan dadhisva Ssatakrato. 
Jathare vajinivaso. 


Indra, father of morning freshness, lord of a 
hundred acts of yajna, distilled are these soma essences. 
Take these, hold them safe in the treasury of this world 
for a fresh lease of life’s energy. 


विद्या हि त्वां धनञ्जयं वाजेषु दधृषं ae | 
अर्धा ते सुम्नमीमहे ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Vidma hi tva dhananjayam vajesu dadhrsam kave. 
Adha te sumnamimahe. 
We know you for sure, O lord of knowledge 
and vision, winner of wealth and bold fighter of battles 


for health and energy. And now we pray to you for the 
gift of peace and comfort of well-being. 


इममिन्द्र गर्वाशिरं यवाशिरं च नः foe 
आगत्या वृष॑भिः सुतम्‌॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 43 1243 

7. Imamindra gavasiram yavasiram ca nah piba. 
Agatya vrsabhih sutam. 

Indra, lord of power, honour and energy, come 

and have a drink of this soma of ours filtered with the 


shower of clouds, reinforced with rays of the sun and 
accompanied by a diet of barley milk. 


Paes स्व sitaas सोमं चोदामि पीतये । 
एष रारन्तु ते हृदि ।॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Tubhyedindra sva okye somam codami pitaye. 


Esa rarantu te hrdi. 


Indra, lord lover of power and energy, for your 
drink I distil and reinforce this soma in my own yajnic 
house of science. It would inspire, strengthen and delight 
your heart. 


त्वां सुतस्य॑ पीतये प्रलरमिनद्र हवामहे । 
कुशिकासो! अवस्यवः ॥ ९ ॥ 
a, Tvam sutasya pitaye pratnamindra havamahe. 


Kusikaso avasyavah. 


Indra, veteran lord and ruler of the world, we 
children of knowledge and humility invoke and invite 
you to have a drink of the soma of our own making for 
the sake of protection and progress. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 43 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


आ agate वन्धुरे छास्तवेदनुं प्रदिव॑ः सोमपेय॑म्‌। प्रिया 
सयाया वि qed बर्हिस्त्वामिमे हव्यवाहो हवन्ते ॥ ९ ॥ 


1244 RGVEDA 


1. A yahyarvanupa bandhuresthastavedanu pra- 
divah somapeyam. Priya sakhaya vi mucopa 
barhistvamime havyavaho havante. 


Indra, lord of honour and power, riding your 
chariot, come to us for a drink of soma, brilliant and 
exhilarating, distilled from the light of the sun. Leave 
your favourite horses behind. These yajakas bearing 
fragrant offers of homage invite you to the yajna vedi. 


आ याहि पूर्वीरति चर्षणीर अर्य आशिष उप॑ नो eRe । 
इमा हि wat मतयः स्तोम॑तष्टा इन्द्र हव॑न्ते सख्यं 
जुंषाणाः॥ २॥ 

2 A yahi purvirati carsaniran arya aSisa upa no 
haribhyam. Ima hi tva matayah stomatasta 
indra havante sakhyam jusanah. 


Indra, lord and leader of the nation, come to us 
across the multitude of people by your chariot of horse 
power to receive our blessings of old and our good 
wishes. These worshipful people all with songs of 
adoration invoke and invite you, they love to be friends 
with you. 
आ नो यज्ञं न॑मोवृधं सजोषा इन्द्र॑ देव हरिभिर्याहि qa 
अहं हि त्वा मतिधिर्जोहिवीमि घुतप्र॑याः सधमादे मधुं 
नाम्‌॥ ३॥ 

A no yajiam namovrdham sajosa indra deva 
haribhiryahi tuyam. Aham hi tva matibhir- 
jJohavimi ghrtaprayah sadhamade madhunam. 


Indra, brilliant creator of wealth and master of 
development, come fast by your car of motive power as 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 43 1245 


a friend to join our yajnic programme of development 
for the growth of food, energy and overall prosperity. 
With the best of people, in the best of words and thought, 
I invite you and welcome you with the best of delicious 
offerings to our house of honey sweets. 


आ च त्वामेता वृष॑णा वहातो हरी सखाया सुधुरा CAST । 
धानावदिन्द्रः सव॑नं जुषाणः सखा सख्युः श्वणवदन्द॑- 
ATT ४॥ 


4. A ca tvameta vrsana vahato hari sakhaya sudhura 
svanga. Dhanavadindrah savanam jusanah sakha 
sakhyuh srnavad vandanani. 


And while these mighty friendly powers of light 
and wind, well employed in a beautiful car immaculately 
built, transport you to join the session of developmental 
programme as a partner, I pray, O friend, listen to the 
adorations of a friend. 


कुविन्मां गोपां कर॑ से जनस्य कुविद्राजानं मघवन्नृजीषिन्‌ । 
कुविन्म ऋषिं पपिवांसं सुतस्य॑ कु विन्मे वस्वो अमृतस्य 
शिक्षाः ॥ ५॥ 


a, Kuvinma gopam karase janasya kuvid rajanam 
maghavannrjisin. Kuvinma rsim papivamsam 
sutasya kuvinme vasvo amrtasya Siksah. 


O lord, make me a great protector of the cow, 
the earth and the holy Word. Lord of wealth and power, 
lover of simple and natural ways of living, make me a 
brilliant guardian of the people. Make me a man of 
sagely vision, a seer of divine mantras, and bless me 
with knowledge and immense wealth of imperishable 
value. 


1246 RGVEDA 


आ त्वा बृहन्तो हस्यो युजाना अर्वागिन्द्र सधमादो वहन्तु | 
प्रये द्विता fea ऋञ्जन्त्याताः सुसंमृष्टासो वृषभस्यं 
ART: ६॥ 


6. A tva brhanto harayo yujana arvagindra sadha- 
mado vahantu. Pra ye dvita diva rnjantyatah 
susammrstaso vrsabhasya murah. 


Indra, adorable lord giver of honour, excellence 
and prosperity, the motive powers of your chariot, 
mighty and harnessed together like fire and wind, 
impetuous forces of potent and generative nature, rise 
and fly to the heights of the sky, dividing the space, as 
if, into two. May these powers, well refined, reinforced 
and accelerated, complementarily exhilarated, carry you 
forward and transport you to our house of yajnic 
development. 


इन्द्र पिब वृष॑धूतस्य वृष्ण आ यं a श्येन Sora जभारं। 
यस्य ud च्यावयसि प्र कृष्टीर्यस्य मदे अपं गोत्रा 
ववर्थ! ॥ ७॥ 


vis Indra piba vrsadhutasya vrsna a yam te Syena 
usate jabhara. Yasya made cyavayasi pra krstir- 
yasya made apa gotra vavartha. 


Indra, lord of power and passion for life, drink 
of the potent soma created by the vibrations of generous 
nature and brought down from the sky by the eagle 
flights of your car for you, lord of love and ambition, 
for your people. It is in the ecstasy of soma that you 
inspire the children of the earth with energy, and it is in 
the ecstasy of that energy that the earth abides and turns 
round and round. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 44 1247 


शुनं ean मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugr-amutaye 
samatsu ghanantam vrtrani sanyitam dhananam. 


We invoke, invite and call upon Indra, lord 
creator and giver of knowledge, best of the leaders of 
humanity, in this battle between the learned and the 
ignorant, for success in discrimination between 
knowledge of truth and ignorance, for initiation and 
completion of our search for knowledge and in our 
battles between the good and evil forces. We call upon 
Indra, destroyer of conflict, winner of wealth and 
knowledge, sympathetic listener and lustrous lord of 
judgement and discrimination, and above all commander 
of wealth, power and honour for the good of humanity. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 44 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


अयं ते अस्तु हर्यतः सोम आ हरिभिः सुतः। 
जुषाण इन्द्र हरिभिर्न आ गह्या तिष्ठ हरितं रथ॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 


I; Ayam te astu haryatah soma त haribhih sutah. 
Jusana indra haribhirna a gahya tistha haritam 
ratham. 


Indra, lord lover of soma and the honour and 
lustre of life, this soma is dedicated to you. Brought by 
your carrier powers, let it be for you. To taste of it and 
enjoy it, ride the chariot drawn by the powers of horse 
and come to us. (The chariot is the chariot of the sun 


1248 RGVEDA 
and the horses are sun-rays.) 


हर्यन्नुषसमर्चयः ge हर्यन्नरोचयः । विद्वांञ्चिंकित्वान्हंर्यशव 
वर्धस इन्द्र विर्वा अभि fara: ॥ २॥ 


2. Haryannusasamarcayah suryam haryanna- 
rocayah. Vidvanscikitvan haryasva vardhasa 
indra visva abhi Sriyah. 


Lord of love and beauty, you shine the dawn. 
Lord of light, you illuminate the sun. Lord omniscient, 
light of the world, Indra, riding the sun-rays, you create 
and augment all the beauty and wealth of the world. 
aifa-at eRerad पृथिवीं हरि वर्पसम्‌। 
अर्धारयद्छरितोर्भूरि भोज॑नं ययोरन्तर्टरिश्चरत्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Dyamindro haridhayasam prthivim harivar- 
pasam. Adharayaddharitorbhuri bhojanam 
yayorantarhariscarat. 


The heaven which holds the light of the sun, 
the earth which wears the green apparel of light, and 
the middle regions between heaven and earth in which 
the light shines and the winds blow and where food for 
life abounds in plenty, Indra, lord of light and life holds 
it all and sustains. 


wart हरिंतो वृषा विश्वमा भाति trea 
हर्यश्वो हरितं धत्त आयुंधमा वरं arate Ra ४ ॥ 


4. Jajnano harito vrsa visvama bhati rocanam. 
Haryasvo haritam dhatta ayudhama vajram 
bahvorharim. 


Rising and manifesting, the potent lord of light 
and showers of generosity illuminates the beautiful 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 45 1249 


world of existence. The lord of sunrays in his arms 
wields the blazing weapon of thunder and lightning. 
And he holds and sustains the sun and shines self- 
refulgent. 


इन्द्रो हर्यन्तमजुनं at शुक्रैर भीवूंतम्‌ । 
अपावृणोब्दरिंभिरद्रिभिः सुतमुद्रा हरिंभिराजत ॥ ५ ॥ 

5. Indro haryantamarjunam vajram sukrairabhi- 
vrtam. Apavrnoddharibhiradribhih sutamud ga 
haribhirajata. 


Indra, the sun, with its brilliant rays, uncovers 
and manifests his glorious form of light girdled round 
by the radiant halo and with his light reaches and re- 
reveals the earth and her environment sprinkled over 
by cloud showers. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 45 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


आ मन्द्रैरिन्द्र हरिभिर्याहि मयूररोमभिः var त्वा के चिति 
dated न पाशिनो ऽति धन्वेव at इहि ॥ ९॥ 
iF A mandrairindra haribhiryahi mayurarom-abhih. 
Ma tva ke cinni yaman vim na pasino’ti dhanveva 
tan thi. 
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, come by 
the rays of light, beautiful and colourful as the feathers 


of the peacock. May none, as fowlers ensnare birds, 
catch you. Outskirt the fowlers as a rainbow and come. 


वृत्रखादो व॑लंरूजः पुरां दर्मो अपामजः | स्थाता रथ॑स्थ 
हर्योरभिस्वर इन्द्रो दूव््हा चिदारुजः ॥ २ ॥ 


1250 RGVEDA 


2: Vrtrakhado valamrujah puram darmo apamajah. 
Sthata rathasya haryorabhisvara indro drlha 
cidarujah. 


Indra is the breaker of the clouds. He shatters 
the caverns of the demons, routs the cities of sin and 
releases the flow of waters. Sitting firm in the middle 
of the chariot behind the horses in the uproar like the 
sun on the back of the rays, he breaks even the 
unbreakables. 


गम्भीरो उदधीरसिव क्रतुं पुष्यसि गा इव । प्र ator यव॑सं 
धेनवो यथा हृदं कुल्या इवाशत ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Gambhiran udadhinriva kratum pusyasi ga iva. 
Pra sugopa yavasam dhenavo yatha hradam kulya 
ivasata. 

Indra, lord of life, power and prosperity, you 
promote and overfill the yajna and bless the yajamana 
like the deep sea and protect the earths, cows and the 
grass for them. As a good cowherd protects and feeds 
the cows and guards the fodder for the cows, so do you, 
O man, protect and promote the yajna. And as the cows 
gain the food, and as the rivers and rivulets reach the 
sea for self-fulfilment, so would you enjoy the delicacies 
of life and reach the Lord, Indra, for self-fulfilment. 


आ नस्तुजं रयिं भरांशं न प्रतिजानते । वृक्षं पक्वं Hea 
धूनुहीन्द्र donut aq ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A nastujam rayim bharamsam na pratijanate. 
Vrksam pakvam phalamankiva dhunuhindra 
samparanam vasu. 


Bring us wealth of the world, brilliant and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 46 1251 


indestructible, as our share, for the devotees in a bond 
of covenant. As a gardener with his hook shakes a tree 
laden with ripe fruit, so shake for us the auspicious tree 
of life and bring down the fruits of wealth and light 
from the heights of heaven to help us cross the seas of 
the material world. 


स्वयुरिन्द्र venta cares: स्वय॑शस्तरः। स वावृधान 
ओज॑सा पुरुष्टुत भवा नः सुश्रवस्तमः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Svayurindra svardalasi smaddistih svayasas-tarah. 
Sa vavrdhana ojasa purustuta bhava nah susra- 
vastamah. 


Indra, you are self-sufficient, self-refulgent, 
sovereign, innately honourable, self-growing with your 
own lustre, universally admired and celebrated. Be most 
kind and benevolent to us, we pray. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 46 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


gored ते वृषभस्य स्वराजं उग्रस्य यूनः स्थविरस्य घृष्वेः | 
अजूर्यतो विणो वीर्यां देणीन्द्र श्रुतस्य॑ महतो महानि ॥ ९॥ 


ie Yudhmasya te vrsabhasya svaraja ugrasya yunah 
sthavirasya ghrsveh. Ajuryato vajrino viryani- 
ndra srutasya mahato mahani. 


Indra, great are the acts and achievements of 
yours, Indra, mighty fighter, virile and generous, self- 
refulgent, lustrous and blazing, young, firm and senior, 
fierce challenger, unaging youthful, hero of thunder and 
lightning, famous and great. 


1252 RGVEDA 


महां ofa महिष वृष्ण्येभिरर्धनस्पृट्ग्र सहं मानो sari 
एको विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य राजा स योधयां च क्षयया a 
जनान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Mahan asi mahisa vrsnyebhirdhanasprdugra 
sahamano anyan. Eko visvasya bhuvanasya raja 
sa yodhaya ca ksayaya ca janan. 


Great you are, adorable high, mighty winner of 
wealth with showers of generosity, fierce and potent, 
challenger and vanquisher of adversaries. You alone are 
the sole ruler of the world. Go, move the people, make 
them fight the adversities and settle them in peaceful 
homes. 


प्र मात्राभी रिरिचे रोच॑मानः प्र देवेभिर्विश्वतो sada: 1 
प्र मज्मना fea इन्द्रः पृथिल्याः प्रोरोर्म॒हो अन्तरिक्षाद्‌- 
जीषी ॥ ३॥ 


ध Pra matrabhi ririce rocamanah pra devebhir- 
visvato apratitah. Pra majmana diva indrah 
prthivyah prorormaho antariksad-rjisi. 


Self-refulgent, Indra exceeds all measures of 
definition and description. With his own majesty, he is 
uncomprehended by all the brilliancies of the world. 
With his own omnipotence, he is greater than heaven 
and earth. And simple and natural in character and 
function, he is greater than the mighty space and time 
in existence. 


उरुं ग॑भीरं ss ग्रं विश्वव्य॑चसमवतं म॑तीनाम्‌। इन्द्र 
सोमासः प्रदिवि सुतासः समुद्रं न स्रवत आ विशन्ति ॥ ठ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 47 1253 


4. Urum gabhiram janusabhyugram visvavya- 
casamavatam matinam. Indram somasah pardivi 
sutasah samudram na sravata G visanti. 


Men of peace and vision, fed on the light of 
divinity and nectar from heaven, attain and enter the 
presence of Indra, vast and deep, potent and lustrous 
by nature, all-world comprehensive, guardian of 
humanity and promoter of collective vision and 
intelligence, in the same way as streams of water flow 
and reach and enter the ocean. 


यं सोम॑मिन्द्र पृथिवीद्यावा गर्थन माता fatsrerecarert | 
तं ते हिन्वन्ति ag ते मृजन्त्यध्वर्यवों वृषभ पातवा उ ॥ ५ ॥ 
2: Yam somamindra prthividyava garbham na mata 


bibhrtastvaya. Tam te hinvanti tamu te mrjantya- 
dhvaryavo vrsabha pdatava u. 


Indra, lord of power, honour and generosity, the 
soma, life’s joy and ecstasy, which by virtue of your 
love and law, earth and heaven bear as a mother bears 
the baby in her womb, the highpriests of the yajna of 
love and nonviolence purify and promote as homage in 
service to you. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 47 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
Teal इन्द्र वृषभो रणाय पिबा सोपम॑मनुष्वधं मदाय । आ 
Rivera जठरे मध्व॑ ऊर्मि त्वं राजासि प्रदिवः सुता- 
नाम्‌॥ ९॥ 


॥\ Marutvan indra vrsabho ranaya piba somam- 
anusvadham madaya. A sincasva jathare madhva 
urmim tvam rajasi pradivah sutanam. 


1254 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of the winds and showers of favour 
from heaven, drink the soma of the light of divinity and 
life’s joy and ecstasy to your heart’s content for 
inspiration and exhilaration. Let the waves of the honey 
sweets of soma quench your thirst and exhilarate your 
ambition. You are the ruler and protector of the light 
and joy distilled from heaven on earth. 


सजोषा इन्द्र सग॑णो मरुद्धिः सोमं fra वृत्रहा शुर विद्धान्‌ | 
जहि sag मृधो नुदस्वाऽथाभ॑यं कृणुहि विश्वतो न: ॥ २॥ 


2. Sajosa indra sagano marudbhih somam piba 
vrtraha Sura vidvan. Jahi sSatrunrapa mrdho 
nudasva’thabhayam krnuhi visvato nah. 


Indra, friend of humanity, companion at the 
table, commander of the winds and forces of your 
auxiliaries, breaker of the cloud and dispeller of 
darkness, wise and brave, destroy the enemies, initiate 
and push on the battles, and create fearlessness all round 
for us. 


उत ऋतुभिं ऋतुपाः पाहि सोममिन्द्र देवेभिः aa: सुतं 
न॑ः। at आभ॑जो मरुतो ये त्वाऽन्वहन्वृत्रमदंधुस्तुभ्य- 
मोजः ॥ २३॥ 


ः Uta rtubhirrtupah pahi somamindra devebhih 
sakhibhih sutam nah. Yan abhajo maruto ye 
tva’nvahan vrtram-adadhus-tubhyam-ojah. 


Indra, ordainer, preserver and sustainer of the 
cycle of seasons, protect and promote the soma distilled 
by divines and friends for us according to the seasons. 
Protect and promote the Maruts, storm troops of yours 
who, in your service, destroy adversaries, dispel 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 47 1255 


darkness to bring in the light of reason and divinity, 
bring showers of rain and, for you, win and bear the 
honour and grandeur of majesty. 


ये त्वाहिहत्ये मघवन्नवर्धन्ये शम्बरे हरिवो ये गविष्ठौ । 
ये cat नूनम॑नुमद॑न्ति विप्राः पिबेन्द्र सोमं सग॑णो 
मरुद्धिः॥2॥ 


4. Ye tvahihatye maghavannavardhan ye sambare 
harivo ye gavistau. Ye tva nunam-anumadanti 
viprah pibendra somam sagano marudbhih. 


Indra, lord of honour, prosperity and majesty, 
drink the soma with your friends and stormy troops of 
the Maruts who did you proud in battle against the 
darkness of serpentine forces, and, O lord of sunrays, 
who fight on in the battle for waters, light and cows, 
and celebrate with those wise scholars and sages who 
exhilarate, exalt and enlighten you in the joy of victory. 


मरुत्वन्तं वृषभं वावृधानमकवारिं दिव्यं शासमिन्द्र॑म्‌। 
विश्वासाहमवसे नूत॑नायोग्रं संहोदापिह तं हुवेम ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Marutvantam vrsabham vavrdhanamakavarim 
divyam sasamindram. Visvasahamavase nutana- 
yogram sahodamiha tam huvema. 


Here on the yajna vedi of our social order, for 
the latest modes of defence and protection, we invoke, 
exalt and celebrate Indra, commander of the stormy 
troops of Maruts, virile and generous with showers of 
favours, progressive and advancing in glory, universal 
friend having no enemies, heavenly, noble ruler, mighty 
glorious, all patient and all victorious, blazing brave 
and giver of strength and fortitude. 


1256 RGVEDA 


Mandala 3/Sukta 48 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


सद्यो हं जातो dae: कनीनः प्रभ॑तुमावदन्ध॑सः Urea । 
साधोः पिब प्रतिक्ामं यथां ते रसाशिरः प्रथमं सोम्यस्य ॥। ९॥ 


ie Sadyo ha jato vrsabhah kaninah prabhartuma- 
vadandhasah sutasya. Sadhoh piba pratikamam 
yatha te rasasirah prathamam somyasya. 


The newly risen sun, mighty generous and 
beautiful, protects the essence of food in order to sustain 
and promote it for life. Indra, O sun, drink first the good 
and delicious essence of soma mixed with milk as it 
suits your desire, and protect and promote the soma for 
life. 

(The mantra also applies to the brilliant ruler of 
the social order, and every new authority of taxation 
and the defence, protection, promotion and development 
of the people and the order, the primary aim being 
happiness and progress of society with taxes as the 
means and not the end strictly, with reference to the 
needs of the system. 


The mantra can also apply to the birth of human 
life, its growth and maturity. It can be applied to the 
birth of the sun itself in the process of creative evolution. 
In short, Indra should be interpreted as the sun, the 
human soul, 1.e., jivatma, the creative energy and the 
ruler.) 


यजनाय॑थास्तदहरस्य arisen: पीयूष॑मपिबो गिरिष्ठाम्‌ । 
तं तै माता परि योषा जनित्री महः पितुर्दम आसिंञ्च- 
aan 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 48 1257 


2. Yajjayathastadaharasya kamem’soh piyusama- 
pibo giristham. Tam te mata pari yosa janitri 
mahah piturdama asincadagre. 

As you were born, that same day, in the desire 
for life and sustenance, you drank the nectar sweet of 
soma abiding and maturing in the cloud and on the 
mountain, which your loving mother, as life’s creative 
spirit, inspired with love, recreated and nourished for 
you in the house of your great father much in advance 
of your birth. 


उपस्थाय मातर मन्नमेड तिग्ममपश्यदभि सोपमूध॑ः। 
प्रयावय॑न्नरचरद्‌ गृत्सो अन्यान्महानिं चक्रे पुरुधप्रतीकः ॥ २ ॥ 


Be Upasthaya mataramannamaitta tigmamapa- 
Syadabhi somamudhah. Prayavayannacarad 
grtso anyan mahani cakre purudhapratikah. 


Having approached the mother, he yearned for 
food and saw her breast overflowing with exhilarating 
soma of milky food and fiery energy. Growing, going 
forward, moving and leading others, strong and wise, 
versatile in form and action, he performs great deeds. 


उग्रस्तुराषाव्छभिभूत्योजा यथावशं तन्वं चक्र एषः। 
त्वष्टारमिन्द्रो जनुषाधिभूयाऽऽमुष्या सोम॑मपिवच्यमूषुं ।। ४ ॥ 


4. Ugrasturasalabhibhityoja yathavasam tanvam 
cakra esah. Tvastaramindro janusabhibhuya- 
’musya somamapibaccamiusu. 


Blazing brave, lustrous and impetuous victor 
over fastest forces, overwhelming in strength, he is a 
versatile master of his manifestation in action. By nature 
and birth he commands and controls the creative energy 


1258 RGVEDA 


for development and, drawing it in from nature, he 
drinks the soma from all sources of nature and humanity. 


शुनं ean मघर्वानमिन्द्र मस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु wed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ५॥ 


a: Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


We invoke, invite and call upon Indra, 
auspicious and benevolent giver, commander of wealth, 
power and honour, best of men and leaders, for 
protection, defence and victory in this battle of life. He 
listens to prayer for protection in battles and rises, a 
fierce fighter, destroyer of demons and dark clouds, and 
winner of the wealths of life. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 49 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


शंसा महामिन्द्रं यस्मिन्विश्वा आ pea: सोमपाः 
काममव्य॑न्‌। यं सुक्रतुं धिषणे विभ्वतष्टं घनं वृत्राणां 
जनयन्त देवाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


I; Samsa mahamindram yasmin visva a krstayah 
somapah kamamavyan. Yam sukratum dhisane 
vibhvatastam ghanam vrtranam janayanta devah. 


Celebrate and glorify Indra, ruler of the world, 
great, hero of noble actions, fashioned by all pervading 
divinity, breaker of the clouds and dispeller of the forces 
of darkness, whom the brilliancies of the world elect 
and heaven and earth consecrate as ruler, and in whom 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 49 1259 


all soma-makers and soma-lovers of the world find 
fulfilment of their heart’s desire. 


यं नु नकिः पृत॑नासु स्वराजं द्विता तर॑ति नृत॑मं हरिष्टाम्‌। 
इनत॑मः सत्व॑भिर्यो हं शुषः पुंथुज्रयां अमिनादायुर्दस्योंः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Yam nu nakih prtanasu svarajam dvita tarati 
nrtamam haristham. Inatamah satvabhiryo ha 
susaih prthujraya aminadayurdasyoh. 


In battles, none for certain can surpass Indra, 
self-refulgent and blazing by his manifold strength. Best 
of men and leaders is he, abiding with humanity in 
command of his impetuous forces. Most potent is he 
and most determined, widest in reach and effect, and 
with his essential purity of mind and strength of 
character, he frustrates the life and age of the wicked to 
naught. 


सहावा पृत्सु तरणिर्न caret रोद॑सी मेहनावान्‌। भगो 
न कारे हव्यो मतीनां पितेव चारुः सुहवो वयोधाः ॥ ३॥ 


Sahava prtsu taranirnarva vyanasi rodasi meha- 
navan. Bhago na kare havyo matinam piteva 
caruh suhavo vayodhah. 


Undeterred and victorious in battles, instant in 
action, going forward like a current of energy, he 
vibrates through heaven and earth. Rich and generous, 
lord of power and prosperity, he is to be invoked and 
invited in yajnic programmes of enlightened people like 
a very shower of rain. And he is kind and generous, 
ever gracious, ready like a father with gifts of life and 
sustenance for his children. 


1260 RGVEDA 


धर्ता दिवो रज॑सस्यृष्ट ऊर्ध्वो रथो न वायुर्वसुंभिर्नियुत्वान्‌ | 
क्षपां वस्ता जनिता सूर्य॑स्य विभ॑क्ता भागं धिषणे'व 
वाज॑म्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Dharta divo rajasasprsta urdhvo ratho na vayur- 
vasubhir-niyutvan. Ksapam vasta janita suryasya 
vibhakta bhagam dhisaneva vajam. 


Sustainer of the light of heaven and earth and 
the skies, all pervasive, going high and higher like a 
chariot, mighty as the wind, controller and ruler of the 
people by the people, he is the light of dawn after the 
night of darkness, creator and harbinger of new and 
higher light, and, like the generous heaven and earth, 
giver of our share of food, energy and success in life. 


शुनं ean मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु aed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ५॥ 


=: Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugram-iutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


In this battle of our life for food, energy and 
victory in the struggle, we invoke, invite and call upon 
Indra, best and highest of men and leaders, auspicious 
and generous lord of power and prosperity. Bright and 
blazing is he, listens graciously when we call upon him 
in the battles for defence, protection and success, 
destroys the demons of darkness, and wins the wealths 
of life for his children and celebrants. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 50 1261 


Mandala 3/Sukta 50 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


इन्द्रः स्वाहां पिबतु यस्य सोम॑ आगत्या qa वृषभो 
Tea ओरुव्य्चाः पृणतायेभिरन्नैरास्यं हविस्तन्व ९: 
काम॑मृध्याः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Indrah svaha pibatu yasya soma agatya tumro 
vrsabho marutvan. Oruvyacah prnatamebhira- 
nnairasya havistanvah kamamrdhyah. 


Indra, strong, virile and generous, lord creator 
and giver of power, prosperity and excellence of life, 
commanding the force of the winds and stormy troops 
over the wide world, may, we pray, come, and having 
come enjoy the offerings made in truth of word and 
deed with faith and humility and, pleased with these 
offerings, grant fulfilment of the devotee’s mission of 
earthly existence. 


आ ते सपर्यू wad युनज्मि ययोरनु ued: श्रुष्टिमावंः 1 
इह त्वा धेयुर्हस्यः सुशिप्र पिवा त्वस्य सुषुतस्य चारो: ॥ २॥ 


2. A te saparyu javase yunajmi yayoranu pradivah 
srustimavah. Iha tva dheyurharayah susipra 
piba tvasya susutasya caroh. 


For your fast movement in work and travel I 
employ the fastest vehicles and appoint the most 
dynamic people in your service by which you come fast 
and protect the light of the world for us. O warrior of 
the helmet, lord of beauty and grace, may the intelligent 
and industrious people help you on here where you may 
drink this delicious soma of our making with them. 


1262 RGVEDA 


गोभिर्मिपिक्षं cer सुपारमिन्द्रं Seats धाय॑से गृणानाः 1 
मन्दानः सोमं पपिर्वों ऋजीषिन्त्समस्मभ्यं पुरुधा गा 
इषण्य ॥ ३॥ 


3. Gobhirmimiksum dadhire suparamindram 
Jyaisthyaya dhayase grnanah. Mandanah somam 
papivan rjisin tsamasmabhyam purudha ga 
isanyd. 


With words of welcome and praise, the 
celebrants install and consecrate Indra, the ruler, 
generous as showers and saviour promoter of the 
common wealth, in the highest office of governance. O 
lord ruler, drink and enjoy the soma of the nation’s 
prosperity and happiness, and, moving on the simple 
and natural paths of progress, initiate, inspire, and bring 
us many ways the knowledge, lands and cows required 
for the people. 


इमं कामं मन्दया गोभिरश्वैरुचन्द्रव॑ता राध॑सा पप्रथ॑र्च | 
स्वर्यवो! मतिधिस्तुभ्यं विप्रा इन्द्राय are: कुशिकासो 
अक्रन्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Imam kamam mandaya gobhirasvaiscandravata 
radhasa_ paprathasca. Svaryayo matibhistu- 
bhyam vipra indraya vahah kusikaso akran. 


This desire, prayer and programme, O lord of 
power and prosperity, fulfil to our heart’s desire over 
the earth and extend it to the heights of heaven, with 
abundance of cows, horses, golden prosperity and 
celebrated means of success and advancement. May 
there be glory to you and joy come to the earth. In search 
of light and joy, earnest sages and scholars of holy 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 51 1263 


Shastras with their understanding, imagination and 
resolution, together with the will of the people, compose 
this prayer and exhortation for you, lord ruler of the 
world, and present it to you for the honour and 
excellence of life. 


शुनं ean मघवानमिन्द्रमस्मिन्भरे नृत॑मं वाज॑सातौ । 
श्रृण्वन्त॑मुग्रमूतये' समत्सु wed वृत्राणि संजितं धना- 
नाम्‌॥ ५॥ 


>. Sunam huvema maghavanamindramasmin bhare 
nrtamam vajasatau. Srnvantamugr-amutaye 
samatsu ghnantam vrtrani samjitam dhananam. 


In this battle of existence, for the sake of success 
and victory, we invoke, invite and call upon Indra, best 
and highest of humanity, auspicious creator and 
commander of power, prosperity, honour and excellence 
of life. Blazing glorious is he, intent listener to prayers 
of his people, a fierce fighter for protection and progress, 
a destroyer of the demons of darkness, evil and poverty, 
harbinger of the showers of prosperity and a victor of 
trophies and treasures of corporate life. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 51 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
चर्षणीधृतं मघर्वानमुक्थ्य१ मिन्द्रं गिरो बृहतीर भ्य॑नूषत। 
वावृधानं deed सुंवृक्तिभिरमर्त्य जर॑माणं दिवेदिवे ॥ ९ ॥ 


Ile Carsanidhrtam maghavanam-ukthyam-indram 
giro brhatir-abhyanusata. Vavrdhanam puruh- 
utam suvrktibhir-amartyam jaramanam divedive. 


Address these comprehensive words of prayer 


1264 RGVEDA 


and celebration with offers of yajna to Indra, lord ruler 
and sustainer of the people, munificent, honourable, 
growing in power and prosperity, universally acclaimed 
and celebrated, immortal in fame and glory, close and 
closer day by day in love and exhortation of the people. 
Let the songs glorify the lord. 


शतक्रतुमण्विं शाकिनं नरं गिरो म saad यन्ति faved: 1 
वाजसनिं पूर्भिदं तूर्णिमप्तुरं धामसाचमभिषाचं स्वर्विं- 
द॑म्‌॥२॥ 


2. Satakratum-arnavam Sakinam naram giro ma 
indram-upa yanti visvatah. Vajasanim purbhidam 
turnim-apturam dhamasacam-abhisacam 
svarvidam. 


My words of prayer and praise constantly reach 
Indra, lord of a hundred great acts of yajna, deep and 
munificent as the sea, mighty powerful, leader, source 
of sustenance and light, winsome warrior and victor, 
shatterer of the strongholds of evil, instant starter and 
instantaneous reacher, sanctifier of the home, presiding 
presence and ceaseless shower of bliss. 


आकरे वसोर्जरिता प॑नस्यतेऽ नेहयः स्तुभ इन्द्रो दुवस्यति | 
विवस्व॑तः सद॑न आ हि पिप्रिये संत्रासाह्मभिमातिहनं 
स्तुहि ॥ २॥ 

Akare vasorjarita panasyate’nehasah stubha 


indro duvasyati. Vivasvatah sadana ठ hi pipriye 
satrasaham-abhimatihanam stuhi. 


In the house of wealth, the celebrant of Indra is 
praised. Indra loves and appreciates the simple and 
honest prayers and celebrations of the innocents. In the 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 51 1265 


house of light and splendour, he feels pleased. O man, 
praise and pray to the challenger of evil forces and the 
destroyer of adversity. 


नृणाम्‌ त्वा नृत॑मं गीर्भिरुक्थेरभि प्र वीरमर्चता स॒बाधः | 
सं सदसे पुरुमायो जिहीते नमो अस्य प्रदिव एक॑ ईशो ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Nrnamu tva nrtamam girbhirukthairabhi pra 
viramarcata sabadhah. Sam sahase purumayo 
Jihite namo asya pradiva eka ise. 


Indra, let all honour and adore you with holy 
words and songs of worship, you who are mighty brave 
and best of men and leaders. 


Indra is irresistebly brave, strong against the 
violent, highly meritorious, and he goes forward for a 
test of victory. All alone he rules over the heavens and 
the enlightened children of the earth. Salutations to the 
sole lord ruler of his world of light and life. 


Waiter निष्षिधो मर्त्येषु पुरू वसूनि पृथिवी बिभर्ति । 
इन्द्राय ara ओषधीरुतापो रयिं vera जीरयो 
वनानि & I 


>: Purvirasya nissidho martyesu puri vasuni prthivi 
bibharti. Indraya dyava osadhirutapo rayim 
raksanti jirayo vanani. 


Many and ancient are his blessings and defences 
among the people. Abundant wealth does the earth hold. 
The regions of light, the sun light, the greenery, the 
flowing waters and vapours, the veteran citizens, the 
forests, all these hold, preserve and protect many forms 
of wealth for Indra, ruler of the world. 


1266 RGVEDA 


तुभ्यं ब्रह्माणि गिर॑ इन्द्र तुभ्यं सत्रा der हरिवो weed | 
बोध्या ईपिरव॑सो नूत॑नस्य सखे वसो जरितृभ्यो वयो 
धाः॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tubhyam brahmani gira indra tubhyam satra 
dadhire harivo jusasva. Bodhyapiravaso nutana- 
sya sakhe vaso jaritrbhyo vayo dhah. 


Indra, lord of excellence, accept and cherish the 
songs of the celebrants which bear the wealth of divine 
praise in your honour, which bear the truth of existence 
with gratitude. O lord omnipresent, lord of vitalities, 
friend and shelter of all, know this, and bring for the 
celebrants the latest methods of protection and good 
health and long age. 


इन्द्र॑ मरुत्व इह पाहि सोमं यथा शायति अपिबः सुतस्यं । 
तव प्रणीती तव॑ शूर शर्मन्ना विवासन्ति waa: 
सुयज्ञाः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Indra marutva tha pahi somam yatha saryate 
apibah sutasya. Tava praniti tava Sura Sarma- 
nna vivasanti kavayah suyajnah. 


Indra, leader of heroic warriors, in this business 
of the world, protect the joy and excellence of life as 
you protect the joy of those who resist danger and 
violence to their lives. O lord commander of the brave, 
intelligent people of imagination and yajnic action adore 
and pray for your ways of conduct and restful haven for 
home. 


स वावशान इह पाहि सोमं मरुद्धिरिन्द्र ahaa: सुतं 
न॑: । जातं यत्त्वा परि देवा अभुंषन्महे भराय ead 
विश्वे ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 51 1267 


8. Sa vavasana tha pahi somam marudbhirindra 
sakhibhih sutam nah. Jatam yat tva pari deva 
abhusan mahe bharaya puruhita visve. 


Indra, lord of love and majesty, invoked and 
invited by many, come with the storm troops of the 
winds and vitalities, and, here in the world, taste, protect 
and promote our soma of life’s joy and excellence 
distilled by our friends and vibrant youth, since as you 
arose and manifested to view, all the brilliancies of the 
world adored and investitured you with power and 
honour for the sake of grandeur and glory in life. 


अपूर्यै मरुत आपिरेषोऽ म॑न्दच्निन्द्रमनु दातिंवाराः। तेभिः 
साकं पिबतु gaara: सुतं सोमं दाशुषः स्वे सधस्थे ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Apturye maruta apireso’mandannindramanu 
dativarah. Tebhih sakam pibatu vrtrakhadah 
sutam somam dasusah sve sadhasthe. 


This lord Indra is a friend and universal ally. 
The Maruts, vibrant youth and stormy troops of the 
nation, stand by him and exhort and exalt him in the 
speedy march of the nation to victory. With these, may 
Indra, consuming, absorbing and transforming the dark 
energies of life to light and joy, drink the soma distilled 
in the generous yajamana’s own house. 


इदं ह्यन्वोज॑सा सुतं राधानां पते। 
पिबा aie गिर्वणः ॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Idam hyanvojasa sutam radhanam pate. 
piba tvasya girvanah. 


O lord and ruler of wealth, power and potential, 
drink the exciting soma of this generous yajamana, 


1268 RGVEDA 


elaborately distilled with vigour and splendour and 
offered with the voice of homage and reverence. 
यस्ते अनुं स्वधामसत्सुते नि य॑च्छ तन्व॑म्‌। 
स त्वां ममत्तु सोप्यम्‌।॥ ९९॥ 
11. Yaste anusvadhamasat sute ni yaccha tanvam. 
Sa tva mamattu somyam. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, whatever and 
whoever be in accord with your power and pleasure, 
pray control, direct, administer and order the body-polite 
into settled form, and may all that give you pleasure 
and satisfaction, lover and creator of soma peace as you 
are. 


प्र त अश्नोतु Heat: Wx ब्रह्मणा शिर॑ । 
प्रबाहू शुर TAU ९२॥ 

12. Pra te asnotu kuksyoh prendra brahmana Sirah. 
pra bahu sura radhase. 


Indra, heroic lord ruler of the world, whatever 
you receive into the body of your treasury for asset and 
energy, may that wealth and energy inspire your mind 
with knowledge and enlightenment, and strengthen your 
arms for potential development of the wealth of nations. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 52 
Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
धानाव॑न्तं कर स्भिण॑मपूपव॑न्तमुक्िनंम्‌ | 
इन्द्रं प्रातर्जुषस्व नः ॥ ९॥ 


ie Dhanavantam karambhinamap upavantam- 
ukthinam. Indra pratarjusasva nah. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 52 1269 


Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence, 
accept and enjoy in the morning our gift of homage and 
yajna mixed with roasted rice and curds and sanctified 
and offered with the chant of holy words. 


पुरोव्ठाशं पचत्यं जुषस्वेन्द्रा गुरस्व च। 
तुभ्यं हव्यानि सिस्रते ॥ २॥ 

2, Purolasam pacatyam jusasvendra gurasva ca. 
Tubhyam havyani sisrate. 


Indra, accept and enjoy the purodasha cooked 
and seasoned with soma, relish and grow strong. The 
sweets of offerings flow to you. 


पुरोव्ठाशं च नो घसो! जोषयासे गिर॑श्च नः | 
वधूयुरिव योष॑णाम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 
a: Purolasam ca no ghaso josayase girasca nah. 
Vadhuyuriva yosanam. 
Accept and eat the purodasha and cherish the 


voices of exhortation offered by us like one impassioned 
for the love of his wife. 


पुरोव्ठाशं सनश्रुत प्रातःसावे AC नः। 
इन्द्र करतुर्हि ते बृहन्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Purolasam sanasruta pratahsave jusasva nah. 
Indra kraturhi te brhan. 


Indra, lord of universal word of wisdom and 
discrimination, accept and enjoy our purodasha offered 
in the morning session of yajna. Great is your word and 
light and creative action of cosmic dimensions. 


1270 RGVEDA 


Tere सव॑नस्य धानाः पुरोव्ाशमिन्द्र कृष्वेह 
चारुम्‌। प्र यत्स्तोता जरिता तूर्ण्यर्थो वृषायमाण sd 
THA ॥ ५ ॥ 


2; Madhyamdinasya savanasya dhanah puroldasa- 
mindra krsveha carum. Pra yat stota jarita turn- 
yartho vrsayamana upa girbhiritte. 


Indra, lord of light and power, accept, enjoy and 
sanctify the taste and joy of the yajnic rice and pudding 
of the mid-day session of the yajnic business of life 
which the singer, celebrant and generous devotee eager 
for the success of his endeavour profusely offers in 
worship and homage to you with words of love and 
faith. 

adel धानाः सव॑ने पुरष्टुत पुरोव्माहंतं मामहस्व नः | 
ऋभुमन्तं वाज॑वन्तं त्वा कवे प्रय॑स्वन्त उप॑ शिक्षेम 
धीतिभिः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Trtiye dhanah savane purustuta purolasamahu- 
tam mamahasva nah. Rbhumantam vajavantam 
tva kave prayasvanta upa Siksema dhitibhih. 


O lord of knowledge and poetic imagination 
admired and revered by many, in the third and closing 
session of the day’s programme of yajnic action, accept, 
enjoy and exalt the value of our gift of rice and pudding 
which we, doing our best in thought and action, bring 
and offer to you, lord in command of food, energy, 
knowledge and expertise of the art of living. 


पूषण्वते ते चकृमा करम्भं हरिवते हर्यश्वाय धानाः | 
अपूपमद्धि सग॑णो मरूद्धिः सोमं पिब वृत्रहा शुर 
विद्धान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1271 


7. Pusanvate te cakrma karambham harivate 
haryasvaya dhanah. Apupamaddhi sagano 
marudbhih somam piba vrtraha Sura vidvan. 


We prepare the roasted grain and curds for you, 
giver of health and nourishment, lord of sunbeams 
possessing the fastest means of motion. O breaker of 
the clouds of rain and dispeller of the shades of darkness, 
heroic brave, master of knowledge, relish the cake and 
drink the soma with your friends and supporters and 
commandos of the speed of winds. 


प्रति धाना भ॑रत तूय॑मस्मै पुरोव्ठाशं वीरत॑माय नृणाम्‌ | 
दिवेदिवे सद्शींरिन्द्र तुभ्यं वर्धन्तु त्वा सोमपेयाय 
धृष्णो ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Prati dhana bharata tuyamasmai purolasam 
viratamaya nrnam. Divedive sadrsirindra tubh- 
yam vardhantu tva somapeyaya dhrsno. 


Bear and bring roasted rice and purodasha in 
homage fast and full for this hero of the best of leaders 
and warriors. Indra, fierce and fiery hero of arm and 
speech, may the forces of equal form and performance 
rise for you, dedicated as you are to the soma of life’s 
dignity and excellence, and may they exalt you with 
glory day by day. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 53 


Indra-parvata, Indra, Vak, Rathanga Devata, 
Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


इन्द्रापर्वता बृह॒ता रथेन वामीरिष आ व॑हतं gat: | 
वीतं हव्यान्य॑ध्वरेषुं देवा वर्धेथां गीर्भिरिव्डया मद॑न्ता ॥ ९॥ 


1272 RGVEDA 


1. Indraparvata brhata rathena vamirisa a vahatam 
suvirah. Vitam havyanyadhvaresu deva vardhe- 
tham girbhirilaya madanta. 


Indra and Parvata, sun and cloud, come on the 
grand chariot of light, wind and rain, bring us lovely 
foods and drinks of energy for the heroic people, O 
powers divine and generous, receive the offerings in 
the yajnas of love, faith and non-violence, feed on the 
music of the songs, and wax with the hymns of 
celebration. 


तिष्ठा सु कं मघवन्मा परां गाः सोम॑स्य नु त्वा सुषुतस्य 
afar पितुर्न पुत्रः सिचमा र॑भे त इन्द्र स्वादिष्ठया गिरा 
रशंचीवः॥ २॥ 


2. Tistha su kam maghavan ma para gah somasya 
nu tva susutasya yaksi. Piturna putrah sicama 
rabhe ta indra svadisthaya gira Sacivah. 


Maghavan, lord of wealth, power and prosperity, 
come and stay at peace in comfort, do not go away, feed 
yourself at pleasure in company with us on the soma 
joy of excellence. Indra, lord ruler of a noble people as 
you are, as a child clings to the hem of the father’s cloak 
for love and security, so do I, with sweet words and 
prayer, seek shelter and support in you for security and 
peace. 


शंसावाध्वर्यो प्रतिं मे गणीदीन्द्रय वाहं: कृणवाव SE | 
एदं बर्हिर्यज॑मानस्य सीदाऽथा च भू दुक्थमिन्द्राय 
VTL ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1273 


८ Samsavadhvaryo prati me grnihindraya vahah 
krnavava justam. Edam barhiryajamanasya 
sida’tha ca bhudukthamindraya sastam. 


Let us sing in praise of Indra, O high-priest of 
non-violent yajna, join me in response to my voice and 
we’ ll create a lovely song of exaltation for Indra. Come, 
sit on the holy grass of the yajamana and then let there 
be an excellent song of jubilation in honour of Indra. 


जायेदस्तं मघवन्त्सेदु योनिस्तदित््वा युक्ता हस्यो वहन्तु | 
यदा कदा च॑ सुनवाम Gaal दूतो धंन्वात्यच्छ ॥ ॐ ॥। 


4. Jayedastam maghavantsedu yonistadit tva yukta 
harayo vahantu. Yada kada ca sunavama soma- 
magnistva duto dhanvatyaccha. 


Indra, maghavan, lord of power, prosperity, 
peace and passion of life, the wife is the real spirit of 
the home. She is the haven of conjugal bliss. There may 
the horses yoked to your chariot bear you. And whenever 
we prepare the soma, then let Agni, the fire of life, be 
the messenger of passion and inspiration for you. 


परां याहि मघवन्ना च॑ ards भ्रातरुभयत्रा ते अर्थम्‌। 
यत्रा रथ॑स्य बृहतो निधानं विमोचनं वाजिनो रास- 
भस्य ॥ ५॥ 


a Para yahi maghavanna ca yahindra bhrataru- 
bhayatra te artham. Yatra rathasya brhato nidha- 
nam vimocanam vajino rasabhasya. 


Maghavan, lord of power and prosperity, go far, 
and come back home. Brother, both ways there is a 
meaning and purpose for you, here as well as there, 
where there is the start (with harnessing of the horses) 


1274 RGVEDA 


or the finish of your grand chariot of power and speed 
(with unharnessing of the horses at the terminal). 


अपाः areas प्र याहि कल्याणीर्जाया सुरणं गृहे 
ते। यत्रा रथ॑स्य बृहतो निधानं विमोचनं वाजिनो 
द्चिणावत्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Apah somam-astam-indra pra yahi kalyanirjaya 
suranam grhe te. Yatra rathasya brhato nidhanam 
vimocanam vajino daksinavat. 


Indra, lord of peace and joy and brilliance, drink 
the soma, go home, the delightful haven, there is your 
blessed love, there is the start and finish of your grand 
chariot journey for the brilliant battle, there is the 
harnessing and unharnessing of the horses. And there 
you are abundant with charity. 


इमे भोजा अ्धिरसो विरूपा दिवस्पुत्रासो असुरस्य वीराः | 
विश्वामित्राय दद॑तो मघानि सहस्रसावे प्र तिरन्त 
आयुः ॥ ७ ॥ 


Tei Ime bhoja angiraso virupa divasputraso asurasya 
virah. Visvamitraya dadato maghani sahasrasave 
pra tiranta ayuh. 


These lovers and creators of food, scholars of 
the secrets of the body system and inspirers of pranic 
energies, various children of the light of heaven, heroes 
of universal vitality, giving health and wealth of life to 
the darling friend of humanity cross over the seas of 
existence through a hundred yajnic programmes of 
action. 


रूपंरूपं मघवा बोभवीति मायाः कुण्वानस्तन्वं4 परि 
स्वाम्‌ ।त्रिर्यदिवः oR मुहूर्तमागास्स्वैर्मनत्रैरन्‌तुपा ऋतावा ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1275 


8. Rupamrupam maghava bobhaviti mayah 
krnvanastanvam pari svam. Triyad divah pari 
muhurtamagat svairmantrairanrtupa rtava. 


Indra, lord of knowledge, power and action, 
manifests infinite forms of his own divinity, extending 
his essential and wondrous powers for us as he, lord 
omniscient of the truth and law of existence, reveals 
himself every moment, constantly irrespective of time 
and season, through his own mantras, mystical formulae, 
three ways in meditative yajnas from the light of 
Divinity. 


Het ऋषिर्देवजा देवजूतोऽ स्त॑भ्नास्सिन्धुंमर्णवं नृचक्षाः | 
विश्वामित्रो यदव॑हत्सुदासमप्रिंयायत कुशिकेभिरिन्द्रः ॥ ९ ॥ 


व, Mahan rsirdevaja devajuto’stabhnat sindhum- 
arnavam nrcaksah. Visvamitro yadavahat suda- 
samapriyayata kusikebhirindrah. 


Great and glorious is Indra, Rshi, all-seeing, all- 
revealing, generator of all forces of nature and, 
manifested in all these, vibrates in and by all these and 
in great minds. He wields and sustains the river and the 
ocean, the flow of nature’s energy as well as the ocean 
of nature’s particles of matter and energy. And he 
watches all humans for what they do and what they 
ought to do. He is the friend and well-wisher of the 
world since he showers his gifts of generosity on all. 
Universal is his love since he blesses us with guides 
and teachers who know and show us the right ways of 
successful living. 


1276 RGVEDA 


हंसाइव कृणुथ शुलोकमद्िभिर्मद॑न्तो Rea सुते सचां । 
देवेभिर्विप्रा ऋषयो नृचक्षसो वि पिबध्वं कुशिकाः सोम्यं 
मधुं ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Hamsa iva krnutha slokamadribhirmadanto 
girbhiradhvare sute saca. Devebhirvipra rsayo 
nrcaksaso vi pibadhvam kusikah somyam madhu. 


Like hansa birds singing and rejoicing by the 
beauty and majesty of cloud showers, O Kushikas, 
vibrant sages and scholars, seers of nature and divinity, 
divining into the mysteries of omniscience, watching 
the ways of vast humanity, joining together with the 
divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity, in the 
non-violent yajnas of love and faith enacted and 
conducted, sing songs of Divinity in celebrative words 
of holy joy and drink the nectar sweets of soma replete 
with the power of peace and divine ecstasy. 


उप प्रेतं कुशिकाश्चेतयंध्वमश्वं राये प्र मुञ्चता सुदासः | 
Tet वृत्रं जंद्खनत्प्रागपागुद्गथा यजाते वर्‌ आ 
पुथिव्याः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Upapreta kusikas-cetayadhvam-asvam raye pra 
muncata sudasah. Raja vrtram janghanat pra- 
gapagudagatha yajate vara a prthivyah. 


O brilliant scholars and sages, teachers and 
preachers, heroes of action, dedicated to Divinity, yajnic 
charity and fraternal expansion, go forward together, 
awake and awaken the community, release vibrant 
energy and motive powers for the attainment of wealth, 
honour and excellence. Let the refulgent ruler break the 
clouds of rain, dispel the darkness all round, east, west, 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1277 


north, south, up and down below, and then perform the 
yajna of unison on the wide earth. 


य इमे रोद॑सी उभे अहमिन्द्रमतुंष्टवम्‌। 
विश्वामित्रस्य रक्षति aad भारतं FAT ९२॥ 
12. Ya ime rodast ubhe aham-indram-atustavam. 


Visvamitrasya raksati brahmedam bharatam 
Janam. 


I serve and worship Indra who protects both 
heaven and earth and the firmament between the two, 
the people of this all bearing mother earth and the wealth 
and power of the friendly world of humanity. 


विश्वामित्रा अरासत ब्रहयन्द्रय वचिणें। 
कर दिन्नः सुराध॑सः॥ ९३॥ 


13. Visvamitra arasata brahmendraya vajrine. 
Karadinnah suradhasah. 


Friends of the world, sing songs of exaltation 
and gratitude for Indra, lord of thunderous arm and 
power who blesses us with wealth and all round potential 
for success. 


किं ते कृण्वन्ति कीकटेषु गावो नाशिरं gs न त॑पन्ति 
घर्मम्‌। आ नो! भर प्रमगन्दस्य वेदों नैचाशाखं म॑घवच्रन्धया 
नः॥ ९४॥ 


14. Kim te krnvanti kikatesu gavo nasiram duhre na 
tapanti gharmam. A no bhara pramagan-dasya 
vedo naicasakham maghavan randhaya nah. 


What do the cows do for you in the country of 
the selfish! They yield no milk, nor do they raise the 
flames of yajna fire. Bear and bring up the hoard of the 


1278 RGVEDA 


miserly and the avaricious in the open, subject them to 
law and control those who cower under pretence of 
squalor and poverty. 


ससर्परीरमतिं बाध॑माना बृहन्मि॑ंमाय saan | 
आ सूर्यस्य दुहिता त॑तान श्रवो देवेष्वमृत॑मजुर्यम्‌ BG ॥ 


15. Sasarpariramatim badhamana brhanmimaya 


jJamagadnidatta. A suryasya duhita tatana 
Sravo devesvamrtamajuryam. 


Living knowledge and language flowing from 
Eternity given through direct experience of the eye, 
physical, mental and spiritual, preventing ignorance and 
superstition, is daughter of the sun, gift of the omniscient 
lord, which, like the dawn, revealing the vast reality of 
existence, brings in and extends an immortal and 
imperishable stream of awareness and experience 
among the brilliant devotees of Divinity. 


ससर्परीर॑भर त्ूय॑मेभ्योऽधि श्रवः पाञ्च॑जन्यासु कृष्टिषु । 
सा पक्ष्याड नव्यमायुर्दधाना यां में पलस्तिजमदग्रयो 
ददुः ॥ ९६॥ 


16.  Sasarparirabharat tuyamebhyo’dhi sravah 
pancajanyasu krstisu. Sa paksyad navyama- 
yurdadhana yam me palastijamadagnayo daduh. 


That stream of language and knowledge, 
flowing ever anew from the lord of light, bearing new 
life and age with fresh energy is the same which the 
grey-haired veteran scholars of cosmic vitality earlier 
gave to me, and the stream bears superior kind of food 
and nourishment for body, mind and soul for the seekers 
among all the five classes of dynamic people. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1279 


स्थिरौ गावौ भवतां diearet मेषा वि afe मा युगं fa 
शारि। इन्द्र॑ः पातल्ये ददतां शरी तोररिं्टनेमे अभि न॑ः 
सचस्व ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Sthirau gavau bhavatam vilurakso mesa vi varhi 
ma yugam vi Sari. Indrah patalye dadatam 
Saritoraristaneme abhi nah sacasva. 


Let the oxen of the chariot be strong and steady, 
let the axle be strong, let the shaft never break, may the 
yoke never be damaged, May Indra, lord of inviolable 
chariot and action, be friendly with us to give us strength 
and to renew whatever is wearing out. 


ae धेहि तनूषु नो बल्मिन्द्रानब्डुत्सुं 4:1 बलं तोकाय 
तन॑याय जीवसे त्वं हि ब॑ल्दा असिं ।॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Balam dhehi tanusu no balamindranalutsu nah. 
Balam tokaya tanayaya jivase tvam hi balada asi. 


Indra, Spirit of life and vitality, give strength to 
our bodies, put strength into our animals. Give strength 
and vital energy to our children and our youth. You alone 
are the giver of strength, energy and vitality. 


अभि व्य॑यस्व खदिरस्य arcane धेहि स्पन्दने शिश- 
पायाम्‌। अक्ष atest वीच्ित वीव्छय॑स्व मा यार्मादस्मादवं 
जीहिपो नः॥ eeu 


19. Abhi vyayasva khadirasya saramojo dhehi 
spandane simsapayam. Aksa vilo vilita vilayasva 
ma yamddasmadava jthipo nah. 

Aksha, centre hold of knowledge, vision and 


power, bring us the centre strength of the Khadira wood 
for our chariot of life. In our body and mind, as in the 


1280 RGVEDA 


motion of a chariot, infuse light and lustre. O master of 
strength and light, universally admired, inspire us with 
strength and courage of the conviction, forsake us not 
in the streaming flow of life and time. 


अयपमस्मान्वनस्पतिर्मा च हा मा च॑ रीरिषत्‌ | 
स्वस्त्या गृहेभ्य आवसा आ विमोच॑नात्‌॥ २०॥ 


20. Ayamasman vanaspatirma ca ha ma ca ririsat. 
Svastya grhebhya avasa ठ vimocanat. 


May Vanaspati, lord of the light of life, never 
forsake us. May the chariot of life never hurt us. May 
the lord and life be good and kind to us and our homes 
while we are riding the chariot until we reach the 
terminal and the horses are released. 


इन्द्रोतिभिं्बहुलाभिंनो अद्य याच्छष्ठाभिंमघवजञ्चछूर जिन्व | 
यो नो द्वेछ्यध॑रः सस्प॑दीष्ट॒ यमं द्विष्मस्तमु प्राणो जंहातु ॥ २९॥ 


21.  Indrotibhirbahulabhirno adya yacchrestha- 
bhirmaghavanchiura jinva. Yo no dvestyadha-rah 
saspadista yamu dvismastamu prano jahatu. 


Indra, potent lord of honour and prosperity, 
come to us today with ample modes of best and highest 
modes of protection and give us the joy of life. 
Whosoever hate us may, we pray, fall down, and 
whatsoever we all hate, that, we pray, may the breath of 
life forsake. 


परशं चिद्धि त॑पति शिम्बल्ं चिद्धि वुंङ्चति। 
उखा चिदिन्द्र येषन्ती प्रय॑स्ता फेन॑मस्यति ॥ २२॥ 


22. (वदरा) cid vi tapati Simbalam cid vi vrscati. 
Ukha cidindra yesanti prayasta phenamasyati. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1281 


Indra, lord ruler of the realm, just as the arm- 
smith heats the steel and tempers the axe, or the gardener 
plucks off the shimbala flower, or the boiling pan, 
bubbling over, throws out the froth and foam, so does 
the commander of the army throw out the enemies. 


न साय॑कस्य चिकिते जनासो लोधं न॑यन्ति पशु मन्य॑मानाः | 
नावाजिनं वाजिना हासयन्ति न गर्दभं पुरो अश्वान्न- 
यन्ति॥ २३॥ 


23. Na 5दव)वष््वऽ व cikite janaso lodham nayanti pasu 
manyamanah. Navajinam vajina hasayanti 
na gardabham puro asvannayanti. 


The brave take no cognition of the pain of 
arrows. They lead the greedy opponent anywhere, 
feeling that he is just a human animal. They do not 
demean the weak foot-soldier by a bold horse-warrior, 
nor do they lead the horses by an ass in the forefront. 


इम इन्द्र भर तस्य॑ पुत्रा अपपित्वं चिकितुर्न प्रपित्वम्‌। 
हिन्वन्त्यश्वमर॑णं न नित्यं ज्यावाजं परि णयन्त्याजौ ॥ २४॥ 


24. Ima indra bharatasya putra apapitvam cikiturna 
prapitvam. HinvantyaSvamaranam na nityam 
Jyavajam pari nayantyajau. 


Indra, these boys, followers of the veteran 
commander, know retreat as well as advance, spur on 
the horse like a spirit inspired and send out the twang 
of the bow string in battles and contests always without 
exception. 


1282 RGVEDA 


Mandala 3/Sukta 54 


Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Vaishvamitra or Prajapatir 
Vachya Rshi 


इमं महे विदथ्याय शूषं शश्वत्कृत्व ईड्याय प्र जशः | 
श्रृणोतु नो दम्येभिरनीकेः श्रणोत्वथिर्दिव्यैरजंस््रः ॥ ९ ॥ 


(४ Imam mahe vidathyaya susam Sasvat krtva idyaya 
pra jabh-uh. Srnotu no damyebhir-anikaih srnot- 
vagnir-divyair-ajasrah. 


The celebrants create and raise this inspiring 
song of praise again and again for all time in honour of 
the great adorable lord of mighty yajnic cosmic action. 
May Agni listen to our prayer with all the controllable 
blazing lights and forces. May Agni, eternal light of 
life, with all divine powers listen to us. 


महि महे fea अर्चा पृथिव्यै कामों म इच्छञ्च॑रति 
प्रजानन्‌ aad स्तोमे विदथेषु देवाः सपर्यवो मादयन्ते 
सचायोः ॥ २॥ 


2. Mahi mahe dive arca prthivyai kamo ma icchan- 
carati prajanan. Yayorha stome vidathesu devah 
saparyavo madayante sacayoh. 


Offer ecstatic songs of celebration in honour of 
high heaven and vast earth. Knowing these, and desiring 
fulfilment, man goes forward for the light of heaven 
and dominion over the earth. Surely in the songs of 
heaven and earth, the divine powers of nature and the 
best of humanity join together and rejoice in the yajnic 
battles of life. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1283 


युवोऋतं रोदसी सत्यमस्तु महे षु णः सुविताय प्र भूंतम्‌। 
इदं fea नमो' अग्ने पृथिव्यै संपर्यायि प्रय॑सा यापि 
रत्न॑म्‌ 3 ॥ 


2. Yovorrtam rodasi satyamastu mahe su nah 
suvitaya pra bhutam. Idam dive namo agne 
prthivyai saparyami prayasa yami ratnam. 


O heaven and earth, may your universal law of 
divinity be realised in truth in our human world across 
the globe. Be good and kind to advance us to greatness 
and glory in comfort and well-being. Agni, O lord of 
the dominion, this song and yajnic offering is in honour 
of heaven and earth. I serve with the best of effort and 
thereby move on to the jewels of life. 


उतो हि वां पूया आविविद्र ऋतावरी रोदसी aerare: | 
नरणश्चिद्वां सपिथे शूरसातौ ववन्दिरे पुथिवि वेविं- 
दानाः॥ ४॥ 


4. Uto hi vam purvya avividra rtavari rodasi satya- 
vacah. Narascid vam samithe Surasatau vavan- 
dire prthivi vevidanah. 


O heaven and earth, abiding in and by the 
universal law of existence, veteran sages of knowledge 
and voice of truth know you and obtain the fruit of their 
desire. O mother earth, the pioneers and leaders of 
humanity too, knowing both of you, in the battles of 
the brave and struggle for life’s prizes, achieve the jewels 
of their heart’s desire. 


को अब्दा de क इह प्र वोचदेवों अच्छ पथ्या का समेति। 
दद्र एषामवमा सदांसि परेषु या गुह्येषु व्रतेषु ॥ ५॥ 


1284 RGVEDA 


on Ko addha veda ka iha pra vocad devan accha 
pathya ka sameti. Dadrsra esamavama sadamsi 
paresu ya guhyesu vratesu. 


Who knows here for certain, who can say, which 
path for sure leads to the lights of the Divine? (He 
knows.) Who can divine into the secret laws of the 
farthest mysteries? Who actually see even the nearest 
and closest operations of these? (He.) 


कविर्नृचश्चा अभि षीमचष्ट ऋतस्य योना विधुते मद॑न्ती । 
नानां चक्राते सद॑नं यथा वेः संमानेन क्रतुना संविदाने ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Kavirnrcaksa abhisimacasta rtasya yona vighrte 
madanti. Nana cakrate sadanam yatha veh 
samanena kratuna samvidane. 


The one omniscient poet creator watching the 
entire world of humanity comprehends, illuminates and 
oversees the two worlds of heaven and earth, both 
rejoicing in accord yet sustained apart by one law of 
existence, in the cosmic womb of nature’s divinity, 
making one but various home as the birds’ on the same 
one tree. 


समान्या वियुते दूरेअन्ते ga पदे त॑स्थतुर्जागरूक । उत 
स्वसारा युवती भव॑न्ती आदु gare मिथुनानि नाम॑ ।॥ ७॥ 


des Samanya viyute dure ante dhruve pade tastha- 
turjagaruke. Uta svasara yuvati bhavanti adu 
bruvate mithunani nama. 


Alike yet apart far off at the end, they abide in 
orbit ever awake and youthful, strong and stable, and 
moreover they are called twin sisters since their very 
birth, dyava-prthivi, heaven and earth, by name. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1285 


विश्वेदेते जनिमा सं विविक्तो महो देवान्बिभ्र॑ती न care | 
एजंद्‌ ga dad विश्वमेकं चसत्पतत्नि विषुणं वि 
जातम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Visvedete janima sam vivikto maho devan bibhrati 
na vyathete. Ejad dhruvam patyate visvamekam 
carat patatri visunam vi jatam. 


These two, heaven and earth, one together for 
sure, yet separate and distinct in identity, holding and 
sustaining all the great earthly and celestial created 
objects, do not deviate from their orbit. Vibrating yet 
constant and stable, the one universe, existence born in 
all its variety, moving, flying, expanding all round, is 
sustained (by its sole lord and master creator). 


vat पुराणमध्येम्यारान्महः पितुर्जनितुर्जामि aa: 1 
देवासो यत्र॑ पनितार एवैशूरौ पथि व्युते तस्थुरन्तः ॥ ९ ॥ 


a Sana puranam-adhyemyaran-mahah piturjan- 
iturjami tannah. Devaso yatra panitara evair- 
urau pathi vyute tasthurantah. 


I study the ancient and eternal, yet ever new, 
heaven and earth, twin creation of our great father 
creator, just like our brother and sister, wherein brilliant 
forces of nature, celebrants of the Divine creator, with 
their powers and attributes abide and operate in the wide 
open paths of space in existence. 


इमं स्तोमं रोदसी प्र ब्र॑वीम्यृदूदराः श्रृणवन्नभिजिह्याः | 
पित्रः सम्राजो वरुणो युवान आदित्यासः कवयः 
पप्रथानाः ॥ ९०॥ 


1286 RGVEDA 


10. Imam stomam rodasi pra bravimyrdudarah 
Srnavannagnijihvah. Mitrah samrajo varuno 
yuvana adityasah kavayah paprathanah. 


O heaven and earth, I sing this song of divine 
praise and celebration for you. May simple and noble 
hearted people of natural truth and honesty, Mitra, 
universal friends, brilliant rulers and administrators, 
Varuna, powers of justice and discrimination, youth, 
Adityas, enlightened people of blazing genius, and poets 
of open and expansive mind and intelligence may hear 
this and proclaim the truth with a tongue of fire. 


हिर॑ण्यपाणिः सविता सुंजिहस्तिरा दिवो विदथे wet: 1 
देवेषु च सवितः शत्ोकमश्रेरादस्मभ्यमा da सर्वता- 
तिम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Hiranyapanih savita sujihvastrira divo vidathe 
paryamanah. Devesu ca savitah Slokamasre- 
radasmabhyama suva sarvatatim. 


Savita, creator and giver of light and life, lord 
with the golden arms of sunrays and a noble tongue of 
fire, descends from the heavens thrice, protecting, 
sustaining and advancing us in our yajnic programmes 
of life. O lord of light, Savita, hear our song of 
celebration and exaltation, diffuse the light, sweetness 
and fragrance among the nobilities of humanity over 
earth and divinities of nature in space, and create and 
then bring us all round prosperity and well being. 


सुकृत्सुंपाणिः स्वर्व ऋतावा देवस्त्वष्टाव॑सरे aA नो धात्‌। 
पूषण्वन्त ऋभवो मादयध्वमु्ध्वर्रावाणो अध्वरमतष्ट ॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1287 


12. Sukrt supanih svavan rtava devastvastavase tani 
no dhat. Pusanvanta rbhavo madayadhvamur- 
dhvagravano adhvaramatasta. 


May the brilliant Tvashta, divine creator and 
maker of forms and institutions, noble of action and 
generous of hands, self-possessed of light and wealth, 
and keeper and observer of the laws of truth and science 
of yajna, bring us all those gifts of prosperity and well 
being for our protection and advancement. Rejoice ye 
Rbhus, experts of yajna, and yajakas rich with food and 
fragrance for nourishment. The clouds on high, the 
mighty mountains and the soma stones are up and ready, 
the yajna is organised, conducted and accomplished. 


विद्युद्रथा Hed ऋष्टिमन्तो feat मयी ऋतजाता stare: । 
सर॑स्वती श्वणवन्यज्ञियांसो धाता रयिं सहवीरं तुरासः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. = Vidyudratha maruta rstimanto divo marya rtajata 
ayasah. Sarasvati srnavan yajniyaso dhata rayim 
sahaviram turasah. 


Stormy troops of Marut commandos riding 
electric chariots, strongly armed, brilliant, mortal 
fighters, truly disciplined, prompt and powerful, worthy 
of honour and reverence, lightning smart, and mother 
Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and language of 
command, may, we pray, listen and bring us wealth 
alongwith brave progeny. 


विष्णुं स्तोमासः पुरुदस्ममर्का भग॑स्येव कारिणो याम॑नि 
ग्मन्‌। उरुक्रमः ककुहो यस्य gait मर्धन्ति युवतयो 
जनित्रीः ॥ ९४॥ 


1288 RGVEDA 


14. Visnum stomasah purudasmamarka bhagasyeva 
karino yamani gman. Urukramah kakuho yasya 
purvirna mardhanti yuvatayo janitrih. 


May our songs and yajakas, following the divine 
path of the creator of life’s honour and excellence, reach 
Vishnu, omnipresent lord of marvellous actions. Great 
is he, mighty his deeds and gifts. Even heaven and earth, 
dyavaprthivi, ancient and eternal, ever youthful mothers 
of life, cannot violate him. 


इन्द्रो favddtas : पत्य॑मान उभे आ dat रोद॑सी महित्वा | 
पुरंदरो वुत्रहा peur: संगृभ्या न आ भ॑रा भूरिं पश्वः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Indro Visvairviryaih patyamana ubhe a paprau 
rodasi mahitva. Purandaro vrtraha dhrsnuse-nah 
sangrbhya na a bhara bhuri pasvah. 


Indra, sustaining and preserving both heaven 
and earth with universal vitalities like a father and 
guardian, pervades and fills both with his divine power. 
O lord commander of terrible forces, breaker of clouds 
and destroyer of darkness, shatterer of enemy forts, 
create and develop a lot of wealth and bless us all with 
that wealth, power and honour. 


area मे पितरां बन्धुपृच्छ सजात्य॑मश्विनोश्चारु A | 
युवं हि स्थो र्यिदौ नो रयीणां दात्रं रक्षेथे अक॑वैर- 
द॑ब्धा॥ ९६॥ 

16. Nadsatya me pitara bandhuprccha sajatyama- 


§vinoscaru nama. Yuvam hi stho rayidau no 
rayinam datram raksethe akavairadabdha. 


Ashvins, imperishable complementarities of 
nature and humanity such as heaven and earth, sun and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1289 


moon, heat and cold, father and mother, working in 
cooperation, together as in a circuit of energy, are my 
sustainers like parents and care givers like brothers and 
sisters. Their kinship itself by birth and nature 18 worthy 
and venerable. 


Ashvins, you always abide strong and stable as 
givers of our wealth, honour and fame and, intrepidable 
as you are, you protect and promote the gift and the 
giver by acts and means which are not selfish nor 
ungenerous but which are liberal and philanthropic. 


Wedd: कवयश्चारु नाम aes देवा भव॑थ fava इन्द्र । 
सख॑ ऋभुभिंः पुरुहूत प्रियेभिरिमां धियं सातये तक्षता 
नः॥ २७॥ 


I Mahat tad vah kavayascaru nama yaddha deva 
bhavatha visva indre. Sakha rbhubhih puruhuta 
priyebhirimam dhiyam sataye taksata nah. 


Poets, scholars and visionary sages, great and 
auspicious is that name and reputation of yours since 
you rise to be world renowned celebrities in the roll of 
honour of the social order of Indra. O lord, Indra, 
approved, invited and invoked by many, friends with 
these dear enlightened experts and sagely scholars, 
refine this corporate intelligence and sharpen this vision 
of ours for common progress and prosperity of the nation 
of humanity. 


अर्यमा णो अदिंतिर्यज्ञियासोऽद॑ब्धानि वरूणस्य aah 
gard नो अनपत्यानि गन्तोः strata: पशुर्मं अस्तु 
गातुः॥ ९८ ॥ 


1290 RGVEDA 


18. Aryama no aditiryajniyaso’dabdhani varunasya 
vratani. Yuyota no anapatyani gantoh prajavan 
nah pasuman astu gatuh. 


May Aryama, lord of justice, Aditi, unimpaired 
fertility of Mother Nature, and sages dedicated to yajna 
protect and promote our vows of the discipline of 
Varuna, lord of rectitude, intact and unviolated. O Spirit 
of Divinity, ward off the causes of childlessness and 
sterility from our path of life so that our course of home 
life may be blest with progeny and cattle wealth. 


देवानां दूतः deel Was नागान्नो वोचतु सर्वताता । श्वणोतुं 
नः पृथिवी द्यौरुतापः सूर्यो नक्ष॑त्रेरुर्वप न्तरिश्चम्‌॥ 23 


19. Devanam diutah purudha prasuto’nagan no 
vocatu sarvatata. Srnotu nah prthivi dyaurutapah 
suryo naksatrairurvantariksam. 


Agni, messenger of the devas, i.e., vibrations 
of the forces of nature and voice of the visionary teachers 
of the wisest of humanity, arisen many ways and bearing 
all-round knowledge, may speak to us in our state of 
open, uncoloured and unvitiated mind and bring us the 
tolerance and forgiveness of the earth, enlightenment 
of heaven, peace and coolness of waters, light and life 
giving vitality of the sun, and the vastness of expansive 
space with stars and planets. And may all these forces 
and personalities listen and perceive our signals and be 
in contact with us. 


श्युण्वन्तुं नो वृष॑णः पर्वतासो श्युवक्षेमास seat Asa: | 
आदित्यैर्नो अदितिः sore यच्छ॑न्तु नो मरूतः शर्म 
UAL oul 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1291 


20. Srnvantu no vrsanah parvataso dhruvaksemasa 
ilaya madantah. Adityairno aditih srnotu 
yacchantu no marutah Sarma bhadram. 


Let the raining clouds, mighty mountains and 
constant stars at peace, ecstatic participants with the 
earth and cosmic energy, receive our signals. Let the 
constant inviolable energy of the cosmos with light of 
the stars radiate and reach us. Let the winds provide us 
the joy of well being and peaceful shelter. 


wat सुगः पितुमाँ seq पन्था neat देवा ओष॑धीः सं 
fdas | भगो मे अगे सख्ये न मध्या उद्रायो अश्यां सद॑नं 
पुरुक्षोः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Sada sugah pituman astu pantha madhva deva 
osadhih sam piprkta. Bhago me agne sakhye na 
mrdhya ud rayo asyam sadanam puruksoh. 


May the path be straight and clear, full of wealth 
and prosperity. O brilliant and generous powers of 
nature, fill the herbs with honey to the full. Agni, brilliant 
and generous power, may honour and prosperity forsake 
me never, nor my friends, during our friendship that is 
abiding. And may I be blest with wealth and a house of 
plenty and generosity. 


स्वद॑स्व get समिषो दिदीद्यस्यऋ्य क्सं मिमीहि श्रवांसि । 
विर्व अग्ने पृत्सु ताञ्जेषि शत्रूनहा विश्वां सुमना दीदिही 
TURAL त त 7 

22. Svadasva havya samiso didihyasmadryak sam 
mimthi Sravamsi. Visvan agne prtsu tanjesi 
Satrunaha visva sumana didihi nah. 


1292 RGVEDA 


Agni taste and relish the oblations offered, shine 
and illuminate knowledge and energy all together, and 
let food, energy and knowledge flow towards us. You 
win all those, and those enemies in battles for victory. 
Be happy and kind at heart and let all the days of life be 
bright for us. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 55 


Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Vaishvamitra or Prajapati 
Vachya Rshi 


उषसः पूर्वां अध यद्‌ व्युषुर्महद्धि जज्ञे अक्षरं पदे गोः | 
व्रता देवानामुप नु प्रभूष॑न्महदेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ ९॥ 


|! Usasah purva adha yad vyusurmahad vi jajne 
aksaram pade goh. Vrata devanamupa nu prabhu- 
san mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Before the dawns of primeval time, which arose 
and shone bright, later reflecting and illuminating the 
ordained tasks of the forces of nature, arose Mahat, the 
first manifest principle of imperishable Prakrti in the 
depth of oceanic space. Great and One is the living spirit 
and glory of the divine refulgent forces of the universe. 


मो षूणो अत्र जुहुरन्त देवा मा पूर्वे अग्ने पितरः पदज्ञाः। 
पुराण्योः सद्य॑नोः केतुर न्तर्महदेवानामसुर्‌ त्वमेकम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

Di Mo su no atra juhuranta deva ma purve agne 
pitarah padajnah. Puranyoh sadmanoh keturan- 
tarmahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Agni, lord and light of the world, in this universe 
and its business of knowing and doing, we pray, may 
the brilliant forces of nature and humanity never oppose 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1293 


and hurt us, may the primal [0181116 energies of parental 
sustenance never neglect and damage us, may the one 
great principal bright and breathing spirit in the primal 
forms of existence never hurt us. Great and one is the 
life and glory of the multiple divinities of the universe. 


fad qear प॑तयन्ति कामाः शम्यच्छा ater पूर्व्याणि | 
समिद्धे अग्रावृतमिद्ध॑देम महद्ेवानामसुर त्वमेकम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Vi me purutra patayanti kamah samyaccha didye 
purvyani. Samiddhe agnavrtamid vadema mahad 
devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


My desire and ambitions are great and many, 
they soar high and far in search of holy fulfilment. I 
pray I may realise them well in solemn yajnic action, 
shine myself and illuminate the ancient traditions. Let 
us all speak the truth, sing songs of Divinity when the 
fire is rising in flames of yajna, and let us exalt the 
universal law of Divinity operative in the universe. 
Great, glorious and one is the life and spirit of the life 
and spirit of the divinities of natural force. 


समानो राजा विभवतः पुरुत्रा शये शयासु प्रयुतो वनानु । 
अन्या वत्सं भर॑ति क्षेति माता महद्ेवानांमसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Samano raja vibhrtah purutra Saye Sayasu 
prayuto vananu. Anya vatsam bharati kseti mata 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


One self-refulgent ruler, constant and unvariable 
spirit and presence pervades the inexhaustible forms of 
Prakrti, dormant in inert matters and energies, and 
moving and extending with waves and currents of water, 
light and other energy forms to the sunrays and green 


1294 RGVEDA 


forests. One mother Prakrti, bears the individual form 
such as the baby, the other, Divine Spirit, rules and 
sustains it. Great and glorious is the one living, 
breathing, omnipresent and omnipotent spirit of the 
inexhaustible variations of nature’s divinities. 


आश्चित्पूरवास्विप॑रा अनूरुत्द्यो जातासु तरुणीष्वन्तः | 
अन्तर्व तीः सुवते अप्र॑वीता महदेवानामसुर त्वमेकम्‌ ५ ॥ 


3. Aksit purvasvapara anurut sadyo jatasu taruni- 
svantah. Antarvatih suvate apravita mahad 
devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Life abides in the ancient forms and in others, 
later ones, asserting with the desire to be, in the new 
born ones and in the mature youthful ones, and fertilising 
the unfertilised. Great is the glory of the generous and 
refulgent powers of nature’s Divinity, one and only one. 


शयुः परस्तादध नु द्विमाताऽब॑न्धनश्च॑रति वत्स We: | 
fara ता वरुणस्य व्रतानि महदेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Sayuh parastadadha nu dvimdata’bandhan- 
ascarati vatsa ekah. Mitrasya ta varunasya 
vratani mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Agni, vital heat of life, pervades far and farthest, 
dormant or manifest, child of two mothers, akasha and 
vayu, Space and cosmic energy, moving and operating 
freely without bonds, by itself, All this is within the laws 
of the one supreme lord, universal friend and controller 
of the universe. Great and glorious is the life and action 
of the living forces of nature, one and indivisible. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1295 


द्विमाता होता विदथेषु सम्राव्छन्वग्रं चर॑ति क्षेति बुध्नः | 
प्र रण्यानि रण्यवाचो भरन्ते महद्देवानामसुर त्वमेकम्‌ ॥। ७ ॥ 


di Dvimata hota vidathesu samralanvagram carati 
kseti budhnah. Pra ranyani ranyavaco bharante 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Agni, self-refulgent child of two mothers, 
cosmic space and cosmic energy, universal yajaka in 
cosmic yajna and, on the seats of yajna such as earth, 
moves on in its orbit fixed by the Divine and shines and 
abides in the vast space. Happy celebrants bear and offer 
joyous songs of homage to the sun and the cosmic energy 
of Agni. Great and glorious is the life and refulgence of 
the divinities of nature, one and only one. 


शूर॑स्येव युध्य॑तो अन्तमस्य प्रतीचीनं ददृशो विश्व॑मायत्‌। 
अन्तर्मतिश्च॑रति निष्षिधं गोर्महदेवानमसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Surasyeva yudhyato antamasya praticinam 
dadrse visvamayat. Antarmatiscarati nissidham 
gormahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


All that comes into the light of the brave 
refulgent sun ever on the move and striking everything 
at the closest and farthest seems on the left side of the 
light, inferior. Source of light and intelligence for the 
world, it moves through and across the objects in the 
womb of cosmic space. Great and glorious is the life 
and vital power of the divinities of nature, one and only 
one. 


नि वेवेति ufedt दूत आ॑स्वन्तर्महांश्च॑रति treat | 
वपूंषि बिश्र॑दभि नो वि च॑ष्टे महदेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


1296 RGVEDA 


9. Ni veveti palito duta asvantarmahamscarati 
rocanena. Vapumsi bibhradabhi no vi caste 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


He that pervades all, ancient and eternal self- 
refulgent creator and harbinger of light and knowledge, 
great and glorious, vibrates wide awake in all these 
modes of Prakrti by his beauty and majesty. Wielder 
and sustainer of all forms and institutions, ever manifest 
and eloquent, speaks to us in the soul, that is the great 
and glorious life breath of all the divinities of nature 
and humanity, one and absolute without a second. 


विष्णुर्गोपाः प॑र॒मं पाति पाथ॑ः प्रिया धामान्यमृता दर्धानः। 
अथिष्टा विश्वा भुव॑नानि वेद महदे वानामसुर त्वमे- 
कम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Visnurgopah paramam pati pathah priya 
dhamanyamrta dadhanah. Agnista visva bhuva- 
nani veda mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Vishnu, lord omnipresent, all pervasive, all 
protective, wielding and sustaining all the dear immortal 
homes of existence, preserves and promotes the highest 
food and agents of life such as heat, water, air and the 
earth. Agni, vital heat and light of life’s vitality, knows, 
reaches and maintains all the regions of the universe. 
Great is the glory of the life breath of the divinities of 
nature and humanity, one and only one. 


नानां चक्राते यम्या ३ वपूंषि तयोर न्यद्रोच॑ते कृष्णमन्यत्‌। 
श्यावी च यदरुषी च स्वसारौ महदेवानामसुरत्वमे- 
HAUL 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1297 


11. Nana cakrate yamya vapumsi tayoranyad rocate 
krsnamanyat. Syavi ca yadarusi ca svasarau 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Two twins, night and day, manifest in many 
forms and reveal all those many forms. One of them 
shines bright, the other is dark. The dark one and that 
which is bright are sisters. Great is the glory and power 
of the divinities of nature, one and undivided. 


mean a यत्र॑ दुहिता च॑ धेनू dade धापयेते समीची । 
ऋतस्य ते सद॑ सीक्छे अन्तर्महदेवारनामसुर त्वमेकम्‌ 22 


12. Mata ca yatra duhita ca dhenu sabardughe 
dhapayete samict. Rtasya te sadasile antarmahad 
devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Where mother and daughter, day and night, 
heaven and earth, generous as cows, yielding 
nourishments sweet as nectar, together feed each other, 
there I offer worship, O lord ruler of the world, to you 
in the house of universal truth and law. Great and 
glorious is the life and action of the divinities of the 
universe, one, undivided and absolute. 


अन्यस्यां वत्सं रिहती मिमाय कयां भुवा नि द॑धे धेनुरूधः । 
ऋतस्य सा पय॑सापिन्वतेव्छ महद्ेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ 23 ॥ 


13. Anyasya vatsam rihati mimaya kaya bhuva ni 
dadhe dhenurudhah. Rtasya sa payasapinvatela 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Kissing and caressing the other’s child, 1.6., the 
cloud, which is a concentration of vapours from the 
earth, the mother sky waxes with joy and laughs with 
thunder. By which process of nature’s, by which region 


1298 RGVEDA 


of space, does she hold the milk of life in the breast? 
She receives it from the waters of the universal order 
and waxes, and the earth grows with nourishment from 
the nectar waters of the sky. Great and one is the glory 
of the divinities of nature. 


(The earth too, as one of the mothers, kisses and 
caress the heavens’ child, sunlight, and waxes with joy. 
She fills her breasts with nourishment with rain from 
the skies and feeds both human life and nature. The 
vapours then rise and shower down, completing the 
cycle of nature’s law.) 


पर्या वस्ते पुरुरूपा वपुष्यर्ध्वां त॑स्थौ ज्यविं रेरिहाणा । 
ऋतस्य wa वि च॑रामि विद्वान्पहदेवानामसुर त्वमे- 
HAUS 


14.  Padya vaste pururupa vapumsyurdhva tasthau 
tryavim rerihana. Rtasya sadma vi carami 
vidvanmahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


The earth bears and sustains many forms of 
innumerable variety. The high heaven, caressing the sun, 
sustainer of the three regions of the earth, middle region 
and the region of light, stays above. Knowing this, I 
move freely in the house of Rtam, the cosmic order. 
Great is the glory and one the variety of the Lord’s 
omnipotent Infinity. 


पदेडंव Fata दस्मे अन्तस्तयोरन्यद्‌ गुह्य॑माविरन्यत्‌। 
सध्रीचीना gears सा विषुची महदेवानपसुर- 
त्वमेकम्‌ ॥ ९५५ ॥ 

15. Pade iva nihite dasme antastayoranyad guhyama- 
viranyat. Sadhricina pathya sa visuct mahad 
devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1299 


Positioned both inside the same one wonderful 
house of space, one of them is hidden in the dark, the 
other is manifest in open day light. Their path of 
movement and their goal is one and the same, universal, 
and yet it is different and separate, (they meet and yet 
they never meet). Great is the glory of the Infinite 
Divine, one and yet different. 


आ धेनवो धुनयन्तामशिश्वीः सबर्दुघा: शाय अप्र॑दुग्धाः | 
न्व्याननव्या युवतयो भव॑न्तीर्महद्ेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌।॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. A dhenavo dhunayantamasisvih sabardughah 
Sasaya apradugdhah. navyanavya yuvatayo 
bhavantirmahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Let the ‘cows’, day and night, heaven and earth, 
stars and planets, move and shake and shower the nectar 
milk of light and life, vibrant and full, abundant and 
inexhaustible, like youthful maidens ancient yet ever 
fresh anew. Great is the glory and gifts of Divinity, 
various, infinite, yet one, undivided, indivisible. 


यदन्यासु वृषभो रोरवीति सो अन्यस्मिन्यूथे नि द॑धाति 
रेत॑: । स हि क्षपावान्त्स भगः स राजां महदेवानामसुर- 
त्वमेकम्‌ V9 


17. Yadanyasu vrsabho roraviti so anyasmin yuthe 
ni dadhati retah.Sa hi ksapavantsa bhagah sa raja 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


The one omnipotent lord, sun and shower of the 
days and nights, roars with creative passion in all regions 
and directions of skies and space, and he plants the seed 
of life in the multitudinous variety of the forms of the 
other, Prakrti. He alone is the beauty and majesty of the 


1300 RGVEDA 


nights as the moon, he is the blazing splendour of the 
day as the sun and the ruling law and lord of the universe. 
Great is the glory and life breath of the inexhaustible 
divinities of nature, one, inviolable, absolute. 


वीरस्य नु स्वश्व्यं जनासः प्र नु वोचाम विदुर॑स्य देवाः। 
Wow युक्ताः पञ्च॑प॒ञ्चा व॑हन्ति महदेवानामसुर्‌ - 
त्वमेकम्‌ १८ ॥ 


18. Virasya nu svasvyam janasah pra nu vocama 
vidurasya devah. Solha yuktah pancapanca 
vahanti mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Come ye all people, let us sing and celebrate 
the wondrous valour and vibrancy of this great hero, 
Indra, the soul. Sages and scholars know of him. Six 
and six, five and five horses draw his chariot, (these 
being five perceptive faculties and one intellect, five 
volitional faculties and one mind, five principal pranic 
energies and five subordinate pranic energies). Great is 
the glory and majesty of the lord of divine variety, one 
and only one. 


देवस्त्वष्टा सविता विश्वरूपः पुपोष प्रजाः deen ज॑जान | 
इमा च विश्वा भुव॑नान्यस्य महदेवानमसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


19. Devastvasta savita visvarupah puposa prajah 
purudha jajana. Ima ca visva bhuvananyasya 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Self-refulgent and generous lord of existence 
as Tvashta, maker of forms, and as Savita, generator 
and giver of light and vitality, inspiring and pervading 
the universe, creates, nourishes and sustains his children 
and all these worlds of the universe in many ways and 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1301 


thus manifests himself in infinite forms and ways. Great 
is the glory and unity of the divine forms of his creation 
and of the divine breath of life in them. 


मही समैरच्यम्वां समीची उभे ते अंस्य वसुना न्यं टे । eye 
वीरो विन्दमानो adh महदेवानामसुर त्वमेकम्‌ ॥ २०॥ 


20. Mahi samairaccamva samici ubhe te asya vasuna 
nyrste. Srnve viro vindamano vasuni mahad 
devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Indra, omnipotent lord creator, inspires the great 
and united heaven and earth with light and life, and 
they both are blest with the splendour and generosity 
of this lord. And I, brave and free, blest with honour 
and prosperity of the divine gifts of heaven and earth, 
hear of the glory and generosity of the lord. Great is the 
glory and great the gifts of the lord’s divinities, all one 
and united. 


suid नः पृथिवीं विश्वर्धाया sd क्षेति हितमित्रो न ust 1 
पुर ad: शर्मसदो न वीरा महदेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ २९॥ 


21. Imam ca nah prthivim visvadhaya upa kseti 
hitamitro na raja. Purah sadah Sarmasado na vira 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Like a brilliant ruler who is a benevolent friend 
of his people, and like the warlike heroes, leaders, 
pioneers and citizens who bring victory and prosperity 
to their motherland, Indra, omnipotent lord creator, 
abides by the heavens and by this mother earth of ours 
which contains all our wealth and sustains all her 
children. Great is the glory and great the gifts of the 
lord’s divinities, all one and united. 


1302 RGVEDA 


निष्षिध्व॑रीस्त ओष॑धीरुतापों रयिं त॑ इन्द्र पृथिवी बि॑भर्तिं। 
स्वायस्ते वाम॒भाज॑ः स्याम महदेवानामसुरत्वमेकम्‌॥ २२॥ 


22. Nissidhvarista osadhirutapo rayim ta indra 
prthivi bibharti. Sakhayaste vamabhajah syama 
mahad devanam-asuratvam-ekam. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, auspicious 
and generous is the world of your creation, soothing 
are the herbs, energising the waters, wondrous the 
wealth earth bears and sustains. O lord of beauty and 
majesty, let us be friends with you, sharers of your 
honour and excellence. Great is the glory, one the spirit, 
and absolute the power and spirit of your divine 
manifestations. Let us be one with glory and divinity. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 56 


Vishvedeva Devata, Prajapati Vaishvamitra or Prajapati 
Vachya Rshi 


न ता ara मायिनो न धीरां व्रता देवानां प्रथमा श्ुवाणिं। 
न रोद॑सी अद्रा वेद्याभिर्न पर्वता निने तस्थिवांसं: ॥ ९॥ 


i, Na ta minanti mayino na dhira vrata devanam 
prathama dhruvani. Na rodasit adruha vedya- 
bhirna parvata niname tasthivamsah. 


Original and inviolable are the laws and 
observances of divine forces in nature and in humanity. 
Enchanters cannot transgress them, wise men of steady 
mind do not violate them. Neither heaven and earth, 
nor scholars free from hate and jealousy with all their 
knowledge, nor the fixed mountains can break or bend 
the strong and resolute. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 56 1303 


षड्‌ भारो एको अचच॑रन्वबिभर््युतं वर्षि्ठमुप गाव आगुः | 
तिस्त्रो महीरूपंरास्तस्थुरत्या गुहा द्वे निहिते avant ।॥ २ ॥ 


2. Sad bharan eko acaran bibhartyrtam varsistha- 
mupa gava aguh. Tisro mahiruparastas-thuratya 
guha dve nihite darsyeka. 


One constant and unmoving bears six burdens. 
The moving ones go round the one which is sun and 
shower and the universal law. Three great regions go 
round in space in constancy. Two remain hidden in the 
cave of mystery. One is apparently seen. 


(The one unmoving is Ishvara who creates 
Mahat and five elements from Prakrti. Three great ones 
are Bhu, earth, Bhuvah, the middle region of the sky, 
and Svah, the region of light, of which the higher two 
are unseen while the earth is seen. Another interpretation 
is that the one unmoving is the sun, the six are the 
seasons. The one constant can be interpreted as Prakrti 
also which bears Mahat and the elements and the three 
greats as sattva, rajas and tamas. The mantra is mystical 
and mysterious and the beauty is deep in mystery.) 


त्रिपाजस्यो dust विश्वरूप उत च्युधा deer waar 
त्यनीकः प॑त्यते मा्हिनावान्त्स Vater dust: शश्व॑ती - 
नाम्‌॥ ३॥ 

2: Tripajasyo vrsabho visvarupa uta tryudha 
purudha prajavan. Tryanikah patyate mahinav- 
antsa retodha vrsabhah sasvatinam. 


The sun and shower and the Law is lord of three 
worlds, bears the forms of the universe, feeds the three 
worlds like the mother cow, sustains all and fathers the 
children of existence. Three are his beautiful forces, 


1218 RGVEDA 


sattva, rajas and tamas. Lord of highest power, he rules 
and sustains all. Lord of power, sun and shower, he bears 
the seed of all the universal forms of existence. 


अभीकं आसां पदवीर॑बोध्यादित्यानामह्वे चारु AAI 
आप॑श्चिदस्मा अरमन्त देवीः पृथण््रज॑न्तीः aft षीम- 
STL ४ ॥ 


4. Abhika asam padavirabodhyadityanamahve caru 
nama. ApaScidasma aramanta devith prthag 
vrajantih pari stmavrnjan. 


Immanent in these stages of the evolution of 
forms such as stars and living beings, the lord knows 
them all and 1, in love and devotion, invoke and chant 
his gracious name. The celestial currents of water and 
energy love to flow for him, each in its separate path, to 
him and from him. 


त्री षधस्था सिन्धवस्तरिः कवीनासुत त्रिमाता विदथेषु 
सम्राट्‌। ऋतावरीर्योष॑णास्तिस्रो अप्यास्तिरा दिवो विदथे 
पत्य॑मानाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Tri sadhastha sindhavastrih kavinamuta trimata 
vidathesu samrat. Rtavariryosanastisro apya- 
strira divo vidathe patyamanah. 


Self-refulgent creator is the ruling lord of light 
and life in all cosmic acts of creation and sustenance. 
Three are the rolling floods of light, air and waters, in 
heaven and skies and on the earth. Of the vision, thought 
and expression of the sagely poets and Rshis, he is the 
origin and inspiration. Three are the streams of causal, 
subtle and physical energy with cosmic truth and law 
flowing to the life on earth like youthful maidens rushing 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 57 1217 


to meet their lover. Three are the regions and three the 
lights, agni (fire) on earth, vayu (air and electricity) in 
the sky, and aditya (light) in heaven, sustaining life in 
the cosmic yajna in three sessions. 


त्रिरा fea: संवितर्वायीणि दिवेदिव आ da त्रिर्नो ard: 1 
त्रिधातु राय आ dar वसूनि भग॑ त्रातर्धिषणे सातायें 
धाः॥ ६॥ 


6. Trira divah savitarvaryani divediva a suva trirno 
ahnah. Tridhatu raya a suva vasuni bhaga 
tratardhisane sataye dhah. 


Savita, lord creator and giver of light and life 
and inspiration, bring us three of the choicest blessings 
of wealth and excellence day by day in three sessions 
of daily yajna. Create and give us the wealth of three 
metals of excellent order. O lord of honour and 
excellence, saviour and sustainer, O heaven and earth, 
O mother Sarasvati, bear and bring us the patience, 
courage and fighting strength for winning the victories 
of life. 


Ent fea: dfaer सोंषवीति राजाना मित्रावरुणा सुपाणी। 
आप॑श्चिदस्य रोद॑सी चिदुर्वी रलं भिश्चन्त सवितुः Gar ।॥ ७॥ 

ह Trira divah savita sosaviti rajana mitravaruna 
supani. Apascidasya rodasi cidurvi ratnam 
bhiksanta savituh savaya. 


Thrice does Savita shower us with inspiration 
and energy from the light of heaven, so do Mitra and 
Varuna, refulgent powers of nature and humanity, 
friendly, just, and generous of hands. Indeed, the flowing 
waters, heaven and earth and the wide firmament, all 


1218 RGVEDA 


pray for the gifts of light, wealth and power from this 
lord Savita for yajnic advancement in life. 


त्रिरुत्तमा दूणशा रोचनानि त्रयो राजन्त्यसुरस्य AR: | 
ऋं तावान इषिरा geurafent दिवो विदथे सन्तु 
देवाः US 


8. Triruttama dunasa rocanani trayo rajantya- 
surasya virah. Rtavana isira dulabhasastrira divo 
vidathe santu devah. 


Three are the best and highest lights, formidable 
and indestructible: fire, electricity and the solar energy. 
These three brave and heroic powers of the lord of light 
and life’s energy shine in the world. Heroes of truth 
and cosmic law and the fluent light of rectitude, vibrant 
and tempestuous, blazing brilliant far and wide, may, 
we pray, shine like divinities thrice and threefold in the 
yajnic battles of life by virtue of the lights of heaven. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 57 
Vishvedeva Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


प्र मे fafacat अंविदन्मनीषां धेनुं चरन्तीं प्रयुंतामगोपाम्‌। 
सद्यश्चिद्या दुदुहे भूरि धासेरिन्द्रस्तदगिः प॑नितारो अस्याः ॥ ९॥ 


im Pra me vivikvan avidanmanisam dhenum 
carantim prayutamagopam. Sadyascid ya duduhe 
bhuri dhaser-indras-tadagnih panitaro asyah. 


Let the man of discrimination know and 
appreciate my language and intelligence, rich and 
versatile, freely moving like a cow over the wide wide 
pasture, i.e., field of knowledge, which always readily 
yields the abundant milk of knowledge. Agni and Indra, 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 57 1217 


the powerful and the brilliant, are great admirers of this 
understanding and language of knowledge. 


इन्द्रः सु पूषा वृष॑णा सुहस्ता दिवो न प्रीताः Vigra दुदु | 
विश्वे यद॑स्यां र॒णय॑न्त देवाः प्र वोऽ त॑ वसवः सुम्नम॑- 
ङ्याम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2, Indrah su pusa vrsana suhasta divo na pritah 
sasayam duduhre. Visve yadasyam ranayanta 
devah pra vo’tra vasavah sumnam-asyam. 


Indra and Pusha, the power and the pranic 
energy of divine nature, generous and inexhaustible with 
open hands like happy friends, shower the gifts of the 
light of heaven and reveal it in the language of divinity. 
Brilliancies of the world rejoice in the acquisition of 
this light of knowledge and language. O Vasus, scholars 
of the first order, I wish and pray I may benefit from the 
pleasure and peace of your gifts of light, knowledge 
and the language of divinity. 


या जामयो वृष्ण sword शक्तिं न॑मस्यन्तींजानते 
गर्भ॑मस्मिन्‌। अच्छा पुत्रं धेनवो! वावशाना महश्च॑रन्ति 


fava वपूंषि ॥ ३॥ 
a. Ya jamayo vrsna icchanti saktim namasyantir- 


14141 garbhamasmin. Accha putram dhenavo 
vavasana mahascaranti bibhratam vapumsi. 


Those young women who love and desire the 
virility and vitality of a youthful husband, knowing that 
they have come to maturity and there is full vitality of 
impregnation therein, approach the man in marriage with 
reverence and love in a graceful manner and, like cows 
in season, receive and bear and rear the great gift of a 


1218 RGVEDA 
baby having a handsome body of full and perfect parts. 


(The image in this mantra describes not only 
the relationship of man and woman in married life but 
also the relationship of heaven and earth and the rain of 
fertility from the clouds in the process of natural 
procreation.) 


अच्छ विवक्मि रोद॑सी सुमेके ग्राव्णों युजानो अध्वरे 
म॑नीषा। इमा उ ते मन॑वे भूरिंवारा ऊर्ध्वां भ॑वन्ति दर्शाता 
यज॑त्राः usu 


4. Accha vivikmi rodasit sumeke gravno yujano 
adhvare manisa. Ima u te manave bhurivara 
urdhva bhavanti darsata yajatrah. 


O men and women abundant and generous as 
clouds, joined together in home yajna, with the best of 
mind in the best of words, I revere and celebrate heaven 
and earth, man and woman joined together with heart 
and mind in marriage as two-in-one. O men, these 
women are showers of love and joy and prosperity for 
you. They rise high, sweet and soothing and beautiful, 
equal partners in the family yajna and divine procreation, 
worthy of respect and reverence as the flames of yajna 
fire. 

या ते frat मधुमती सुमेधा अगर देवेषूच्यतं उरूची । तयेह 
fagat अव॑से यजंत्राना सादय पायय। चा मधूनि & 


Ya te jihva madhumati sumedha agne devesucyata 
uruct. Tayeha visvan avase yajatranasadaya 
payaya ca madhuni. 


O Agni, fire of home yajna, gracious lady of the 
house, honey sweet is your tongue like the beautiful 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 58 1217 


flame of light which radiates intelligence and wisdom 
far and wide and wins admiration among the noblest 
people. With this sweetness and light of speech and 
grace of manner, bring in on the vedi of home yajna all 
the sagely souls worthy of reverence and let them drink 
of the nectar sweets of a blessed home. 


(The mantra also implies the women’s 
contribution to the material prosperity and cultural grace 
of a happy home.) 


ad अग्रे पर्वतस्येव धारासंश्चन्ती पीपयंदेव fer 
तामस्मभ्यं प्रम॑तिं जातवेदो वसो रास्व॑ सुमतिं fava- 
ज॑न्याम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ya te agne parvatasyeva dharasascanti pipayad 
deva citra. Tamasmabhyam pramatim jatavedo 
vaso rasva sumatim visSvajanyam. 


Agni, presiding power and light divine of the 
yajnic home, wonderful is the flame and fragrant flow 
of your generosity which swells and showers like the 
streams of a cloud without reserve or fear or favour. 
With that same abundant flow, pioneer intelligence, 
noble wisdom and universal mother fertility, O treasure 
home of prosperity and power omniscient and 
omnipresent, we pray, bless us. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 58 
Ashvinau Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


धेनुः wees काम्यं दुहानाऽन्तः पुत्रश्च॑रति afatorren: | 
आ द्योतनिं व॑हति शुश्रयामोषसः स्तोमो अश्विनाव- 
जीगः॥ ९॥ 


1218 RGVEDA 


I. Dhenuh pratnasya kamyam duhana’ntah putra- 
scarati daksinayah. A dyotanim vahati subhr- 
ayamosasah stomo aSsvinavajigah. 


The holy cow, dawn of the Voice Divine, 
overflowing with love and beauty of Eternity, the light 
and meaning of the Voice like the calf borne in the womb 
of exuberant mystery, moves around at freedom. The 
dawn riding a radiant chariot, harbinger of a new day, 
she bears and brings the light of truth, and the song of 
the dawn is awake, O Ashvins, teacher and disciple, the 
light and life of the world is live. 


सुयुग्वंहन्ति प्रतिं वामृतेनोर्ध्वां भ॑वन्ति पितरेव Fett: 1 
weeny word नीषां युवोरवङ्चकृमा यातमर्वाक्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Suyug vahanti prati vamrtenordhva bhavanti 
pitareva medhah. Jarethamasmad vi panerma- 
nisam yuvoravascakrma yatamarvak. 


O Ashvins, harbingers of the light of life, right 
thoughts and intelligence, vision and wisdom move 
towards you by the paths of universal truth and law and 
rise higher as children look up to the parents and rise. 
Come up front, ward off from us the disposition of greed 
and poor calculation, teach us the right ways of dealing 
with the business of living, and we shall do what your 
pleasure is. 


सुयुग्भिरणश्वैः सुवृता रथेन दस्राविमं sured yates: | 
किमङ्ग वां प्रत्यवर्तिं गपिं्ठा ऽऽहुर्विप्रासो अश्विना 
पुराजाः U3 Ul 

2: Suyugbhirasvaih suvrta rathena dasravimam 


srnutam Slokamadreh. Kimanga vam pratyavar- 
tim gamistha’’hurvipraso asvina purajah. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 58 1217 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and life, destroyers 
of suffering and poverty, listen to this prayer of the 
yajamana liberal as the cloud: Come by fastest horses 
well yoked to the chariot of the wheels of whirlwinds. 
O dear friends, our breath of life, haven’t the sages of 
yore said of you that you are instant fighters against 
want and deprivation? 


आ म॑न्येथामा ग॑तं कच्िदेवैर्विंश्वे जनासो sifvert हवन्ते | 
इमा हि at गोऋजीका मधूनि प्र मित्रासो न ददुरुस्रो 
sus i 


4. A manyethamagatam kaccidevairvisve janaso 
asvina havante. Ima hi vam gorjika madhuni 
pra mitraso na dadurusro agre. 


Ashvins, scholars, teachers, specialists, come by 
whatever fastest means of transport you can at the 
earliest and study our plans and projects. All the best 
people of the world invite and call upon you. These 
cherished programmes and achievements on earth and 
plans of solar energy are for your consideration which, 
as friends, they dedicate to you for approval and 
application in advance of the sunrise. 


तिरः पुरू चिदश्विना रजांस्याङ्गूषो वां मघवाना जनेषु । 

एह ald पथिभिरर्देवयानैर्दस््राविमे वां निधयो मधूनाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

a, Tirah puru cidasvina rajamsyanguso vam magha- 

vana janesu. Eha yatam pathibhir-devayanair- 
dasravime vam nidhayo madhunam. 

Ashvins, scholars of science and energy of light 


and winds, cross over many many regions of earth and 
skies and come here. O lords of power and prosperity, 


1218 RGVEDA 


let your songs of praise ring among the people. Reach 
here by paths of brilliant sun-rays. O destroyers of 
suffering and poverty, all the treasures of sweets and 
pleasure are for you. 


पुराणमोकः सख्यं शिवं at युवोर्नरा द्रविणं जह्याठ्याम्‌। 
पुन॑ः कृण्वानाः सख्या शिवानि मध्वा मदेम सह नू 
स॑मानाः॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Puranamokah sakhyam sivam vam yuvornara 
dravinam jahnavyam. Punah krnvanah sakhya 
sivani madhva madema saha nu samanah. 


Ashvins, leaders of the human nation, old and 
constant is your friendship, blissful, restful and pleasing 
as a holiday home. Your wealth and power lies in the 
culture and philosophy of the self-sacrificing pioneers. 
Let us together, equal and alike, doing friendly and 
benevolent acts, again and again, join, sing and 
celebrate. 


अश्विना वायुना युवं सुदक्षा नियुद्धिश्च स॒जोष॑सा युवाना | 
नास॑त्या तिरोअहयं जुषाणा सोमं पिबतमस्तिधां सुदानू ॥ ७ ॥ 


vin 4 5171760 vayuna yuvam sudaksa niyudbhisca 
sajosasa yuvana. Nasatya tiro-ahnyam jusana 
somam pibatam-asridha sudanu. 


Ashvins, experts of arts and sciences, equal 
friends, ever youthful, constantly true, readily helpful 
to the distressed, abundantly generous, come you both 
by the winds yoked as horses to the chariot, without 
delay, without injury to yourselves, join us and drink 
the soma of joy. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 58 1217 


अश्विना परि anfae: पुरूचीरीयुर्गीर्भि्यत॑माना अप्राः । 
tat ह वाम्रतजा अद्विजूतः परि दद्यार्वापृथिवी याति 
सद्यः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asvina pari vamisah puruciriyurgirbhiryatamana 
amrdhrah. Ratho ha vamrtaja adrijutah pari 
dyavaprthivi yati sadyah. 


Ashvins, scholars and masters of science and 
technology, may abundant energy and maintenance and 
comprehensive success come to you to your heart’s 
desire. May conscientious people, self-controlled, 
indefatigable in effort, with words of thanks and praise, 
approach and assist you. Your chariot built with the 
materials of nature on the principles of natural force 
and law, powered with solar energy, spatial electricity 
and vapours of the clouds, and accelerated by 
thunderous friction of gears goes round earth and heaven 
at instant speed. 


अश्विना मधुषुत्तमो युवाकुः सोमस्तं पातमा ग॑तं ext | 
रथो ह वां भूरि वर्पः करिक्रत्सुताव॑तो निष्कृतमागंमिष्ठः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1 Asvina madhusuttamo yuvakuh somastam 
patamagatam durone. Ratho ha vam bhuri 
varpah karikrat sutavato niskrtam-agamisthah. 


Ashvins, leaders of the nation’s defence and 
governance, the power and glory of the soma of our 
success is overflowing, with the highest sweetness of 
honey, pure as well as shared by you and all. Come, 
taste of it and enjoy and celebrate, and protect it in the 
home. Your chariot indeed is wondrous of form and 
perennial in performance. Surely the action and effort 
of the creator and builder and of the maker of soma is 


1218 RGVEDA 


come to success. Let us call it a day! 


Mandala 3/Sukta 59 
Mitra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


मित्रो जनान्यातयति garon मित्रो दाधार पृथिवीमुत द्याम्‌ 
मित्रः कृष्टीरनिंमिषाभि as मित्राय हव्यं घृतवज्जुहोत ॥ ९ ॥ 


ly Mitro janan yatayati bruvano mitro dadhara 
prthivimuta dyam. Mitrah krstiranimisabhi caste 
mitraya havyam ghrtavajjuhota. 


Mitra, Lord omnipotent, self-refulgent sun, 
speaking to people, and directing them through their 
direct experience, inspires and moves them to act and 
exert. Mitra holds and sustains the heaven and earth 
and the children of the earth. Mitra fully watches the 
people and their actions without a wink of the eye. 


प्रस faa df ord प्रय॑स्वान्यस्तं आदित्य शिक्ष॑ति व्रतेन॑ | 
न ह॑न्यते न जीयते त्वोतो नैनमंहो अश्नोत्यन्तितो न 
दूरात्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2, Pra sa mitra marto astu prayasvan yasta aditya 
Siksati vratena. Na hanyate na jiyate tvoto 
nainamamho asnotyantito na durdat. 


Mitra, lord of universal love, Aditya, lord self- 
refulgent, may that person be active and alert in action, 
blest with ample food and drink and the joy of life who 
abides by your divine law and learns and makes others 
learn the ways of divine discipline and action. O lord, 
the person under your gracious protection is neither 
conquered nor killed by any mortal. Sin and evil reach 
him not, much less touch and pollute, either from far or 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 59 1217 
from near. 


अनपमीवास इव्छ्या मद॑न्तो feastat वरिमन्ना पथिव्याः। 
आदित्यस्य व्रतमुंपक्षियन्तों वयं fara सुपतौ स्याम ।॥ ३॥ 


2: Anamivasa ilaya madanto mitajnavo varimanna 
prthivyah. Adityasya vratamup-aksiyanto vayam 
mitrasya sumatau syama. 


Free from physical and mental sickness and 
disease, all rejoicing by virtue of the wide earth, under 
instructions of the divine Word, strongly organised and 
moving freely over the vast expanse of mother earth, 
abiding by the rule and discipline of the self-refulgent 
sun, may we, we pray, live under the benign eye of Mitra, 
lord of universal light and love, and have the benefit of 
his favour and pleasure. 


अयं मित्रो न॑मस्य॑: सुशेवो राजा Geral अजनिष्ट वेधाः | 
तस्य॑ वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्याऽपिं भद्रे सौमनसे स्याम i ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam mitro namasyah susevo raja suksatro 
ajanista vedhah. Tasya vayam sumatau yajniya- 
sya’ pi bhadre saumanase syama. 


Mitra, lord of universal love and friendship, is 
worthy of reverence and worship. He is worthy of 
service and giver of peace and comfort. He is the brilliant 
ruler of the vast social order of the world, all wise by 
nature and manifestation. Let us act and conduct 
ourselves so as to have the benefit of the love and favour 
of this lord worthy of homage and service in yajna and 
enjoy the bliss of his kindness and grace. 


महां आदित्यो नम॑सोपसद्यो यातयज्जनो गृणते सुशोवंः । 
तस्मा एतत्पन्य॑तमाय SS aa पित्राय॑ हविरा जुहोत ॥ ५५ ॥ 


1218 RGVEDA 


3. Mahan adityo namasopasadyo yatayajjano grnate 
susevah. Tasma etat panyatamaya justam-agnau 
mitraya havira juhota. 


Aditya, lord self-refulgent and inviolable, is 
great, approachable with humility and faithful offerings 
in yajna. Inspiring people with courage and self- 
confidence to act and exert themselves, he is the giver 
of peace and joy to the thankful celebrant. For such a 
friendly lord most adorable, offer this cherished stream 
of oblations of havi into the holy fire. 


fara चर्षणीधृतोऽ at देवस्य॑ सानसि। 
दयुम्नं चित्रश्रवस्तमम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Mitrasya carsanidhrto’vo devasya sanasi. 
Dyumnam citrasravastamam. 


The care and protection, wealth and 
enlightenment of the self-refulgent sustainer and 
ordainer of humanity is eternal and omnificent, most 
wonderful and inexhaustible, glorious and infinite. 


अभि यो म॑हिना दिवं पित्रो ase सप्रथाः | 
अभि श्रवोंभिः पृथिवीम्‌॥ ७॥ 


7. Abhi yo mahina divam mitro babhuva saprathah. 
Abhi sravobhih prthivim. 


Mitra, lord of universal love, light and 
friendship, having created the heaven and earth along 
with their light, food and energy, manifests himself by 
the expansive universe, and transcends them both by 
his supreme omnipotence. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 60 1217 


मित्राय पञ्च॑ येमिरे जना अभिष्िशवसे | 
स देवान्विर्वास्विभर्तिं ॥ ८ ॥ 


Bi Mitraya panca yemire jana abhistisavase. 
Sa devan visvan bibharti. 


All the five classes of people offer service and 
oblations to Mitra, radiant lord of love and friendship, 
who commands all desirable power and protection. That 
lord sustains all the brilliant and generous powers and 
forces of nature and humanity. 


मित्रो देवेष्वायुषु जनाय वृक्तबर्हिषे | 
इषं इष्टव्रता अकः ।॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Mitro devesvayusu janaya vrktabarhise. 
Isa istavrata akah. 


Among the brilliant and generous people and 
among the average people too, Mitra, radiant lord of 
universal love and friendship, creates and provides for 
fulfilment of the desires of the man of renunciation 
dedicated to yajnic offerings, in response to his 
observance of the chosen vows of holy discipline. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 60 

Rbhus, Indra Rhbus Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 
see वो मन॑सा बन्धुतां नर उशिजो Sas तानि वेद॑सा । 
याभिंमायाथिः प्रतिजुतिवर्पसः सौधन्वना afi 
भागर्मानशा ॥ ९॥ 

| Theha vo manasa bandhuta nara usijo jagmurabhi 
tani vedasa. Yabhirmayabhih pratijutivarpasah 
saudhanvana yajhiyam bhagamanasa. 


1218 RGVEDA 


O Rbhus, leaders of science and technology, 
your intelligential fraternity is right here and here only, 
where men of passion and determination advance and 
reach those goals by that art and those techniques, 
miraculous ones, by which you, warriors of the bow 
and children of the skies, instantly changing roles and 
taking tempestuous forms, achieve your rightful share 
of the fruits of yajnic endeavour. 


याथिः शचींभिश्चमसां अपिंशत यया धिया गामरिणीत 
चर्म॑णः | येन हरी मन॑सा निरत॑क्षत तेन॑ देवत्वमुंभवः 
समाना ॥ २॥ 


ps Yabhih sacibhiscamasan apimsata yaya dhiya 
gamarinita carmanah. Yena hari manasa 
nirataksata tena devatvam-rbhavah samanasa. 


O Rbhus, by the knowledge and powers with 
which you make and break the clouds, by the skill with 
which you resuscitate and rejuvenate the cow from a 
skeleton and win back the earth with the shield of 
protection, and by the mind with which you create the 
energies and design circuitous movement, by these you 
rise to the brilliance of divinity. 


इन्द्रस्य सख्यमुभवः समानशुर्मनोर्नर्पातो अपसो दधन्विरे । 
सौ धन्वनासों अमृतत्वमेरिंरे fast शमीभिः सुकृतः 
सुकृत्यया ॥ ३ ॥ 

Indrasya sakhyam-rbhavah samanasurmanor- 
napato apaso dadhanvire. Saudhanvanaso 


amrtatvamerire vistvi Samibhih sukrtah sukr- 
tyayd. 


Men of intelligence, wisdom and vision, enjoy 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 60 1217 


the love and friendship of Indra, lord omnipotent of the 
world. They perform actions worthy of the son of 
infallible man. Warriors of the bow, dedicated to noble 
action with good intention and righteous resolution, 
doing acts of goodness leading to peace and joy, attain 
the state of immortality. 


इन्द्रेण याथ सरथं सुते Tal अथो वशानां भवथा सह 
Bria व॑ः प्रतिमे सुकृतानि वाघतः सौध॑न्वना ऋभवो 
वीर्यीणि aus 


4. Indrena yatha saratham sute sacan atho vasanam 
bhavatha saha Ssriya. Na vah pratimai sukrtani 
vaghatah saudhanvana rbhavo viryani ca. 


O Rbhus, leaders and pioneers of humanity, 
commanders of knowledge, science and power, warriors 
of the bow and rovers of the skies, when the soma is 
distilled and the nation is on top, go forward and rejoice 
with the honour and splendour of the land, sharing the 
chariot as friends with Indra, and then be one with the 
plenty, prosperity and grace of the people who love you. 
There is nothing equal to your valour, courage and noble 
achievements. 


इन्द्र॑ ऋभुभिर्वाजंवद्धिः समुचितं सुतं सोममा वुंषस्वा 
गभ॑स्त्योः । धियेषितो म॑घवन्दाशुषों गृहे सौधन्वनेभिः सह 
मत्स्वा नृभिः ॥ ५॥ ति 

a, Indra rbhubhirvajavadbhih samuksitam sutam 
somama vrsasva gabhastyoh. Dhiyesito magha- 
van dasuso grhe saudhanvanebhih saha matsva 
nrbhih. 


Indra, lord of power and splendour, come with 


1218 RGVEDA 


the Rbhus, commanders of plenty and energy of the 
winds, and shower the soma distilled and supervitalised 
into the bowls of the supplicants. Lord of magnificence, 
inspired with love and gifts of intelligence, come to the 
house of the generous giver and rejoice with the people 
and the pioneers. 


इन्द्र ऋभु मान्वाजवान्मत्स्वेह नो ऽस्मिन्त्सव॑ने शर्या 
पुरुष्टुत । इमानि तुभ्यं स्वस॑राणि येपिरे व्रता देवानां मनुषश्च 
धर्मभिः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indra rbhuman vajavan matsveha 110 ' smint- 
savane Sacya purustuta. Imani tubhyam svasarani 
yemire vrata devanam manusasca dharmabhih. 


Indra, lord commander of the intelligent and 
energetic wielders of power, sung and celebrated by 
many, give us the gift of joy and the grace of holy vision 
and action in this session of yajna. These daily sessions, 
and the laws of nature alongwith the dharmic and karmic 
observances of humanity move but only in your service. 


इन्द्र ऋभुभिं वाजिभिंवाजयंन्निह स्तोमं जरितुरुपं याहि 
यज्ञिय॑म्‌। शतं केतेभिरिषिरेभिंरायवें स॒हस्र॑णीथो अध्वरस्य 
होम॑नि।॥ ७॥ 


a, Indra rbhubhir-vajibhir-vajayanniha stomam 
jariturupa yahi yajniyam. Satam_ ketebhir-isire- 
bhir-ayave sahasranitho adhvarasya homani. 


Indra, giver of life’s honour and excellence, 
come with the visionaries of light and intelligence, come 
with leaders of dynamic action, hastening, strengthe- 
ning, vitalising, come here and listen to the celebrant’s 
song of thanks and praise offered in the yajna. Come 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 61 1217 


with fulfilments of a hundred cherished desires, leading 
men by hundred ways of knowing and doing in the 
business of yajnic living. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 61 
Usha Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina Rshi 


उषो वाजेन वाजिनि प्रचेताः स्तोमं जुषस्व गृणतो म॑घोनि। 
पुराणी देवि युवतिः पुर॑न्धिरनु ad च॑रसि विश्ववारे ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Uso vajena vajini pracetah stomam jusasva 
grnato maghoni. Purani devi yuvatih purandhi- 
ranu vratam carasi visvavare. 


O Dawn, lady of light, mighty with spirit and 
energy, replete with intelligence and revelation, mistress 
of grandeur, accept and enjoy the celebrative address 
of the admirer. Queen of splendour and generosity, old 
yet ever youthful, versatile sustainer of many, loved and 
adored by the whole world, you go on the rounds in 
accordance with the laws of truth in pursuit of your own 
discipline. 


उषो देव्यमंर्त्यां वि भाहि चन्द्रर॑था सूनृता ईरयन्ती । आ 
wat वहन्तु सुयमासो अश्वा हिर॑ण्यवर्णां पृथुपाजंसो 
ये॥२॥ 


2. Uso devyamartya vi bhahi candraratha sunrta 
irayantt. A tva vahantu suyamaso asva hiranya- 
varnam prthupdajaso ye. 


O Dawn, brilliant and generous harbinger of the 
day, immortal divinity, shine and illuminate. Come 
riding the chariot of the beauty and majesty of the moon, 
inspiring mind and speech with the truth of life and 


1218 RGVEDA 


nature. May the well directed horses, which are the 
resplendent rays of the sun, bring you here on earth. 


उष॑ः प्रतीची भुव॑नानि favateat तिं्टस्यमृत॑स्य Sha: | 
समानमर्थ' चरणीय्माना चक्रमिव न्यस्या व॑वृत्स्व ॥ ३ ॥ 


De Usah pratict bhuvanani visvordhva tisthasya- 
mrtasya ketuh. Samanamartham carantyamana 
cakramiva navyasya vavrtsva. 


O Dawn, breath of nectar and torchlight of 
immortality, you rise upfront and shine above all the 
worlds of the universe. Ever new and ever young, 
serving one master and one purpose, you go round and 
round as the wheel of time. 


अव स्यूमेव चिन्वती मघोन्युषा याति स्वसरस्य uel 
स्वप जन॑न्ती सुभग। सुदंसा आन्ताददिवः पप्रथ आ 
पुथिव्याः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ava syumeva cinvati maghonyusa yati svasarasya 
patni. Svarjananti subhaga sudamsa antad divah 
papratha a prthivyah. 


Like the thread spun and woven extensively 
with the cloth, expansive with the rays of light, the 
radiant queen of the day, the dawn of light, goes on and 
on the round, effulgent, generous, creating and giving 
paradisal bliss and inspiration from close to the sun 
expanding over to the ends of the earth. 


अच्छा वो देवीमुषसं विभातीं प्र वों भरध्वं नम॑सा सुवृक्तिम्‌। 
ऊर्ध्वं मधुधा दिवि पाजो sista रोचना रुरूचे रण्व- 


GSH ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 61 1217 


a. Accha vo devimusasam vibhatim pra vo bhara- 
dhvam namasa suvrktim. Urdhvam madhudha 
divi pajo aSret pra rocana ruruce ranvasandrk. 


Come ye celebrants, bear and bring songs of 
praise with offers of homage to the dawn over there, 
radiant and inspiring queen of light. Up there in high 
heaven she holds the nectar sweets and splendour of 
life, glorious, sublime, and blissful to the sight of 
mortals. 


ऋतावरी दिवो अर्कैर॑बोध्या रेवती रोद॑सी चित्रम॑स्थात्‌। 
आयतीम॑ग उषसं विभातीं वाममेषि द्रविणं भिक्च- 
ATUT: 1S Il 

6. Rtavari divo arkairabodhya revati rodasi citra- 
masthat. Ayatimagna usasam vibhatim vama-mesi 
dravinam bhiksamanah. 
Observing the Law of Divinity, descending from 
the heights of heaven, the dawn is revealed by the 
showers of light, rich in wealth and splendour, 
illuminating the earth and skies with wondrous beauty. 
Agni, enlightened performer of yajna, watching 
the rising dawn shining in glory, and praying to the 
Almighty, you attain the wealth of your heart’s desire. 
ऋतस्य ert उषसामिषण्यन्वृषां मही रोद॑सी आ विवेश | 
मही यित्रस्य वरुणस्य माया चन्द्रेव॑ भानुं वि द॑धे 
पुर्त्रा॥७॥ 

“7 Rtasya budhna usasamisanyan vrsa mahi rodasi 


a vivesa. Mahi mitrasya varunasya maya candre- 
va bhanum vi dadhe purutra. 


1218 RGVEDA 


In observance of the laws of nature, moving the 
rise of the dawns, the sun, mighty cause of energy 
showers, pervades and illuminates heaven and earth. 
The supernal energy of nature, powers of attraction and 
repulsion, sustains both heaven and earth and the sun 
as well as the golden moon, in various ways. 


Mandala 3/Sukta 62 
Devata: Indra-Varuna (1-3), Brhaspati (4-6), Pusha (7- 
9), Savita (10-12), Soma (13-15), Mitra- Varuna (16-18), 
Vishvamitra Rshi, or Jamadagni (16-18) 


इमा ड at भृमयो मन्य॑माना युवावं ते न तुज्यां अभूवन्‌ । 
क्व त्यदिन्द्रावरुणा यशो वां येन॑ स्मा सिनं भरथः 
सखिभ्यः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ima u vam bhrmayo manyamana yuvavate na 
tujya abhuvan. Kva tyadindravaruna yaso vam 
yena sma sinam bharathah sakhibhyah. 


Indra and Varuna, powers of energy and water, 
these circuitous revolutions of your energy, highly 
valuable and undeniable, are not to be opposed or 
damaged for both of you in the interest of protection 
and progress, for, if they are damaged, where would be 
that honour and reputation of yours by which you bear 
and bring food and comfort for your friends? 


अयमु! वां पुरु तमो! रयीयज्छ॑र्वत्तममवंसे जोहवीति । 
सजोषाविन्द्रावरुणा मरुद्धिर्दिवा पुधिल्या sur हवं 
Aue 

2. Ayamu vam purutamo rayiyanchasvattamam- 


avase johaviti. Sajosavindravaruna marud- 
bhirdiva prthivya srnutam havam me. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 62 1217 


This first and most eminent yajaka of all, 
desirous of wealth, honour and excellence of permanent 
nature, invokes and calls upon you. Hence you, Indra 
and Varuna, harbingers of power and peace, together 
with the winds, heaven and earth, triple energies of wind, 
light and earth, listen to the call and prayer of mine. 


अस्मे तदिन्द्रावरुणा वसुं ष्यादस्मे रयिर्मरुतः Geta: | 
अस्मान्वरूत्रीः शरणैरंवन्त्वस्मान्होत्रा भार॑ती afat- 
णाभिः॥ ३॥ 


3 Asme tadindravaruna vasu syadasme rayirma- 
rutah sarvavirah. Asman varutrih Saranairava- 
ntvasman hotra bharati daksinabhih. 


Indra and Varuna, may that wealth of power and 
peace be for us. O Maruts, heroes of the winds, may 
that man power of all-heroic order be ours. May the 
highest powers of nature and humanity protect us with 
shelter and modes of defence, and may our joint 
programmes of developmental yajna, and mother earth, 
and divine knowledge and speech bless us with 
imperishable gifts of honour, excellence and prosperity. 


लु ह॑स्पते जुषस्व नो हव्यानि विश्वदेव्य | 
रास्व रत्नानि दाशुषे ts 


4. Brhaspate jusasva no havyani visvadevya. 
Rasva ratnani dasuse. 


Brhaspati, ruler and sustainer of the wide world, 
master of universal vision and wisdom and guardian of 
holy speech and yajaka, be pleased to accept our gifts 
of homage and yajaka. O lord universally adorable, grant 
us the jewels of wealth and honour in favour of the 


1218 RGVEDA 
generous yajamana. 


शुचिंमकैर्बहस्पतिमध्वरेषुं नमस्यत | 
अनाम्योज आ च॑के ॥ ५॥ 


5. Sucim-arkairb-rhaspatim-adhvaresu namasyata 
Anamyoja a cake. 


O lovers and seekers of knowledge and the holy 
Word, in your programmes of education and 
development, bow in homage with words of gratitude 
and offers of yajna to Brhaspati, master and guardian 
of universal knowledge and human speech, with a pure, 
unsullied mind and intellect. 


O lord and master, I love and pray for 
indomitable courage and valour (to follow the path of 
universal truth and righteousness). 


वृषभं चर्षणीनां विश्वरूपमर्दाभ्यम्‌। 
ल्रहस्पतिं atv ६ ॥ 

6. Vrsabham carsaninam visvarupamadabhyam. 
Brhaspatim varenyam. 

I bow in homage to Brhaspati, master of 
knowledge and speech, mighty generous and creative, 
indomitably brave, exponent of all forms and variations 
of world knowledge and world language, most eminent 
and brilliant of scholars among men, the one and only 
one worthy of choice and homage. 

इयं ते पूषन्नाघृणे सुष्टुतिर्देव नव्य॑सी | 
अस्माभिस्तुभ्यं शस्यते ॥ ७॥ 


00 Iyam te pusannaghrne sustutirdeva navyasi. 
Asmabhis-tubhtam Sasyate. 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 62 1217 


O brilliant master, giver of mental and spiritual 
nourishment, this is the latest song of homage and 
reverence composed and sung by us for you in honour 
of your light of knowledge and flames of fire (for world 
enlightenment). 


तां जुंषस्व गिरं मम॑ वाजयन्तीमवा धियं॑म्‌। 
वधूयुरिव योष॑णाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tam jusasva giram mama vajayantimava dhiyam. 
Vadhuyuriva yosanam. 
Please to accept, appreciate and cherish this song 
of mine, inspired, true and exciting, and protect the love, 
thought and beauty of imagination enshrined in it like a 
suitor’s courting his youthful lady love. 
यो विश्वाभि विपश्य॑ति भुव॑ना सं च asafar 
aa: पूषाविता Wad ९॥ 

Yo visvabhi vipasyati bhuvana sam ca pasyati. 
Sa nah pusavita bhuvat. 

The One who sees all the things and living 
beings and all the worlds directly and instantly in all 
their variety, and watches all of them together as one, 
in truth, that lord giver of life and sustenance, we pray, 
be our saviour and protector. 

तत्स॑वितुर्वरेण्यं ent देवस्य॑ धीमहि । 
धियो यो न॑: प्रचोदर्यात्‌॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Tat saviturvarenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi. 
Dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. 


We concentrate and meditate on the radiant glory 


1218 RGVEDA 


of self-refulgent lord Savita, lord giver of light and life, 
who may, we pray, inspire and energise our mind and 
intelligence. That glory alone is worthy of choice and 
meditation. 


देवस्य॑ सवितुर्वयं वाजयन्तः पुर॑न्ध्या । 
भग॑स्य रातिमीमहे ।॥ ९९॥ 

11. Devasya saviturvayam vajayantah purandhya. 
Bhagasya ratimimahe. 


Inspired, energised and enlightened with far- 
sighted vision and intelligence, we pray for the divine 
gifts of generous, gracious and glorious Savita, lord 
giver of life, light and inspiration. 


देवं नर॑: सवितारं faut यज्ञः daft: | 
नमस्यन्ति धियेषिताः ॥ ९२ ॥ 

12. Devam narah savitaram vipra yajnaih 53/11" - 
Bhih. Namasyanti dhiyesitah. 


Men of piety, knowledge and intelligence, 
inspired with will and light divine, who control and 
direct their mind and sense, bow to generous and self- 
refulgent Savita in meditation, adore him with songs of 
ecstasy and offer him thanks and homage with yajnas 
and self-sacrifice. 


सोमो जिगाति गातु विदेवानांमिति निष्कृ तम्‌। 
ऋतस्य योनिंमासद॑म्‌।॥ ९३॥ 

13. Somo jigati gatuvid devanameti niskrtam. 
Rtasya yonimasadam. 


The stream of peace and joy in meditation flows 
on by the paths of the mind and reaches where the senses 


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 62 1217 


and mind terminate, the very seat of light divine and 
origin of the spirit’s will to move into the existential flow. 


सोमो अस्मभ्यं द्विपदे adder च asta | 
अनमीवा इष॑स्करत्‌ il ९४॥ 


14. = Somo asmabhyam dvipade catuspade ca pasave. 
Anamiva isaskarat. 


May Soma, spirit of peace and joy in nature, 
blissful as the moon, create healthful foods and drinks, 
free from disease, for us humans, bipeds, quadrupeds 
and other animals and fulfil our physical and material 
needs and desires. 


अस्माकमायुर्वर्धय॑न्नभिमांतीः Gears: | 
are: सधस्थमासंदत्‌॥ ९५॥ 
15. Asmakamayurvardhayannabhimatih saham- 


anah. Somah sadhasthamasadat. 


May Soma, stream of life’s vigour and joy, 
invigorating health, prolonging life, and resisting, 
challenging and eliminating devitalising toxins and 
diseases, all enemies of health and age, abide in our 
home, our seat of yajna, and our body. 


आ नों मित्रावरुणा घृतैर्गव्यूतिमुक्षतम्‌। 
मध्वा रजांसि UT ९६॥ 

16. A no mitravaruna ghrtairgavyutimuksatam. 
Madhva rajamsi sukratu. 


May Mitra and Varuna, sun and shower, heat 
and cold, fire and water, and friends of the nation 
inspired with justice and rectitude, fertilise and energise 


1218 RGVEDA 


our lands and environment with waters and yajnic 
enrichments, protect and promote our cows and other 
cattle wealth, develop our milk products, and make the 
earth flow with streams of milk and honey. May all these 
powers do good to humanity, our lands and our homes. 


उरुशंसा नमोवृधा wet दक्ष॑स्य usta: | 
द्राधिष्ठाभिः शुचिव्रता ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Urusamsa namovrdha mahna daksasya rajathah. 
Draghisthabhih sucivrata. 

Mitra and Varuna, friends of humanity, 
dedicated to justice and values of rectitude, universally 
adored and exalted with homage, dedicated to 
observance of truth and purity of life and conduct, you 
shine and reign by the strength of your will and vision, 
dexterity of your art and expertise and the acts of 
persistent patience and endurance. 


गृणाना जमद॑िना योनावृतस्य सीदतम्‌। 
पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18.  Grnana jamadagnina yonavrtasya sidatam. 
Patam somamrtavrdha. 


Mitra and Varuna, friends of humanity dedicated 
to love and justice, exalted by life and acts of truth, 
exalting universal law and the flow of existence, 
celebrated by men of vision dedicated to rational and 
empirical experience of reality, abide in the house of 
truth and righteousness on the vedi of yajna, protect, 
promote and enjoy the beauty, peace and ecstasy of life. 


इति तृतीयं मण्डल्कम्‌ ॥ 


