| AUM ॥ 


RIGVEDA 


ऋग्वेदः 


(With Original Sanskrit Text, Transliteration & 
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition 
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda) 


English translation by 
Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. (London, U.K.) 


(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer) 


Sanskrit Text as per publication of 


Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer 


© Dr. Tulsi Ram 


ISBN : 978-81-7077-157-4 


Publisher : 
Vijaykumar Govindram Hasanand 
Delhi. 


Edition : First, 2013 


Price : Rs. 700.00 


RIGVEDA Vol. III by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. 


Cv) 


CONTENTS 
S.No. Particulars Page 
1. RIGVEDA: 
MANIDAD AT © Ziccctervscshccsenacnsnuaviasientaaciasamesstans 1-370 
MANDA 8: -veatessintinnniiniieise Abia 371-982 


(vi) 


DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION 


Vowels 
अ आ 8 ४ 1 ई 7 
उ ou ऊ u We r ऋ 7 
a itr aq r 
ए € ae) ai aT 0 ओ au 

अनुस्वार (` ) 7) विसर्ग (:) h 
() fi 
Consonants 


Guttural 
क्‌ ६ ख्‌ kh ग॒ g घ्‌ gh |= aA 
Palatal 

tec B ch Bj HB jh ज्‌ A 
Lingual 

zt द्‌ th 


र 


sa 
~~ 
Ou 
‘Du 
> 
d 
द्ध 
= 


Dental 
त्‌ { थू th द्‌ ५ ध्‌ dh A no 
Labial 
Tp प॒ ph ब्‌ b YX bh म्‌ m 


others 


a & श ल्‌ 1 व्‌ ४ 
Is ष्‌ $ स्‌ $ दह्‌ bh 
(5) “23 am 


MANDALA 7 


Mandala 7/Suktal 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


Tht नरो दीधिं तिभिर्रण्योर्हस्त॑च्युती जनयन्त प्रशस्तम्‌ | 
दूरे दृशं गृहप॑ तिमथर्युम्‌॥ ९॥ 


0 Agnim naro didhitibhiraranyorhastacyuti jana- 
yanta prasastam. Duredrsam grhapatimathar- 
yum. 


O leading lights of yajna, let the people produce 
fire by the heated friction of arani woods done with the 
manual motion of hands. Fire is an admirable power 
seen from afar and shining far and wide, sustaining home 
life like a guardian but otherwise silent, implicit in 
nature and non-violent. Further create this domestic 
energy by your acts of research and intelligence. 


wah वस॑वो न्युंण्वन्त्सुप्रतिचक्चमव॑से कुत॑ज्चित्‌। 
दक्षाय्यो यो दम आसर नित्य॑ः ॥ २॥ 


2. Tamagnimaste vasavo nyrnvantsupraticaksa- 
mavase kutascit. Daksayyo yo dama asa nityah. 


The energy of fire and electricity, scholars of 
basic science and original vision produce for domestic 
purpose or for communication and transportation 
somehow from something they know best. It is of 
versatile use for defence and protection, universal in 
nature and character, and an all purpose asset in the 
home for any service. 


2 RGVEDA 


tral अग्ने दीदिहि पुरो नोऽजस्रया weit यविष्ठ | 
त्वां शश्वन्त उप॑ यन्ति वाजा: ॥ ३ ॥ 


Preddho agne didihi puro no ’jasraya surmya 
yavistha. Tvam Sasvanta upa yanti vajah. 


O fire divine, ever youthful power and presence, 
well kindled and raised, shine on, radiate and illuminate 
us, constantly, through the continuous channel of 
nature’s dynamics. All things in constant motion reach 
you and flow on in the cosmic cycle. 


प्रते अग्रयोऽ भिभ्यो वरं निः सुवीरासः शोशुचन्त द्युमन्तः | 
यत्रा नर॑: समासते सुजाताः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra te agnayo’gnibhyo varam nih suvirasah sosu- 
canta dyumantah. Yatra narah samasate sujatah. 


O light divine, brighter and stronger than flames 
of fire are those vibrant radiations of yours, all 
illuminating, purifying and sanctifying, which arise 
when leading lights of yajnic vision and action, well 
educated and holily cultured, sit together on the vedi 
and kindle you to join the cosmic circuit of intelligence. 


दा नों अग्ने धिया रयिं सुवीरं स्वपत्यं स॑हस्य प्रशस्तम्‌ | 
न यं यावा तर॑ति यातुमावान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


it, Da no agne dhiya rayim suviram svapatyam 
sahasya prasastam. Na yam yava tarati yatu- 
mavan. 


O mighty fire and light of divinity, with 
luminous intelligence and noble action give us that 
honour and excellence of life and that brave, admirable 
and seasoned progeny worthy of us which no force 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 1 3 
would be able to violate or overcome. 


उप यमेति युवतिः सुदक्षं दोषा वस्तोर्हविष्मती घृताची | 
उप स्वैन॑मरम॑तिर्वसूयुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Upa yameti yuvatih sudaksam dosavastorha- 
vismati ghrtact. Upa svainamaramatirvasuyuh. 


The creative vitality of Agni is active and 
operative day and night: the youthful maiden approaches 
her versatile lover and stays with him in marriage for 
life, the yajna ladle overflowing with ghrta reaches the 
kindled fire of the vedi, the rich dark night looks up to 
the moon and terminates with the sun, the virgin nature, 
divine lord’s own consort, with the passion for creation, 
joins him for ever and creates the living world. 


विश्वां अगेऽप॑ं दहारातीर्यभिस्तपोधिरदंहो जरूथम्‌ | 
प्र निस्वरं चातयस्वामीवाम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Visva agne’pa daharatiryebhistapobhiradaho 
jarutham. Pra nisvaram catayasvamivam. 


O divine fire, burn off all the negativities and 
adversities of the world with those flames of light with 
which you burn, eliminate the ailments, sickness and 
disease from the very roots, and recreate life anew. 


आ यस्त अग्र इधते अनीकं वसिष्ठ शुक्र दीदिवः पाव॑क | 
उतो न॑ एभिः स्तवथेरिह स्याः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A yaste agna idhate anikam vasistha sukra didivah 
pavaka. Uto na ebhih stavathairiha syah. 


O divine fire of life, Agni, destroyer, purifier 
and recreator, haven and home of the living world and 
blazing ruler, let your power and forces which shine all 


4 RGVEDA 


round shine on and illuminate our life, and, with all 
these our songs of praise and prayer, stay with us as 
protector and promoter and strengthen us for our self 
defence and protection. 


विये ते sa भेजिरे अनीकं vat नरः पित्र्यासः Gear 
उतो नं एभिः सुमना इह स्याः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Vi ye te agne bhejire anikam marta narah pitrya- 
sah purutra. Uto na ebhih sumana tha syah. 


Agni, light of life and fiery power, many are the 
mortals, leading lights, good and kind as parents, 
dedicated to you and serving your powers and forces of 
existence. With all these be kind and gracious at heart 
toward us here in life and now. 


इमे नरो वृत्रहत्येषु शूरा विश्वा अदेवीरभि स॑न्तु HT: | 
ये मे धियं पनय॑न्त प्रास्ताम्‌॥ ९०॥ 

10. Ime 1470 vrtrahatyesu ईव visva adevirabhi santu 
mayah. Ye me dhiyam panayanta prasastam. 


All these leaders of the world, best and bravest 
in the battles of life against evil, who approve and 
admire my work and intelligence consecrated to you, 
are unchallengeable. The wiles and tactics of the wicked 
would be dull and ineffective before the brave dedicated 
to you, O light and leader of the world. 


मा शूने अग्ने नि ष॑दाम नृणां माशेषंसोऽ वीर॑ता परिं car | 
प्रजावतीषु gate दुर्यं ॥ eeu 


11. Ma 51८ agne ni sadama nrnam masesa-so’virata 
pari tva. Prajavatisu duryasu durya. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, may we never sit 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 1 5 


idle in a state of depression or in a state of swollen pride. 
Among our men, let there be none without descendants. 
O lord sustainer of happy homes, let there be no trace 
of cowardice among the happy communities settled in 
happy homes wholly dedicated to you. 


यमश्वी नित्यमुपयाति यज्ञं प्रजावन्तं स्वपत्यं क्षयं A: 
स्वज॑न्पना शेष॑सा वावृधानम्‌ ९२॥ 


12. Yamasvi nityamupaydati yajnam prajavantam 
svapatyam ksayam nah. Svajanmana sesasa 
vavrdhanam. 


Agni, lord of life, ruler and sustainer of happy 
homes and settled communities, give us a blessed home 
bubbling with the joy of noble children and the presence 
of happy people, rising and advancing with our own 
posterity, a happy place for yajna blest by daily visit 
and constant presence of Agni, lord of sun rays. 


पाहि नो अग्रे Carat अलजुं्टात्पाहि धूर्तेरररुषो अघायोः | 
त्वा युजा GATT ष्याम्‌॥ ९३॥ 

13. Pahi no agne raksaso ajustat pahi dhurterara- 
ruso aghayoh. Tva yuja prtanayunrabhi syam. 


Agni, lord of all power and inexhaustible energy, 
save us from monsters void of love, loyalty and 
friendship. Protect us against the wicked, violent and 
sinful. With you as friend, ally and protector, let me 
face and overthrow even whole armies of adversaries. 


सेदथिर ग्रीरत्य॑स्त्वन्यान्यत्र वाजी तन॑यो वीद्टुपाणिः। 
सहस्रपाथा stant समेति ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14.  Sedagniragninratyastvanyan yatra vaji tanayo 
vilupanih. Sahasrapatha aksara sameti. 


6 RGVEDA 


That Agni, vision, power and energy, excels 
other forms of power and energy where the energy, like 
an offspring, fast and strong a thousand ways of 
application as working power of hands, is joined with 
the imperishable source and flows therefrom therewith 
like water. 


सेदगिर्यो dasa निपाति समेब्दार मंह॑स उरुष्यात्‌। 
सुजातासः परि चरन्ति वीराः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Sedagniryo vanusyuto nipati sameddharaman- 
hasa urusyat. Sujatasah pari caranti virah. 


That Agni, power and energy, is real agni which 
promotes the supplicants and protects them from the 
violent, which saves the kindler and augmenter from 
sin, and which the brave, cultured and enlightened 
leaders, well educated, serve and promote for a common 
cause. 


अयं सो अगिराहुंतः Tear यमीशानः समिदिन्धे हविष्मान्‌ । 
परि यमेत्यध्वरेषु Satu ९६ ॥ 


16. Ayam so agnirahutah purutra yamisanah sami- 
dindhe havisman. Pari yametyadhvaresu hota. 


This is that Agni, light and fire of existence for 
the sake of life, served and honoured universally, which 
the lord ruler of the universe commanding the creative 
resources of existence lights and raises, and which the 
yajaka with all his resources invokes all round in yajnic 
acts of service and development for the common cause 
of love and non-violence. 


त्वे अग्र आहवनानि भूरीशानास आ a gare Fret । 
उभा कृण्वन्तो वहतू मियेधे u ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 1 7 


17. Tve agna ahavanani bhurisanasa a juhuyama 
nitya. Ubha krnvanto vahatu miyedhe. 


Agni, light of life, with all the resources at our 
disposal we always offer you abundant materials in 
yajna, promoting thereby both the priest and the host in 
the holy act of love and non-violence for development. 


इमो aia वीततमानि हव्याऽजंस्नो afar देवतांतिमच्छं। 
प्रतिं न ई सुर भीणिं व्यन्तु॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Imo agne vitatamani havya’jasro vaksi devata- 
timaccha. Prati na im surabhini vyantu. 


Agni, life of life, universal power, carry well 
these cherished, holiest and most expansive oblations 
offered to you in honour of the divinities and, in 
consequence, let the sweets and fragrances of nature 
come to us from all sides. 


मानो अग्नेऽ वीर॑ते परां दा दुर्वाससेऽ म॑तये मा नो अस्यै । 
मानः क्षुधे मा Card ऋतावो ar at aH मा वन आ 
wear: eeu 


19. Mano agne’virate para da durvasase’mataye ma 
no asyai. Ma nah ksudhe ma raksasa rtavo ma no 
dame ma vana a juhurthah. 


Agni, refulgent lord and ruler of life, give us 
not up to a state of cowardice and impotence. Reduce 
us not to a state of rags and destitution. Subject us not 
to such indigence and intellectual imbecility. Reduce 
us not to hunger. Throw us not to the evil and the wicked. 
O lord observer and protector of truth and law, lead us 
not astray in the home and in the forest. 


8 RGVEDA 


नू मे satan उच्छशाधि त्वं देव मघवंद्धयः सुषूदः | 
रातौ स्यामोभयास आ ते यूयं पात स्वस्तिथिः wat 
A २०॥ 


20. Nu me brahmanyagna ucchasadhi tvam deva 
maghavadbhyah susudah. Ratau syamobha-yasa 
a te yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, brilliant and generous lord of 
enlightenment, you are the divine reservoir of learning 
and the laws of Dharma. Teach me and the commanders 
of power and prosperity the laws and values of Dharma. 
We pray let us both, the priest and yajamana, ruler and 
ruled, high and low, abide in the orbit of your generosity. 
And may you both, teacher and preacher, and the divine 
power promote us with peace, prosperity and well being 
all round all time. 


TARY सुहवो! रण्वसंदूक्सुदीती Gar सहसो दिदीहि। मा 
त्वे सचा तन॑ये नित्य आ धङ्मा वीरो अस्मन्नय वि 
दासीत्‌ 22 


21. Tvamagne suhavo ranvasamdrk suditi suno sa- 
haso didthi. Ma tve saca tanaye nitya a dhanma 
viro asmannaryo vi dasit. 


Agni, lord of light, invoked with love and 
eagerly responsive, blissful of form and bright of flame, 
born of omnipotence, you shine and illuminate. Let not 
the devotee, always dedicated to you in holy work for 
the child’s sake, be consumed by the fire of evil. Let the 
noble and brave son never be indifferent and callous 
toward us. 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 1 9 


मानो अगे दुर्भतये सचैषु देवेन्देष्विषु प्र वोचः। 
मा तें अस्मान्दुर्मतयो! भृमाच्चिद्देवस्य सूनो सहसो 
नशन्त ॥ २२॥ 


22. Ma no agne durbhrtaye sacaisu deveddhesva- 
gnisu pra vocah. Ma te asman durmatayo 
bhrmaccid devasya suno sahaso naSanta. 


Agni, child of omnipotence, lord generous and 
brilliant, devoted as we are to you in all these yajnic 
fires kindled by holy ones, pray do not condemn us to 
indigent living and poor maintenance. Let not your 
displeasure, O bright and generous lord, even by mistake 
ever touch us. 


स मर्तो अग्ने स्वनीक Tare य आजुहोति हव्यम्‌ | 
स देवतां वसुवर्निं'दधाति यं सूरिर थीं पृच्छमान एति ।॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Samarto agne svanika revan-amartye ya ajihoti 
havyam. Sa devata vasuvanim dadhati yam 
surirarthi prcchamana eti. 


Agni, lord of light and life, noble of flames and 
potent of forces, blest is that mortal with wealth of life 
who offers holy libations to the immortal fire of yajna. 
The immortal lord bears immense wealth and honour 
of life to gift the man of enlightenment who calls upon 
the lord in a mood of prayer and supplication. 


महो नो अग्ने सुवितस्य विद्धात्रयिं सूरिभ्य आ व॑हा ged | 
येन॑ वयं संहसावन्मदेमाऽविक्चितास आयुषा सुवीराः ॥ २४ ॥। 
24. Maho no agne suvitasya vidvan rayim suribhya 


a vaha brhantam. Yena vayam sahasavan 
madema’viksitasa ayusda suvirah. 


10 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of light and life, you know our great 
desire and prayer. Pray bring us abundant and expansive 
wealth and enlightenment for the brave by which, O 
lord of power, we may live and enjoy a long life with 
lustre and noble progeny without hurt, waste or 
corruption. 


नू मे satan उच्छशाधि त्वं देव मघवंद्धयः सुषूदः | 
रातौ स्यामोभयास आ ते यूयं पात स्वस्तिथिः wat 
नः॥ २५॥ 


25. Nu me brahmanyagna ucchasadhi tvam deva 
maghavadbhyah susudah. Ratau syamobhaya-sa 
a te yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, lord of light and wealth of life, brilliant, 
generous and divine, give us more and more of food 
and plenty of wealth for the dedicated men of honour 
and power and enlighten us how to live with honour 
and joy. O lord, we pray let us all, givers and receivers 
both, abide in the bliss of your grace and generosity. O 
leaders of power and enlightenment, always protect and 
promote us on the path of peace, plenty and total well 
being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 2 
Apra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
wera नः समिध॑मग्रे अद्य virat बृहद्यजतं धूममृण्वन्‌ | 
उप स्पृश दिव्यं सानु स्तूपैः सं रश्मिभिस्ततनः सूर्य॑स्य ॥ ९ ॥ 
is Jusasva nah samidhamagne adya soca brhad 
yajatam dhumamrnvan. Upa sprsa devyam sanu 
stupaih sam rasmibhistatanah suryasya. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 2 11 


Agni, light of the world, accept our homage of 
yajnic fuel today, let the sacred flames and fragrance 
rise illuminating and purifying the wide space, touch 
the heights of celestial skies with the holy chant of 
mantras upto the pinnacles of purity and expand with 
the rays of the sun. 


नराशंस॑स्य महिमानमेषामुप स्तोषाम यजतस्य ast: | 
ये सुक्रत॑वः शुच॑यो धियंधाः स्वद॑न्ति देवा उभयानि 
हव्या ॥ २ ॥ 


2s Narasamsasya mahimanamesamupa stosama 
yajatasya yajnaiah. Ye sukratavah sucayo 
dhiyamdhah svadanti deva ubhayani havya. 


With yajnic acts of holy offering, we honour and 
celebrate the grandeur of this sacred Agni, light of life, 
adored by humanity in the midst of the enlightened 
divinities, performers of creative actions, who are pure 
and purifying, intelligent in heart and mind, and who 
accept and taste both kinds of yajnic offerings for the 
development of both mental and physical faculties. 


gaa वो असुरं सुदक्षमन्तर्दूतं रोद॑सी aerate | 
मनुष्वद मनुना समिद्धं सम॑ध्वराय सदमिन्म॑ हेम ।॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Ilenyam vo asuram sudaksam-antardutam rodast 
satyavacam. Manusvad-agnim manunda sami- 
ddham samadhvaraya sadaminmahema. 


Let us always and for all of you honour and exalt 
the adorable, inspiring, efficient and generous Agni 
operative like a human ambassador between heaven and 
earth, between body and spirit, true of speech like a 
superman, enlightened and inspired by the wisest of 


12 RGVEDA 


humanity for the sake of creation and development with 
love and non-violence for progress of the world. (Agni 
here is the leader of humanity brilliant as light and 
inspired with will and enthusiasm like fire.) 


सपर्यवो भरमाणा अभिन्न प्र वुंञ्जते नम॑सा बर्हिर । 
आजुह्छना घतपुंष्ठं पृषद्वदध्वर्यवो हविषां मर्जयध्वम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Saparyavo bharamana abhijnu pra vrnjate na- 
masa barhiragnau. Ajuhvana ghrtaprstham 
prsadvadadhvaryavo havisa marjayadhvam. 


Worshippers sitting on their knees, bearing 
sacred grass and fragrant materials, offer the preliminary 
oblation of holy grass and ghrta with reverence into the 
fire. O priests invoking and raising the fire burning 
bright with flames of ghrta as rain from the cloud, feed 
the fire with holy oblations of havi and thereby purify 
the hearts of the worshippers. 


Tareas वि at! देवयन्तोऽ शिश्रय रथयुर्देवताता | 
पूर्वी शिशुं न मातरा रिहाणे समग्रुवो न सम॑नेष्वञ्जन्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Svadhyo vi duro devayanto ’sisrayu rathayur- 
devatata. Purvi Sisum na matara rihane sama- 
gruvo na samanesvanjan. 


Devout thinkers and dedicated scholars 
committed to yajna and the divinities move at the speed 
of chariots in holy works, wide open the doors of 
heavenly bliss and beautify them for all in the battles of 
life. Loving and bold they are like young mothers to 
the child and advance forces for the ruler. 


उत योष॑णे दिव्ये मही नं उषासानक्ता सुदुधेव धेनुः | 
बर्हिषद पुरुहूते मघोनी आ यज्ञिये सुविताय श्रयेताम्‌ ॥। & ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 2 13 


6. Uta yosane divye mahi na usasanakta sudugheva 
dhenuh. Barhisada puruhute maghoni 4 yajniye 
suvitaya Srayetam. 


And may the holy and divine night and the dawn, 
both celestial maidens of the universe abiding in spaces 
between heaven and earth, abundant with beauty and 
power, universally invoked and adored, worthy of 
worship, come and bless us in life for happiness and 
well being, like the mother earth, like the generous 
mother cow, and like the infinite speech of divine 
revelation. 


विप्रा यज्ञेषु ar ay कारू मन्ये वां जातवेदसा यजध्यै । 
ऊर्ध्व नो अध्वरं कुतं हवेषु ता देवेषु वनथो वार्यणि ॥ ७॥ 


fe Vipra yajnesu manusesu karu manye vam 
jatavedasa yajadhyai. Urdvam no adhvaram 
krtam havesu ta devesu vanatho varyani. 


O scholars and scientists, artists and craftsmen, 
you know all the facts, values and requirements of the 
world around. I honour you in the yajnic programmes 
of humility and invite you to participate in the creative 
programmes of development. Pray take the challenge 
and raise our corporate programmes of love and non- 
violence to the heights of achievement. May you all 
create, acquire and bring in the cherished objects of 
value for the noble humanity. 


आ भार॑ती भार॑तीभिः सजोषा sat eae TAHT: | 
सर॑स्वती सारस्वतेभिर वरक्ततिस््रो देवीर्बर्हिरेदं स॑दन्तु ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. A bharati bharatibhih sajosa ila devairmanu- 
syebhiragnih. Sarasvati sarasvatebhirarvak tisro 
devirbarhiredam sadantu. 


14 RGVEDA 


May Bharati, goddess of world speech, 
knowledge and culture come. May Ila, goddess of divine 
speech, knowledge and grace come. May Sarasvati, 
mother dynamics of universal speech, knowledge and 
culture come. May the three divinities, loving, kind and 
gracious, come with the enlightened daughters of the 
earth, men and divines of enlightenment, and dedicated 
scholars of eternal and historical knowledge, come and 
grace our sacred seats of yajna. May Agni, lord 
omniscient, come and bless us in the soul. 


तन्नस्तुरीपमध पोषयिलु देव॑ त्वष्टरविं रराणः स्य॑स्व । 
यतो वीरः कर्मण्यः सुदक्षो युक्तग्रावा जायंते देव- 
कामः॥ ९॥ 


9. Tannasturipamadha posayitnu deva tvastarvira- 
ranah syasva. Yato virah karmanyah sudakso 
yuktagrava jayate devakamah. 


O Tvashta, brilliant maker of forms and shaper 
of men, generous and joyous giver of all round 
nourishment, physical, mental and spiritual, give us that 
vitality and that virility, that perfection of form, 
education and culture without delay from which is born 
the brave hero of action, expert scientist and 
technologist, specialist of clouds and rain dedicated to 
divinity as well as to noble humanity. 


वन॑स्पतेऽ व॑ सृजोप देवानभ्रर्हविः मिता सुंदयाति | सेदु 
होतां स॒त्यत॑रो यजाति यथा देवानां जनिमानि वेद॑ ॥ Qo ul 

10. Vanaspate’va srjopa devanagnirhavih samita 
sudayati. Sedu hota satyataro yajati yatha 
devanam janimani veda. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 3 15 


Giver of life and nourishment to the woods, lord 
of light and sun rays, take up the fragrance and reach it 
across to the generous powers of nature and humanity. 
Agni, fire of yajna, has catalysed and refined the holy 
materials in the vedi for diffusion. Agni, that’s the yajaka 
of nature, ever true and more which coexists with the 
divine elements of nature from their origin, joins them, 
and refines and intensifies them for the common good 
of nature and humanity. 


आ याह्यग्ने समिधानो अर्वांडिन्द्र॑ण देवैः सरथं तुरेभिः | 
aféd आस्तामदिं तिः सुपुत्रा स्वाहां देवा अमृतां माद- 
यन्ताम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. A yahyagne samidhano arvanindrena devaih 
saratham turebhih. Barhirna astamaditih suputra 
svaha deva amrta madayantam. 


Agni, fire of life, light of the sun, brilliant 
scholar and teacher, come to us right here, burning, 
blazing, shining and illuminating, with Indra, light and 
power as that of thunder and lightning. Come by chariot 
across the spaces with the divines and forces of instant 
action, sit on the holy grass, and let Aditi, mother earth 
and nature, with her children of virtue and the immortal 
divinities all be happy and give us joy in truth of word 
and deed. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 3 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
at वो caahhhy: सजोषा यजिं दूतमध्वरे कुणुध्वम्‌। 
यो मर्त्यैषु निश्चुविऋतावा adden घृतान्नः पावकः ॥ ९ ॥ 


16 RGVEDA 


I Agnim vo devamagnibhih sajosa yajistham 
dutamadhvare krnudhvam. Yo martyesu nidhr- 
uvirrtava tapurmurdha ghrtannah pavakah. 


O learned scholars and scientists, in your yajnic 
programmes of corporate endeavour for human 
purposes, light and produce that adorable agni, energy, 
from various forms of heat and sunlight, which is 
brilliantly useful and universally helpful and which acts 
as a messenger between region and region and earth 
and space. It is permanently present in all forms of 
mortal creation, abides by the laws of nature, is vested 
with heat and power at the highest, consumes finest food 
and it is fiery and purifying. 


प्रोथदश्वो न यव॑सेऽ विष्यन्यदा महः संवर॑णाद्‌ areata | 


आद॑स्य वातो अनु वाति शोचिरध स्म ते व्रज॑नं कृष्ण- 
ART २॥ 


me Prothadasvo na yavase’visyan yada mahah 
samvaranad vyasthat. Adasya vato anu vati $oci- 
radha sma te vrajanam krsnamasti. 


Roaring and consuming its food like a horse 
exulting in grass, it rises from its source and moves like 
velocity itself, splitting, protecting, accomplishing. 
Currents of wind and energy follow the rise of its power. 
O fiery energy, attraction and repulsion, that’s your path 
of motion. 


उद्यस्य॑ ते Aes वृष्णोऽग्ने चर॑न्त्यजरां SAAT: | 
अच्छा द्याम॑रुषो धूम एति सं दूतो अग्र ईय॑से हि देवान्‌ ॥ 3 ॥ 


oF Ud yasya te navajatasya vrsno’gne carantyajara 
idhanah. Accha dyamaruso dhuma eti sam dito 
agna tyase hi devan. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 3 17 


Agni, abundant energy divine, as your flames 
arise, new and undecaying, the radiant waves traverse 
the heights of heaven in space, and thus you move like 
a messenger to the divinities of nature at the one end 
and to the brilliant scholars at the other. 


वि यस्य॑ ते पृथिव्यां पाजो अश्रेत्तृषु यदन्ना समवु॑क्त जम्भः | 
सेनेव सृष्टा प्रसिंतिष्ट एति यवं न द॑स्म जुह्वा विवेक्षि ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Vi yasya te prthivyam pajo वला trsu yadanna 
samavrkta jambhaih. Seneva srsta prasitista eti 
yavam na dasma juhva viveksi. 


Your power and force spreads in and all over 
the earth instantly as you consume the inputs by the 
jaw-like motion of your flames and release the energy. 
The radiation of energy moves like a fighting force 
forward on the advance when, O mighty power, you 
receive the materials and convert them into energy as 
grain is converted into vitality. 


तमिद्दोषा तमुषसि यविंछ मथिमत्यं न म॑र्जयन्त नरः: । 
निशिशाना अतिथिमस्य योनौ' दीदाय शोचिराहुतस्य 
वृष्णः ॥ ५५ ॥ 

a, Tamid dosa tamusasi yavistham-agnimatyam na 


didaya Socirahutasya vrsnah. 


O leading lights of science and technology, as 
riders groom a race horse for better performance, 
similarly strengthen and sharpen the power of this 
radiant and most youthful, unaging, Agni, serving and 
refining it like an undated but most welcome visitor, 
and increase the light and speed of this abundant treasure 


18 RGVEDA 


of energy fed with greater inputs at source, and let it 
shine at night and at dawn and let it radiate more and 
ever more. 


ade स्वनीक प्रतीकं fa यद्रुक्मो न रोच॑स उपाके | 
दिवो न ते तन्यतुरेति शुष्मश्चित्रो न सूरः प्रति चक्षि 
भानुम्‌ ६ ॥ 


6. Susamdrk te svanika pratikam vi yad rukmo na 
rocasa upake. Divo na te tanyatureti Susmascitro 
na surah prati caksi bhanum. 


Radiant Agni, commander of noble ensign, 
power and force, beautiful is your form when, close at 
hand, you shine like radiant gold. The light of your 
power radiates and blazes like lightning from the sky, 
and you display your splendour like the wonderful sun. 


यथा वः स्वाहाग्रये दाशेम परीव्छांभिर्घतवंद्धिश्च हव्यैः | 
ahaa अगर अमितैर्महोभिः शतं पूर्भिराय॑सीभिर्निं 
पाहि॥ ७॥ 


Yatha vah svahagnaye dasema parilabhir- 
ghrtavadbhisca havyaih. Tebhirno agne amit- 
airmahobhih satam purbhir-ayastbhir-ni pahi. 


Agni, refulgent ruler of the world, as we offer 
homage and yajna to you in truth of word and deed with 
fragrant materials soaked in ghrta and exalt you with 
streams of holy songs without reserve, you too, we pray, 
in gracious response, protect and promote us a hundred- 
fold with great unbounded golden citadels of steel 
security, prosperity and culture. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 3 19 


ar at a सन्तिदाशुषे अधा गिरो वा याभिरनुवतींरूरुष्याः | 
ताभिर्नः सूनो सहसो नि पाहि स्मत्सूरीञ्ज॑रि तृञ्जात- 
वेदः ॥ ८. ॥ 


8. Ya va te santi dasuse adhrsta giro va yabhir- 
nrvatirurusyah. Tabhirnah suno sahaso ni pahi 
smat surin-jaritrn-jatavedah. 


Or what we know are your divine voices, loud, 
bold and unchallengeable, gifted to the generous yajnic 
giver, by which you protect your people who comprise 
the best men and women, by them, O child of 
omnipotence, Jataveda, present with every thing in 
existence, protect and promote us and the learned brave 
celebrants of divinity. 


निर्यत्पूतेव स्वधितिः शुचिगरत्स्वियां कृपा तन्वा ३ trata: | 
आ यो मात्रोरुशेन्यो जनिं देवयज्याय सुक्रतुः पावकः ॥ ९॥ 


५.१ Niryat puteva svadhitth sucirgat svaya krpa tanva 
rocamanah. A yo mdatrorusenyo janista devaya- 
Jyaya sukratuh pavakah. 


Agni, refulgent ruler of the world, emerging like 
fire from its mother source of arani woods or like heat 
and light from earth and heaven, arises from the land 
and her people and goes forward blazing like a 
thunderbolt of crystal, pure and purifying, bright by the 
grace of his body and mind, illuminating, sanctifying, 
dedicated to the service of divine nature and noble 
humanity. 


एता नो! अग्रे सौभ॑गा दिदीह्यपि wd सुचेत॑सं वतेम । 
विश्वां स्तोतृभ्यो गृणते च॑ सन्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥ ९०॥ 


20 RGVEDA 


10. Eta no agne saubhaga didthyapi kratum suce- 
tasam vatema. Visva stotrbhyo grnate ca santu 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


These are our good fortunes, O fire divine, O 
lord of light. Shine and illuminate these so that we may 
attain noble intelligence and will to do good works. O 
lord, let all these riches be for the celebrant and servant 
of Divinity too. O children of the earth, O divine powers, 
protect and promote us always all round with peace and 
joy of well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 4 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र व॑ः wear are भरध्वं हव्यं मतिं चाग्रये TATA | 
यो दैव्यानि मानुषा जनृष्यन्तर्विश्वानि विदाना जिगाति ॥ ९॥ 


I Pra vah sukraya bhanave bharadhvam havyam 
matim cagnaye suputam. Yo daivyani manusa 
jJanumsyantarvisvani vidmana jigdati. 

For your strength and vitality and for your light 
and wisdom, bear and offer purified fragrant oblations 
and songs of praise to Agni, refulgent spirit of Divinity 
which, with its light and awareness, inspires and 
enlightens all human and superhuman manifestations 
of life within. 

स गृत्सो अभिस्तरुणज्चिदस्तु यतो afast अज॑निष्ट मातुः | 
संयो वनां युवते शुचिं दन्भूरि चिदन्ना समिद॑त्ति सद्यः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Sa grtso agnis-tarunascidastu yato yavistho 
ajanista matuh. Sam yo vana yuvate sucidan bhuri 
cidanna samidatti sadyah. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 4 21 


Let that Agni, spirit of life, be young, ever fresh 
and progressive since it is the youngest born of Mother 
Nature. As fire abides with the woods for food, so does 
the spirit abide with sun rays for food and energy, and 
as one consumes food with pure white teeth so does the 
fiery youth always consume lots of food for energy and 
growth in the physical form. 


अस्य cara संसद्यनीके यं मतीसः श्येतं जंगृभ्रे । 
नियो गृभं पौरुषेयीमुवोच दुरोकमथिरायवें शुशोच ॥ ३ ॥ 


Si Asya devasya samsadyanike yam martasah 
syetam jagrbhre. Ni yo grbham pauruseyimu-voca 
durokam-agnir-dyave 57150८८. 


The grandeur of this brilliant lord of light, the 
mortals perceive and realise in his splendid assembly 
and in the blazing armies of his power. He defines 
spiritual excellence as the very embodiment of it in 
manifestation and shines as an unassailable hero for 
humanity. 


अयं कविरकविषु प्रचेता मर्तेष्ठभिर मृतो नि ether 
समानो अत्रं जुहुरः सहस्वः सदा त्वे सुमन॑सः स्याम ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Ayam kavirakavisu praceta martesvagniramrto 
ni dhayi. Sa ma no atra juhurah sahasvah sada 
tve sumanasah syama. 


This Agni, intelligent, brilliant and a poetic 
visionary among the unwise and unintelligent, pervades 
and shines, the immortal spirit among the mortals. O 
lord most potent and patient, forsake us never, never 
abandon us to the wicked in the world, let us always 
enjoy your good will, love and grace. 


22 RGVEDA 


आ यो योनिं देवकुतं Gale ऋत्वा ari fi मृतो stair | 
तमोष॑धीश्च वनिन॑र्च गभं भूमिर्च विश्वधायसं 
विभति ॥ ५॥ 


3: A yo yonim devakrtam sasada kratva hya gnir- 
amrtan atarit. Tamosadhisca vaninasca garbham 
bhumisca visvadhayasam bibharti. 


That Agni, universal spirit, which by his creative 
yajna resides in the cosmic home created by divine 
powers of Prakrti in association with the supreme lord, 
and which redeems the immortal souls in mortal forms 
to freedom, the same cosmic creator and sustainer, the 
herbs, the trees and the earth bear at heart in seed form 
in the state of existence as the principle of growth and 
sustenance of the universe. 


ईशो ह्य भिर मृत॑स्य भूरेरीशे रायः सुवीर्यस्य दातो: । 
मात्वा वयं सहसावन्नवीरा area: परिः षदाम 
मादुवः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ise hyaginiramrtasya bhurerise rayah suviryasya 
datoh. Ma tva vayam sahasavannavira mapsavah 
pari sadama maduvah. 


Agni, lord of light and life, commands abundant 
gifts of nectar-like food and immortal values, and he 
commands the gifts of wealth, honour and excellence. 
O lord of power and patience, we pray, let us always be 
with you but not as cowards, not without progeny, not 
without obedience and service in faith, not in a state of 
ugliness and gracelessness. 


परिषद्य ह्यर॑णस्य रेक्णो नित्य॑स्य रायः पत॑यः स्याम । 
न शोषो अग्रे अन्यजांतमस्त्यचेतानस्य मा पथो वि दुक्षः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 4 23 


7. Parisadyam hyaranasya rekno nityasya rayah 
patayah syama. Na seso agne anyajatamastya- 
cetanasya ma patho vi duksah. 


Wealth, but without debt and fight, is to be 
sought for. Let us be masters of wealth of permanent, 
undiminishing character. The child born of another is 
not your own as wealth earned by another is not yours. 
O lord Agni, pray do not vitiate the paths of the simple 
and ignorant, protect the innocents. 


नहि ग्रभायारंणः सुशोवोऽ Areal मन॑सा मन्तवा उ | 
अधा चिदोकः पुनरित्स एत्या नो वाज्य॑भीषाच्छेतु नव्य॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nahi grabhayaranah susevo ’nyodaryo manasa 
mantava u. Adha cidokah punarit sa etyad no 
vajyabhisaletu navyah. 


The child born of another even though well 
disposed is but distant and not ideal for adoption because 
ultimately he is drawn to his native home by nature. O 
lord, bless us with our self-born, patient and intelligent 
child. 


wana वनुष्यतो नि पाहि त्वमुं नः सहसावन्नवद्यात्‌ । 
सं त्वा ध्वस्मन्वदभ्येतु पाथः सं र॒यिः स्पृहयाय्यः 
सहस्री ॥ ९ ॥ 

a: Tvamgne vanusyato ni pahi tvamu nah saha- 


savannavadyat. Sam tva dhvasmanvadabhyetu 
pathah sam rayih sprhayayyah sahasri. 


Agni, brilliant commander of knowledge and 
power, protect the supplicants from the violent. O lord 
of power and patience, protect us from sin and evil, 


24 RGVEDA 


jealousy and calumny. May food and wealth of honest 
imperishable nature flow to you with noble and most 
desirable honour and excellence. 


एता नो! अग्रे सौभ॑गा दिदीह्यपि wd सुचेत॑सं वतेम । 
विश्वां स्तोतृभ्यो गृणते च॑ सन्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Eta no agne saubhaga didthyapi kratum 
sucetasam vatema. Visva stotrbhyo grnate ca 
santu yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


These are the glories and good fortunes of life, 
Agni, which, pray, give us, shine and refine so that we 
may achieve the holiness of yajnic action and divine 
awareness. Let all these be the share of supplicants, 
singers and celebrants of life and divinity. O divinities 
of nature and humanity, may you all protect and promote 
us with the gifts of honour, excellence and the prosperity 
of well being all round. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 5 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


waa तवसे भरध्वं गिरं दिवो अरतये पुथिव्याः। 
यो विश्वेषाममृतानामुपस्थे वैश्वानरो वावृधे ALTARS: ॥ ९॥ 


1. Pragnye tavase bharadhvam giram divo arataye 
prthivyah. Yo visvesam-amrtanam-upasthe 
vaisanaro vavrdhe jagrvadbhih. 


Bear and offer words of praise and thankfulness 
in honour of mighty Agni which, ever active without 
rest at the heart of heaven and earth and all things beyond 
destruction, is the living light and life of the world, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 5 25 


Vaishvanara, and rejoices with all those that are awake 
and keeps them alive and growing. 


Note: Vaishvanara Agni is the divine fire 
and vitality of the earth and the terrestrial sphere, Vayu 
is the electric energy of the middle region, and Aditya, 
Taijas is the light and life of the heavenly solar region 
of the universe. 


पृष्टो दिवि धास्य्िः पृथिव्यां नेता सिन्धूनां वृषभः 
स्तिर्यानाम्‌। स मानुषीरभि fast वि भाति वैश्वानरो 
वावृधानो ALOT २॥ 


2. Prsto divi dhayyagnih prthivyam neta sindhunam 
vrsabhah stiyanam. Sa manustrabhi viso vi bhati 
vaisvanaro vavrdhano varena. 


The divine fire is pervasive in the heaven and 
over the earthly sphere. It is the mover of rivers and 
showerer of rains. It shines among all the human 
communities and inspires them to action. This is 
Vaishvanara Agni growing with the expansive world 
by its own divine glory. 


त्वद्धिया विशं आयन्नसिक्नीरसमना जहतीर्भोजनानि । 
वैश्वानर पूरवे शोशुचानः पुरो aa दरयन्नदीदेः ॥ ३॥ 


त, Tvad bhiya visa ayannasiknirasamana jahatir- 
bhojanani. Vaisvanara purave Sosucanah puro 
yadagne darayannadideh. 


By virtue of your awe and pressure of law, 
human communities move forward, each in its own way, 
leaving behind the sufferance of their experiences. O 
Vaishvanara Agni, shine on illuminating the people as 
you have ever been shining and eliminating the 


26 RGVEDA 
sufferings of mankind. 


ad त्रिधातुं पृथिवी उत द्यौर्वैश्वानर aaa सचन्त । त्वं 
भासा रोद॑सी आ त॑तन्थाऽजंस््रेण शोचिषा शोशुचानः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tava tridhatu prthivi uta dyaurvaisvanara 
vratamagne sacanta. Tvam bhasa rodasi a 
tatantha’jasrena Socisa Sosucanah. 


O Vaishvanara Agni, lord omnipresent and 
leading light of the universe, the heaven and earth and 
the threefold Prakrti (Nature) of Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas, that is, mind, motion and matter, all these observe 
and move by your law. You pervade and enliven heaven 
and earth and the middle regions with your self- 
refulgence, shining, illuminating and purifying the 
world by your eternal heat and light. 

त्वाम॑ग्ने हरितो वावशाना गिर॑ः सचन्ते धुन॑यो gare: । 

पतिं कृष्टीनां रथ्यं रयीणां वैशवानरमुषसां केतुमह्व॑म्‌॥। ५ ॥ 
Tvamagne harito vavasana girah sacante dhu- 

nayo ghrtacth. Patim krstinam rathyam rayinam 

vaisvanaram-usasam ketum-ahnam. 

You, O fire divine, Vaishvanara Agni of the 
universe, the resounding quarters of space, eloquent voices 
of poets, roaring winds and silence of the nights, all adore 


you, protector of humanity, end and aim of all wealth and 
honour, glory of the dawns and the blaze of days. 


त्वे stat) वस॑वो न्यंण्वन्क्रतुं fed मित्रमहो जुषन्तं। 
त्वं दस्यूँरोकसो अगम आज उरु ज्योतिर्जनयन्नायीय ॥ & ॥ 


6. 117८ asuryam vasavo nyrnvan kratum hi te mitra- 
maho jusanta. Tvam dasyunrokaso agna aja 
uru Jyotir-janayann-aryaya. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 5 27 


The Vasus, abodes of life such as earth, abide 
by you, find life energy in you, and while they join your 
universal yajna of life’s creation and sustenance, they 
find their end and aim in you as the greatest friend and 
sustainer. O light divine, Agni, you reach the ignorant 
and their abodes and you create the vast light of life for 
the noble and the wise. 


स जाय॑मानः परमे व्योमन्वायुर्न पाथः aR पासि सद्यः | 
त्वं भुव॑ना जनयन्नभि क्रन्नप॑त्याय जातवेदो दश॒स्यन्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


अ Sa jayamanah parame vyoman vayurna pathah 
pari pasi sadyah. Tvam bhuvana janayann-abhi 
krann-apatyaya jatavedo dasasyan. 


O Jataveda, lord omniscient of created existence, 
self-manifested in the highest heaven of space you 
create, and universal breath of life like Vayu, you all 
time sustain fire, water and earth, thus creating and 
perfecting all regions of the world and providing 
everything for the children of creation. 


aay अस्मे samara वैश्वानर द्युमतीं जातवेदः | यया 
राधः पिन्व॑सि विश्ववार पृथु श्रवो! दाशुषे मत्यौय॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tamagne asme isamerayasva vaisvanara 
dyumatim jatavedah. Yaya radhah pinvasi 
visvavara prthu 57410 dasuse martyaya. 


Agni, leading light of life, lord omniscient all 
adorable, bring us that illuminating food and energy 
for body, mind and soul by which you perfect and sustain 
the means of success, and unbounded honour and 
excellence for the generous mortals dedicated to yajnic 
charity. 


28 RGVEDA 


तं नो अग्रे wees: Geet रयिं नि वाजं श्रुत्यं युवस्व । 
वैश्वानर महिं नः शर्म यच्छ रुद्रेभिरग्ने वसुभिः सजोषाः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Tam no agne maghavadbhyah puruksum rayim 
ni vajam Srutyam yuvasva. Vaisvanara mahi nah 
sarma yaccha rudrebhiragne vasubhih sajosah. 


Agni, giver of light and life, for us, for our men 
of honour and excellence, create, provide and manage 
food for all, energy, wealth and honour and honourable 
success. O Vaishvanara, leading light of life, Agni, fire 
divine, give us a great home full of love and peace, in 
association with Rudras, pranic energies of nature, and 
the Vasus, generous life sustainers such as earth. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 6 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र सम्राजो असुरस्य प्रशस्तिं पुंसः कृष्टीनाम॑नुमाद्यंस्य | 
इन्द्र॑स्येव प्र तवस॑स्कृतानि वन्दे ae वन्द॑मानो विव- 
fare i 


il Pra samrajo asurasya prasastim pumsah krsti- 
namanumadyasya. Indrasyeva pra tavasaskrtani 
vande darum vandamano vavakmi. 


I speak in honour of the universal Vaishvanara, 
leading artist and light of the world : I honour and 
celebrate the glory of the self-refulgent, generous, virile, 
beloved hero of the nations like the exploits of mighty 
Indra, the sun, joy of the world. 


कविं केतुं धासिं areas हिन्वन्ति शं राज्यं रोद॑स्योः। 
पुरन्दरस्य गीर्भिरा विंवासेऽ tear पूव्यां महानि ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 6 29 


2. Kavim ketum dhasim bhanumadrerhinvanti Sam 
rajyam rodasyoh. Purandarasya girbhira vivase 
*enervratani purvya mahani. 


Poets invoke and celebrate the omniscient, self- 
manifested, life sustaining light and blissful ruler of 
heaven and earth. The same Agni, omnipotent lord 
breaker of the clouds and mountains, I adore, and I sing 
and celebrate his great eternal laws and acts with the 
holiest words of praise. 


न्य॑क्रतून्ग्रथिनो मृध्रवाचः पणीर्श्रब्दों stgett अयज्ञान्‌ । 
प्रप्र तान्दस्यंर िर्विवाय पूर्वश्चकाराप॑रां अय॑ज्यून्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Nyakratun grathino mrdhravacah parninra- 
sraddhan avrdhan ayajnan. Prapra tan dasyun- 
ragnirvivaya purvascakaraparan ayajyun. 


Agni, highest ruler of the world, reforms, 
removes, or reduces to nullity the saboteurs, misguided 
plotters, evil-tongued scandalisers, retrogrades, 
reactionaries, selfish exploiters, wicked and antisocial 
elements of society. 


यो अपाचीने तम॑सि मदन्तीः प्राचीश्चकार नृत॑मः 
शचीभिः । तमीशानं वस्वो अगिं गणीषेऽ नानतं दमय॑न्तं 
पृतन्यून्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yo apacine tamasi madantih praciscakara 
nrtamah sactbhih. Tamisanam vasvo agnim 
grnise nanatam damayantam prtanyun. 

I glorify Agni, that highest and dauntless leader 
of humanity, lord ruler of world power and wealth who, 


with his noble words and actions, converts the powers 
wallowing in dark negation to brilliant and progressive 


30 RGVEDA 


forces of the world and subdues the stubborn powers 
raising their fighting forces against humanity. 


यो देह्यो ३ अन॑मयद्वधस्ैर्यो अर्यप॑लीरुषसंश्चकारं | 
स निरुध्या नहुषो ae अगिर्विशश्चक्रे afeea: 
सहोभिः ॥ ५॥ 


2: Yo dehyo anamayad vadhasnairyo aryapatniru- 
sasascakara. Sa nirudhya nahuso yahvo agnir- 
visascakre balihrtah sahobhih. 


Agni, ruler of the world worthy of homage and 
support, controls the lawless by the force of justice and 
punishment and brings about the dawn of new days and 
new protections for the noble people. Observant of the 
law, dedicated to truth, the great Agni energises the 
people and, with his power and patience, enlightens the 
people to pay homage and in turn be the beneficiaries. 


यस्य शर्मन्नुप विश्वे जनास एवैस्तस्थुः सुं मतिं faretarom: । 
वैश्वानरो वरमा रोद॑स्योरायिः dare पित्रोरुपस्थ॑म्‌।॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Yasya Sarmannupa 177517८ janasa evaistasthuh 
sumatim bhiksamanah. Vaisvanaro varama roda- 
syoragnih sasada pitrorupastham. 


By Agni’s house of peace and protection all 
people abide, by virtue of knowledge, virtue and karma, 
sharing the common good will and natural intelligence. 
Vaishvanara Agni abides between heaven and earth, in 
the bosom of the parents. 


आ देवो द॑दे बुध्न्या ३ adh वैश्वानर उदिता सूर्य॑स्य | 
आ समुद्रादवरादा पर॑स्मादाभ्िर्ददे दिव आ पुंथिव्याः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 7 31 


7. 4 devo dade budhnya vasuni vaisvanara udita 
suryasya. A samudradavarada parasmadagnir- 
dade diva a prthivyah. 


Brilliant Vaishvanara on sun rise takes away the 
darkness and gives us the wealth of light through the 
space and sky. Similarly from the lower sky and the 
farther space he takes away the darkness and gives us 
the light of the earth from the solar region. (Such is 
Agni, leading light of the world, this is Vaishvanara, 
Agni, brilliant ruler, leader of all.) 


Mandala 7/Sukta 7 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


ual देवं चित्सहसानमयिमश्वं न वाजिनं हिषे नमोभिः। 
भरवां नो दूतो अध्वरस्य विद्वान्त्मनां cag विविदे frag: ॥ ९॥ 


I. Pra vo devam cit sahasanam-agnim-asvam na 
vajinam hise namobhih. Bhava no duto adhva- 
rasya vidvantmana devesu vivide mitadruh. 


Citizens of the world, for you all, just as a rider 
spurs on the war horse on the course to achieve his goal, 
so do I, with homage and adorations, invoke, invite and 
inspire Agni, brilliant, generous and brave leader of the 
world, dynamic and warlike achiever, and I say: O lord 
all knowing, well known for your wisdom and 
observance of the laws among the nobilities, be the 
messenger and leader of our yajnic social system of 
peace, non-violence and all round progress for all. 
Conscientiously be so, and move at a measured pace. 


आ याह्यग्ने पथ्या ३ अनु स्वा मन्द्रो देवानां सख्यं GATT: | 
आ सानु शुष्मैर्नदयंन्पृथिव्या जम्भेभिर्विंश्व॑मुशधग्व- 
नानि॥ २॥ 


32 RGVEDA 


2: A yahyagne pathya anu sva mandro devanam 
sakhyam jusanah. A sadnu Susmairnadayan 
prthivya jambhebhirvisvamusadhagvanani. 


Come Agni, warm as fire, brilliant as light, 
forceful as lightning, happy and rejoicing, to your own 
people, eager for the love and friendship of noble people 
who love and value the paths of rectitude. Come on top 
of the world, proclaiming loud and bold your knowledge 
and power and illuminating the thickest forests of 
darkness with the radiations of your light. 


Wet यज्ञः afd हि बर्हिः प्रीणीते अथिरींच्छितो न erat 
आ मातरा विश्ववारे हुवानो यतो यविष्ठ जल्िषे 
Usa: ॥ ३॥ 


3: Pracino yajnah sudhitam hi barhih prinite 
agnirilito na hota. A matara visvavare huvano 
yato yavistha jajnise susevah. 


The yajna is organised right here in front. The 
holy seats of grass and fragrant materials of yajna are 
laid. Agni as the ruling high priest invoked, anointed 
and initiated, is happy with a sense of fulfilment. O 
brilliant high priest and ruler, Agni, invoking the 
blessings of your twin mothers, heaven and earth, and 
serving them here, you arise as the most youthful 
favourite child of heaven and earth. 


सद्यो अध्वरे रथिरं ज॑नन्त मानुषासो विचेतसो य एषाम्‌। 
विशामधायि विश्पतिर्दुरोणे ३5 गिर्मन््रो मधुवचा ऋतावा ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sadyo adhvare rathiram jananta manusaso 


vicetaso ya esam. Visamadhayi vispapatirdu- 
rone’ gnirmandro madhuvaca rtava. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 7 33 


Agni, high priest and ruler of the social order, 
whom people of discernment and wisdom create and 
initiate as the leader of leaders in the yajna without delay, 
is happy at heart, sweet of tongue and observant of the 
laws of truth. He is the ruler and protector of the people 
and is held in high esteem in the heart and home of 
these people who have elected him to the office. 


असादि वृतो वदह्धिराजगन्वानभिर्ब्रहया नृषदं ने विधर्ता । द्यौश्च 
यं पूंथिवी वावृधाते आ यं होता यज॑ति विश्ववारम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


Asadi 1110 vahnirajaganvan-agnirbrahma nrsa- 
dane vidharta. Dyausca yam prthivi vavrdhdate a 
yam hota yajati visvavaram. 


Agni, light of life, living fire and passion of the 
world, elected and adored, abides in the heart and home 
of the people, carrying the burdens of society, radiating 
all round in the world of humanity, ruling and 
conducting the business of living as the presiding power 
and vision. That is the universal power and presence 
whom heaven and earth advance and whom the yajaka 
honours and adores in yajna. 


एते द्युम्नेभिर्विंश्वमातिंरन्त मन्त्रं ये वारं wal अतंश्चन्‌ । 
प्र ये विशस्तिरन्त श्रोष॑माणा आ ये में अस्य दीध॑य- 
aaa ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ete dyumnebhir-visvamatiranta mantram ye 
varam narya ataksan. Pra ye visastiranta Srosa- 
mana a ye me asya didhayannrtasya. 


Those leading personalities find total fulfilment 
across the world with all honours and excellence who 
conceive and fashion forth the rule of law to the purpose 


34 RGVEDA 


of Agni, light and lord of life. And those people too 
cross over the seas of existence who listen and spread 
the light of the truth of this song of mine. 


न्‌ wary ईमहे वसिं्ठा ईशानं Gat सहसो GSAT Sa 
स्तोतृभ्यो! मघवव॑द्द्रय आनड्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
A: ७॥ 


7. Nu tvamagna imahe vasistha isanam suno sahaso 
vasunam. Isam stotrbhyo maghav-adbhya anad 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, light of life, manifestation of 
omnipotence, ruler and ordainer of the wealth and 
honours of the world, we, the people, happily settled 
adore you: pray bless the celebrants and leading lights 
with honour and sustenance. O leading lights, pray 
always protect and promote us all with peace, comfort 
and total well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 8 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


इन्धे राजा समर्यो नमोभिर्यस्य प्रती क मा्हतं घतेन । 
नरो हव्येभिरीव्छते सबाध आथिरग्रं उषसामशोचि ।॥ ९॥ 


if Indhe raja samaryo namobhir-yasya pratika- 
mahutam ghrtena. Naro havyebhir-ilate sabadha 
agniragra usasamasoci. 


The spirit of life, Agni, which the ruling leader 
challenging the battle of life kindles with faith, 
reverence and fragrant oblations, feeding its physical 
symbol, the yajnic fire, with ghrta, honour and dignity 
of life, the leading lights of the nation take over, augment 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 8 35 


it and celebrate it with the best offers of yajna, and then, 
just as the light of the sun earlier obstructed by nightly 
darkness rises and shines with the dawns in advance of 
the day, so does the spirit of the nation earlier suppressed 
arise on the clarion call of yajna. 


अयमु ष्य सुम॑हाँ अवेदि होता मन्द्रो मनुषो यहयो STAT: | 
वि भा अंकः ages: पृथिव्यां कृष्णप॑विरोषंधी- 
भिरर्ववक्षे ॥ २॥ 


pa Ayamu sya sumahan avedi hota mandro manuso 
yahvo agnih. Vi bha akah sasrjanah prthivyam 
krsnapavir-osadhibhir-vavakse. 


This is Agni, that ruling spirit of life felt and 
known, that great and good arouser and yajaka, happy 
and joyous, human and mighty over all, 
unchallengeable, who brings out the lights of life from 
within, wielding great powers and forces, creating and 
making new things and institutions, and ruling over the 
earth. 


क्या नो at वि da: सुवृक्तिं कामु स्वधामृणवः 
शस्यमानः । कदा भ॑वेम पत॑यः सुदत्र रायो वन्तारो दुष्टर॑स्य 
साधोः॥ ३॥ 


Kaya no agne vi vasah suvrktim kamu svadha- 
mrnavah sasyamanah. Kada bhavema patayah 
sudatra rayo vantaro dustarasya sadhoh. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord ruler of the world, what 
is the method and manners of life by which your grace 
would shine upon us? What is the song of adoration, 
what fragrance of yajna you love by which we would 
adore and celebrate your majesty? O generous lord giver, 


36 RGVEDA 


when shall we be masters, producers and sharers of rare 
excellent wealth, power and honour for ourselves and 
others? 


प्रप्रायमभिर्भर तस्य॑ श्रृण्वे वि यत्सूर्यो न रोचं ते बृहद्धाः। 
अभि यः पूरुं पृत॑नासु तस्थौ द्युतानो दैव्यो अतिंधिः 
शुशोच ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Praprayamagnir-bharatasya srnve vi yat suryo 
na rocate brhad-bhah. Abhi yah purum prtanasu 
tasthau dyutano daivyo atithih Susoca. 


This Agni always listens and attends to the 
bearer and sharer of the wealth of life when he shines 
with vast splendour, like the sun. He stands by the ruler, 
commander and supporter of the people in all battles 
and problems of life, shining bright, divine, welcome 
as a guest, magnificent. 


stafara आहवनानि भूरि भुवो विश्वभिः सुमना अनीकः | 
सतुतश्चिदग्ने श्रण्विषे गृणानः स्वयं वर्धस्व तन्वं सुजात ॥ ५ ॥ 


> Asannit tve ahavanani bhuri bhuvo visvebhih 
sumana anikaih. Stutascidagne srnvise grnanah 
svayam vardhasva tanvam sujata. 


Agni, light and spirit of life, good and gracious 
at heart, all these many adorations and oblations of the 
earth with all powers and splendours of the world are 
for you and abide in you only. And when you are thus 
adored and celebrated, you listen, absorbed approvingly 
blissful. Listen then, O nobly born and self-manifested, 
wax with joy, and let your light of glory shine more and 
more on us. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 9 37 


इदं ad: शतसाः संसंहस्रमुदग्रये। जनिषीष्ट feat: । 
शं यत्स्तोतृभ्यं आपये भवाति द्युमद॑मीवचात॑नं रश्चोहा Ut & ॥ 


6. Idam vacah satasah samsahasramudagnaye 
Janiststa dvibarhah. Sam yat stotrbhya apaye 
bhavati dyumadamivacatanam raksoha. 


This song of adoration full of a hundred 
thousand-fold power and virtue of both knowledge and 
humility is created in honour of Agni so that, for the 
enlightened celebrant, there may be peace and well 
being full of light, freedom from ailment, and protection 
against evil and wickedness. 


नू त्वामंग्र ईमहे वसिष्ठा ईशानं सूनो सहसो वसूनाम्‌ । इषं 
स्तोतृभ्यो! मघवव॑द्द्रय आनड्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
A ७॥ 


4, Nu tvamagna imahe vasistha isanam suno sahaso 
vasunam. Isam stotrbhyo maghava-dbhya anad 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


We people happily settled in peace and plenty 
earnestly adore you, Agni, giver of patience and fortitude 
and ruler of wealth and power. Pray bring us cherished 
knowledge and enlightenment for the devoted celebrants 
and people endowed with wealth and honour. And may you 
all, men of knowledge, wealth and power, always protect 
and promote us with the gift of peace and well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 9 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
अबोधि जार STATA मन्द्रः कवित॑मः ATA: | 
दधाति केतुमुभय॑स्य जन्तोर्हव्या देवेषु द्रविणं सुकृत्सु ।॥ ९ ॥ 


38 RGVEDA 


1. Abodhi jara usasamupasthaddhota mandrah 
kavitamah pavakah. Dadhati ketum-ubhayasya 
jantorhavya devesu dravinam sukrtsu. 


See, the holy fire of morning sun is risen from 
the lap of early dawn, the sun having stolen away the 
darkness of night. It is the morning yajaka, delightful, 
and the most poetic symbol of divinity. It radiates light 
to reveal the identify of both coming and going living 
forms, carries our oblations to the elements and bestows 
wealth upon the noble performers. 


स सुक्रतुर्यो वि दुर॑ः पणीनां पुनानो अर्क पुंरुभोज॑सं नः । 
होता मन्द्रो विशां दमूनास्तिरस्तमो ददृशो राम्याणाम्‌॥ २॥ 


ps Sa sukraturyo vi durah paninam punano arkam 
purubhojasam nah. Hota mandro visam damuna- 
stirastamo dadrse ramyanam. 


He is the noble performer of action who opens 
the doors of divinity for the celebrants, blesses and 
sanctifies light and food, giving protection and 
nourishment for all, performs yajna, gives delight, 
controls and ogranises people with discipline, removes 
darkness of the nights and appears blissful. 


अमूरः कविरदिंतिर्विंवस्वान्त्सुसंसन्यित्रो sifdfa: शिवो 
न॑: । चित्रभानुरुषसां भात्यग्रेऽपां गर्भ: प्रस्व आ 
fader ॥ ३ ॥ 

A Amurah kavir-aditirvivasvant-susamsanmitro 
atithih sivo nah. Citrabhanur-usasam bhdatyagre 
‘pam garbhah prasva ठ vivesa. 


Far-sighted wise, creative visionary, constant as 
mother nature, refulgent, noble in assembly, friend, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 9 39 


welcome as holy guest, giver of peace and prosperity, 
light of wonder ahead of the dawns, seed of cosmic 
dynamics, inspirer of life, he emerges and manifests in 
us all. 


ईच्छेन्यो at wet युगेषु समनगा अशुच्नातवेदाः | 
सुसंदृशा भानुना यो विभाति प्रति गाव॑ः समिधानं 
aera ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ilenyo vo manuso yugesu samanaga asucajjata- 
vedah. Susamdrsa bhanuna yo vibhdati prati gavah 
samidhanam budhanta. 


The adorable one going on through the battles 
of existence for ages, the one omniscient and 
omnipresent with all that is born in the world, who 
purifies, sanctifies and enlightens you all humans with 
the blissful light of life and knowledge, and the refulgent 
one to whom the earths, planets, satellites, and the rays 
of light respond with brilliance, that is Agni, that is the 
sun, that is the Enlightened One. 


अग्न याहि gai मा Raval gat अच्छा wept 
गणेन॑। सर॑स्वतीं मरुतो अश्विनापो afat cardasata 
विश्वान्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


2. Agne yahi dutyam ma risanyo devan accha 
brahmakrta ganena. Sarasvatim maruto asvinapo 
yaksi devan ratndheyaya visvan. 


Agni, light and radiance of nature and humanity, 
go, radiate and reach for communication and 
enlightenment without hurting or injuring any good 
natural or human powers. Go well by the body of means 
created by nature or by words of divine language. Go 


40 RGVEDA 


by the flow of correct language, winds and currents of 
energy, the stars, the waters and other noble powers of 
means and men to bring about here all the jewel wealth 
of the world. 


त्वामंगे समिधानो वसिष्ठो जरूथं हन्यक्िं राये ater 
पुरुणीथा जातवेदो जरस्व यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ६॥ 


6. Tvamagne samidhano vasistho jarutham han 
yaksi raye purandhim. Purunitha jatavedo jara- 
sva yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, light and fire of life, the celebrant settled 
in peace and prosperity enkindles you. Bright and 
blazing, all knowing all present, burn off the dead wood, 
develop the living resources of nature and the cities for 
the sake of wealth. Extend the creative and productive 
programmes. And you all, Agni and other enlightened 
ones, always protect and promote us with happiness and 
all round well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 10 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
उषो न जारः पृथु UIs अश्रदविंद्यु तदीद्यच्छोशुचानः । वृषा 
हरिः शुचिरा भति भासा धियो हिन्वान उशतीरजीगः ॥ ९॥ 
iB Uso na jarah prthu pajo asred davidyutad didya- 
cchosucanah. Vrsa harth sucira bhati bhasa dhiyo 
hinvana uStirajigah. 
Like the lover of the light of dawn, the sun, Agni, 


commands and diffuses light on a vast scale, blazing, 
illuminating, burning and purifying, giving abundant 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 10 41 


showers of rain, eliminating want and suffering, pure 
and immaculate, shines with light, inspiring the mind, 
intelligence and will, and exhorts men of passion and 
will to awake and rise for action. (Such is Agni, such is 
the scholar, sagely teacher and the leader.) 


vaio वस्तोरुषसामरोचि यज्ञं त॑न्वाना उशिजो न मन्म॑। 
अगिर्जन्मानिदेव आ वि विद्धान्द्रवद्‌ दूतो देवयावा 
वनिष्ठः ॥ २॥ 


pa Svarna vastorusasamaroci yajnam tanvana usijo 
na manma. Agnirjanmani deva a vi vidvan dravad 
duto devayava vanisthah. 


Like the light of dawn and splendour of the day, 
Agni shines and radiates the light of life as inspired 
priests enact the yajnic business of the morning and 
expand the thoughts of the day. Thus Agni, knowing 
and pervading the origin of things, most generous 
messenger and carrier of nature’s bounties, radiates all 
round conducting and distributing the vitalities of life. 


अच्छा गिरो मतयो tae hi य॑न्ति द्रविणं fratarom: 1 
सुखन्दशं सुप्रतीकं स्वञ्चं हव्यवाह॑मर तिं मानुषाणाम्‌ ॥। ३ ॥ 


5: Accha giro matayo devayantiragnim yanti 
dravinam bhiksamanah. Susandrsam suprati-kam 
svancam havyavahamaratim manusanam. 


All holy voices of prayer, all acts of thought 
and will of the people dedicated to the bounties of 
divinity, seeking their share of the world’s wealth and 
honour move and converge on Agni, blissful of sight, 
noble in manifestation, easy of access and attainment 
and the fastest carrier of oblations and relentless 


42 RGVEDA 


harbinger of the cherished fruits of the yajnic actions 
of mankind. 


इन्द्रं नो अग्रे वसुभिः Usirat Gs रुद्रेभिरा व॑हा Gedy! 
आदित्येभिरदितिं विश्वजन्यां बु हस्पतिमृक्करभिर्विश्व- 
वारम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Indram no agne vasubhih sajosa rudram rudre- 
bhira vaha brhantam. Adityebhiraditim visvajan- 
yam brhaspatim-rkvabhir-visvavaram. 


Agni, lord of light and life, generous, loving 
and kind to all, pray bring us, lead us, to Indra, cosmic 
energy with the wealth and abundance of earth and other 
supports of life, to Rudra the soul, with pranic energies, 
to Aditi, infinite and eternal time and space, with a vision 
of the suns and origin of the universe, and to the 
universal lord and spirit of existence with divination 
into the original revelation. 


मन्द्रं होतारमुशिजो यविष्ठ मिं fast gaa अध्वरेषु । 
स हि क्षपावां अभवद्रयीणामतनद्रो दूतो यजथाय देवान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Mandram hotaramusSijo yavisthamagnim visa 
tlate adhvaresu. Sa hi ksapavan abhavad rayi- 
nam-atandro dito yajathaya devan. 


In their acts of vision, creation and development, 
with love and non-violence, people of the world inspired 
with love and faith invoke, kindle and adore Agni, light 
and life of the world of existence, most youthful, blissful 
and generous giver of every thing. He alone presides 
over the deep night before the dawn of creation. He 
alone, ever free from inertness and sleep, is the prime 
mover and harbinger of wealth, honour and excellence 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 11 43 


to bless the noble souls in life. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 11 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


Wet sheared प्रकेतो न ऋते त्वदमृतां मादयन्ते | 
आ विश्वेभिः सरथं याहि cata होता प्रथमः सं देह ॥ ९ ॥ 


ll, Mahan asyadhvarasya praketo na rte tvadamrta 
madayante. A visvebhih saratham yahi devair- 
nyagne hota prathamah sadeha. 


Agni, prime high priest of the cosmic yajna of 
creation, come by the chariot of nature itself with all 
the divine powers of existence and grace our vedi here. 
Great you are, the very soul and spirit of yajna. Not 
without you do the immortals rejoice. 


त्वामीव्छते अजिरं दूत्याय हविष्मन्तः सदमिन्मानुषासः | 
यस्य॑ देवैरासदो बर्हिर गरेऽ हौन्यस्मै सुदिना भवन्ति ॥ २॥ 


2. Tvamilate ajiram dutyaya havismantah sada- 
minmanusasah. Yasya devairasado barhiragne 
*hanyasmai sudina bhavanti. 


People of the world with offers of homage and 
havi always invoke and adore you, unaging and 
immortal Agni, for the sake of radiation and 
communication. When you come and grace the seats of 
yajna with the powers of nature’s divinity, whosoever 
be the man, all the days of life turn into days of good 
fortune for him. 


त्रिश्चिदक्तोः प्र चिकितुर्वसूनि त्वे अन्तर्दाशुषे मत्यौय । 
मनुष्वदग्न इह afer देवान्भवा नो दूतो अभिशस्तिपावा ॥ ३ ॥ 


44 RGVEDA 


0 Triscidaktoh pra cikiturvasuni 11८ antardasuse 
martyaya . Manusvadagna iha yaksi devan bhava 
no dito abhisastipava. 


The wise know that there are three fold valuable 
gifts in you for the general mortal in the day and night. 
Come here like a human power, Agni, meet the brilliant 
wise, contact the powers of nature and be like a 
messenger to protect us against calumny and 
imprecation. 


अभिरींशे बहतो अंध्वरस्याऽभ्िर्विंश्वस्य हविषं: कृतस्य । 
क्रतुं ह्य॑स्य वस॑वो जुषन्ताऽथां देवा द॑धिरे हव्यवाह॑म्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Agnirise brhato adhvarasya’ gnirvisvasya havisah 
krtasya. Kratum hyasya vasavo jusanta’ tha deva 
dadhire havyavaham. 


Agni rules the great yajnic programmes of 
development without violence. Agni conditions and 
controls the entire yajnic materials of the world. The 
Vasus such as earth and other life supports take to the 
creative action of Agni for sustenance. Among the wise, 
scholars of the Vasu order of twenty four year’s study 
specialise in Agni’s gifts. And thus the generous and 
the wise all depend on this harbinger of life sustaining 
means and materials. 


आँ ae हविरद्याय देवानिन्द्र॑ज्येष्ठास इह मादयन्ताम्‌ | 
इमं यज्ञं दिवि देवेषु धेहि यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ५॥ 


3. Agne vaha haviradyaya devanindrajyesthasa iha 
madayantam. Imam yajnam divi devesu dhehi 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, scholar of the first order, light and fire of 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 12 45 


life, bring us the delicacies of yajnic production for the 
brilliant people so that they may taste them with delight 
and rejoice with the ruler on top. Take this yajna to the 
heights among the divinities. O holy ones, scholars and 
scientists, protect and promote us all time with gifts of 
peace, prosperity and all round well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 12 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


अग॑न्म महा नम॑सा afas यो दीदाय समिद्धः स्वे PAT | 
चित्रभानुं रोदसी अन्तरुर्वी स्वाहुतं विश्वत; प्रत्यञ्चम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Aganma maha namasa yavistham yo didaya 
samiddhah sve durone. Citrabhanum rodasi 
antarurvi svahutam visvatah pratyancam. 


With profound homage and reverence, let us 
move and rise to the most youthful Agni, light, fire and 
electrical energy, which shines well kindled in its own 
region, is wondrously bright and forceful between the 
vast heaven and earth, and when it is well invoked it 
moves in all directions for all. 


स मह्या विश्वं दुरितानि साह्यनयिः sa दम आ जातवेदाः 1 
सनो रक्षिषद्‌ दुरिताद॑वद्यादस्मान्गणत उत नो। मघोनः ॥ २॥ 


2. Sa mahna visva duritani sahvanagnih stave dama 
a jatavedah. Sa no raksisad duritadava-dyadas- 
man grnata uta no magonah. 


May that Agni, self refulgent lord of cosmic 
energy, omnipresent percipient of every thing in 
existence and destroyer of all negativities and evils by 
his greatness in the world on prayer, save us all, devotees 


46 RGVEDA12 


and celebrants blest with wealth, power and excellence, 
from sin and scandal. 


त्वं वरुण उत मित्रो अग्ने cat व॑र्धन्ति मतिथिर्वसिं्ाः। 
त्वे वसुं सुषणनानि सन्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः Gat नः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Tvam varuna uta mitro agne tvam vardhanti 
matibhir-vasisthah. Tve vasu susananani santu 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O lord of light and life, Agni, you are the judge, 
you are the friend. Devotees and celebrants blest with 
settlement and prosperity exalt you with their will and 
wisdom. May those who repose their love and faith in 
you enjoy the gifts of your generosity. And may you all, 
scholars and leading lights, protect and promote us with 
peace, prosperity and all round well being of life. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 13 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


ure विश्वशुचे धियन्धेऽ ara मन्म॑ धीतिं भ॑रध्वम्‌ । 
भरे हविर्न बर्हिषि प्रीणानो वैश्वानराय यत॑ये मतीनाम्‌ 2 


| Pragnaye visvasuce dhiyandhe ’suraghne manma 
dhitim bharadhvam. Bhare havirna barhisi 
prinano vaisvanardya yataye matinam. 


To Agni, purifier of the world, inspirer of the 
mind and soul, and destroyer of evil and darkness, bear 
and offer all your thought, will and action in dedication 
as I, happy at heart in the assembly house of social yajna, 
dedicate mine to the leading light of the world, selfless 
guide and pioneer of action and endeavour for humanity. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 13 47 


त्वमग्रे शोचिषा शोशुचान आ रोद॑सी अपृणा जाय॑मानः | 
त्वं देवां अभिशस्तेरमुञ्चो वैरुवानर जातवेदो महित्वा ॥ २ ॥ 


2, Tvamagne socisad Sosucana a rodasi aprna 
jJayamanah. Tvam devan abhisasteramunco 
vaisvanara jatavedo mahitva. 


Agni, bright purifier of the world with light and 
inspiration, rising in action you fill the heaven and earth 
with light and purity. O spirit all pervasive and all 
knowing, leading light of humanity, with your might 
and majesty, protect the noble people from pride, 
calumny and imprecation. 


जातो aed थुव॑ना ret: पशून्न गोपा इर्यः परिज्मा । 
वैश्वानर ब्रह्म॑णे विन्द गातुं यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥३॥ 


a Jato yadgne bhuvana vyakhyah pasun na gopa 
iryah parijma. Vaisvanara brahmane vinda gatum 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Agni, rising, manifesting and moving all round 
every where freely, you shine and fill all regions of the 
world with light and inspiration, and, as a shepherd looks 
after, protects and guides his flock so, O leading light 
of humanity, all knowing and all pervasive, find ample 
appreciation and comfortable settlement for the scholar 
and teacher of the universal Vedic knowledge of 
existence. O scholars and leading lights of humanity, 
always protect and promote us with peace, prosperity 
and all round well being of life. 


48 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 14 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


समिध। जातवेदसे देवाय॑ देवहूतिभिः । 
हविर्भिः शुक्रशोचिषे नमस्विनो वयं दाशेमाग्रये ॥ ९ ॥ 


if Samidha jatavedase devaya devahutibhih. 
Havirbhih sukrasocise namasvino vayam dase- 
magnaye. 


Bearing holy fuel for the fire and fragrant 
materials for oblations, chanting divine words of 
invocation and invitation, and bowing in profound 
reverence, we offer homage in yajnic service of love 
and non-violence to Agni, self-refulgent lord of light, 
pure and potent giver of life and the universal vision 
and knowledge of life in the Veda. 


वयं ते अग्ने समिधा विधेम वयं दाम सुष्टुती य॑जत्र | 
वयं घृतेर्नाध्वरस्य होतर्वयं दव हविषां भद्रशोचे ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Vayam te agne samidha vidhema vayam dasema 
sustuti yajatra. Vayam ghrtenadhvar-asya hotar- 
vayam deva havisa bhadrasoce. 


Agni, light divine and fire of life, we offer you 
service with holy fuel for the rise of living flames. O 
lord adorable, most sociable, we offer you hymns of 
praise and worship. O lord high priest of the cosmic 
yajna of love and creation, giver of light and purity of 
well being, we offer you service and worship with ghrta 
and fragrant oblations of self-surrender to your glory 
of self-refulgence. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 15 49 


आ नो देवेधिरुपं देवहू तिम याहि वष॑ट्‌ कृतिं जुषाणः | 
तुभ्यं देवाय दाशतः स्याम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
नः॥ ३॥ 


a Ano devebhirupa devahitimagne yahi vasatkrtim 
jJusanah. Tubhyam devaya dasatah syama yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 

Agni, giver of light and purifier of life, listen to 
our prayer of the sages, accept our service and oblations 
and grace our life’s yajna with the bounties of divinity. 
We pray, may we ever abide in your service and divine 
favour, creating, producing, giving selflessly. O lord and 
all wise lovers of divinity, protect and promote us always 
with your gifts of peace and well being all round. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 15 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
उपसद्याय teed आस्ये जुहुता हविः । 
यो नो Afsana ९॥ 
I; Upasadyaya milhusa asye juhuta havih. 
Yo no nedisthamapyam. 


Let us offer the best of havi, holy food, into the 
holy fire, and homage to Agni, most generous, potent 
and generative power sitting next to us, a very closest 
of friends with an open door, ready with the best we 
need and desire. 


यः usd चर्षणीरभि निषसाद दमेदमे। 
क विर्गृहप॑तिर्युवां ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Yah panca carsanirabhi nisasada damedame. 
Kavir-grhapatir-yuva. 


50 RGVEDA 


To Agni, who abides with and stabilises the five 
orders of society in every household from door to door, 
the wise visionary, master protector and promoter of 
the home and family, youthful spirit and power of the 
light and fire of life and pranic energy. 


सनो वेदों अमात्य॑मगरी र॑क्षतु faved: | 
उतास्मान्पात्वंह॑सः ॥ ३ ॥ 
ai Sano vedo amatyamagni raksatu visvatah. 


Utasman patvanhasah. 


May he protect our wealth and knowledge and 
our family all round and also guard us against all sin 
and sinners. 


नवं नु स्तोम॑मग्रयें दिवः vaare sina 
वस्व॑ः कुविद्धनातिं नः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Navam nu stomamagnaye divah Syenaya jijanam. 


Vasvah kuvid vanati nah. 


I create a new song of adoration for Agni. who, 
like an angel of heaven, wise and great, begets us the 
wealth, honour and excellence of the world. 


corel यस्य श्रियो दृशे र यिर्वीरिव॑तो यथा | 
अग्रे यज्ञस्य शोच॑तः ॥ ५॥ 
5: Sparha yasya Sriyo drse rayirviravato yatha. 
Agre yajnasya Socatah. 
Like the wealth, honour and magnificence of a 
chief of heroic brave, the flaming splendour of Agni is 


glorious to the sight when it shines first and foremost 
of the graces of yajna. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 15 51 


सेमां dg वष॑ट्‌ कृतिमभिर्जुंषत नो गिर॑ः | 
यलि हव्यवाहनः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Semam vetu vasatkrtim-agnirjusata no girah. 
Yajistho havyavahanah. 


May that friendly and most adorable Agni, 
receiver of oblations and disseminator of fragrance, 
accept with pleasure this offer of service and oblations 
of ours and accept with love our words of celebration 
and submission. 


fA cat नश्य विश्पते द्युमन्तं देव धीमदहि। 
सुवीर॑मग्र आहुत ॥ ७ ॥ 


qt Ni tva naksya vispate dyumantam deva dhimahi. 
Suviramagna ahuta. 


Agni, loving and accessible protector and ruler 
of the people, brilliant and generous chief of heroic 
brave, universally honoured and invoked, we love and 
enshrine you in our heart and home with faith and 
reverence. 


ad seve दीदिहि स्वग्रयस्त्वयां वयम्‌। 
सुवीर स्त्वम॑स्मयुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ksapa usrasca didihi svagnayastvayad vayam. 
Suvirastvamasmayuh. 


Shine forth, beatify the night and brighten up 
the day with the light of sun rays, and by virtue of your 
brilliance let us shine too like holy fires. Chief of the 
youthful brave you are, our own, always for us. 


52 RGVEDA 


उप॑ त्वा सातये नरो विप्रासो यन्ति eftfafar: 1 
उपाक्षरा सहस्तिणी ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Upa tva sataye naro vipraso yanti dhitibhih. 
Upaksara sahasrini. 


Leading lights of humanity and holy sages 
approach you, meditate on you, for the acquisition of 
wealth of wisdom, you who are imperishable giver of a 
thousand gifts. 


अग्री रक्षांसि सेधति शुक्रशोचिरमर्त्यः। 
शुचिं: पावक FSA: ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Agni raksamsi sedhati Sukrasociramaryah. 
Sucih pavaka idyah. 


Agni counters, corrects, also destroys, 
wickedness. Immortal, purifying, adorable, the lord 
blazes with dazzling refulgence of fire and the sun. 


सनो राधांस्या भरेशानः सहसो यहो । 
भग॑श्च दातु वार्यम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Sano radhamsya bharesanah sahaso yaho. 
Bhagasca datu varyam. 


And that ruling power, a very image of patience, 
fortitude and omnipotence, may, we pray, bring us the 
best of means, materials and modes of success, and may 
the lord of power, honour and excellence bring us all 
we cherish and value in life. 


wana वीरवद्यशो eave सविता wat: | 
दितिश्च दाति वार्यम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 15 33 


12. Tvamagne viravad yaso devasca savita bhagah. 
Ditisca dati varyam. 

Agni, refulgent ruler, Deva Savita, generous 
creative power of inspiration, Bhaga, commanding 
power of wealth and excellence, Diti, law and ethics of 
universality, you bless us with honour and magnificence 
with noble progeny of our choice and ambition of the 
best order with freedom from suffering. 


अग्ने रक्षाणो अंह॑सः प्रतिं ष्म देव रीष॑तः। 
तपिंैर जरो दह।॥ ९३॥ 

13. Agne raksa no anhasah prati sma deva risatah. 
Tapisthairajaro daha. 


Agni, fiery ruler and generous lord of 
enlightenment, save us from sin, protect us from the 
sinful and the destroyers. Lord eternal and unaging, with 
your blazing law, justice and discipline, burn out evil, 
evil deeds and evil doers. 


अधां मही न आयस्यनाधृष्टो नृपीतये । 
पूर्भवा शतभुजिः ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. = 44/1व mahi na ayasyanadhrsto nrpitaye. 
Purbhava satabhujih. 


And O lord redoubtable, let the earth, the land, 
and the governance of the state, firm as adamant and 
strong as steel, be like a mother city of a hundred-fold 
defences for the protection, promotion and progress of 
the people. 


त्वं न॑: पाद्यंहंसो दोषावस्तरघायतः | 
दिवा नक्तमदाभ्य HN ९५५ ॥ 


54 RGVEDA 


15.  Tvam nah pahyanhaso dosavastaraghayatah. 
Diva naktamadabhya. 


O lord undaunted and unchallengeable against 
the violent, the saboteur and the terrorist, save us and 
protect us from sin, inequity and violence in the day 
and at night. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 16 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


एना at अग्निं नम॑सोर्जो नपातमा ga । 
प्रियं चेतिष्ठमरतिं स्व॑ध्वरं विश्व॑स्य दूतममूत॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ena vo agnim namasorjo napatama huve. Priyam 
cetisthamaratim svadhvaram visvasya dutam- 
amrtam. 


O people, for your sake, with food, homage and 
self-surrender, I invoke and serve Agni, giver of light 
and fire of life, product as well as the source of unfailing 
energy, strength and power, cherished and valuable 
friend, most enlightened and constant agent of the 
holiest programmes of love and non-violent 
development, and imperishable carrier and messenger 
of world communications. 


स योजते अरुषा विश्वभोजसा a दु॑द्र वत्स्वांहुतः | 
सुब्रह्मा यज्ञः सुशमी वसूनां देवं राधो जनानाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2. Sa yojate arusa visvabhojasa sa dudravat sva- 
hutah. Subrahma yajnah susami vasunam devam 
radho jananam. 


That Agni, leading power of nature and 
humanity, uses bright natural elements of universal value 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 16 55 


such as sun rays, fire and water, like horses harnessed 
to the chariot, and, when invoked and raised, would 
move at the fastest speed. He is the master of natural 
knowledge and natural materials, adorable, noble and 
potent worker, and the accomplisher of means, materials 
and projects of humanity for common success and 
progress. 


उद॑स्य शोचिर्स्थादाजुह्नस्य tees: | 
उद्‌ gard अरुषासो दिविस्पृशः समभिमिंन्धते नरः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Si Udasya Ssocirasthadajuhvanasya milhusah. Ud 
dhumaso arusaso divisprsah samagnimindhate 
narah. 


High rises the radiant glory of this fire of Agni 
fed on holy food while the flames and fragrance soar 
and touch the skies, when people light and raise the fire 
with profuse oblations of ghrta offered to the bountiful 
power. 


तं त्वा दूतं Gone य॒शस्त॑मं cat आ वीतये वह । 
विर्वा सूनो सहसो मर्तभोजना रास्व तद्यत्त्वेम॑हे ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tam tva dutam krnmahe yasastamam devan a 
vitaye vaha. Visva suno sahaso martabhojana 
rasva tad yat tvemahe. 


We light, raise and develop the holy fire as 
messenger and harbinger of excellent gifts of life’s light 
and fragrance. So do we elect, adore and anoint you on 
the highest and most glorious office of the nation. Bring 
us the divine nobilities and brilliancies of the world of 
nature and humanity together and give us all the 
cherished blessings of life for which purpose we love 


56 RGVEDA 


and adore the fire and you, O lord of power and honour 
manifest and embodiment of excellence. 


त्वमग्रे गृहप॑तिस्त्वं होता नो अध्वरे। 
त्वं पोता विषशुववार प्रचेता यक्षि वेषिं च वार्यम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


१ Tvamagne grhapatistvam hota no adhvare. Tvam 
pota visvavara praceta yaksi vesi ca varyam. 


Agni, fiery and enlightened ruling power of 
nature and humanity, you are the protective and 
promotive head of the family and the home land. You 
are the receiver and giver of every thing in the loving 
and non-violent business of the nation’s governance and 
administration. You are the purifier, sanctifier and giver 
of enlightenment universally adored. You organise, 
accomplish and pervade the yajnic business of life and 
living together by choice and common will. 


कृधि ta यज॑मानाय सुक्रतो त्वं हि tae असिं | 
आ न॑ ऋते शिशीहि विर्व॑मृत्विजं सुशंसो यश्च दश्च॑ते ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Krdhiratnam yajamanaya sukrato tvam hi ratna- 
dha asi. A na rte sisthi visvamrtvijam susamso 
yasca daksate. 


O presiding power of holy actions in life, bestow 
the jewels of life upon the yajamana as you are the lord 
ruler and disburser of the world’s wealth. Shine, sharpen 
and inspire us to do well in the truth and law of the 
world of nature and humanity and advance the person 
whoever commands honour and excellence and rises as 
expert performer in the universal yajna of evolution and 
progress at the social level. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 16 57 


त्वे अंगने स्वाहुत fared: सन्तु Gea: | 
यन्तारो ये मघवानो जर्नानामूर्वान्दयंन्त गोनाम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


di Tve agne svahuta priyasah santu surayah. 
Yantaro ye maghavano jananamurvan dayanta 
gonam. 


Agni, ruling light of the world, invoked with 
reverence and adored, let those brave leaders and 
eminent scholars commanding wealth and power be dear 
and closer to you who move forward, and lead, control 
and protect the defenders and promoters of the people, 
lands and cows. 


येषामिव्छा घृतहस्ता दुरोण ओं अपि प्राता निषीद॑ति। 
तोस्त्रायस्व सहस्य दरुहो निदो यच्छा नः शर्म दीर्घश्रुत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yesamila ghrtahasta durona an api prata nisidati. 
Tanstrayasva sahasya druho nido yaccha nah 
Sarma dirghasrut. 


Patient and potent lord ruler of light, strength 
and power, protect from jealousy and malignity those 
good people in whose home sweet and sacred speech 
and manners, like a gracious lady of generosity with 
sweetened hands perfumed with ghrta and holy water, 
reigns and resides and, O lord of wide reputation and 
long experience of the voice of divinity, give us the home 
abounding in peace and comfort, love and courtesy. 


स मन्द्रया च जिह्वया वह्धिरासा विदुष्ट॑रः। 
अग्न रयिं मघव॑द्धयो न आ वंह हव्यदातिं च सूदय ॥ ९॥ 
Sa mandraya ca jihvaya vahnirasa vidustarah. 


Agne rayim maghavadbhyo na ठ vaha havyadatim 
ca sudaya. 


58 RGVEDA 


Agni, leading light and fire of life, most 
pervasive power ever on the move, all aware and self- 
conscious, receiver of the inputs into the fire of 
consumption and disseminator of the fragrances for the 
living system of existence by charming flames, pray 
refine and intensify the holy inputs of havi and bring 
higher returns of honour, excellence and generosity for 
those who manage the wealth and power of humanity 
for the common good. 


ये राधांसि ददत्यश्व्या मघा कामेन श्रव॑सो महः। 
at अंह॑सः पिपृहि adfrs शतं पूर्भिर्यविष्ठ्य ॥ ९०॥ 


10. {< radhamsi dadatyasvya magha kamena sravaso 
mahah. Tan anhasah piprhi partrbhistvam Satam 
purbhiryavisthya. 


O lord most youthful, power enlightened, there 
are those generous souls who, of their own will and 
desire, provide all possible and attainable means and 
materials for successful living, food and energy, wealth 
and power, and great honour and reputation for 
excellence. O lord, protect them from sin and evil, 
promote them with a hundred safeguards and 
fortifications. 


देवो dt द्रविणोदाः पूर्णा विंवष्ट्यासिच॑म्‌। 
set सिञ्चध्वमुप वा पृणध्वमादिद्रो। देव ओहते ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Devo vo dravinodah purnam vivastyasicam. Ud 
va sincadhvamupa va prnadhvamddid vo deva 
ohate. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord giver of wealth, honour 
and excellence, loves to have your fire of yajnic action 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 17 59 


sprinkled with overflowing ladle of ghrta and the highest 
refined action. Serve him closely, feed the fire to the 
full, let the flames rise, and the generous lord refulgent 
would lead you to the heights of prosperity and 
excellence. 


तं होतारमध्वरस्य प्रचेतसं वद्धिं देवा अकृण्वत । 
दधाति ta विधते सुवीर्य'मगिर्जनाय दाशुषे ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tam hotaram-adhvarasya pracetasam vahnim 
deva akrnvata. Dadhati ratnam vidhate suvirya- 
magnirjanaya dasuse. 


Let the brilliant, noble and generous leaders of 
humanity choose, sanctify and anoint that intelligent 
all-aware person as Agni, leader, ruler and high-priest 
of the yajnic social order of love, peace and non- 
violence, who would create and bear the jewel wealth 
and values of life and high power and prestige of the 
noblest order for generous self-sacrificing people 
dedicated to the yajna of the social system. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 17 
Agni Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
अग्रे भव॑ सुषमिधा समिद्ध उत बर्हिरुर्विया वि स्तुणी- 
ATAU ९॥ 
tl. Agne bhava susamidha samiddha uta barhi- 
rurviya vi strnitam. 


Agni, O leading light, O brilliant seeker, O fire 
divine of yajna, be kindled with the holy fuel offered, 
and let the heat and light and fragrance of life spread 
over the wide earth, the skies and the vast spaces. 


60 RGVEDA 
उत द्वारं उशतीविं श्रयन्तामुत देवां उशत आ AST २॥ 


Uta dvara uSsatirvi $srayantamuta devan uSata a 
vaheha. 


And let the doors of love and ecstasy be thrown 
open, and let the divinities inspired with the light and 
love of holy ambition enter. O leading light, bring them 
in hither. 


अगर वीहि हविषा यक्षि देवान्त्स्व॑ध्वरा shure जातवेदः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Agne vthi havisa yaksi devantsvadhvara krnuhi 
jatavedah. 


Agni, light and fire of life and intelligence, all 
knowing, all reaching, go to the bounties of nature and 
brilliancies of humanity, join them with the light and 
fragrance you bear by the oblations of havi received, 
and win their favour of blessings for our yajna of the 
business of life and living. 


स्वध्वरा करति जातवेदा यक्च॑देवां अमृताग्पिप्रय॑च्य।॥ ४॥ 


4. Svadhvara karati jataveda yaksad devan amrtan 
piprayacca. 


Jataveda, all knowing, all reaching power of 
nature and humanity, yajna fire and teacher, 
communicates with the undecaying bounties of nature 
and the immortal souls of enlightened humans and 
seekers of enlightenment, renders them favourable to 
the yajnic programmes of peace and non-violent 
development and thus gives them fulfilment. 


वंस्व विर्वा वार्यीणि प्रचेतः सत्या भ॑वन्त्वाशिषों नो 
अद्य ॥५॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 61 


a. Vamsva visva varyani pracetah satya bhava- 
ntvasiso no adya. 


O man of knowledge and enlightenment, acquire 
and disseminate all the cherished gifts and virtues of 
the world so that all our hopes and ambitions for a full 
living may be truly fulfilled here and now. 


त्वामु ते दधिरे हव्यवाहं देवासो! अग्र ऊर्ज आ AAT ॥ & ॥ 


6. Tvamu te dadhire havyavaham devaso agna urja 
a napatam. 


Agni, light and fire of life and humanity, all 
divinities of nature and humanity acknowledge, take 
over and advance you for their life’s fulfilment, you 
being the source of infallible hope, energy and karma 
and bearer as well as harbinger of the divine invitations 
to live. 


ad dara ata: स्याम महो नो रला वि द॑ध इयानः W198 ॥ 


1 Te te devaya dasatah syama maho no ratna vi 
dadha iyanah. 


O great one, as you come, you bear and bring 
for us the jewel wealths, honours and excellences of 
life. We pray may we too with gratitude be servers and 
givers in honour of the generous and brilliant light and 
fire of life. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 18 


Indra (1-21) and Sudasa Paijavanasya Dana stuti (22- 
25) Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


त्वे ह यत्पितरज्चिन्न इन्द्र fagat वामा ज॑रितारो असन्वन्‌ । 
त्वे गाव॑ः सुदुघास्त्वे ह्यश्वास्त्वं वसुं देवयते वनिष्ठः ॥ ९॥ 


62 RGVEDA 


I Tve ha yat pitarascinna indra visva vama jaritaro 
asanvan. Tve gavah sudughastve hyasvastvam 
vasu devayate vanisthah. 


Indra, lord of power, splendour and beneficence, 
ruler of the world, all beauties and graces of life which 
our parents and sustainers pray for and achieve, all fertile 
cows, lands and lights with high yield, all horses and 
fast communications are there for them because you are 
there. All wealth of home, habitat and materials, you 
alone give to the devotee who prays for the favours and 
light of divinity. 

राजेव हि जनिंधिः क्षेष्येवाऽव द्युभिरभि विदुष्कविः सन्‌। 
पिशा गिरो मघवन्गोभथिरश्वैस्त्वायतः शिशीहि राये 
अस्मान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


0. Rajeva hi janibhih ksesyeva’va dyubhirabhi 
viduskavih san. Pisa giro maghavan gobhirasvai- 
stvayatah sisthi raye asman. 


Like a brilliant prince you live with the people 
all round, every way, every day. Being a scholar, poet 
and visionary, inspire us, your admirers, with your lights 
of wisdom, and refine our voices of admiration with 
gentle forms and manners. Lord of wealth, power and 
honour, sharpen our plans and initiatives with the 
development of lands and cows, horses and transport 
for our assets and prosperity. 


इमा उ त्वा पस्य॒धानासो अत्र॑ मन्द्रा गिरो देवयन्तीरूपं स्थुः 1 
अर्वाची ते पथ्या राय एतु स्याम ते सुमताविन्द्र शर्मन्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


छ Ima u tva pasprdhanaso atra mandra giro 
devayantirupa sthuh. Arvaci te pathya raya etu 
syama te sumatavindra Sarman. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 63 


Indra, glorious ruler, these are the people and 
our voices of admiration, earnest and joyous, vying with 
each other in love and reverence on this occasion, which 
may, we pray, reach you and be accepted. May your 
modern ethics and policies lead us all to wealth, honour 
and excellence. May we always abide in peace and 
prosperity in a happy home under your care and 
kindness. 


धेनुं न त्वा सूयव॑से दुदुक्षन्नुप ब्रह्माणि ससृजे AAs: | 
त्वामिन्मे गोप॑तिं विश्व॑ आहाऽऽ न इन्द्र॑ः सुमतिं 
ग॒न्त्वच्छ॑ ।। ४ ॥ 


4. Dhenum na tva suyavase duduksannupa brahmani 
sasrje vasisthah. Tvaminme gopatim visva 
aha’’na indrah sumatim gantvaccha. 


As a shepherd goes to the cow in a rich pasture 
for good milk, so the man of peace and enlightenment 
approaches you seeking fulfilment and creates songs 
of appreciation in praise of your policy and performance 
as a ruler. Indra, O lord ruler of the world, the whole 
world calls you the preserver, defender and promoter 
of the earth and her social order for me, and I pray you 
enjoy the favour and goodwill of the people for our sake. 


अ्णींसि चित्पप्रथाना सुदास इन्द्रो गाधान्य॑कृणोत्सुपारा | 
शर्धन्तं शिम्युमुचथ॑स्य नव्यः शापं सिन्धूंनामकृणो- 
दशंस्तीः॥५॥ ` 

>: Arnamsi cit paprathana sudasa indro gadhan- 
yakrnot supara. Sardhantam simyum-ucathasya 
navyah sapam sindhunam-akrnod-asastth. 


Indra, brilliant ruler, rising anew like the sun, 


64 RGVEDA 


controls and bounds overflooded expansive waters into 
fordable limits for comfortable movement of business, 
converts the violent to peaceable beneficence, silences 
the imprecations of the vociferous and controls the 
erratic behaviour of the rivers and the seas. 


पुरोव्ा इत्तुर्वशो यक्षुरासीद्राये मत्स्यासो निशिता अपीव । 
श्रुष्टि च्॑रुर्भृग॑वो gadva war सखायमतर eset: ॥ & ॥ 


6. Purola it turvaso yaksurasid raye matsyaso nisita 
apiva. Srustim cakrur-bhrgavo druhya-vasca 
sakha sakhayam-atarad visucoh. 


The ruler is chief of all, all controller and instant 
achiever, keen yajaka and sociable with open doors, 
sharpest reacher to the target like fish in the ocean, for 
economic and social progress. Men of economic 
ambition, science and wisdom do him honour, enemies 
cower before him, and as a friend he saves and supports 
the friend of versatile genius. 


आ पक्थासो Tara भनन्ताऽकल्िनासो featur: 
शिवासः | आ योऽ न॑ंयत्सधमा आर्य॑स्य गव्या तृत्सुभ्यो 
अजगन्युधा नून्‌॥ ७॥ 


De A pakthaso bhalanaso bhananta’linaso visaninah 
sivasah. A yo’nayat sadhama aryasya gavya 
trtsubhyo ajagan yudha nrn. 


Men of ripe age and experience, vibrant experts 
of yajnic material, nobly born and cultured, graceful 
and highly sagacious, who bring about peace and joy 
for all, approve and glorify the ruler who leads and 
guides members of the council who manage the 
governance and administration of the land for the noble 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 65 


people and organise the defence forces to deal with the 
violent, destructive and lawless elements from within 
and without. 


दुराध्यो ३ अदितिं स्त्रेवयं॑न्तोऽ चेतसो वि Saya परुष्णीम्‌। 
मह्वाविंव्यक्पृथिवीं पत्य॑मानः पशुष्क विर॑शायच्याय- 
मानः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Duradhyo aditim srevayanto’cetaso vi jagrbhre 
parusnim. Mahnavivyak prthivim patyamanah 
pasus-kavir-aSayac-cayamanah. 


Thoughtless men of evil disposition try to fail 
his policy of universal and inviolable values and grab 
lands of fertility. But Indra, a man of vision, all round 
perceptive, saving the land and policy frustrates their 
designs and maintains national integrity and rests in 
peace and fearlessness. 


ईयुरर्थं न न्यर्थं परुष्णीमाशुश्चनेद॑भिपित्वं ज॑गाम | सुदास 
इन्द्रः सुतुकौ अमित्रानरन्धयन्मानुषे वधि॑वाचः॥ ९ ॥ 


2 Tyurartham na nyartham parusnim-asuscaneda- 
bhipitvam jagama. Sudasa indrah sutukan amitra 
narandhayan-manuse vadhrivacah. 


When Indra, generous ruler and commander 
equipped fully with assistant forces, overcomes 
unfriendly powers and evil voices rampant in society 
and thus reaches his target of correction and 
achievement in the daily business of life’s governance 
and administration including the optimum means of 
sustenance and development, the people too realise the 
ends of his universal policy and achieve their goals of 
life in definiteness without any delay. 


66 RGVEDA 


gantat न यव॑सादगोपा यथाकृतमभि सित्रं चितासंः। 
पृश्निंगावः पृर्निनिप्रेषितासः श्रुष्टिं च्॑र्नियुतो रन्त॑- 
यञ्च ॥ ९०॥ 


10. 01410 na yavasddagopa yathakrtamabhi 
mitram citasah. Prsnigavah prsninipresitasah 
Srustim cakrurniyuto rantayasca. 


Just as cows free from the cowherd rush to the 
master from the pasture, as friends rush to meet a friend, 
as people having performed good actions by nature and 
law advance to receive their prize, and as the sun rays 
radiate across space and sky to meet the variegated earth, 
so do the forces of Indra, whether organised in battle 
order or resting off duty, and the people at peace rally 
and rush to Indra, the ruler, for service immediately on 
the clarion call. 


एकं च यो fa otf च॑ श्रवस्या वैकण्योर्जनात्राजा न्यस्त॑: | 
दस्मो न सदान्नि शिशाति बर्हिः शूरः सर्गमकृणोदिन्द्र 
एषाम्‌ SS 


11. Ekam ca yo vimSatim ca Sravasya vaikarnayor- 
janan raja nyastah. Dasmo na sadman ni Sisati 
barhih surah sargam-akrnod-indra esam. 


The ruler, personally resigned and socially 
committed as a trustee, commanding power and 
brilliance as Indra, dedicated to the elimination of want 
and suffering, creates and ministers a senate of twenty 
and one reputed people over a variety of views and 
opinions and thus, brave and brilliant as he is, organises 
the nation into a dynamic social order like a high priest 
organising and energising the vedi in the house of yajna. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 67 


अधं श्रुतं कवषं वृब्दमप्स्वनुं द्रुह्यं नि वृंणग्व्र॑बाहुः । वृणाना 
अत्र॑ सख्याय सख्यं त्वायन्तो ये अम॑दन्ननुं त्वा ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Adha srutam kavasam vrddham-apsvanu 
druhyum ni vrnag-vajrabahuh. Vrnana atra sa- 
khyaya sakhyam tvayanto ye amadann-anu tva. 


The lord of thunder power and justice engages 
the scholar, the teacher, the senior and even the jealous 
critic and opponent into the thick of social action, 
choosing some positively and others to weed out 
negativity. Thus they too, O ruler, opt for you, some 
opting for you as a friend for friendship, and others to 
be with you and around, but all in order to be happy 
and joyous in consonance with you. 


वि सद्यो विश्वां दृंहितान्येषामिन्द्रः पुरः सह॑सा aa ad: | 
व्यान॑वस्य तृत्सं वे गयं भाग्जेष्म पूरु face yerar- 
चम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Vi sadyo visva drmhitanyesamindrah purah 
sahasa sapta dardah. Vyanavasya trtsave gayam 
bhagjesma purum vidathe mrdhravacam. 


Let the ruler with his enlightened forces always 
and at the earliest rule out and destroy the sevenfold 
citadels of these outmoded enemies, and let him serve 
and support the home and institutions of values anew 
for the rising people of free thought and action. Let us 
always realise and win the values of the eternal and 
liquid flow of the holy voice in our yajnic business of 
systemic life. 


नि गव्यवोऽ न॑वो द्रुह्यवश्च षष्टिः शता सुषुपुः षट्‌ सहस्रा । 
षष्टिर्वीरासो अधि we data विश्वेदिन्द्रस्य वीयीौ 
कृतानि ॥ ९४ ॥ 


68 RGVEDA 


14. Nigavyavo’navo druhyavasca sastih sata susupuh 
sat sahasra. Sastirviraso adhi sad duvoyu 
visvedindrasya virya krtani. 


All the wondrous deeds of the world are 
accomplished by Indra, since sixty-six of his brave 
watriors devoted to their lord, all fervent, new and 
ferocious fighters dedicated to the land and light, send 
to eternal sleep sixtysix thousand of his enemies. 


इन्द्रैणौते तृत्स॑वो afataron आपो नसृष्टा उधवन्त नीचींः। 
दुर्मित्रासः प्रकलविन्मिमाना जहुर्विश्वानि भोज॑ना 
सुदासे ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Indrenaite trtsavo vevisana apo na srsta adha- 
vanta nicth. Durmitrasah prakalavinmimana 
jJahurvisvani bhojana sudase. 


There furious warriors overwhelming the enemy 
like turbulent waters rushing down hill are the creation 
of Indra, and they, over-coming and cutting to size the 
enemies and strategists camouflaged as friends, are 
prepared to renounce all comforts for the sake of their 
devotion to the generous master and ruler. 


अर्ध वीरस्य श्तपाम॑निन्द्रं परा शर्धन्तं नुनुदे अभि क्षाम्‌। 
इन्द्रो मन्युं मन्युम्यो मिमाय भेजे पथो वर्तनिं पत्य॑- 
मानः॥ ९६॥ 


16. Ardham virasya $rtapamanindram para sardha- 
ntam nunude abhi ksam. Indro manyum manyu- 
myo mimaya bheje patho vartanim patyamanah. 


Indra, ruler of the earth, inspires and promotes 
the person who promotes the brave, prepares ripe inputs 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 69 


for yajnic development, and challenges and eliminates 
want and dishonour from the world. Being the destroyer 
of pride and anger, he reduces the proud and angry to 
zero, and promotes, defends and serves the paths of 
rectitude and processes of law and justice. 


आश्रणं चित्तद्वेकं चकार सिंह्यं चित्पेत्वेना जघान । 
अव॑ स्रक्तीर्वेश्यावृश्चदिन्द्रः प्राय॑च्छद्धिश्वा भोज॑ना 
सुदासे ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Adhrena cit tadvekam cakara sinhyam cit petvena 
jJaghana. Ava sraktir-vesyavrscad-indrah praya- 
cchad visva bhojana sudase. 


By patience, fortitude and stabilized power, 
Indra, destroyer of evil and enmity, unites and 
consolidates the world into one socio-political order. 
With limited but committed powers of love and 
creativity, he defeats the tigers of violence and 
destruction. With pointed advance like the penetration 
of a needle, he routs deep formations of hostility and 
opposition. And thus he provides all sustenance and 
peaceful comfort and prosperity for a happy and 
generous humanity. 


ङाश्वन्तो हि शत्र॑वो रार धुष्ट भेदस्य चिच्छर्धतो विन्द 
रन्धिम्‌। मती एनः स्तुवतो यः कृणोति तिग्मं तस्मिन्नि 
ज॑हि वरं मिन्द्र ni ९८ ॥ 

|  Sasvanto hi Satravo raradhuste bhedasya cicchar- 


dhato vinda randhim. Martan enah stuvato yah 
krnoti tigmam tasmin ni jahi vajra-mindra. 


Indra, lord destroyer of division, opposition and 
hostility, let your persistent enemies be subdued 


70 RGVEDA 


relentlessly. Let the persistent purveyors of division and 
dissidence be brought to justice. And whoever does evil 
and violence to the supportive and celebrative people 
among humanity, strike the sharp and instant bolt of 
justice upon them. 


आवदिन्द्रं यमुना तृत्स॑वश्च प्रात्र॑ Ye सर्वताता मुषायत्‌ । 
अजासश्च शिग्रवो यक्षवश्च बलिं शीर्षाणि जश्रुर- 
vertu ९९॥ 


19.  Avadindram yamuna trtsavasca pratra bhedam 
sarvatata musayat. Ajasasca Sigravo yaksavasca 
balim Ssirsani jabhrurasvyani. 


Let the powers of justice, keepers of law and 
order and defence guards provide security cover for 
Indra, ruler of the social order. Let the ruler eliminate 
all elements of division, dissension and secession from 
this one, united and universal order of governance and 
human welfare. And let the weapon launchers, 
intelligence network using code language, supporting 
and cooperative yajnic powers of the system bear and 
offer him the highest loyalty and conduct fastest services 
of defence and communication for him. 


न त॑ इन्द्र सुमतयो न राय॑ः संचक्षे पूवी उषसो न sett: 1 
देव॑कं चिन्मान्यमानं ज॑घन्थाऽव त्मना बहतः great 
भेत्‌ ॥ २०॥ 

20. Nata indra sumatayo na rayah samcakse purva 


usaso na nutnah. Devakam cinmanyamanam 
Jaghantha’va tmana brhatah sambaram bhet. 


Indra, lord ruler of power, honour and 
excellence, like the beauty, blessedness and grandeur 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 71 


of the dawns old and new, your knowledge and wisdom, 
ethics and policies and your wealth and excellence 
cannot be described, since you achieve the adorable light 
of divinity, shatter the pride and pretence of simulated 
brilliance, and by your innate power and splendour break 
the greatest and deepest clouds to bring down showers 
of rain. 


ये गृहादम॑मदुस्त्वाया प॑राशारः waatqa fas: 1 न ते 
भोजस्य सख्यं म्र॑षन्ताऽ्धां Gea: सुदिना व्युच्छान्‌ ॥। २९॥ 


21. (21८ ८ grhad-amamadus-tvaya parasarah sataya- 
turvasisthah. Na te bhojasya sakhyam mrsanta’- 
dha suribyah sudina vyucchan. 


By virtue of your blazing glory and showers of 
generosity, the sage who dispels evils, the warrior who 
goes forward with a hundred and faces many hundreds, 
and the host who provides the best shelter and hospitality 
like mother earth, all who rejoice in the home as well as 
outside, would never neglect, forget or forsake the 
kindness and friendship of yours who are the ruler and 
protector of the world community. And we pray may 
happy days ever shine upon these brave, learned and 
generous people. 


द्वे नसुर्देवव॑तः शते गो्द्धा cat वधूमन्ता Gare: | 
san पैजवनस्य दानं होतेव सद्य पर्येमि रेभ॑न्‌ ॥ २२॥ 


22. 121 napturdevavatah Sate gordva ratha vadhu- 
manta sudasah. Arhannagne paijavanasya danam 
hoteva sadma paryemi rebhan. 


Two hundred cows and two chariots drawn by 
double motive powers are the gifts of the generous 


72 RGVEDA 


yajamana, grand child of a dynamic, pious and 
progressive God-fearing yajaka. O Agni, lord and leader 
of the light and fire of the corporate life of humanity, 
happily acknowledging, singing and celebrating the gift 
of the man of peace and progress, I go round the house 
of yajna with reverence like the high priest and the 
yajaka myself. 


चत्वारो मा पैजवनस्य दानाः afesa: Heal FATS । 
ऋज्रासो मा पृथिविष्ठाः सुदासंस्तोकं तोकाय श्रव॑से 
वहन्ति ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. = Catvaro ma paijavanasya danah smaddistayah 
krsanino nireke. Rjraso ma prthivisthah sudasa- 
stokam tokaya Sravase vahanti. 


Four-fold gifts of the generous yajamana, grand 
child of the pious progressive yajaka, golden majestic 
and moving straight on the right course in life in the 
most stable manner without jolt or deviation on the earth, 
bear me like a child of divinity to my grand child for 
the achievement of honour and excellence. 


यस्य stat रोद॑सी अन्तरुर्वी शीर्ष्णेशीष्णो विबभाजा 
विभक्ता। सप्तेदिन्द्रं न स्रवतो गृणन्ति नि युंध्यामधिम॑- 
शिशाद्‌- भीक ॥ २४॥ 


34. Yasya Sravo rodasi antarurvi Sirsnesirsne viba- 
bhaja vibhakta. Saptedindram na sravato grnanti 


^ ° ^ ~ 


ni yudhyamadhim-asisad-abhike. 


One whose honour and fame rings in the skies 
and over the wide earth, whose gifts of generosity are 
distributed over from person to person of eminence, 
whom the seven fluent regions of heaven and earth 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 19 73 


celebrate and glorify like Indra, lord of light and fire 
and power, and who fights out a war monger in battle 
close at hand as one would eliminate a disease, such a 
person and power is fit to be the ruler. 


इमं न॑रो मरूतः सश्चतानु दिवोदासं न पितरं सुदासः | 
अविष्टना पैजवनस्य केतं दूणाशं श्चत्रमजरं दुवोयु ।॥ २५॥ 


25. Imam naro marutah sascatanu divodasam na 
pitaram sudasah. Avistana paijavanasya ketam 
dunasam ksatramajaram duvoyu. 


O leading lights of humanity and vibrant people 
of the world in general, join, support and celebrate this 
generous giver of light and life like the father creator of 
the generous yajaka and high priest of world yajna, and 
there by join and integrate with the divine and 
undecaying social order which is the irresistible will 
and creation of the gracious lord of peace and 
forgiveness. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 19 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


यस्तिग्मश्यंङ्खो वृषभो न भीम एकः कृष्टीश्च्यावयति प्र 
विश्वाः । a: ङश्व॑तो अदाशुषो गय॑स्य प्रयन्तासि 
सुष्वितराय वेदः ॥ ९॥ 

i, Yastigmasrngo vrsabho na bhima ekah krsti- 
S§cyavayati pra visvah. Yah sasvato adasuso 
gayasya prayantasi susvitaraya vedah. 

Indra, lord commander of weapons sharp and 


blazing as rays of light, virile, generous and yet fearsome 
as a bull, is the one supreme who guides, controls, rules 


74 RGVEDA 


and inspires the world community, and he is the one 
who always is the supporting power of the house and 
children of the indigent who cannot afford to pay for 
education and development. O lord, you are the guide 
and giver of wealth and knowledge to the man dedicated 
to the yajnic development of humanity. 


त्वं ह त्यदिन्द्र कुत्समावः शुश्रषमाणस्तन्वां समर्ये | दासं 
यच्छुष्णं कुय॑वं न्यस्मा अर॑न्धय आर्जुनेयाय शिक्ष॑न्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Tvam ha tyadindra kutsamavah susrusama- 
nastanva samarye. Dasam yacchusnam kuyavam 
nyasma arandhaya arjuneyaya Siksan. 


Indra, brilliant ruler, you govern and strike your 
thunderbolt of justice and punishment, listen to the voice 
of the people in the battle business of life and protect 
the sagely man of judgement and discretion with your 
force when you fight the demon of drought, punish the 
selfish exploiter and food polluter and help and arrange 
for the education of the children of noble mothers all 
for our sake. 


त्वं ष्णो eect वीतहव्यं प्रावो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः सुदासम्‌ | 
प्र पौरुकुत्सिं त्रसदस्युमावः क्षेत्र॑साता वृत्रहत्येषु पूरुम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Tvam dhrsno dhrsata vitahavyam pravo visva- 
bhirutibhih sudasam. Pra paurukutsim trasada- 
syumavah ksetrasata vrtrahatyesu purum. 


O bold and determined ruler, with all your power 
and determination and with all your methods and tactics 
of defence and offence, protect and preserve the assets 
of the nation acquired, support the commander of 
services, guard the wielders of high class weapons and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 19 75 


protect their families, defend the powers of law and 
order against crime, and in the battle against want and 
darkness and for victory in the battle field of defence 
and development, protect the supply line and citizens 
of the land. 


त्वं नृभिर्नृमणो देववीतौ भूरीणि वृत्रा हर्यश्व हंसि । 
त्वं नि दस्युं चुमुरिं धुनिं चाऽस्वापयो दभीतये Gerd ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tvam nrbhir-nrmano devavitau bhurini vrtra 
haryasva hamsi. Tvam ni dasyum cumurim 
dhunim ca’svapayo dabhitaye suhantu. 


O leader and commander equipped with 
transport, communications and armoured fighting 
forces, cherished and honoured ruler of the heart of the 
nation, in the battle business of the protection and 
advancement of the divinities of nature and humanity 
you fight out and eliminate the cumulated forces of 
darkness and destruction with the assistance and 
cooperation of the leading people. You lay to sleep and 
totally destroy the violent criminal, the thief and the 
terrorist in order to suppress and root out the forces of 
negation and destruction. 


तव॑ च्यौलानिं वज्रहस्त तानि नव यत्पुरो नवतिं च॑ cer: 1 
निवेशने शततमाविवेषीरहञ्च वृत्रं नमुचिमुताहन्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


>, Tava cyautnani vajrahasta tani nava yat puro 
navatim ca sadyah. NivesSane Satatamavivesira- 
hanca vrtram namucimutahan. 


O wielder of the thunderbolt, those frightful 
forces of yours which instantly destroy nintynine 
citadels of want and darkness and hundreds more for 


76 RGVEDA 


the entry of light and justice, pray demolish the 
unbreakable walls of the forts of impenetrable 
ignorance, superstition, prejudice, hatred and violence. 


सना ता त॑ इन्द्र भोज॑नानि Tears दाशुषे Gara । वृष्णे 
ते हरी वृष॑णा युनज्मि व्यन्तु ब्रह्माणि पुरुशाक वाज॑म्‌ ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Sana ta ta indra bhojanani ratahavyaya dasuse 
sudase. Vrsne te hari vrsna yunajmi vyantu 
brahmani purusaka vajam. 


Indra, lord of light and power, those permanent 
gifts and protections of the world of existence you have 
created and granted for the oblation bearing yajaka, for 
the generous man of charity, and for the commander of 
the protective forces of humanity, and those mighty 
motive forces of life’s power and generosity which I 
harness in your service may, O lord of all ruling power, 
we pray, bring us all voices of Divinity, all means and 
modes of sustenance, and all success and progress in 
our life. 


मा ते अस्यां संहसावन्परिं्टावघायं भूम हरिवः are | 
त्राय॑स्व नोऽ वृकेभिर्वरूथेस्तवं प्रियासः सूरिषु स्याम ॥ ७॥ 


ce Ma te asyam sahasavan paristavaghaya bhuma 
harivah paradai. Trayasva no’vrkebhirvariuthai- 
stava priyasah surisu syama. 


O lord of peace, patience and justice, ruler of 
dynamic powers and people, in this social order of your 
governance, let us not be exposed to a state of throw 
away sin and crime. Save us by virtue of the company 
of non-violent, best and wisest protective people. Let 
us abide among your dearest favourites and loved ones, 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 19 77 
among the brave, the wise and the virtuous. 


प्रियास sa मघवन्नभिष्टौ नरो मदेम शरणे aaa: 1 
नि तुर्वशं नि याद्वं शिशीह्यतिथिग्वाय शंस्यं करिष्यन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Priyasa it te maghavann-abhistau naro madema 
sarane sakhayah. Ni turvasam ni yadvam Sisthya- 
tithigvaya Samsyam karisyan. 


Lord of wealth, honour and excellence, let us 
all, leaders and friends of yours, abide and rejoice as 
your dearest in the protective shelter of your love and 
good will for our desired aims. Inspire and refine the 
nearest settled neighbour as well as the traveller on the 
move, raising the generous host in honour and praise 
for hospitality. 


सद्यश्चिन्नु ते मघवन्नभिष्टौ नर॑: शंसन्त्युक्थशास उक्था | 
ये ते हवेभिर्वि पणीरदांशन्नस्मान्वर॑णीष्व युज्याय तस्यै ।॥ ९॥ 


a, Sadyascinnu te maghavann-abhistau narah sam- 
santyukthasasa uktha. Ye te havebhir-vi paninra- 
dasann-asman vrnisva yujyaya tasmai. 


O lord of light, honour and excellence of 
generosity, select us for dedication to that holy work 
which, under the protection of your love and goodwill, 
leading scholars and interpreters of the Divine Word 
relentlessly pursue, reciting and teaching the Vedic 
songs of divinity and, by recitation and exhortation, 
converting even hard headed businessmen to generous 
givers of charity in the service of Divinity. 


एते स्तोमां नरां नुंतम तुभ्य॑मस्मद्रय॑ञ्चो दद॑तो मघानिं। 
तेषामिन्द्र वृत्रहत्ये शिवो भूः सखा च शूरोऽ विता च॑ 
नृणाम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


78 RGVEDA 


10. Ete stoma naram nrtama tubhyamasmadryaiico 
dadato maghani. Tesamindra vrtrahatye Sivo 
bhuh sakha ca Suro’ vita ca nrnam. 


These songs of adoration offered to you, O 
highest leader of the leaders of men, in fact, come back 
to us, giving wealth, honours and excellence of life. O 
lord, in these people’s battle against darkness, want and 
injustice, be their friend, wise protector and kind 
defender. 


नू इन्द्र शूर स्तव॑मान ऊती ब्रह्मजूतस्तन्वा वावृधस्व | उप॑ 
नो वाजान्मिमीह्युप स्तीन्यूयं uta स्वस्तिथिः सदा 
TEU UU 


11. Nua indra sura stavamana uti brahmajutastanva 
vavrdhasva. Upa no vajan mimihyupa stinyuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Indra, wise and brave leader and ruler of the 
world celebrated in song, exhorting the brave, 
commanding the defence and protection and the wealth 
of power, prosperity, food, energy and divine wisdom, 
grow in body, mind and soul by your body politic, and 
help us grow as a united commonwealth blest with 
honour, excellence and prosperity, and let there be no 
alliances of opposition and enmity against humanity. O 
lord and leaders of the world, protect and promote us in 
a state of honourable peace, prosperity and all round 
well being for all time. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 20 79 


Mandala 7/Sukta 20 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


उग्रो जंज्ञे वीयीय स्वधावाञ्चक्िरपो नर्यो यत्करिष्यन्‌ | 
जग्मिर्युवा नृषदंनमवोभिस्त्राता न इन्द्र एन॑सो मह 
स्चिंत्‌॥ ९॥ 


॥. Ugro jajne viryaya svadhavancakrirapo naryo yat 
karisyan.Jagmiryuva nrsadanam-avobhis-trata 
na indra enaso mahascit. 


Indra, the ruling soul, a great performer blest 
with innate powers, rises bright and blazing to do great 
heroic deeds when he undertakes the manly acts he plans 
to do. Youthful and bold, he goes to the house of the 
people with his powers of protection as a saviour of us 
all from great sin and transgression. 


हन्तां वृत्रमिन्द्रः शूशुवानः प्रावीन्नु वीरो ज॑रितार॑मूती । कती 
सुदासे अह वा ड लोकं दाता वसु मुहुरा दाशुष भूत्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Hanta vrtramindrah susuvanah pravinnu viro 
jaritaramuti. Karta sudase aha va u lokam data 
vasu muhura dasuse bhit. 


Growing and rising, Indra is breaker of the 
clouds and destroyer of want and darkness of ignorance. 
The youthful hero protects the dedicated celebrant with 
his powers of protection. He is the creator of a beautiful 
world for the man of service and charity and he is the 
giver of wealth again and again to the generous man of 
charity and gratitude to Divinity. 


युध्मो stat खंजकृत्समदा शूरं: सत्राषाड्‌ AT ATE: । 
व्यास इन्द्रः पृत॑नाः स्वोजा अधा विश्वं शत्रूयन्तं जघान ॥ ३ ॥ 


80 RGVEDA 


छ Yudhmo anarva khajakrt samadva Surah satrasad 
janusemasalhah. Vyasa indrah prtanah svoja 
adha visvam Satruyantam jaghana. 


Veteran warrior, relentless campaigner, 
passionate fighter, magnanimous hero, always 
victorious, Indra is unconquerable by nature. In the face 
of tumultuous conflicts he blazes with holy splendour 
and destroys all hostility from the earth. 


उभे चिदिन्द्र रोद॑सी महित्वा ऽऽपंप्राथ तविंषीभिस्तुविष्मः। 
नि वज्रमिन्द्रो हरिंवान्मिमिंश्चन्त्समन्ध॑सा मदेषु वा SAT ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ubhe cidindra rodasi mahitva’’papratha tavisi- 
bhis-tuvismah. Ni vajramindro harivan mimiksa- 
ntsamandhasa madesu va uvoca. 


Mighty Indra with his splendour and irresistible 
forces pervades both earth and sky by the strength of 
his presence felt all round. Wielding his thunderbolt of 
justice, protection and correction, commanding 
humanity and mixing with the people by perceptible 
presence as well as social gatherings over joyous 
celebrations, he maintains his dialogue with them. 


वृषा जजान वृष॑णं रणाय तमु चिन्नारी नर्य' ससूव । प्र यः 
सेनानीरध नृभ्यो अस्तीनः सत्वा गवेष॑णः स धृष्णुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


चः Vrsa jajana vrsanam ranaya tamu cinnari naryam 
sasuva. Pra yah senaniradha nrbhyo astinah 
satva gavesanah sa dhrsnuh. 


Him the omnipotent generous father begets, and 
him the supreme creative mother nature bears and 
nurtures as the mighty, virile and generous leader for 
the battle of humanity for a full joyous life on earth, the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 20 81 


mighty ruler Indra who then rises as the commander of 
armies and glorious protector promoter of the world 
community: brave and true, seeker of truth and the 
divine Word of nature, the ruler irresistible for the 
people. 


न्‌ चित्स dea जनो न ast यो ster घोरमाविवांसात्‌। 
uae इन्द्रे दध॑ते दुवांसि क्षयत्स राय ऋतपा ऋतेजाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nu cit sa bhresate jano na resanmano yo asya 
ghoram-avivasat.Yajnairya indre dadhate 
duvamsi ksayat sa raya rtapa rtejah. 


Never does that person waver or go astray, never 
does he fail or face disaster, never does he hurt anyone, 
who obeys and serves the venerable thought and will 
of this awesome master. Whoever reposes his trust and 
prayers by love, self-sacrifice and yajna in him abides 
in peace for the achievement of wealth, honour and 
excellence, serving truth and rising in stature in truth 
and divine law. 


यदिन्द्र पूर्वो अप॑राय शिक्षन्नरयज्न्यायान्कनीयसो देष्णम्‌। 
अमृत इत्पयौसीत दूरमा चित्र चित्र्यं भरा र॒यिं न॑: ॥ ७॥ 


४ Yadindra purvo aparaya Siksannayajjyayan 
kaniyaso desnam. Amrta it paryasita durama citra 
citryam bhara rayim nah. 


What the former generation teaches and 
bequeathes to the next, and what the elder generation 
may learn and obtain from the younger one as a valuable 
gift, and that immortal wealth of life far out of sense, 
experience and time, O lord sublime, that sits eternal, 
O lord of omniscience and omnipotence, Indra, bear 


82 RGVEDA 


and bring us, that wondrous, super existential wealth 
and vision of life. 


यस्त॑ इन्द्र प्रियो जनो ददाशदसन्निरेके अद्रिवः सखा ते। 
वयं त अस्यां सुमतौ चनिष्ठाः स्याम्‌ वरूथे अघ्नतो 
नृपीतौ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yasta indra priyo jano dadasadasannireke adri- 
vah sakha te. Vam te asyam sumatau canisthah 
syama varithe aghnato nrpitau. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world over clouds and 
mountains, whoever the person that pays homage to you, 
may he be dear to you as a friend in the open honest 
business of living. In this social order of goodwill and 
human welfare of the lord of love and grace free from 
violence, let us live in peace at home blest with 
sustenance and security in comfort and divine grace. 


एष ea अचिक्रदद्‌ वृषा त उत स्तामुर्म॑घवन्नक्रपिष्ट। 
रायस्कामो जरितारं त आगन्त्वमङ्क शक्र वस्व आरको 
नः॥९॥ 


9. Esa stomo acikradad vrsa ta uta stamurma- 
ghavannakrapista. Rayaskamo jaritaram ta agan 
tvamanga Sakra vasva a Sako nah. 


O lord of wealth, honour, power and excellence, 
this song of adoration vibrates with prayer for your 
attention and the celebrant prays for your grace. May 
your gift of wealth and fulfilment flow to the celebrant. 
O lord of power dear as breath of life, make it possible 
for us to win all wealth, honour and excellence we pray 
for. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 21 83 


स न॑ इन्द्र त्वय॑ताया इषे धास्त्मना च ये मघवानो जुनन्ति | 
वस्वी घु तै जरित्रे अ॑स्तु ahaa पात स्वस्तिथिः सदां 
नः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sana indra tvayataya ise dhastmana ca ye 
maghavano junanti. Vasvi su te jaritre astu Sakti- 
ryuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Indra, lord giver of energy and vitality, sustain 
us and those who join you vitally and spiritually for the 
gift of energy and pranic vitality in contact with 
universal energy. May your universal vitality be the 
harbinger of universal wealth, honour and excellence 
for the celebrant. O lord and divinities, all time protect 
and promote us with success, prosperity and good 
fortune all round. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 21 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


असावि दवं गोऋजीकमन्धो न्य॑स्मिचिन्द्रों जनुषेमुवोच | 
बोर्धामसि त्वा हर्यश्च यन्नर्बोधां नः स्तोममन्ध॑सो मदेषु ॥ ९ ॥ 


if Asavi devam gorjikamandho nyasminn-indro 
jJanusemuvoca. Bodhamasi tva haryasva yajnai- 
rbodha nah stomam-andhaso madesu. 


Distilled is the spirit of life, divine, brilliant, 
the very essence of earth and nature’s energy. Let Indra, 
the ruling lord of life, by his very nature and origin, 
join and address the assembly and make it resound. O 
lord of instant powers and faculties, we invoke and invite 
you by our yajnic adorations. Join us in the ecstasy of 
our celebration and inspire our congregation to awake 
into enlightenment. 


84 RGVEDA 


प्र य॑न्ति यज्ञं विपयंन्ति बर्हिः सोममादो विदथे दुश्चर्वाचः। 
न्यु भ्रियन्ते यशसो गृभादा दूरञ॑पब्दो वृष॑णो नृषाचः ॥ २ ॥ 


ps Pra yanti yajnam vipayanti barhih somamado 
vidathe dudhravacah. Nyu bhriyante yasaso 
grbhada dura-upabdo vrsano nrsacah. 


Lovers of soma ecstasy march forward to join 
the yajna of the social order, their shouts of joy 
resounding to the skies. The brave and generous leaders 
of the nation move forward from the home, with 
resounding proclamations bearing vibrations of their 
characteristic home and fame, to join the assembly. 


त्वमिन्द्र स्रविंतवा अपस्कः परि्ठिता अर्हिना शूर पूर्वीः | 
त्वद्वावक्रे teats न धेना रेजन्ते विश्वा कृत्रिमाणि 
भीषा ।॥ ३॥ 


Tvamindra sravitava apaskah paristhita ahina 
Sura purvih. Tvad vavakre rathyo na dhena 
rejante visva krtrimani bhisa. 


And you Indra, leader and ruler, set aflow the 
natural voice and energies of the nation otherwise 
withheld from expression by diffidence, fear and 
darkness of ignorance. Freed by you, the energies of 
the nation flow freely into action like words of 
eloquence directed to a definite purpose like streams 
flowing to the sea and chariot horses directed to a 
destination, and then all artificial creations of fear 
tremble like fear itself. 


भीमो विंवेषायुंधेभिरेषामपांसि विश्वा नयीणि विद्धान्‌ । 
इन्द्र: पुरो we wont fa दूंधोद्धि वज'हस्तो महिना 
ज॑घान ॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 21 85 


4. Bhimo vivesayudhebhir-esamapamsi visva 
naryani vidvan. Indrah puro jarhrsano vi 
dudhodvi vajrahasto mahina jaghana. 


Indra, formidable scholar and fearsome warrior, 
enters with his weapons of offence and defence and 
inspires all the will and actions of the people which are 
in the interest of humanity and which are humanly 
possible. Happy and rejoicing, wielding the thunderbolt 
of power and justice in hand, he shakes to naught the 
strongholds of evil, sin and crime with his grandeur. 


न ade इन्द्र जूजुवुर्नो न वन्द॑ना शविष्ठ वेद्याभिः | स 
शर्धदर्यो विषुणस्य जन्तोर्मा शिश्नदेवा अपिं गु ऋतं 
न॑ः॥५॥ 


a, Na yatava indra jujuvurno na vandana savistha 
vedyabhih. Sa sardhadaryo visunasya jantorma 
sisnadeva api gurrtam nah. 


Indra, lord most potent, let not the wicked and 
violent approach and hurt us. Let them not affect our 
holy works in spite of their tactics worth knowing 
though they be. O noble lord, control and nullify the 
various and disorderly people. Let not the sensual and 
licentious sex slaves vitiate our moral conduct and 
rectitude. 


अभि क्रत्वेन्द्र भूरध ज्मन्न ते विव्यङ्महिमानं रजांसि । 
स्वेना हि aa शव॑सा जघन्थ न शत्रुरन्तं विविदद्युधा ते ॥। & ॥ 


0; Abhi kratvendra bhuradha jman na te vivyan 
mahimanam rajamsi. Svena hi vrtram Savasa 
jJaghantha na Satrurantam vividad yudha te. 


Indra, lord of splendour, by your own strength 


86 RGVEDA 


overthrow the enemies of humanity on earth. They do 
not know the greatness and glory of your powers. By 
your innate powers you destroy the demon of darkness, 
want and ignorance. O mighty warrior, the enemies do 
not realise the expanse of your power and grandeur. 


देवाश्चित्ते असुयौय पूर्वेऽ नुं क्षत्राय॑ ममिरे सहांसि | 
इन्द्रो मघानि दयते विषद्येन््रं वाज॑स्य जोहुवन्त सातौ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Devascit te asuryaya purve’nu ksatraya mamire 
sahamsi. Indro maghani dayate visahyendram 
vajasya johuvanta satau. 


Indra, ruling power of the world, brilliant 
divines, scholars and scientists of veteran eminence 
value your courage and bold actions in the field of 
energy and spirituality for the development, prosperity 
and well being of the social order. Having faced 
challenges with patience and fortitude, Indra commands 
and shares powers, privileges and prosperity, and the 
people invoke and support him for leadership in their 
struggle for peace, prosperity and progress. Therein lies 
honour and victory. 


कौीरिश्चिद्दि त्वामव॑से जुहावेशानमिन्द्र सौभ॑गस्य भूरेः | 
अवो बभूथ शतमूते अस्मे अंभिक्त्तुस्त्वाव॑ तो वरूता ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Kirisciddhi tvamavase juhavesanamidra saubha- 
gasya bhureh. Avo babhutha Satamute asme 
abhiksattustvavato varuta. 


For protection and advancement, the devotee 
calls upon you, Indra, lord ruler and giver of abundant 
power and prosperity, honour and excellence. O lord of 
a hundred protective powers, be the guardian, protector 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 21 87 


and saviour of our abundant power and prosperity. And 
our guardian and protector against the challenging 
enemy too, may, we pray, be brave as you. 


सखायस्त इन्द्र विश्वहं स्याम HT TET महिना त॑रुत्र । 
वन्वन्तु स्मा तेऽ dar समीके ३ऽभींतिमर्यो वनुषां 
शावांसि॥ ९॥ 


0. Sakhayasta indra visvaha syama namovrdhaso 
mahina tarutra. Vanvantu sma te’vasa samike’- 
bhitimaryo vanusam Savamsi. 


O saviour triumphant, while we worship and 
glorify you daily with greater and greater love, faith 
and strength of loyalty, pray let us be your friends for 
ever. O lord and master of the people, let us all be close 
to you and, under your protection, let us all win and 
enjoy freedom from fear and strength worthy of the 
seekers of Divinity. 


स न॑ इन्द्र त्वय॑ताया इषे धास्त्मना च ये मघवानो जुनन्ति । 
वस्वी षु ते जरित्रे अस्तु शक्तिर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sana indra tvayataya ise dhastmana ca ye 
maghavano junanti. Vasvi su te jaritre astu Sakti- 
ryuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Indra, lord of life and majesty, hold us all, sustain 
us all, all the blessed souls who by their sincere devotion 
enjoy the glory of your favour and grace so that we 
may continue to enjoy the strength and success granted 
by you. May your power and grace be the source of 
wealth and excellence for the celebrant. All you 
divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote 


88 RGVEDA 


us for all time with all freedom and security. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 22 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


पिबा सोम॑मिन्द्र मन्द॑तु wat यं ते सुषावं हर्यश्वाद्रिः | 
सोतुबहिभ्यां सुय॑तो arate 


i; Piba somamindra mandtu tva yam te susava 
haryasvadrih. Soturbahubyam suyato narva. 


Indra, lord ruler and controller of the dynamic 
forces of the world, drink this soma of ecstasy which, I 
am sure, would exhilarate you. The cloud, generative 
power of nature, has distilled it and showered on you. 
And just as a horse well controlled by the hands and 
reins of the driver moves to the right destination, so is 
this soma generated by the hands of the creator meant 
to exhort you to take the dominion to its destination. 


यस्ते मदो युज्यश्चासरस्ति येनं वृत्राणि हर्यश्व हंसि । 
स त्वामिन्द्र प्रभूवसो ममत्तु ॥ २॥ 


2, Yaste mado yujyascarurasti yena vrtrani har- 
yasva hamsi. Sa tvamindra prabhiuvaso mamattu. 


That beauty and joy of the governance of your 
dominion which is agreeable, inspiring and worthy of 
support and participation, and by which joy, O controller 
of the dynamic forces of the people, you break the 
negative forces of darkness, sin and crime, want and 
ignorance like the sun breaking dark clouds for showers, 
may that joy, O sovereign lord of power for settlement 
and prosperity, give you the real pleasure of creative 
governance and administration. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 22 89 


बोधा सु मे मघवन्वाचमेमां यां ते वसिष्ठो अर्चति प्रशस्तिम्‌। 
इमा ब्रह्म सधमादे जुषस्व ॥ २ ॥ 


Di Bodha sume maghavan vacamemam yam te vasi- 
stho arcati prasastim. Ima brahma sadhamade 
Jusasva. 


O lord of honour, power and magnificence, pray 
know well this voice of mine which the sage well settled 
at peace offers you in adoration of your glory. And 
accept, honour and apply these holy words of vision 
and wisdom in practice in the assembly house of the 
wise for governance and administration. 


श्रुधी हवं विपिपानस्यादरर्बोधा विप्रस्यार्चतो मनीषाम्‌ | 
कृष्वा दुवांस्यन्तमा सचेमा ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Srudhi /1८1/व77  vipipanasyadrerbodha vipras- 
yarcato manisam. Krsva duvamsyantama sacema. 


Listen to the cloud shower of exhortation from 
the vibrant sage, joyous participant in the congregation, 
know the thought and will of the wise scholar in 
adoration of your honour, and honour these prayers, 
most sincere and intimate, in action. 


नते गिरो अपिं मृष्ये तुरस्य न सुंष्टुतिम॑सुर्य॑स्य विद्धान्‌ | 
सदा ते नामं स्वयशो विवक्मि ॥ ५॥ 


9 Na te giro api mrsye turasya na sustutima- 
suryasya vidvan. Sada te nama svayaso vivakmi. 


Never shall I forget your words, instant and 
mighty of action as you are, nor shall I, knowing your 
power and potential, ever neglect your appreciation and 
adoration. I value and appreciate the significance of your 


90 RGVEDA 
name and your innate honour and excellence. 


भूरि हि ते सव॑ना मानुषेषु भूरिं मनीषी ह॑वते त्वामित्‌। 
मारे अस्मन्म॑घवञ्ज्योक्कः॥ ६ ॥ 


6. 68170777 hi te savana manusesu bhuri manist havate 
tvamit. Mare asmanmaghavanjyok kah. 


O lord of honour and excellence, many are your 
acts of generosity and magnificence in the world of 
humanity. Many are the acts of adoration the dedicated 
wise offer to you. O lord, never let these be alienated 
from us. 


तुभ्येदिमा सव॑ना शूर विश्वा तुभ्यं ब्रह्माणि वर्धना 
कृणोमि | त्वं नृभिर्हव्यो! विर्वर्धासि ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Tubhyedima savana Sura visva tubhyam brahmani 
vardhana krnomi. Tvam nrbhirhavyo visvadhasi. 


O lord of honour and excellence, wise and brave, 
all these yajnic acts of service and adoration are for 
you. All these acts of holy creation and development 
for progress I do, are for your honour and majesty. You 
are the ruler and sustainer of the world, accepted and 
adorable for the leading people of the world. 


नू fag ते मन्य॑मानस्य दस्मोदश्नुवन्ति महिमानमुग्र । 
न वीर्यमिन्द्रते न राधः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nu cinnu te manyamanasya dasmodasnuvanti 
mahimanamugra. Na viryamindra te na radhah. 


Indra, lord of blazing splendour, destroyer of 
suffering and darkness, adored by the world, the people 
of the world acknowledge your grandeur but they 
comprehend it not, much less equal and surpass. Nor 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 23 91 


can they surpass, equal or even comprehend your power 
and potential or your munificence. 


ये च पूर्वं ऋष॑यो ये च etl इन्द्र ब्रह्माणि saa fat: । 
अस्मे d सन्तु सख्या शिवानि यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
AUS 


a Ye ca purva rsayo ye ca nutna indra brahmani 
jJanayanta viprah. Asme te santu sakhya Ssivani 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


All the songs of adoration and acts of homage 
and worship which the veteran seers of ancient wisdom 
and new scholars of modern vision and wisdom create 
and offer to you, mighty ruler of the world, may they all 
be friendly and blissful for us all. O seers and scholars, 
O lord Indra, pray always protect and promote us with 
all modes of protection, promotion and all round well- 
being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 23 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


उदु ब्रह्माण्यैरत श्रवस्येन्द्रं समर्ये म॑हया वसिष्ठ। आ at 
fasalf शव॑सा ततानोपश्रोता a ईव॑तो वचांसि ॥ eu 


1. Udu brahmanyairata sravasyendram samarye 
mahaya vasistha. A yo visvani Savasa tatanopa- 
57014 ma ivato vacamsi. 


O brilliant sage of divine vision settled in peace, 
raise your voice and sing songs of celebration in honour 
of Indra, mighty ruler of the world. In the battle business 
of life, glorify him who pervades the wide worlds by 
his might, and as I approach him he listens close by so 


92 RGVEDA 
that my words of prayer reverberate across the spaces. 


अयामि घोषं इन्द्र देवजामिरिरज्यन्त यच्छुरुधो विवाचि । 
नहि स्वमायुश्चिकिते जनेषु तानीदंहांस्यति पर्ष्यस्मान्‌ 2 ॥ 


2. Ayami ghosa indra devajamirirajyanta pacchu- 
rudho vivaci. Nahi svamayuscikite janesu tani- 
damhamsyati parsyasman. 


I come, lord Indra, the sound of prayer rises like 
a battle cry with the divine waves of nature, charming, 
mastering, the notes resounding in the tumultuous roar. 
No one knows the thread of his span of life in humanity. 
O lord, cleanse us of those sins which pollute us to 
darkness. 


युजे रथं गवेषणं हरिभ्यामुप ब्रह्माणि जुजुषाणमस्थुः । वि 
बाधिष्ट स्य रोदंसी महित्वेन्द्रो वृत्राण्यप्रती जघन्वान्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Yuje ratham gavesanam haribhyamupa brahmani 
Jujusanamasthuh. Vi badhista sya rodasi mahitve- 
ndro vrtranyaprati jaghanvan. 


I ride the chariot of worship in pursuit of the 
light of truth harnessing the two carriers of mind and 
intellect alongwith the senses. My prayers reach the lord 
of love who accepts the supplicant with grace. The lord 
pervades both heaven and earth with his might, prevents 
evil, and destroys the demons of sin and darkness which 
we cannot even perceive with our human eyes of 
ordinary vision. 


आपंज्चित्पिप्युः wats न गावो नक्चन्रृतं ज॑रितार॑स्त इन्द्र | 
याहि वायुर्न नियुतो नो अच्छा त्वं हि धीभिर्दयसे वि 
वाजान्‌ ॥ 2 ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 23 93 


4. Apascit pipyuh staryo na gavo naksannrtam 
jaritarasta indra. Yahi vayurna niyuto no accha 
tvam hi dhibhirdayase vi vajan. 


Indra, lord of light and action, just as waters 
flow and rays of light radiate over darkness, so let your 
celebrants, men of holy action, rise and attain to the 
light of truth. O lord of the cosmic chariot, come like 
the wind to your servants of action with grace since 
you bless us with mercy and with gifts of intelligence, 
vision and the light of divinity. 


ते त्वा Hal इन्द्र मादयन्तु शुष्मिणं Caras जरित्रे | 
एको देवत्रा दय॑से हि मती नस्मिञ्छूर सव॑ने मादयस्व ॥ ५ ॥ 


>. Te tva mada indra maddayantu Susminam 
tuviradhasam jaritre. Eko devatra dayase hi 
martan-asminchura savane mddayasva. 


Indra, lord of might, mercy, magnanimity and 
giver of all round success, may the devotees blest with 
joy and vision of action win your pleasure and favour 
for the gift of strength and power, sure success and 
excellence in all fields to bless the celebrant. You, the 
one adorable lord, bless the mortals with love and mercy. 
Come and share our celebrations of yajnic ecstasy with 
us in this session. 


एवेदिन्द्रं वृष॑णं वज्र॑ बाहुं वसिं्ठासो अभ्यर्चन्त्यकैः । स न॑ः 
स्तुतो वीरवंद्दातु गोमद्यूयं पात स्वस्तिथिः सदा नः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Evedindram vrsanam vajrabahum vasisthaso 
abhyarcantyarkaih. Sa nah stuto viravad dhatu 
gomad yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus do the brilliant poets of vision and heroes 


94 RGVEDA 


of action settled and settlers at peace with homage and 
adorations celebrate Indra, lord ruler and commander 
of world forces, giver of showers of joy and wielder of 
thunder arms for the world order. The lord commands 
forces of the youthful brave and prosperity of the world’s 
commonwealth. Praised and celebrated thus, may the 
lord protect and promote us. O lord, and O men of vision 
and potent action, protect and promote us all time with 
all modes of happiness and well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 24 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


योनिष्ट इन्द्र सद॑ ने अकारि तमा af: पुरुहूत प्र याहि। 
असो यथा नोऽविता वृधे च ददो वसूनि ममद॑श्च 
ara: neu 


Ls Yonista indra sadane akari tama nrbhih puruhita 
pra yahi. Aso yatha no’vita vrdhe ca dado vasuni 
mamadasca somaih. 


Indra, lord ruler and commander of the world, 
the holy seat for you is created and reserved in the house 
of nations. Elected and invited by all equally, pray come 
and take it with the leading lights of humanity in the 
manner that you may be our saviour and protector for 
advancement, receive and disburse the means and 
materials of life’s wealth and comfort, and be happy 
and celebrate the joy of life with the soma of the world’s 
excellence. 


गृभीतं ते मन॑ इन्द्र fgadt: सुतः सोमः परिषिक्ता मधूनि । 
विसं धेना भरते सुवृक्तिरियमिन्द्रं जोहुवती मनीषा ॥ २ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 24 95 


2. Grbhitam te mana indra dvibarhah sutah somah 
parisikta madhuni. Visrstadhena bharate suvrkti- 
riyamindram johuvati manisd. 


Indra, brilliant lord, accepted is your mind 
wholly, both wish and will, ideas and intentions, 
philosophy and policy, ethics and action. The soma of 
joy and celebration is distilled and ready. The honey 
sweets are exuberant and overflowing. The general will, 
single voice and enthusiastic resolution of this generous 
land initiates, invites and anoints you in your seat. 


आ नो fea आ पुंथिव्या ऋजीषिन्निदं बर्हिः सोमपेयाय 
याहि। वहन्तु त्वा हर॑यो मद्र ञ्चमाङ्गूषमच्छा तवसं 
मदाय ॥ ३॥ 


a A no diva a prthivya rjisinnidam barhih somape- 
yaya yahi. Vahantu tva harayo madryancam- 
angusamaccha tavasam madaya. 


Indra, mighty lord of natural simplicity and 
grace, lover of joy, come to this holy seat of ours from 
wherever you are, from the regions of heavenly light or 
the dark green earth to drink of the soma of celebration 
for the land. May the leading personalities of the nation 
well conduct you to receive our felicitations with us 
here. 


आ नो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः सजोषा ब्रह्मं जुषाणो हर्यश्व 
याहि। वरी वृजत्स्थविं रेभिः सुशिप्राऽस्मे दधद्‌ वृष॑णं 
शुष्म॑मिन्द्र ।॥। ४ ॥ 

4. A no visvabhir-utibhih sajosa brahma jusano 
haryasva yahi. Varivrjat sthavirebhih suSsipra’- 
sme dadhad vrsanam susmamindra. 


96 RGVEDA 


Indra, friendly ruler, lover of divinity and the 
best things of life, commanding the best of assistants, 
blest with a gracious personality, come to us with all 
the means of protection and progress for us, bringing 
showers of strength, honour and excellence for the 
nation and warding off all opponent forces, come 
supported by the wisest veterans of the land. 


एष स्तोमो! मह उग्राय Ae धुरी ई वात्यो न वाजयन्नधायि । 
इन्द्र॑ त्वायमर्क SS agai दिवीव द्यामधि नः श्रोम॑तं 
धाः॥५॥ 


3: Esa stomo maha ugraya vahe dhurivatyo na 
vajayannadhayi. Indra tvayamarka itte vasunam 
diviva dyamadhi nah Sromatam dhah. 


This inspiring song of felicitation and this 
vibrant institution of governance is created and offered 
to Indra, great and brilliant lord ruler and sustainer of 
the world, like the leading power of the nation’s chariot. 
O lord Indra, this supplicant and celebrant prays to you 
for the gift of wealth, honour and excellence for the 
nation. Pray raise our honour and fame to the regions 
of bliss over the sky and light of the sun. 


एवा न॑ इन्द्र वार्यस्य पूर्धि प्र ते पहीं सुं मतिं वेविदाम । इषं 
पिन्व म॒घव॑द्भ्यः सुवीरां यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Eva na indra varyasya purdhi pra te mahim 
sumatim vevidama. Isam pinva maghavad-bhyah 
suviram yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Likewise O lord of excellence, Indra, destroyer 
of suffering, bless us with abundant good fortune of the 
choicest order. Grant us the great favour of your love 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 25 97 


and good will. Protect and promote the honour, energy 
and sustenance of the nation blest with youthful brave 
for the noble people. O lord and veterans of the world, 
protect and advance us with the peace, prosperity and 
all round well being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 25 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ ते मह इन्द्रोत्युंग्र सम॑न्यवो यत्समरन्त सेनाः । पताति 
दिद्युन्नर्यस्य arerat ते मनो विष्वद्र्यग्वि चारीत्‌ ९॥ 


1. A te maha indrotyugra samanyavo yat samaranta 
senah. Patati didyunnaryasya bahvorma te mano 
visvadryagvi carit. 


Indra, blazing lord of glory and illustrious 
commander of the forces of defence and protection, 
when your armies impassioned by ardent zeal march 
forward, the thunderbolt in your hands, O magnificent 
leader of humanity, flashing and blazing, falls upon the 
enemy. O lord, your mind instantly traversing over 
spaces otherwise, would never ramble from us but hit 
the target. 


नि दुर्ग इन्द्र श्नधिह्यमित्रानभि ये नो मतौसो अमन्ति | आरे 
तं शंसं कृणुहि निनित्सोरा नो भर संभरणं वसूनाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 
2. Ni durga indra snathihyamitranabhi ye no 


martaso amanti. Are tam samsam krnuhi ninitso- 
ra no bhara sambharanam vasunam. 


Indra, lord destroyer of want and suffering, 
strike upon the strongholds of the enemies and break 
down the hostilities of mortals that afflict us with 


98 RGVEDA 


violence and disease. Throw out far off that curse and 
calumny of the malevolent and bring us fulfilment with 
abundance of health, wealth, honour and excellence of 
life. 
शतं ते शिप्रिन्नूतयः सुदासे सहस्त्रं शंसा उत रातिरस्तु | 
जहि वधर्वनुषो मर्त्य॑स्याऽस्मे द्युम्नमधि tet च धेहि॥ ३॥ 


28 Satam te siprinnutayah sudase sahasram samsa 
uta ratirastu. Jahi vadharvanuso martyasya’sme 
dymnamadhi ratnam ca dhehi. 


O lord of golden helmet, hundreds be your 
favours and protections for the man of generosity, 
thousands your blessings and gifts of grace. Destroy 
the weapons of death in the hands of the violent mortal 
and vest us with that wealth, honour and excellence of 
life which is the supreme jewel of existence. 


त्वावतो die क्रत्वे अस्मि त्वाव॑तोऽ faa: शुर रातौ। 
विश्वेदहानि तविषीव sa ओकः कृणुष्व हरिवो न 
मर्धीः usu 


4. Tvavato hindra kratve asmi tvavato’vituh Sura 
ratau. Visvedahani tavisiva ugran okah krnusva 
harivo na mardhih. 


Indra, mighty lord beyond fear, in submission 
to your will, I abide in holy action and pray for the gift 
of your protection and grace. O lord illustrious of blazing 
power, pray dwell in my heart for ever. Forsake us not, 
O lord of tempestuous forces. 


कुत्सा एते हर्य॑श्वाय शूषमिन्द्रे सहो देवजुंतमियानाः । सत्रा 
कधि सुहना शूर वृत्रा वयं तरुत्राः सनुयाम वाज॑म्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 25 99 


a Kutsa ete haryasvaya susamindre saho devaju- 
tamiyanah. Satra krdhi suhana Sura vrtra vayam 
tarutrah sanuyama vajam. 


All these arms and armaments of thunder power, 
all the sagely people who have come to peace and power, 
patience and fortitude inspired by divinities for the 
attainment of honour and excellence: all these are 
dedicated to Indra, lord ruler of vibrant powers and 
people of the world. O lord giver of freedom from fear 
and violence, make it easy for us to dispel the evil and 
darkness of life. Let us be victors of light over ignorance 
and darkness and cross over the seas to the realms of 
bliss. 


एवा न॑ इन्द्र वार्यस्य पूर्धि प्र ते महीं सुं मतिं वेविदाम । इषं 
पिन्व मघवंद्यः सुवीरौ यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Eva na indra varyasya purdhi pra te mahim 
sumatim vevidama. Isam pinva maghavadbhyah 
suviram yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus O lord Indra, bless us with honour and 
excellence of our choice in abundance. Let us have the 
divine bliss of your love and good will. Sustain and 
promote food, energy and knowledge for the noble 
people blest with youthful and brave warriors of 
freedom. O lord, O noble people, O saints and sages, O 
youthful brave, protect and promote us with all modes 
of good fortune and well being for ever. 


100 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 26 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


न सोम इन्द्रमसुतो ware नाब्रंहयाणो मघर्वानं gare: | 
तस्मा उक्थं जनये यज्नुजोंषन्नवन्नवीयः श्रृणवद्यथा 
नः॥ ९॥ 


I; Na soma indramasuto mamada nabrahmano 
maghavanam sutasah. Tasma uktham janaye 
yajjujosan-nrvannaviyah srnavad yatha nah. 


Undistilled soma does not please Indra, lord of 
humanity. Nor do distillations of soma unsanctified by 
divine chants of Veda satisfy the lord of power and 
divinity. Therefore I create and compose the latest song 
of adoration with Vedic vision with the distillation so 
that the lord may listen and accept our homage of soma 
with pleasure. 


उक्थञक्थे सोम इन्द्रं ममाद नीथेनीथे मघवानं gars: | 
यदीं सबाधः पितरं न पुत्राः स॑मानद॑श्चा अव॑से हव॑न्ते ॥ २॥ 


De Uktha-ukthe soma indram mamada nithenithe 
maghavanam sutasah. Yadim sabadhah pitaram 
na putrah samanadaksa avase havante. 


With every chant of song divine, the soma 
pleases Indra. At every stage of adoration, at every step 
of the song, the draughts of soma exhilarate the lord. 
For this reason, surely, eager supplicants, equally 
proficient, invoke and offer homage to the lord for 
protection and progress like children approaching 
parents with love to have their blessings. 


चकार ता कृणव॑न्नूनमन्या यानि ब्रुवन्ति aera: सुतेषु | 
जनीरिव पतिरेकः समानो नि मामृजे पुर इन्द्रः सु सवी: ॥ २३॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 26 101 


a Cakara ta krnavannunamanya yani bruvanti 
vedhasah sutesu. Janiriva patirekah samano ni 
mamryje pura indrah su sarvah. 


What the sages and scholars say and proclaim 
in matters of science and development of soma, let the 
pursuant follow and do even more, and just as the ruler 
protector and sustainer looks after the people and the 
father looks after the children by himself equally well, 
so should Indra first and foremost look after and refine 
the development of knowledge and all the pursuers. 


एवा तर्पाहुरुत wa इन्द्र एको, विभक्ता तरणिर्मघानाम्‌ । 
मिथस्तुर ऊतयो यस्य॑ पूर्वीरस्मे भद्राणि सश्चत 
प्रियाणि ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Eva tamahuruta Srnva indra eko vibhakta 
taranirmaghanam. Mithastura Utayo yasya 
purvirasme bhadrani sascata priyani. 


Only Indra they celebrate in holy words. Only 
of him do we hear, that he is the giver of all power, 
progress, honour and excellence and he alone is the 
saviour and protector. Instant and unfailing are his 
powers and forces of protection and defence, 
unbreakable as ever. May all dear and cherished good 
things of life come to us by the lord’s kindness and grace. 


एवा ates इन्द्रमूतये Apert aust सुते Wontar 
सहस्रिण उप॑ नो माहि वाजान्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥५॥ ति 

a, Eva vasistha indramutaye nrn krstinam vrsabham 
sute grnati. Sahasrina upa no mahi vajan yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


102 RGVEDA 


Thus does the ardent sage settled in peace and 
wisdom celebrate Indra, the soul and generous ruler of 
the world and leading lights of humanity for the sake of 
defence and protection in the social order of the lord’s 
creation. May the lord bring us a thousand fold honour 
and excellence in food, sustenance and knowledge. O 
lord and leaders, protect and promote us with all your 
gifts of good fortune and all round well being as ever. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 27 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


इन्द्रं नरो Aafia हवन्ते यत्पायीं युनजं ते धियस्ताः । शुरो 
नृषाता शव॑सश्चकान आ गोम॑ति व्रजे भ॑जा त्वं न॑: ॥ ९॥ 


५ Indram naro nemadhita havante yat parya 
yunajate dhiyastah. Suro nrsata Savasascakana 
a gomati vraje bhaja tvam nah. 


Leading people call upon Indra, lord ruler of 
the world, in their serious struggles of life and pray for 
those concentrative faculties of mind and intelligence 
by which they can join the divine presence and win their 
goal. The lord is the brave, generous and fearless leader 
of humanity in their corporate life, lover of strength 
and inspirer of heroic souls. O lord, give us the grace of 
your divine presence and lead us in our development of 
lands and cows and in our plans of education, 
enlightenment and our vision of the divine Word. 


ashe ope werk oe fear wer oes 
wa: । त्वं हि geet म॑घवन्विचता अपां वृधि परिवृतं न 
Tel: WH 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 27 103 


2. Ya indra Susmo maghavan te asti Siksa 
sakhibhyah puruhuta nrbhyah. Tam hi drlha 
maghavan viceta apa vrdhi parivrtam na radhah. 


Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence, that 
strength and power of yours for which you are invoked 
by all humanity, pray give us, your friends and leaders 
of a free world. O lord of honour and majesty, 
unshakable lord of universal vision and knowledge, 
remove the cover of darkness and open out our potential 
like a hidden treasure revealed. 


इन्द्रो राजा जगतश्चर्षणीनामधि क्षमि विषुरूपं यदस्ति । 
ततो ददाति दाशुषे वसुनि चोदद्राध उपंस्तुतण्चिद- 
ate ॥ ३॥ 


Di Indro raja jagatascarsaninamadhi ksami 
visurupam yadasti. Tato dadati dasuse vasuni 
codad radha upastutascidarvak. 


Indra is the sovereign ruler of the moving world 
and her people on the earth. Whatever various and 
manifold wealth there is on the earth, he alone is the 
master ruler. And therefrom he gives profusely of wealth, 
honour and excellence to the generous man of charity, 
inspires our potential strength and success, and when 
he is closely adored in meditation, he reveals his 
presence to our direct vision and experience. 


नू faa इन्द्रो मघवा सहूती दानो वाजं नि य॑मते न Heit । 
अनुना यस्य दक्षिणा Utara वामं नृभ्यो अभिवीता 
सखिंभ्यः॥ ४॥ 

4. Nu cinna indro maghava sahuti dano vajam ni 
yamate na uti. Anuna yasya daksina pipaya 
vamam nrbhyo abhivita sakhibhyah. 


104 RGVEDA 


Surely Indra, lord of honour and glory, is the 
generous and instant giver on invocation and prayer. 
He gives sustenance, protection and progress, and he 
controls and guides our advance to victory in life. 
Boundless is his grace which ever inspires and promotes 
our will and action, and it is freely available to people 
who seek his love and friendship. 


नू इन्द्र राये वसिवस्कृधी न आ ते wal ववृत्याम मघाय । 
गोमदश्वावद्रथ॑वद्‌ व्यन्तो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥५॥ 


5. Nu indra raye varivaskrdhi na ठ te mano vavr- 
tyama maghaya. Gomadasvavad rathavad vyanto 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Indra, generous lord of munificence, we turn 
ourselves to you seeking your love and kindness to 
achieve the honour and treasures of life. Pray open the 
paths of advancement for us to wealth and victory of 
lands and cows, horses and chariots of the good life. O 
lord, O leading lights, be gracious and protect and 
promote us with all good fortune and well being for 
ever. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 28 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
ब्रह्मा ण इन्द्रोप याहि विद्वानर्वाञ्चंस्ते हर॑यः सन्तु युक्ताः | 
विश्वे चिद्धि त्वा विहवन्त मतौ अस्माकमिच्छ्णुहि 
विश्वमिन्व ।॥ ९॥ 
1. Brahma na indropa yahi vidvan-arvancaste 


harayah santu yuktah. Visve ciddhi tva vihavanta 
marta asmakamicchrnuhi visvaminva. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 28 105 


Indra, lord omniscient, all pervasive in the 
world, come, listen to our prayer, let the horses 
harnessed to your chariot be directed hitherward to us. 
All people of the world without exception invoke you. 
Pray listen to our prayer and bring us the gifts of 
Divinity. 

हवं त इन्द्र महिमा व्यानड्‌ ब्रह्म॒ यत्पासि। शवसिन्नृषीणाम्‌। 
आ aga दधिषे हस्त॑ उग्र घोरः सन्क्रत्वा जनिष्ठा 
state: ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Havam ta indra mahima vyanad brahma yat pasi 
Savasinn-rsinam. A yad vajrm dadhise hasta ugra 
ghorah san kratva janistha asalhah. 


O lord of might, since you protect and preserve 
the voice of the seers of divine vision, your grandeur 
vests in the holy voice and holy projects of humanity. 
Awful lord of blazing lustre, when you wield the 
thunderbolt in hand in a state of divine passion for action 
you rise invincible for any power of the world. 


तव प्रणीतीन्द्र जोहुवानान्त्सं यन्नृन्न रोद॑सी निनेथं। 
महे क्षत्राय शव॑से हि जज्ञेऽ तुंतुजिं चित्ततंजिरशिश्नत्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


8 Tava pranitindra johuvanantsam yannrn na 
rodast ninetha. Mahe ksatraya savase hi 
Jajne ’tutujim cit tutujirasisnat. 

Indra, by your ethics and policy you guide the 
leading lights of humanity and those called upon to duty 
as you light up the earth and space, and thus surely by 
nature and character you rise to the mighty power of 
the governance of the great social order. Truly the mighty 
and the dynamic govern and guide the weak who need 


106 RGVEDA 
protection. 


एभिर्न इन्द्राह॑भिर्दशस्य दुर्मित्रासो fe क्षितयः पव॑न्ते । प्रति 
यच्चष्टे अनूंतमनेना अवं द्विता वरुणो मायी न॑: सात्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ebhirna indrahabhir-dasasya durmitraso hi 
ksitayah pavante. Prati yaccaste anrtamanena 
ava dvita varuno may nah sat. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, in these few days 
bless us that the evil in friends be purged and they 
become good citizens. O lord, if the man of judgement 
and discrimination were to see untruth and false conduct, 
then he, Varuna, with justice and power, may cause it to 
be reduced to half and then purged off. 


वोचेमेदिन्द्रं मघवानमेनं महो रायो राध॑सो यदद॑न्नः। यो 
अर्चतो ब्रहमकृतिमविंछो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Vocemedindram maghavanamenam maho rayo 
radhaso yad dadannah. Yo arcato brahma- 
krtima-vistho yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


We speak and sing, thus, of Indra, this lord of 
power, honour and excellence who gives us great wealth 
and further capacity for success and victory and who 
accepts homage as the most loving protector of the 
worshipper. O lord, may you and your divine forces 
protect and promote us with all gifts of good fortune 
and well being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 29 


Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


अयं सोम॑ इन्द्र तुभ्यं सुन्व आ तु प्र याहि हरिवस्तदोकाः | 
पिबा त्वस्य सुषुतस्य चारोर्ददो मघानि मघवन्नियानः ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 29 107 


im Ayam soma indra tubhyam sunva क tu pra yahi 
harivastadokah. Piba tvasya susutasya carordado 
maghani maghavanniyanah. 


I extract and distil this soma juice for you, Indra, 
lord of honour and power. Commander of the dynamic 
forces of the world, abiding in that house of majesty, 
come and drink of this juice distilled and seasoned 
delightfully, and while coming bring us the wealth, 
honour and excellence of life. 


ब्रह॑न्वीर ब्रह्म॑कृतिं woroi's वचिीनो erate तूय॑म्‌ । 
अस्मिन्नू षु सवं ने मादयस्वोप ब्रह्माणि श्रुणव इमा न॑: ॥ २॥ 


2. Brahman vira brahmakrtim jusano ’rvacino hari- 
bhiryahi tuyam. Asminnu su savane madayasvopa 
brahmani srnava ima nah. 


O mighty Indra, ruler of the world and master 
of universal knowledge, lover of the lord’s creation, 
come here straight to us driven fast by dynamic forces, 
join this yajnic programme of our life, be happy and 
rejoice with us, and listen to those celebrative chants 
and prayers of ours. 


का ते अस्त्यरं कृतिः सूक्तैः कदा नूनं त मघवन्दारोम । 
विश्वां मतीरा त॑तने त्वायाऽधां म इन्द्र शणवो हवेमा ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Ka te astyaramkrtih suktaih kada nunam te 
maghavan dasema. Visva matira tatane tvaya’dha 
ma indra 5170410 havema. 


What is the honour and pleasure we can do by 
our songs of adoration to your grace? O lord of glory, 
what can we offer and when in homage to you? All 
thoughts, imagination and songs we offer are but an 


108 RGVEDA 


extension of your grace in adoration of your honour. 
So, O lord, only listen to these songs of adoration and 
be pleased. 


उतो घा ते deers इदासन्येषां पूर्वेषामश्युंणोऋरषीणाम्‌। 
अधाहं त्वा मघवञ्जोहवीयि त्वं न॑ इन्द्रासि प्रम॑तिः 
पितेव xi 


4. Uto gha te purusya idasan yesam purvesam- 
asrnor-rsinam. Adhaham tva maghavan-johavimi 
tvam na indrasi pramatih piteva. 


And all songs and adorations of the seers of all 
time which you graciously listen and accept are but 
human adorations of the visionaries in your honour. I 
too, O lord of universal knowledge, vision and glory, 
offer the same song of invocation and adoration. O lord 
and master, Indra, you are our teacher, protector and 
provider like the father. 


वोचेमेदिन्द्रं मघवानमेनं महो रायो राध॑सो यदद॑न्नः। यो 
अर्चतो ब्रहमकृतिमविं्ठो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Vocemedindram maghavanamenam maho rayo 
radhaso yad dadannah. Yo arcato brahma- 
krtimavistho yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Such is Indra, glorious lord of knowledge and 
power whom we celebrate in song. He gives us the 
grandeur and abundance of wealth, honour and 
excellence and the competence for higher and higher 
success. And he loves and accepts the homage and 
adorations of the celebrant supplicant of divinity. O lord, 
O visionaries, poets and teachers, protect and promote 
us with all modes of honour and well being for all time. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 30 109 


Mandala 7/Sukta 30 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ नो देव शव॑सा याहि शुष्मिन्भवा वृध इन्द्र रायो अस्य। 
महे Pore नृपते सुवच्र afe श्चत्राय diets शूर ॥ ९॥ 


it. A no deva Savasa yahi Susmin bhava vrdha indra 
rayo asya. Mahe nrmnaya nrpate suvajra mahi 
ksatraya paumsyaya Sura. 


Indra, lord divine, generous and most potent 
ruler, come to us with strength and power and be the 
promoter of this commonwealth. O lord ordainer of 
humanity, heroic wielder of the thunderbolt of defence 
and order of law and justice, come for the rise of this 
great social order, for wealth and splendour and for the 
manly character, courage and vigour of the nation. 


हव॑न्त उ त्वा हव्यं विवाचि तनूषु शूराः सूर्य॑स्य सातौ । 
त्वं विश्वेषु सेन्यो जनेषु त्वं वृत्राणि रन्धया Gerd ul २ ॥ 


2 Havanta u tva havyam vivaci tanusu surah 
suryasya satau. Tvam visvesu senyo janesu tvam 
vrtrani randhaya suhantu. 


In their discussions, debates or differences of 
opinion, in matters of language and education, in their 
heart of hearts and in all organisational bodies of the 
common wealth, and in their struggles for light, 
enlightenment and brilliance of the order, brave and 
fearless leaders of the nation call upon you, the real 
adorable leader. You are the leader and commander 
among all powers and forces of humanity. O leader and 
commander, Indra, expose all strongholds of darkness 
and negation, eliminate all evil and wickedness, for there 


110 RGVEDA 


is no evil too difficult for you to destroy. 


अहा यदिन्द्र सुदिना व्युच्छान्दधो यत्केतुमुं पमं aed | 
vaifa: सीददसुरो न होता हुवानो अत्र॑ सुभगाय 
देवान्‌ BU 


Aha yadindra sudina vyucchan dadho yat ketum- 
upamam samatsu. Nyagnih sidadasuro na hota 
huvano atra subhagaya devan. 


Indra, lord ruler, leader and commander of the 
nation, when the days of enlightenment and good 
fortune shine and you bear the banner of light and 
victory in battles of progress, symbol of the nation’s 
excellence, then Agni, brilliant leader and light giver, 
having called up the wise and brave, sits at peace among 
them at the head of yajna as the priest giving life and 
energy for further good fortune and higher progress. 


वयं ते त॑ इन्द्र ये च॑ देव स्तव॑न्त शूर दद॑तो मघानि । 
यच्छ। सूरिभ्य उपमं वरूथं स्वाभुवो! जरणामश्नवन्त ॥। ठ ॥। 


4. Vayam te ta indra ye ca deva stavanta Sura dadato 
maghani. Yaccha suribhya upamam varutham 
svabhuvo jaranamasnavanta. 


Indra, generous lord ruler of glory, brave and 
fearless leader of the nation, we are yours and we stand 
for you, and so are all those who praise and celebrate 
the giver and creator of wealth and excellence for all. 
Pray give to the learned and the wise a good home, 
sustenance and security worthy of them, noble seniors 
they are in their own right, moving on forward to a whole 
fulfilled life. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 31 111 


वोचेमेदिन्द्रं मघवानमेनं महो रायो राध॑सो यदद॑न्नः। यो 
अर्चतो ब्रहमकृतिमविंछो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Vocemedindram maghavanam-enam maho rayo 
radhaso yad dadannah. Yo arcato brahmakrti- 
mavistho yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


We sing and celebrate the honour and glory of 
this Indra, lord of magnificence, leader and ruler of the 
nation, who creates and gives us great wealth and honour 
and all means and materials of success and victory for 
life’s fulfilment, and who loves and accepts, protects 
and promotes the homage and adoration of the devotee. 
O lord, O learned and wise leaders, protect and promote 
us with all good fortune and all modes of well being for 
all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 31 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
प्रव इन्द्राय ues हर्यश्वाय गायत। 
सखायः सोमपाब्ने ।॥ ९॥ 


0 Pra va indraya madanam haryasvaya gayata. 
Sakhayah somapavne. 


O friends, sing exciting songs of celebration in 
honour of Indra, your leader, commander of dynamic 
forces who loves the nation’s honour and excellence 
and thirsts to celebrate the grandeur of it. 


शंसेदुक्थं सुदानव उत द्युक्षं यथा नर॑ः | 
चकृमा सत्यराधसे ॥ २॥ 


Zi Samseduktham suddnava uta dyuksam yatha 
narah. Cakrma satyaradhase. 


112 RGVEDA 


Say adorable words of praise for Indra, generous 
giver, and sing heavenly songs for him as leading lights 
of the nation do. Let us too do the same honour to him, 
the great accomplisher of truth. 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्र वाजयुस्त्वं गव्युः श॑तक्रतो | 
त्वं हिरण्ययुर्वसो ॥ ३ ॥ 

a Tvam na indra vajayustvam gavyuh Satakrato. 
Tvam hiranyayurvaso. 


Indra, glorious ruler, you are giver of peace and 
settlement, you are accomplisher of a hundred yajnic 
acts of truth, you are giver of victory and progress to 
us, you are lover of the land and culture and you are 
creator of golden wealth, honour and excellence. 


वयमिन्द्र त्वायवोऽ भि प्र ONT वृषन्‌। 
विद्धी त्वस्य नो वसो ॥ ४॥ 


4. Vayamindra_ 1144176 10/11 pra nonumo vrsan. 
Viddhi tvasya no vaso. 


Indra, generous and valorous lord ruler, giver 
of settlement, peace and progress, we are your admirers, 
and we stand for you. O lord, know this of us, for us 
and for the nation. 


at al fre च वक्तवेऽर्यो रन्धीररांव्णे। 
त्वे अपि TAA ॥ ५॥ 


= Ma no nide ca vaktave’ryo randhiraravne. 
Tve api kraturmama. 


O lord ruler of the nation, leave us not to the 
reviler, malignant scandaliser, and the selfish miser. My 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 31 113 


strength, intelligence and action sustains in you and 
flows from there. 


त्वं वमीसि सप्रथः पुरोयोधश्च वृत्रहन्‌ । 
त्वया प्रतिं qa युजा ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tvam varmasi saprathah puroyodhasca vrtrahan. 
Tvaya prati bruve yuja. 


You are the celebrated armour of defence and 
all round protection, front rank warrior, destroyer of 
evil, darkness and want: committed to you in covenant, 
I say so and bind myself. 


Wet उतासि यस्य तेऽ a स्वधावरी ae: । 
मम्नाते इन्द्र रोद॑सी 9 


i Mahan utasi yasya te’nu svadhavari sahah. 
Mamnate indra rodasi. 


You are great and glorious, Indra, and 
accordingly your courage and fortitude is great. The 
abundant heaven and fertile earth both acknowledge 
your grandeur. 


तं wat cect परि भुवद्वाणी स॒याव॑री । 
नक्षमाणा सह द्युभिः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tam tva marutvati pari bhuvad vant sayavari. 
Naksamana saha dyubhih. 

The voice of admiration, expression of your 
essential nature and power, raised by vibrant humanity, 
reaching you incessantly with the light and truth of your 
power and performance, may ever abide around you. 

ऊध्वसिस्त्वान्विन्द॑वो भुवन्दस्ममुप द्यविं। 
सं त नमन्त Hea: ॥ ९॥ 


114 RGVEDA 


9, Urdhvasastvanvindavo bhuvan dasmamupa 
dyavi. sam te namanta krstayah. 


People of the world together in unison bow to 
you in homage and subsequently joyous voices of 
admiration rise for you, mighty lord destroyer of 
enemies, like mists of soma unto the heights of heaven. 


प्रवो महे महिवृधे भरध्वं प्रचेतसे प्र सुं मतिं कुणुध्वम्‌। 
fast: पूर्वीः प्र च॑रा चर्षणिप्राः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Pra vo mahe mahivrdhe bharadhvam pracetase 
pra sumatim krnudhvam. Visah purvih pra cara 
carsaniprah. 


Bear and bring homage, assistance and 
cooperation and offer positive thoughts and advice to 
Indra, your leader and ruler. Great is he, promoter of 
great people and the common wealth, and a leader wide- 
awake with deep and distant foresight. O leader and 
ruler of the land, be good to the settled ancient people 
and take care of the farming communities and other 
professionals so that all feel happy and fulfilled without 
frustration. 


उरुव्यचसे महिने सुवृक्तिमिन्द्रौय wel जनयन्त विप्राः | 
तस्य॑ व्रतानि न fara धीराः ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Uruvyacase mahine suvrktim-indraya brahma 
janayanta viprah. Tasya vratani na minanti 
dhirah. 


To the great Indra, the ruler widely perceptive 
and all aware, vibrant people of the land, the learned 
and the wise with a sense of dynamism, all offer homage, 
rooting out dead wood, planting new saplings, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 115 


generating new forms of sustenance and energy, and 
creating new forms of appreciating and realising the 
eternal spirit. And they, people of constancy and settled 
mind, never violate the laws and discipline of the lord’s 
Eternal Law. 


इन्द्रं वाणीरनुंत्तमन्युमेव सत्रा राजानं दधिरे सहध्यै । 
ea vars बर्हया समापीन्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Indram vanir-anuttamanyum-eva satra rajanam 
dadhire sahadhyai. Haryasvaya barhaya sama- 


pin. 


All voices of the people, all sessions of yajnic 
programmes of action, uphold and support only the 
brilliant ruler, Indra of constant vision and passion, in 
order to maintain the social order of governance without 
obstruction. O friends and citizens of the land, exhort 
your people in support of Indra, leader of the dynamic 
nation of humanity. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


मो षु cat वाघत॑श्चनाऽऽरे अस्मन्नि रीरमन्‌। 
आरात्ताच्यित्सथधमादं न आ गंहीह वा सन्नुप॑ श्रुधि ॥ ९॥ 


li; Mo su tva vaghatascana’’re asmanni riraman. 
Arattaccit sadhamadam na a gahtha va sannupa 
Srudhi. 


Let not your worshippers be far away from us, 
nor let them detain you. Come to our house of 
celebration from the farthest distance even, and when 
you are here, listen to our songs of celebration and divine 


116 RGVEDA 
adoration. 


इमे fed sand: सुते सचा मधौ न मक्च आसं ते। 
इन्द्रे कामं जरितारो वसूयवो रथे न पादमा द॑धुः ॥ २॥ 


(५१ Ime hi te brahmakrtah = 57/1८ saca madhau na 
maksa asate. Indre kamam jaritaro vasuyavo 
rathe na padama dadhuh. 


When the celebrants have distilled and seasoned 
the soma of homage and worship for Indra, ruler of the 
social order of governance, they sit together like bees 
clustering round honey. The celebrants dedicated to the 
honour and prosperity of the ruling order place their 
trust and faith in Indra, the ruler and the law of 
governance, like travellers who place their foot on the 
step and ride the chariot to reach their goal. 


रायस्कामो avert सुदश्चिणं पुत्रो न पितरं हवे ।॥ ३ ॥ 


1 Rayaskamo vajrahastam sudaksinam putro na 
pitaram huve. 


Dedicated to the honour and prosperity of the 
human nation, and keen to realise the excellence of life 
for myself too, I invoke generous Indra, lord ruler of 
the world, wielder of the thunderbolt of defence and 
protection in hand as keeper of the law and justice of 
the order of governance. I invoke him like a child 
yearning for the father for his generosity. 


इम इन्द्राय सुन्विरे सोमासो दध्याशिरः 1 
at आ मदाय वज्रहस्त पीतये हरिभ्यां याह्योक situ 


4. Ima indraya sunvire 50777650 dadhyaSirah. 
Tan a madaya vajrahasta pitaye haribhyam 
yahyoka a. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 117 


These somas of the nation’s honour and 
excellence energised by the ferment of inspiration and 
enthusiasm have been distilled to celebrate the dignity 
and majesty of the land and the ruler Indra. O lord 
wielder of the thunderbolt, come to our hall of fame for 
the joy of a drink of them. Come fast by the chariot 
drawn by horses of the winds. 


श्रवच्छ्रुत्कर्ण ईयते वसूनां नू चिन्नो मर्धिंषद्‌ fr: | 
सद्यश्चिद्यः सहस्त्राणि शता दद त्रकिर्दित्स॑न्तमा मिंनत्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


Sravac-chrutkarna 741८ vasunam nu ८711110 
mardhisad girah. Sadyascid yah sahasrani Sata 
dadan-nakir-ditsantam-a minat. 


The lord has a keen ear to listen to the supplicant. 
He listens, therefore he is approached for the gift of 
wealth, honour and excellence. May the lord never 
ignore our prayers, may he, instead, soften and sanctify 
our supplications. Indeed, instant giver of a hundred 
thousand gifts of good fortune as he is, no one can 
withhold him when he extends his hand of generosity. 


स वीरो अप्र॑तिष्कुत इन्द्रेण शूशुवे ATH: | 
यस्ते गभीरा सव॑नानि वृब्रहन्त्सुनोत्या च धाव॑ति ॥ & ॥ 


6. Sa viro apratiskuta indrena susuve nrbhih. 
Yaste gabhira savanani vrtrahant-sunotya ca 
dhavati. 


He who approaches you, does your behest and 
performs the serious assignments given by you, O 
destroyer of evil, he goes forward bold and unshaken, 
and, exhorted by leading men, rises under the protection 
of Indra. 


118 RGVEDA 


भवा वरूथं मघवन्मघोनां यत्समजासि शर्धं"तः। 
वि त्वाहतस्य वेद॑नं भजेमह्या दूणाशो! भरा गय॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ce Bhava varutham maghavan maghonam yat 
samajasi Sardhatah. Vi tvahatasya vedanam 
bhajemahya dunaso bhara gayam. 


O lord of power and glory, be the shelter home 
and all round protector of those who wield, control and 
rule the wealth and honour of the nation — you who 
impel and inspire the bold and daring, and humble the 
defiant. Let us share the knowledge and learn from the 
painful experience of those who have been punished 
by you. O lord indestructible, bless our home and give 
us fulfilment. 


सुनोता सोमपाव्ने सोममिन्द्राय विणे | पच॑ता पक्तीरवसे 
कृणुध्वमित्पृणत्नित्पुंणाते मयं: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sunota somapavne somam-indraya vajrine. 
Pacata paktiravase krnudhvamit prnannit prnate 
mayah. 


Extract, mature and prepare the nectar of life 
for the lord, Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice 
and punishment and destroyer of evil, who loves the 
soma spirit of life’s beauty and joy. Ripen and perfect 
the drinks and drugs for health care and protection of 
life, and create the state of comfort and well being, 
giving success and fulfilment for those who work for 
the joy and fulfilment of all in general. 


मा स्त्रैधत सोमिनो दक्ष॑ता महे कृणुध्वं राय STS | 
तरणिरिज्नयति क्षेति पुष्यति न cara: कवल्रवे।। ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 119 


र Ma sredhata somino daksata mahe krnudhvam 
raya atuje. Taranir-ijjayati kseti pusyati na 
devasah kavatnave. 


Relent not, O makers of soma. Hurt not the 
lovers of soma. Perfect the nectar for life’s grandeur, 
strengthen the makers for the beauty and glory of life. 
Work on and on for the growth of life and for the strong 
defence of life’s vitality. The one that runs wins the race, 
lives in peace as well as provides for peace and security, 
grows and contributes to growth. The brilliant and 
generous are not for the lazy, the miser and the selfish. 


नकिः सुदासो रथं पीस न Aer 
इन्द्रो यस्याविता यस्य॑ मरुतो गमत्स गोम॑ति व्रजे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Nakih sudaso ratham paryasa na riramat. Indro 
yasyavita yasya maruto gamat sa gomati vraje. 


No one can counter turn the chariot of the 
generous nor stop it for rest or entertainment. The rider 
whose patron is Indra, destroyer of obstructions, and 
Maruts, vibrant defenders of life, stops not until he 
reaches the goal where abides the treasure of his love 
and ambition. 


गमद्वाजं वाजय॑चिन्द्र मर्त्यो यस्य त्वम॑विता yal: 1 
अस्माकं बोध्यविता रथानामस्माकं शूर नृणाम्‌॥ ९९॥ 
11. Gamad vajam vajayann-indra martyo yasya tvam- 


avita bhuvah. Asmakam bodhyavita rathanam- 
asmakam Sura nrnam. 


Indra, lord of light and life, the mortal whose 
guardian protector you are runs the race and reaches 
the victory post of enlightenment. O lord of might and 


120 RGVEDA 


fearlessness, take care of us too, enlighten us and be 
the guardian protector of our chariots and our people. 


उदिज्व॑स्य रिच्यतेंऽ शो धनं न Rares: 1 
य इन्द्रो हरिवान्न द॑भन्ति तं रिपो दक्षं दधाति सोमिनिं।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Udinnvasya ricyaten’so dhanam na jigyusah. Ya 
indro harivan na dabhanti tam ripo daksam 
dadhati somini. 


High rises the victor’s share of excellence as 
his wealth of life increases when Indra, guardian 
protector of the brave, vests his love of victory and 
soma-sublimity with the will and expertise of yajnic 
living. And then no enemies can ever defeat and destroy 
him. 


मन्त्रमखर्वं सुधितं सुपेशसं दधात यज्ञियेष्वा । 
पूर्वीश्चन प्रसितयस्तरन्ति तं य इन्द्रे कर्म॑णा भुव॑त्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Mantram-akharvam sudhitam supesasam 
dadhata yajniyesva. Purviscana prasitayas- 
taranti tam ya indre karmana bhuvat. 


Offer perfect, well structured and graceful 
mantric thoughts, adorations and actions to the divinities 
in yajnic programmes of creativity and development. 
Then even the oldest bounds of will and passion take 
the yajaka across the seas who dedicates his actions to 
the service of Indra. 


कस्तमिन्द्र त्वावसुमा मर्त्योः दधर्षति | 
श्रद्धा इत्ते मघवन्पार्ये दिवि वाजी वाजं सिषासति ॥ ९४ u 


14. Kastamindra tvavasuma martyo dadharsati. 
Sraddha it te maghavan parye divi vaji vajam 
sisasati. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 121 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, who can assail 
that mortal who wholly lives under the shade and shelter 
of your protection? O lord of the wealth and power of 
existence, whoever reposes his faith and dynamism in 
you as the sole saviour and pilot while he is in action 
receives his share of victory in the light of divinity. 


Ta: स्म वृत्रहत्येषु चोदय ये दद॑ति प्रिया वसु । 
तव प्रणीती हर्यश्व सूरिभिर्विश्वा तरेम दुरिता ॥ १५॥ 


15. Maghonah sma vrtrahatyesu codaya ye dadati 
priya vasu. Tava praniti haryasva suribhirvisva 
tarema durita. 


O lord commander of world forces, in the battles 
against darkness, want and evil, inspire those leaders 
of wealth, honour and power who contribute to world 
service in the manner dear to you. O ruler of the 
dynamics of nations, we pray, may we, along with the 
wise and the fearless, cross over all evils of the world 
under the guidance of your ethics, morals and policy in 
matters of universal values. 


तवेदिन्द्रावमं वसु त्वं पुष्यसि मध्यमम्‌। सत्रा विश्व॑स्य 
पर मस्य॑ राजसि नकिरा गोषुं वृण्वते ।॥ ९६ ॥ 


16.  Tavedindravamam vasu tvam pusyasi madhya- 
mam. Satra visvasya paramasya rajasi nakistva 
gosu vrnvate. 


Indra, you protect, promote and rule over the 
lower orders of wealth of the world. You promote and 
rule over the middle order of the world’s wealth. And 
you rule and shine over wealth of the highest order of 
the world. You are the true and the eternal power. No 


122 RGVEDA 


one can resist you among the lands and lights of the 
world. Who would not accept you? 


त्वं विश्व॑स्य धनदा अंसि श्रुतो य ई भवन्त्याजयः | 
तवायं विश्व॑ः पुरुहूत पार्थि वोऽ ata भिक्षते 1 ९७॥ 


17. Tvam visvasya dhanada asi 5716 ya im bhava- 
ntyajayah. Tavayam visvah puruhuta parthivo 
*vasyurnama bhiksate. 


You are the wealth giver of the world, 
universally heard and acclaimed, universally invoked 
in all battles of the world that there are, since the whole 
humanity on earth in search of protection looks up to 
you and prays for sustenance and progress. 


यदिन्द्र याव॑तस्त्वमेताव॑ंदहमीशीय। caran fat terra 
रदावसो न पापत्वाय॑ wets ९८ ॥ 


18. Yadindra yavatas-tvametavad-ahamisiya. 
Stotaramid didhiseya radavaso na papatvaya 
rasiya. 

Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of wealth 

and excellence, as much as you grant, so much I wish I 

should control and rule. I would hold it only to support 

the devotees of divinity and would not spend it away 
for those who indulge in sin and evil. 


fraafa-deaa दिवेदिवे राय आ कहचिद्धिदे । 
नदि त्वदन्यन्म॑घवन्न आप्यं वस्यो अस्तिं पिता चन ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Sikseyaminmahayate divedive raya @ kuhacid- 
vide. Nahi tvadanyanmaghavan na apyam vasyo 
asti pita cana. 


Every day I would wish to give wealth and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 123 


support for the person who seeks to rise for 
enlightenment wherever he be. O lord of wealth, power 
and honour, there is none other than you worthy of love 
and attainment as our own, as father indeed. 


तरणिरित्सिषासति वाजं पुर॑न्ध्या युजा । 
आ व इन्द्रं पुरुहूतं न॑ मे गिरा नेमिं aa aa Ro ॥ 


20. Taranirit sisasati vajam purandhya yuja. A va 
indram puruhutam name gira nemim tasteva 
sudrvam. 


Only the saviour, a person of dynamic will and 
action joined in the soul with a controlled and dedicated 
mind, would share wealth and knowledge with the 
people and distribute it over the deserving. With words 
of prayer I bow to Indra, the ruler invoked by you all 
and draw his attention to you just like the carpenter 
bending flexible wood round as felly of the wheel. (The 
lord is flexible too, his heart melts with sympathy for 
the people.) 


न godt मर्त्यो विन्दते वसु न स्त्रेधन्तं र यिर्न शत्‌ । 
सुशक्तिरिन्म॑घवन्तुभ्यं माव॑ते देष्णं यत्पार्ये दिवि ॥ २९॥ 


21. Na dustuti martyo vindate vasu na sredhantam 
rayirnasat. Susaktirinmaghavan tubhyam mavate 
desnam yat parye divi. 


By protest and violence the mortal does not win 
the wealth of life. Nor does wealth oblige the inactive 
and malevolent. O lord of honour and excellence, right 
competence dedicated to Divinity is your gift for a 
person like me which is good on the day of the cross 
over. 


124 RGVEDA 


अभि त्वा शूर नोनुमोऽ दुग्धाइव ara: । ईशानमस्य जग॑तः 
स्वर्दृामीशणानपिन्द्र तस्थुषं: ॥ २२॥ 


22. Abhi tva Sura nonumo’dugdha iva dhenavah. 
Isanam-asya jagatah svardrsam-isanam-indra 
tasthusah. 


O lord almighty, we adore you and wait for your 
blessings as lowing cows not yet milked wait for the 
master. Indra, lord of glory, you are ruler of the moving 
world and you are ruler of the unmoving world and your 
vision is bliss. 


न त्वार्वो अन्यो दिव्यो न पार्थिवो न जातो न ज॑निष्यते | 
अश्वायन्तो मघवचिन्द्र वाजिनो गव्यन्तस्त्वा हवामहे ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Na tvavan anyo divyo na parthivo na jato na 
jJanisyate. ASvayanto maghavann-inda vajino 
gavyantas-tva havamahe. 


There is none other like you, neither heavenly 
nor earthly, neither born nor yet to be born. O lord of 
power and glory, we invoke you and pray for veteran 
scholars, dynamic scientists and technologists and the 
light of the divine Word of knowledge. 


अभी षतस्तदा भरेन्द्र ज्यायः कनींयसः। 
पुरूवसुर्हि म॑घवन्त्सनादसि भरेभरे च हव्यं: ॥ २४॥ 
24. Abhi satastada bharendra jyayah kaniyasah. 


Puruvasurhi maghavant-sanadasi bharebhare ca 
havyah. 


Indra, lord of honour, power and excellence, you 
are the eternal lord of universal wealth and shelter home 
of all existence, invoked and worshipped in all 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 125 


challenging situations. Pray bring us the knowledge and 
experience of that essence of ultimate reality which is 
smaller than the smallest and greater than the greatest. 


परा णुदस्व मघवन्नमित्रान्त्सुवेदां नो वसू कृधि । 
अस्माकं बोध्यविता म॑हाधने भवां वृधः सखीनाम्‌ ॥ २५ ॥ 


25. Para nudasva maghavann-amitrant-suveda no 
vasu krdhi. Asmakam bodhyavita mahadhane 
bhava vrdhah_ sakhinam. 


Lord of wealth, honour, power and excellence, 
treasure home of glory and grandeur, throw off the 
enemies far away. Give us the wealth of life. Give us 
the knowledge and awakenment for good living. Be our 
saviour and protector in the strife of existence which is 
otherwise too great for us. Be the promoter of all friendly 
forces. 


इन्द्र क्रतुं न आ भ॑र पिता पुत्रेभ्यो यथा। feat uit 
अस्मिन्पुरुहूत याम॑नि जीवा ज्योतिरशीमहि ॥ २६ ॥ 


26. Indrakratumnadabhara pita putrebhyo yatha. 
Siksa no asmin puruhuta yamani jiva jyotirasi- 
mahi. 


Bring us the divine vision, will and intelligence 
as father does for his children. O lord universally 
invoked and worshipped, instruct us as a teacher at this 
present time so that we, ordinary souls, may have the 
new light of life and living experience of Divinity. 


मा नो अज्ञाता वृजनं दुराध्यो ३ माशिवासो अवं क्रमुः | 
त्वया वयं प्रवतः शश्व॑तीर पोऽ तिं शूर तरामसि ॥ २७॥ 


126 RGVEDA 


27. Ma no ajnata vrjana duradhyo masivaso ava 
kramuh. Tvaya vayam pravatah sasvatirapo ’ti 
Sura taramasi. 


O lord almighty beyond fear, let not the ignorant 
and unknown, crooked intriguers, evil designers, and 
malevolent opponents in ambush attack us on way to 
you. May we, guided, directed and protected by you, 
cross the universal streams of life rushing down the 
slopes of time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 33 


Indra, Vasishtha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni & 
Vasishtha Putrah Rshis 


स्वित्यञ्चो मा दक्षिणतस्कपर्दा धियंजिन्वासो अभिहि 
प्र॑म॒न्दुः | उत्तिष्ठन्वोचे परि बर्हिषो qa मे दूरादवितवे 
afast: ॥ ९॥ 

1. Svityaiico ma daksinatas-kaparda dhiyamjin-vaso 
abhi hi pramanduh. Uttisthan voce pari barhiso 
nrn na me durddavitave vasisthah. 

Celibate disciples of the first order of scholars 
wearing locks of hair on the right side, settled for studies 
to collect knowledge for intellectual advancement come 
from far to study under my care and give me delight. I 
arise from my seat of grass, speak to them and speak of 
them as leading lights of the future. 


दूरादिन्द्र॑मनयन्ना सुतेन॑ तिरो वैशन्तमति पान्त॑मुग्रम्‌। 
पाश॑द्युम्नस्य वायतस्य सोमात्सुतादिन्द्रोऽवृणीता 
वसिष्ठान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 33 127 


2, Durdd-indram-anayanna sutena tiro vaisan- 
tamati pantam-ugram. Pasadyumnasya vayatas- 
ya somat sutadindro’vrnita vasisthan. 


From far off and in view of their achievement 
in preference to others’, they invite and bring over Indra, 
pioneer of knowledge and power and strong supporter 
of people settled in peace, and Indra agrees and accepts 
the invitation of the aspiring scholars in recognition of 
the progress and prosperity of the producers of wealth, 
scholarship of the learned and the governance and 
justice of the organisers. 

(The mantra points to the free movement of 
scholars and specialists across the globe for 
advancement of knowledge and culture on the 
international level.) 


Wad कं सिन्धुं मेभिस्ततारे वेन्नु कं भेदमेभिर्जघान । एवेन्नु 
कं दाशराज्ञे सुदासं प्रावदिन्द्रो ब्रह्म॑णा वो वसिष्ठाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Evannu kam sindhumebhistatarevennu kam 
bhedamebhirjaghana. Evennu kam dasarajne 
sudasam pravadindro brahmana vo vasisthah. 


This way, for sure, Indra, leader of knowledge 
and power, crosses with ease any river of difficulty by 
virtue of these scholars. This way too he easily 
overcomes difference, division and disunity. This way, 
again, O scholars and leaders settled at peace, by your 
vision, wisdom and mantric formulae, he defends and 
promotes generous rules for the advancement of good 
government and administration. 


जुष्टी नरो ब्रह्म॑णा वः पितृणामक्ष॑मव्ययं न किल्कौ रिषाथ | 
यच्छक्व॑रीषु लृ हता रवेणेन्द्रे शुष्ममदधाता वसिष्ठाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


128 RGVEDA 


4. Justi naro brahmana vah pitrnamaksam-avyayam 
na kila risatha. Yacchakvarisu brhata ravenendre 
susmamadadhata vasisthah. 


O leading lights of the nation, by your vision, 
wisdom and active homage, the tradition of the ancients 
is preserved and happily advanced. Therefore, never for 
any reason, obstruct the relentless wheel of the nation 
and never disturb the inviolable equilibrium of forces 
which, O leading lovers of peace, by your reverberating 
words and heroic action in the great battles of humanity, 
you vested in the nation and its governance as the centre 
of stability. 


उच्छ्यामिवेत्तृष्णजों नाथितासोऽ दींधयुदांशराज्ञे Tara: | 
वसिं्टस्य स्तुवत इन्द्रो अश्रोदुरुं तृत्सुभ्यो अकृणोदु 
THANG ॥ 


a: Ud dyamivet trsnajo nathitaso’didhayur-dasa- 
rajne vrtasah. Vasisthasya stuvata indro asrodu- 
rum trtsubhyo akrnodu lokam. 


The leading lights of the nation, selected and 
duly appointed, thirsting to cross over the hurdles of 
life, shine and glorify the generous ruler like the sun 
for the advancement of the liberal order for the people. 
Let Indra, enlightened ruler, listen to the leading lights 
and scholars and create vast and brilliant channels and 
possibilities for the defence and developmental forces 
of the nation. 


दण्डाइवेद्रोजजंनास stra-ah Fasat भरता अर्भकासः | 
अभ॑वच्च पुरएता वसिष्ठ आदित्तृत्सूनां विशो अप्रथन्त ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 33 129 


6. Danda ived go-ajanasa asan paricchinna bharata 
arbhakasah. Abhavacca pura-eta vasistha adit 
trtsunam viso aprathanta. 


Let the pioneers and bearers of the burdens of 
social order be straight and strong like the sceptre of 
authority, eloquent and progressive in language, 
education and culture, definite and judicious in law and 
policy and youthful in energy. Let the leader of these, 
wise and stable in mind, be ever first and foremost in 
the advance specially of the people and of the defence 
and development forces. 


त्रय॑ः कृण्वन्ति भुवं नेषु रेत॑स्तिस््रः प्रजा आर्या ज्योतिरग्राः | 
wal घर्मास उषसं सचन्ते Gal इत्ताँ अनुं विदुर्वसिष्ठाः ॥ ७॥ 


a Trayah krnvanti bhuvanesu retastisrah praja arya 
Jytiragrah. Trayo gharmasa usasam sacante 
sarvan it tan anu vidurvasisthah. 


Three vital fires, of earth, sky and the sun, 
generate life energy in world regions and life forms. 
Three are the people’s classes dynamic and enlightened. 
Three vital fires, heat, light and electricity, serve the 
dawn, and the enlightened scholars know all of them. 


सूर्यस्येव वक्षथो ज्योतिरेषां समुद्रस्येव महिमा ग॑भीरः। 
वातस्येव प्रजवो नान्येन स्तोमो! वसिष्ठा अन्वेतवे वः ॥ ८ ॥ 
om Suryasyeva vaksatho jyotiresam samudrasyeva 


mahama gabhirah. Vatasyeva prajavo nanyena 
stomo vasistha anvetave vah. 


Let the rise of these leading lights be like the 
splendour of the sun, their grandeur as profound as the 
depth of the sea, their drive like the wind, and let their 


130 RGVEDA 


organisation and its magnitude be impossible for anyone 
else to follow or rival. 


त इन्निण्यं हृद॑यस्य प्रकेतैः सहस्रवल्शमभि सं aia | 
यमेनं ततं प॑रिधिं वय॑न्तोऽ vara उप॑ सेदुर्वसिष्ठाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Ta inninyam hrdayasya praketaih sahasravalsa- 
mabhi sam cananti. Yamena tatam paridhim 
vayanto ’psarasa upa sedurvasisthah. 


Leading scholars and sages by the reflections 
of divine light of their heart sojourn over the mystery 
of the thousand branched tree of existence, going round 
and round across, and by the bounds of this web of life 
woven by the cosmic law giver and by their imagination 
rise up to the wonders of heaven in the clouds. 


विद्युतो ज्योतिः oR संजिहानं पित्रावरुणा यदप॑श्यतां त्वा । 
तत्ते जन्मोतैकं वसिष्ठाऽगस्त्यो यत्त्वां विश आजभार i ९०॥ 


10. Vidyuto jyotih pari samjihanam mitravaruna 
yadapasyatam tva. Tat te janmotaikam vasistha- 
*gastyo yat tva visa ajabhara. 


O holy sage of knowledge, peace and power, 
sun and moon, heat and air, virility and fertility, pranic 
energies, receive and bear you when, as light of life 
you leave your sojourn in nature. That is one birth of 
yours. Then Agastya, the teacher scholar free from sin 
and stain brings you back to the community of people 
(as a complete and finished human being, 1.e., dvija). 


saa मैत्रावरुणो व॑सिष्टोर्वश्या ब्रह्यन्मनसोऽ fal जातः। 
द्रप्सं स्कन्नं ब्रह्म॑णा दैव्येन विश्वे! देवाः पुष्क॑रे त्वाद- 
दन्त।॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 33 131 


11. Utasi maitravaruno vasisthorvasya brahman 
manaso'dhi jatah. Drapsam skannam brahmana 
daivyena visve devah puskare tvadadanta. 


Vasishtha, sage and scholar, living soul, you are 
a child of sun and moon, born of the heart of Mother 
Nature nurtured by mother knowledge. Like a drop of 
distilled soma, all divine powers of the world nourish 
you in the lotus cradle on celestial wealth of food for 
vitality and light for knowledge. 


aden ses प्रविद्दान्त्सहस्त्रदान उत वा Gals: | 
ane ततं afi वयिष्यन्नप्सरसः परिं जज्ञे वसिष्ठः 1122 ॥ 


12. Sa praketa ubhayasya pravidvan tsahasradana 
uta va sadanah. Yamena tatam paridhim vayisya- 
nnapsarasah pari jajne vasisthah. 


Vasishtha, man of enlightenment, scholar of 
both heaven and earth, blest with a thousand gifts, and 
giver of a thousand gifts traverses the very bounds of 
the web of life woven by the mover and law giver of 
the world and rises over the winds and clouds. 


सत्रे हं जाताविषिता नमोभिः कुम्भे रेत॑: सिषिचतुः 
समानम्‌। ततो ह मान उदियाय मध्यात्ततो जातमृषि- 
माहुर्वसिंछम्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13.  Satre ha jatavisita namobhih kumbhe retah sisi- 
catuh samanam. Tato ha mana udiyaya madhya- 
ttato jatam-rsim-ahur-vasistham. 


Inspired teachers and scholars risen to eminence 
over yajnic sessions of teaching relentlessly feed the 
disciples with gifts of vital knowledge, and from that 
rises the faithful scholar and sage whom they call 


132 RGVEDA 
Vasishtha, brilliant seer and visionary. 


saad सामभृतं बिभर्ति ग्रावाणं बिश्चत्प्र dare | 
उपैनमाध्वं सुमनस्यमाना आ al गच्छाति प्रतृदो 
afas: ९२४ ॥ 

14. Ukthabhrtam samabhrtam bibharti gravanam 


bibhrat pra vadatyagre. Upainamadhvam suma- 
nasyamana क vo gacchati pratrdo vasisthah. 


O men of noble mind and heart, the brilliant sage 
who bears the knowledge of Rgveda and Samaveda and 
who commands the secrets of yajna relating to the clouds 
and mountains for rain, and who proclaims the 
knowledge to dispel the darkness of ignorance, comes 
to you. Receive him, and welcome him for your good. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 34 
Vishvedevah, Ahi, Ahirbudhnya Devatah, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 
प्र Used देवी म॑नीषा अस्मत्सुतष्टो रथो न वाजी ॥ ९॥ 
1. Pra Sukraitu devi manisa asmat sutasto ratho na 
vajl. 
May divine intelligence of pure and brilliant 


order come to us like the dawn riding a wonderfully 
crafted chariot drawn by flying horses. 


fag: पूंथिव्या दिवो जनित्रं श्रृण्वन्त्यापो अध क्षर॑न्तीः ॥ २ ॥ 
2; Viduh prthivya divo janitram $rnvantyapo adha 
ksarantih. 


Those who listen to words of knowledge as earth 
receives the showers of rain know the cause and creator 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 34 133 
of heaven and earth. 
आप॑श्चिदस्मै पिन्व॑न्त पृथ्वीर्वृत्रेषु शरा मंस॑न्त उग्राः 13 


2 Apascidasmai pinvanta prthvirvrtresu sura mam- 
santa ugrah. 


The showers of rain nourish the earth and her 
progeny for this Indra, social order of humanity, and in 
the battles of life the blazing brave bow down in honour 
to it. 


आ geet दधाताश्वानिन्द्रो न व्री हिर॑ण्यबाहुः ॥  ॥ 
4. A dhursvasmai dadhatasvanindro na vajri 
hiranyabahuh. 


Like Indra of the thunderbolt and golden hands 
of charity, rally the fastest forces and harness them to 
the centre pole of the earthly order in the service of 
Indra, the ruler. 


अभि प्र स्थाताहेव यज्ञं यातेव Geet हिनोत ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Abhi prasthataheva yajnam yateva patman tmana 
hinota. 


Like the dawn go forward to the yajna of the 
day and, like the pilgrim of divinity, advance on the 
way with self-confidence and enthusiasm. 


wrt ward हिनोतं यज्ञं cate केतुं जनाय che 6 ॥ 


6. Tmana samatsu hinota yajnam dadhata ketum 
jJanaya viram. 


Advance the yajna in the battles of life 
conscientiously and keep the flag of victory flying high 
in the service of humanity. 


134 RGVEDA 
उद॑स्य शुष्पाद्धानुनर्ति बिभर्ति भारं पुथिवी न at ७॥ 


ds Uadasya susmad bhanurnarta bibharti bharam 
prthivi na bhuma. 


And the sun rises by its own essential power 
and bears the burden of the earth, so does the earth bear 
the burden of her children, so let us be like the sun and 
the earth. 


हवयामि देवां अयातुरग्ने साधंच्रुतेन धियं दधामि॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Hvayami devan ayaturagne sadhannrtena dhiyam 


dadhami. 


Agni, lord of light and life, I invoke the divinities 
of nature and humanity, living life by the practice of 
truth and eternal law, and I acquire the wisdom of life 
and action from the teacher dedicated to peace and non- 
violence. 


अभि वों देवीं धियं दधिध्वं प्र di देवत्रा वाचं कृणु- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥। ९॥ 


9. Abhi vo devim dhiyam dadhidhvam pra vo devatra 
vacam krnudhvam. 


Acquire and maintain your intelligence and 
wisdom of the order of divinities and speak the language 
worthy of noble sages. 

आ च॑ आसां पाथो नदीनां वरुण उग्रः खहस्त्र॑चश्चाः ॥ Qo 
10. 4 casta Gsam patho nadinam varuna ugrah saha- 
sracaksah. 


Just as the refulgent sun, lord of a thousand eyes, 
watches and reveals the course of the streams of water, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 34 135 


so does the brilliant sage of the Word and wisdom 
commanding a thousand streams of speech oversee the 
flow of holy speech and communication. 


राजां राष्टानां पेशो नदीनामनुंत्तमस्पै श्चत्रं विश्वायुं 22 11 
11. Raja rastranam peso nadinam-anuttam-asmai 
ksatram visvayu. 


If the ruler of nations, Varuna, of a thousand 
eyes, be of the form of flowing streams, dynamic and 
fluent in speech, policy and action, his order of 
governance would be better than the best, 1.e., 
permanent, of universal sway over the world. 


अविष्टो अस्मान्विश्वासु विक्ष्वद्युं कृणोत शंसं 


निनित्सोः ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Avisto asman visvasu viksvadyum krnota Samsam 
ninitsoh. 


Give us safety and security among people of 
the world, black out the envy and malignity of scandal 
mongers, and turn criticism into appreciation. 


व्येतु दिद्युद्‌ द्विषामशोवा युयोत विष्वग्रप॑स्तनूनाम्‌ 23 ॥ 

13. Vyetu didyud dvisamaseva yuyota visvagr-apas- 
tanunam. 

Let the flaming arrow and pernicious ill will of 


the jealous be thrown off far away. Eliminate all the 
ailments, ill health and infirmities of our body. 


staat अग्िर्हव्यान्नमोधिः प्रेष्ठो अस्मा अधायि स्तोम॑ः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Avinno agnir-havyan-namobhih prestho asma 
adhayi stomah. 


136 RGVEDA 


May Agni, light of life, dearest ruler, consume 
and eliminate negativities, protect and preserve us with 
good food and health care, and accept our song of praise 
and prayer in appreciation. 


सजर्देवेभि॑रपां नपातं सखायं कृध्वं शिवो नो! अस्तु 2G ॥ 


15. Sajur-devebhir-apam napatam sakhayam krdh- 
vam Sivo no astu. 


Be friends with Agni, fire and the sun, which 
creates the indestructible waters of space and the 
firmament, along with other nature’s divinities, so that 
there may be happiness and well being in our life. 


अब्जामुक्थेरर्हिं गृणीषे बुध्ने नदीनां रजं मसु षीदन्‌॥ ९६॥ 
16. Abjamukthairahim grnise budhne nadinam 
rajahsu sidan. 


With songs of praise adore the sun which creates 
the cloud born of waters and which, while abiding in 
high space, also abides in every particle of river waters. 


मा नोऽ fede रिषे धान्मा यज्ञो अस्य स्रिधदृतायोः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Ma no‘hirbudhnyo rise dhanma yajnio asya sri- 
dhadrtayoh. 


May the yajnic governance and administration 
of this ruler dedicated to truth and eternal law never 
rule us with the motive of hurt and exploitation. So may 
also the cloud in the firmament never hurt us by excess 
or drought of rain. 


उत न॑ एषु नृषु श्रवो धुः प्र राये य॑न्तु शर्धन्तो अर्यः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Utana esu nrsu Sravo dhuh pra raye yantu Sar- 
dhanto aryah. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 34 137 


And may the ruler and governors generate and 
consolidate food, sustenance and prosperity among 
these noble people and move forward on way to honour 
and excellence, strengthening the devoted faithfuls and 
overcoming the envious rivals and hostile forces of 
opposition. 


तप॑न्ति शत्रं taut eat महासेनासो अमेभिरेषाम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Tapanti Satrum svarna bhuma mahasenaso 
amebhiresam. 


Leaders and commanders of mighty forces, they 
mortify and purge or defeat and destroy the enemies by 
these forces. Let us then be happy as in heaven on earth. 


आ यन्नः पलीर्गमन्त्यच्छा cast सुपाणिर्दधातु वीरान्‌ 20 UN 


20. A yannah patnir-gamantyaccha tvasta supanir- 
dadhatu viran. 


And when wives come and meet us, may 
Tvashta, lord destroyer of suffering and dexterous maker 
of graceful forms, bless us with brave and handsome 
children. 


प्रति नः स्तोमं त्वष्टा जुषेत स्यादस्मे srg: ॥ २९॥ 


21.  Pratinah stomam tvasta juseta syadasme arama- 
tirvasuyuh. 


May Tvashta, creator and ruler of world forms 
and institutions, accept our praise and prayer and, lord 
of vision and intelligence as he is, may he be the giver 
of wealth, honour and excellence for us. 


138 RGVEDA 


ता A रासत्रातिषाचो वसून्या रोद॑सी aeons श्रुणोतु | 
वरूत्रीभिः सुशरणो नो अस्तु त्वष्टा सुदत्रो वि द॑धातु 
राय॑ः ॥ २२॥ 


22. {त 77 rasan ratisaco vasunya rodasi varunant 
5111011८. Varutribhih susarano no astu tvasta suda- 
tro vi dadhatu rayah. 


May the heaven and earth, generous and 
judicious givers of gifts, overflowing with liquid wealth 
and energy, listen to our prayer and give us peace and 
comfort in a settled state of life. May Tvashta, creator 
and maker of forms, with all modes of protection and 
promotion be our shelter home, and may he, generous 
giver of the best things of life, bring us wealth, honour 
and excellence. 


तन्नो रायः ud area आपस्तद्रातिषाच sireefted ei: 1 
वनस्पतिभिः पृथिवी सजोषा उभे रोद॑सी a पासतो 
नः॥ २३॥ 


23. Tanno rayah parvatastanna apastad ratisaca 
osadhiruta dyauh. Vanaspatibhih prthivi sajosa 
ubhe rodasi pari pasato nah. 


That wealth, honour and excellence of ours, the 
clouds and mountains, the waters, the liberal givers, the 
herbs, the solar region, the dear motherly earth with her 
trees and forests and both heaven and earth protect, 
preserve and promote for us all round. 


अनु तदुर्वी रोद॑सी जिहातामनु दयुक्षो वरुण इन्द्र॑सखा । अनु 
विश्वे मरुतो ये Geral रायः स्याम धरुणं धियध्यै ।। २४॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 34 139 


21. Anu tadurvi rodasi jihatamanu dyukso varuna 
indrasakha. Anu visve maruto ye sahaso rayah 
syama dharunam dhiyadhyai. 


May the wide earth and heaven be kind and 
favourable to us and procure for us the wealth, honour 
and excellence of life we pray for. May the refulgent 
sun, the ocean, the friendly powers of the ruling lord 
Indra, and all the winds of space and vibrant heroes of 
the world who command both challenging force and 
fortitude be favourable so that we may be able to hold 
and manage the wealth, honour and excellence of life 
which the divinities of nature and humanity have 
given us. 


तन्न इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अभिराप ओषधीर्वनिनो जुषन्त। 
शर्म॑न्त्स्याम मरुतामुपस्थे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
नः॥ २५॥ 


25. Tanna indro varuno mitro agnirapa osadhirva- 
nino jusanta. Sarmantsyama marutamupasthe 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


May Indra, ruling lord of the world, Varuna, the 
ocean and the world’s powers of judgement and 
discrimination, Mitra, the sun and our brilliant friends, 
Agni, cosmic fire and the leaders, Apah, spatial waters 
and our people of holy action, and the herbs and trees 
of the earth, all brilliant and inspiring, be favourable 
and generous. May we, we pray, live close under the 
protection of the best of human world and nature. O 
divine powers of nature and humanity, protect, preserve 
and promote us with all good fortune and well being of 
life all round, all ways, all time. 


140 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 35 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


शं न॑ उन्द्राग्री भवतामवोभिः शं न इन्द्रावरुणा WAT । 
शमिन्द्रासोमा सुविताय शं योः शं न इन्द्रापूषणा 
वाज॑सातौ i ९॥ 


1. Sam na indragni bhavatamavobhih sam na indra- 
varuna ratahavya. Samindrasoma suvitaya sam 
yoh sam na indrapusana vajasatau. 


May cosmic energy and fire with all means of 
protection and advancement be for our peace and 
happiness for the good life. May solar energy and waters, 
givers of all good things of life be for our peace and 
joy. May life energy and the herbs be for our peace and 
honour for well being. May pranic energy and vital 
nourishment be for our peace and joy in our striving for 
the ultimate victory. 


शं नो भगः शमु नः शंसो अस्तु शं नः पुरन्धिः शमुं सन्तु 
रायः । शं न॑ः सत्यस्य॑ सुयमस्य शंसः शं नो अर्यमा पुरुजातो 
अ॑स्तु॥२॥ 


2. Sam no bhagah Samu nah samso astu sam nah 
purandhih samu santu rayah. Sam nah satyasya 
suyamasya samsah Sam no aryama purujato astu. 


May our honour and glory and our praise and 
approbation prevailing around be for our good and well 
being. May our law and order for social sustenance and 
our wealth and honour be for peace and well being. 
May our honour and respect for true Dharma and law 
and for the proper pursuit of Dharma and law in effective 
governance and administration be for our joy and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 35 141 


prosperity for the good life. And may our law and justice 
of universal value and fair application be for our good 
and well being in peace. 


शंनो धाता शमु, धर्तां at अस्तु शं न॑ उरूची भ॑वतु 
स्वधाभिः । शं रोद॑सी वृहती शं नौ अदः शं नो! देवानां 
सुहर्वानि सन्तु ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Sam no dhata Samu dharta no astu $am na uruct 
bhavatu svadhabhih. Sam _ rodast brhati Sam no 
adrih Sam no devanam suhavani santu. 


May the lord creator, ruler and sustainer be good 
and gracious and give us peace and joy of well being. 
May the extensive space and the wide earth be good 
with gifts of sustenance for our peace and well being. 
May the great firmament, and the regions of light and 
the cloud and the mountain be for our good, peace and 
joy. And may our invocations and adorations of the 
divinities of nature and humanity be good and bring us 
peace and joy. 


शं नो अभिर्ज्योतिंरनीको अस्तु शं at मित्रावरुणावश्विना 
शम्‌। शं न॑: सुकृतां सुकृतानि सन्तु शं न॑ इषिरो अभि वातु 
ard: ॥ ४॥ 


4. Sam no agnirjyotiraniko astu Sam no mitrava- 
runavasvina sam. Sam nah sukrtam sukrtani santu 
sam na isiro abhi vatu vatah. 


May the fire and the light and splendour of life 
be good for our peace and well being. May the prana 
and udana energies and the circuitous dynamics of 
nature be for our good and joy of well being. May the 
noble works of good artists and great men be for peace 


142 RGVEDA 


and happiness for us, and the ever blowing winds blow 
and inspire us for peace and joy. 


शं नो द्यावापृथिवी पूर्वहूतौ शमन्तरिश्चं दुशये नो sted | 
शं न ओषधीर्वनिनो भवन्तु शं नो रज॑स स्पति॑रस्तु 
जिष्णुः ॥ ५॥ 


a: Sam no dyavaprthivi purvahutau samantariksam 
drsaye no astu. Sam na osadhirvanino bhavantu 
sam no rajasaspatirastu jisnuh. 


May the heaven and earth invoked since eternity 
in the first yajna, and the middle regions so charming 
to see be good for our peace and joy. May the herbs 
instilled with the vitality of sun rays be for our peace 
and joy of good health, and may the victorious lord of 
life on earth and in distant regions be good and bring us 
peace, prosperity and happiness. 


शं न इन्द्रो वसुभिर्देवो sicq शमादित्येभिर्वरुणः Ysera: | 
शां नो रुद्रो cahoots: शं नस्त्वष्टा ग्राभिरिह श्वुणोतु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sam na indro vasubhirdevo astu Samdaditye- 
bhirvarunah susamsah. Sam no rudro rudre- 
bhirjalasah sam nastvasta gnabhiriha srnotu. 


May the self-refulgent sun with life sustaining 
planets be good for peace and happiness in our life. 
May the ocean so adorable be good for our peace and 
joy all the year round with the sun in Zodiacs. May the 
lord of nature’s life energy, Rudra, with pranic energies 
warding off pain and suffering be good for our peace 
and well being, and may the lord maker of forms, 
Tvashta, with his fires of evolution and new structures 
be good and gracious for our peace and happiness and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 35 143 


listen to us here itself. 


शं नः सोमो! भवतु ब्रह्म शं नः शं नो ग्रावाणः शमुं सन्तु 
यज्ञाः । शं नः स्वरूणां मितयो भवन्तु शं न॑ः प्रस्व १: शम्व॑स्तु 
वेदिः ॥ ७॥ 


6. Sam na somo bhavatu brahma Sam nah Sar no 
gravanah Samu santu yajnah. Sart nah svaranam 
mitayo bhavantu sam nah prasvah samvastu 
vedih. 


May the moon give us peace and joy. May the 
lord supreme with gifts of sustenance bless us with 
peace. May the clouds bring us peace. May the yajnas 
give us peace. May the pillars of the vedi and Vedic 
chants structured to sensitive measure bring us peace. 
May the vedi bring us peace. May the newly sprouting 
herbs bring us peace. 


शं नः सूर्य॑ उरुचश्चा उदेतु शं नश्चत॑स््रः प्रदिशो भवन्तु । 
शां नः पर्वता qaat भवन्तु शं नः सिन्ध॑वः शमु 
सन्त्वापः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sam nah surya urucaksa udetu sam nascatasrah 
pradiso bhavantu. Sam nah parvata dhruvayo 
bhavantu sam nah sindhavah samu santvapah. 


May the sun of universal eye rise for our peace 
and joy. May the four directions with their subdirections 
be for our peace and joy. May the mountains be stable 
and undisturbed to give us peace. Let the seas be calm 
and peaceful, and let all forms of water be for us and 
our peace and joy. 


144 RGVEDA 


शं नो अदितिर्भवतु व्रतेथिः शं नो भवन्तु Wed: tant: | 
शं नो विष्णुः शमु पूषा नो! अस्तु शं नो भवित्रं शम्व॑स्तु 
वायुः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Sam no aditirbhavatu vratebhih sam no bhavantu 
marutah svarkah. Sam no visnuh Samu pusa no 
astu §am no bhavitram Samvastu vayuh. 


May the indestructible nature mother with her 
laws and mother earth be peaceful for us. May the holy 
and adorable winds and vibrant humanity of brilliant 
virtues be for peace and joy for us. May Vishnu, lord 
omnipresent, be gracious and give us peace and joy. 
May nature’s nourishment be for our peace and 
happiness. Let the future possibilities be for our good 
and happiness of well being. Let the air be for our peace 
and happiness. Let all laws and disciplines be for peace. 


शं नो da: संविता त्राय॑माणः शं नो भवन्तूषसो विभातीः | 
शं न॑: पर्जन्यो भवतु प्रजाभ्यः शं नः क्षेत्र॑स्य पतिरस्तु 
WA: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sam no devah savita trayamanah sam no 
bhavantusaso vibhatih. Sam nah parjanyo 
bhavatu prajabhyah sam nah ksetrasya patirastu 
sambhuh. 


May lord creator Savita, generous saviour and 
refulgent giver of guidance, grant us peace and 
happiness. May the glorious dawns shower us with 
peace and joy. May the cloud of rain be harbinger of 
peace and joy for the people. And may the lord of peace, 
sustainer of the world, master of our field of action and 
cultivation, be gracious and give us peace and happiness. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 35 145 


शं नो देवा विश्वदेवा भवन्तु शं सर॑स्वती सह धीभिरस्तु | 
शमभिषाचः शमु रातिषाचः शं नो। दिव्याः पार्थिवाः शं 
नो अप्याः ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. „वा? 7 deva visvadeva bhavantu sam sarasvati 
saha dhibhirastu. Samabhisacah samu ratisacah 
sam no divyah parthivah $am no apyah. 


May the generous divines of the world be good 
and gracious to us at peace. May Sarasvati, eternal 
mother knowledge and divine speech with universal 
intelligence, be for our peace and well being. May the 
Overpowering yajnic energies and all generous 
tendencies be for our good and peace of well being. 
And may all the divinities of heaven, earth and ocean 
give us peace and joy. 


शं न॑: सत्यस्य पत॑यो भवन्तु शं नो अर्वन्तः शमु सन्तु 
गाव॑ः । शां न॑ ऋभवः सुकृतं: सुहस्ताः शं नो भवन्तु पितरो 
हवेषु ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sam nah satyasya patayo bhavantu sari no 
arvantah Samu santu gavah. Sam na rbhavah 
sukrtah suhastah sam no bhavantu pitaro havesu. 


May the keepers and observers of truth be at 
peace for our good and well being. May our horses and 
transports be at peace, may our lands and cows be at 
peace for our peace and well being. May our wise 
veterans, noble artists and expert craftsmen, be at peace 
for happiness and comfort for us. And may our seniors 
be at peace and give us peace at our programmes of 
holy action when we call upon them. 


146 RGVEDA 


शं नो अज एकपादेवो अस्तु शं नोऽ fecie-a4: शां ays: | 
शं नो अपां नपात्पेरूरस्तु शं नः पुञ्निर्भवतु देवगोपा ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Sam no aja ekapad devo astu sam no'hirbudhn- 
yah sam samudrah. Sam no apam napat perurastu 
sam nah prsnirbhavatu devagopa. 


May the generous and self-refulgent lord unborn 
and eternal, sole sustainer of the universe, be gracious 
and give us peace. May the cloud floating in the sky be 
at peace and give us peace. May the ocean be at peace. 
May the boats and ships to cross the seas be at peace 
for us, and may the space and colourful sky sustaining 
divine generosities be at peace and give us peace and 
happiness. 


आदित्या Gal वस॑वो जुषन्तेदं ब्रह्म क्रियमाणं नवीयः | 
श्रुण्वन्तु नो दिव्याः पार्थिवासो गोजाता उत ये यज्ञि- 
यासः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Aditya rudra vasavo jusantedam brahma 
kriyamanam naviyah. Srnvantu no divyah parthi- 
vaso gojata uta ye yajniyasah. 


May the Adityas, cosmic lights, Rudras, catalytic 
agents of nature, and the Vasus, sustaining abodes of 
life, receive this song divine of homage being sung at 
the latest and be at peace for us, and may the divinities 
of heaven and earth born of nature and the holy Word 
sung in divine voice, and those who are venerable sages 
dedicated to yajna be at peace and give us peace and 
happiness. 


ये देवानां यज्ञिया यज्ञिर्यानां मनोर्यजत्रा अमृता ऋतज्ञाः । 
तेनो रासन्तामुरुगायमद्य यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद। नः ॥ ९५॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 36 147 


15. Ye devanam yajniya yajniyanam manoryajatra 
amrta rtajnah. Te no rasantam-urugayam-adya 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Those who are most venerable of the venerable 
divines of brilliance honoured by the wise, immortal 
knowers of truth and divine law, may bless us with 
knowledge universally celebrated. May you all, O divine 
sages and natural powers of divinity, protect and 
promote us with peace and joy for happiness and well 
being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 36 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र ब्रहौतु सदनादृतस्य वि रश्मिभिः ससृजे सूर्यो गाः | 
वि सानुना पृथिवी de उर्वीं पृथु प्रतीकमध्येधे अभिः ॥ ९॥ 


le Pra brahmaita sadanadrtasya vi rasmibhih sasrje 
suryo gah, Vi sanuna prthivi sasra urvi prthu 
pratikam-adhyedhe agnih. 


Let the knowledge of existence arise from the 
divine centre of universal truth : the sun radiates light 
with its rays and illuminates the earths, the wide earth 
moves on with her peaks of mountains, and fire rises 
and blazes over the vedi, symbol of cosmic yajna. 


इमां at मित्रावरुणा सुवृक्तिमिषं न ve असुरा नवीयः | 
इनो वामन्यः प॑द्वीरद॑ब्धो जनं च पित्रो य॑तति ब्रुवाणः ॥ २॥ 


2. Imam vam mitravaruna suvrktimisam na krnve 
asura naviyah. Ino vamanyah padaviradabdho 
Janam ca mitro yatati bruvanah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, sun and cosmic energy and 


148 RGVEDA 


intelligence, both givers of life energy to the living 
world, I offer this new song of adoration as homage to 
you. One of you, Varuna, is resistless, all pervasive and 
coexistent with every stage of life’s evolution, and the 
other, Mitra, the sun, as a friend enjoins humanity to 
the life of activity proclaiming its rise as direct presence. 


आ वात॑स्य॒ ध्रज॑तो रन्त इत्या अपीपयन्त धेनवो न सूर्दाः। 
महो दिवः सद॑ने जाय॑मानोऽचिंक्रदद्‌ वृषभः सस्मिन्नू- 
ध॑न्‌॥ ३॥ 


A vatasya dhrajato ranta itya apipayanta dhenavo 
na sudah. Maho devah sadane jayamano’- 
cikradad vrsabhah sasminnudhan. 


The currents of sportive wind play around like 
abundant cows yielding milk, and the mighty cloud 
laden with vapour, born of the great regions of heaven, 
roars in its house of mid skies. 


गिराय एता युनजब्दरी त इन्द्र प्रिया सुरथा शूर धायू | 
प्रयो मन्युं रिरिक्षतो मिनात्या सुक्रतुमर्यमणं ववृत्याम्‌ ॥। ठ ॥ 


4. Gira ya eta yunajaddhari ta indra priya suratha 
sura dhayu. Pra yo manyam ririksato minatya 
sukratum-aryamanam vavrtyam. 


Indra, all powerful ruler of the world, I pray, let 
me come to have the benefit of the power and presence 
of Aryama, chief power of justice, holy in action, who, 
with his order and invitation deploys the noble and 
efficient forces that run the chariot of your social order, 
who controls and punishes the violent deeds and corrects 
the violent attitudes of the negative and destructive 
forces. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 36 149 


यज॑न्ते अस्य सख्यं Galva नमस्विनः स्व ऋतस्य TAL 
वि पृक्षो बाबधे afr: स्तर्वान इदं नमो सद्राय प्रेष्ठ॑म्‌ ॥ ५५ ॥ 


oF Yajante asya sakhyam vayasca namasvinah sva 
rtasya dhaman. Vi prkso babadhe nrbhih stavana 
idam namo rudraya prestham. 


In their own house of truth, justice and yajna, 
devotees with reverence and homage pray for life energy 
and the friendship and company of this Rudra, destroyer 
of suffering and injustice, and giver of pranic energy. 
Loved and adored by the people, he releases for them 
nourishment and energy in abundance. This cherished 
homage and adoration is offered to Rudra. 


आ यत्साकं ATA वावशानाः सरस्वती सप्तथी 
सिन्धुमाता । याः सुष्वय॑न्त सुदुघाः सुधारा अभि स्वेन पय॑सा 
पीप्यानाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A yat sakam yasaso vavasanah sarasvati saptathi 
sindhumata. Yah susvayanta sudughah sudhara 
abhi svena payasa pipyanah. 


Sarasvati, the eternal stream of life, of cosmic 
waters, and of speech and sacred knowledge, the seventh 
over the streams flowing through five senses and the 
mind, through five elements and the stuff of mind and 
intelligence, and through the poetic streams of the Veda, 
all these streams which flow abundantly, exuberant, 
magnificent, roaring with splendour, all of them ever 
growing and rising with their own flood of water: may 
all these continue to flow together gloriously for us. 


उत त्ये नो मरुतो मन्दसाना धियं तोकं च॑ वाजिनो।ऽ वन्तु। 
मानः परि ख्यदक्षरा चरन्त्यवीवृधन्युज्यं ते रयिं न॑: ॥ ७॥ 


150 RGVEDA 


4 Uta tye no maruto mandasana dhiyam tokam ca 
vajino'vantu. Ma nah pari khyadaksara cara- 
ntyavivrdhan yujyam te rayim nah. 


And those happy and joyous Maruts, vibrant 
scholars and sages, leaders of the nation, pioneers of 
science, manners and traditions, protect and advance 
our rising generation and our knowledge, intellect, 
imagination and culture. May the eternal mother stream 
of light and knowledge continuously flow for us and 
never forsake us. And may the Maruts augment and 
consolidate our wealth, honour and excellence for use 
and future progress. 


val महीमरमतिं कृणुध्वं प्र पूषणं विदथ्यं न वीरम्‌। 
भगं धियोऽवितारं नो अस्याः सातौ वाजं रातिषाचं 
पुर॑न्धिम्‌ ८ ॥ 


8. Pra vo mahimaramatim krnudhvam pra pusan- 
am vidathyam na viram. Bhagam dhiyo’vitaram 
no asyah satau vajam ratisacam purandhim. 


O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and brilliant 
scholars, sages and leaders of humanity, create, cultivate, 
increase and consolidate a high order of intelligence, 
nutrition and health care, a force of the brave to face 
the warlike business of life, a high standard of honour 
and excellence, protection for our order of knowledge, 
culture and tradition, and a generous and abundant state 
of this stable polity equipped with instant powers of 
defence and advancement. 


अच्छायं al मरूतः श्लोकं एत्वच्छा विष्णं निषिक्तपाम- 
वोभिः। उत प्रजायै गृणते वयो! धुर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
सद। नः ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 37 151 


9. Acchayam vo marutah Sloka etvaccha visnum 
nisiktapamavobhih. Uta prajayai grnate vayo 
dhuryuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O Maruts, vibrant forces of divinity in nature 
and humanity, may this song of celebration reach you 
well and gracefully. And so may it reach Vishnu, 
protector of the initiated dedicated to Dharma, who 
protects us with all methods of protection and 
advancement. We pray bring us life energy and a full 
span of good health and age for the celebrant and the 
people. O divinities, protect us always with all means 
of protection and advancement for our well being all 
round. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 37 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ वो वारिष्ठो वहतु स्तवध्यै रथों वाजा FVII STH: | 
अभि त्रिपृष्ठैः सवं नेषु सोमैर्मदे सुशिप्रा महभिः पृण- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


I A vo vahistho vahatu stavadhyai ratho vaja 
rbhuksano amrktah. Abhi triprsthaih savanesu 
somairmade susipra mahabhih prnadhvam. 


O Rbhus, high spiritual experts of science and 
technology, equipped with noble visor and helmet, come 
and join this celebration of ours to enjoy yourselves on 
abundant thrice distilled and seasoned drinks of soma 
in our yajnic meets. Let your strongest, fastest and 
unbreakable chariot transport you here. Regale 
yourselves and refine the yajna to perfection. 


152 RGVEDA 


यूयं ह रलं म॒घव॑त्सु धत्थ स्वर्दृश ऋभुक्षणो अमृक्तम्‌ । सं 
यज्ञेषुं स्वधावन्तः पिबध्वं वि नो राधांसि मतिभिंर्दय- 
ध्वम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Yuyam ha ratnam maghavatsu dhattha svardrsa 
rbhuksano amrktam. Sam yajnesu svadhavantah 
pibadhvam vi no radhamsi matibhirdayadhvam. 


O scholars of science and technology, 
visionaries of light, you bring jewels of imperishable 
wealth for men of power and excellence. O commanders 
of food, sustenance and power, drink the soma of success 
in the yajnas of corporate programmes, and with your 
research and intelligence create the infrastructure for 
the development and success of our nation. 


उवोचिथ हि म॑घवन्देष्णं महो अर्भस्य वसुनो विभागे। 
उभा ते पूर्णां वसुना गभ॑स्ती न सूनृता नि य॑मते aa- 
व्या॥३॥ 


3 Uvocitha hi maghavan desnam maho arbhasya 
vasuno vibhage. Ubha te purna vasuna gabhasti 
na sunrta ni yamate vasavya. 


Lord and master of wealth, you take delight in 
charity and love to give and share, whether the giving 
and distribution involves a large or a small amount. Both 
your hands are full of plenty, your voice of truth from 
the heart overflows with generosity and nothing ever 
restrains your hands from giving. 


त्वमिन्द्र स्वय॑शा AAT वाजो न साधुरस्तं मेष्युक्वा । वयं 
नु ते दाश्वांसं: स्याम ब्रह्म॑ कृण्वन्तो हरिवो वसिष्ठाः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 37 153 


4. Tvamindra svayasa rbhuksa vajo na sadhura- 
stamesyrkva. Vayam nu te dasvamsah syama 
brahma krnvanto harivo vasisthah. 


Indra, enlightened and generous ruler and 
commander of wealth, innate honour and wisdom, 
manager of experts and manpower in general, you are 
good, versatile and efficient in function like food, 
energy, speed and success itself, you come home to 
people like the sun on the day’s completion. We pray 
let us be beneficiaries of your grace, generous like 
yourself, creator of food and wealth in the spirit of piety 
and well established in charity. 


arate प्रवतो! दाशुषे चिद्याधिर्विविंषो हर्यश्व धीभिः। 
ववन्मा नु ते युज्याभिरूती कदा न॑ इन्द्र राय आ द॑ंश- 
स्येः॥५॥ 


Sanitasi pravato dasuse cid yabhirviveso har- 
yasva dhibhih. vavanma nu te yujyabhiruti kada 
na indra raya a dasasyeh. 


Indra, lord commander of manpower, speed and 
success, you are the giver of overflowing wealth to the 
generous man of charity. O lord, we pray, when would 
you bless us with that wealth, honour and excellence, 
that practical intelligence and expertise, and that security 
and protection by which you prevail over the world of 
nature and humanity. 


वासयसीव वेधसस्त्वं न॑: कदा न॑ इन्द्र वच॑सो बुबोधः | 
अस्तं तात्या धिया रयिं सुवीरं पृक्षो नो अर्वां न्युंहीत 
वाजी ॥ ६ ॥ 


154 RGVEDA 


6. Vasayasiva vedhasastvam nah kada na indra 
vacaso bubodhah. Astam tatya dhiya rayim 
suviram prkso no arva nyuhita vaji. 


Indra, giver of settled security and peace, 
intelligent and dedicated devotees as we are, when 
would you listen to our voice of prayer as to people 
settled in peaceful homes? O lord of dynamic forces, 
commander of speed, power and success, visit our home, 
bless us with divine vision and wisdom and bring us 
wealth, honour and excellence, food and energy and a 
noble progeny. 


अभि यं देवी निऋतिश्चिदीशो नक्षन्त इन्द्रं शरदः सुपश्च 21 
उप त्रिबन्धुर्जरदष्टिमेत्यस्व॑वेशं यं कृणवन्त मतीः ॥ ७॥ 


i Abhi yam devi nirrtiscidise naksanta indram 
Saradah suprksah. Upa tribandhurjaradastime- 
tyasvavesam yam krnavanta martah. 


The lord whom the divine earth glorifies from 
the depth of her being, to whom the seasons of the year 
abundant with food and flowers look up and resort, to 
whom the friend and brother in bond with three worlds 
and humanities attains, to that lord and spirit of unending 
age without his own essential form comprehended in 
matter, thought or time, the mortals look up and pray. 


आ नो राधांसि सवितः स्तवध्या आ रायो यन्तु पर्व॑तस्य 
रातौ। सदा नो दिव्यः पायुः सिंघक्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिथिः 
सदां नः ॥ ८ ॥ ति 

8. A no radhamsi savitah stavadhya कं rayo yantu 
parvatasya ratau. Sada no divyah payuh sisaktu 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 38 155 


O Savita, glorious lord of generation, sustenance 
and resolution, may all means and materials of life come 
to us for success and self-fulfilment, may all forms of 
wealth, honour and excellence come to us so that we 
adore and amply glorify you through the gifts of the 
clouds of abundance. O Vishvedevas, divines of the 
world, pray you protect and promote us with all modes 
of peace and security for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 38 
Savita, Vajinah, Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


उदु ष्य देवः सविता य॑याम हिरण्ययीममतिं यामशिश्रेत्‌ । 
नूनं भगो हव्यो मानुषेभिर्वि यो tat पुरूवसुर्दधाति ut ९ ॥ 


iF Udu sya devah savita yayama hiranyayim-amatim 
yamasisret. Nunam bhago havyo manusebhirvi 
yo ratna puruvasurdadhati. 


Let us rise and attain to that golden glory of 
divinity which the self-refulgent Savita radiates — 
Savita, lord of splendour and treasure-hold of universal 
wealth who truly rules and gives the jewel glories of 
existence. The lord alone is to be worshipped by 
humanity. 


उदु fas सवितः श्रुध्यश्स्य हिरण्यपाणे प्रभं तावृतस्यं | 
व्युर्वीं पृथ्वीममतिं' सृजान आ नृभ्यो मर्तभोजनं 
सुवानः ॥ २॥ 

2. Udu tistha savitah srudhyasya hiranyapane 
prabhrtavrtasya. Vyurvim prthvim-amatim srjana 
a nrbhyo martabhojanam suvanah. 


O Savita, lord creator of the world and giver of 


156 RGVEDA 


light with golden hands of infinite generosity, arise and 
shine at the dawn of the light of truth in the heart and 
listen to the prayer of this soul in mortal body. You create 
the wide wide earth of golden beauty and you generate 
the food for mortals for the sake of living humanity on 
earth. 


sift sa: dfaar देवो sig यमा चिद्विश्वे वस॑वो aorta | 
स नः स्तोमात्रमस्य4श्चनों धाद्विश्वेभिः पातु पायुभिर्नि 
सूरीन्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Api stutah savita devo astu yama cid 177517८ vasavo 
grnanti. Sa nah stoman namasyascano dhad 
visvebhih patu payubhirni surin. 


May Savita, lord refulgent and generous, be 
praised and celebrated, the lord whom all learned saints 
and sages worship and adore. May he, worthy of homage 
and obedience, accept our songs of celebration and 
prayer and protect and promote the learned brave with 
all modes of protection and advancement. 


अभि यं देव्यदितिर्गृणातिं सवं देवस्य॑ सवितुर्जुषाणा | अभि 
सम्राजो वरुणो गृणन्त्यभि मित्रासो! अर्यमा सजोषाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Abhi yam devyaditirgrnati savam devasya savi- 
turjusana. Abhi samrajo varuno grnantyabhi 
mitraso aryama sajosah. 


The holy mother, divine earth and indestructible 
nature, all adore lord Savita, enjoying and celebrating 
the generous lord’s creation. So also do brilliant rulers, 
men of choice merit, friends of life and humanity, and 
the lord of justice and dispensation, Varuna, all enjoying 
and appreciating the lord’s creation, adore and worship 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 39 157 


him. 
अभिये मिथो वनुषः सप॑न्ते रातिं दिवो रातिषाचः 
पृथिव्याः | अहिर्बुध्न्य उत न॑: श्रृणोतु वरूब्येकधेनुभिर्निं 
पातु॥५॥ 

Abhi ye mitho vanusah sapante ratim divo ratisa- 


cah prthivyah. Ahirbudhnya uta nah srnotu varu- 
tryekadhenubhirni patu. 


We are the supplicants all together who seek 
and pray for the grace and gifts of generous heaven and 
earth. May the lord creator, original cause of the universe 
all pervasive in space, listen, and may the divine mother 
protector and giver of vision protect us with all those 
virtues which converge and focus on a single thought, 
voice and decisive action. 


अनु तन्नो जास्पतिर्मसीष्ट wet देवस्य॑ सवितुरियानः | 
भरग॑मुग्रोऽ ada जोहवीति भगमनुग्रो अध॑ याति रल्न॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Anu tanno jaspatirmamsista ratnam devasya savi- 
turiyanah. Bhagamugro’vase johaviti bhagama- 
nugro adha yati ratnam. 


Let the ruler and protector of the people know 
and believe that whatever the jewel wealth for life he 
receives from Savita, self-refulgent lord giver of light 
and life, all that is for the people, for all of us, so that 
whatever honour and prosperity the man of passion and 
ambition invokes and achieves, the same after all, the 
man of peace and dispassion who receives in 
consequence. 


शं नों भवन्तु वाजिनो ey देवताता मितद्रवः स्वर्काः । 
जम्भयन्तोऽ हि वृकं रक्षांसि सनेम्यस्मद्युयवन्नमींवाः ॥ ७ ॥ 


158 RGVEDA 


4 Sam no bhavantu vajino havesu devatata mita- 
dravah svarkah. Jambhayanto'him vrkam 
raksamsi sanemyasmad yuyavannamivah. 


Let the war-like leaders of knowledge, arms and 
creativity, brilliant, balanced and dedicated to divine 
service in action, be for our peace and prosperity in the 
battles of life, crushing the surreptitious, thievish and 
demoniac forces of society and removing all ill health 
and evils from us. 


वाजेंवाजेऽ वत वाजिनो नो धनेषु विप्रा अमृता ऋतज्ञाः | 
अस्य मध्व॑: पिबत मादयध्वं तुसा यात पथिभिव्देवयानैः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vajevaje'vata vajino no dhanesu vipra amrta 
rtajnah. Asya madhvah pibata madayadhvam 
trpta yata pathibhirdevayanaih. 


O immortal heroes commanding knowledge, 
strength of arms and production in matters of eternal 
truth and law and the science of yajna, protect and 
promote us at every stage in the battles of life. Drink of 
the honey sweets of this celebration of the organised 
system of life, celebrate joyously and, self-fulfilled here, 
go forward by the paths of divines. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 39 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
ऊर्ध्वो aft: quid ara अश्रत्प्रतीची जूर्णिर्देवतांतिमेति | 
भेजाते अद्री र थ्यव पन्थामृतं Stat न इषितो य॑जाति ॥ ९ ॥ 
Li Urdhvo agnih sumatim vasvo asret pratict jurnir- 
devatatimeti. Bhejate adri rathyeva panthamrtam 
hota na isito yajati. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 39 159 


The fire on high radiates light inspiring pleasure 
and enlightenment. The dawn as veteran lady of the 
house goes forward to offer homage to the divinities. 
The yajamana and his wife together move forward as 
by chariot on way to yajna to adore the lord, and the 
priest offers to join the yajna like one inspired. 


प्र वावृजे सुप्रया बर्हिरेषामा विरुपतीव aiRe gare 
विशामक्तोरुषसः पूर्वहूतौ वायुः पूषा स्वस्तये नियु- 
त्वान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Pra vavrje supraya barhiresama vispativa birita 
iyate. Visamaktorusasah purvahutau vayuh pusa 
svastaye niyutvan. 


The yajna of these people proceeds, richly 
provided with holy materials. Vayu and Pusha, wind 
and life-giving sun, like guardian rulers and protectors 
of the people, move across the skies as if riding a chariot 
drawn by horses at the sacred call of night and dawn to 
yajna early for the good of humanity. 


ज्मया STA वस॑वो रन्त देवा उरावन्तरि A मर्जयन्त शुभ्राः | 
अर्वाक्पथ उरुज्रयः कृणुध्वं श्रोतं दूतस्य॑ जग्मुषो! नो 
अस्य ॥ ३॥ 


2: Jmaya atra vasavo ranta deva uravantarikse 
marjayanta Subhrah. Arvak patha urujrayah 
krnudhvam Srota dutasya jagmuso no asya. 


Let the Vasus, life giving energies of nature, and 
enlightened people settled at peace in learning, abound 
and rejoice here on earth. Let radiant purities of divine 
refulgence from yajna rise to the vast sky and purify 
the atmosphere. Let divine energies of vast extension 


160 RGVEDA 


receive and respond to this yajnic code of our 
participation in nature’s dynamics and converge on this 
way to our earth. 


ते हि aad यज्ञियास ऊमाः सधस्थं विश्वे अभि सन्तिं 
देवाः। at अध्वर उशतो dead श्रुष्टी भगं नासत्या 
पुरन्धिम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Te hi yajnesu yajniyasa umah sadhastham 1751८ 
abhi santi devah. Tan adhvara uSsato yaksyagne 
Srustt bhagam nasatya purandhim. 


All those divinities of the world, adorable and 
conjoined in nature’s dynamics of cosmic yajna, are 
catalytic agents of protection and promotion keenly 
concentrative toward life’s evolution and advancement. 
O generous yajamana, O bright fire, keen and passionate 
as they are in yajna, join them in yajna right away: join 
Bhaga, universal treasure of wealth, honour and 
excellence, Nasatya, constant complementarities of 
nature and natural law, and Purandhi, keeper and 
protector of habitations and institutions. 


आग्ने fit दिव on पुंथिव्या मित्रं de वरुणमिन्द्र॑मयिम्‌। 
आर्यमणमदितिं विष्णु'मेषां सर॑स्वती wed! माद- 
यन्ताम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


> Agne giro diva ठ prthivya mitram vaha varuna- 
mindramagnim. Aryamanamaditim visnum-esam 
sarasvatit maruto madayantam. 


O sage and scholar, bring us the knowledge and 
the language of the knowledge of heaven and earth. 
Bring us the gifts of Mitra, sun and pranic energy, 
Varuna, water and air, Indra, electric energy, and Agni, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 39 161 


fire and light, of Aryaman, cosmic gravitation, Aditi, 
nature’s constancy, Vishnu, omnipresent cosmic 
intelligence, so that Sarasvati, corresponding language 
of their expression may grow and children of the earth 
may rejoice with enlightenment. 


ररे हव्यं मतिभिर्यजिर्यानां नक्षत्कामं मत्यीनामसिन्वन्‌। 
धाता रयिमविदस्यं सदासां सक्षीमहि युज्येधिर्न देवैः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Rare havyam matibhir-yajniyanam naksat kamam 
martyanam-asinvan. Dhata rayim-avidasyam 
sadasam saksimahi yujyebhirnu devaih. 


Let us offer oblations of holy materials to Agni 
with the thoughts and words of adorable sages so that 
the desires of mortals bound in love may be fulfilled. 
May the lord ruler of the world bring us imperishable 
wealth of universal value, and may we join with brilliant 
people worthy of association. 


नू रोद॑सी afusa वसिष्ठे ऋतार्वानो वरूणो पित्रो अथिः। 
यच्छ॑न्तु चन्द्रा ॐपमं नो अर्कं यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ७॥ 


qe Nu rodasi abhistute vasisthair-rtavano varuno 
mitro agnih. Yacchantu candra upamam no arkam 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus heaven and earth are adored and celebrated 
by brilliant sages. May Varuna, Mitra and Agni, lords 
of truth and law, justice, love and light, grant us gifts of 
exemplary beauty, bliss and brilliance. O Vishvedevas, 
pray always protect and promote us with all modes of 
peace, progress and all round well being. 


162 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 40 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


ओ श्रुष्टिर्विदथ्या३ समेतु प्रति स्तोमं दधीमहि arom । 
यदद्य देवः स॑विता सुवाति स्यामास्य रलिनो विभागे ॥ ९॥ 


1. O Srustirvidathya sametu prati stomam dadhi- 
mahi turanam. Yadadya devah_ savita suvati 
syamasya ratnino vibhage. 


Let instant perception and active response 
worthy of our yajnic social system come to us in peace 
for every group and class of people, vibrant and really 
fast, and let us internalise it in every detail so that 
whatever the refulgent creator and ruler, Savita, inspires 
and creates today, right now we may share and, in 
participation together, be beneficiaries of this lord’s 
jewel gifts of life. 


पित्रस्तच्नो वरुणो रोद॑सी च द्युभ॑क्तमिन्द्रो' अर्यमा dara । 
दिदेष्टु देव्यदिती रेक्णो वायुश्च यत्नियुवैते भग॑श्च ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Mitrastanno varuno rodasi ca dyubhaktamindro 
aryama dadatu. Didestu devyaditi rekno vayusca 
yanniyuvaite bhagasca. 


May Mitra, lord dear as friend, Varuna, oceans 
of earth and space, the heaven and the earth and sky, 
Indra, lord ruler of energy, power and excellence, and 
Aryama, lord of justice, give us heavenly gifts of 
divinity. And may Aditi, imperishable generous Mother 
Nature, Vayu, the wind, and Bhaga, lord of power and 
glory, bestow upon us what they produce, promote and 
preserve for us. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 40 163 


सेदुग्रो अस्तु मरूतः स शुष्मी यं ae पृषदश्वा srater 
sania: सर॑स्वती जुनन्ति न तस्य॑ रायः पर्येतास्ति 3 


Sedugro astu marutah sa susmi yam martyam 
prsadasva avatha. Utemagnih sarasvati junanti 
na tasya rayah paryetasti. 


Surely that person would be strong and brilliant 
whom the Maruts, great commanders of the power of 
fire, wind and water, protect and promote. Indeed, none 
would be able to counter his power and prosperity whom 
Agni, brilliant leader of divinities, and Sarasvati, spirit 
of knowledge and speech, inspire, energise and 
motivate. 


अयं हिनेता वरूण sacred मित्रो राजानो अर्यमापो धुः । 
सुहवां देव्यदिंतिरनवां ते नो अंहो अति पर्षन्नरिष्टान्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Ayam hi neta varuna rtasya mitro rajano arya- 
mapo dhuh. Suhava devyaditir-anarva te no amho 
ati parsann-aristan. 


And this leader of the yajnic social order of truth 
and dynamism of society and supportive ruling powers, 
judicious Varuna, friendly Mitra, far seeing guiding 
force Aryama, and self-directive brilliant and 
indestructible spirit and policy, Aditi, all adorable 
powers faithfully invoked and invited, may, we pray, 
guide and direct our actions and purge us of evil, sin 
and crime without hurt or violence. 


अस्य cared Hagel वया विष्णोर षस्यं प्रभृथे हविर्भिः | 
fae fe eat रुद्धियं महित्वं यासिष्टं वर्तिरश्विनावि- 
रावत्‌॥ ५५ ॥ 


164 RGVEDA 


Ds Asya devasya milhuso vaya visnoresasya pra- 
bhrthe havirbhih. Vide hi rudro rudriyam mahi- 
tvam yasistam vartir-asvinav-iravat. 


Of this generous, self-refulgent, creative and 
omnipresent lord Vishnu, all divinities and varieties of 
existence are extensive manifestations like branches of 
a tree, in this well sustained system of the universe by 
virtue of the homage they offer and the sustenance they 
receive. Rudra, lord sustainer of the good and scourage 
of evil, alone knows the mighty majesty I adore, and I 
pray may the Ashvins, sun and moon and twin divine 
complementarities of nature’s energy, come by the paths 
of divine bounties and bless us. 


मात्र पूषन्नाघण इरस्यो वरूत्री यद्रातिषाचश्च wa 
मयोभुवो नो अर्वन्तो नि पान्तु वृष्टं परिज्मा वातों 
ददातु NG ॥ 


6. Matra pusannaghrna irasyo varutri yad rati- 
sacasca rasan. Mayobhuvo no arvanto ni pantu 
vrstim parijma vato dadatu. 


O Pushan, refulgent lord giver of health and 
sustained growth, worthy of attainment as you are, pray 
sustain me here and sustain all that what Mother Nature 
and divine speech and generous givers of society give 
us. May the universal givers of peace and well being 
protect and promote us. May the winds blowing all 
round for all alike bring us showers of rain and bliss. 


नू रोद॑सी अभिष्टुते वसिंठे ऋतार्वानो वरूणो मित्रो अथिः। 
यच्छन्तु चन्द्रा Sun नो अर्कं यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
A: ७॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 41 165 


8 Nu rodasi abhistute vasisthair-rtavano varuno 
mitro agnih. Yacchantu candra upamam no arkam 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus are the heaven and earth adored and 
celebrated by sages of enlightenment settled at peace 
in divine bliss. May Varuna, lord of justice and universal 
choice, Mitra, lord of universal love and light, and Agni, 
lord of leadership and enlightenment, all sustainers of 
truth and law, shower us with exemplary gifts of beauty, 
bliss and enlightenment for maintenance of piety. O 
Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, pray 
protect and promote us with all modes and means of 
progress and well being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 41 


Agni and others. Bhaga, Usha Devatah, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्रातरयिं प्रातरिन्द्रं हवामहे प्रातर्मित्रावरुणा प्रातरण्विनां। 
प्रातर्भगं पूषणं ब्रह्मणस्पतिं प्रातः सोममुत सुद्र SAF ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Prataragnim pratarindram havamahe pratar- 
mitravaruna pratarasvina. Pratarbhagam pusa- 
nam brahmanaspatim pratah somamuta rudram 
huvema. 


We invoke Agni, the holy fire, early morning. 
We invoke Indra, cosmic energy, early morning. We 
invoke Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, early morning. 
We invoke the Ashvins, twin divines of nature’s energies 
of prana and udana, early morning. We invoke Bhaga, 
spirit of grandeur and glory, Pusha, spirit of nourishment 
and vitality, and Brahmanaspati, lord supreme of the 
universe and the Divine Word early morning, and we 


166 RGVEDA 


invoke Soma, herbal energy, and Rudra, lord of justice 
and freedom from evil and ailment in the early morning 
as we begin the day. 


प्रातर्जितं भगमुग्रं gaa वयं पुत्रमदितेर्यो विधर्ता । आध्र 
Rad मन्य॑मानस्तुरश्चिद्राजा चिद्यं भगं भक्षी - त्याह ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Pratarjitam bhagamugram huvema vayam putra- 
maditeryo vidharta. Adhrascid yam manyamana- 
sturascid raja cid yam bhagam bhaksityaha. 


Early morning we invoke Bhaga, all victorious 
lord and spirit of glory, child of indestructible mother 
Infinity and sustainer of all regions of the universe, 
universally acknowledged and adored, to whom the 
weakest as well as the most powerful and brilliant ruler 
prays and rays: O lord, give me the glory and the grace 
I need. 


भग प्रणेतर्भग सत्य॑राधो भगेमां धियमुद॑वा ada: | 
भग प्रणो जनय गोभिरश्वैर्भग प्र नृभिर्नृवन्तः स्याम ॥ ३ ॥ 


2: Bhaga pranetar-bhaga satyaradho bhagemam 
dhiyamudava dadannah. Bhaga pra no janaya 
gobhir-asair-bhaga pra nrbhir-nrvantah syama. 


Bhaga, lord of power and glory, you are the 
leader. Lord of light, you are the giver of victory in the 
field of truth. Lord omniscient, protect and promote this 
wisdom and intelligence of ours, giving us more and 
ever more of it. Lord of universal prosperity, promote 
us with lands, cows and the light of knowledge and with 
speed and success in the field of transport, 
communication and achievement. O lord of life and 
humanity, let us be blest with leaders and manpower of 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 41 167 
exceptional order. 


उतेदानीं भग॑वन्तः स्यामोत प्रपित्व उत मध्ये अहछम्‌। 
उतोदिता मघवन्त्सूर्यस्य वयं देवानां सुमतौ स्याम uw 


4. Utedanim bhagavantah syamota prapitva uta 
madhye ahnam. Utodita maghavant-suryasya 
vayam devanam sumatau syama. 


And let us be happy and prosperous now at this 
very time and at the end of the day, and also at the middle 
of the day through the seasons. And also, O lord of power 
and glory, let us enjoy the good will and kindness of 
the divinities at the rise of the sun. 


भगं एव भग॑वाँ अस्तु SATE वयं भग॑वन्तः स्याम | 
तं त्वां भग ad इज्नोहवीति स नो भग पुरएता भ॑वेह॥ ५ ॥ 


39, Bhaga eva bhagavam astu devastena vayam 
bhagavantah syama. Tam tva bhaga sarva ijjoha- 
viti sa no bhaga pura eta bhaveha. 


Bhaga, lord of glory, is really the lord of glory. 
By virtue of his grace, let us too be masters of power, 
prosperity and excellence, brilliant and generous. O lord 
of universal power and grace, all life and humanity does 
you homage and obeisance. O lord of power, prosperity 
and excellence, you alone be our guide, pioneer and 
leader here in life. 


सम॑ध्वरायोषसो! नमन्त दधिक्रावेव शुच॑ये पदाय॑ | अवचिीनं 
वसुविदं भगं नो रथमिवाश्वा वाजिन आ व॑हन्तु ।॥ ६ ॥ 
6; Samadhvarayosaso namanta dadhikraveva 


Sucaye padaya. Arvacinam vasuvidam bhagam no 
rathamivasva vajina a vahantu. 


168 RGVEDA 


As the dawns arise and bless our morning yajna 
with holiness, as the sun inspires us to rise to the highest 
and purest divine attainment, as the motive forces of 
energy drive the chariot and lead the master to the 
desired destination, so may the Vajins, scholars, sages 
and warlike leaders lead us and thus bring us the latest 
and highest honour and excellence overflowing with 
the wealth and values of life. 


अशू्वावतीर्गोमिं तीर्न उषासो! वीरव॑तीः सद॑मुच्छन्तु भद्राः | 
घृतं दुहाना विश्वतः प्रपीता यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥ ७॥ 


fi. Asvavatir-gomatirna usaso viravatih sadamu- 
cchantu bhadrah. Ghrtam duhana visvatah pra- 
pita yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


May the blessed and blissful dawns, vibrant with 
energy and light of the sun, full of inspiration for the 
bright and brave youth, showering milk and honey all 
round with hands overflowing with generosity, arise and 
bless our home with light and prosperity. O dawns of 
light and knowledge, O youthful ladies of the home 
bright as dawn, pray you all protect, promote and 
advance us with all life’s modes of peace, progress and 
protection for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 42 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
प्र ब्रह्माणो अद्धिःरसो नक्षन्त प्र क्रन्दनुर्न'भन्य॑स्य वेतु। 
प्र धेनव उदप्रुतो नवन्त युज्यातामद्री अध्वरस्य पेश॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 
Li Pra brahmano angiraso naksanta pra kranda- 


nurnabhanyasya vetu. Pra dhenava udapruto 
navanta yujyatamadri adhvarasya pesah. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 42 169 


Let the sagely scholars of Veda and the vibrant 
scientists dear as life breath come and join the yajna all 
round, let the chant of hymns and fragrance of yajna 
rise to the skies, let the fertile cows, overflowing streams 
and vaulting voices celebrate divine generosity, and let 
the clouds and mountains take the blessed form of yajna 
full of peace and prosperity. 


सुगस्ते अग्रे सन॑वित्तो steat युक्ष्वा सुते हरितो रोहित॑र्च । 
ये वा सद्य॑न्नरुषा वीर वादो! ga देवानां जनिमानि सत्तः ॥ २॥ 


2. Sugaste agne sanavitto adhva yuksva sute harito 
rohitasca. Ye va sadmannarusa viravaho huve 
devanam janimani sattah. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, master of divine 
knowledge, simple and straight is your path of motion 
and radiation, ancient, known, pursued and followed in 
this world of the lord’s creation. Join the forces of nature 
and divinity wide as quarters of space, fluent as streams 
of water and passionate as flames of fire, which lead 
the brave to the house of yajna wherein, sitting and 
meditating, I sing and celebrate the origins of the 
divinities of nature and humanity. 


aad at यज्ञं म॑हयत्नमोधिः प्र होता मन्द्रो रिरिच उपाके । 
यज॑स्व सु पुर्वणीक देवाना यजियामरम॑तिं ववृत्याः ॥ ३ ॥ 
3. Samu vo yajnam mahayan namobhih pra hota 


mandro ririca upake. Yajasva su purvanika 
devana yajniyam-aramatim vavrtyah. 


Together and holily they sing, celebrate and 
glorify your yajna with reverence and homage while 
close at hand the happy and meditative yajaka and 


170 RGVEDA 


generous priest excels in faith and generosity. O lord of 
manifold forces, Agni, join the divinities of nature and 
humanity and keep on the holy and yajnic vision and 
wisdom of the life divine for us without relent. 


यदा वीरस्य॑ रेवतो दुरोणे स्योनशीरतिधिराचिकैतत्‌ | सुप्रीतो 
अगिः सुधितो दम आ स fast दाति वार्यमियत्यै ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yada virasya revato durone syonastratithiraci- 
ketat. Suprito agnih sudhito dama @ sa vise dati 
varyamiyatyal. 


When Agni, brilliant and blissful honoured 
guest, is welcomed in the house of the brave and 
prosperous host, then Agni, happy, well provided and 
comfortably rested at home, gives to the host and his 
people the gifts of knowledge and wealth they desire. 


इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं जुषस्व मरुच्स्विन्द्रै यशसं कृधी नः। 
आ नक्तां बर्हिः स॑ंदतामुषासोशन्तां मित्रावरुणा यजेह ॥ ५ ॥ 


3. Imam no agne adhvaram jusasva marutsvindre 
yasasam krdhi nah. A nakta barhih sadatamu- 
sasosanta mitravaruna yajeha. 


Agni, venerable and brilliant guest of the house, 
accept and enjoy this yajnic hospitality of ours for the 
sake of the people and our social order and thereby 
enhance our honour and virtue. For the night and day, 
grace the yajnic seat and join the people who respect 
you, for the advancement of love, friendship and sense 
of justice in society. 


Wart संहस्यं1 वसिंो रायस्कामो विषवप्स्न्य॑स्य स्तौत्‌। 
इषं र यिं पप्रथद्वाजमस्मे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 43 171 


6. Evagnim sahasyam vasistho rayaskamo visvapsn- 
yasya staut. Isam rayim paprathad vajamasme 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus does Vasishtha, the brilliant sage settled 
at peace in love with the pursuit of life’s wealth and 
excellence, adore Agni, omnipresent inspirer of life 
forms with fire and passion alongwith moral stability 
and spiritual constancy, Agni that creates, expands and 
gives us food and energy, wealth and honour, and speed, 
success and progress in social and cultural life. O 
divinities, protect and promote us with all round good 
fortune all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 43 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


Wal यज्ञेषु देवयन्तो, अर्चन्द्यावा नमोभिः पृथिवी इषध्यै । 
येषां ब्रह्माण्यसमानि विप्रा विष्व॑ण्वियन्तिं वनिनो न 
शाखाः ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Pra vo yajnesu devayanto arcan dyava namobhih 
prthiviisadhyai. Yesam brahmanyas-amani vipra 
visvagviyanti vanino na sakhah. 


In your yajnas of science and research, let 
vibrant scholars dedicated to the pursuit of divinity study 
heaven and earth with reverence and homage for self 
fulfilment so that their exceptional adorations of 
universal knowledge rise and spread all round like 
branches of the universal tree. 


Waa एतु हेत्वो न ससिरुद्य॑च्छध्वं सम॑नसो घृताची: । 
स्तृणीत बर्हिर॑ध्वरायं साधुर्वा शोचींषि देवयून्यस्थुः ॥ २ ॥ 


172 RGVEDA 


2: Pra yajna etu hetvo na saptir-udyacchadhvam 
samanaso ghrtacth. Strnita barhir-adhvaraya 
sadhurdhva socimsi devayunyasthuh. 


Let the yajna expand and rise like a tempestuous 
flying horse, and you, altogether of one mind, fill the 
ladle full, raise it and offer the oblation into the yajna 
of love, peace and non-violence to cover the sky with 
fragrance. Let the bright and blissful flames rise high 
to the divinities. 


आ पुत्रासो न मातरं विभत्राः सानौ card ated: सदन्तु | 
आ विश्वाचीं विदरथ्यामनक्त्वगरे मा नो देवताता मृध॑- 
Th: २॥ 


3: A putraso na mataram vibhrtrah sanau devaso 
barhisah sadantu. A visvact vidathyamanaktva- 
gne ma no devatata mrdhaskah. 


Just as children in the mother’s lap rest blissfully, 
so let the conductors and organisers of yajna, all noble 
and brilliant souls, rise and reach the heights of skies. 
And then let universality of values adorn and sanctify 
our yajnic policy of governance and administration so 
that, O lord of light, fire and power, Agni, no one may 
violate us in our divine programme of development and 
progress. 


ते सीषपन्त जोषमा यजत्रा ऋतस्य धाराः सुदुघा दुहानाः | 
ज्येष्ठं बो अद्य मह आ GSAT ग॑न्तन सम॑नसो यति छ ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Te sisapanta josama yajatra rtasya dharah 
sudugha duhanah.Jyestham vo adya maha a 
vasunama gantana samanaso yati stha. 


And let those divinities of nature committed in 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 44 173 


love and accord with you, all of them abundant and 
adorable, harbingers of rain and revelations of nature’s 
truth, come and bless you. O people of the land, thus 
may the first and highest of the wealth of existence come 
to you, and thus may you abide, all with one mind, in 
your common programme and yajnic commitment. 


एवा A अग्रे विक्ष्वा दंशस्य त्वया वयं सहसावन्नास्क्राः | 
राया युजा सधमादो अरिष्टा यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥५॥ 


=f Eva no agne viksva dasasya tvaya vayam saha- 
savannaskrah. Raya yuja sadhamado arista 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus O lord of light, fire, power and constancy, 
Agni, bless us along with all peoples of the earth so 
that, O lord of challenge, patience and fortitude, 
committed as one with you and blest with wealth, honour 
and excellence, we may live happy and abide healthy 
and unhurt in the land and her yajnic order. O divinities 
of nature and humanity, pray protect and promote us all 
round with all good fortune for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 44 
Mantrawise Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


दधिक्रां a: प्रथममणश्विनोषसंमभिं समिद्धं भगमूतये हुवे । 
इन्द्रं विष्णुं पूषणं ब्रह्मणस्पतिमादित्यान्द्यावांपृथिवी अपः 
स्व॑ः॥ ९॥ 


0 Dadhikram vah prathamam-aSvinosasam-agnim 
samiddham bhagamutaye huve. Indram visnum 
pusanam brahmanaspatim-adityan dyavaprthivi 
apah svah. 


174 RGVEDA 


For your protection and progress, I invoke and 
adore Dadhikra, original divine energy which moves, 
sustains and energises all movers and sustainers of 
existential forms, Ashvins, the sun and moon, the dawn, 
the burning fire, and Bhaga, honour and glory of life, 
Indra, electrical energy, Vishnu, cosmic wind energy, 
Pushan, cosmic vitality and nourishment, Brahmana- 
spati, cosmic Soul, Adityas, Zodiacs of the sun, heaven 
and earth, the cosmic waters, and eternal happiness and 
well being. 


दधिक्रामु नम॑सा ater उदीराणा यज्ञमुपप्रयन्तः । saat 
देवीं बर्हिषि सादयंन्तोऽ श्विना विप्रां सुहवां हुवेम ॥ २॥ 


2 Dadhikramu namasa bodhayanta udirana 
yajnam-upaprayantah. Ilam devim barhisi 
sdadayanto’svina vipra suhava huvema. 


Awakening cosmic motive energy with 
reverence and homage, rising and moving to the yajna 
with full knowledge, sanctifying the holy grass on the 
vedi with holy speech, we invoke and invite the ready 
and instant moving Ashvins like the sagely teacher and 
the preacher to guide and conduct our yajnic business 
of life. 


दधिक्रावाणं बुबुधानो sired ga उषसं सूर्य गाम्‌ । ब्रध्नं 
मंश्चतोर्वरुणस्य ay ते विश्वास्महुरिता यावयन्तु 1 ३ ॥ 
Dadhikravanam bubudhano agnimupa bruva 


usasam suryam gam. Bradhnam mamscatorva- 
runasya babhrum te visvasmad durita yavayantu. 


Knowing full well the all-motive cosmic energy, 
I specifically speak of fire power, and I celebrate the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 44 175 


dawn, the sun and the earth, and I speak of the great 
integrative and sustaining power of the cosmic oceans 
of waters, and I pray that these natural energies may 
ward off all evils and ailments away from us. 


दधिक्रावा प्रथमो वाज्यर्वाऽग्े tatat भवति प्रजानन्‌। 
संविदान उषसा सूर्येणाऽऽदित्येभिर्वसुंभिरद्धिंःरोभिः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Dadhikrava prathamo vajyarva’gre rathanam 
bhavati prajanan. Samvidana usasa suryena- 
’dityebhir-vasubhir-angirobhih. 


That cosmic energy is the primary intelligent 
dynamic force which moves at the fastest velocity, and 
that energy is basically the first motive and transportive 
power of everything in motion, like a horse in front of a 
chariot, whether it is in relation to the dawn or the sun 
or motion of the sun in orbit through the Zodiacs or the 
abodes of life such as earth or the pranic energy forms 
of nature and life. 


आ नो' दधिक्राः पथ्यामनक्त्वृतस्य पन्थामन्वेतवा ॐ 1 
श्रृणोतु! नो दैव्यं शर्धो" अभिः श्रृण्वन्तु विश्वे महिषा 
START: ॥ ५॥ 


5. A no dadhikrah pathyamanaktvrtasya pantha- 
manvetava u. Srnotu no daivyam sardho agnih 
Srnvantu visve mahisa amurah. 


May the cosmic forms of energy and may the 
supreme mover of cosmic energy adorn, illuminate and 
sanctify our path and our movement over the path of 
truth and eternal law so that we may safely tread the 
holy paths of living. May Agni, lord omniscient, listen 
to our prayer and be favourable to our brilliance and 


176 RGVEDA 


divine gift of strength and power. May the mighty sages 
of the world listen to us and favour us with gifts of 
wisdom. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 45 
Savita Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ देवो यातु सविता सुरल्नोऽ न्तरिश्चप्रा वह॑मानो अश्वैः । 
हस्ते दधानो नयी पुरूणि निवेशयंञ्च प्रसुवञ्च भूमं ॥ ९ ॥ 


ly A devo yatu savita suratno’ntariksapra vahamano 
asvaih. Haste dadhano narya puruni nivesayanca 
prasuvanca bhuma. 


May the self-refulgent Savita, giver of light and 
life, come and bless, bearing jewels of life, radiating 
through the sky, carried by light rays, bearing in hands 
manifold treasures for humanity, suffusing and 
fertilising the earth with life and vitality. We pray we 
too may be brilliant and generous like the sun. 


उद॑स्य बाह्रूशशिंथिरा बृहन्ता हिर ण्ययां दिवो अन्ती अनष्टाम्‌ | 
नूनं सो अस्य महिमा पनिष्ट सूरश्चिदस्मा अनुं दादप- 
स्याम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Udasya bahu sithira brhanta hiranyaya divo 
antan anastam. Nunam so asya mahima panista 
surascidasma anu dadapasyam. 


Mighty are his hands and arms, vast and 
extensive, golden generous, reaching unto the bounds 
of heaven. Truly that grandeur of his is adorable. May 
the brave refulgent sun inspire us with will and passion 
for initiative and action. 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 46 177 


सघांनो देवः dian सहावाऽऽ साविषद्रसुंपतिर्वसनि | 
विश्रय॑माणो अमतिमुरूचीं म॑ ्तभोजं नमध॑ रासते नः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Sa gha no devah savita sahava’’ savisad vasupa- 
tirvasuni. Visrayamano amatim-urucim marta- 
bhojanam-adha rasate nah. 


May that refulgent creator and inspirer Savita, 
mighty and friendly, lord and master of wealth, radiating 
his wide expansive glory, provide vital food and energy 
for the mortals. 


इमा गिर॑ः सवितारं aie पूर्णग॑भस्तिमीक्छते सुपाणिम्‌। 
चित्रं वयो बृहदस्मे द॑धातु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
AUS 


4. Ima girah savitaram sujihvam purnagabhastim- 
ilate supanim. Citram vayo brhadasme dadhdatu 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 

These celebrant voices adore and glorify Savita, 
life giver and inspirer, bright and benedictive of light 
and flame, generous of hands full of blessings. May the 
lord bear and bring us universal health and life full of 
wonderful wealth and value. O lord Savita, O brilliancies 
of nature and humanity, protect and promote us with all 
modes of good fortune and well being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 46 
Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
इमा esta स्थिरध॑न्वने गिर॑ः क्चिप्रेष॑वे card caer 


अरषाक्हाय सह॑मानाय वेधसे तिग्मायुधाय भरता श्रृणोतु 
नः॥९॥ 


178 RGVEDA 


I Ima rudraya sthiradhanvane girah ksipresave 
devaya svadhavne. Asalhaya sahamanaya 
vedhase tigmayudhaya bharata srnotu nah. 


Offer these words of adoration and prayer to 
Rudra, brilliant destroyer of evil and injustice, wielder 
of the unshakable bow, shooting flying arrows of 
lightning speed. He bears his own essential power and 
sense of justice, irresistible is he, unconquerable, a 
challenger with unfailing fortitude, all knowing and 
equipped with blazing arms and armour. May the lord 
listen to us and accept our call. 


स हि क्षयेण क्षम्य॑स्य जन्म॑नः साम्राज्येन दिव्यस्य Safa 
अवन्नवन्तीरुप नो दुर॑श्चराऽनमीवो रुद्र जासु नो भव ॥ २॥ 


00 Sa hi ksayena ksamyasya janmanah samrajyena 
divyasya cetati. Avannavantirupa no durascara- 
71417171, rudra jasu no bhava. 


He is known by his own divine refulgence and, 
by the same exceptional brilliance and by close 
proximity of his presence and residence among the peace 
loving people of his blessed dominion, he proclaims 
himself and enlightens the people while he is perceived 
and glorified by them. O Rudra, protecting, sustaining 
and promoting our defence forces, be at the doors of 
our settlements by your presence and power among our 
people, and ever be giver of freedom from ailments and 
evil. 


या ते fegedust दिवस्परि क्ष्मया चर॑ति परि सा dure 
नः। Geet ते स्वपिवात भेषजा मा नस्तोकेषु तनं येषु 
रीरिषः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 47 179 


a Ya te didyudavasrsta divaspari ksmaya carati pari 
sa vrnaktu nah. Sahasram te svapivata bhesaja 
ma nastokesu tanayesu ririsah. 


The blaze of your lightning power released from 
heaven prevails over earth which may, we pray, spare 
us and not uproot us. O lord of refreshing winds, 
thousands are your rejuvenations and medicaments. Pray 
strike not upon our children and grand children, refresh, 
nourish and strengthen them to full maturity. 


मानोंवधीरुद्रमापरादा माते भूम uaa हीक्ठितस्यं। 
आ नो भज बर्हिषिं जीवशंसे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥४॥ 


4. Mano _ vadhi rudra ma para da ma te bhuma 
prasitau hilitasya. A no bhaja barhisi jivasamse 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O lord of justice, punishment and good health, 
strike us not, forsake us not to alienation. Let us not fall 
into the snares of your anger. Be with us on the vedi 
over earth and spaces for the joyous celebration of life. 
O lord ruler and physician of health, protect and promote 
us with all good fortunes of well being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 47 
Apah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
आपो ad: प्रथमं देवयन्तं इन्द्रपान॑मूर्मिमकुण्वतेव्छः। 
तं वो वयं शुचिमरिप्रमद्य dare मधुमन्तं वनेम 2 


il, Apo yam vah prathamam devayantam indrapa- 
nam-urmim-akrnvatelah. Tam vo vayam Sucima- 
ripram-adya ghrtaprusam madhuman-tam 
vanema. 


180 RGVEDA 


O cosmic waters, seers and sages in pursuit of 
divinity, we love and yearn for that pure, divine, 
delicious and honey sweet primordial thrill of the ecstasy 
drink of yours which you distilled from the Cosmic 
Word, original nature and the earth for the taste of Indra, 
the human soul, at the dawn of creation. 


तमूर्मिमापो मधुमत्तमं ats ut नपादवत्वाशुहेमा | 
यस्मिन्निन्द्रो वसुभिमांदर्याते तम॑श्याम देवयन्तो at 
अद्य ॥ २॥ 


2. Tamurmim-apo madhumattamam vo’ pam napad- 
avatvasuhema. Yasminn-indro vasubhirmadayate 
tamasyama devayanto vo adya. 


That sweetest of honey thrill of joyous ecstasy 
of existence in which Indra rejoices with the wealth, 
honours and excellences of life may, we pray, the holy 
fire, infallible extension of cosmic waters, protect and 
promote. That same thrill and ecstasy, we pray, may we 
too in our pursuit of divine joy attain here and now. 


श॒तप॑वित्राः स्वधया मद॑न्तीर्दूवीर्दैवानामपिं यस्ति ures: 1 
ता इन्द्र॑स्य न मिनन्ति व्रतानि सिन्धुभ्यो हव्यं घृतव॑ज्नु- 
Stu ३॥ 


ai Satapavitrah svadhaya madantir-devir-deva- 
namapi yanti pathah. Ta indrasya na minanti 
vratani sindhubhyo havyam ghrtavaj-juhota. 


The holy and ecstatic waters, hundred ways pure 
and flowing with their innate inspiring vitality, move 
on and converge to the divinities, centre yajna of the 
cosmos. They do not violate the divine laws of Indra, 
lord of existence. O men and women, offer oblations 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 48 181 
with ghrta for augmenting the rivers and the seas. 


याः सूर्यो रश्मिभिराततान याभ्य इन्द्रो अरंदद्रातुमूर्मिम्‌। 
ते सिन्धवो aRat धातना नो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ४॥ 


4. Yah suryo rasmibhir-atatana yabhya indro 
aradad gatumurmim. Te sindhavo varivo dhatana 
no yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


The vapours and waters which the sun expands 
with its rays in space, the showers of rain for which 
Indra, cosmic electricity, breaks the clouds of vapour 
to fall and flow, and the currents of water which dig out 
the river beds on earth, may all those oceans, seas and 
rivers bear and bring us treasurefuls of choice food, 
energy and wealth to sustain and support us. O cosmic 
waters, sun and showers, rivers and seas, protect and 
promote us with the best of good fortune for well being 
for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 48 
Rbhavah Vishvedevah Devatah, 
Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


ऋभुक्षणो वाजा मादयध्वमस्मे न॑रो मघवानः AAA | आ 
वोऽ वचिः क्रत॑वो न यातां विभ्वो रथं नर्य' वर्तयन्तु ॥ ९॥ 


iL. Rbhuksano vaja madayadhvamasme naro 
maghavanah sutasya. A vo’rvacah kratavo na 
yatam vibhvo ratham naryam vartayantu. 


O great scientists, leaders of humanity 
commanding power and excellence, rejoice and let us 
rejoice in the excellence of our science, power and 


182 RGVEDA 


culture. Come to us and let the Kratus, expert workers 
of holy will and resolution, as the Vibhus, artists and 
technologists, turn your chariot worthy of the human 
nation towards us. 


ऋ भुऋ भुभिर भि व॑ः स्याम विभ्वो विभुधिः शव॑सा 
शवांसि । वाजो अस्माँ stag वाज॑साताविन्द्रैण युजा त॑रुषेम 
BARN २॥ 


2 Rbhur-rbhubhir-abhi vah syama vibhvo vibhu- 
bhih Savasa Savamsi. Vajo asman avatu vajasata- 
vindrena yuja tarusema vrtram. 

Let us be scientists with the great scientists, let 
us be experts with the experts and command powers 
and forces with the power and knowledge of the 
scientists and technologists. May the warriors of power 
and speed protect you and us in the battles of life’s 
freedom and success in excellence. And let us join Indra, 
lord of power and excellence and cross over evil, 
darkness and want to light, freedom and prosperity. 


ते fate पूर्वीरभि सन्तिं शासा विश्व अर्य उपरताति 
वन्वन्‌। इन्द्रो विभ्वा ऋभुक्षा वाजो। अर्यः शत्रो ्मिंथत्या 
Huraira नुम्णम्‌॥ ३॥ ति 

ai Te ciddhi purvirabhi santi Sasa visvan arya 
uparatati vanvan. Indro vibhvan rbhuksa vajo 
aryah satror-mithatya krnavan vi nrmnam. 


They, the Rblus, eternal presences, surely excel 
and advance the borders of knowledge and power by 
discipline, being attached to their master with loyalty 
in all battles for progress. And Indra, the ruler vested 
with power, having settled eminent scientists, artists and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 49 183 


craftsmen, and, having scattered out all enmities in 
conflicts, they develop new wealth and prosperity for 
the nation. 


eared aRa: कर्तना नो भूत नो विश्वेऽ aa सजोषाः | 
समस्मे इषं वस॑वो ददीरन्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सद नः ॥  ॥ 


4. Nu devaso varivah kartana no bhita no visve'vase 
sajosah. Samasme isam vasavo dadiran yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O divine brilliant Rbhus, wondrous scientists, 
artists and craftsmen of the world, creators of wealth 
and providers of settlement at peace, create the best of 
comfort and prosperity for us. Loving and cooperative 
all, be for our safety, security and progress. Eminent 
masters of knowledge and expertise, provide the best 
of food, energy and sustenance for us. O Rbhus, O Vasus, 
pray always protect and promote us with all the good 
fortune for life’s well being all round, all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 49 
Apah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


समुद्रज्येष्ठाः सलिलस्य Tea यन्त्यनिविशमानाः | 
इन्द्रो या वज्री dee रराद ता आपो देवीरिह माम॑वन्तु ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Samudrajyesthah salilasya madhyat punana 
yantyanivisamanah. Indro ya vajri vrsabho 
rarada ta apo deviriha mamavantu. 


The divine waters, chief of which is the ocean, 
arise from the heart of cosmic energy as a surge of 
liquidity and ceaslessly flow, purifying, sanctifying 
everything they suffuse. Indra, the sun and electric 


184 RGVEDA 


energy of the firmament, power of thunder and 
generosity, creates the channels for their flow. May those 
streams of waters inspire and impel me too with the 
initiative and drive of life for initiative and action here 
in the world and protect me against evil and sloth. 


या आपो दिव्या उत वा स्त्रवन्ति waar sa at याः 
स्व॑ यजाः । समुद्रार्था याः शुच॑यः पावकास्ता आपो देवीरिह 
माम॑वन्तु ॥ २॥ 


2. Ya apo divya uta va sravanti khanitrima uta va 
yah svayamjah. Samudrartha yah sucayah 
pavakasta apo deviriha mamavantu. 


May those divine streams of water and cosmic 
energy which flow in channels made by man and those 
which flow their own way and rush to join the sea, all 
of which are pure and sacred, purifying and sanctifying, 
may all those streams protect and promote me onward 
here in the world of dynamic activity. 


यासां राजा वरूणो याति मध्ये सत्यानृते अंवपश्यञ्ज- 
नानाम्‌ । मधुश्चुतः शुच॑यो याः पावकास्ता आपो देवीरिह 
माम॑वन्तु ।॥ ३॥ 


2 Yasam raja varuno yati madhye satyanrte 
avapasyan-jananam. Madhuscutah sucayo yah 
pavakasta apo deviriha mamavantu. 


Those liquid streams of waters and divine energy 
in the currents of which the cosmic ruler of universal 
law, Varuna, vibrates with universal judgement and 
omnipotence, watching the truth and untruth of the 
people’s actions within the rules of divine law, the 
streams which are replete with the honey sweets of life’s 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 50 185 


joy, pure and purifying, may all these streams of divinity 
protect, inspire and promote me here in this world of 
action. 


यासु राजा वरुणो यासु सोमो विश्वे देवा यासूर्जं मद॑न्ति। 
वैश्वानरो यास्वथिः प्रविष्टस्ता आपो देवीरिह माम॑- 
STU SU 


4. Yasu raja varuno yasu somo visve deva yasurjam 
madanti. Vaisvanaro yasvagnih pravistasta apo 
deviriha mamavantu. 


Those streams of water and cosmic energy in 
which Varuna, self-refulgent ruler, pervades, in which 
Soma, peace and life’s vitality and joy, resides, in which 
all divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity find 
their breath of life and rejoice, in which Vaishvanara, 
vital heat of earth life, resides and inspires her children, 
may those divine streams of the waters of existence 
inspire, protect and promote me here in this world. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 50 
Mitra, Varuna, Agni, Vishvedevah, Nadyah 
Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 

आ मां पिंत्रावरुणेह र॑क्षतं कुत्ाययंद्विश्वयन्मा न आ ग॑न्‌ । 
अजकावं Geile तिरो द॑धे मा मां पद्योन रप॑सा विद्‌- 
त्सरुः ॥ ९॥ 

| A mam mitravaruneha raksatam kulayayad 
visvayanma na ठ gan. Ajakavam durdrsikam tiro 
dadhe ma mam padyena rapasa vidat tsaruh. 


May the sun and waters, curative and preventive 
health care, protect me here. Let no bodily infirmity, no 


186 RGVEDA 


insidious or infectious disease come to me. Let me keep 
off all diseases that spread through animals and insects, 
all those that spread through germs and viruses difficult 
to see with naked eye. Let all those ailments be off which 
arise from external contact or from internal weakness 
such as lack of resistance, depression or self-guilt. 


यद्विजामन्परुषि वन्द॑नं भुव॑द्ठीवन्तौ GR कुल्फौ च sec | 
अथिष्टच्छोचन्नरप॑ बाधतापितो मा मां पद्येन रप॑सा 
विदत्त्सरुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yad vijaman parusi vandanam bhuvad-asthiv- 
antau pari kulphau ca dehat. Agnistacchocann- 
apa badhatamito ma mam padyena rapasa vidat 
tsaruh. 


Let Agni, heat treatment and fire element, burn 
away and keep off all tumours or rheumatic disease 
corresponding to the joints and bone density, pain which 
swells and burns ankles and knees and reaches up to 
the hips and stomach. Let no surreptitious disease 
beginning with the feet and creeping up by infection 
touch me. 
यच्छल्मलौ भव॑ति यन्नदीषु aatdeitea: परि जाय॑ते 
विषम्‌। विश्वे देवा निरितस्तत्सुवन्तु मा मां cela रप॑सा 
विदत्त्सरुः ॥ ३॥ 

Yacchalmalau bhavati yannadosu yadisadhi- 


bhyah pari jayate visam. Visve deva niritastat 
suvantu ma mam padyena rapasa vidat tsaruh. 


Whatever poison there be in the cotton plant or 
silktree or in the streams of water or what is produced 
by herbs and trees, let the scholars of science and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 51 187 


medicine of the world isolate and eliminate from there 
as antibiotic. Let no surreptitious ailment from external 
or internal causes come and afflict me. 


याः प्रवतो निवतं sed उदन्वतीरनुदकाश्च याः। ता 
अस्मभ्यं पय॑सा पिन्व॑मानाः शिवा देवीरशिपदा भ॑वन्तु 
सवी नद्यो अशिपिदा भ॑वन्तु ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yah pravato nivata udvata udanvatir-anudakasca 
yah. Ta asmabhyam payasa pinvamanah Siva 
devir-asipada bhavantu sarva nadyo asimida 
bhavantu. 


All streams of water, wind and energy, rushing, 
flowing, rising, on mountains, slopes and valleys or 
plains with abundant or lean content, may be for us full 
of nourishment, health giving, blissful and sparkling 
generous. May they ward off all disease, may they never 
be destructive. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 51 
Adityah Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आदित्यानामवसा नूत॑नेन सक्षीमहि शर्मणा शन्तमेन । 
अनागास्त्वे अदितित्वे qua इमं यज्ञं द॑धतु श्रोषं- 
माणाः॥ ९॥ 


iP Adityanamavasa nutanena saksimahi Sarmana 
Samtamena. Anagastve adititve turasa imam 
yajnam dadhatu srosamanah. 


May we join the Adityas, eminent sagely 
scholars of knowledge and science, and benefit from 
their latest modes of protection and promotion and from 
the peace of a blessed home. May they, swift and 


188 RGVEDA 


powerful of action, listen to our prayer and conduct this 
social yajna of ours in a state of sinlessness and 
invincibility. 
आदित्यासो अदितिर्मादयन्तां पित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो रजिष्ठाः | 
अस्माकं सन्तु भुव॑नस्य गोपाः पिब॑न्तु सोममवसे नो 
अद्य ॥ २॥ 


2. 44713450 aditir-madayantam mitro aryama 
varuno rajisthah. Asmakam santu bhuvanasya 
gopah pibantu somam-avase no adya. 


We pray, may the Adityas, brilliant sages and 
the seasonal phases of the sun, Aditi, mother nature and 
the ethics and policy of universal values, Mitra, the sun 
and the friendly ruler, Aryama, leader and pioneer, 
Varuna, chief of law and justice, all straight powers of 
rectitude, rejoice, be protectors of our social system and 
give us a life of joy. May they too join us today and 
share the taste of life’s ecstasy and excellence for further 
progress. 


आदित्या विश्वे मरुतंर्च विश्वे देवाश्च विश्वं ऋभवश्च 
विश्वे । इन्द्रो अथिर श्विना तुष्टुवाना यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
सदा नः ।॥ ३॥ 


Aditya 177517८ marutasca visve devasca visva rbha- 
vasca visve. Indro agniraSsvina tustuvana yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


All the Adityas, refulgent powers of nature and 
humanity, all the Maruts, winds and heroic men, all 
devas, brilliancies of nature and humanity, Rbhus, all 
artists and craftsmen, Indra, ruling power and electricity, 
Agni, fire and the brilliant leader, Ashvins, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 52 189 


complementary currents of natural energy and teachers 
and preachers, all happy, adorable and appraising, may 
protect and promote us with all good fortune and well 
being for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 52 
Adityah Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आदित्यासो अदितयः स्याम पूर्देवत्रा व॑सवो मर्त्यत्रा । सनेम 
मित्रावरुणा सनन्तो भवेम द्यावापृथिवी भवन्तः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Adityaso aditayah syama purdevatra vasavo mar- 
tyatra. Sanema mitravaruna sananto bhavema 
dyavaprthivi bhavantah. 


O Adityas, dynamic unassailable lights of the 
world, may we too be brilliant and unassailable. O Vasus, 
shelter homes of life, let us be servants of divinity and 
servants of humanity, shelter and comfort for all, holy 
as the city. O Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, joining 
and serving you, let us acquire depth and brilliance. O 
earth and heaven, trying to be like you, let us be generous 
and free and blest beyond all bonds of lower existence. 


पित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो मामहन्त शर्म' तोकाय तन॑याय गोपाः। 
मा वो भुजेमान्यजातमेनो मा तत्कर्म वसवो यच्ययंध्वे i २॥ 


2. Mitrastanno varuno mamahanta sarma tokaya 
tanayaya gopah. Ma vo bhujemanyajatameno 
ma tat karma vasavo yaccayadhve. 


May Mitra and Varuna, protectors like friends, 
the sun and the vast ocean, promote the peace and joy 
of our hearth and home to honour and glory for our 
children and grand children. O Vasus, shelter homes of 
life, let us not suffer afflictions born of sin committed 


190 RGVEDA 


by others, nor should that, O children of the earth, affect 
you, and may the karma you do and accumulate never 
be that sinful. 


तुरण्यवोऽ erat नक्षन्त ta देवस्य॑ सवितुरियानाः | 
पिता च तन्नो महान्यजत्रो विश्वे देवाः सम॑नसो जुषन्त ॥ ३ ॥ 


च Turanyavo'ngiraso naksanta ratnam devasya 
savituriyanah. Pita ca tanno mahan yajatro 
visve devah samanaso jusanta. 


Men of initiative, swift in thought and action, 
zealous as life energy, study, meditate on and attain the 
jewel gifts of Savita, refulgent and generous lord creator 
and inspirer. That adorable lord creator, our father and 
sustainer, and all brilliant sages and scholars of the world 
working together with one united mind may, we pray, 
give us that bliss of divine gifts and grandeur. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 53 
Dyava-prthivyau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र द्यावां यज्ञैः परथिवी नमोभिः स॒बाध॑ $3 बहती यजत्रे । 
ते चिद्धि पूर्वे कवयो गृणन्त॑ः पुरो मही द॑धिरे देवपुत्रे ॥ ९ ॥ 


॥ Pra dyava yajnaih [01111717 namobhih sabadha 
tle brhati yajatre. Te ciddhi purve kavayo grnan- 
tah puro mahi dadhire devaputre. 


Challenged by difficulties on the way forward, 
I invoke high heaven and mother earth with offers of 
homage and adoration. Vast and abundant they are, close 
friends and generous givers, divine sources of hope and 
energy, whom noble men serve and exalt with songs. 
To these, for sure, celebrant poets and visionaries of all 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 53 191 


time look up and these they adore for inspiration with 
offers of homage and adoration. 


प्र पूर्वजे पितरा नव्य॑सीभिर्गीर्भिः कुणुध्वं सदं ने ate । 
आ नो द्यावापृथिवी दैव्येन जनेन यातं महिं वां वरू- 
थम्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Pra purvaje pitara navyasibhir-girbhih krnu- 
dhvam sadane rtasya. A no dyavaprthivi daivyena 
jJanena yatam mahi vam varutham. 


O noble men and women of the world, in the 
house of the yajnic study of the laws of nature and 
advancement of light and waters, flow, adore the ancient 
fatherly sun and motherly earth with the latest words of 
research and knowledge, and let the highest light of 
heaven and the great abundance of the earth come to 
your homes with the holiest and most brilliant people. 


उतो हि वां Tada सन्तिं पुरूणि द्यावापृथिवी gare | 
अस्मे ध॑त्तं यदसदस्कृधोयु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥३॥ 


a Uto hi vam ratnadheyani santi puruni dyava- 
prthivi sudase. Asme dhattam yadasadas-krdhoyu 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O sun and nature, fatherly sun and mother earth, 
generous givers of all time, yours are the jewel treasures 
of life for the generous giver, whatever they are. Bear 
and bring us whatever be the finest and most abundant 
gifts of your eternal jewels. Pray preserve, protect and 
promote us for all time with peace, happiness and well 
being. 


192 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 54 
Vastoshpati Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


वास्तोष्पते प्रति arigreareataont अनमीवो भ॑वा नः। 
यत्त्वेमहे प्रति तन्नो जुषस्व शं a भव द्विपदे शं 
चतुष्पदे ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Vastospate prati janithyasmantsvaveso anamivo 
bhava nah. Yat tvemahe prati tanno jusasva 
sam no bhava dvipade sam catuspade. 


O Vastupati, master architect and guardian of 
the home, know us for certain and approve what we 
want, be for us the provider of a happy and comfortable 
home free from pollution and disease. Be pleased to 
give us the facilities we ask you to provide, and let there 
be peace and well being for humans and for animals. 


वास्तोष्पते प्रतर॑णो न एधि गयस्फानो गोधिरणश्वेभिरिन्दो। 
अजरासस्ते सख्ये स्याम पितेव पुत्रान्प्रति नो जुषस्व ॥ २॥ 


2. Vastospate pratarano na edhi gayasphano 
gobhir-asvebhir-indo. Ajarasaste sakhye syama 
piteva putran prati no Jusasva. 


O master and guardian of the home, giver of 
peace and bliss, be our saviour and protector all round, 
promote the homestead and the inmates along with the 
cows and horses. In love and friendship with you, let us 
be free from disease and ravages of age. Pray love and 
protect us and promote us as father for the children. 


वास्तोष्पते शग्मां संसदा ते alas रण्वया गातुमत्यां । 
पाहि क्षेम॑ उत योगे वरं नो यूयं ula स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥३॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 55 193 


a Vastospate Sagmaya samsada te saksimahi 
ranvaya gatumatya. Pahi ksema uta yoge varam 
no yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Master architect, maker and guardian of the 
home, the family and the nation, may we, by your 
kindness and favour enjoy a settled home in peace, 
comfort, joy and good fellowship and prosperity with 
you and the nation’s assembly. Pray protect and promote 
us in the preservation, acquisition and advancement of 
our wealth and excellence in the best manner. O 
guardians and protectors of the human nation, all time 
protect and promote us with the best of happiness and 
all round well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 55 
Vastoshpati and Indra Devate, 
Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


अमीवहा वास्तोष्पते विष्वा रूपाण्याविशन्‌ | 
सयां सुशेवं एधि नः ॥ ९॥ 


I. Amivaha vastospate visva rupanyavisan. 
Sakha suseva edhi nah. 


Vastoshpati, father and guardian of the abode 
of life (111 body, family and the nation), destroyer of 
pain, suffering and disease, in all forms of life and its 
organisation your power and presence is reflected. Pray 
be our friend and saviour, giver of peace and bliss free 
from strain. 


यदर्जुन सारमेय दतः पिंशङ्क यच्छ॑से । वीव भ्राजन्त ऋष्टय 
उप स्रक्वेषु बप्सतो नि षु स्व॑प॥ २॥ 


194 RGVEDA 


2: Yadarjuna sarameya datah pisanga yacchase. 
Viva bhrajanta rstaya upa srakvesu bapsato ni 
su svapa. 


Lord of purity and blazing power, creator and 
controller of values and the essence of things and 
institutions, handsome and versatile in form and 
performance, you raise, wield and control your weapons 
of defence and offence, devouring missiles target 
oriented in readiness in defence labs beaming like a trail 
of light in the sky, and thus you may rest in peace and 
security in the state of readiness. 


स्तेनं राय सारमेय तस्करं वा पुनःसर । स्तोतृनिन्द्रस्य रायसि 
किमस्मान्दुच्छुनायसे नि षु स्व॑प॥ ३॥ 


Ds Stenam raya sarameya taskaram va punah sara. 
Stotrn-indrasya rayasi kimasman ducchunayase 
ni su svapa. 


Lord of wealth and glory, lover of values and 
essence of things in life, keep on pursuing the thief and 
the smuggler and bring them to book. And don’t you 
appreciate and encourage those who support and 
augment the wealth of the nation and the ruling order 
and assure that we are safe against evil and the 
negationists? You do. If so, you may thus rest in peace 
and security in the state of readiness. 


त्वं dare adig तवं add सूकरः । स्तोतृनिन्द्र॑स्य रायसि 
किमस्मान्द्च्छुनायसे नि षु स्व॑प।॥ ४॥ 
4. Tvam sukarasya dardrhi tava dardartu sukarah. 


Stotrn-indrasya rayasi kimasman ducchunayase 
ni su svapa. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 55 195 


Promote with incentive the forces of positive 
action and let the forces of good action promote you 
and the social order. You advance the supporters and 
admirers of the order and you protect us against 
saboteurs and evil doers for sure. In such a state of 
vigilance and readiness you may rest in peace and 
security. 


सस्तु माता सस्तुं पिता सस्तु श्वा aed विश्पतिः | 
ससन्तु सर्वे" ज्ञातयः सस्त्वयमभितो जनं: ॥ ५॥ 


Sastu mata sastu pita sastu sva sastu vispatih. 
Sasantu sarve jnatayah sastvayam-abhito janah. 


In the ideal state of order, let the mother sleep 
in peace, let the father rest at peace, let the watch guard 
be sure of peace and security, let the head of the 
community rest at peace. And let this nation of humanity 
be at peace all round all ways. 


य आस्ते यश्च चर॑ति age पश्य॑ति नो जनः | 
तेषां सं ह॑न्मो अक्षाणि यथेदं wef तथा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ya aste yaSca carati yasca pasyati no janah. 
Tesam sam hanmo aksani yathedam harmyam 
tatha. 


The person who sits and works in an appointed 
place, the one who is always on the move on tours, and 
the one who is appointed to watch us all round, of all 
these we centralise the orbits of movement and activity 
as this house is, which is the centre and capital of the 
social order. 


सदहस््र॑शृद्धो वृषभो यः dqargarard| 
wat सहस्येना वयं नि जना॑न्त्स्वापयामसि ॥ ७ ॥ 


196 RGVEDA 


in Sahasrasrngo vrsabho yah samudradudacarat. 
Tena sahasyena vayam ni janant-svapayamasi. 


Thousands are his rays of light and peaks of 
achievement, profuse his showers of peace and generous 
favours, as he, ruler of the order like the sun, rises and 
rules over earth, sea and the sky. By virtue of his might 
and courage, patience and fortitude, we provide for the 
peace and comfort of the people. 


प्रोष्ठेशया व॑दयोशाया antatedcusitald: | 

fern याः पुण्य॑गन्धास्ताः स्वी: स्वापयामसि ।॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Prosthesaya vahyesaya nariryastalpasivarth. 

Striyo yah punyagandhastah sarvah svapayamasi. 

The women who sleep in large homes and open 
court yards, who sleep while on the move in travel, who 
sleep in comfortable beds and those who are fragrantly 
dressed with perfumes, for all these we provide for peace 
and safety to sleep in security. 
Mandala 7/Sukta 56 

Maruts Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 

क ई व्य॑क्ता नरः सनींव्ा रुद्रस्य मर्या अधा स्वश्वाः ॥ ९॥ 
iF Kam vyakta narah sanila rudrasya marya adha 

svasvah. 


What for sure are these individual, specified, 
kindred, mortal and human life forces of Rudra, cosmic 
vitality, the soul, the commander, the destroyer of 
suffering, forces which ride noble steeds like currents 
of wind? 


Tied षां wife वेद्‌ ते अङ्ग विं द्रे मिथो SP 2 ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 197 


2. Nakirhyosam janumsi veda te anga vidre mitho 
Janitram. 


O dear seeker, no one really knows their origin 
and places of birth except that they together manifest in 
action and reveal their origin and generative power. 


अभि स्वपूभिर्मिथो व॑पन्त॒ वात॑स्वनसः श्येना अस्पृध्रन्‌ ॥ 3 ॥ 


2: Abhi svapubhirmitho vapanta vatasvanasah 
Syena asprdhran. 


Roaring like winds, flying like eagles, together 
they rival each other and generate energy and vitality 
of life by their essential purity of character and action. 


एतानि धीरो निण्या चिकेत पृर्निर्यदूधों मही जभार ¥ ॥ 


4. Etani dhiro ninya ciketa prsnir-yadudho mahi 
jabhara. 

The wise and resolute scholar knows these 

mysterious forces, he who knows how the sun and the 


starry sky hold the earth, and the earth, like the cow, 
holds the milky food for life. 


सा विट्‌ सुवीरां मरुद्धिरस्तु सनात्सहन्ती पुष्य॑न्ती नूम्णम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


D: Sa vit suvira marudbhirastu sanat sahanti pusya- 
ntt nrmnam. 


That nation commands the brave which 
maintains its stout and vibrant people by its constant 
values and policy of action, which observes hard 
discipline patiently to challenge the enemies, and which 
strengthens and sustains its manliness of character. 


यामं ast: शुभा शोभिष्ठाः भिया संमिंश्ला ओजो- 
भिरुग्राः॥ ६॥ 


198 RGVEDA 


6. Yamam yesthah subha sobhisthah sriya sammisla 
ojobhirugrah. 


The Maruts, warriors of the nation, are unfailing 
marksmen shooting to the target straight, most decent 
of manners and courtesy, graceful with culture and 
chivalry, and blazing with heroic splendour. 


sta ओज॑ः स्थिरा शवांस्यधा मरुद्धिर्गणस्तुविष्ान्‌॥। ७ ॥ 
is Ugram va ojah sthira Savamsyadha marudbhir- 
ganastuvisman. 


Your vigour is bright and passionate, your 
courage and valour is constant and inviolable, and your 
republic is strong and invulnerable by virtue of the 
vibrant warriors. 


शुभ्रो वः शुष्पः क्रुध्मी मनांसि धुनिर्मुनिरिव 
शर्धस्य TTT: ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Subhro vah Susmah krudhmi manamsi dhunir- 


muniriva Sardhasya dhrsnoh. 


O nation of Maruts, redoubtable challengers of 
the enemy, blazing white and pure is your strength and 
courage, righteous and passionate, your minds are alert, 
agile and thoughtful like that of a sage and your power 
is invulnerable. 


सनेम्यस्मद्युयोतं दिद्युं मा वो दुर्मतिरिह wots A ॥ ९॥ 


9. Sanemyasmad yuyota didyum ma vo durmatiriha 
pranan nah. 


Reject the outmoded weapons, always take to 
the bright and blazing ones. Keep off from us, citizens, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 199 


the old as well as the new and bright ones. Let not evil 
thought and intention ever vitiate and damage you or 
us. 


प्रिया वो नाम॑ हुवे तुराणामा यत्तृपन्म॑रुतो वावशानाः ॥ Yo 


10. Priya vo nama huve turanama yat trpanmaruto 
vavasanah. 

O Maruts, bright and instant warriors, fast 
workers, noble leaders and eminent scholars of the 
nation of humanity, dear and lovable is your name and 
title which I admire and invoke, the name which is 
elevating and deeply satisfying, keen and dedicated as 
you are to the targets of action. 


rargere इष्मिणः सुनिष्का उत स्वयं तन्व१: शुम्भ॑- 
मानाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Svayudhasa isminah suniska uta svayam tanvah 
sumbhamanah. 


Wielders of wondrous weapons, anxious 
creators of food and energy, noble and meticulous in 
matters of wealth and vitality, and keeping your form 
and personality in top condition of dignity and grace, 
that’s what you are. 


शुचीं वो हव्या म॑रुतः शुचीनां शुचिं हिनोम्यध्वरं 
शुचिभ्यः | ऋतेन सत्यम तसाप॑ आयञ्छुचिजन्मानः 
शुच॑यः पावकाः ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Suci vo (रवादं marutah Sucinam sucim hino- 
myadhvaram sucibhyah. Rtena satyam-rtasapa 
ayanchucijanmanah sucayah pavakah. 


O Maruts, mortals, pure are your yajnic 


200 RGVEDA 


transactions, clean your gifts, receipts and dispensations. 
I invoke and augment the pure and non-violent yajna of 
and love and creativity of the pure for the sake of pure 
and sacred people who, committed to truth, advance 
the truth by observance of truth and divine law of 
rectitude. Bright and pure is your birth and origin, pure 
you are and sanctifying. 


अंसेष्वा म॑रुतः खादयो वो वक्ष॑ःसु रुक्मा ॐपशिश्चियाणाः। 
वि विद्युतो न वृष्टिभी रुचाना अनु स्वधामायु धेर्यच्छ - 
मानाः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Amsesva marutah khadayo vo 14८5८15 rukma 
upasisriyanah. Vi vidyuto na vrstibhi rucana anu 
svadham-ayudhair-yacchamanah. 


O Maruts, warriors vibrant as winds, on your 
shoulders you wear deadly weapons which, bright and 
blazing, decorate your chest. Thus wielding and whirling 
your weapons in keeping with your innate strength and 
chivalry, in your yajnic endeavours of development and 
progress, you shine like flashes of lightning with 
showers of rain. 


प्र बुध्न्या व ईरते महांसि प्र नामानि प्रयज्यवस्तिरध्वम्‌ | 
सहस्रियं दम्यं भागमेतं गृहमेधीयं मरुतो जुषध्वम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Pra budhnya va trate mahamsi pra namani 
prayajyavas-tiradhvam. Sahasriyam damyam 
bhagametam grhamedhiyam maruto jusa-dhvam. 


Adorable Maruts, admirable advancers of the 
bounds of progress, your fame and glory rises to clouds 
over the vast skies. Go forward and win the battles. Play 
this part of yours with love and faith worthy of the home 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 201 


like a fragrant yajna of thousand possibilities. 


यदि trea मरुतो अधीथेत्था विप्र॑स्य वाजिनो हवीं मन्‌। 
मक्षू रायः सुवीर्यस्य दात नू चिद्यमन्य आदभदरांवा Ut ९५ ॥ 


15. Yadi stutasya maruto adhithettha viprasya vajino 
haviman. Maksu rayah suviryasya data nu cid 
yamanya adabhadarava. 


O Maruts, vibrant workers and vibrant yajakas, 
if thus you know and remember the holy yajnic 
programmes of positive value enacted by dynamic and 
progressive people, then create and give us abundant 
wealth of highly productive and progressive order at 
the earliest lest others and uncreative forces take over 
and sabotage the plans and programmes. 


Taha न ये मरुतः स्वञ्चो Bargain न aaa मयीः । 
ते हर्म्येष्ठाः शिवो न शुभ्रा वत्सासो न Walford: 
पयोधाः ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. 41650 na ye marutah svanco yaksadrso na 
subhayanta maryah. Te harmyesthah sisavo na 
subhra vatsaso na prakrilinah payodhah. 

The Maruts ever on the move by themselves like 
never resting forces of nature, mortals pure and graceful 
like those who go to meet the divines, they are ever 


bright and happy like innocent children of the palace of 
majesty and playful like sucklings of the cow. 


दशस्यन्तो नो मरुतो Ford वरिवस्यन्तो रोद॑सी सुमेक । 
आरे गोहा Tet वधो वों अस्तु. सुम्नेभिरस्मे व॑सवो 
नमध्वम्‌ ।॥ ९७॥ 


202 RGVEDA 


17. Dasasyanto no maruto mrlantu varivasyanto 
rodast sumeke. Are goha nrha vadho vo astu 
sumnebhirasme vasavo namadhvam. 


May the Maruts, leaders and pioneers serving 
and replenishing the beautiful heaven and earth, be kind 
and gracious and bring us peace and joy. May the butcher 
and the murderer be far from us. May the weapon of 
death be far from you and from us. O givers of peace 
and settlement in joy and prosperity turn to us with 
happiness and well-being. 


आ वो होतां जोहवीति सत्तः सत्राचीं रातिं म॑रुतो गृणानः | 
य ईव॑तो वृषणो अस्तिं गोपाः सो अद्व॑यावी हवते व 
उक्थे: ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Avo hota johaviti sattah satracim ratin maruto 
grnanah. Ya ivato vrsano asti gopah so advayavi 
havate va ukthaih. 


The yajaka settled on the vedi invokes you, O 
Maruts, praising and praying for your blissful generosity 
which is the harbinger of truth and life of real value. He 
is the protector of the dynamic and the generous. He is 
free from double dealing and he invokes and celebrates 
you with the right works of truth and sincerity. 


इमे तुरं मरुतो! रामयन्तीमे सहः सह॑स आ न॑मन्ति। 
इमे शंसं वनुष्यतो नि पान्ति गुर दवेषो अर॑रुषे दधन्ति ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Ime turam maruto ramayantime sahah sahasa a 
namanti. Ime Samsam vanusyato ni panti guru 
dveso araruse dadhanti. 


They sustain and strengthen the fast moving 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 203 


progressive forces and bend the might of the mighty. 
They protect the prayer of the supplicant and advance 
the song of the celebrant against the violent and they 
bear and maintain deep opposition to the jealous and 
the wicked. 


इमे te चिन्मरुतो जुनन्ति yf चिद्यथा वस॑वो aod | 
अपं बाधध्वं वृषणस्तमांसि धत्त विश्वं तन॑यं तोक - 
मस्मे ॥ २०॥ 


20. Ime radhram cinmaruto junanti bhrmim cid yatha 
vasavo jusanta. Apa badhadhvam vrsanasta- 
mamsi dhatta visvam tanayam_ tokamasme. 


These vibrant Maruts, leading lights of wealth 
and settlement, inspire the settled prosperous as they 
encourage the migrant seeker and explorer on the move 
since they command the sources of wealth and 
production. O generous powers, shut off all forms of 
darkness and sloth, bear and bring us dynamic children 
and grand children ranging over the vast world of 
possibilities and achievement. 


मावो carats Freire मा पश्चाद ष्म रथ्यो विभागे। 
आ न॑ः स्पार्हे भ॑जतना वसव्ये यदी' सुजातं वुंषणो वो 
अस्ति ॥ २९॥ 


21. Ma vo datran-maruto nirarama ma pascad 
dadhma rathyo vibhage. A nah_ sparhe_ bhaja- 
tana vasavye yadim sujatam vrsano vo Asti. 


O Maruts, dynamic explorers, creators and 
distributors, masters of the chariot, never shall we stop 
you from giving and never must we be left behind in 
sharing and distribution. O generous powers, whatever 


204 RGVEDA 


your wealth of desirable value worthy of life and settled 
peace, let us share it with you. 


सं यब्दन॑न्त मन्युभिर्जनासः शुरां यहीष्वोष॑धीषु विक्षु | अधं 
स्मा नो मरुतो रुद्रियासस्त्रातारो भूत पृतनास्वर्यः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Sam yaddhananta manyubhir-janasah sura 
yahvisvosadhisu viksu. Adha sma no maruto 
rudriyasas-trataro bhuta prtanasvaryah. 


If people with rage and passions join together 
and strike and kill, then O Maruts, brave heroes of the 
line of Rudra, saviour with drugs and medicaments and 
with justice and punishment, you be our saviours and 
defenders and defend the ruler and master of the land 
in the strifes and contests of life extending to the people 
and great herbs and forests. 


भूरिं चक्र मरुतः पिर््याण्युक्थानि या a: शस्यन्ते पुरा 
faq मरुद्धिंरूग्रः पृतनासु creel मरुद्धिरित्सनिता वाज- 
मवी ।॥ २३॥ 


23.  Bhuri cakra marutah pitryanyukthani ya vah 
Sasyante pura cit. Marudbhir-ugrah prtanasu 
salha marudbhirit sanita vajamarva. 


O Maruts, vibrant leaders and pioneers of 
humanity, many are your deeds and songs in honour of 
the forefathers which have been sung and celebrated 
since times immemorial. It is by virtue of the Maruts 
that the haughty warrior wins the battles, and it is by 
the Maruts that the sharer gets his food and the 
contesting horse wins the race. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 205 


अस्मे वीरो म॑रुतः शुष्म्यस्तु जनानां यो असुरो विधर्ता । 
अपो येन॑ सुक्षितये तरे माऽध स्वमोको अभि वं 
स्याम॥ २४॥ 


24. = 4.471८ 1770 marutah Susmyastu jananam yo asuro 
vidharta. Apo yena suksitaye tarema’dha 
svamoko abhi vah syama. 


O Maruts, let our young hero be strong and 
powerful who, vibrant as energy itself, may defend and 
sustain the people, and by virtue of whom we may cross 
the seas of life for the achievement of success on earth 
and live free in our own home as friends with you. 


तन्न इन्द्रो वरुणो पित्रो अगिराप sire rat जुषन्त। 
शर्म॑न्त्स्याम मरुतामुपस्थे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
नः॥ २५॥ 


25. Tanna indro varuno mitro agnirapa osadhir- 
vanino jusanta. Sarmantsyama marutamupasthe 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


May that success, freedom and happiness, Indra, 
power and energy, Varuna, night and peace, Mitra, sun 
and the day, Agni, light and fire, Apah, waters and 
dynamic progress, Oshadhis, greenery of nature and 
good health, vanins, herbs and forests, may, we wish 
and pray, support, augment and share our happy home 
which may be in close vicinity with the Maruts, vibrant 
heroes and energising winds. O divinities of nature and 
humanity, protect and promote us always with all 
happiness and well being all time. 


206 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 57 
Maruts Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


मध्वो वो नाम मारुतं यजत्राः प्र यज्ञेषु शव॑सा मदन्ति | 
येरेजय॑न्ति रोद॑सी चिदुर्वी पिन्वन्त्युत्सं यदयासुरुग्राः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Madhvo vo nama marutam_ yajatrah pra yajnesu 
Savasa madanti. Ye rejayanti rodasi cidurvi 
pinvantyutsam yadayasurugrah. 


O Maruts, cosmic winds of vitality, admirable 
is your name and action worthy of the life force and 
humanity which worshipful yajakas invoke and 
celebrate with strength and enthusiasm in yajnic 
programmes. When the raging winds blow they shake 
the heaven and earth, swell the cloud and shower the 
earth with life giving waters. 


निचेतारो हि मरुतो गृणन्तं प्रणोतारो यज॑मानस्य मन्म | 
अस्माकमद्य विदथेषु बर्हिरा वीतये सदत पिप्रियाणाः ॥ २॥ 

१ Nicetaro hi maruto grnantam pranetaro  yaja- 
manasya manma. Asmakamadya vidathesu barhi- 
ra vitaye sadata pipriyanah. 

You are inspiring guardians of the celebrant and 
leading lights for the mind and vision of the yajamana 
devotee. Come today right now for our good and grace 
our seats in our yajnas rising to the skies, happy, 
rejoicing, and inspiring us with joy and enthusiasm. 


नैतावदन्ये मरुतो यथेमे भ्राज॑न्ते रु क्मैरायुंधेस्तनुभिः । आ 
रोद॑सी विश्वपिशः पिशानाः संमानमञ्ज्य॑ञ्जते शुभे 
PANU 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 57 207 


a Naitavadanye maruto yatheme bhrajante 
rukmairayudhais-tanubhih. A rodasi visvapisah 
pisanah samanam-anjyanjate subhe kam. 


No other powers are like them, nor can anyone 
else do as much as they do, shining in body with 
weapons of golden radiance, pervading heaven and 
earth, wearing blessed brilliance and soothing 
comeliness equal with the beauty and grandeur of nature 
to enhance their innate grace. 


ऋधक्सा वो! मरुतो दिद्युदस्तु ag आग॑ः Gerd कराम | 
मा वस्तस्यामपि भूमा यजत्रा अस्मे वो अस्तु सुमतिश्च- 
Fists 


4. Rdhak sa vo 1114716 didyudastu yad va agah 
purusata karama. Ma vastasyamapi bhuma yaja- 
tra asme vo astu sumatis-canistha. 


O Maruts, best of the human world powers, may 
that beauty and brilliance of your policy and 
performance be ever distinguished and true. Even 
though out of our human frailty we may transgress your 
law or commit sin, O venerable heroes of the yajnic 
social order, let us not fall out of favour with you. Let 
that goodwill of yours still stay constant for us with 
love and grace. 


कृते चिदत्र मरुतो रणन्ताऽनवद्यासः शुच॑यः पावकाः । प्र 
wis वत सुमतिभिर्यजत्राः प्र वाजेभिस्तिरत पुष्यसे 
नः ।॥ ५ ॥ त 

a, Krte cidatra maruto rananta'navadyasah_ Ssuca- 
yah pavakah. Pra no'vata sumatibhir-yajatrah pra 
vajebhis-tirata pusyase nah. 


208 RGVEDA 


O Maruts, irreproachable, pure and sanctifying 
powers of nature and humanity, heroic in action, in this 
yajnic order of positive action, abide in joy. O friendly 
powers of joint yajnic creativity, protect and promote 
us with love and good will and noble laws and policy in 
the company of noble people and, for the sake of good 
health and all round progress, lead us across the world 
of action to perfection. 


उत स्तुतासो मरुतो व्यन्तु विश्वेभिर्नामंभिर्नरो हवींषि । 
ददात नो अमृत॑स्य प्रजाये जिगृत रायः सूनृता मघानि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta stutaso maruto vyantu visvebhir-namabhir- 
naro havimsi. Dadata no amrtasya prajayai jigrta 
rayah sunrta maghani. 


O Maruts, leaders and pioneers of humanity, 
sung and celebrated with all words of praise and 
appreciation, receive the best of honours and 
presentations of the social order. Give us wealths of the 
immortal order for the people and create the values and 
prosperity of the highest order of truth and Dharma. 


आ स्तुतासो! मरुतो! विश्व॑ ऊती अच्छ। सूरीन्त्सर्वताता 
जिगात। ये नस्त्मना शतिनो वर्धयन्ति यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
सदां नः ।॥ ७॥ 


a: A stutaso maruto visva uti accha surintsarvatata 
Jigata. Ye nastmana satino vardhayanti yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O Maruts, vibrant powers of nature’s energy and 
admirable leading lights of the world, come well with 
all your powers and methods of protection and 
promotion and, in the universal service of life and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 58 209 


humanity, go and exhort those brave pioneers of 
knowledge and action who sincerely work for our 
advancement in a hundred ways. O Maruts, O brave 
scholars, teachers and scientists, producers and 
administrators, pray you all protect and promote us for 
all time with the best of happiness and well being in 
life. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 58 
Maruts Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र साकमुक्षे अर्चता गणाय यो दैव्य॑स्य धाम्नस्तुविष्पान्‌। 
उत क्षोदन्ति रोद॑सी महित्वा नक्चन्ते arch निऋतेर- 
वंशात्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


॥. Pra sakamukse arcata ganaya yo daivyasya 
dhamnas-tuvisman. Uta ksodanti rodasi mahitva 
naksnte nakam_ nirrteravamsat. 


Honour the group of vibrant forces and leading 
heroes which arises mighty from the very light of 
heaven, creatively works together for progress, and 
reaches unto the very heights of divinity. Heaven and 
earth reverberate with the music of their honour and 
fame and they rise to celestial bliss of the spirit even 
across a state of adversity and denial of familial 
continuance. 


जनूज्चिंदो मरुतस्त्वेष्येण भी्मासस्तुविंमन्यवोऽ यासः । प्र 
ये महोभिरोज॑सोत सन्ति विश्वो वो याम॑न्भयते स्वर्दुक्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Januscid vo marutas-tvesyena bhimasas-tuvima- 


nyavo'yasah. Pra ye mahobhir-ojasota santi visvo 
vo yaman bhayate svardrk. 


210 RGVEDA 


O vital energies, mighty heroes, your very birth 
and nature is vested with splendour. Fearsome of mien, 
overwhelming in passion, you are like dynamites in 
action. You are instantly proclaimed by your grandeur 
and majesty, and the world that looks up to the sun and 
the skies looks at you with awe on way to the higher 
life. 

ब्रहद्वयों मघवद्धयो दधात जुजोषन्निन्मरुतः सुष्टुतिं न॑ः। 


गतो नाध्वा वि तिराति जन्तुं प्रण: स्यार्हाभिरूतिभि- 
स्तिरेत ॥ ३॥ 


3 Brhad vayo maghavadbhyo dadhata jujosanni- 
nmarutah sustutim nah. Gato nadhva vi tirati 
jantum pra nah sparhabhir-utibhis-tireta. 


O Maruts, leading lights of life, accept our 
homage and praise and bring us long life and vast 
possibilities of achievement for the noble people. The 
path you follow and show hurts no one living, help us 
to go forward in life with the ways of protection, and 
advancement worthy of the noble ones’ love and desire. 


युष्मोतो विप्रो मरुतः शतस्वी युष्मोतो अर्वां सहरिः ASM | 
युष्मोतं: सम्राद्ुत ह॑न्ति वृत्र प्र तदो अस्तु धूतयो देष्णम्‌ UY ॥ 


4. Yusmoto vipro marutah sSatasvi yusmoto arva 
sahurih sahasri. Yusmotah samraluta hanti 
vrtram pra tad vo astu dhutayo desnam. 


O Maruts, vibrant powers of nature and 
humanity for action, the sage and scholar under your 
patronage rises to a hundred achievements. The dynamic 
leader and pioneer protected by you wins a thousand 
races, victories with patience and fortitude. The noble 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 58 211 


ruler under your aegis destroys enemies and dispels 
forces of darkness and ignorance. O mighty movers and 
shakers, may that gift of yours, of that protection and 
advancement be ours. 


at आ सुद्रस्य॑ मीव््हुषो विवासे कुविन्नंसन्ते मरुतः पुन॑र्नः | 
यत्सस्वतीं जिहीव्ठिरे यदाविरव तदेनं ईमहे तुराणाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5, Tan a rudrasya milhuso vivase kuvinnamsante 
marutah punarnah. Yat sasvarta jihilire yadavi- 
rava tadena imahe turanam. 


I honour and adore those Maruts, offsprings of 
Rudra, lord of the showers of success, power and justice, 
who come and inspire us again and again in many ways. 
And if for reasons of discourtesy, overt or covert, they 
feel angry we shall expiate for that displeasure of the 
dynamic powers of instant punishment for correction. 


प्र सा वाचि सुष्टुतिर्मघोनामिदं सूक्तं मरुतो werd! 
आराच्यिद्‌ द्वेषो वृषणो युयोत यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः Gat 
नः॥६॥ 


6. Pra sa vaci sustutir-maghonam-idam suktam 
maruto jusanta. Araccid dveso vrsano yuyota 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


This song of adoration of the mighty glorious 
powers is expressed in holy words. May the Maruts 
accept it with pleasure. O generous benefactors and 
protectors, cast off far from us all hate, anger and 
jealousy. O scholars and sages, dynamic Maruts, pray 
protect and promote us with all good and well being of 
life without relent for all time. 


212 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 59 
Maruts and Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


यं त्राय॑ध्व इदमिदं देवासो यं च नय॑थ । तस्मा अग्रे वरुण 
मित्रार्यमन्मरुतः शर्म यच्छत ।॥ १॥ 


ie Yam trayadhva idamidam devaso yam ca nayatha. 
Tasma agne varuna mitraryaman marutah $arma 
yacchata. 


O divine Maruts, vibrant, brilliant and generous 
leading lights, givers of enlightenment, whosoever you 
protect, defend and save and whosoever you lead at 
every step in every way by word and deed, for him, you 
all and, O Agni, sage and scholar giver of light, Varuna, 
man of judgement and discrimination, Mitra, 
enlightened friend, and Aryaman, man of justice and 
rectitude on the paths of life, you give a happy home, 
firm settlement and peace of mind. 


युष्माकं देवा अवसाहनि प्रिय ईजानस्त॑रति fea: । 
प्रस क्षयं तिरते वि महीरिषो यो वो arta दाति ॥ २॥ 


2. Yusmakam deva avasahani priya wanastarati 
dvisah. Pra sa ksayam tirate vi mahiriso yo vo 
varaya dasati. 

O vibrant powers of light and justice, by virtue 
of your patronage and protections, the man of yajnic 
action, who works for the growth and progress of society 
and performs holy acts of creativity in good time, 
overcomes all adversaries. The generous man who gives 
abundantly in terms of lands, food and energy in word 
and kind to people in your honour for the good of all 
expands his house and dominion and rules out all waste, 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 59 213 
impairment and decay. 


नहि dyad चन वसिष्ठः परिमंसं॑ते। अस्माकमद्य म॑रुतः 
सुते सचा विश्वे पिबत कामिनं ॥ ३ ॥ 


६ Nahi vaScaramam cana vasisthah parimamsate. 
Asmakamadya marutah sute saca visve pibata 
kaminah. 


O Maruts, vibrant givers of light and energy, 
leading lights of humanity, the celebrated sage best 
settled and giver of settlement mentally and spiritually 
does not ignore or neglect even the last of you but 
honours you all. O lovers and benefactors of the nation, 
come today now itself, join and enjoy the delicious taste 
of our achievement in your honour in the structure and 
order of a great society. 


नहि वं ऊतिः पृत॑नासु मर्धति यस्मा अराध्वं नरः। 
अभि व आव॑त्सुमतिर्नवींयसी तूयं यात पिपीषवः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Nahi va utih prtanasu mardhati yasma aradhvam 
narah. Abhi va avart-sumatir-naviyast tuyam 
ताव pipisavah. 


Never does your protection and patronage in the 
battles of life forsake the man whom you, O leading 
lights of humanity, favour, mature and protect. Let the 
latest and most developed vision and noble policy of 
yours be on the move constantly while, O leaders, 
thirsting for defence, protection and progress, you hasten 
to wherever the nation calls upon you. 


ओ घु घुष्विराधसो यातनान्धांसि पीतये i इमा al हव्या 
म॑रुतो ररे हि कं मो ष्व4 न्यत्र गन्तन ॥ ५॥ 


214 RGVEDA 


3. O su ghrsviradhaso yatanandhamsi pitaye. Ima 


vo havya maruto rare hi kam mo svanyatra 
gantana. 


O Maruts, mighty and munificent accomplishers 
of the means and materials of achievement in life, go 
forward to enjoy the taste of success and prosperity of 
society. I offer these gifts of homage and song of success 
to you. Pray neglect us not, go not elsewhere. 


आ च॑ नो बर्हिः सद॑ताविता च॑ नः स्पार्हाणि दात॑वे ae । 
अस्रेधन्तो मरूतः सोम्ये मधौ स्वाहेह मादयाध्वै ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Acano barhih sadatavita ca nah sparhani datave 
vasu. Asredhanto marutah somye madhau 
svaheha madayadhvai. 


O Maruts, leading lights of the nation, come and 
sit on the holy seats of our house to protect us and, 
without hurting and destroying anything, to give us the 
wealth and honours we love and desire. Come and enjoy 
the honey sweets of the most soothing soma of life 
offered with sincerest word and deed. 


सस्वश्चिद्दि तन्व: शुम्भ॑माना आ हंसासो aes 
अपप्तन्‌। विश्वं शर्धो अभितोंमा निषद्‌ नरो न रण्वाः 
सव॑ने मद॑न्तः ।॥ ७॥ 


7. Sasvasciddhi tanvah sumbhamana a hamsaso 
nilaprstha apaptan. visvam sardho abhito ma ni 
seda naro na ranvah savane madantah. 


Gracious in body and bearing yet unrevealed in 
modesty, the Maruts, leading lights of the nation like 
hansa birds of blue beauty of the plume, rejoicing in 
unison like leaders of the congregation, they descend 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 59 215 


with dignity and sit around me, the very strength and 
power of the world. 


योनो मरुतो अभि दुर्हणायुस्तिरश्चित्तानिं वसवो 
जिघांसति । द्रुहः पाशान्प्रति स मुचीष्ट तपिष्ठेन हन्म॑ना 
हन्तना तम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yo no maruto abhi durhrnayustirascittani vasavo 
Jighamsati. Druhah pasan prati sa mucista 
tapisthena hanmana hantana tam. 


O Maruts, leading lights and givers of wealth, 
honour and peaceful settlement, whoever is evil at heart 
toward us and seeks to damage our dignity and identity, 
let him be forced to withdraw his snares of hate and 
enmity back to himself and strike him with an unfailing 
weapon of punishment which scorches his enmity to 
smoke and naught. 


सान्त॑पना इदं हविर्मरुतस्तज्जुंजुष्टन । 
युष्माकोती रिशादसः ॥ ९॥ 

9. Santapana idam havir-marutas-tajjujustana. 
Yusmakoti risadasah. 

O Maruts, leaders of the world and vibrant 
energisers, chastened in the fire of discipline and 
subduers of the violent by your methods of law, 
protection and defence, accept our homage and 


cooperation offered in obedience to law and discipline 
of peace. 


गृहमेधास आ wa मरुतो माप॑ भूतन। 
युष्माकोती सुदानवः ॥ ९०॥ 


216 RGVEDA 


10. Grhamedhasa a gata maruto mapa bhitana. 
Yusmakoti sudanavah. 


O Maruts, guardians of the home and family as 
a sacred institution of social yajna, come, stay not away, 
forsake us not. Let your divine protection remain 
constant, O generous givers of prosperity, joy and 
domestic bliss. 


Bee वः स्वतवसः कव॑यः सूर्य॑त्वचः | 
यज्ञं म॑रुत आ aur ee i 


11. Theha vah svatavasah kavayah suryatvacah. 
Yajnam maruta a vrne. 


O Maruts, commanders of innate strength and 
power, creative visionaries of the highest order, 
illustrious as the refulgent sun, come here right now, I 
invoke you and choose you as the high priests of my 
yajna in the programme of social cohesion, creative 
production and universal benediction. 


त्र्य॑म्बकं यजामहे सुगन्धिं पुष्टि वर्धनम्‌। 
उर्वारूकमिव बन्ध॑नान्मूत्योर्मुक्षीय मामृतात्‌ ॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. Tryambakam yajamahe sugandhim pustivar- 
dhanam. Urvarukamiva bandhanan-mrtyor- 
mukstya mamrtat. 


We invoke and do homage to lord Tryambaka, 
creator and protector of the three worlds, whose 
immanent fragrance of energy and bliss enhances the 
life and joy of existence all three times. O Rudra, 
destroyer of evil and suffering, giver of bliss, release 
me from the bonds of mortality like the ripe fruit falling 
off from the stalk and redeem me into the infinite 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 60 217 


presence of Immortality. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 60 


Surya, Mitra-Varuna Devatah, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


यदद्य Ya sats नागा उद्यन्मित्राय वरुणाय सत्यम्‌। 
वयं देवत्रादिते स्याम तवं प्रियासों अर्यमन्गुणन्तं ॥ ९॥ 


iF Yadadya surya bravo’naga udyan mitraya 
varunaya satyam. Vayam devatradite syama 
tava priyaso aryaman grnantah. 


O sun, while you arise today, purify us and 
proclaim to Mitra and Varuna, presiding powers of day 
and night and upholders of earth, sky and heaven, that 
we are free from sin. O Aditi, immortal mother earth 
and Infinity, O Aryaman, lord of justice and the paths 
of rectitude, dedicated as we are to the divinities, 
celebrating and glorifying them, hold us dear as 
dedicated to you. 


एष स्य मित्रावरुणा नृचक्षा उभे उदेति सूर्यो अभि ज्मन्‌। 
विश्व॑स्य स्थातुर्जगतश्च गोपा ऋजु मर्तेषु वृजिना च 
पश्य॑न्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


Zi Esa sya mitravaruna nrcaksa ubhe udeti suryo 
abhi jman. Visvasya sthaturjagatasca gopa 
rju martesu vrjina ca pasyan. 


Mitra and Varuna, this is the sun that pervades 
both gross and subtle worlds, watcher and light giver 
of humanity, which rises across the sky over the earth 
and witnesses both the simple and the crooked ways of 
action among the mortals. It is the protector, life giver 


218 RGVEDA 
and promoter of the moving and the unmoving world. 


अयुक्त सस हरितः सधस्थाद्या ई ada सूर्य घृताचीः । 
धामानि मित्रावरुणा युवाकुः सं यो यूथेव जनिमानि 
चष्ट ।॥। ३॥ 


ai Ayukta sapta haritah sadhasthad yaim vahanti 
suryam ghrtacth. Dhamani mitravaruna yuvakuh 
sam yo yutheva janimani caste. 


The sun, like a charioteer harnessing his horses, 
radiates seven rays of light which from the solar region 
carry the energy of light and cosmic waters and bring 
about the nights as they withdraw. The sun, also, joining 
and pervading various regions, the prana and udana 
energies of life and the origins of causal entities, 
proclaims them all as one multitudinous living system 
of which it is the centre. 


उद्वां पृक्षासो मधुमन्तो अस्थुरा सूर्यो अरुहच्छुक्रमर्णः | 
यस्मा आदित्या अध्व॑नो रद॑न्ति सित्रो अर्यमा वरुण 
सजोषाः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Ud vam [56.50 madhumanto asthura suryo 
aruhacchukramarnah. Yasma aditya adhvano 
radanti mitro aryama varunah sajosah. 


For you, O men and women, the friendly cloud 
and the vast skies replete with honey sweets abide on 
high and the sun raises vitalising oceans of vapour, the 
sun for which the Adityas, months of the year, Varuna 
and Aryama, Adityas all together, prepare the paths 
across the zodiacs, Mitra. 


इमे चेतारो sees भूरेर्मित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो हि सन्ति । 
इम ऋतस्य वावृधुर्दुरोणे शग्मासः पुत्रा अदि तेरद॑ब्धाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 60 219 


>. Ime cetaro anrtasya bhurermitro aryama varuno 
hi santi. Ima rtasya vavrdhurdurone sagmasah 
putra aditer-adabdhah. 


These Adityas, Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, 
loving friend, discriminative judge, and the path maker 
of rectitude, give us the sense and awareness of right 
and wrong, of falsehood as distinct from truth and 
correctness, in all varieties of situations. And they 
persist, and they augment the order of truth and right in 
the house of divine law, children of mother Infinity as 
they are, happy at peace, loving and kind, yet dauntless 
and unchallengeable. 


इमे मित्रो वरुणो qoutes चेतसं चिच्यितयन्ति दक्षैः | 
अपि ad सुचेतसं वतंन्तस्तिरश्चिदंहः सुपथा नयन्ति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ime mitro varuno dilabhaso ’cetasam ciccitayanti 
daksaih. 417 krtum sucetasam vatantastiraSsci- 
damhah supatha nayanti. 


These powers of love and friendship, judgement 
and rectitude and universal truth and law are rare and 
undaunted, and with their intelligence and expertise of 
method, they awaken even the stupid and ignorant to 
sensitivity and wisdom. Further, inspiring the man of 
noble mind and holy action, they protect him from 
crookedness and sin and lead him on by the path of 
truth, goodness and beauty to higher attainment. 


इमे दिवो after पृथिव्याण्चिंकित्वांसो अचेतसं Aaa । 
प्रव्राजे चिंन्नद्यो गाधमस्ति पारं नो अस्य विंष्ितस्यं 
पर्षन्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


220 RGVEDA 


fin Ime divo animisa prthivyascikitvamso acetasam 
nayanti. Pravraje cinnadyo gadhamasti param no 
asya vispitasya parsan. 


The ever vigilant powers of light and love, 
judgement and discrimination of right knowledge and 
right action, know of heaven and earth and constantly 
guide the ignorant to wake up and move on the right 
path. Even in the depth of rivers in flood, there is ground 
to stand on, a ford to cross. May Mitra, Varuna and 
Aryama take us across the deep seas of existence by 
our karma. 


यद्रोपावददितिः शर्म॑ भद्रं मित्रो यच्छन्ति वरुणः are | 
तस्मिन्ना तोकं तन॑यं दधाना मा कर्म देवहेव्ड॑नं तुरासः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yad gopavadaditih sarma bhadram mitro 
yacchanti varunah sudase. Tasminna tokam tana- 
yam dadhana ma karma devahelanam turasah. 


When, like the lord ruler of the earth and 
protector of her children, Aditi, Mitra and Varuna, 
mother nature and her law, and divine powers of love, 
friendship and judgement provide a blessed home of 
peace, plenty and joy for the generous man of noble 
action and charity, then in that state of good fortune 
we, all dynamic and enthusiastic fast achievers, in the 
joyous company of our children and grand children must 
not do anything to affront our sages, seniors and scholars 
or to violate the sanctity of the divinities of nature and 
suffer their anger. 


अव वेदिं होत्राभिर्यजेत रिपः काश्चिंदरुणध्रु तः सः | 
परि द्वेषोभिरर्यमा durpe सुदासे वृषणा उ त्ोकम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 60 221 


2. Ava vedim hotrabhiryajeta ripah kascid varuna- 
dhrutah sah. Pari dvesobhir-aryama vrnakturum 
sudase vrsana u lokam. 


One who dishonours and desecrates the vedi of 
yajna with unholy chant and stingy insulting libation of 
holy offerings suffers. What sin and suffering does he 
not face when he is shaken by Varuna, power of justice 
and discrimination? May Aryama, divine guide and path 
maker, keep him away along with the jealous and the 
hostile, and may Mitra and Varuna, liberal givers, create 
and award the generous yajaka with a happy home and 
vast freedom of spirit in an age and environment of bliss. 


सस्वश्चिद्धि समृतिस्त्वेष्येषामपीच्येन सह॑सा सह॑न्ते । 
युष्मद्भिया dun रेजमाना दक्ष॑स्य चिन्महिना मृव्छता 
AT: ९०॥ 


[| ॥ Sasvasciddhi samrtis-tvesyesam-apicyena sahasa 
sahante. Yusmad bhiya vrsano rejamana daksa- 
sya cinmahina mrlata nah. 


The nature, character and policy of these divine 
powers of love and friendship, justice and 
discrimination, and thought and action in rectitude is 
mysteriously integrated, brilliant and blazing. They 
move and act with patience, fortitude and irresistible 
force. O generous powers, shakers of the jealous and 
the enemies with fear, save us and let us prosper in peace 
and joy with the grandeur of your power and force. 


यो ब्रह्मणे सुमतिमायजाते वाज॑स्य सातौ प॑र॒मस्य॑ 
रायः | सीक्च॑न्त मन्युं मघवानो अर्य उरु क्षयाय चक्रिरे 
सुधातु ॥ ९९॥ 


222 RGVEDA 


11. Yo brahmane sumatim-ayajate vajasya satau 
paramasya rayah. Siksanta manyum magha-vano 
arya uru ksayaya cakrire sudhatu. 


Whoever applies his holy and faithful mind for 
the vision of Divinity and for the achievement of food 
and energy and supreme wealth, honour and excellence 
of life, the generous divine powers energise his righteous 
passion and bless his action, and they create a vast house 
of joy and prosperity for him and award him golden 
wealth and irresistible vitality. 


इयं ea पुरोहिंतिर्युवभ्यां यज्ञेषु! मित्रावरुणावकारि | 
favalf दुर्गा पिपृतं तिरो at यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
A: WU ९२ ॥ ५ 

12. lLyam deva purohitiryuvabhyam yajnesu mitrava- 
runavakari. Visvani durga piprtam tiro no yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O divine Mitra and Varuna, powers of love and 
judgement of nature and humanity, this homage of 
reverence is created and offered in your honour in the 
congregations of academic and socio-economic yajna. 
Pray protect us, promote us, help us cross the hurdles 
of life with action and bless us with complete fulfilment. 
O generous powers, save us, defend us and let us 
advance with all round peace and security for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 61 


Mitra- Varuna Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


sat चक्षुर्वरुण सुप्रतीकं saa tat Gel स्ततन्वान्‌। अभि 
यो विश्वा भुव॑नानि चष्टे स मन्युं मर्त्येष्वा Fala ९॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 61 223 


im Ud vam caksurvaruna supratikam devayoreti 
suryas-tatanvan. Abhi yo visva bhuvanani caste 
sa manyum martyesva ciketa. 


O Varuna, up rises the sun, bright and beautiful 
eye of you both, Mitra and Varuna, divine pranic 
energies of the universe, spreading the light far and wide 
over spaces. It illuminates and reveals all regions of the 
world, and awakens and inspires all mortals’ love for 
life and living. 


vata arasunrgaran विप्रो मन्मानि दीर्घश्रुदियर्ति | 
यस्य ब्रह्माणि सुक्रतू अर्वाथ आ यत्क्रत्वा न शरदः 
पृणैथे ॥ २॥ 


2: Pra vam sa mitravarunavrtava vipro manmani 
dirghasrud-iyarti. Yasya brahmani sukratu 
avatha a yat kratva na saradah prnaithe. 


O Mitra and Varuna, divinities of nature and 
humanity, your hymns of knowledge and power, that 
vibrant sage and scholar, a veteran reader and long time 
listener dedicated to truth and the laws of nature, studies, 
proclaims and extends by application. O powers of 
divine action, inspire, strengthen and protect his studies 
and fulfil his mission with intelligence and revelations 
as you fulfil the seasons of the year with natural 
evolution of their spirits. 


प्रोरोर्मित्रावरुणा पृथिव्याः प्र fea ऋष्वाद्‌ बरं हतः सुदानू । 
स्पशो दधाथे ओष॑धीषु विक्ष्वृधग्यतो अनिमिषं tet- 
माणा॥ ३॥ 

a Prorormitravaruna prthivyah pra diva rsvad 


brhatah sudanu. Spaso dadhathe osadhisu 
viksvrdhagyato animisam raksamana. 


224 RGVEDA 


O Mitra and Varuna, light and life of the 
universe, generous love and intelligence of nature and 
humanity, you transcend the wide earth and the vast 
heaven by your dynamic power and sublimity. You vest 
life energy and distinct form in herbs and trees and 
specific identity in people and their communities while 
you preserve and protect the truth of law and the 
pursuers of truth with relentless vigil. 


शंसा मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाम शुष्मो रोद॑सी ager महित्वा । 
अयन्मासा अयज्वनामवीराः प्र यज्ञम॑न्मा वृजनं तिराते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Samsa mitrasya varunasya dhama susmo rodasi 
badbadhe mahitva. Ayan masa ayajvan-amavirah 
pra yajnamanma vrjanam tirdate. 


Study and meditate on the origin and abode of 
Mitra and Varuna, pranic energies of nature and human 
virtue of love and friendship, light and enlightenment, 
and justice and discrimination. By virtue of their great 
universal power and force they hold and sustain the earth 
and heaven together and yet apart. The time, months 
and years of those who do not perform yajna, corporate 
acts of social and environmental value, pass by without 
the joy of children. On the other hand, those who serve 
Divinity, nature and humanity with their heart and soul 
cross the paths of life and reach the ultimate freedom of 
Moksha. 


अमूरा fasat वृषणाविमा at न are चित्रं ददृशो न 
यक्चम्‌। द्रुहः सचन्ते अनुंता जनानां न at निण्यान्यचिते 
अभूवन्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

9; Amura 17514 vrsanavima vam na yasu citram 
dadrse na yaksam. Druhah sacante anrta jana- 
nam na vam ninyanyacite abhuvan. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 61 225 


O wise and generous powers of the world, Mitra 
and Varuna, these words of adoration are for you and 
your divine gifts to humanity, in which there is nothing 
that is not marvellous and nothing that is not divinely 
consecrated. Only the jealous and hostile among 
humanity indulge in scandal and falsehood, and even 
your smallest favours are too deep for the ignorant to 
perceive and appreciate. 


we वां यज्ञं Hed नमोभिर्हुवे वां मित्रावरुणा स॒बाध॑ः | 
प्र वां मन्मान्यचसे नवानि कृतानि ब्रह जुजुषन्निमानि ॥ ६॥ 


6. Samu vam yajnam mahayam namobhirhuve vam 
mitravaruna sabadhah. Pra vam manma-nyrcase 
navani krtani brahma jujusannimani. 


O Mitra and Varuna, I invoke and join your great 
yajna of universal grandeur with homage especially 
when I am faced with challenges and limitations. Your 
latest thoughts, visions and revelations are created, 
structured and gifted to us for the advancement of 
knowledge and wisdom in relation to the highest reality 
of existence. 


इयं देव पुरोह तिर्युवभ्यां यज्ञेषुं मित्रावरुणावकारि | 
विश्वानि दुर्गा पिपृतं तिरो नो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः ॥ ७ I 
ह Iyam deva purohitir-yuvabhyam yajnesu mitra- 
varunavakari. Visvani durga piprtam tiro no 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 
O divines, Mitra and Varuna, this song of 


adoration is offered to you in your holy congregations 
of yajnic creation. Pray reduce our difficulties and help 


226 RGVEDA 


us cross them to success and fulfilment. O saints and 
sages, scholars and teachers, come you all and all time 
protect and promote us with all happiness and well 
being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 62 


Surya, Mitra - Varuna Devatah, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


उत्सूर्यो बृहदर्चीष्यिश्रेत्पुरु विश्वा जनिम मानुंषाणाम्‌। समो 
दिवा dest रोच॑मानः क्रत्वा कृतः Gana: कर्तृभिर्भूत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


if Ut suryo brhadarcimsyasret puru visva janima 
manusanam. Samo diva dadrse rocamanah kratva 
krtah sukrtah kartrbhirbhiut. 


The cosmic Sun, self refulgent life of the 
universe, rises and radiates his vast and mighty abundant 
rays of light, constantly shining day and night and 
revealing the birth and evolution of all people of the 
world. Sung and celebrated, adored and worshipped by 
holy performers of yajna, he himself is the cosmic yajna 
by virtue of his manifestive creation, the supreme 
yajamana as well as the presiding Deity. 


ada प्रति पुरो न sat एभिः स्तोमेभिरेतशेभिरेवैः। प्र नो 
मित्राय वरुणाय वोचोऽ नागसो अर्यम्णे अग्रये च ॥ २॥ 


2. Sa surya prati puro na ud ga ebhih stomebhir- 
etaSebhirevaih. Pra no mitraya varundya voco’- 
nagaso aryamne agnaye ca. 


O Sun, self refulgent lord giver of light and life, 
come in response to these songs of adoration and 
specified waves of thought energy stimulated by our 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 62 227 


songs. Let the light arise in our heart and mind, and 
speak to Mitra, Varuna, Aryama and Agni, powers of 
love and friendship, judgement, discrimination and 
integration, guidance and leadership with rectitude, and 
energy and enlightenment in our human community. 
Speak to us so that we may maintain a state of purity 
and freedom from sin and crime. 


वि न॑: सहस्त्रं Bee रदन्त्वृतावानो वरूणो मित्रो अभिः। 
यच्छन्तु चन्द्रा पमं नो अर्कमा नः कामं पूपुरन्तु स्त- 
वानाः॥ ३॥ 


3; Vi nah sahasram surudho radantvrtavano varuno 
mitro agnih. Yacchantu candra upamam no 
arkama nah kamam pupurantu stavanah. 


May they, Varuna, Mitra and Agni, happy and 
beneficent, healers and destroyers of suffering, keepers 
of divine laws of truth and nature in word and deed, 
when properly celebrated and appreciated in nature and 
character, give us a thousand forms of peace, power 
and joy, bless us with unique light of knowledge, and 
grant us complete fulfilment of our desire and ambition. 


द्यावाभूमी अदिते त्रासीथां नो ये वां जज्ञुः सुजनिमान 
ऋष्वे । मा हेष भूम वरुणस्य वायोर्मा मित्रस्यं प्रियतमस्य 
be bh Sill 
4. Dyavabhumi adite trasitham no ye vam jajnuh 
sujanimana rsve. Ma hele bhuma varunasya 
vayorma mitrasya priyatamasya nrnam. 
O sun in high heaven and noble earth, both 


dynamic, inviolable and sublime life giving powers, 
protect us with your creative and rejuvenating powers. 


228 RGVEDA 


Fortunately born and educated as humans, we know your 
energy and efficacy. Give us the energy and resistance 
so that we may never suffer the disorder of prana and 
aparna vitalities of wind and respiration, dearest to 
humans in the health system. 


प्र बाहां सिसृतं जीवसे न आ नो गव्यूतिमुक्षतं घुतेन॑ | 
आ नो जनें श्रवयतं युवाना श्रुतं मे मित्रावरुणा हवेमा ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Pra bahava sisrtam jivase na व no gavyutim- 
uksatam ghrtena. A no jane Sravayatam yuvana 
Srutam me mitravanuna havema. 


O Mitra and Varuna, loving and discriminative 
pranic vitalities of our health system, extend your power 
and energy like helping hands for our life and health 
and sprinkle the vital movement of our senses and mind 
with liquid rejuvenation and replenishment of energy. 
O youthful powers of rejuvenation, vest our people with 
the glow of health and light of intelligence in response 
to my invocation and input of pranayamic exercise for 
the pranic energy system. 


नू पित्रो वरुणो अर्यमा नस्त्मने तोकाय aRat दधन्तु। 
सुगा नो विश्वां सुपर्थानि सन्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥६॥ 


6. Nu mitro varuno aryama nastmane tokaya varivo 
dadhantu. Suga no visva supathani santu yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus O Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, powers of 
cosmic as well as earthly love and friendship, reason 
and discrimination, justice and advancement in order, 
guiding everything from the smallest particle to the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 63 229 


cosmos and from the individual human to the world 
community, bless us with the best of life’s gifts for the 
enlightenment of our soul and the continuation of our 
race. Let all our paths of life and living be simple and 
straight, noble and easy to follow. O powers of health 
and enlightenment, protect and promote us on our way 
onward with all modes and means of happiness and well 
being all round for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 63 


Surya, Mitra- Varuna Devatah, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


उदेति सुभगो favecen: साधारणः सूर्यो मानुषाणाम्‌ | 
चक्षुर्मित्रस्य वरुणस्य देवश्चर्मेव a: समविव्यक्तमांसि ॥ ९॥ 


i. Udveti subhago visvacaksah sadharanah suryo 
manusanam. Caksurmitrasya varunasya deva- 
S§carmeva yah samavivyak tamamsi. 


The glorious Sun, self-refulgent sovereign lord 
of the universe, rises high and higher, watching the 
world, giving light and intelligence to humanity in 
general. The lord that gives light to the day and depth 
to the ocean dispels all darkness and confusion as the 
storm disperses leaves of dry grass. (The mantra refers 
to the rise of the light of Divinity in the soul of the 
individual human being during meditation. The Light 
blesses any one who practices meditation under the 
instructions of a teacher and continues the practice with 
unquestionable faith.) 


उद्वेति प्रसवीता जनानां महान्केतुरर्णवः geet 
समानं चक्रं पर्या विवृंत्सन्यदेतशो वहति ye युक्तः ॥ २ ॥ 


230 RGVEDA 


2: Udveti prasavita jananam mahan keturarnavah 
suryasya. Samanam cakram_ paryavivrtsan 
yadetaso vahati dhursu yuktah. 


High rises the progenitor and inspirer of 
humanity, supreme light of omniscience, inexhaustible 
ocean of omnificence, keeping the chariot of the sun 
and the wheel of time constantly moving, omnipotent 
motive force at the centre of the moving universe. 


विभ्राजमान उषसामुपस्थद्रेभेरूदेत्यनुमद्यमानः । एष में देवः 
सविता चच्छन्द यः संमानं न प्र॑पयिनाति ara ३॥ 


ai Vibhrajamana usasam-upasthad rebhair-ude- 
tyanumadyamanah. Esa me devah savita caccha- 
nda yah samanam na praminati dhama. 


Self-refulgent and all illuminative since the 
origin of eternal dawns, the light of Divinity rises, 
inspiring and enlightening, when sung and celebrated 
by worshipful devotees. May this lord of cosmic light 
bless me with spiritual fulfilment, the lord who never 
frustrates his loved celebrant and never remisses on his 
own majesty nor compromises with his own generosity. 


दिवो wan ॐरुचक्षा उदेति दूरेअं्थस्तरणिरभ्राजंमानः | 
नूनं जनाः सूर्येण प्रसूता अयन्नथीनि कृणवन्नपांसि ॥ x ॥ 


4. Divo rukma urucaksa udeti durearthas-taranir- 
bhrajamanah. Nunam janah suryena prasuta 
ayannarthani krnavann-apamsi. 


The self-refulgent lord of heavenly light all- 
watching, all-saviour, present far and wide everywhere, 
emerges and shines in the heart of people when they, 
inspired and reborn into self-consciousness by the light 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 63 231 


of divinity, follow the meaningful paths of life and 
perform their karmic acts with piety. 


यत्रा चक्कर मृत। गातुमस्मै vat न दीयन्नन्वेति पाथ॑: । 
प्रति वां सूर उदिते विधेम नमोभिर्मित्रावरुणोत हव्यैः ॥ ५ ॥ 


>. Yatra cakruramrta gatumasmai $yeno na diyann- 
anveti pathah. Prati vam sura udite vidhema 
namobhir-mitravarunota havyaih. 


Where the immortals have carved and shown 
the path for this mortal humanity to reach this divine 
source of eternal light, to that lord giver of immortal 
bliss the same path leads as by the speed of light. O 
Mitra and Varuna, light of day and peace of night, sun 
and cosmic ocean, sage and scholar, giver of knowledge 
and leader to judgement and rectitude, when the rising 
light emerges and the mind is awake, we honour and 
serve you with homage and reverence and with 
presentations of yajnic fragrance. 


नू पित्रो वरुणो अर्यमा नस्त्मने तोकाय aRat दधन्तु। 
सुगा नो विश्वां सुपर्थानि सन्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥६॥ 


6. Nu mitro varuno aryama nastmane tokaya varivo 
dadhantu. Suga no visva supathani santu yuyam 
pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus the loving light of life, the leading light of 
judgement and discrimination, and the path maker to 
the divine destination of eternal truth and bliss may, we 
pray, bless us with the best gifts of life for our soul and 
the continuance of our race. May all our paths of life 
and progress be simple, straight and easy to follow. O 


232 RGVEDA 


saints and sages, scholars and teachers, protect and 
promote us by the paths of rectitude with all modes and 
means of happiness and well being for all time without 
relent. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 64 
Mitra-Varuna Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


दिवि क्षयन्ता रज॑सः पृथिव्यां प्र वां घतस्य निर्णिजो ददीरन्‌ | 
हव्यं नो पित्रो अर्यमा सुजातो राजा सुक्षत्रो वरुणो 
जुषन्त ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Divi ksayanta rajasah prthivyam pra vam ghr- 
tasya nirnijo dadiran. Havyam no mitro aryama 
sujato raja suksatro varuno jusanta. 


O Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, the vapours 
of your potential waters of soma abiding in the solar 
region and the mists and vapours abiding in the earthly 
atmosphere and the sky form into clouds and give us 
showers of purifying and vitalising waters. May Mitra, 
the sun, Aryama, the carrier wind, Varuna, cosmic 
vitality, and the ruler of the social order nobly born and 
justly appointed join and share our offers of holy 
materials into the rain yajna for well being of the social 
order and bring us life giving waters and peace and 
progress. 


आ राजाना मह ऋतस्य गोपा सिन्धुपती क्षत्रिया यात- 
Tate | gat नो सित्रावरुणोत वृष्टिमव॑ं fea इन्वतं 
जीरदानू ॥ २॥ ति 

0.0 A rajana maha rtasya gopa sindupati ksatriya 
yatamarvak. Ilam no mitravarunota vrstimava 
diva invatam jiradanu. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 64 233 


O rulers and keepers of the law of truth of the 
great social order, O controllers and protectors of the 
rivers and the seas, O defenders and ordainers of the 
people and the land, come forward and join us, offer 
homage and oblations with us so that Mitra and Varuna, 
sun and the cosmic ocean, both liberal givers in instant 
response, may bring rain, protection and nourishment 
to the earth from the high regions of light. 


यित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो देवो अर्यः प्र साधिष्ठेभिः पथिभिर्नयन्तु | 
ब्रवद्यथा न आदरिः सुदासं इषा म॑देम सह देवगोपाः ॥ ३ ॥ 


i, Mitrastanno varuno devo aryah pra sadhisthebhih 
pathibhir-nayantu. Bravad yatha na adarih 
sudasa isa madema saha devagopah. 


May the teacher, Mitra, giver of light, the 
discriminative judge, Varuna, and the brilliant ruler, 
Aryama, all lead us by the paths of rectitude with all 
good means of life and living, just as the lord supreme, 
self-refulgent and generous, would speak and illuminate 
the path of progress for the man of generosity so that, 
under the protection of the lord supreme and the brilliant 
leaders, we may enjoy and celebrate the gifts of life all 
together with plenty and prosperity. 


यो वां गर्तं मन॑सा तक्षदेतमूर्ध्वां धीतिं कृणवब्धारयंच्य | 
उक्षेथां मित्रावरुणा ges ता राजाना सुद्चितीस्तर्पये- 
थाम्‌॥ ४॥ 

4. Yo vam gartam manasa taksadetam-urdhvam 


dhitim krnavad dharayacca. Uksetham mitra- 
varuna ghrtena ta rajana suksitis-tarpayetham. 


O Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and love, lord 


234 RGVEDA 


of judgement, discretion and discrimination, whoever 
may, with meditative mind and soul, realise your 
profound revelation and define the meaning and purpose 
for the self, raising his intelligence and imagination high 
to heaven and stabilising it there, pray bless him with 
showers of peace and bliss. O rulers and ordainers of 
life on earth, let them, all such, have complete fulfilment 
in a happy home in a land of freedom and joy. 


एष स्तोमो वरुण मित्र तुभ्यं सोम॑ः शुक्रो न वायवेंऽ यामि | 
अविष्टं धियो जिगृतं पुर॑न्धीर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥५॥ 


5. Esa stomo varuna mitra tubhyam somah sukro 
na vayave’yami. Avistam dhiyo jigrtam pura- 
ndhir-yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


This song of homage and adoration I offer to 
you, O Varuna, lord of profound judgement and 
generosity, and to you Mitra, lord of infinite love and 
light, the song pure and exhilarating as soma, and it is 
for Vayu too, the dynamic force of cosmic order. Pray 
inspire our mind and will and enlighten our rulers and 
intelligentsia. O generous and refulgent lords, protect 
and promote us with all modes and means of happiness 
and all round well being all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 65 
Mitra-Varuna Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
प्रतिं वां सूर उदिते सूक्तैर्मित्रं हवे वरुणं पूतदंश्चम्‌। 
ययोरसुर्य१ मक्ितं ज्येष्ठं विश्वस्य यामन्नाचिता जिगलु ॥ ९ ॥ 


॥ Prati vam sura udite suktair-mitram huve varu- 
nam putadaksam. Yayor-asuryam-aksitam jye- 
stham visvasya yamannacita jigatnu. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 65 235 


Early at the dawn of sun rise, with songs of 
adoration, I invoke and worship Mitra, lord of infinite 
love and universal friendship, Varuna, lord of omniscient 
wisdom, judgement and justice, lords of pure 
omnipotence whose life giving energy and power is 
boundless and imperishable, first, foremost and highest, 
and when invoked and realised, it is all victorious in 
the battles of life. 


ताहि देवानामसुरा तावर्या ता न॑: fart: करतमूर्जयन्तीः | 
अश्याम मित्रावरुणा वयं वां द्यावा च यत्र॑ पीपयन्नहा 
च॥ २॥ 


2: Ta hi devanam-asura tavarya ta nah ksitth kara- 
tam-urjayantih. ASyama mitravaruna vayam vam 
dyava ca yatra pipayann-aha ca. 


Mitra and Varuna, manifestations of the 
Supreme Lord’s generous love and justice, are the best 
and highest of nature’s bounties. They strengthen and 
energise our lands and people and make them fertile 
and creative. O Mitra and Varuna, may we receive your 
favours whereby the earth and heaven, both exuberant, 
may promote us day and night. 


ता भूरिपाशावनुतस्य Ad दुरत्येतू रिपवे मत्यीय। 
ऋतस्य मित्रावरुणा पथा वामपो न नावा दुरिता त॑रेम ॥ ३॥ 

Si Ta bhuripasavanrtasya setu duratyetu ripave 
martyaya. Rtasya mitravaruna patha vamapo na 
nava durita tarema. 


Many are their bonds and chains, bridges to 
cross over untruth and sin, which are difficult to 
approach and cross for the mortal man of enmity and 


236 RGVEDA 


jealousy. O Mitra and Varuna, we pray, let us cross over 
sin and evil by your divine path of truth and law just as 
we cross the seas by the boat. 


आ नो मित्रावरुणा हव्यजुष्टिं घृतैर्गव्यूंतिमुक्चषतमिर्व्छाभिः। 
प्रति वामत्र वर माजनांय पृणीतमुद्धो दिव्यस्य चारोः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Ano 777/7दा वात havyajustim ghrtair-gavyi-tim- 
uksatam-ilabhih. Prati vamatra varama janaya 
prnitamudno divyasya caroh. 


O Mitra and Varuna, Supreme Lord’s mani- 
festations of cosmic love and justice in the integrative 
and analytical forces of nature’s bounties working in 
the centripetal and centrifugal operations of world, 
enforce and energise our yajnic inputs of creative 
production and let our programmes of land, language 
and knowledge development soar high by the vitalities 
of liquid energies and inspirations of new visions of 
divinity and faith in action, ethics and policies, and may 
you, in response to our yajnic performance, grant us 
the best of your gifts of blissful light and dynamic energy 
for our people. 


एष स्तोमो वरुण मित्र तुभ्यं सोम॑ः शुक्रो न वायवेंऽ यामि | 
अविष्टं धियो जिगृतं पुर॑न्धीर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा 
नः॥५॥ 


a Esa stomo varuna mitra tubhyam somah sukro 
na vayave’yami. Avistam dhiyo jigrtam puran- 
dhir-yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 

This yajnic homage and song of celebration, O 


Mitra and Varuna, is for you, pure and exhilarating as 
soma, and I offer it for the divine energy of Vayu too, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 237 


the dynamic force of cosmic order. Pray protect and 
promote our mind and will, and enlighten our rulers 
and intelligentsia. O generous and brilliant powers of 
nature and humanity, protect and promote us with all 
modes of happiness and all round well being all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 66 
Devatah: Mitra - Varuna (1-3, 17-19), Adityah (4-13), 
Surya (14-16), Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र मित्रयोर्वरुणयोः स्तोमो न एतु शुष्य॑ः। 
नम॑स्वान्तुविजा तयोः ॥ ९॥ 


L. Pra mitrayor-varunayoh stomo na etu Susyah. 
Namasvan tuvijatayoh. 


May this peaceful yet powerful song and yajna 
of ours in praise of Mitra and Varuna, unborn and 
distinctive yet integrated manifestations of the Lord 
Divine’s potent love and justice vested in nature, go 
forward full of energy and reverential gratitude and 
stimulate the consequential process in nature for the 
prosperity of humanity and the environment. 


या धारयन्त देवाः सुदश्चा दश्च॑पितरा। 
असुयीय प्रम॑हसा ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ya dharayanta devah sudaksa daksapitara. 
Asuryaya pramahasa. 


Generous saints and sages, brilliant scholars and 
teachers, hold on to Mitra and Varuna, love and justice 
of the Supreme Lord, omniscient, omnipotent and father 
protector of the wise experts and scientists, for the 
attainment of knowledge, power and courage. 


238 RGVEDA 


ता न॑ः स्तिपा त॑नूपा वरुण STITT | 
fast साधयतं धिय॑ः ॥ ३॥ 


a Ta nah stipa tanupa varuna jaritrnam. 
Mitra sadhayatam dhiyah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, love and justice of the 
omnipotent lord of our choice, protectors, promoters 
and sanctifiers of the health and home of grateful 
celebrants and all mortal humanity, pray inspire, 
promote and accomplish our mind, intellect and will to 
the state of perfection. 


यदद्य सूर उदितेऽ नागा यित्रो अर्यमा । 
सुवाति सविता भग॑ः ॥  ॥ 


4. Yadadya sura udite’nagda mitro aryama. 
Suvati savita bhagah. 


Whatever wealth of energy and blessed light of 
wisdom today at the dawn of sunrise the lord immaculate 
and sinless Mitra, universal love and friendship, 
Aryama, guide and judge on the path of rectitude, Savita, 
inspirer and generator, and Bhaga, omnipotent and 
glorious, generate and radiate, that we pray may come 
and bless us. 


सुप्रावीरस्तु स क्षयः प्र नु यामन्त्सुदानवः। 
ये नो अंहोऽतिपिप्र॑ति।॥ ५॥ 

3. Supravirastu sa ksayah pra nu yamantsudanavah. 
Ye no amho’tipiprati. 


O self-refulgent Adityas, immortal powers of 
light, generous givers of wisdom and vision, who protect 
us from sin and darkness, may that home, homeland 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 239 


and dominion of ours be protected, protective and full 
of peace throughout our paths of onward progress. 


उत स्वराजो अदितिरदब्धस्य व्रतस्य ये। 
महो राजान ईशते ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta svarajo aditiradabdhasya vratasya ye. 
Maho rajana 7541. 


And the self-refulgent Adityas, self-governing 
and great imperishable ruling powers of nature, and 
mother Infinity, who observe and maintain the great law 
of existence and disciplines of life, may guide us and 
protect us over the paths of progress. 


प्रतिं वां सूर sfea fas गंणीषे वरुणम्‌। 
अर्यमणं रिशादसम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


% Prati vam sura udite mitram grnise varunam. 
Aryamanam risadasam. 


O self-refulgent and self-governing protectors 
and light givers, in grateful response to your light and 
protection, at the dawn of sunrise I praise and celebrate 
Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, lord Infinite’s love, justice 
and divine light of guidance, all destroyers of sin and 
darkness. 


राया हिरण्यया मतिरियमवृकाय शव॑से | 
इयं विप्रां मेधसातये ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Raya hiranyaya matir-iyam-avrkaya Savase. 
Iyam vipra medhasataye. 
O saints and sages of dynamic will and wisdom, 


let this golden wealth of divinity, this intelligence and 
the song of praise be for the growth of holy strength 


240 RGVEDA 


free from sin, and for the accomplishment of yajnic acts 
for human progress and prosperity. 


ते स्याम देव वरुणा ते मित्र सूरिभिः सह। 
इषं स्व॑श्च धीमहि॥ ९॥ 


9. Te syama deva varuna te mitra suribhih saha. 
Isam svasca dhimahi. 


O lord self-refulgent Varuna, lord of justice, 
Mitra, just friend of humanity, give us the will and 
wisdom that with all our wise and brave we be dear and 
dedicated to you and we meditate to achieve the strength 
and bliss of Divinity. 


बहवः Geaerars गरिजिह्या ऋतावृधः । त्रीणि ये येमुर्विंद- 
थानि धीतिभिर्विश्वानि परिभूतिभिः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. = Bahavah suracaksaso’gnijihva rtavrdhah. Trini 
ye yemur-vidathani dhitibhir-visvani paribhuti- 
bhih. 


Many are the leaders and pioneers, with vision 
bright and pure as light of the sun and speech as flames 
of fire, who extend the bounds of truth, law and selfless 
service of life through yajnic creativity and, with their 
wisdom, will and commanding action, lead and conduct 
the three basic institutions of research and education, 
governance and economy, and human culture and values 
of life through beauty, goodness and truth with gratitude 
to Divinity for the world. 


fa ये दधुः शरदं मासमादहंर्यजलयक्तुं चादूच॑म्‌। 
अनाप्यं वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा ast राजान आशत ।॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 241 


11. Vi ye dadhuh saradam masam-dad-aharyajnam- 
aktum cadrcam. Anapyam varuno mitro aryama 
ksatram rajana GSata. 


They, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, brilliant 
leaders and rulers with dedication to Dharma and justice, 
love and friendship, and the right sense of action and 
direction in the light of universal knowledge and eternal 
values, conduct the yajnic governance and 
administration of the social order through years and 
months, days and nights, relentlessly holding on to the 
Vedic vision of eternity. They achieve what has not yet 
been achieved and thus extend the possibilities of the 
good and happy life in the united world order. 


तद्वो अद्य म॑नामहे सूक्तैः सूर Sled adie d वरुणो मित्रो 
अर्यमा यूयमृतस्य रथ्यः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tad vo adya manamahe suktaih sura udite. 
Yadohate varuno mitro aryama yuyam-rtasya 
rathyah. 


Today at the rise of dawn, with Vedic hymns 
and meditation, we think and deliberate upon that social 
order which is desired and which is to be achieved. For 
that we call upon Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, leaders of 
justice and order, love and light and the universal laws 
of rectitude and direction. That we pray for, O lords, 
since you command the chariot of the laws of truth, 
action and progress on the right path. 


ऋतावान ऋतजाता ऋतावृधो घोरासो! अनृतद्विषः । 
तेषां वः सुम्ने सुंच्छर्दि्ट॑मे नर: स्याम ये च॑ सूरय: ॥ ९३॥ 


242 RGVEDA 


13. Rtavana rtajata rtavrdho ghoraso anrtadvisah. 
Tesam vah sumne succhardistame narah syama 
ye ca surayah. 


O brilliant scholars, rulers and all those who are 
redoubtable leaders, lovers and seekers of truth by 
knowledge and action, born in truth and extending the 
bounds of the values of truth in the social order, terrible 
in action with no tolerance for untruth and social evil, 
let us abide in law in your good will and in the felicity 
of a happy home in peace and security. 


उदु त्यदंशतं वपुर्दिव एति ulcer | 
यदीमाशुर्वहति देव एत॑शो विश्व॑स्मै चक्ष॑से अरम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. (व tyad darsatam vapurdiva eti pratihvare. 
Yadimasurvahati deva etaso viSvasmai caksase 
aram. 


And now (when we are at peace), the glorious 
vision of Divinity arises on the horizon of consciousness 
when the divine frequency of the illuminative mind with 
the divine communicates it to the consciousness 
instantly in response to meditative concentration for the 
man of universal vision. 


शीर्ष्णः शीर्ष्णो जग॑तस्तस्थुषस्पति समया विश्वमा Ta: | 
सप्त स्वसारः सुविताय सूर्य ada हरितो ra ९५॥ 


15. Sirsnah Sirsno jagatas-tasthusas-patim samaya 
visvama rajah. Sapta svasarah suvitaya suryam 
vahanti harito rathe. 

By virtue of the highest human intelligence in 


respect of person and practice, seven dynamic faculties, 
i.e., five senses, mind and intellect, carry the light of 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 243 


Divinity to the soul at the right time for its good during 
its meditative sojourn in the vehicle of this beautiful 
body. This is the light of the self-refulgent Sun, creator, 
sustainer and ordainer of the moving and non -moving 
world from the particle to the entire universe through 
eternity. 


wate dated शुक्रमुच्यर॑त्‌। 
पश्येम ene: शतं जीवेम शरदः STATA 26 


16.  Taccaksur-devahitam sukram-uccarat. 
Pasyema Saradah satam jivema saradah satam. 


That Light Divine, pure and potent, universal 
eye that watches all and blesses noble humanity, rises 
and radiates for all time. May the Lord bless us that we 
may live a hundred years watching it full for all the 
hundred years. 


काव्येभिरदाभ्याऽऽ यातं वरुण AL | 
पित्रश्च सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९७॥ 
17. Kavyebhir-adabhya’’yatam varuna dyumat. 
Mitrasca somapitaye. 
May Varuna, blazing lord of fearless justice, and 
Mitra, fearless, loving and enlightened friend, come with 


saints and sages to protect and promote our soma yajna 
and join the celebration. 


दिवो धाम॑भिर्वरुण मित्रश्चा यातमद्रुहा । 
पिब॑तं सोममातुजी ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Devo dhamabhir-varuna mitrasca yatam-adruha. 
Pibatam somamatuji. 


244 RGVEDA 


O Varuna and Mitra, powers of love and 
judgement free from hate, malice and jealousy, come 
and drink of the soothing and exhilarating soma at the 
yajna. 


आ यातं मित्रावरुणा जुषाणावाहुतिं नरा। 
पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा ॥ ९९॥ 


19. A yatam mitravarund jusanavahutim nara. 
Patam somam-rtavrdha. 


Come Mitra and Varuna, leaders and pioneers 
of light and judgement, delighting in our yajna and 
oblations of soma, protect our yajna, drink of soma and 
advance the law of truth and rectitude. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 67 
Ashvins Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्रतिं वां रथं नृपती जरध्यै हविष्प॑ता मन॑सा यज्ियेन । यो 
वां दूतो न धिंष्ण्यावजींगरच्छ॑ सूनुर्न पितरां विवक्मि ॥ ९ ॥ 


Le Prati vam ratham nrpati jaradhyai havismata 
manasa yajniyena. Yo vam duto na dhisnyavajiga- 
raccha sunurna pitara vivakmi. 


O rulers and protectors of the people, wise and 
bold, harbingers of light to the inauguration of the 
morning yajna, to celebrate your chariot of the ruling 
order and do honour to your yajnic rule with a mind 
dedicated in homage to the order, like a son doing 
honour and reverence to the father, I compose and offer 
a song of celebration which would reach you as a 
messenger and stimulate your love and favour. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 67 245 


अशोंच्यथिः समिधानो अस्ये sal अदृश्रन्तम॑सण्चिदन्ताः। 
अचेति केतुरुषसः पुरस्ताच्छ्िये दिवो वुहितुर्जाय॑मानः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 ASocyagnih samidhano asme upo adrsran 
tamasascidantah. Aceti keturusasah purasta- 
cchriye divo duhiturjayamanah. 


The fire of morning yajna is kindled and shines 
for us, and the end of darkness is seen close at hand. 
The sun is rising in the east like an honour flag of the 
glory of the dawn, daughter of heaven. 


अभि वां नूनमश्विना सुहोता स्तोमैः सिषक्ति नासत्या 
विवक्वान्‌ । पूर्वीभिर्यातं पथ्याभिर॒ ्वाक्स्वर्विदा वसुमता 
TATU BU 


2 Abhi vam nunam-asvina suhota stomaih sisakti 
nasatya vivakvan. Purvibhir-yatam pathyabhi- 
rarvak svarvida vasumata rathena. 


Ashvins, twin harbingers of light dedicated to 
truth of the ruling order, for sure the host and performer 
of the inaugural session of the yajna of social order, 
speaking words of truth and piety celebrates you and 
your light in songs of adoration. O prophets of the light 
of heaven commanding the wealth, honour and 
excellence of the world, ascend your chariot and come 
by the eternal paths of universal truth and rectitude. 


अवोवीं नूनम॑श्विना युवाकुर्हुवे यद्वां सुते माध्वी वसूयुः | 
आ वां वहन्तु स्थविंरासो अश्वाः पिबाथो अस्मे सुषुता 
मधूनि ४॥ 

4. Avorvam nunamasvina yuvakurhuve yad vam sute 


madhvi vasuyuh. A vam vahantu sthaviraso asvah 
pibatho asme susuta madhuni. 


246 RGVEDA 


O sweet and kind twin divine powers of nature 
and humanity, Ashvins, harbingers of a new dawn for 
the social order of the world, dedicated to your means 
and modes of preservation, defence and progress, and 
desirous of advancement in the wealth, honour and 
excellence of the nation, I invite you to take over the 
conduct of this great yajna of the ruling order. May 
seasoned and strong sages, scholars and experts of the 
nation lead you hither. Come, share and promote for us 
all the honey sweets of our yajnic planning and 
achievement. 


प्राचीमु देवाश्विना धियं मेऽ dat सातये कृतं वसूयुम्‌ । 
favat अविष्टं वाज॒ आ पुर॑न्धीस्ता न॑: शक्तं शचीपती 
शचीभिः ॥ ५॥ 


a: Pracimu devasvina dhiyam me ’mrdhram sataye 
krtam vasuyum. Visva avistam vaja a purandhi- 
sta nah saktam Sacipati Sactbhih. 


O brilliant and generous Ashvins, commanders 
of the twin powers of nature and humanity, inspire my 
simple, ancient and progressive intelligence and will, 
strengthen it and make it inviolable in the pursuit of 
higher wealth, honour and excellence. In all our battles 
of life, protect our mind and will and, with all the powers 
and potential at your command, strengthen us to move 
forward and rise higher and higher. 


अविष्टं धीष्व॑श्विना न आसु प्रजावद्रेतो steat नो अस्तु । 
आ वां तोके तन॑ये तूतुजानाः सुरत्नासो देववीतिं गमेम ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Avistam dhisvasvina na asu prajavad reto ahra- 


yam no astu. A vam toke tanaye tutujanah surat- 
naso devavitim gamema. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 67 247 


Ashvins, divine powers of creation, preser- 
vation, recuperation and procreation, protect us in all 
our acts of thought, will and action for achievement. 
May our creative and procreative vitality remain intact 
and inviolable for our posterity. By virtue of your 
inspiration and invigoration for the sake of children and 
grand children, let us be blest with jewels of posterity 
and let us rise to the company of the divines. 


एष स्य वां पूर्वगत्वैव सख्ये निधिर्हितो माध्वी रातो अस्मे। 
stead मनसा ्यातमवगिष्नन्ता हव्यं मानुषीषु विक्षु ॥ ७॥ 


a Esa sya vam purvagatveva sakhye nidhirhito 
madhvi rato asme. Ahelata manasa yatamarva- 
gasnanta havyam manusisu viksu. 


Ashvins who command the honey sweets of 
knowledge and culture, this gift of homage as a treasure 
trove already committed to you is offered for the sake 
of company and friendship with you. Come forward, 
join us here with a joyful mind free from hate and anger, 
be among the human community of the earth and share 
with us the sweets of good fellowship in faith and love. 


एकस्मिन्योगे भुरणा समाने UR वां सप्त स्रवतो रथो गात्‌। 
न वायन्ति सुभ्वो देवयुक्ता ये वां धूर्षु तरणयो वह॑न्ति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ekasmin yoge bhurana samane pari vam sapta 
sravato ratho gat. Na vayanti subhvo devayukta 
ye vam dhursu taranayo vahanti. 


Ashvins, responsive givers of fulfilment, pranic 
energies of nature and mind, dedicated to a common 
purpose with humanity, the radiant inspiration of your 
spiritual power as a carrier of vision goes past the 


248 RGVEDA 


fluctuations of the five senses, mind and intellect. The 
seven, which otherwise involve the soul with 
fluctuations of the mind, when converted, inverted and 
converged on to the spirit of your vision at the centres 
of consciousness, no longer distract the soul, instead 
they become the carriers of consciousness to the divine 
goal of spiritual bliss. 


असश्चतां मघवंद्द्रयो हि भूतं ये राया म॑घदेयं जुनन्ति । प्र 
ये बन्धुं सूनृत॑भिस्तिरन्ते weal पृञ्चन्तो अश्व्या 
मघानि ॥ ९ ॥ 


2. Asascata maghavadbhyo hi bhutam ye raya 
maghadeyam junanti. Pra ye bandhum sunrta- 
bhistirante gavya prncanto asvya maghani. 


Never forsake the generous : Be inexhaustible 
sources of incentive and encouragement for those who 
support charity with means and materials, those who 
help out friends and relatives in distress, and those who 
give liberal gifts of lands, cows and knowledge and 
things the needy love and desire. 


नू मे हवमा Aue युवाना यासिष्टं वर्तिरंज्विनाविरावत्‌। 
धत्तं tal जर॑तं च सूरीन्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
नः॥ १०॥ 


10. Nu me havama srnutam yuvana yasistam 


surin yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 
O youthful Ashvins, complementarities of nature 
and humanity, listen to my prayer and invocation: come 


home to the house of liberal donor in yajna, bear and 
bring the jewels of life for the givers, honour and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 68 249 


appreciate the wise and bold, and thus protect and 
promote us all time with all happiness and well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 68 
Ashvinau Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ शुभ्रा यातमश्विना स्वश्वा गिरो दस्रा जुजुषाणा 
युवाकोः | हव्यानिं च प्रतिंभृता वीतं न॑ः ॥ ९॥ 
॥ ५ A subhra yatamasvina svasva giro dasra jujusana 
yuvakoh. Havyani ca pratibhrta vitam nah. 
O riders of noble steeds, Ashvins, youthful 
heroes of the human nation, illustrious warriors and 
marvellous achievers, listen to the voices of your friends 


and admirers, come, join us and enjoy the sweets and 
delicacies of our yajnic hospitality. 


प्र वामन्धांसि मद्यान्यस्थुररं गन्तं हविषो वीतये! मे। 
तिरो अर्यो हव॑नानि श्रुतं न॑: ॥ २॥ 
2. Pra vamandhamsi madyanyasthuraram gantam 


haviso vitaye me. Tiro aryo havanani srutam nah. 


Delightful delicacies are here laid out for you. 
Come straight to partake of our holy offerings. Throw 
off the enemies, root out distress, listen to our call and 
prayers. 


प्र वां रथो wasn इयर्ति तिरो रजांस्यश्विना शतोतिः । 
अस्मभ्यं सूर्यावसू इयानः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Pra vam ratho manojava iyarti tiro rajams- 
yasvina satotih. Asmabhyam suryavasu iyanah. 


Fast moves your chariot at the speed of mind 
across the spaces, it is equipped with a hundred means 


250 RGVEDA 


of defence and victory whereon you ride with the dawn 
of a new day for us. 


अयं ह यद्वां देवया उ अद्विसतर्ध्वो विव॑क्ति सोमसुद्युवभ्याम्‌ | 
आ वल्गू विप्रो ववृतीत हव्यैः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Ayam ha yad vam devaya u adrirurdhvo vivakti 


somasud yuvabhyam. A valgu vipro vavrtita 
havyaih. 


When this divine chariot of yours, dedicated to 
the moon for peace and joy roars over mountains and 
clouds, then the eminent scholar and the yajnic scientist 
turns it for you with new inputs. 


चित्रं ह यद्वां भोज॑नं न्वस्ति न्यत्रये महिष्वन्तं युयोतम्‌ । 
यो वामोमानं दध॑ते प्रियः सन्‌॥ ५ ॥ 
= Citram ha yad vam bhojanam nvasti nyatraye 


mahisvantam yuyotam. Yo vamomanam dadhate 
priyah san. 

Whatever your food that may be special or 
surplus, keep that in reserve exclusively for people for 
the time of distress. They would love you for that 
because they honour the protector dear to them. 


उत त्यद्वां जुर ते अश्विना भूच्च्यर्वानाय प्रतीत्यं हविर्दे | 
अधि agi! इतऊति धत्थः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta tyad vam jurate asvina bhuccyavanaya 
pratityam havirde. Adhi yad varpa itauti dhatthah. 


And let that insight, incentive and experiment 
of your help for people in need be for the weak and 
elderly, for those on the move such as the deprived, the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 68 251 


fallen, uprooted and refugees, and let it be for those 
who give in charity for the sake of charity. That is the 
philanthropic role you take on for the protection of 
people. 


उत त्यं भुज्युमश्विना सखायो मध्ये weg tara: समुद्र | 
निरी पर्षदरावा यो युवाकुः: ॥ ७॥ 


अ Uta tyam bhujyumasvina sakhayo madhye 
jJahurdurevasah samudre. Nirim parsadarava yo 
yuvakuh. 


And be friends with the man who was once 
affluent but now is in distress since jealous friends and 
associates deserted him and cast him insolvent into the 
sea of misfortune. Save him, take him across the sea, he 
is loyal and looks up to you for help. 


वृकाय farsa शक्तमुत श्रुतं शायवें हूयमाना । 
यावघ्न्यामपिंन्वतमपो न ede? चिच्छक्त्यश्विना 
शचींभिः।॥ ८॥ 


8. Vrkaya cijjasamanaya saktamuta Srutam Sayave 
huyamana. Yavaghnyam-apinvatam-apo na 
staryam cicchaktyaSsvina sactbhih. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and energy of a new 
day, against the wolfish thief and the aggressor, for the 
powers of law and punishment against exploitation, and 
for the lazy and the backward, bring force and counsel 
whenever the situation calls on you to act. You who 
command the competence for correction and 
rejuvenation with your powers can revitalise old cows 
and waste lands and make them overflow with milk and 
honey like abundant streams of water. 


252 RGVEDA 


एष स्य कारुर्जरते सूक्तैरग्रे बुधान उषसां सुमन्मा | 
इषा तं वर्धदघ्न्या पयोभिर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः Gat नः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Esa sya karur-jarate suktair-agre budhana 
usasam sumanma. Isa tam vardhadaghnya 
payobhir-yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Thus does the divine poet, wakeful in advance 
of the rise of dawn, with holy mind and faithful 
intelligence, celebrate in song the divine Ashvins, twin 
harbingers of new life to nature and humanity. May the 
inviolable Mother Nature and Infinity advance him in 
life with vision, will and energy. O saints and scholars, 
ruler and administrators, O Ashvins, protect and promote 
us with peace, happiness and all time well being in life. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 69 
Ashvinau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ वां रथो रोद॑सी बद्वधानो हिरण्ययो वुष॑भिरर्यात्वरुवैः | 
घृतवर्तनिः पविभी रुचान इषां dtoe नृपतिर्वा जिनीं - 
वान्‌॥ १॥ 


ly A vam ratho rodasi badbadhano hiranyayo 
vrsabhir-yatvasvaih. Ghrtavartanih pavibhi 
rucana isam volha nrpatir-vajinivan. 


O harbingers of light and fresh life for the dawn 
of a new day, let your golden chariot traversing heaven, 
earth and the skies by powerful forces on blazing wheels 
across the cosmic waters come to us loaded with 
nourishments and inspiring energies and be the guide 
and protector of humanity for higher victories. (The 
mantra is an address to the brilliant powers of social 
governance and management for the protection and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 69 253 


progress of the people. These powers should act as 
harbingers of fresh life and energy with the light of a 
new sun at the rise of a new dawn every day.) 


स पप्रथानो अभि पञ्च भूमा त्रिबन्धुरो मनसा यातु युक्तः | 
विशो येन गच्छ॑थो देवयन्तीः कुत्रा चिद्याम॑मज्विना 
दधाना ॥ २॥ 


2: Sa paprathano abhi panca bhuma tribandhuro 
manasa yatu yuktah. Viso yena gacchatho 
devayantih kutra cid yamamasvina dadhana. 


Let this chariot structured on five-fold body 
bound by three bonds come to us evolving day by day. 
It is structured on a five-fold chassis fixed by three bonds 
in an ascending order and it moves forward as controlled 
by the mind. By this, O Ashvins, you come to the people 
and radiate light and energy to those who are in search 
of divinity. On way, you choose your own stages of rest 
and travel for further progress. 


(This mantra is a metaphor of the human body 
in which the ruler is soul, the controller is mind, and 
motive forces for perception and volition are senses. 
The body is made up of five elements: earth, water, fire, 
air and space, and characterised by three conditioning 
qualities of nature: sattva, rajas and tamas which are 
intellectual, sensual and material qualities of personality. 
It is through this body-chariot that the Ashvins, 
circuitous complementarities of divine nature radiate 
and inspire light and energy to the human being and to 
humanity too as one personality.) 


स्वश्वा aster यातम्वग्दिस्त्रां निधिं मधुमन्तं पिलाथः। 
वि वां रथों वध्वा याद॑मानोऽ न्ताद्दिवो बाधते वर्तनि- 
भ्याम्‌॥ ३॥ 


254 RGVEDA 


2 Svasva yasasa yatamarvag dasra nidhim 
madhumantam pibathah. Vi vam ratho vadhva 
ydadamano’ntan divo badhate vartanibhyam. 


O mighty honourable heroes commanding 
speedy motive forces, destroyers of jealousy, enmity and 
suffering, come hither to us and share the honey sweets 
of the human world. Let your chariot heading to the 
destination with your associates reach the bounds of 
heavenly space by its whirling wheels. 


युवोः श्रियं परि योषावृणीत सूरो दुहिता परि तक्स्यायाम्‌ । 
यदे वयन्तमव॑थः शचीभिः परि घ्रं समोमन। at वयो। 
गात्‌ ॥ SU 

4. Yuvoh sriyam pari yosavrnita suro duhita pari- 
takmyayam. Yad devayantam-avathah sactbhih 
pari ghramsamomana vam vayo gat. 


The youthful dawn, daughter of the mighty sun, 
by choice takes on to your grace and splendour as her 
mate over and across the soothing night, since while 
you protect and promote the devout with your energies, 
your power with its potential circumambulates the light 
of the sun. 


योह स्य वां रथिरा aed sen रथो युजानः प॑रियातिं 
afd: tad नः शं योरुषसो व्युष्टौ न्य॑श्विना वहतं यज्ञे 
अस्मिन्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5: Yo ha sya vam rathira vasta usra ratho yujanah 
pariyati vartih. Tena nah sam yorusaso vyustau 
nyasvina vahatam yajne asmin. 


And that which is the master of your chariot 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 69 255 


and, wearing the splendour of the sun, rides it and goes 
about on the ways of life over the paths of existence 
and comes home to human habitations, by that very 
divine light and grace, O charioteers of Divinity, at the 
rise of dawn, bring in the peace and bliss of life to this 
our universal yajna of the world’s social order. 


नरां titel विद्युतं तृषाणाऽस्माकमद्य Marae यातम्‌ | पुरुत्रा 
हि वां मतिभिर्हवन्ते मा वामन्ये नि य॑मन्देवयन्तः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nara gaureva vidyutam trsana’smakamadya 
savanopa yatam. Purutra hi vam matirbhir- 
havante ma vamanye ni yaman devayantah. 


O leaders of humanity, pioneers of light, eager 
like a planet drawn by the sun, come today to our yajnic 
social order and bring in the dawn of a new day. The all 
time seekers of Divinity through eternity have invoked 
you with the best of their thought, will and action. Let 
not anyone stop you on way. 


युवं भुज्युमव॑विन्दं समुद्र उदूहथुरर्णसो अस्तरिंधानैः। 
पतत्रिभिरश्चमैर्व्यथिभिंर्दसर्नाभिरण्विना पारयन्ता ॥ ७॥ 


ds Yuvam bhujyum-avaviddham samudra uduha- 
thurarnaso asridhanaih. Patatribhirasr-amaira- 
vyathibhir-damsanabhir-asvina parayanta. 


O leaders and pioneers of the world, harbingers 
of light and power, you retrieve the ruling powers sunk 
in distress, recover the resources of wealth and joy 
hidden in the oceans, and you take them across the 
oceans of water and space to the shore to the wanted 
destination by unfailing, indefatigable and inviolable 
floating and flying machines created by your marvellous 


256 RGVEDA 


knowledge, power and skill. 


नू मे हवमा श्वुणुतं युवाना यासिष्टं वर्तिरंश्विनाविरावत्‌। 
धत्तं रतानि जर॑तं च सूरीन्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nu me havama srnutam yuvana yasistam vartira- 


yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Listen to my call, O youthful Ashvins, twin 
powers of nature and humanity, leading lights of the 
nation, go to the basic sources of wealth and knowledge 
over land and sea and across the skies, bear and bring 
the jewels of life, appreciate, honour and admire the 
brilliant and the brave, and protect and promote us with 
all time peace and prosperity of well being. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 70 
Ashvins Devath, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ विंङुववाराश्विना गतं नः प्र तत्स्थानमवाचि at 
पृथिव्याम्‌। अश्वो न वाजी शुनपष्ठो अस्थादा यत्सेदथु वसे 
न योनिंम्‌॥ ९॥ 


leg A visvavarasvina gatam nah pra tat sthanam- 
avaci vam prthivyam. ASvo na vajt Sunaprstho 
asthada yat sedathur-dhruvase na yonim. 


Ashvins, world heroes of universal choice, come 
to our yajna. The seat on the earth vedi is fixed, reserved 
and proclaimed for you and stays like a war horse at 
rest after victory. That you would occupy without 
disturbance as in your own home and there be firm as 
the pole star. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 70 257 


सिष॑क्ति सा वां सुमतिश्चनिष्ठाऽर्तापि घर्मो मनुषो दुरोणे। 
यो वां समुदरान्त्सरितः पिपर्त्येतग्वा चिन्न सुयुजा युजानः ॥ २॥ 


2. Sisakti sa vam sumatiscanistha’tapi gharmo 
manuso durone. Yo vam samudrant-saritah 
pipartyetagva cinna suyuja yujanah. 


Ashvins, O complementary currents of nature, 
the yajnic process in song and action with holy offerings 
of fragrant havi reaches you and serves you. The fire of 
yajna is burning in the house of the yajamana, which, 
like the radiations of sunlight, activates the catalysis of 
heat and water in nature and fills up the streams and 
seas with rain. 


यानि स्थानान्यश्विना दधाथे दिवो य॒ह्वीष्वोष॑धीषु विक्षु । 
नि पर्व॑तस्य मूर्धनि सदन्तेषं जनाय दाशुषे वह॑न्ता ॥ ३ ॥ 


a. Yani sthananyasvina dadhathe divo yahvisvosa- 
dhisu viksu. Ni parvatasya murdhani sadante-sam 
jJanaya dasuse vahanta. 


Whichever places, Ashvins, you occupy, abiding 
on top of mountains or clouds, you carry food and energy 
from the regions of light and vest it in great forests, 
herbs and trees and communicate it among people of 
the world for the man of yajnic generosity. 


चनिष्टं dar ओषधीष्वप्सु यद्योग्या अश्नवैथे ऋषीणाम्‌ | 
पुरूणि tat दध॑तौ न्यस्मे अनु पूवीणि चख्यथुर्युगानि x ॥ 


4. Canistam deva osadhisvapsu yad yogya asna- 
vaithe rsinam. Puruni ratna dadhatau nyasme- 
anu purvani cakhyathur-yugani. 


Divine Ashvins, life giving powers of natural 


258 RGVEDA 


and human complementarities, whatever appropriate 
gifts of food and energy worthy of the sages you radiate 
and vest into herbs and waters, bearing jewels of eternal 
value, give us too in continuance at the present time as 
you have been doing for ages immemorial, as you 
yourself have revealed. 


wsatat चिदश्विना पुरूण्यभि ब्रह्माणि चक्षाथे 
ऋषीणाम्‌ । प्रति प्र यातं वरमा ज्नायाऽस्मे वामस्तु सुमति- 
Vastu ५ ॥ 


2; Susruvamsa cidasvina purunyabhi brahmani 
caksathe rsinam. Prati pra yatam varama janaya- 
*sme vamastu sumatiscanistha. 


Ashvins, learned scholars of knowledge and 
practical application of knowledge, speak to us of the 
earlier and eternal knowledge and formulations of the 
seers of Divinity and nature. Come and grace our yajna, 
and may your knowledge and wisdom be appropriately 
good and beneficial for our people. 


यो at यज्ञो नासत्या हविष्मान्कृतब्रंहया समर्यो ३ भर्वाति। 
उप प्र यातं वरमा वसिष्ठमिमा ब्रह्माण्यृच्यन्ते युव- 
भ्याम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yo vam yajno nasatya havisman krtabrahma 
samaryo bhavati. Upa pra yatam varama vasi- 
sthamima brahmanyrcyante yuvabhyam. 


Ashvins, observers of truth and law in theory 
and practice, this yajna of adoration and liberal havi 
presided over by Vedic scholars and conducted with 
Vedic hymns for you in honour of Divinity is dedicated 
to the unity and victory of humanity over want and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 71 259 


suffering. Come and join this holy programme of 
brilliance, peace and settlement for all. These words of 
song are chanted for you and radiate for you in living 
vibrations. 


इयं म॑नीषा इयमश्विना गीरिमां सुवृक्तिं वंषणा जुषेथाम्‌ | 
इमा ब्रह्माणि युवयून्य॑ग्मन्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ७॥ 


qs Iyam manisa iyamasvina girimam suvrktim 
vrsana jusetham. Ima brahmani yuvayunyag- 
manyuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O generous and brilliant Ashvins, divine and 
human givers of success and fulfilment, come and join 
this thoughtful programme of yajna, this song of 
adoration, this divine praise and prayer. These sacred 
words of adoration and acts of homage are offered in 
your honour. O saints and scholars, divine powers of 
nature and humanity, listen, and protect and promote 
us with all time peace, prosperity, happiness and well 
being all round. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 71 
Ashvinau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 

अप radar नग्जिंहीते रिणक्ति कृष्णीररुषाय पन्थाम्‌ | 
अश्वामघा गोम॑घा वां हुवेम दिवा नक्तं शरुमस्मद्युंयो- 
तम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 

i. Apa svasurusaso nagjihite rinakti krsnirarusaya 
pantham. Asvamagha gomagha vam huvema 
diva naktam Sarumasmad yuyotam. 


The night takes leave of her sister dawn, 


260 RGVEDA 


darkness departs and clears the path for the light of day. 
O harbingers of light and wisdom, pioneers of action 
and achievement, masters of plenty and prosperity, 
Ashvins, we invoke you at this hour of the dawn, pray 
come and bless us, and dispel all sin and evil, darkness 
and ignorance, inaction and poverty far off from us day 
and night relentlessly. 


उपायातं दाशुषे मत्यीय रथेन वामम॑श्विना वह॑न्ता | 
युयुतमस्मदनिंराममींवां दिवा नक्तं माध्वी त्रासीथां नः ॥ २ ॥ 


0.0 Upayatam dasuse martyaya rathena vama- 
masvina vahanta. Yuyutam-asma-daniram- 
amivam diva naktam madhvi trasitham nah. 


Ashvins, harbingers of anew dawn of sweetness 
and light of culture and prosperity, come by your chariot 
laden with riches of beauty and bliss for generous 
mortals, ward off from us sufferance and disease, and 
protect and promote us day and night relentlessly. 


आ वां रथ॑मवमस्यां AST सुम्नायवो वृष॑णो वर्तयन्तु | 
स्यूम॑गभस्तिमृतयुग्िरश्वैराश्विंना वसुमन्तं वहेथाम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Dy A vam ratham-avamasyam vyustau sumnayavo 
vrsano vartayantu. Syumagabhastim-rtayugbhir- 
asvairasvina vasumantam vahetham. 


On the rise of the new dawn when darkness is 
cleared, O devout, generous, gracious and powerful 
pioneers of light and wisdom, turn and guide your 
chariot towards us. Ashvins, harbingers of light and joy, 
steer your chariot laden with wealth, controlled by reins 
of sun rays and powered by the wise dedicated to the 
truth of divine laws, come to us and bless all. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 71 261 


यो वां रथो नृपती अस्तिं aioe त्रिवन्धुरो वसुमाँ sear | 
आ न॑ एना नास॒त्योप॑ यातमभि यद्वां विश्वप्स्न्यो 
जिगाति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yo vam ratho nrpati asti volha tribandhuro 
vasuman usrayama. A na end nasatyopa yata- 
mabhi yad vam visvapsnyo jigdti. 


Ashvins, protectors of humanity dedicated to the 
truth and law of nature and Divinity, may your chariot 
laden with wealth and wisdom, inbuilt with three-fold 
bonds of physical, mental and spiritual discipline, going 
by the light of sun, transport you hither to us. Come by 
this chariot to us following the paths which the lord of 
universal vision and eternal wisdom reveals to you. 


युवं च्यर्वानं जरसोऽ मुमुक्तं नि ted Teeny | 
Premera: स्पर्तमत्रिं नि जाहुषं शिथिरे धातमन्तः ॥ ५ ॥ 


9, Yuvam cyavanam jaraso’mumuktam ni pedava 
uhathurasumasvam. Niramhasas-tamasah 
spartamatrim ni jahusam sithire dhatamantah. 


You exempt the active and dynamic from the 
decay of age, raise the relentlessly progressive 
commonwealth to higher achievements in no time, you 
save the man of threefold freedom of body, mind and 
soul from sin and ignorance, and you rejuvenate the 
optimist back to inner light and strength when he feels 
exhausted. 


इयं म॑नीषा इयमश्विना गीरिमां सुवृक्तिं वुंषणा जुषेथाम्‌ | 
इमा ब्रह्माणि युवयून्य॑ग्मन्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः wat 
नः॥६॥ 


262 RGVEDA 


6. Iyam manisa iyamasvina girimam suvrktim 
vrsana jusetham. Ima brahmani yuvayunyag-man 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Ashvins, leaders of light and action, generous 
givers of fulfilment, this reflection and prayer, these 
words of adoration, this act and song of homage offered 
to you, pray accept with pleasure. May these holy 
tributes reach you. May you, saints and scholars, leaders 
and pioneers, harbingers of light, freedom and progress, 
protect and promote us with happiness and well being 
all round all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 72 
Ashvinau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ गोम॑ता नासत्या Warsvataa4n पुरुश्चन्द्रेण यातम्‌ | 
अभि at विर्वा fad: सचन्ते स्पार्हया श्चिया तन्वां 
शुभाना॥ ९॥ 


ibs A gomata nasatya rathena’svavata purus- 
candrena yatam. Abhi vam visva nuyutah sacante 
sparhaya Sriya tanva subhana. 

O saints, scholars and scientists, dedicated to 
truth and the law of nature and divinity, handsome of 
form and person with enviable grace and splendour, 
come to our yajna by your swift, scientific and brilliant 
chariot. All your admirers and allied cooperative powers 
wait for you. 


आ नो cared यातमर्वाक्सजोषसा नासत्या TAT । युवोर्हि 
न॑: सख्या पिर्व्याणि समानो बन्धुरुत तस्य॑ वित्तम्‌ 2 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 72 263 


2. A no devebhirupa yatamarvak sajosasa nasatya 
rathena. Yuvorhi nah sakhya pitryani samano 
bandhuruta tasya vittam. 


Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge 
and wealth of the world, dedicated to truth and law of 
nature and divinity, come to our yajna by your chariot 
in the company of divine sages and brilliant scholars, 
with all your strength of mind and soul. Your friendship 
and ours and our ancestral traditions and also our 
fraternity, pray know of this and give us the benefit of 
this commonalty. 


उदु स्तोमासो अश्विनोरवुश्रञ्जामि ब्रह्माण्युषसश्च 
देवीः । आविवांसत्रोद॑सी धिष्ण्येमे अच्छ विप्रो नास॑त्या 
विवक्ति ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Udu stomaso asvinor-abudhran-jami brahm- 
anyusasasca devih. Avivasan rodasi dhisnyeme 
accha vipro nasatya vivakti. 


And the songs of praise in honour of the Ashvins 
and the hymns of adoration in honour of their sister 
dawn awake, inspire and arouse all, and they reverberate 
and fill the vast heaven and earth. O brilliant Ashvins, 
the vibrant devotee chants these well in faith with love 
for the brilliant lights of truth. 


वि चेदुच्छन्त्यंश्विना उषासः प्र वां ब्रह्माणि कारवो भरन्ते | 
ऊर्ध्व भानुं सविता देवो sista बृहदग्रय॑ः समिधां जरन्ते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Vi ceducchantyaSsvina usasah pra vam brahmani 
karavo bharante. Urdhvam bhanum savita devo 
asred brhadagnayah samidha jarante. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light, wisdom and wealth 


264 RGVEDA 


of life, when the dawns arise and shine, poets and priests 
sing hymns of praise in your honour, the lord creator 
Savita in the glory of self-refulgence sends up the orb 
of sun for the day, and the fires of yajna fed on holy 
fuel rise in flames to glorify the light of Divinity. 


आ पश्चातान्नासत्या पुरस्तादाश्विना यातमधरादुदक्तात्‌ | 
आ faydd: पाञ्च॑जन्येन राया यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥५॥ 


2; A pascatannasatya purastadasvina yatama- 
dhara-dudaktat. A visvatah padincajanyena raya 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Ashvins, holy harbingers of the light of truth 
and law of eternity and permanent values, pray come 
from behind, come from front, come from below, come 
from above, come all round from all directions of the 
world with the wealth of life for all the people of the 
earth. O holy powers of light and wealth of excellence, 
protect and promote us with all time peace and well 
being for all people. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 73 
Ashvinau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
अतारिष्प तम॑सस्पारमस्य प्रति स्तोमं देवयन्तो cert: 1 
पुरुदंसा पुरुतमा पुराजाऽमंत्यां हवते अश्विना गीः ॥ ९॥ 


Ls Atarisma tamasas-paramasya prati stomam 
devayanto dadhanah. Purudamsa purutama 
puraja’martya havate asvina gth. 


The voice of the worshipper invokes and 
celebrates the Ashvins, harbingers of the light and bliss 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 73 265 


of divinity, most versatile in generous action, most 
ancient, original and immortal. Offering songs of praise 
in homage to divinity in meditative search for the life 
divine, we cross over this darkness and ignorance of 
our existence. 


न्यु॑ प्रियो wae: सादि होता arden यो यजं ते वन्द॑ते च। 
अश्नीतं मध्वो अश्विना उपाक आ वां वोचे विदथेषु 
प्रय॑स्वान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Nyu priyo manusah sadi hota nasatya yo yajate 
vandate ca. ASnitam madhvo asvina upaka 
a vam voce vidathesu prayasvan. 


O light and love of life divine, Ashvins, 
harbingers of bliss, the person who joins the divine 
consciousness in concentration, worships the lord of 
bliss and surrenders his carnal self in communion, gets 
settled in the peace of samadhi. Come close into the 
heart, O light of divinity and radiations of super life, 
suffuse this spirit in the honey sweets of bliss, so says 
the yajamana in union to you in the sessions of yoga 
yajna. 

अहेम Ua पथामुराणा इमां सुवृक्तिं वृषणा जुषेथाम्‌। 
श्रुष्टीवेव प्रेषितो वामबोधि प्रति स्तोमैर्जरमाणो 
वसिष्ठः ॥ ३॥ 

a Ahema yajnam pathamurana imam suvrktim 
vrsana jusetham. Srustiveva presito vamabodhi 
prati stomair-jaramano vasisthah. 

O mighty generous powers of the divine circuit 


of light, harbingers of energy and enlightenment, we 
extend the possibilities of yajna and follow the path of 


266 RGVEDA 


achievement wider and wider from the individual to 
society on the physical, mental and spiritual level. Listen 
and accept this homage and invitation to join us. The 
most enlightened high priest celebrating divinity with 
hymns of adoration is awake and, as on the waves of 
thought, comes and exhorts you. 


उप त्या वहीं गमतो विशं नो रक्षोहणा संभ्रुता वीद्टुर्पाणी । 
समन्धांस्यग्मत मत्सराणि मा नो मर्धिष्टमा ग॑तं शिवेन uw ॥ 


4. Upa tya vahni gamato visam no raksohana 
sambhrta vilupanit. Samandhamsyagmata 
matsarani ma no mardhistama gatam Sivena. 


You are destroyers of evil and negativities, you 
are abundant and open minded, and strong of hand in 
charity. You are harbingers of joy and energy for all. 
Exhilarating delicacies abound all round. Come and join 
our people with all possibilities of peace and fulfilment. 
Pray neglect us not. 


आ पश्चातान्नासत्या पुरस्तादाश्विना यातमधरादुद॑क्तात्‌। 
आ विश्वतः पाञ्च॑जन्येन राया यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥५॥ 


A pascatannasatya purastadasvina yatam- 
adharadudaktat. A ivSvatah pancajanyena raya 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O mighty generous powers of divinity in nature 
and humanity, dedicated to truth, come from the back, 
come from front, come from below, come from above, 
come from all quarters of the world and bring the wealth 
of life for all our people, whatever their class or social 
status. O saints and sages, scholars and scientists, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 74 267 


divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote 
us all time with all round peace and fulfilment. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 74 
Ashvinau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


इमा उ वां fefasa sem ह॑वन्ते अश्विना । 
अयं वामह्वे ऽ de शचीवसू विशंविशं हि गच्छ॑थः ॥ ९॥ 


1; Ima u vam divistaya usra havante asvina. Ayam 
vamahve’vase Sacivasu visamvisam hi gaccha- 
thah. 


Brilliant Ashvins, these yajakas dedicated to life 
divine invoke and call upon you for light, and I too, O 
versatile commanders of the wealth of knowledge, 
power and vision, invite you and pray for protection 
and advancement since you visit and bless every 
individual and every community. 


युवं चित्रं ददथुर्भोजनं नरा चोदेथां सूनृतावते । 
अर्वाग्रथं सम॑नसा नि य॑च्छतं पिब॑तं सोम्यं मधुं॥ २॥ 


2. Yuvam citram dadathurbhojanam nara codetham 
sunrtavate. Arvagratham samanasa ni yacchatam 
pibatam somyam madhu. 


O leading lights of humanity, you provide 
wonderful food for the body, mind and soul, provide 
inspiration and incentive for the man of truth and 
rectitude. With an equal mind with us all, bring up your 
chariot, add to the joy of the community and share the 
honey sweets of peace and pleasure. 


आ यातमुप॑ भूषतं मध्व॑: पिबतमश्विना | 
दुग्धं पयो! वृषणा जेन्यावसू मा नो मर्धिष्टमा ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


268 RGVEDA 


BD. A yatamupa bhisatam madhvah pibata-masvina. 
Dugdham payo vrsana jenyavasu ma no mar- 
dhistama gatam. 


Ashvins, creators as well as harbingers of light 
and inspiration, come hither to us, add to the power and 
grace of our corporate programme and share the honey 
sweets of our achievement. O creators and winners of 
wealth, honour and excellence, brave and generous, 
enjoy the showers of milk and nectar. Pray come, do 
not neglect us. 


sata ये वामुप॑ दाशुषो गृहं युवां दीय॑न्ति बिभ्र॑तः | 
agar हयेभिरण्विनाऽऽ देवा यातमस्मयू ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asvaso ye vamupa dasuso grham yuvam diyanti 
bibhratah. Maksuyubhirnara hayebhirasvina’’- 
deva yatamasmayiu. 


Ashvins, leading lights of nature and humanity, 
the transports which bear you to the house of the 
generous yajamana radiate and shine and illuminate the 
hall of yajna. O brilliant and powerful lights of humanity, 
twin divines, come by the fastest powers of sun rays 
and grace our yajna. 


अधा ह यन्तो! अश्विना yet: सचन्त Ea: । 
ता यंसतो मघव॑द्धरयो oa यशश्छर्दिर्‌ स्मभ्यं नास॑त्या ॥ ५ ॥ 
5. Adha ha yanto asvina prksah sacanta surayah. 


Ta yamsato maghavadbhyo dhruvam yasa- 
schardirasmabhyam nasatya. 


And now, Ashvins, leading lights of the truth 
and law of nature and humanity, brilliant sages and 
scholars are on the move and come to join you in pursuit 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 75 269 


of knowledge. To them, grant honour and fame with 
the wealth of achievement, and bless us with a happy 
and peaceful home. 


प्र ये ययुरवृकासो रथाइव नृपातारो जनानाम्‌ | 
उत स्वेन शव॑सा शूशुवुर्नर उत क्षियन्ति सुक्षितिम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra ye yayur-avrkaso ratha iva nrpataro jana- 
nam. Uta svena Savasa Susuvurnara uta ksiyanti 
suksitim. 


Those who are simple, honest and non-violent 
saviours and protectors of the people go forward shining 
as by royal chariots. They, leaders and pioneers, rise by 
their own strength and find a happy home in the 
promised land of their own choice. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 75 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


व्युषा आवो दिविजा ऋतेनाऽऽविष्कृण्वाना म॑हि- 
मानमागा॑त्‌। अप geet आवरजुं ष्ट मद्धिरस्तमा पथ्यां 
अजीगः ॥ ९॥ 


Il; Vyusa avo divija rtena’’viskrnvanad mahimana- 
magat. Apa druhastama avarajustamangirastama 
pathya ajigah. 


The dawn arises from the light of heaven, 
revealing the awful splendour and majesty of Divinity 
by the law of eternity, dispelling the odious darkness, 
hate and jealousy, and illuminates the paths of daily 
activity with inspirations of highest freshness of life 
energy for humanity. 


270 RGVEDA 


महे नो अद्य सुविताय बोध्युषो! महे सौभ॑गाय प्र य॑न्धि । 
चित्रं रयिं यशसं धेह्यस्मे देवि मर्तेषु मानुषि श्रवस्युम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Mahe no adya suvitaya bodhyuso mahe saubha- 
gaya pra yandhi. Citram rayim yasasam dhehya- 
sme devi martesu manusi Sravasyum. 


O dawn, light of divinity, at the rise of this new 
day inspire us to rise to higher faith and greater good 
fortune and lead us forward to achieve greater happiness 
and well being. O divine harbinger of new life and 
vision, bless us with wondrous wealth, honour and 
excellence and awaken mortal humanity to self- 
recognition and the human condition with gratitude to 
Divinity. 

एते त्ये भानवो दरण तायांश्चित्रा उषसो अमृतास आगुः | 
जनयंन्तो दैव्यानि व्रतान्यापृणन्तो, अन्तरिक्षा व्य॑स्थुः ॥ ३ ॥ 
Ete tye bhanavo darSsatayascitra usaso amrtasa 


aguh. Janayanto daivyani vratanyaprnanto 
antariksa vyasthuh. 


These are radiations of light divine at the break 
of dawn, wonderful, sublime and immortal that come 
and inspire, creating a deep sense of awareness of the 
ways and disciplines of life divine. They radiate through 
the cosmic spaces out and vibrate in the space within in 
the heart and abide in the soul. 


एषा स्या Ast प॑राकात्पञ्चं क्षितीः परि सद्यो जिंगाति। 
अभिपश्यन्ती वयुना जनानां दिवो दुहिता भुव॑नस्य 
पलीं ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 75 271 


4. Esa sya yujana parakat panca ksitith pari sadyo 
Jigati. Abhipasyanti vayuna jananam divo duhita 
bhuvanasya patni. 


This is that light divine, child of heaven arising 
at dawn from afar, which instantly and always awakens 
and illuminates all children of the earth, whatever their 
class or status, and unites the human soul with the divine. 
It watches the ways and karmas of people and sustains 
and inspires life across the universe. 


वाजिनीवती सूर्य॑स्य योर्षा चित्राम॑घा राय ईशो वसूनाम्‌ । 
ऋषिष्टुता जरय॑न्ती मघोन्युषा Sasha वह्धिभिर्गणाना ॥ ५ ॥ 


Vajinivati suryasya yosa citramagha raya 75८ 
vasunam. Rsistuta jarayanti maghonyusa ucchati 
vahnibhirgrnana. 


The youthful light of the rising sun, inspiring 
and energising sustainer of life, commands the wealths 
of the world and rules the life and homes of people on 
earth. Studied and celebrated by sages and seers, seeing 
the devout rise in age and experience, the magnificent 
dawn shines on, adored by the yajakas when the fires 
of yajna are kindled early morning. 


प्रतिं द्युतानामरुषासो अश्वांण्चित्रा अदृश्रन्नुषसं वह॑न्तः | 
यातिं शुभ्रा विश्वपिशा रथेन दर्धाति vat विधते जनाय ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Prati dyutanam-arusaso asvascitra adrsrannu- 
sasam vahantah. Yati Subhra visvapisa rathena 
dadhati ratnam vidhate janaya. 


The radiations of light carrying the glorious 
dawn shine in splendour of various and wondrous rays 
and appear like steeds of the celestial chariot by which 


272 RGVEDA 


the heavenly maiden goes forward on her journey of 
light dispelling darkness of the world and bears and 
brings the jewels of wealth for the people. 


सत्या waited महद्धि det देवेभिर्यजता ats: । रुजद्‌ 
goat दद॑दुस्नरि्याणां प्रति गाव॑ उषसं वावशन्त ॥ ७ ॥ 


Satya satyebhir-mahati mahadbhir-devi deve- 
bhir-yajata yajatraih. Rujad drlhani dadadu- 
sriyanam prati gava usasam vavaSsanta. 


Ever true, served by the truthful, ever great 
honoured by the great, ever glorious adored by the 
brilliant sages and devout yajakas, the dawn destroys 
strongholds of darkness and gives freedom and energy 
of morning radiations to those who love and wait for 
the rise of a new day of divine awareness. 


नू नो गोम॑दीरवब्देहि रल्रमुषो अश््वावत्पुरु भोजो stat 
मानों बर्हिः पुरुषता निदे कर्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥८॥ 


8. Nu no gomad viravad dhehi ratnamuso asvavat 
purubhojo asme. Ma no barhih purusata nide ka- 
ryuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O light divine, give us jewels of the wealth of 
lands and cows and brilliance of speech and knowledge, 
swiftness of transport and achievement, food and 
prosperity for all, and a heroic line of descendants. Let 
none malign our manliness and house of yajna. O saints 
and sages, protect and promote us all ways all time with 
all happiness and well being. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 76 273 


Mandala 7/Sukta 76 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


उदु ज्योतिरमृतं विश्वजन्यं fava: सविता देवो sista | 
क्र्त्वा देवानामजनिष्ट चक्चुराविरं कर्भुव॑नं विश्वमुषाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


I Udu jyotiramrtam visvajanyam visvanarah savita 
devo asret. kratva devanamajanista caksuravira- 
karbhuvanam visvamusah. 


Self-refulgent Savita, leading light of the world 
and inspirer of life, radiates universal and immortal light 
for the benefit of humanity. The sun, eye of the divinities 
of nature and humanity, is risen by the cosmic yajna of 
divinity and the light of dawn illuminates and reveals 
the entire world to view. 


प्र मे पन्थां देवयाना sresradei=n वसुंथिरिष्कुतासः। 
अभूदु केतुरुषसः पुरस्तात्प्रतीच्यागादधिं हरम्येभ्य॑: ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Pra me pantha devayana adrsrann-amardhanto 
vasubhiriskrtasah. Abhudu keturusasah purastat 
praticyagadadhi harmyebhyah. 


The paths of divinity are clearly visible for me, 
blissful, unobstructed and unobstructing, showing the 
order of stars and planets. The morning light of dawn, 
symbol of divinity, is risen in the east and spreads 
westward dispelling darkness over high altitudes. 


तानीदहानि बहुत्कान्यासन्या प्राचीनमुदिता सूर्यस्य | 
यतः UR जारडवाचर न्त्युषो ददृक्षे न पुनर्यतीव ॥ ३॥ 

3; Tanidahani bahulanyasan ya pracinamudita 
suryasya. Yatah pari jara ivacarantyuso dadrkse 
na punaryativa. 


274 RGVEDA 


Many and intense are those resplendent lights 
of the divine sun arisen long before antiquity from where 
the dawns are seen rising like fire but never seen 
returning, deserted or deserting or forsaken. 


त इदेवानां सधमादं आसन्नृतावानः aed: geata: eos 
ज्योतिः पितरो अन्व॑विन्दन्त्सत्यमन्त्रा अजनयन्चुषा- 
स॑म्‌॥४॥ 


4. Ta id devanam sadhamdada asannrtavanah 
kavayah purvyasah. Gulham jyotih pitaro anva- 
vindant-satyamantra ajanayann-usasam. 


They alone share communion and union with 
divinities in the house of meditative yajna who, 
dedicated to divine truth and law, are veteran visionaries 
and creative poets, who are sagely father figures and 
realise the mysterious sublimity of light divine, and who, 
having realised and mastered the activating mantra, 
recreate and reveal the light of divinity in spiritual 
vision. 


समान ad अधि संग॑तासः सं जानते न य॑तन्ते पिथस्ते। 
ते देवानां न मिनन्ति व्रतान्यमर्धन्तो वसुंधियदिंमानाः॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Samana urve adhi samgatasah sam janate na 
yatante mithaste. Te devanam na minanti vrata- 
nyamardhanto vasubhir-yadamanah. 


Men of vision dedicated to common and equal 
programmes of vast significance join together not only 
in mutual covenant but also in absolute union, and 
together endeavour to realise their divine aim without 
ever contending against one another. They do not break 
the laws and disciplines of truth and divinities, nor do 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 76 275 


they violate the conventions and traditions of the wise 
and, marching forward by the light of stars and wealth 
of Vedic knowledge without violence to any one, they 
attain their aim. 


प्रतिं त्वा ead वसिंछा sadel: सुभगे तुष्टुवांसः | 
गवां नेत्री वाज॑पत्नी न उच्छोषंः सुजाते प्रथमा ज॑रस्व ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Prati tva stomairilate vasistha usarbudhah 
subhage tustuvamsah. Gavam netri vajapanti na 
ucchosah sujate prathama jarasva. 


O dawn, lady of light and good fortune, nobly 
born of the sun divine, generous sustainer and giver of 
inspiration and energy, harbinger of light and controller 
of mind and senses, brilliant and celebrant sages of 
highest faith and intelligence awake at dawn offer you 
homage with songs of adoration: Come, first born, light 
of divinity, shine and bring us too the life divine. 


एषा नेत्री राध॑सः सूनृतानामुषा Saad! रिभ्यते वसिष्ठः 1 
दीर्घश्रुतं रयिमस्मे दधाना यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ७॥ 


a. Esa netri radhasah sunrtanamusa ucchanti ribh- 
yate vasisthaih. Dirghasrutam rayimasme 
dadhana yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


This light divine of eternal life that arises at 
dawn shines and dispels the darkness of the external 
and internal world of humanity. It illuminates the mind 
and soul of the people dedicated to holy truth and the 
divine law of eternity, perfects their faculties and guides 
them over the paths and ways of divine pursuits to the 
accomplishment of success and glory. It bears and brings 


276 RGVEDA 


us the wealth, honour and excellence of life we have 
heard of since time immemorial and leads us to the 
eternal light of divinity. Thus is it celebrated by the most 
brilliant sages of knowledge and wisdom. Pray save us, 
protect us and advance us with the means and modes of 
peace and fulfilment all ways, all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 77 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


उपों रुरुचे युवतिर्न योषा विश्वं जीवं प्रसवन्तीं चरायै । 
अभू दयिः समिधे मानुषाणापमकर्ज्योतिर्बाध॑माना 
तमांसि ।॥ ९॥ 


1. Upo ruruce yuvatirna yosa visvam jivam pra- 
suvanti carayai. Abhud-agnih samidhe manusa- 
nam-akarjyotir-badhamana tamamsi. 


Lo, there arises the dawn and shines like a 
youthful maiden breathing, radiating and inspiring life 
energy and light for the moving world. Let the holy fire 
be kindled. When it is kindled, it creates the light and 
dispels the darkness of humanity. This too is the holy 
fire kindled at the dawn of creation which radiates light 
and life for the living beings and dispels the darkness 
of the pre-creation state. 


विश्वं प्रतीची सप्रथा उद॑स्थाद्रुशद्वासो बिभ्र॑ती शुक्रम॑श्वैत्‌ | 
दिरंण्यवर्णां सुदृशी कसंदूग्गवां माता नेत्सह्वामरोचि ॥ २॥ 


De Visvam pratict sapratha udasthad rusad vaso 
bibhrati sukramasvait. Hiranyavarna sudrsika- 
samdrg gavam mata netryahnamaroci. 


It rises, advancing, expanding, shining, wearing 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 77 277 


the light of glory, bearing the power and purity of 
divinity, and thus it beams forth over the world in golden 
majesty and blissful beauty as the mother of light and 
holy speech and shines as harbinger of days, each anew 
every morning. 


देवानां चक्षुः सुभगा वह॑न्ती श्वेतं नय॑न्ती सुदृशी - 
कमश्व॑म्‌। उषा अदि रश्मिभिर्व्यक्ता चित्रामघा 
विश्वमनु प्रभूता ॥ ३॥ 


Devanam caksuh subhaga vahanti $vetam nayanti 
sudrsikamasvam. Usa adarsi rasmibhir-vyakta 
citramagha visvamanu prabhuta. 


It is the eye of divinities, revealing and radiating 
the glory of divinity, bearing light and good fortune, 
leading the glorious sun like the white horse of the 
universal chariot of existence. Thus appears the dawn 
manifested in rays of light in wondrous majesty 
prevailing all over the world. 


अन्तिवामा दूरे अमित्र॑मुच्छोर्वी गव्यूतिमभयं कृधी नः। 
यावय देष आ भ॑रा वसूनि चोदय राधो गृणते म॑घोनि ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Antivama dure amitramucchorvim gavyutima- 
bhayam krdhih nah. Yavaya dvesa a bhara vasuni 
codaya radho grnate maghoni. 


O lady of light, O dawn of a new day, be close 
at hand with wealth and loveliness, let the unfriendly 
be far off, pray shine and illuminate the wide world, 
and let all our paths of progress be free from fear and 
violence. Ward off hate, jealousy and enmity, bring us 
the wealth, honour and excellence of life, and inspire 
and energise the power, prosperity and generosity of 


278 RGVEDA 


the celebrant, you who command the wealth, power and 
majesty of the world. 


अस्मे श्र्टैभिभनुथिर्विं भाद्युषो। देवि प्रतिरन्ती न आयुः । 
इषं च नो दध॑ती विश्ववारे गोमदशूवांवद्रथ॑वच्च राध॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Asme Sresthebhir-bhanubhir-vi bhahyuso devi 
pratiranti na ayuh. Isam cano dadhati visvavare 
gomadasvavad rathavacca radhah. 


O brilliant dawn, blissful light of Divinity, shine 
for us with the best and highest values of existence by 
the lights of the sun, giving us good health and longevity. 
O cherished benefactor of the world, bear and bring for 
us food and energy, intelligence and all wealth of life 
abundant with lands, cows and brilliant thought and 
speech, horses and advancement, and an efficient 
progressive social order for our success and fulfilment. 


यां wat दिवो दुहितर्वर्धयन्त्युष॑ः सुजाते मतिभिर्वसिष्ठाः । 
सास्मासु धा रयिमृष्वं बृहन्तं यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥ ६॥ 


6. Yam tva divo duhitar-vardhayantyusah sujate 
matibhir-vasisthah. Sasamasu dha rayimrsvam 
brhantam yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O dawn, nobly born of the sun, child of Divinity, 
brilliant sages, poets and scholars adore and glorify you 
with holy words, thoughts and actions. O light divine, 
bear and bring to bless us excellent wealth, honour and 
glory rising and ever rising. O saints, sages and heroes 
of humanity, protect and promote us with peace, 
progress and all round well being all time. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 78 279 


Mandala 7/Sukta 78 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Rshi 
प्रति cae: प्रथमा sigsrqeat steer अञ्जयो वि श्र॑यन्ते | 
उषो अर्वाचा बृहता रथेन ज्योतिष्मता वाममस्मभ्यं 
वक्षि॥ ९॥ 
Prati ketavah prathama adrsrann-urdhva asya 


anjayo vi Srayanto. Uso arvaca brhata rathena 
Jyotismata vamamasmabhyam vaksi. 


The first flames of the dawn are visible, the rays 


of its light rise and radiate upward on the firmament. O 
dawn, light of divinity, come hither to us and bring us 
the beauty and glory of the wealth of the world by your 
great and grand chariot of light. 


प्रतिं षीमभिर्जरते समिद्धः प्रति विप्रासो मतिभिर्गृणन्त॑ः। 
उषा याति ज्योतिषा बाध॑माना विश्वा तमांसि दुरितापं 
देवी ॥ २॥ 


Prati stmagnir-jarate samiddhah prati vipraso 
matibhir-grnantah. Usa yati jyotisa badhamana 
visva tamamsi duritapa devi. 


In response, the kindled fire of yajna honours 


the rising dawn while the vibrant priests adore the light 
divine with holy thoughts, actions and words of song. 
The dawn, brilliant light of divinity, rises higher in 
flames and expands with light, dispelling all darkness 
of the world and warding off all evil, sin and crime. 


एता उ त्याः प्रत्य॑दृश्रन्पुरस्ताज्न्योतिर्य॑च्छं न्तीरु षसो 
विभातीः । अजींजनन्त्सूर्य' यज्ञमग्रिम॑पाचीनं तमो अगाद- 
जुष्टम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


280 RGVEDA 


Bi Uta u tyah pratyadrsran purastajjyotir-yacchan- 
tirusaso vibhatth. Ajijanantsuryam yajnamgnim- 
apacinam tamo agadajustam. 


And there in front yonder are seen those higher 
radiations of the dawn, lights of flame shining and 
illuminating the world. Up rises the sun, the fire of yajna 
grows and the flames of the holy fire expand, and thus 
all disagreeable darkness goes out, dispelled by the light 
divine. 


अचेति दिवो दुहिता मघोनी विश्वे पश्यन्त्युषसं विभातीम्‌। 
आस्थाद्रथं स्वधया युज्यमानमा यमश्वासः सुयुजो 
वह॑न्ति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Aceti divo duhita 71460077 visve pasyan-tyusasam 
vibhatim. Asthad ratham svadhaya yujyamanama 
yamasvasah suyujo vahanti. 


The resplendent and munificent dawn, child of 
heaven, is perceived rising on the horizon, riding her 
chariot efficient in service, powered by her own energy 
and drawn by efficient, well trained and well directed 
horses. All people of the world see this brilliant dawn 
and feel blest. 


प्रतिं त्वाद्य ret बुधन्ताऽस्माकासो मघवानो वयं च॑ । 
तिल्वित्कायध्व॑मुषसो विभातीर्युयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥५॥ 


5: Prati tvadya sumanaso budhanta’smakaso 
maghavano vayam ca. Tilvilayadhvam-usaso 
vibhatir-yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


You, O Dawn today, people of noble mind, our 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 79 281 


own, wealthy, honourable and excellent, and we all, 
invoke, admire and adore. O resplendent and 
magnificent lights of dawn, inspire us with love and 
refinement. O lights of divinity, saints and sages, protect 
and promote us with all peace, prosperity and happiness 
all ways, all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 79 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


व्युषा आवः पथ्या ३ SA पञ्च॑ ्चिती्मानुंषीर्बोधय॑न्ती । 


सुखन्द्ग्भिंरुक्षभिंभनुमश्रद्ि सूर्यो रोद॑सी चक्ष॑सावः ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Vyusa avah pathya jananam panca ksitirmanu- 
strbodhayanti. Susamdrgbhir-uksabhirbhan- 
umasred vi suryo rodasi caksasavah. 


The lights of the dawn arise, rejuvenating, 
revealing the paths of life for the day and awakening 
all five communities of the people for their daily chores. 
She reveals the birth of the sun by beatific radiations 
and as the sun rises it illuminates heaven and earth and 
fills them with light. 


व्य॑ञ्जते दिवो अन्तेष्वक्तून्विशो न युक्ता उषसो यतन्ते | 
सं ते गावस्तम आ वर्तयस्ति ज्योतिर्यच्छन्ति सवितेवं 
व्राहू।॥ २॥ 

2. Vyanjate divo antesvaktun viso na yukta usaso 


yatante. Sam te gavastama a vartayanti Jyotir- 
yacchanti saviteva bahu. 


The lights of the dawn radiate their rays and fill 
the space from earth to the bounds of heaven. Together 
they radiate in succession and act like a divine force in 


282 RGVEDA 


unison. Constantly those radiations turn out the darkness 
and, like the circuitous operations of solar radiation, 
they give light and life to the world in sequence. 


SYST इन्द्रतमा मघोन्यजींजनत्सुविताय श्रवांसि | 
fa दिवो देवी दुहिता द॑धात्यद्धिरस्तमा सुकृते ARF ॥ ३ ॥ 


Abhudusa indratama maghonyajijanat suvitaya 
sravamsi. Vi divo devi duhita dadhatyangir- 
astama sukrate vasuni. 


The dawn arises, most potent and regenerative, 
wealthy and munificent, and creates and recreates food, 
energy, wealth, honour and excellence for the goodness 
and well being of humanity. May the divine dawn, child 
born of the eternal light of life, bring us the most 
inspiring and rejuvenating wealths of life for the good 
life and well being of noble humanity. 


तावदुषो राधो अस्मभ्यं रास्व race AeA अस्दो गृणाना | 
यां त्वा wae use रवेण वि दूक््हस्य दुरो अद्रे 
Trot: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tavaduso radho asmabhyam rasva yavat stotr- 
bhyo arado grnana. Yam tva jajnurvrsabhasya 
ravena vi drlhasya duro adreraurnoh. 


O dawn of the light of divinity, give us ample 
wealth and competence for the good life, as much as 
you grant to the devout celebrants who have adored you 
since eternity and known you by the roar of thunder, 
the shower of clouds, and the bellowing of the bull, 
when you open the caves of mighty mountains and 
clouds and unveil the folds of darkness from over the 
light of the sun. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 80 283 


देवंदेवं राध॑से चोदय॑न्त्यस्मऋय॑क्सूनृता aM । व्युच्छन्तीं 
नः सनये धियो! धा यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः ॥ ५॥ 


2. Devamdevam radhase codayantyasmadryak 
sunrta trayanti. Vyucchanti nah sanaye dhiyo dha 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Inspiring every noble person for the attainment 
of wealth and competence for the good life, radiating 
the light of divinity and holy intelligence for us, 
enlightening our thought and will with the original 
message of divinity for advancement in generosity, O 
lights of the dawn, protect and promote us with all modes 
and means of success for peace, progress and the good 
life all ways all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 80 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्रति स्तोमेभिरुषसं वसिं्टा गीर्िविप्रासः प्रथमा अबुध्रन्‌ । 
विवर्तयन्तीं रज॑सी सम॑न्ते आविष्कृण्वतीं भुव॑नानि 
विर्वा ॥ ९॥ 

iF Prati stomebhir-usasam vasistha girbhirviprasah 
prathama abudhran. Vivartayantim rajasi sama- 
nte avisrnvatim bhuvanani visva. 


Brilliant saints and vibrant sages at the very first 
dawn of life receive the light of divinity in revelation, 
celebrate the dawn of light in inspired songs of 
adoration, the same light of dawn that illuminates and 
enlightens all regions of the universe within the bounds 
of heaven and earth every revolution of the day. 


एषा स्या नव्यमायुर्दधाना गू द्वी तमो ज्योतिषोषा अबोधि । 
अग्र॑ एति युवतिरहयाणा प्राचिंकितत्सूर्य' यज्ञपयिम्‌॥ २॥ 


284 RGVEDA 


2: Esa sya navyamayurdadhana gudhvi tamo 
Jyotisosa abodhi. Agra eti yuvatirahrayana praci- 
kitat suryam yajnmagnim. 


This is the dawn bearing and bringing new life 
and energy, that deep and sublime light of divinity which 
enlightens ignorance with knowledge and informs even 
darkness with light. It goes forward first before sunrise, 
youthful, bold, enlightened, unrestrained and free, and 
gives light to the sun and life to the yajna fire. 


अशू्वावतीर्गोमिं तीर्न उषासो वीरव॑तीः सद॑मुच्छन्तु SST: | 
घृतं दुहाना विश्वतः प्रपीता यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा 
नः॥३॥ 


a: Asvavatir-gomatirna usaso viravatih sadamu- 
cchantu bhadrah. Ghrtam duhana visvatah 
prapita yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 

May the blissful dawns every morning, 
abounding in light and dynamism, energy, fertility and 
procreation of the race in heroic generations, illuminate 
and energise our home and family, give us showers of 
water, milk and honey, and bless us with total fulfilment 
from all quarters of the world. O lights of dawn, protect 
and promote us with all peace, progress and happiness 
of the good life always all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 81 
Usha Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
प्रत्यु अदश्यायत्यु१ च्छन्ती दुहिता fea: | 
अपो महिं व्ययति चक्ष॑से तमो ज्योतिष्कृणोति सूनरी! ॥ ९॥ 


10 Pratyu adarsyayatyucchanti duhita divah. Apo 
mahi vyayati caksase tamo jyotiskrnoti sunari. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 81 285 


The great and glorious dawn, child of the light 
of divinity, is seen rising, dispelling mists and darkness, 
and illuminates with light the world of our actions, 
brilliant guide as she is for the day. 


उदुस्रियाः सृजते qa: wel उद्यज्नक्च॑त्रमर्चिंवत्‌। 
तवेदुषो व्युषि सूर्य॑स्य च सं भक्तेन गमेमहि neni 


2 Udusriyah srjate suryah sacan udyannaksatra- 
marcivat. Taveduso vyusi suryasya ca sam bha- 
ktena gamemahi. 


And then the sun, friend and associate together, 
takes over and, blazing with splendour, sends forth 
radiations of light and illuminates the planet earth. O 
dawn, in your original revelation of light divine and in 
the solar radiations, we pray, let us abide and act with 
faith and delightful experience of the illumination. 


प्रतिं त्वा दुहितर्दिव sat जीरा अभुत्स्महि । या वह॑सि पुरु 
स्पार्हं व॑नन्वति va न दाशुषे मय॑: ॥ २॥ 


3; Prati tva duhirardiva uso jira abhutsmahi. Ya 
vahasi puru sparham vananvati ratnam na dasuse 
mayah. 


O dawn, daughter of heaven, receiver of divine 
light and giver of inspiring radiations, who bring us 
cherished gifts of eternal and infinite blessings like the 
jewels of life for the generous man of charity, we pray, 
may we be instant and faithful recipients of your light 
divine, peace and joy, every morning. 


उच्छन्ती या कृणोषि teat महि प्रख्यै देवि स्वश | 
तस्यास्ते रत्नभाज ईमहे वयं स्याम मातुर्न सूनवः ॥ ४ ॥ 


286 RGVEDA 


4. Ucchanti ya krnosi mamhana mahi prakhyai devi 
svardrse. Tasyaste ratnabhaja imahe vayam 
syama maturna sunavah. 


Generous and divine dawn, great and glorious, 
who with your splendour enlighten the world to have 
the vision and awareness of divinity, we pray that we 
too may experience that vision and share those jewels 
of life, and thus abide in life like favourite children of 
the divine mother. 


तच्चित्रं राध आ भरोषो यदी्घ॑श्रुत्तमम्‌। 
यत्ते दिवो दुहितर्मर्तभोजनं तद्रास्व भुनजामहे ॥ ९५ ॥ 


5. Taccitram radha ठ bharoso yad dirghasruttamam. 
Yat te divo duhitar-martabhojanam tad rasva 
bhunajamahai. 


O light of dawn, bear and bring for us that vision, 
wealth and competence of life, wonderful, various, 
versatile and infinite, heard over the longest time and 
widest space which, O light of self-refulgent heaven, is 
your gift to mortal humanity as food for the body, mind 
and soul. Give us that wealth of food for our benefit 
and enlightenment. 


श्रव॑ः सूरिभ्यो stad वसुत्वनं वाजी अस्मभ्यं गोम॑तः | 
चो दयित्री मघोनः सूनृतावत्युषा उच्छदप स्रिधः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Sravah siribhyo amrtam vasutvanam vajan asma- 


bhyam gomatah. codayitri maghonah srnrtava- 
tyusa ucchadapa sridhah. 


O dawn, inspirer of the wealthy and powerful, 
commanding the light and truth of existence in action, 
bring immortal food and wealth, honour and fame to 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 82 287 


the wise and brave. Bring food and energy and the 
wealth of lands and cows for us all, and ward off all sin, 
error and enmity from us, shine and give us settlement 
in peace. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 82 
Indra-Varunau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


इन्द्रावरुणा युवमध्वराय नो fast जनाय महि शर्म॑ 
यच्छतम्‌ । दीर्घप्र॑यच्युमति यो वनुष्यति वयं ज॑येम पृत॑नासु 
दूढ्यः ॥ ९ ॥ 


iP Indravaruna yuvamadhvaraya no vise janaya 
mahi Sarma yacchatam. Dirghaprayajyumati yo 
vanusyati vayam jayema prtanasu dudhyah. 


Indra, lord of ruling power, and Varuna, lord of 
justice, you both together for our people in general 
provide a very home and comfortable security of life so 
that they may do their creative and productive work in 
peace without fear and violence and, in our joint 
ventures for the nation, we may defeat, better win over, 
the person who out of hate and malevolence injures or 
violates the peace of a citizen engaged in continuous 
work for the nation. 


सम्राव्छन्यः स्वराव्छन्य उच्यते वां महान्ताविन्द्रावरुणा 
महाव॑सू। विश्वे cara: परमे व्योमनि सं वामोजो वृषणा 
GaAs दधुः ॥ २॥ 

2. Samralanyah svaralanya ucyate vam mahanta- 


vindravaruna mahavasu. Visve devasah parame 
vyomani sam vamojo vrsana sam balam dadhuh. 


O Indra, lord ruler, and Varuna, lord of justice, 


288 RGVEDA 


grand powers of the common wealth, one of you is called 
‘Samrat, sovereign ruler of the nation as one collected 
person’, the other is called ‘Swarat, autonomous ruler 
of the judiciary as a sub-system of the sovereign state’. 
O brave and generous lords, may all the brilliant sages 
and scholars of the nation and all the divinities of nature 
in this vast sovereign common wealth of humanity vest 
you with dignity and power. 


(This mantra may also be interpreted as pointing 
to the two extreme ends, though both mutually balanced, 
of the sovereign social order, whether the order is a 
nation or the entire human world on earth. One is 
‘Samrat’ the total sovereign system with one supreme 
head, the other is ‘swarat’, the autonomous individual, 
the citizen with his or her freedoms and loyalty to the 
national law, and the balance of rights and duties of the 
‘swarat’ individual.) 


अन्वपां खान्य॑तृन्तमोजसा सूर्य॑मैरयतं fafa प्रभुम्‌। 
इन्द्रावरुणा मदे अस्य मायिनोऽ पिन्वतमपितः पिन्व॑तं 
धियः ॥ ३॥ 


Di Anvapam khanyatrntam-ojasa suryam-airayatam 
divi prabhum. Indravarunad made asya mayino’- 
pinvatam-apitah pinvatam dhiyah. 


With your light and lustre, O Indra and Varuna, 
sovereign ruler and lord of independent judgement, state 
and the individual, general will and collective power 
and individual will and autonomous judgement, together 
you break open the flood gates of waters and national 
energy in social dynamics. You raise the social brilliance 
in the regions of culture and enlightenment to the highest 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 82 289 
degrees of freedom and sovereignty. 


O lords of power and judgement, together in 
the joy of this wonderful ruling order, you replenish the 
dry streams of life to flow with fresh energy and energise 
our bored will and intellect with new vision, ambition 
and resolution all round. 


युवामिद्युत्सु पृत॑नासु बह्वयो युवां क्षेम॑स्य प्रसवे मितज्ञवः | 
ईशाना वस्व॑ उभयस्य कारव इन्द्र वरुणा सुहवा हवा- 
महे ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yuvamid yutsu prtanasu vahnayo yuvam ksema- 
sya prasave mitajnavah. [sana vasva ubhayasya 
karava indravaruna suhava havamahe. 


Indra and Varuna, ruler and preserver of both 
the citizen and the state for earthly as well as for higher 
values, men of fiery passion and action call upon you 
in their joint struggles for advancement and fresh 
acquisitions. Men of settled vision and judgement seated 
on firm ground call upon you in their efforts for peace, 
preservation and stability. Creators of the wealth of the 
nation thus, we all call upon you in our battles for both 
yoga and kshema, progress and preservation in balance, 
constant watchers and instantly responsive as you are. 


इन्द्रावरुणा यदिमानि चक्रथुर्विश्वा जातानि भुव॑नस्य 
मज्मना । क्षेमेण मित्रो वरुणं दुवस्यति मरुद्धिरुग्रः शुभ॑मन्य 
ईयते ॥ ५॥ 


9 Indravaruna yadimani cakrathurvisva jatani 
bhuvanasya majmana. Ksemena mitro varunam 
duvasyati marudbhirugrah subhamanya tyate. 


Indra and Varuna, with your strength and vision 


290 RGVEDA 


you rule and advance and thus serve all these children 
of the earth. Mitra, power of love and friendship with 
warmth of passion for peace and stability serves and 
supports Varuna, judgement and discrimination for the 
collective good, and the other, Indra, power and passion 
for advancement, with all his storm troopers fast as 
winds fights for the defence and advancement of the 
good of all. 


महे शुल्काय वरुणस्य नु त्विष ओजो मिमाते श्ुवम॑स्य 
यत्स्वम्‌। अजामिमन्यः इ्नथयंन्तमातिरह भ्रेभि॑रन्यः प्र 
aorta भूय॑सः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Mahe sulkaya varunasya nu tvisa ojo mimate 
dhruvam-asya yat svam. Ajamim-anyah snatha- 
yantam-atirad dabhrebhir-anyah pra vrnoti 
bhuyasah. 


For the greatness and rising prosperity of the 
social order of peace and progress, Indra and Varuna 
augment its power and lustre and preserve and increase 
what its basic and consolidated national asset is. One 
of them, Indra, overthrows its unfriendly and hostile 
opponents who try to sabotage and arrest its progress, 
and the other, Varuna, even with minimum but 
convincing power, subdues many devastating critics. 


न तमंहो न दुरितानि मर्त्यमिन्द्रवरुणा न तपः कुत॑श्चन। 
यस्य॑ देवा गच्छथो वीथो अध्वरं न तं मर्त॑स्य नाते 
परिंह्वतिः।॥ ७॥ 

7: Na tamamho na duritani martyam-idravarund na 


tapah kutascana. Yasya deva gacchatho vitho 
adhvaram na tam martasya naSate parihvrtih. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 82 291 


No sin, no evils, no suffering, nor any man’s 
crookedness can ever touch or disturb that mortal man, 
that ruler of the social order, whose yajna of individual 
freedom of action and loyalty to the social order and its 
laws, O Indra and Varuna, lord of omnipotence and lord 
of justice and mercy, glorious and generous rulers of 
the universe, you bless, visit, lead and guide. 


state न॑रा दैव्येनावसा ग॑तं ord हवं यदि मे जुजोषथः | 
युवोर्हि सख्यमुत वा यदाप्यं मा्डीकमिंन्द्रावरूणा नि 
य॑च्छतम्‌ ८ ॥ 


8. Arvan nara daivyenavasa gatam srnutam havam 
yadi me jujosathah. Yuvorhi sakhyamuta va 
yadapyam mardikamindravaruna ni yacchatam. 


O Indra and Varuna, leading lights of nature and 
humanity, lords of power, justice and mercy of the social 
and natural order, since I enjoy your love and friendship, 
come hither to me with protection and promotion, listen 
to my call, and bear, bring and give me the benefit of 
your friendship and whatever is peaceful, blissful and 
attainable. 


अस्माकमिन्द्रावरुणा भरेभरे पुरोयोधा भ॑वतं कु्योजसा | 
यद्वां हव॑न्त उभये अधं स्पधि नरस्तोकस्य तन॑यस्य 
सातिषु ९॥ 


2, Asmakam-indravaruna bharebhare puroyodha 
bhavatam krstyojasa. Yad vam havanta ubhaye 
adha sprdhi narastokasya tanayasya satisu. 


Indra and Varuna, ruling powers of the people 
and the social order, be the front leaders and warriors 
in every battle of ours since the leading lights of both 


292 RGVEDA 


the people and the ruling services invite you in their 
struggles for the progress of their children and grand 
children. 


अस्मे इन्द्रौ वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा द्युम्नं यच्छन्तु महि ore 
aud: | अवध्रं ज्योतिरदि तेऋतावृधो' देवस्य शलोकं 
सवितुर्म नामहे।॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Asme indro varuno mitro aryama dyumnam ya- 
cchantu mahi Sarma saprathah. Avadhram jyotir- 
aditer-rtavrdho devasya Slokam saviturmana- 
mahe. 


May Indra, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, lord of 
power, justice and generosity, love and friendship, and 
guide and lord ruler of the world order, bless us with 
honour and excellence and give us great good peace 
and prosperity ever increasing. We pray for the kind 
and beneficial light of mother Infinity and celebrate the 
glory of the self-refulgent Savita, lord creator, inspirer 
of life and protector of the truth and law of this expansive 
universe. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 83 
Indra-Varunau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


युवां न॑रा पश्य॑मानास आप्यं प्राचा गव्यन्त॑ः पृथुपर्शवो 
ययुः । दासा च वृत्रा हृतमा्यीणि च सुदास॑मिन्द्रावरुणावं- 
AAT UW ९ ॥ 

॥ Yuvam nara paSsyamanasa apyam praca gavyan- 
tah prthuparsavo yayuh. Dasa ca vrtra hatamar- 
yani ca sudasamindravaruna-vasavatam. 


Indra and Varuna, O warrior and tactician of the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 83 293 


commanding order, the bold and brave front rank 
leaders, seeing your power and performance, march 
forward and join you with large axes in hand and reach 
you as leaders with an open door. O fighters, having 
destroyed the forces of darkness and sabotage, with all 
your forces protect and promote the noble, the generous 
and the dedicated people of society. 


यत्रा नर॑ः स॒मय॑न्ते कृ तध्व॑जो यस्मिन्नाजा भवंति किं चन 
प्रियम्‌। यत्रा भय॑न्ते भुव॑ना स्वर्दृशस्तत्रा न इन्द्रावरुणाधि 
वोचतम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2: Yatra narah samaynte krtadhvajo yasminnaja 
bhavati kim ca na priyam. Yatra bhayante bhu- 
vana svardrsastatra na indravarunadhi vocatam. 


Where the leading brave of the nation meet with 
banners in hand, where there would be but little good 
in battle or in contest, where the people of the earth 
quake with fear though they see the light and joy of 
heaven otherwise, of that, O Indra and, Varuna, speak 
to us. 


सं भूम्या अन्तां ध्वसिरा अंदृक्चतेन्द्रवरुणा दिवि घोष 
sited | अस्थुर्जनानामुप मामरातयोऽवगिव॑ंसा हवनश्रुता 
ग॑तम्‌॥ ३॥ ति 
a Sam bhumya anta dhvasira adrksatendr-avaruna 
divi ghosa aruhat. Asthur-jananamupa mama- 
ratayo’rvagavasa havanasruta gatam. 


Indra and Varuna, destroyers of the evil and the 
violent, look to the ends of the earth, let the clang of 
arms and roar of battle rise to the sky, let the people’s 
enemies stand at the door and face me, and in any crisis, 


294 RGVEDA 


as you hear the signal and the clarion call, come forward 
with all the defence forces. 


इन्द्रौ वरुणा वधनाभिरप्रति भेदं वन्वन्ता प्र सुदासंमावतम्‌। 
ब्रह्माण्येषां श्रुणुःतं हवीमनि सत्या तृत्सूनामभवत्पुरो- 
हितिः usu 


4. Indravaruna vadhanabhiraprati bhedam van- 
vanta pra sudasamavatam. Brahmanyesam srnu- 
tam havimani satya trtsunam-abhavat purohitih. 


Indra and Varuna, leading warrior and enemy 
destroyer and saviour and rebuilder, facing and breaking 
the difficult enemy lines of offence with fatal weapons, 
protect the generous ruler of the land. In this strife of 
battle, listen to the earnest voices of the priests engaged 
in yajnic development of the nation, and let the priest- 
like prophecy and expectations of the people seeking 
peace and freedom come true. 


इन्द्रावरुणावभ्या त॑पन्ति माघान्यर्यो वनुषामरातयः | युवं 
हि वस्व॑ उभयस्य राजथोऽध स्मा नोऽ वतं पार्ये दिवि ॥ ५॥ 


> Indravarunavabhya tapanti maghanyaryo vanu- 
samaratayah. Yuvam hi vasva ubhayasya raja- 
tho’dha sma no’vatam parye divi. 


Indra, lord of power, Varuna, lord of justice and 
mercy, the evil deeds of the violent and the adversities 
caused by the saboteurs torment me all round. You alone 
rule and order the power and prosperity of both 
terrestrial and celestial worlds. Protect us on the earth 
and lead us to the light and joy of freedom beyond the 
bounds of earth. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 83 295 


युवां ह॑वन्त उभयास आजिष्विन्द्रं च वस्वो वरुणं च सातये | 
यत्र राज॑भिर्दशभिर्निबाधितं प्र सुदासमावतं तृत्सुभिः 
Geng ॥ 


6. Yuvam havanta ubhayasa ajisvindram ca vasvo 
varunam ca sataye. Yatra rajabhir-dasabhir- 
nibadhitam pra sudasamavatam trtsubhih saha. 


Both the people and the leaders call upon you 
in battles, O Indra and Varuna, for victory in battle and 
regaining of success and prosperity. They call upon you 
in battle where you defend the generous ruler against 
tens of tormenting dictators and, alongwith the ruler, 
you save three orders of scholars and sages in three fields 
of arts, sciences and universal values of Dharma and 
justice. 


aot राजानः समिता अय॑ज्यवः सुदास॑मिन्द्रावरुणा न 
युयुधुः | सत्या नृणामद्यसदामुपंस्तुतिर्देवा एंषामभवन्देव- 
हूतिषु॥७॥ 

qs Dasa rajanah samita ayajvayah sudasamindra- 
varuna na yuyudhuh. Satya nrnam-admasadam- 
upastutir-deva esam-abhavan devahitisu. 


Indra and Varuna, spirit of life and sense of 
judgement victorious over evil and impiety, even ten 
brilliant but impious and impulsive forces together 
cannot fight against the versatile and generous ruler of 
the self and society. The prayers of holy men dedicated 
to divinity in the house of yajna and charity come true 
and the divinities of humanity and nature both join the 
invocations of these holy men in their acts of piety and 
divine service. 


296 RGVEDA 


दाशराज्ञे परियत्ताय favad: सुदासं इन्द्रावरुणावशिक्षतम्‌ | 
श्वित्यञ्चो यत्र नम॑सा कपर्दिनो धिया धीवन्तो अस॑पन्त 
तुत्स॑वः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Dasarajne pariyattaya visvatah sudasa indra- 
varunavasiksatam. Svityanco yatra namasa 
kapardino dhiya dhivanto asapanta trtsavah. 


Indra and Varuna, you come to the help of the 
liberal man of charity and the benevolent ruler 
surrounded by hostilities all round, and you join his 
house of yajnic discipline and ruling order where 
intelligent and pious sages help the priestly performers 
with offers of oblations and thoughts of wisdom. 


वृत्राण्यन्यः समिथेषु Freda व्रतान्यन्यो अभि ara सद।। 
हवामहे वां वृषणा सुवृक्तिभिरस्मे इन्द्रावरुणा शर्म 
यच्छतम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

9. Vrtranyanyah samithesu jighnate vratanyanyo 
abhi raksate sada. Havamahe vam vrsna suvr- 
ktibhirasme indravaruna Sarma yacchatam. 


Of Indra and Varuna, one destroys evil and 
darkness in the battles of life, the other always protects 
the laws and observances of pious people’s holy 
disciplines. O generous and divine lords of power and 
wisdom, we invoke you and offer you homage with 
adorations and holy presentations. May Indra and 
Varuna give us a happy home of peace and prosperity. 


अस्मे इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा द्युम्नं यच्छन्तु महि शर्म॑ 
सप्रथ॑ः। अवध्रं ज्योतिरदितेऋतावृधों देवस्य श्लोकं 
सवितुर्मनामहे il ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 84 297 


10. Asme indro varuno mitro aryama dyumnam- 
yacchantu mahi sarma saprathah. Avadhram 
Jyotir-aditer-rtavrdho devasya slokam savitur- 
manamahe. 


May Indra, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama bless us 
with power, justice, love and friendship, and passion 
for progress, honour and excellence with settlement in 
a happy home wherein, ever advancing, we may live a 
life of truth, observing the eternal law of Dharma 
operative in nature and humanity. We pray for the 
blissful light of mother Infinity and celebrate in song 
the glory of Savita, lord giver of the light of life and 
inspiration for the True, the Good and the Beautiful in 
existence. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 84 
Indra- Varunau Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


आ वां राजानावध्वरे व॑वृत्यां हव्येभिंरिन्द्रावरुणा 
नमोभिः । प्र वां घृताची बाह्यर्दधाना परि त्मना विषुरूपा 
जिगाति॥ ९॥ 


ie A vam rajanavadhvare vavrtyam havyebhir- 
indra-varuna namobhih. Pra vam ghrtacit bahvor- 
dadhana pari tamana visurupa jigati. 


Indra-Varuna, self-refulgent rulers of life, 
Supreme Lord’s power and justice, light and rectitude, 
law and freedom, reward and punishment, I pray, let 
me turn to you and abide there. I invoke you with 
salutations and homage worthy for divinity in this yajna 
of life full of love and free from violence. The ladle in 
all universal forms overflowing with ghrta held in hands 


298 RGVEDA 


spontaneously moves to you to make the offer of total 
surrender to the sacred fire. 


युवो us बृहदिन्वति द्यौर्यौ सेतृभिररज्जुभिः सिनीथः । परि 
नो हेव्ठो वरुणस्य वृज्या उरु न इन्द्र॑ः कृणवदु त्लोकम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Yuvo rastram brhadinvati dyauryau setrbhir- 
arajjubhih sinithah. Pari no helo varunasya vrjya 
urum na indrah krnavadu lokam. 


The mighty heaven of light feeds the vast social 
order under your rule. You join, you bind, with bonds 
without snares. May the displeasure of Varuna and 
consequent suffering be far off from us. May Indra bless 
us and create a vast expansive world of light for us. 


कृतं a यज्ञं विदथेषु चारु कृतं ब्रह्माणि aie प्रशास्ता | 
उपो रयिर्देवजूतो न एतु प्र ण॑ः स्पाहाभिरूतिभिस्ति- 
रेतम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Krtam no yajnam vidathesu carum krtam brah- 
mani surisu prasasta. Upo rayirdevajuto na etu 
pra nah sparhabhir-utibhis-tiretam. 


Indra- Varuna, pray raise our yajnic acts in the 
business of life to beauty and grace. May you vest our 
songs of adoration and gratitude with love and faith 
among the wise and brave of the community. May 
wealth, honour and excellence of life inspired by 
divinities come to us. May you, Indra-Varuna, help us 
cross the seas of life with cherished means of protection 
and progress. 


अस्मे इन्द्रावरुणा fasaakt रयिं ध॑त्तं वसुमन्तं Gear 
प्रय आदित्यो अनंता पिनात्यमिंता शुरो दयते वसूनि ॥ ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 85 299 


4. Asme indravaruna visvavaram rayim dhattam 
vasumantam puruksum. Pra ya ddityo anrta 
minatyamita Suro dayate vasuni. 


Indra- Varuna, pray bear and bring for all of us 
wealth, honour and excellence of universal order in 
plenty, full of the world’s riches. The lord of light that 
frustrates and destroys untruth is the lord of power and 
gives boundless forms of wealth, joy and peaceful 
settlement on earth. 


इयमिन्द्रं वरुणमष्ट मे गीः urea तन॑ ये aT I 
सुरत्नासो देववीतिं गमेम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद। नः ॥ ५॥ 


= Tyamindram varunamasta me &7/1 pravat toke 
tanaye tutujana. Suratnaso devavitim gamema 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Let my voice of adoration reach Indra and 
Varuna at the earliest and bring protection and progress 
for our children and grand children at the fastest. Let us 
all blest with the jewels of life reach the house of yajna 
and attain the blessings of Indra and Varuna. O divinities 
of nature and humanity, saints and sages, protect and 
promote us with all modes and means of safety, security 
and all round well being of life for all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 85 
Indra- Varuna Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
पुनीषे वामर श्चसं मनीषां सोममिन्द्रय वरूणाय Bead | 
घृतप्र॑तीकामुषसं न देवीं ता नो याम॑न्ुरुष्यताम भीक ॥ ९ ॥ 


lL. Punise vam-araksasam manisam somam-idraya 
varunaya juhvat. Ghrtapratikam-usasam na 
devim ta no yamann-urusyatam-abhike. 


300 RGVEDA 


I dedicate and sanctify the song of adoration 
free from evil, enmity and malice, and offer it to Indra 
and Varuna, having made a presentation of holy soma 
to the ruler warrior and the chief of justice. It is soft and 
sweet and brilliant, full of power like the divine dawn. 
May Indra and Varuna come and inspire us to shine in 
our battle of life against evil with full divine protection. 


स्पर्धन्ते वा उ देवहूये अत्र येषुं ध्वजेषु दिद्यवः पत॑न्ति । 
युवं at इन्द्रावरुणावमित्रान्हतं पराचः शर्वा विषूचः ॥ २॥ 


Dy Spardhante va u devahiuye atra yesu dhvajesu 
didyavah patanti. Yuvam tan indravarunava- 
mitran hatam paracah Sarva visucah. 


And those who fight and oppose us in this 
struggle of the social order, and in those battles in which 
the enemy weapons fall upon our flags of honour, all 
those enemies and crooked adversaries, O Indra and 
Varuna, pray frustrate and destroy with the force and 
justice of the social order. 


आपं॑श्चिद्ि स्वय॑शसः ad 4 देवीरिन्द्रं वरुणं देवता धुः | 
कृष्टीरन्यो धारयंति प्रविक्ता वृत्राण्यन्यो studi 
हन्ति ॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Apasciddhi svayasasah sadahsu devirindram 
varunam devata dhuh. Krstiranyo dharayati 
pravikta vrtranyanyo apratini hanti. 


Intelligent and brilliant people in their own right 
of quality and social prestige select, appoint and 
consecrate Indra and Varuna, brilliant and noble 
authorities, in their offices and assemblies. One of them, 
Varuna, manages the different orders of people, the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 85 301 


other, Indra, destroys forces of darkness and enmity who 
refuse to be managed otherwise. 


स सुक्रतुंऋतचिद॑स्तु होता य आदित्य शव॑सा वां नम॑स्वान्‌ | 
आववर्तदवसे वां हविष्मानसदित्स सुविताय प्रय॑स्वान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa sukratur-rtacid-astu hota ya aditya Savasa vam 
namasvan. Avavartad-avase vam havisman- 
asadit sa suvitaya prayasvan. 


Surely that individual is a good citizen of noble 
action, a true yajaka, dedicated to universal values of 
truth and law, who, of his own free will, with his power 
and potential and high degree of endeavour and 
application, turns to you, O brilliant Indra and Varuna, 
with sincere loyalty and homage for the sake of 
protection and advancement. And surely he deserves 
all round happiness and well being. 


इयमिन्द्रं वरुणमष्ट मे गीः प्रावत्तोके तन॑ ये तू तुंजाना। 
सुरत्नासो देववीतिं गमेम यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सद। नः ॥ ५॥ 


a Iyamindram varunamasta me gth pravat toke 
tanaye tutujana. Suratnaso devavitim gamema 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


May this earnest and vibrating voice of homage 
and prayer reach Indra and Varuna for the protection 
and progress of our children and grand children. May 
we, blest with the jewels of life, reach and join the noble 
assembly of the enlightened and participate in the yajnic 
business of the nation. O Indra and Varuna, O 
enlightened citizens and leaders of humanity, protect 
and promote us with all safeguards and securities and 
all modes of happiness and well being all ways all time. 


302 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 86 
Varuna Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


धीरा त्व॑स्य महिना जनूंषि वि यस्तस्तम्भ रोद॑सी चिदुर्वी । 
प्र नाकमृष्वं नुनुदे बृहन्तं द्विता नक्षत्रं पप्रथ॑च्य भूमं ॥ ९ ॥ 


ke Dhira tvasya mahina janumsi vi yastastambha 
rodast cidurvi. Pra nakamrsvam nunude brhan- 
tam dvita naksatram paprathacca bhuma. 


Firm in balance are the creations of this Varuna, 
light of the universe, by virtue of his greatness as he 
holds and stabilises the heaven and earth and indeed 
the expanding universe. He energises and impels the 
high heavens of bliss and the distant stars and lights 
them both day and night, pervading the vast world of 
existence. Only the wise and brave know this. 


उत स्वयां तन्वा सं व॑दे तत्कदा न्वपैन्तर्वरुणे भुवानि। 
किं मे हव्यम॑णानो जुषेत कदा मु॑व्टीकं सुमना अभि 
ख्य॑म्‌॥ २॥ 


१ Uta svaya tanva sam vade tat kada nvantarvarune 
bhuvani. Kim me havyam-ahrnano juseta kada 
mrlikam sumana abhi khyam. 


And when would I, by my own individual self, 
commune with the lord? When would I join the 
innermost presence of Varuna? Would he accept my 
homage and prayer with pleasure? When would I, with 
peace in the mind, experience the bliss of that presence 
and power? 


पृच्छे तदेनो वरुण fecal एमि चिकितुषो विपृच्छम्‌ | 
wana कवय॑ज्चिदाहुरयं ह तुभ्यं वरुणो हृणीते ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 86 303 


a Prcche tadeno varuna didrksupo emi cikituso 
viprccham. Samanaminme kavayascidahur- 
ayam ha tubhyam varuno 1111171९. 


O Varuna, I ask myself what sin is. Keen for the 
vision of divinity, I go and meet the wise, and freely I 
ask what sin is. And the wise sages all say the same 
thing to me: This Varuna feels displeased only for your 
sake, to save you from sin. 


किमाग॑ आस वरूण ज्येष्ठं यत्स्तोतारं जिघांससि eater 
प्र तन्मे वोचो दूठ्छभ स्वधावोऽ व॑ त्वानेना नम॑सा तुर 
इयाम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Kimaga asa varuna jyestham yat stotaram 
Jighamsasi sakhayam. Pra tanme voco dulabha 
svadhavo ’va tvanena namasa tura iyam. 


Varuna, what is the greatest sin or crime for 
which you punish your friend and celebrant? Speak of 
that to me, O lord rare to be attained, self-refulgent and 
self-omnipotent. Save me, lord. A sinless innocent soul, 
post haste I come to you with homage, prayer and 
surrender. 


अवं द्रुग्धानि पित्र्या सृजा नोऽ व या वयं च॑कृमा तनूभिः। 
अवं राजन्पशुत॒पं न तायुं सृजा वत्सं न दाम्नो वसिं्ठम्‌॥ ५॥ 

Ava drugdhani pitrya srja no’va ya vayam cakrma 
tanubhih. Ava rajan pasutrpam na tayum srja 
vatsam na damno vasistham. 


Loosen and free us from weaknesses inherited 
from the forefathers. Save us from the sins and evils 
committed by ourselves in person. O sovereign ruler, 


304 RGVEDA 


free us from animal passions, like the thief from jail, 
and relieve the earnest celebrant from passions and 
slavery, like the calf set free from bonds of the tether. 


नसस्वो दश्चो वरुण afta: सा सुरां मन्युर्विभीदको 
अचित्तिः । अस्ति ज्यायान्कनीयस उपारे स्वप्र॑श्चनेदनुंतस्य 
प्रयोता ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Na sa 5170 dakso varuna dhrutih sa sura manyur- 
vibhidako acittih. Asti jyayan kaniyasa upare 
svapnascanedanrtasya prayota. 


It is not our own essential virtue, competence 
and expertise that is the cause of evil and the fall. It is 
liquor, anger, gambling and infatuation, ignorance and 
loss of good sense that is the cause of evil. It is also the 
company of the wrong senior with the junior and the 
dreams of unrealistic ambition that tempt a person to 
fall a victim to falsehood and evil. 


अरं दासो न Heed कराण्यहं देवाय yuras नागाः | 
अचेतयदचितो देवो अर्यो गृत्सं राये कवितरो जुनाति ॥ ७ ॥ 


Tei Aram daso na milhuse karanyaham devaya 
bhurnaye’nagah. Acetayad-acito devo aryo 
grtsam raye kavitaro junati. 


Let me, an innocent person free from evil, do 
unreserved service and offer sincere prayers like a 
dedicated servant to Varuna, refulgent and generous lord 
giver of sure and complete fulfilment. He, brilliant and 
generous lord of all, wiser than any one else, omniscient 
master, enlightens the ignorant and inspires the holy 
and intelligent, and leads them to honour and prosperity. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 87 305 


अयं सु तुभ्यं वरूण स्वधावो हदि स्तोम उपश्रितश्चिदस्तु | 
शंनः क्षेमे शमु योगे नो अस्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा 
नः॥८॥ 


8. Ayam su tubhyam varuna svadhavo hrdi stoma 
upasritascidastu. Sam nah kseme Samu yoge no 
astu yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Varuna, self-existent lord of omniscience and 
omnipotence, may this song of adoration reach your 
heart and be graciously accepted. Let there be all good 
and full protection for what we have achieved, and all 
good grace and advancement for what we may further 
achieve. O lord, O divinities of nature and humanity, 
pray protect and promote us with all happiness and well 
being all ways all time, bless us with yoga and kshema 
in peace. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 87 
Varuna Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


रद॑त्पथो वरुणः सूयय प्राणींसि समुद्रिया नदीनाम्‌ | 
सर्गो न सृष्टो अर्व तीऋतायञ्चकारं महीर वनी रह॑भ्यः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Radat patho varunah suryaya prarnamsi samu- 
driya nadinam. Sargo na srsto arvatir-rtayan- 
cakara mahir-avanir-ahabhyah. 


The universe is a mighty explosion of thought, 
energy and matter let free like a cosmic horse on course: 
Varuna, lord of supreme power, intelligence and 
imagination, carving out orbits for the self-refulgent 
stars, setting cosmic oceans into floods of rivers heading 
for the sea, structuring mighty moving galaxies and great 
planets and satellites from the stars, all moving in 


306 RGVEDA 
observance of the cosmic law. 


आत्मा ते वातो रज आ नवीनोत्पशुर्न ufireaa 
ससवान्‌। अन्तर्मही लं हती रोद॑सीमे विश्वां ते धाम॑ वरुण 
प्रियाणि ॥ २॥ 


2. Atma te vato raja क navinot pasurna bhurnirya- 
vase sasavan. Antarmahi brhati rodasime visva 
te dhama varuna priyani. 


Your spirit, O Varuna, sets the currents of energy 
in motion like winds and energises the cosmic particles 
anew, once asleep all, now rushing restless for food for 
existence like a horse moving for grass. O lord immanent 
and transcendent, all this great expansive universe of 
heaven and earth, all these abodes of existence, are 
homes of life dear to you, dear to the living forms. 


परि स्पशो वरुणस्य स्मदिष्टा उभे प॑श्यन्ति रोद॑सी सुमेके । 
ऋतावानः कवयो यज्ञधीराः प्रचेतसो य इषयन्त मन्म॑ 3 


3; Pari spaso varunasya smadista ubhe pasyanti 
rodast sumeke. Rtavanah kavayo yajnadhirah 
pracetaso ya isayanta manma. 


Currents of cosmic intelligence which are 
observant forces of Varuna appointed to their task, 
together watch both heaven and earth and they also 
observe and inspire to thought and imaginative creation, 
poets, intellectuals and devotees constantly dedicated 
to yajna all of whom observe the laws of eternal truth 
and Dharma and celebrate the divinity of Varuna. 


उवाचं मे वरुणो मेधिराय त्रिः सप्त नामाघ्न्या fate | 
विद्वान्पदस्य गुह्या न वोचद्युगाय विप्र उप॑राय शिक्ष॑न्‌ x ॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 87 307 


4. Uvaca me varuno medhiraya trih sapta nama- 
ghnya bibharti. Vidvan padasya guhya na vocad 
yugaya vipra uparaya Siksan. 


Varuna, vibrant lord of cosmic intelligence, 
supreme teacher, spoke to me, dedicated faithful 
disciple, that divine nature, divine speech, divine earth 
and sacred cow, each inviolable, bears thrice seven 
names. Enlightening the scholar approaching the teacher 
with homage and reverence, the omniscient lord speaks 
of the supreme state of freedom and bliss as the mystery 
of existence. 


frat द्यावो Ffgar अन्तर॑स्मिन्तिस््रो भूमीरुप॑राः षद्धिं- 
धानाः । गृत्सो राजा वरुणश्चक्र एतं दिवि प्रद्धं हिरण्ययं 
शुभे SLUNG 
a, Tisro dyavo nihita antarasmin tisro bhumiru- 
parah sadvidhanah. Grtso raja varunascakra 
etam divi prenkham hiranyayam subhe kam. 
Three heavens of light are contained in the 
presence of this lord Varuna and there are three orders 
of the earthly globe over which there are six variations. 
The all - wise refulgent omnipotent ruler Varuna created 
all this universe including the vibrant and glorious sun 
in the blissful heaven high up for light of the world. 


अव सिन्धुं वरुणो द्यौरिव स्थाद्‌ द्रप्सो न श्वेतो 
मृगस्तुविष्मान्‌ । गम्भीरशंसो रज॑सो विमान॑: सुपारक्ष॑त्रः सतो 
अस्य राजां ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ava sindhum varuno dyauriva sthad drapso na 


Sveto mrgas-tuvisman. Gambhirasamso rajaso 
vimanah suparaksatrah sato asya raja. 


308 RGVEDA 


Varuna places the sea below as the heaven 
above, the lord immaculate who, as a drop of crystal, is 
mighty powerful as the lion, supreme adorable, creator 
of space and stars, sovereign of the mighty universal 
order, sole ruler and law giver of this world of reality. 


यो मृव्छयाति चक्रुषे चिदागो! वयं स्याम॒ वरणो अनागाः | 
अनुं व्रतान्यदिः cera यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः ॥ ७॥ 


न Yo mrlayati cakruse cidago vayam syama varune 
anagah. Anu vratanyaditer-rdhanto yuyam pata 
svastibhih sada nah. 


O Varuna, lord who save even the sinner, bless 
us that we may be sinless, observing the laws of mother 
Infinity’s discipline. O lord, O saints and sages, teachers 
and rulers, protect and promote us with peace, progress 
and all round well being all ways all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 88 
Varuna Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र शुन्ध्युवं वरूणाय test मतिं व॑सिष्ठ मी क्षें भरस्व | 
य ईमवञ्चिं कर॑ते यज॑त्रं सहस्रामघं वृष॑णं बृहन्त॑म्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


Ls Pra sundhyuvam varunaya prestham matim 
vasistha milhuse bharasva. Ya tmarvancam 
karate yajatram sahasramagham vrsanam 
brhantam. 


Holiest sage and brilliant scholar, develop pure, 
purifying and transparent intelligence of the dearest 
order and offer reverence and yajnic homage to Varuna, 
potent and generous lord inspirer of life, who creates, 
energises and brings us the great adorable sun and the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 88 309 


expansive and deepening cloud of showers bearing a 
thousandfold wealth of life. 


अधा न्व॑स्य संदृशं Wari वरुणस्य मंसि । 
स्वधर्यदश्म॑त्रथिपा उ अन्धोऽ भि मा addera निनीयात्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Adha nvasya samdrsam jaganvan-agneranikam 
varunasya mamsi. Svaryadasmann-adhipa u 
andho’bhi ma vapurdrsaye niniydt. 


Meditating on the blissful presence of Varuna, 
lord of light and wisdom, when I feel the flames of fire 
and divine exhilaration, then, I pray, the lord of bliss 
and sovereign of the world may reveal to me his divine 
presence as it is so that I may experience it in the inner 
being and live the ecstasy of life divine. 


आ यद्रुहाव वरुणश्च नावं प्र यत्संमुद्रमीरयांव HEAT | 
अधि यदपां स्नुभिश्चराव WSS Faas शुभे कम्‌॥ २॥ 


a: A yad ruhava varunasca navam pra yat samudra- 
mirayava madhyam. Adhi yadapam snubhi- 
scarava pra prenkha inkhayavahai subhe kam. 


And when I ride on the wings of Ananda 
samadhi with the presence of divine Varuna, I float 
through the boundless ocean of his infinite 
omnipresence, and when I fly over the world of karmic 
existence and all that goes with it, I transcend it with 
the divine presence and roll in the infinite ecstasy of 
pure bliss above the world of existence. 


afas ह वरुणो नाव्याधादृषिं चकार स्वपा महोभिः। 
स्तो तारं विप्र॑ः सुदिनत्वे stat यान्नु द्याव॑स्ततनन्यादु- 
घासं: ॥ 2 ॥ 


310 RGVEDA 


4. Vasistham ha varuno navyadhadrsim cakara 
svapa mahobhih. Stotaram viprah sudinatve 
ahnam yannu dyavastatanan yadusasah. 


Varuna, lord of love and omniscience, helps the 
man of vision and enlightenment to rise to the plane of 
bliss and salvation with great good actions, leads the 
dedicated celebrant through the holy light of his days 
of meditative actions to the dawn of light divine, and 
extends the dawn to the continuous light of a heaven of 
infinite bliss. 

क्ववै त्यानिं नौ सख्या ब॑भूवुः सचावहे adach पुरा Feta 
बृहन्तं मानं वरुण स्वधावः Teele जगमा गृहं ते ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Kva tyani nau sakhya babhuvuh sacavahe 
yadavrkam pura cit. Brhantam manam varuna 
svadhavah sahasradvaram jagama grham te. 


O lord, where are those days of dawn, that flight 
of bliss, that friendship and intimacy we lived together 
ever before without violation? What happened? O 
Varuna, lord of absolute power and bliss, let us come 
home with you, to that very state of bliss open a thousand 
ways, that grace abounding and infinite. 


य आपिर्नित्यो वरुण प्रियः सन्त्वामागांसि कृणवत्सखा 
ते। मा त एन॑स्वन्तो यक्षिन्भुजेम यन्धि ष्मा विप्र॑: स्तुवते 
वरूथम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 

6. Ya apirnityo varuna priyah san tvamagamsi 
krnavat sakha te. Ma ta enasvanto yaksin bhujema 
yandhi sma viprah stuvate varutham. 


Varuna, lord of judgement and love, if some one 
who is always your devotee, ever a friend dear to you, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 89 311 


by remiss indulges in sin, let him not do so. O lord 
adorable let us not live this life in sin. O lord of love, 
omniscient power, bring a home of peace, the bliss of 
light for the devoted celebrant. 


धरुवासु! त्वासु क्षितिषु क्षियन्तो व्य स्मत्पाशं वरुणो 
मुमोचत्‌। अवो! वन्वाना अदि तेरुपस्थाद्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
सदां नः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Dhruvasu tvasu ksitisu ksiyanto vyasmat pasam 
varuno mumocat. Avo vanvana aditerupasthad 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Living in these settled homes in these peaceful 
lands of mother earth, we pray, may Varuna release us 
from the bonds of sin and sinful existence. Enjoying 
peace and protection received from the lap of inviolable 
earth and mother Infinity, O saints and sages, protect 
and promote us with all modes of peace and well being 
always without relent. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 89 
Varuna Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


मो षु deur मृन्मयं We राजन्नहं TH 
Wot सुक्षत्र Wasa Ue 
1. Mo su varuna mrnmayam grham rajannaham 
gamam. Mrla_ suksatra mrlaya. 
Varuna, refulgent ruling lord of the world, just 
and merciful, let me not be destined to go to the house 


of clay. Be gracious, O holy lord of the world order, 
give me peace and joy. 


312 RGVEDA 


यदेमि प्रस्फुरन्निव दृतिर्न ध्मातो अद्रिवः। 
मृव्ठा सुक्षत्र Woes ॥ २॥ 


pA Yademi prasphuranniva drtirna dhmato adrivah. 
Mrla suksatra mrlaya. 


If at all I go blown about as a leaf or floating 
around as a cloud of dust in mere existence, even then, 
O gracious ruler of the order of existence, be kind, save 
me and give me joy. 
क्रत्व॑ः समह दीनतां प्रतीपं ज॑गमा शुचे । 
Wot सुक्षत्र WA ॥ ३॥ 

3. Kratvah samaha dinata pratipam jagama 571८९. 
Mrla suksatra mrlaya. 


O lord of holy action and magnanimity, if by 
weakness or error I go astray or move into the opposite 
direction, then, O noble ruler, be gracious and kind and 
save me. 


अपां neal तस्थिवांसं तृरष्णाविदज्जरितारम्‌। 
Wer सुक्षत्र word i 
4. Apam madhye tasthivamsam trsnavidaj-jarita- 
ram. Mrla suksatra mrlaya. 
I stand stranded in the midst of waters, but still 
thirst torments me, the celebrant. I stand rooted in the 


heart of karma, yet ambition overwhelms me, the 
devotee. O lord of magnanimous order, save me, bless me. 


यत्किं चेदं व॑रुण दैव्ये e's Paste मनुष्या ईैश्चरांमसि। 
अचित्ती यत्तव धर्मौ युयोपिम मा नस्तस्मादेन॑सो देव 
रीरिषः ॥ ५५॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 90 313 


a Yat kim cedam varuna daivye jane’bhidroham 
manusyas-caramasi. Acitti yat tava dharma 
yuyopima ma nas-tasmad-enaso deva ririsah. 


O Varuna, in the midst of noble humanity 
whatever wrong we commit as humans against divinity 
out of ignorance or negligence, whatever code of 
Dharma we violate, be not angry because of that 
trespass. O lord of grace, save us, bless us. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 90 
Vayu, Indra-Vayu Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र वीरया शुच॑यो दद्रिरे वामध्वर्युभिर्मधुंमन्तः Gara: | 

वहं वायो नियुतो, याह्यच्छा Prat सुतस्यान्ध॑सो मदाय ॥ ९ ॥ 
ie Pra viraya Sucayo dadrire vam-adhvaryu-bhir- 

madhumantah sutasah. Vaha vayo niyuto yahy- 

ccha piba sutastyandhaso madaya. 


Vayu, vibrant source giver of wind energy, come 
hither, bring all the appointed forces, pure honey sweets 
of food and drink distilled by specialists of the art are 
prepared and offered for you. Come and taste of the 
purest foods for the inspiration and motivation of the 
brave. 


ईशानाय प्रहुतिं यस्त आनट्‌ शुचिं सोमं शुचिपास्तुभ्यं 
वायो। कृणोषि तं मर्त्येषु प्रास्तं जातोजातो जायते 
वाज्य॑स्य॥ २॥ 

2. Isanaya prahutim yasta anat ईला) somam 
Sucipastubhyam vayo. Krnosi tam martyesu 
prasastam jatojato jayate vajyasya. 


Vayu, ruler, controller and giver of energy, 


314 RGVEDA 


whoever the person makes an offering to you with yajna 
for energy and serves you with pure soma of delight, 
you raise him to honour and fame among mortals and, 
O protector, promoter and lover of purity and energy, 
he grows stronger and more powerful as he emerges in 
one manifestation and birth after another. 


राये नु यं जज्ञतू रोद॑सीमे राये देवी धिषणां धाति देवम्‌ । 
अधं वायुं नियुतः सश्चत स्वा उत vad वसुधितिं 
Fre ३॥ 


Raye nu yam jajnatu rodasime raye devi dhisana 
dhati devam. Adha vayum niyutah sascata sva 
uta Ssvetam vasudhitim nireke. 


Vayu is the brilliant and generous power of 
energy which the heaven and earth generate for the 
production of wealth, the light of which the divine voice 
of omniscience, Veda, holds and bears for the knowledge 
of humanity. This pure and brilliant power, treasure hold 
of wealth and prosperity, Vayu, its own companion 
forces serve, and bear it to fight out want and poverty 
where they prevail. 


उच्छन्नुषसः सुदिना अरिप्रा उरु ज्योति्विंविदुर्ींध्यानाः | 
गव्यं चिदूर्वमुशिजो वि darren प्रदिवः सस्रुरापः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Ucchannusasah  sudina aripra uru jyotir-vivi- 
dur-didhyanah. Gavyam cidurvamusijo vi vavru- 
stesamanu pradivah sasrurapah. 


Pure and immaculate lights of dawn arise and 
shine to bring in the happy day. Shining they collect 
and radiate vast light for the world, and, brilliant with 
beauty and living energy, they uncover and reveal the 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 90 315 


wealth of the earth and vast sky. Consequently the lights 
of dawn lead to radiations of light from the sun and the 
day’s activities follow and proceed. 


ते सत्येन मन॑सा दीध्यानाः स्वेन॑ युक्तासः Sedat वहन्ति | 
इन्द्र॑वायू वीर वाहं रथं वामीशानयोरभि Gat: सचन्ते ॥ ५॥ 


5, Te satyena manasa didhyanah svena yuktasah 
kratuna vahanti. Indravayu viravaham ratham va- 
misanayorabhi prksah sacante. 


They, Indra and Vayu, electric and wind 
energies, kindled, energised and developed by sincere 
application of the scholar’s mind and, together 
augmented with homogeneous means and materials, 
give power, by yajnic combustion, to the chariot for 
transport of the brave. O scientists of wind and 
electricity, ruling the field of energy, all friends, 
associates and colleagues in the field join you in kindred 
programmes. 


ईशानासो ये दध॑ते स्वर्णो गोभिरश्वेभिर्वसुभिर्दिर॑ण्येः। 
इन्द्र॑वायू सूरयो विश्वमायुरर्वंद्धिवीरिः पृत॑नासु सह्युः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Isanaso ye dadhate 5141110 gobhir-asvebhir-vasu- 
bhirhiranyaih. Indravayu surayo visvam-ayur- 
arva-dbhirviraih prtanasu sahyuh. 


Indra and Vayu, scholars and scientists of wind 
and electric energy, those leaders, pioneers and rulers, 
who bear and bring us peace, prosperity and joy with 
lands, cows and holy speech, horses and other means 
of transport, and golden wealths of the world, are brave 
heroes. They attain full health and longevity in the world 
for themselves and others, and win in the battles of life 


316 RGVEDA 


over enemies and negativities by virtue of warriors 
provided with fast and efficient means of transport and 
communication. 


अर्वन्तो न श्रव॑सो भिक्ष॑माणा इन्द्रवायू सुष्टुतिभिर्वसिं्ठाः। 
वाजयन्तः स्वव॑से हुवेम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ७॥ 


Arvanto na sravaso bhiksamana indravayu 
sustutibhirvasisthah. Vajayantah svavase huvema 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Noble and brilliant scholars, fast and dynamic 
in their search for honour, fame and prosperity, warriors 
fighting for victory and success in the battles of life, 
and citizens for the sake of peace, protection and 
progress in life, all of us with songs of praise and 
appreciation call upon scientists and engineers of energy 
and power of wind and electricity with the exhortation: 
you all protect and promote us with all means and modes 
of happiness and well being all ways all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 91 
Vayu, Indra- Vayu Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


कुविदङ्क नम॑सा ये gered: पुरा देवा अनवद्यास आसन्‌ । 
ते वायवे मन॑वे बाधितायाऽवासयन्चुषसं सूर्येण ॥ ९॥ 


i; Kuvidanga namasa ye vrdhasah pura deva 
anavadyasa asan. Te vayave manave badhitaya- 
*yasayann-usasam suryend. 


Often indeed the veteran scholars of old who 
were brilliant and admirable beyond reproach and 
question, working with reverence and dedication for 
the advancement of knowledge and for giving new 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 91 317 


inspiration and vibrant motivation to humanity in crisis, 
kindled the yajnic fire at dawn and ushered in a new era 
with the rise of the sun. 


sored दूता न दभाय गोपा मासश्च पाथः शरद॑श्च पूर्वीः | 
इन्द्र॑वायू सुष्टुतिवीमियाना मांडकमींडे सुवितं च नव्य॑म्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Usanta duta na dabhaya gopa masasca pathah 
Saradasca purvih. Indravayu sustutir-vamiyana 
mardikamitte suvitam ca navyam. 


Indra and Vayu, leaders of power and vibrancy 
of passion motivated like prophets, you are not for 
oppression but for the defeat of oppression. You are 
protectors of humanity and pioneers over paths of 
progress for many many months, seasons and years. O 
harbingers of power and progress, our song of adoration 
addressed to you seeks compassion and prays for a new 
rise in wealth and well being. 


पीवोअन्नां रयिवृधः सुमेधाः श्वेतः fate नियुतामथिश्रीः। 
ते वायवे सम॑नसो वि त॑स्थर्विंश्वेन्नर॑ः स्वपत्यानि चक्रुः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Pivo-annan rayivrdhah sumedhah Svetah sisakti 
niyutamabhisrih. Te vayave samanaso vi tasthur- 
visvennarah svapatyani cakruh. 


Leaders and pioneers of holy intelligence and 
yajna augment foods, they augment wealth, which the 
sun like a white orb of heaven favours as it energises 
the grace and power of the yajnic acts of pioneers with 
the light of its rays. The Dedicated Scholars together of 
one mind and resolution for the inspiration and 
motivation of the people stay strong and, being leaders 
of the world, they execute holy programmes leading to 


318 RGVEDA 
nobler generations of the future. 


यावत्तर॑स्तन्वो ३ यावदोजो यावन्नरश्चश्च॑सा दीध्यानाः | 
शुचिं सोमं शुचिपा पातमस्मे इन्द्र॑वायू सद॑तं बर्हिरेदम्‌॥। ठ ॥ 


4. Yavat tarastanvo yavadojo yavannarascaksasa 
didhyanah. Sucim somam sucipa patamasme 
indravayu sadatam barhiredam. 


Indra and Vayu, leaders of light and power, as 
long as life and health continues, as long as honour and 
lustre lasts, as long as leading lights retain their vision 
and intelligence, so long abide by this house of 
advancement in knowledge and power and, O protectors 
of truth and purity, participate and promote our soma 
yajna of peace, purity and prosperity in holiness. 


नियुवाना नियुतः स्पार्हवीरा इन्द्र॑वायू सरथं यातमर्वाक्‌ | 
इदं हि वां प्रभूतं मध्वो अग्रमध प्रीणाना वि मुंमुक्त- 
मस्मे ॥ ५॥ 


3, Niyuvana niyutah sparhavira indravayu saratham 
yatamarvak. Idam hi vam prabhrtam madhvo 
agramadha prinana vi mumukta-masme. 


Indra, universal power and presence of all 
human action, Vayu, universal inspiration and 
motivation for progress, loved and revered heroes of 
universal life, users and supporters of all human energy, 
the entire humanity takes recourse to you. Come hither 
to us with your wealth of knowledge, action and 
advancement. This best of the honey sweets of our yajnic 
achievement is reserved and first offered to you. Pray 
take it and, pleased and loving, release us from the snares 
of sin and evil. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 91 319 


या वां तं नियुतो याः सहस््रमिन्द्र॑वायू विश्ववाराः 
सच॑न्ते। आभिंयतिं सुविदत्राभिरर्वाक्पातं न॑रा प्रति- 
भूतस्य मध्व॑: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ya vam Satam niyuto yah sahasram-indravayu 
visvavarah sacante. Abhiryatam suvidatra- 
bhirarvak patam nara pratibhrtasya madhvah. 


Indra and Vayu, leading lights of knowledge and 
action, heroes of universal faith and choice, hundreds 
are your supporters, thousands indeed, who join and 
support you. With these, come hither to us by propitious 
paths with blissful gifts and, O leaders and pioneers, 
accept the honey sweets of our homage of abundant 
soma. 


अर्वन्तो न श्रव॑सो भिक्ष॑माणा इन्द्रवायू सुष्टुतिभिर्वसिं्ठाः। 
वाजयन्तः स्वव॑से हुवेम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः ॥ ७॥ 


क Arvanto na sravaso bhiksamana indravayu 
sustutibhir-vasisthah. Vajayantah svavase 
huvema yuyam pata svastibhi sada nah. 


Flying on the wings of vision and imagination 
like riders of the skies, motivated and ambitious for 
honour and fame, aspiring for power and victory, 
brilliant sages and scholars and all of us invoke and 
invite you, Indra and Vayu, lords of knowledge and 
power, inspiration and motivation, with songs of 
admiration for the sake of protection and progress. O 
saints and sages, Indra and Vayu, pray bless us and 
advance us with all means and modes of peace, 
prosperity and all round well being all ways all time. 


320 RGVEDA 


Mandala 7/Sukta 92 
Vayu, Indra- Vayu Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
आ वायो भूष शुचिपा उप॑ नः सहस्त्रं ते नियुतो! विश्ववार । 
उपो ते अन्धो मद्यमयामि यस्य॑ देव दधिषे पृर्वपेय॑म्‌॥ ९ ॥ 
A vayo bhisa sucipa upa nah sahasram te niyuto 
visvavara. Upo te andho madyamayami yasya 
deva dadhise purvapeyam. 


1. Vayu, lord of inspiration, motivation, 
action and achievement, lover and protector of truth and 
purity, commanding love, reverence and choice of the 
world, come and grace our house of yajnic action where 
your supportive devotees await in thousands. I bring 
you inspiring food for presentation which you, O lord 
divine, you regard as your first priority and which, pray, 
please to accept. 

प्रसोतां जीरो अध्वरेष्व॑स्थात्सोममिन्द्रय वायवे पिव॑ध्ये | 

प्र यद्वां मध्वो अभियं भरंन्त्यध्वर्यवों देवयन्तः 
शचीभिः ।॥ २॥ 

Pra sota jiro adhvaresvasthat somamidraya 
vayave pibadhyai. Pra yad vam madhvo agriyam 
bharantyadhvaryavo devayantah sactbhih. 


2. The active press and the soma maker stand 
ready in holy yajnas of love and non-violence to offer 
hospitality to Indra and Vayu, masters of knowledge 
and enlightenment and action and advancement. O Indra 
and Vayu, holy yajakas seeking the favour of divinity 
with their best and holiest actions prepare the best and 
sweetest soma and keep it for you as homage with 
reverence. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 92 321 


प्र याभिर्यासि दाश्वांसमच्छा नियुद्धिं्वायविष्टये दुरोणे । 
निनो'रयिं सुभोजसं युवस्व नि वीरं गव्यमश्व्यं च 
राध॑ः ॥ ३॥ 


2. Pra yabhiryasi dasvamsamaccha niyudbhirva- 
yavistaye durone. Ni no rayim subhojasam yuva- 
sva ni viram gavyamasvyam ca radhah. 


Vayu, lord of knowledge and motivation, come 
by superfast transport with supportive knowledge and 
expertise with which you proceed to the house of the 
liberal host of yajna for the fulfilment of his desired 
aim. Bless us with delicious food and wealth for 
comfortable life, brave generation of youth, plenty of 
lands and cows, horses and transport, and the success 
mantra to attain what is possible further on. 


ये वायवं इन्द्रमादनास आदेवासो नितोशनासो अर्यः । घन्तो 
वृत्राणि सूरिभिः ष्याम सासह्यंसो युधा TT ArT ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Ye vayava indramadanasa dadevaso nitosSanaso 
aryah. Ghnanto vrtrani suribhih syama sasa- 
hvamso yudha nrbhiramitran. 


Those who offer reverence and homage in honour 
of Vayu, who admire and celebrate Indra, respect the 
noble and brilliant people and destroy the enemies of 
the generous and brilliant, with all such brave and far 
sighted people, heroic warriors and leaders, let us take up 
the challenges and destroy the enemies and wipe out the 
demons of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty. 


आ नो frat: शतिनीभिरध्वरं defeuiifired are 
यज्ञम्‌। वायो! अस्मिन्त्सवं ने मादयस्व यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
सदां नः We 


322 RGVEDA 


2: A no niyudbhih satinibhiradhvaram sahasrini- 
bhirupa yahi yajnam. Vayo asmintsavane mada- 
yasva yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


O Vayu, leader and giver of stormy inspiration 
and motivation, come with your forces of a hundredfold 
and thousandfold calibre to our yajna of non-violent 
production and progress and celebrate the glory of the 
social order in this session. O Indra, O Vayu, O heroic 
wise, protect and promote us with all means and modes 
of happiness and all round well being all ways all time. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 93 
Indra-Agni Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


शुचिं नु स्तोमं नव॑ंजातमद्यन्द्राग्री वृब्रहणा जुषेथाम्‌ | 
उभा हि वां सुहवा जोह॑वीमि ता वाजं सद्य शते धेष्ठा ॥ ९ ॥ 


hs Sucim nu stomam navajatamadyendragni vrtra- 
hana jusetham. Ubha hi vam suhava johavimi ta 
vajam sadya usate dhestha. 


Indra and Agni, leaders of power and 
enlightenment, destroyers of darkness, ignorance, 
injustice and poverty, accept this song of purity newly 
created in your honour and come to our yajna session. I 
invoke you both, who, readily responsive to the call, 
instantly grant food, energy and success to the faithful 
devotee inspired for action. 


ता सानसी शवसाना हि भूतं साकंवृधा शव॑सा शूशुवांसा । 
क्षय॑न्तौ रायो यव॑सस्य भरे: Ge वाजस्य स्थविरस्य 
घृष्वेः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 93 323 

2. Ta sanasi Savasana hi bhutam sakam vrdha 

Savasa Susuvamsa. Ksayantau rayo yavasasya 
bhureh prnktam vajasya sthavirasya ghrsveh. 


Universally adored and victorious, you rise 
together, mighty with force and power. You command 
treasures of boundless wealth and grandeur. Pray grant 
us abundance of stable strength, sustenance and 
inviolable power for success and victory. 


उपो। ह afgest वाजिनो गुर्धीभिर्विप्राः प्रम॑तिपिच्छ्मानाः। 
अर्वन्तो न काष्ठां नश्च॑माणा इन्द्रागी जोह॑वतो नरस्ते ॥ ३॥ 


2: Upo ha yad vidatham vajino gur-dhibhir-viprah 
pramatim-icchamanah. Arvanto na kastham 
naksamana indragni johuvato naraste. 


When men of vision, courage and faith proceed 
to join the yajna of social order, and vibrant sages 
desiring super intelligence and wisdom proceed with 
lightning speed to reach the climax of their ambition, 
then they invoke you, Indra and Agni, and they rise to 
be the leaders of humanity with their intelligence, will 
and actions. 


गीर्भिर्विप्रः प्रम॑तिमिच्छमान ईड रयिं यशसं पूर्वभाजंम्‌। 
Sahn वृत्रहणा सुवज्रा प्र नो नव्येभिस्तिरतं Sar: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Girbhir-viprah pramatim-icchamana itte rayim 
yasasam purvabhajam. Indragni vrtrahana 
suvajra pra no navyebhis-tiratam desnaih. 


The vibrant visionary, the poet, seeking super 
intelligence and wisdom, celebrates you, Indra and Agni, 
with songs of adoration and prays for wealth and honour 
of the first and universal order. Indra and Agni, lords of 


324 RGVEDA 


light and action, destroyers of darkness with thunderbolt 
in hand, grant us the latest gifts of light, wealth and 
honour and help us cross the seas of life. 


सं यन्मही Had स्पर्ध माने तनूरुचा शूर॑साता ads | 
अदेवयुं विदथे देवयुभिः सत्रा ह॑तं सोमसुता जनेन ॥ ५॥ 


5. Sam yanmahi 101710व = spardhamane tanuruca 
Surasata yataite. Adevayum vidathe devayubhih 
satra hatam somasuta janena. 


When two great forces, contesting against each 
other in the battle of the brave, fight with their bodily 
might and lustre, then, O warrior, devoted joining with 
the forces dedicated to divinity in the strife, destroy the 
impious power with righteous arms. Save the devotees 
of soma and divinity with your knowledge and 
application of knowledge in action. 


इमामु षु सोम॑सुतिमुप॑ न waht सौमनसाय यातम्‌। नू 
चिद्धि परिमम्नाथे अस्माना वां शश्वंद्धिर्ववृतीय वाजः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Imamu su somasutimupa na endragni sauma- 
nasaya yatam. Nu ciddhi parimamnathe asmana 
vam sasvadbhir-vavrtiya vajaih. 


Indra and Agni, lords of action and light of 
knowledge, come and grace this soma yajna of ours for 
the joy and fulfilment of our heart. After all you accept 
us as your own and never neglect us. Therefore I 
constantly invoke and invite you with homage and yajnic 
gifts of never failing order and value. 


सो अग्र एना नम॑सा समिब्दोऽ च्छ मित्रं वरुणमिन्द्रं बोचेः। 
यत्सीमागश्चकृमा तत्सु de तदर्यमादितिः शिश्रथन्तु ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 94 325 


de So agna ena namasa_ samiddho ’ccha mitram 
varunam-indram voceh. Yat sim-agas-cakrma tat 
su mrla tadaryamaditih sisrathantu. 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, thus adored 
and kindled, pray speak to Mitra, Varuna and Indra, 
friend, judge and ruler, that whatever trespass we have 
committed, they be gracious and ward off with 
sympathy, and may Aryama, lord of rectitude, and Aditi, 
mother nature, loosen the bonds of negative snares. 


एता sty आशुषाणास इष्टीर्युवोः सचाभ्यश्याम वाजान्‌ | 
मेन्द्रो नो विष्णुर्मरुतः परि ख्यन्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां 
नः॥८॥ 


8. Eta agna asusanasa istiryuvoh sacabhyasyama 
vajan. Mendro no visnurmarutah pari khyan 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah . 


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we, your 
devotees, reaching you in earnest with ardent desire, 
pray that we may have the favour of fulfilment with 
knowledge and power and win strength and success in 
our battles of life, and may Indra, lord omnipotent, 
Vishnu, lord omnipresent, and Maruts, energies and 
inspirations of all moving Vayu, never forsake us. O 
lords of light, power and inspiration, O saints and 
scholars, pray you all protect and promote us with all 
means and modes of well being and fulfilment all ways 
all time. 

Mandala 7/Sukta 94 


Indra-Agni Devate, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 
इयं वामस्य मन्म॑न s-ahit पूर्व्यस्तुतिः | 
अभ्राद्‌ वृष्टिरिंवाजनि॥ ९॥ 


326 RGVEDA 
1. Iyam vamasya manmana indragni purvyastutih. 
Abhrad vrstirivajani. 
Indra and Agni, lords of action and enlighten- 
ment, this principal and ancient song of adoration for 
you from the celebrant flows spontaneously like rain 
from the cloud. 
श्रृणुतं ज॑रितुर्हवमिन्द्रास्री वनतं गिर॑ः | 
ईशाना पिप्यतं धियः ॥ २॥ 

2. Srnutam jaritur-havam-indragni vanatam girah. 
Isana pipyatam dhiyah. 

Indragni, lords of action and enlightenment, 
listen to the celebrant’s song of adoration, accept and 
appreciate the words, O sovereign lords, and refine and 
energise his thought and imagination to flow into 
expression and action. 

मा पापत्वाय नो नरेन्द्रास्री माभिशस्तये । 
मानों रीरधतं Fre ३॥ 


छ Ma papatvaya no narendragni mabhisastaye. 
Ma no riradhatam nide. 


Indragni, leaders of humanity, pioneers of 
progress and enlightenment, deliver us not to the sinner, 
not to the tyrant, not to the reviler. Let us be free. 


इन्द्र अग्रा नमो बृहत्सुवृक्तिमेरंयामहे। 
धिया धेनां अवस्यवः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Indre agna namo brhat suvrktim-erayamahe. 
Dhiya dhena avasyavah. 


Salutations and high honour to Indra and Agni, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 94 327 


leading lights of action and advancement with 
enlightenment. Let us offer them high praise and 
gratitude in the best of words with the best of thoughts. 
We need protection, and they are protectors and guides 
in our course of progress. 


ता हि शश्व॑न्त daa इत्था विप्रस ऊतये । 
सबाधो वाज॑सातये ॥ ५ ॥ 

Ta hi sasvanta tata ittha viprasa utaye. 
Sabadho vajasataye. 

Beset with difficulties, saints and sages, scholars 
and pioneers always look up to them and thus pray for 
protection and guidance to move further and win their 
goal. 

ता वां गीर्भिर्विपन्यवः प्रय॑स्वन्तो हवामहे । 
मेधसाता सनिष्यवः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ta vam girbhir-vipanyavah prayasvanto hava- 
mahe. Medhasata sanisyavah. 


With songs of praise, bearing homage and havi 
for the holy fire, we invoke and invite you to our yajna 
in search of higher initiative and further self 
advancement. 


इन्द्रागरी अवसाग॑तमस्मभ्यं चर्षणीसहा । 
मानो दुःशंसं ईत ॥ ७॥ 


Indragni avasagatam-asmabhyam carsanisaha. 
Ma no duhsamsa iSata. 


O lords of light and action, Indra and Agni, 
leaders of the people with patience and spirit of 


328 RGVEDA 


challenge, destroyers of hostilities, come to us with 
protection, guidance and the prize of victory. Let no 
evil, no malicious or disreputable forces rule over us. 


मा कस्य॑ नो अर॑रुषो धूर्तिः प्रणङ्मर्त्यस्य। 
इन्द्रासी शर्म! यच्छतम्‌ uN 


8. Ma kasya no araruso dhurtih prananmartyasya. 
Indragni Sarma yacchatam. 


Let no violent man’s evil design ever touch and 
injure us. Indra and Agni, pray give us the peace and 
felicity of a happy home. 


गोमद्धिर॑ण्यवद्धसु यद्वामश्चावदीमंहे | 
इन्द्राग्नी तद्वनेमहि।॥ ९॥ 
2 Gomaddhiranyavad vasu yad vamasvav-adimahe. 


Indragni tad vanemahi. 


Indra and Agni, whatever gifts of lands, cows 
and the language of enlightenment, whatever wealth of 
gold and gracious manners and culture, horses, 
transport, initiative and achievement we ask of you and 
pray for, help and guide us that we may win the desired 
goal. 


यत्सोम॒ आ सुते नर इन्द्राग्री अजोहवुः | 
सप्तीवन्ता aaa: ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Yat soma ठ sute nara indragni ajohavuh. 
Saptivanta saparyavah. 


When the soma is pressed out and distilled in 
yajna and the leading performers with full faith offer it 
to you in homage, then O Indra and Agni, guides and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 95 329 


pioneers of light and action for success, pray accept the 
call and come post haste to join and enjoy the 
celebrations. 


उक्थेभिर्वृत्रहन्त॑मा या d=arat चिदा गिरा। 
आङ्गूषैराविवासतः ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Ukthebhir-vrtrahantama ya mandana cida gira. 
Angusair-avivasatah. 
O greatest destroyers of evil and darkness, when 
with the holy chant of Vedic hymns and songs of 
adoration in words of faith and sincerity you are invoked 


and invited, then come rejoicing and enlighten the yajna 
with grace. 


ताविदुःशंसं मर्त्य दुर्विद्वांसं रश्चस्विन॑म्‌। 
आभोगं हन्म॑ना हतमुदधिं हन्म॑ना हतम्‌॥ ९२॥ 

12. Tavid duhsamsam martyam durvidvamsam 
raksasvinam. Abhogam hanmana hatam-udadhim 


hanmana hatam. 


Destroy with a fatal blow the despicable and 
disreputable mortal, the negative scholar who abuses 
knowledge, the demonic destroyer and the rapacious 
ogre. Churn the sea of evil with heat and burn it up with 
a single fatal blow. 


Mandala 7/Sukta 95 
Sarasvati, Sarasvan Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


प्र क्षोदसा धाय॑सा wet एषा सर॑स्वती धरुणमायसी पूः 1 
प्रवाल॑धाना रथ्येव याति विश्वा अपो म॑हिना सिन्धु - 
रन्याः॥ ९॥ 


330 RGVEDA 


| १ Pra ksodasa dhayasa sasra esa sarasvati 
dharunamayasti puh. Prababadhana rathyeva yati 
visva apo mahina sindhuranyah. 


This Sarasvati, perennial stream of living waters 
and dynamic knowledge, is a treasure fortress of gold 
that holds all wealth of the world of knowledge. It is a 
constantly running stream that flows with waters, ever 
rushing and ever refreshing, towards the infinite ocean 
of omniscience wherefrom it arises and where it 
terminates. It goes on and on like a chariot on course in 
race, collecting and comprehending all other streams 
of world knowledge by virtue of its all inclusive majesty 
of character. 


एकाचेतत्सर॑स्वती नदीनां शुचिर्यती गिरिभ्य आ समुद्रात्‌ | 
रायश्चेत॑न्ती भुव॑नस्य भूरेर्घृतं पयो दुदुहे नाहुषाय ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ekacetat sarasvati nadinam Suciryati giribhya a 
samudrat. Rayascetanti bhuvanasya bhurer- 
ghrtam payo duduhe nahusaya. 


Sarasvati is the one stream of streams which is 
crystalline pure, receives her content from the eternal 
ocean, emerges from the mountains and flows to the 
ocean, collecting on way reflecting and revealing the 
wealths of this great existential world and yielding water, 
milk, honey and the cream of enlightenment for 
humanity. 


स वावृधे नर्यो योष॑णासु वृषा शिशुर्वृषभो यज्ञियासु । स 
वाजिनं मघवंद्धयो दधाति वि सातये तन्वं मामजीत॥ ३ ॥ 

९ Sa vavrdhe naryo yosanasu vrsa sisurvrsabho 
yajniyasu. Sa vajinam maghavadbhyo dadhati 
vi sataye tanvam mamrjita. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 95 331 


That human wealth of knowledge revealed by 
the eternal stream grows for humanity. It is inspiration 
in the divine hymns of the Veda, holy fire in the yajna 
vedis, destroyer of ignorance, and the shower of rains 
for the yajnic priests of the world of business. It bears 
and brings passion and ambition for the people of 
honour and excellence and strengthens and refines the 
body, mind and spirit for success and victory in the 
battles of life. 


उत स्या नः सर॑स्वती जुषाणोप श्रवत्सुभगा यज्ञे अस्मिन्‌ | 
मितज्ञुभिर्नमस्यैरियाना राया युजा चिदुत्तरा सखिभ्यः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Uta sya nah sarasvati jusanopa sravat subhaga 
yajne asmin. Mitajnubhir-namasyair-iyana 
raya yuja ciduttara sakhibhyah. 


And that perennial living stream, Sarasvati, 
loving and gracious, overflowing with wealth, honour 
and excellence, may come, we pray, and listen to us in 
this yajna of life. When approached by the yajnics of 
discipline with reverence and homage, she showers her 
favours full of wealth higher and ever more on her 
devoted friends. 


इमा Gert युष्मदा नमोभिः प्रति स्तोमं सरस्वति जुषस्व | 
तव शर्मन्तप्रियतं मे दर्धाना उप॑ स्थेयाम शरणं न वृक्षम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Ima juhvana yusmada namobhih prati stomam 
sarasvati jusasva. Tava $arman priyatame 
dadhana upa stheyama saranam na vrksam. 


Sarasvati, eternal stream of the waters of life, 
these adorations presented to you with homage and 
reverence, we pray, accept and cherish at every yajna. 


332 RGVEDA 


Enjoying your gift of peace and a happy home, let us 
abide under your divine shelter and sustenance as birds 
nestle on the tree. 


अयमु, ते सरस्वति वसिं्ो द्वारावृतस्य सुभगे व्यावः । वर्धं 
शुभ्र स्तुवते रंसि वाजान्यूयं पात स्वस्तिथिः सदां नः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ayamu te sarasvati vasistho dvaravrtasya su- 
bhago vyavah. Vardha subhre stuvate rasi vajan 
yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Sarasvati, crystalline stream of the life and light 
of eternity, this sagely scholar in search of brilliance 
opens the double doors of truth, Rtam, the eternal law 
of the dynamics of existence, and Satyam, the world of 
existence living constant under the law at the levels of 
matter, energy and mind enveloping the spirit. O divinity 
of purity, power and excellence, grow and rise to 
manifest in the mind and spirit for the celebrant. You 
give the ultimate wealths and victories of the world. 
Pray come, arise and bless with the perennial flow. O 
Mother stream, O saints and sages, teachers and 
preachers, protect and promote us with all means and 
modes of happiness and well being all ways all time. 


Mandala7/Sukta 96 
Sarasvati, Sarasvan Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


बृहदु गायिषे वचोऽ gat नदीर्नाम्‌। सर॑स्वतीमिन्म॑हया 
सुवृक्तिभिः स्तोमैर्वसिष्ठ रोद॑सी ॥ ९॥ 


il Brhadu gayise vaco ’surya nadinam. Sarasvati- 
minmahaya suvrktibhih stomair-vasistha rodast. 


O brilliant sage, sing and celebrate in lofty song 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 96 333 


Sarasvati, most powerful stream of heaven and earth 
among streams of life, glorify her in holy poems by 
homage and reverence in yajnas. 


उभे aa महिना शुश्र अन्ध॑सी srfafarated aa: | 
सा नों बोध्यवित्री मरुत्सखा ale राधो मघोनाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Ubhe yat te mahina subhre andhasi adhiksiyanti 
puravah. Sa no bodhyavitri marutsakha coda 
radho maghonam. 


O divine stream of crystalline power and purity, 
by the grandeur of your light of knowledge devoted 
celebrants of all time receive both material nourishment 
and spiritual enlightenment, and thereby achieve both 
worldly honour and ultimate freedom. O saving spirit, 
protective mother, companion of the vibrations of 
divinity, awaken us and inspire in us the power and 
potential of eternal wealth and grandeur implicit in us 
and raise it to realisation and perfection. 


भद्रमिद्धद्रा कुणवत्सरंस्वत्यकवारी चेतति वाजिनीवती | 
गृणाना ज॑मदभिवत्स्तुवाना च॑ वसिष्ठ वत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 
SP Bhadramid bhadra krnavat sarasvatyakavari 


cetati vajinivatit. Grnana jamadagnivat stuvana 
ca vasisthavat. 


Gracious Sarasvati does good, opposes the evil, 
and, radiant as light celebrated by the fiery sage and 
celebrated by the brilliant poet, she enlightens all for 
success and victory. 


जनीयन्तो न्वग्र॑वः पुत्रीयन्तः सुदानंवः। 
सर॑स्वन्तं हवामहे ॥ ४ ॥ 


334 RGVEDA 


4. Janiyanto nvagravah putriyantah sudanavah. 
Sarasvantam havamahe. 


Wishing for marriage, or looking forward to 
good progeny, liberally giving in charity, or meditating 
to realise the light of divinity, we pray for the living 
flow of the waters of Sarasvati, radiating light of 
divinity, the eternal ocean whence flow the light and 
the waters of life. 


ये ते सरस्व ऊर्मयो मधुमन्तो घृतश्चुतः | 
तेभिंर्नोऽ विता भ॑व ॥ ५॥ 


5. Ye te sarasva urmayo madhumanto ghrtascutah. 
Tebhirno’ vita bhava. 


O divine ocean of the eternal flow of existence 
and the cosmic light of omniscience, be our light giver 
and saviour with waves of the honey sweets of nectar 
and the radiance of light divine. 


पीपिवांसं सर॑स्वतः स्तनं यो विश्वदर्शतः | 
भश्चीमहिं प्रजामिषम्‌ 6 ॥ 


6. Pipivamsam sarasvatah stanam yo visvadarsatah. 
Bhaksimahi prajamisam. 


O lord, let us live and enjoy life with food, 
energy, knowledge and enlightenment unto the ultimate 
freedom, drinking the divine nectar at the overflowing 
ocean source of eternal life, the sovereign who watches 
and governs everyone, everything, of the universe. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 97 335 


Mandala7/Sukta 97 


Indra, Brhaspati, Indra-Brahmanaspati, Indra- 
Brhaspati Devatah, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


Ua दिवो नृषद्‌ ने पृथिव्या नरो यत्र॑ देवयवो मद॑न्ति। 
इन्द्राय यत्र सव॑नानि सुन्वे गमन्मदाय प्रथमं वय॑श्च ।॥ ९ ॥ 


ll, Yajne divo nrsadane prthivya naro yatra deva- 
yavo madanti. Indraya yatra savanani sunve 
gamanmadaya prathamam vayasca. 


Where in the yajna in the house of assembly, 
leading lights of humanity from the earth and leading 
lights of life from heaven join and rejoice in pursuit of 
divinity, and where the exhilarating essences of soma 
are distilled for celebration in honour of Indra, lord of 
the world, there let us join and pray, and may the lord 
arrive in the first and foremost manifestations of divinity 
for young and old. 


आ dent वृणीमहे ऽ वांसि बृहस्पतिर्नो मह॒ आ स॑खायः | 
यथा भवेम मील्न्हुषे अनागा यो नो दाता परावतः 
fara २॥ 


2. A daivya vrnimahe’vamsi brhaspatirno maha a 
sakhayah. Yatha bhavema milhuse anaga 
yo no data paravatah piteva. 


And there, O friends, let us pray for the 
protection and blessings of divinity, and may Brhaspati, 
lord of the mighty universe, exalt us in the spirit so that 
we grow 3111688 in the eyes of the generous lord of life 
and vitality who alone is our generous giver and supreme 
saviour as father for children. 


336 RGVEDA 


तमु ज्येष्ठं नम॑सा हविर्भिः सुशेवं ब्रह्मणस्पतिं" yore । इन्द्र 
श्त्ोको महि दैव्य॑ः सिषक्तु यो ब्रह्मणो देवकृतस्य 
राजा usu 


3. Tamu jyestham namasa havirbhih susevam 
brahmanaspatim grnise. Indram sloko mahi 
daivyah sisaktu yo brahmano devakrtasya raja. 


The same lord supreme of the universe, merciful 
protector and saviour, I adore with humility, reverence 
and offers of homage, and may this song of divine 
adoration reach the great lord Indra who rules this world 
of divine creation and reveals the divine Word of the 
Veda, universal knowledge. 


सञआनो योनिं'सदतु wel बु हस्पतिर्विंश्वर्वारो यो अस्ति | 
कामो! रायः सुवीर्यस्य तं दात्पर्षन्नो अति सश्चतो 
अरिष्टान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa ano yonim sadatu prestho brhaspatirvisvavaro 
yo asti . Kamo rayah suviryasya tam dat parsanno 
ati saScato aristan. 


May that dearest lord of supreme love, creator 
and ruler of the mighty universe and giver of eternal 
knowledge of the Veda, who is the universal choice and 
sole object of adoration and prayer for the world, bless 
our house of yajna and manifest in our heart, give us 
fulfilment of our heart’s desire for wealth, virility and 
noble progeny, and wash off our sins and ailments which 
pollute us, and thus may the lord cleanse us of our 
existential dirt. 


तमा नो अर्कममृताय जुष्टमिमे धासुरमूर्तासः पुराजाः। 
शुचिक्रन्दं यजतं पस्त्यानां बहस्पतिमनवणिं हुवेम ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 97 337 


a Tama no arkamamrtaya justamime dhasura- 
mrtasah purajah. Sucikrandam yajatam pastya- 
nam brahaspatim-anarvanam huvema. 


That self-refulgent adorable Brhaspati, lord 
sustainer and ruler of the vast world, loved and 
worshipped for the attainment of the immortal state of 
bliss, may these Sages of primeval and original vision 
reveal to us and bring us close to it. That same Brhaspati, 
incomprehensible supreme lord all loving and enemy 
to none, celebrated in the purity of divine hymns of the 
Veda, sole object of the worship and yajnic homage of 
our citizens in our homes, we invoke and adore. 


तं शग्मासो! अरुषासो अश्वा agent सहवाहो वहन्ति । 
eae नीलवत्सधस्थं नभो न रूपमरुषं वसानाः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tam 54611650 arusaso asva brhaspatim sahavaho 
vahanti. Sahascid yasya nilavat sadhastham 
nabho na rupamarusam vasanah. 


The powerful red rays of the rising sun in their 
united majesty, wearing the glorious mantle of his 
sublime form expansive as space, and bearing at heart 
the message of his omnipotence immanent in the 
universe like the treasure of Infinity, reveal, express and 
communicate the presence of Brhaspati, sustainer and 
ruler of the world of existence. 


स fe शुचिः शतपत्रः स शुन्ध्युर्हिरंण्यवाशीरिषिरः स्वर्षाः | 
बहस्पतिः स स्वावेश ऋष्वः पुरू सखिभ्य आसुतिं 
करिष्ठः ॥ ७॥ ति ति 

cP Sa hi sucih Satapatrah sa sundhyur-hiranyava- 
Sirisirah svarsah. Brhaspatih sa svavesa rsvah 
puri sakhibhya asutim karisthah. 


338 RGVEDA 


That lord, Brhaspati, is pure, purifying and 
sanctifying, infinitely manifest in the countless leaves 
of the cosmic tree, golden sweet of word and voice in 
the Veda, ever dynamic in nature and ever rejoicing in 
the self. He is easy of access, being immanent in the 
universe and beatific, creating abundant peace, 
prosperity and joy for the devotees. 


देवी देवस्य रोद॑सी जनित्री बृहस्प्तिः वावृधतुर्महित्वा । 
दक्षाय्याय दक्षता सखायः कर द्‌ TAT सुतरां सुगाधा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Devi devasya rodasi janitri brhaspatim vavrdha- 
tur-mahitva. Daksayyaya daksata sakhayah karad 
brahmane sutara sugadha. 


Divine earth and heaven manifest Brhaspati and 
glorify him by the revelation of his greater glory. O 
friends, glorify the boundless lord of omnipotence who 
reveals the Veda for our knowledge of the vast reality 
of existence and makes the path to divinity through the 
ocean easy to follow. 


इयं वां ब्रह्मणस्पते सुवृक्तिर्ब्ह्यन्द्राय ahaa अकारि | 
अविष्टं धियो जिगृतं पुर॑न्धीर्जजस्तमर्यो वनुषामरातीः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tyam vam brahmanaspate suvrktir-brahmendraya 
vajrine akari. Avistam dhiyo jigrtam purandhir- 
jajastamaryo vanusamaratih. 


O Brahmanaspati, lord sustainer and protector 
of the vast reality of existence and its law and divine 
knowledge, this holy song of adoration is addressed to 
you and Indra in honour of the might and majesty of 
your glory and divine protection against darkness and 
evil. Pray listen, and protect our mind and action, 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 98 339 


awaken the rulers and protectors of our social order, 
fight out and destroy the enemies and oppositions of 
the devotees. 


बृह॑स्पते युवमिन्द्रश्च वस्वो दिव्यस्येशाथे उत पार्थिवस्य | 
धत्तं रयिं स्तुवते कीरये चिद्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥ १०॥ 


10.  Brhaspate yuvamindrasca vasvo divyasyesathe 
uta parthivasya. Dhattam rayim stuvate kiraye 
cid yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Brhaspati, lord of this vast universe, and Indra, 
you are lords omnipotent of the glory and majesty of 
the world, you rule and order the light of heaven and 
the wealths of the earth. Pray bear and bring the light of 
divinity and wealth of the world to bless the celebrant 
and the worshipper. O lords and divinities of nature and 
humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and 
means of peace, prosperity and excellence all ways all 
time. 


Mandala7/Sukta 98 
Indra, Indra-Brhaspati Devate, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 

steddats रुणं दुग्धमंशुं जुहोत॑न aera fara | 
गौराद्वेदीयों अवपानमिन्द्रों विश्वाहेद्याति सुतसोम- 
मिच्छन्‌॥ ९॥ 

0 Adhvaryavo’runam dugdhamamsum juhotana 
vrsabhaya ksitinam. Gaurad vediyan avapana- 
mindro visvahed yati sutasomamicchan. 


O devotees of creative yajna, at the dawn of the 


340 RGVEDA 


fiery sun, offer refined and energised soma and milk 
into the fire of yajna in honour of Indra, generous 
omnipotent ruler of the worlds. Having received 
exhilarating soma inspiration from the sacred vedi of 
light, Indra, the ruler, the scholar, the human soul, 
proceeds to the day’s activity with passion for 
consecrated action every new day. 


adem प्रदिवि चार्वन्नं दिवेदिवे पीतिमिद॑स्य afar उत 
हृदोत मन॑सा जुषाण उशन्निन्द् प्रस्थितान्पाहि सोमान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Yad dadhise pradivi carvannam divedive pitimi- 
dasya vaksi. Uta hrdota manasa jusana usanni- 
ndra prasthitan pahi soman. 


Indra, since you have received and internalised 
the exhilarating soma of the mission of life at the vedi 
in earlier days, and love to live the taste and message of 
it every day, then, loving the soma by heart and soul 
and passionately anxious for action, take the soma 
offered, and inspire and exhort these yajakas for the 
appointed tasks of the day. 


जज्ञानः सोमं सह॑से पपाथ प्र ते माता म॑हिमान॑मुवाच। 
एन्द्र पप्राथोर्व॑१न्तरिंश्चं युधा देवेभ्यो वरिवश्चकर्थ i ३॥ 


3: Jajnanah somam sahase papatha pra te mata 
mahimanam-uvaca. Endra paprathor-vantriksam 
yudha devebhyo varivascakartha. 


Aware of the self, knowing your tasks in life, 
recognising your powers and potential, dedicated to your 
yajna and your yajnic performers, you drank the soma 
of initiation for the realisation of your power, patience 
and passion, and Mother Nature spoke to you and 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 98 341 


dedicated you to the Infinite and Omnipotent. You 
fought with courage and fortitude, achieved wondrous 
peace and prosperity with your warriors for noble 
humanity, and rose to the skies with honour and fame. 


यद्योधया महतो मन्य॑मानान्त्साक्षाम तान्बाहुथिः siret- 
दानान्‌। यद्वा नृभिर्वृत इन्द्राभियुध्यास्तं त्वयानिं सौश्रवसं 
ज॑येम ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yad yodhaya mahato manyamanant-saksama tan 
bahubhih sasadanan. Yad va nrbhirvrta indra- 
bhiyudhyastam tvayajim sausravasam jayema. 


When you fight against those who attack, 
believing they are great, we shall fight out those violent 
enemies with arms even in hand to hand fight. And when 
in formation with your warring heroes around, you 
engage in contests, then with you we shall win that 
contest with honour and fame. 


TREE वोचं प्रथमा कृतानि प्र नूतना मघवा या चकारं । 
यदेददेवीरसहिष्ट माया अथांभवत्केव॑लः सोमो अस्य ॥ ५॥ 


9 Prendrasya vocam prathama krtani pra nutana 
maghava ya cakara. Yadedadevirasahista maya 
athabhavat kevalah somo asya. 


Let me thus proclaim and celebrate the exploits 
of Indra, those accomplished earlier and the latest which 
the illustrious hero has achieved when he challenged 
and frustrated the evil designs of the crafty enemies and 
became the sole winner of the soma of honour and fame. 


तवेदं विश्वमभितः पशव्यं यत्पश्य॑सि चक्च॑सा सूर्यस्य । 
गवामसि गोप॑तिरेकं इन्द्र भक्षीमहि ते प्रय॑तस्य वस्व॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 


342 RGVEDA 


6. Tavedam visvamabhitah pasSavyam yat pasyasi 
caksasa suryasya. Gavamasi gopatireka indra 
bhaksimahi te prayatasya vasvah. 


Indra, yours is all this living wealth around 
which you see under the light of sun. You are the sole 
master, possessor, ruler, protector and promoter of lands 
and cows and the lights of knowledge and culture of 
this earth. We ask of you and solicit wealths of the world 
for ourselves, because you are the giver. 


बृह॑स्पते युवमिन्द्रश्च वस्वो दिव्यस्येशाथे उत पार्थिष्वस्य | 
धत्तं रयिं स्तुवते कीरये चिद्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सद 
नः॥ ७॥ 


4; Brhaspate yuvamindrasca vasvo divyasyesathe 
uta parthivasya. Dhattam rayim stuvate kiraye 
cid yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Brhaspati, lord of the vast universe, Indra, 
omnipotent and illustrious ruler, you are the lord of the 
beauty and majesty of the light of heaven and wealths 
of the earth. You alone rule and order these. Pray bear 
and bring light and wealth to bless the celebrant and 
the worshipper. O lord and divinities of nature and 
humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and 
means of peace, prosperity and excellence all ways all 
time. 


Mandala7/Sukta 99 
Vishnu, Indra- Vishnu Devate, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 
परो मात्र॑या तन्वां वृधान न ते महित्वमन्व॑श्नुवन्ति । उभे तें 
विदा रज॑सी पृथिव्या विष्णो देव त्वं प॑र मस्य॑ वित्से ॥ ९॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 99 343 


im Paro matraya tanva vrdhana na te mahitvam- 
anvasnuvanti. Ubhe te vidma rajasi prthivya visno 
deva tvam paramasya vitse. 


Vishnu, omnipresent lord supreme, manifesting 
by the expansive world forms of mother nature, no one 
comprehends your greatness and majesty. We apprehend 
both your worlds from earth to heaven but, O lord self- 
refulgent, you know and are the ultimate beyond these 
too. (You are immanent and transcendent.) 


न ते विष्णो जाय॑मानो न जातो देव॑ महिम्नः परमन्तंमाप। 
उद॑स्तभ्ना नाकमृष्वं बृहन्तं दाधर्थ प्राचीं ककुभं 
पृथिव्याः ॥ २॥ 


2. Na te visno jayamano na jato deva mahimnah 
paramantamapa. Udastabhna nakamrsvam 
brhantam dadhartha pracim kakubham prthivyah. 

Vishnu, self-refulgent lord immanent and 
transcendent, no one born either in the past or at present 
can reach the ultimate bounds of your grandeur and 
majesty. You uphold the high heaven of boundless glory 
and divine beauty and joy, and you hold the expanse of 
the directions of universal space. 


इरावती धेनुमती हि भूतं सूयवसिनी मनुषे दशस्या । 
व्य॑स्तभ्ना रोदसी विष्णवेते दाधर्थ पृथिवीमभितो 
मयूरवैः ॥ ३॥ 

2, Travatit dhenumati hi bhitam suyavasini manuse 


dasasya. Vyastabhna rodasi visnavete dadhartha 
prthivimabhito mayukhaih. 


O heaven and earth full of food and energy, milk 


344 RGVEDA 


and honey, herbs and rejuvenation, givers of food, 
energy and light of knowledge, both of you are generous 
for humanity. Vishnu, omnipresent and omnipotent, 
upholds these heaven and earth worlds and stabilises 
the earth all round by solar radiations of cosmic energy. 


उरुं यज्ञाय॑ चक्रथुरु लोकं जनयन्ता सूर्य TAT | 
दास॑स्य चिद्‌ वृषशिप्रस्यं माया जघ्रथुर्नरा पृतनाज्येषु ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Urum yajnaya cakrathuru lokam janayanta 
suryam-usasam-agnim. Dasasya cid vrsasipr- 
asya maya jaghnathurnara prtandjyesu. 


Indra- Vishnu, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, 
leader and maker of the world, creating the sun, dawn 
and fire you make up this vast world for yajna, evolution 
and expansion of things at the level of nature and 
humanity. You also destroy the wiles and crookedness 
of negative powers even though they be strong and well 
armed, in close battles among human forces. 


इन्द्राविष्णु दृंहिताः शम्ब॑रस्य नव पुरो नवतिं च॑ श्नधिष्टम्‌। 
शतं वर्चिनं: सहस्रं च साकं हथो अप्रत्यसुरस्य वीरान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Indravisnu dramhitah sambarasya nava puro 
navatim ca snathistam. Satam varcinah sahasram 
ca sakam hatho apratyasurasya viran. 


Indra-Vishnu, lord of unrivalled might and 
universal presence, you break through the nine and 
ninety fortified strongholds of the dark and expansive 
citadels of hoarded treasure and destroy a hundred, even 
thousand, of the brave warriors together even before 
the unique evil power is up for defence and offence. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 99 345 


इयं म॑नीषा बहती बृहन्तोरुक्रमा तवसा वर्धयंन्ती । 
ररे वां स्तोमं विदथेषु विष्णो पिन्व॑तमिषो। वृजनेष्विन्द्र ui & ॥। 


6. Iyam manisa brhati brhantorukrama tavasa 
vardhayanti. Rare vam stomam vidathesu visno 
pinvatamiso vrjanesvindra. 


This resounding song of thoughtful and 
conscientious adoration exalting the grand, versatile and 
mighty Indra- Vishnu, I offer in honour of the lord. Indra- 
Vishnu, pray exhort our power and exalt our honour 
and excellence in our yajnic battles of life on the paths 
of progress. 


ade ते विष्णवास आ aunts तन्मे जुषस्व शिपिविष्ट 
हव्यम्‌ । वर्धन्तु त्वा सुष्टुतयो गिरो मे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः 
Pat A: Wien 


fe Vasat te visnavasa a krnomi tanme jusasva 
Sipivista havyam. Vardhantu tva sustutayo giro 
me yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Vishnu, lord omnipresent of unbounded power, 
this holy song of adoration I sing and offer to you 
directly. O lord of blazing lustre, pray accept this homage 
of mine. May the holy words of my adoration please 
and exalt you. O lord, O divine powers of nature and 
humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and 
means of happiness, prosperity and well being all ways 
all time. 


346 RGVEDA 


Mandala7/Sukta 100 
Vishnu Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi 


नू मर्तो दयते सनिष्यन्यो विष्णव उरुगायाय erst प्र 
यः स॒त्राचा मन॑सा यजात एतावन्तं नर्यमाविवासात्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


in Nu marto dayate sanisyan yo visnava urugdydya 
dasat. Pra yah satraca manasa yajata etavantam 
naryamavivasat. 


That mortal for sure finds success and fulfilment 
who, while he loves Vishnu, lord omnipresent, gives in 
charity in service to the lord, and who, with concentrated 
mind, meditates, worships and exalts the lord of such 
universal love of infinite measure. 


त्वं विष्णो सुमतिं विश्वज॑न्यामप्रयुतामेवयावो मतिं at: 1 
पर्चो यथा नः सुवितस्य भूरे ररवावतः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य 
रायः॥ २॥ 


ys Tvam visno sumatim viSvajanyam-aprayu-tam- 
evayavo matim dah. Parco yatha nah suvitasya 
bhurer-asvavatah puruscandrasya rayah. 


Vishnu, lord omnipresent and omnificent, who 
fulfil the aspirations of all humanity, bless us with such 
intelligence, understanding and faith in values of pure 
and universal character by which we may achieve our 
target of untarnished happiness and plenty of universal 
wealth of honour, beauty and complete fulfilment of 
earthly ambition. 


firga: पुथिवीमेष एतां वि च॑क्रमे शतर्चसं महित्वा । 
प्र विष्णुरस्तु तवसस्तवीयान्त्वेषं ह्य॑स्य स्थविरस्य नाम॑ ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 100 347 


a Trirdevah prthivimesa etam vi cakrame Satar- 
casam mahitva. Pra visnurastu tavasastaviyan 
tvesam hyasya sthavirasya nama. 


This self-refulgent and self-potent generous lord 
Vishnu has made and set in motion the three dimensional 
world of matter, energy and mind by virtue of his own 
essential power and has vested it with the light of 
countless stars. Immanent in the world, mighty Vishnu 
manifests mightier and mightier. The very name of this 
lord beyond motion is ‘Lord of Light.’ 


वि च॑क्रमे पृथिवीमेष एतां क्षेत्राय विष्णुर्मनुषे दशस्यन्‌ । 
gard अस्य कीरयो जनास उरुश्चितिं सुजनिमा चकार ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Vi cakrame prthivimesa etam ksetraya visnur- 
manuse dasasyan. Dhruvaso asya kirayo janasa 
uruksitim sujanima cakara. 


Vishnu, this lord omnipresent, with the desire 
to give humanity a place of birth and a home for dwelling 
and sphere of action, made this wide earth and set it in 
motion. Poet celebrants of this lord, men with constant 
mind, celebrate the glorious manifested maker and sing 
that he it is that made the wide earth for their dwelling 
and place of action. 


प्र तत्ते अद्य शिपिविष्ट arnsd: शंसामि वयुनानि 
विद्धान्‌ । तं त्वा गृणामि तवसमतव्यान्क्षय॑न्तमस्य रज॑सः 
पराके ॥ ५ ॥ 

2. Pra tat te adya Sipivista nama’ryah samsami 
vayunani vidvan. Tam tva grnami tavasama- 
tavyan ksayantamasya rajasah parake. 


O lord self-refulgent, you that have made this 


348 RGVEDA 


wide world, I adore today, celebrate and glorify your 
name: You are the master, lord omniscient of the ways 
and laws of existence. You are the mighty power, all 
pervasive far and wide in the moving world, and you 
are transcendent even beyond. 


fafa विष्णो परिचक्ष्यं भूत्प्र यद्ववक्षे शिपिविष्टो sifar | 
मा वर्पो अस्मदप गूह एतद्यदन्यरूपः समिथे बभूथ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Kimit te visno paricaksyam bhut pra yad vavakse 
Sipivisto asmi. Ma varpo asmadapa guha etad 
yadanyarupah samithe babhitha. 


Vishnu, can that manifestive form of your 
presence be described or ignored? You yourself reveal 
in the Veda that you are self - refulgent. Pray do not 
hide off that form of yours from me, nor the other one 
which manifests in the divine wrath and punishment in 
the existential battle between good and evil. 


ade ते विष्णवास आ कणोमि aa जुषस्व शिपिविष्ट 
हव्यम्‌ । वर्धन्तु त्वा सुष्टुतयो गिरो मे यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः 
सदां नः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Vasat te visnavasa व krnomi tanme jusasva 
Sipivista havyam. Vardhantu tva sustutayo giro 
me yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


Vishnu, lord omnipresent, I do honour to your 
presence in song and offer it to you as homage in words. 
O lord of universal light of life, pray accept this offer of 
homage. May my words of celebration exalt your 
presence in manifestation. O lord, O divinities of nature 
and humanity, pray protect and promote us with all 
means and modes of peace, prosperity and all round 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 101 349 


well being all ways all time. 


Mandala7/Sukta 101 


Parjanya Devata, Vasishtha or Kumara Agneya 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


तिस्रो वाचः प्र व॑द ज्योतिरग्रा या एतदु म॑धुदोघमूधः | 
स वत्सं कृण्वन्गर्भमोषंधीनां सद्यो जातो वृषभो 
रोरवीति ॥ ९॥ 


| 17510 vacah pra vada vyotiragra ya etad duhre 
madhudogham-udhah. Sa vatsam krnvan 
garbhamosadhinam sadyo jato vrsabho roraviti. 


Chant aloud three voices of the divine Word, 
Rk, Sama and Yajush verses of the four Vedas headed 
by the light of Divinity symbolised by the eternal Name: 
AUM. (They comprise the knowledge, action and 
prayerful gratitude of total human endeavour, the three 
being ‘jnana, karma and upasana.) With yajna they distil 
from the cosmic ocean the milky essence of liquid 
vitality, soma, elementary form of the cloud, parjanya. 
That parjanya produces the fiery electric current (here- 
in called the calf) which then gives rise to the seed of 
vegetation in the form of cloud laden with living rain 
waters. “The calf’ then full grown as ‘the virile bull’ 
i.e., the cloud, upon the instant roars and thunders, rains 
and fertilises the earth with the seed of vegetation. 


Note: An extension of this knowledge of the 
evolution of life on earth is found in the science of 
‘Panchagni’, five fires, in Chhandogya Upanishad 5, 4- 
9, and in Brhadaranyaka Upanish 6, 2, 9-14. 
Chhandogya Upanishad is an explanatory extension of 
parts of Sama Veda, and Brhadaranyaka Upanishad is a 


350 RGVEDA 


similar work on parts of Yajur Veda. An indication of 
this science is given in Kathopanishad 1, 1, 12-19. 
Kathopanishad is an explanatory footnote to Yajur- Veda. 


यो वर्धन ओष॑धीनां यो अपां यो विश्व॑स्य जग॑तो देव 
ईशे । स त्रिधातुं शरणं शर्म यंसत्तरिवर्तु ज्योतिः care - 
स्पे।॥ २॥ 


2, Yo vardhana osadhinam yo apam yo visvasya 
jagato deva ise. Sa tridhatu Saranam Sarma 
yamsat-trivartu jyotih svabhistyasme. 


He that generates and augments the vegetation 
and generates the waters and the power that orders and 
rules over the entire moving universe may, we pray, give 
us three fold health and peace of body, mind and soul 
and bless us with threefold shelter against heat, cold 
and rain, and give us threefold light of earth, heaven 
and the middle regions for our well being all round. 


ents त्वद्भवति ad उ त्वद्यथावशं तन्वं चक्र we: । पितुः 
पयः प्रतिं गृभ्णाति माता तेन॑ पिता व॑र्धते तेन॑ पुत्रः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Stariru tvad bhavati suta u tvad yathavasam 
tanvam cakra esah. Pituh payah prati grbhnati 
mata tena pita vardhate tena putrah. 


By virtue of you the heifer becomes fertilized, 
from you this soul assumes the body form it takes 
according to its latencies, the mother receives the shower 
of fertility from the father, by which, again, the father 
receives extension of the self and the off spring grows 
in body. 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 101 351 


यस्मिन्विश्वानि भुव॑नानि तस्थुस्तिस्रो द्यावस्त्रेधा सस्रुरापः । 
त्रयः कोशास उपसेचनासो मध्व॑: श्चोतन्त्यभितो विर - 
HL ४॥ 


4. Yasmin visvani bhuvanani tasthustisro dyava- 
stredha sasrurapah. Trayah kosasa upa-secanaso 
madhvah scotantyabhito virapsam. 


(What is the ultimate parjanya, source of life 
and its joy?) That in whom abide all regions of the 
universe, all three heavens, 1.6., highest, middle and the 
lower, or the earth, the sky and the heaven of light, in 
whom the three currents of air, light and water energy 
flow, or the three grades of karma operate, i.e., sanchit 
(past), kriyamana (present) and prarabdha (conditional) 
rule the soul, and in whom three body-forms of the soul, 
i.e., karana sharira (causal body), sukshma sharira 
(subtle body) and sthula sharira (gross body) overflow 
with energy and shower the honey sweets of pleasure, 
enlightenment and the ecstasy of ananda upon the soul 
in abundance: that is the ultimate cloud from whom life 
flows. 


इदं वच॑ः पर्जन्याय स्वराजे हृदो अस्त्वन्तरं तज्जुजोषत्‌ । 
मयोभुवो वृष्ट य॑: सन्त्वस्मे सुपिप्पला ओषंधीर्देवगोपाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Idam vacah parjanyaya svaraje hrdo astvantaram 
tajjujosat. Mayobhuvo vrstyah santvasme 
supippala osadhir-devagopah. 


This song of adoration, spontaneous flow of love 
from the heart, in honour of the self - refulgent sovereign 
cloud, lord infinite, supreme source of life, may the lord 
accept and cherish to the very core of divine being, and 


352 RGVEDA 


may the imprint abide in our heart too. May the showers 
of rain be full of peace and abundance for us. May the 
herbs and trees be profuse in fruit, give life and 
protective health to noble humanity and be protected 
and promoted by noble humanity. 


सरेतोधा due: शश्व॑तीनां तस्मिन्नात्मा जगंतस्तस्थुष॑र्च । 
तन्म॑ ऋतं पातु शतशारदाय यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः Get 
नः॥ ६॥ 


6. Sa retodha vrsabhah sasvatinam tasminnatma 
jagatas-tasthusasca. Tanma rtam patu Satasara- 
daya yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. 


That lord is the infinite reservoir of the seeds of 
existence, mighty abundant and generous, from whom 
flows the eternal cycle of life. Therein abides the very 
soul of existence in motion and stabilised in motion. 
May the lord sustain, protect and promote the abundant 
flow of truthful life in action for me for a full span of 
hundred years. O lord, O clouds, O showers of rain, 
protect and promote us by all modes and means of 
happiness and well being all round all ways all time. 


Mandala7/Sukta 102 


Parjanya Devata, Vasishtha or Kumara Agneya 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


पर्जन्याय प्र गायत feaeqara tage । 
स नो यव॑समिच्छतु 2 


Ls Parjanyaya pra gayata divasputraya milhuse. 
Sa no yavasamicchatu. 


Sing in praise of the mighty generous and virile 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 102 353 


Parjanya, the cloud that gives us showers of life and 
joy. It is the child of light and saviour of the brilliant. 
May the cloud, that bearer and harbinger of life and 
joy, give us lovely food for body, mind and soul. 


यो गर्भमोषधीनां गवां कृणोत्यर्वताम्‌ | 
पर्जन्यं: पुरुषीणाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


Zi Yo garbham-osadhinam gavam krnotyarvatam. 
Parjanyah purusinam. 


Celebrate the Parjanya, cloud of the showers of 
life and existence, who generates the Golden Egg, 
Hiranyagarbha, the seed of moving stars and revolving 
planets, herbs and trees, cows and horses and the 
humans, and the cloud which then brings the showers 
of living waters and vests the seeds of life in earth for 
vegetation and all that moves and achieves and all the 
human race for the continuance of life in existence. 


तस्मा इदास्ये हविर्जुहोता मधुमत्तमम्‌ | 
sat नः संयतं करत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Tasma idasye havirjuhota madhumattamam. 
Tlam nah samyatam karat. 


To him, the omnipotent omnificent Parjanya, life 
bearing cloud, offer the sweetest oblations into the fiery 
mouth of the yajna vedi with selfless surrender of love 
and non-violence so that he may keep and help us keep 
the unity and integrity of the earth and environment well 
in order and maintain the integrity and harmony of 
humanity and culture in a state of creativity and 
progressive continuity of a familial order. 


354 RGVEDA 


Mandala7/Sukta 103 


Mandukah (Parjanya) Devata, Vasishtha 
Maitravaruni Rshi 


संवत्सरं शशयाना ब्राह्यणा acearkeat: | 
वाचं पर्जन्यजिन्वितां प्र मण्डूक अवादिषुः ॥ ९॥ 


le Samvatsaram Sasayana brahmana vratacar-inah. 
Vacam parjanyajinvitam pra manduka avadisuh. 


Devoted Brahmanas dedicated to Brahma, 
supreme spirit of the universe, observing the sacred 
vows of discipline in silence for a yearly session, 
spontaneously burst into the chant of divine hymns, 
inspired by the cloud of divine showers and celebrate 
the divine spirit, the divine voice and the divine shower 
with enthusiasm. 


दिव्या आपो अभि यदैनमायन्दृतिं न शुष्कं सरसी शयानम्‌। 
गवामह न मायुर्वत्सिनीनां मण्डूकानां वग्नुरत्रा समेति 2 


2: Divya apo abhi yadenamayan drtim na suskam 
sarasi Sayanam. Gavamaha na mayurvatsini-nam 
mandukanam vagnuratra sameti. 


When the heavenly waters shower upon these 
celebrants, like rain on frogs who have been hybernating 
in a dry pond like empty leather bags, they revive with 
exhilaration, they burst into chant, and the chant of these 
celebrants seems like the eager lowing of mother cows 
for their calves or like the excitement of the heart on 
the reflection of a new revelation on the imagination. 


यदीमेनाँ उशतो अभ्यवर्षीत्तृष्याव॑तः प्रावृष्यागं तायाम्‌ | 
अख्खलीकृत्या पितरं न पुत्रो अन्यो अन्यमुप वदंनत- 
मेति ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 103 355 


a Yadimenan uSato abhyavarsit trsyavatah 
pravrsyagatayam. Akhkhalikrtya pitaram na 
putro anyo anyamupa vadantameti. 


And when the rainy season has set in, then, if 
the cloud showers rain upon these longing celebrants 
of life, thirsting for the divine waters of life, one goes 
to meet another, chanting and shouting hilariously like 
the child going to meet the father. 


अन्यो अन्यमनु गृभ्णात्येनोरपां प्र॑सर्गे यदमं॑स्दिषाताम्‌। 
मण्डूको यदभिवुंष्टः कनिष्कन्पृश्निः dog हरिं तेन 
ara ४॥ 


4. Anyo anyamanu grbhnatyenorapam prasarge 
yadamandisatam. Manduko yadabhivrstah 
kaniskan prsnih samprnkte haritena vacam. 


On the fall of divine showers they seize upon 
each other while both experience the ecstasy of meeting 
and the rain. When the celebrant is soaked in the rain, 
the spotted versatile one springs forward and 
communicates with the green one in concentration in 
the language of intimacy. 


यदेषामन्यो अन्यस्य वाचं शाक्तस्येव वदति feretarar: | 
सर्वं तदेषां समृधेव पर्वं यत्सुवाचो वद॑थनाध्यप्सु ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Yadesamanyo anyasya vacam saktasyeva vadati 
siksamanah. Sarvam tadesam samrdheva parva 
yat suvaco vadathanadhyapsu. 


When one of these speaks to the other, they seem 
to repeat each other’s language like pupils repeating 
the words of the teacher. While communicating like this 
they jump and play on the water, their bodies swell with 


356 RGVEDA 
joy and the pride of being. 


गोमायुरेको अजमायुरेकः पृश्निरेको हरिं त एकं एषाम्‌। 
समानं नाम बिभ्र॑तो विरूपाः पुरुत्रा वाचं पिपिशुर्वदन्तः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Gomayureko ajamayurekah prsnireko harita eka 
esam. Samanam nama bibhrato virupah puru-tra 
vacam pipisurvadantah. 


One of them croaks like a cow, another like a 
goat, one of them is spotted, another is green. Of 
different voice and colour, they bear the same one name, 
the “manduka”, the celebrant, but they seem to 
communicate in many different languages. 


ब्राह्मणासो अतिरात्रे न सोमे सरो न पूर्णमभितो वद॑न्तः | 
संवत्सरस्य तद हः UR छ यन्म॑ण्डूकाः प्रावृषीणं बभूवं ।। 9 1 


Ve Brahmanaso atiratre na some saro na purna- 
mabhito vadantah. Samvatsarasya tadahah 
paristha yanmandukah pravrsinam babhiuva. 


O Brahmanas, devotees of supreme Brahman, 
at the end of the annual session when the last night is 
over, then, at the time before dawn, abide as in 
meditation and yajnic celebration just like the frogs who 
play, rejoice and celebrate around the overflowing lake 
when the showers of the season begin. 


ware: सोमिनो वाचमक्रत ब्रहम कृण्वन्तः परिवत्स- 
रीर्णम्‌। अध्वर्यवो घर्मिणः सिष्विदाना आविर्भवन्ति गुह्या 
नके चिंत्‌॥८॥ 

8. Brahmanasah somino vacamakrata brahma 


krnvantah parivatsarinam. Adhvaryavo ghar- 
minah sisvidana avirbhavanti guhya na ke cit. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 103 357 


Brahmanas engaged in the yearly soma yajna 
for peace and harmony conduct the yajna in honour of 
the Supreme Brahman and chant the Vedic mantras at 
the end of the first year. The priests facing the fire and 
soaked in sweat emerge as if from seclusion in the cave. 


देवहितिं जुगुपुद्धादशस्य॑ ऋतं नरो न प्र मिनन्त्येते । 
संवत्सरे प्रावृष्याग॑तायां तप्ता घर्मा अश्नुवते विसर्गम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


व Devahitim jugupurdvadasasya rtum naro na pra 
minantyete. Samvatsare pravrsyagatayam tapta 
gharma asnuvate visargam. 


These Brahmanas, leading lights of the yajnic 
order, do not neglect, never violate, but strictly abide 
by the divinely ordained twelve month seasons and the 
discipline and observances prescribed. At the end of 
the year when the rains set in they emerge seasoned 
and tempered in the heat of yajnic fire and attain their 
freedom. 


गोमायुरदादजमायुरदात्पृश्निरदाब्दरिंतो नो वसूनि। गवां 
मण्डूका दद॑तः श॒तानि सहस्रसावे प्र तिरन्त आयुः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Gomayuradadajamayuradat prsniradaddharito 
no vasuni. Gavam manduka dadatah satani 
sahasrasave pra tiranta ayuh. 


All those that speak and sound like nature in 
motion give us something; all those that speak and sound 
like nature and spirit unborn and eternal give us 
something; all those that speak and sound like the 
spectrum of colours in various forms give us something; 
all those that speak and sound like the dark and green 
in life and nature give us something: all these give us 


358 RGVEDA 


wealths of the world. Indeed all that speak and sound 
and celebrate nature and the eternal spirit of nature give 
us hundreds of wealths and values of existence on the 
move, advance us and give us full health and age in the 
thousandfold business of creative living and lead us to 
fulfilment and ultimate freedom. (Such is the gift of 
nature in the rainy season.) 


Mandala7/Sukta 104 
Indra-Somau, Indra, Soma, Agni, Devah, Gravana, 
Marutah, Vasishtha, Prthirvi-Antarikshe, Devatah, 

Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi. 


इन्द्रासोमा add tet send न्य॑र्पयतं वृषणा तमोवृधः | 
att शृणीतमचितो न्योषतं हतं नुदेथां नि शिंशीतम- 
fact: wee 


ly Indrasoma tapatam raksa ubjatam nyarp-ayatam 
vrsana tamovrdhah. Para srnitam-acito nyosatam 
hatam nudetham ni Ssisitam-atrinah. 


Indra-Soma, O lord and commander of power, 
peace and justice, O lord and master keeper of love, 
peace and harmony, subject the evil and wicked to the 
heat of discipline and correction or punish and reduce 
them to nullity. O generous and virile lord and ruler, let 
not the forces of darkness grow, keep them down, let 
not the misguided rise and spread out, shut these down 
and far off. Let the hoarders, grabbers, ogres and 
devourers be subjected to law and punishment, destroy 
the exploiters, stop them and let their fangs be blunted 
and rooted out. 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 359 


इन्द्रासोमा समघशंसमभ्यघं तपुर्ययस्तु aethirarga | 
ब्रह्यद्धिषें mare घोरचक्षसे gal धत्तमनवायं किमी- 
दिनें।॥। २॥ 


2. Indrasoma samaghasamsam-abhygham tapur- 
yayastu carur-agnivan iva. Brahmadvise kra- 
vydde ghoracaksase dveso dhattam-anavayam 
kimidine. 


Indra-Soma, lord and master of peace and 
power, love and justice, let the sinner and the criminal, 
the supporter and admirer of sin and crime along with 
the sin and crime, and the tormentor of the good and 
innocent go to the fire of discipline, punishment, or 
elimination like a handful of dirt meant for the fire. 
Never compromise with the enemy of nature, divinity, 
humanity and the wisdom of humanity. Rule out the 
cannibal and the carrion eater, the man of hate and evil 
eye, the sceptic, the cynic and the negationist. For them, 
have the disdain they deserve and either correct them 
or eliminate them. 


इन्द्रासोमा दुष्कृतो aa अन्तरनारम्भणे तम॑सि प्र विध्यतम्‌ । 
यथा नातः पु नरेक॑श्चनोदयत्तद्वामस्तु सह॑से मन्युम- 
च्छव: ॥ ३॥ 


Indrasoma duskrto vavre antar-anarambhane 
tamasi pra vidhyatam. Yatha natah punareka- 
S§canodayat tad vamastu sahase manyum- 
acchavah. 


Indra-Soma, fix the evil doer and throw him into 
a deep dungeon of darkness without remission so that 
by reason of that punishment no one again may raise 


360 RGVEDA 


his head for evil doing. That power of yours full of 
patience, fortitude and courage, that righteous passion 
of yours be for the destruction of evil and sabotage 
against life and social harmony. 


इन्द्रासोमा adad दिवो वधं सं पुंथिव्या अघशंसाय 
तर्ह॑णम्‌। उत्त॑क्षतं स्वर्य१ पर्वतेभ्यो येन्‌ vail वावृधानं 
Prefer: es ॥ 


4. Indrasoma vartayatam divo vadham sam prthivya 
aghasamsaya tarhanam. Ut taksatam svaryam 
parvatebhyo yena rakso vavrdhanam nijurvathah. 


Indra-Soma, from heaven and earth, from 
thunder and lightning and the showers of clouds, from 
the light of idealism, love and generosity and down to 
earth realism, bring unfailing laws of punishment and 
correction against sin and crime, acts and policies 
against poverty, disease, unemployment and wilful sloth, 
and against the supporters of sin and crime as well as 
against compromisers with negativities and negationists 
of evil. Enact law of incentive and encouragement for 
the generous, and blazing prohibitions for the 
adamantine evil so that you nip and burn off rising crime 
and evil in the bud. 


satan adad दिवस्पर्यगितपसेभिरर्यंवमश्मंहन्मभिः। 
तपुंर्वधेभिर जर भिरत्रिणो नि ast विध्यतं यन्तुं निस्व- 
रम्‌॥ ५॥ 

2; Indrasoma vartayatam divas-paryagnit-apte- 
bhir-ryuvam-asmahanmabhih. Tapurvadhebhir- 


ajare-bhiratrino ni parsane vidhyatam yantu 
nisvaram. 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 361 


Indra-Soma, lord of power and force, lord of 
peace and harmony, turn all round, revolve your search 
lights and from the skies shoot out your weapons of 
defence and offence, and with fiery, thunder-tipped, 
fatally destructive, irresistible and inviolable weapons 
fix the voracious ogres, strike them on the precipice 
and throw them into the abyss, running off into silence 
and oblivion without uttering a sigh of pain or voice of 
protest. 


इन्द्रासोमा परि वां भूतु favad इयं मतिः कश्च्याश्वेव 
वाजिना । यां वां होत्रां परिहिनोमि मेधयेमा ब्रह्माणि नृपतीव 
जिन्वतम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indrasoma pari vam bhitu visvata iyam matih 
kaksyasveva vajina. Yam vam hotram parihin-omi 
medhayema brahmani nrpativa jinvatam. 


Indra-Soma, leading powers of governance and 
peace, like mighty forces in harness ruling the nation, 
may this prayer of mine, which, with the best of my 
intention and understanding I address to you as an 
exhortation, reach you and inspire you and guide you 
all round, and may you, like the protector and ruler of 
the nation as you are, make these words of prayer, 
exhortation and adoration fruitful. 


प्रतिं स्मरेथां तुजयद्धिरेवैर्हतं द्रुहो रश्चसो भङ्गुराव॑तः। 
इन्द्रासोमा दुष्कृते मा सुगं भूद्यो न॑: कदा चिंदथिदासंति 
द्रुहा ॥ ७॥ 

7. Prati smaretham tujayabdhir-evairhatam druho 


raksaso bhanguravatah. Indrasoma duskrte ma 
sugam bhud yo nah kada cidabhidasati druha. 


362 RGVEDA 


And remember, be watchful and alert against 
the malignant, evil and treacherous forces, ward them 
off and eliminate them with the fastest interceptors and 
destroyers at the very outset. Indra-Soma, let there be 
no peace, nothing easy, for the evil doer whoever any 
time may try to injure, sabotage or enslave us out of 
jealousy, malignity or enmity. 


यो मा पाकेन मन॑सा चर॑न्तमथिचष्टे अनुं तेधिर्वचोभिः। 
आपंडव काशिना संगरंभीता असन्नस्त्वासत इन्द्र वक्ता ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yo ma pakena manasa carantam-abhicaste 
anrtebhir-vacobhih. Apa iva kasina samgrbhita 
asannas-tvasata indra vakta. 


And while I live and act and behave with a 
mature mind of purity and truth, if someone malign me 
with false words, let him be caught up like water in the 
hand grip and evaporate in the heat and, O lord Indra, 
ruler and law giver of power, let him be reduced to 
nothing because he speaks nothing but falsehood. 


ये पाकशंसं विहरन्त एवैर्ये वां भद्रं दूषयन्ति स्वधाभिः | 
अह॑ये वा तान्प्रददातु सोम आ वां दधातु निऋतेरु पस्थ ॥ ९ ॥ 


च. Ye pakasamsam viharanta evairye va bhadram 
dusayanti svadhabhih. Ahaye va tan pradadatu 
soma ठ va dadhatu nirrterupasthe. 


O Soma, lord of peace and justice, if there are 
those who with their smartness and fast actions malign, 
lacerate and deprive the man of purity, truth and 
immaculate honour and spotless reputation, or with their 
powers and prestige denigrate the man of goodness and 
charitable action and bring disgrace upon him, deliver 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 363 


such men to the sufferance of darkness and the pain of 
remorse or let them suffer the fangs of deprivation 
themselves. 


यो नो रसं दिप्स॑ति पित्वो अग्रे यो अश्वानां यो गवां 
यस्तनूनाम्‌ । रिपुः स्तेनः area नि ष हीयतां तन्वा 
तनां TUN ot 


10. Yo no rasam dipsati pitvo agne yo aSvanam yo 
gavam yastanunam. Ripuh stenah steyakrd 
dabhrametu ni sa hiyatam tanva tana ca. 


Whoever pollutes the flavour, taste and vitality 
of our food and injures or impairs the vigour and power 
of our horses, cows and our bodies, let such an enemy, 
the thief, the robber and saboteur, O lord of light and 
vitality, Agni, be reduced to nullity and himself suffer 
debility of body and even deprivation from self- 
extension and further growth. 


परः सो अ॑स्तु dears तनां च fre: पुंथिवीरधो अस्तु 
विश्वाः । प्रति शुष्यतु यशो अस्य देवा यो नो दिवा दिप्स॑ति 
यश्च THAN LVM 


11. Parah so astu tanva tana ca tisrah prthiviradho 
astu visvah. Prati Susyatu yaso asya deva yo no 
diva dipsati yasca naktam. 


O divinities of nature and humanity, he who 
wants to injure and destroy us in the day and in the 
night, must stay far off by his personal presence and 
also by the progeny of his evil tendencies and even fall 
lower than all the three orders of earthly existence, i.e., 
lower far than the good, the bad and the indifferent. His 
honour and reputation would dry up and evaporate to 


364 RGVEDA 


zero and there would be none even to remember him 
after. Let it be so with such a person. 


सुविज्ञानं चिकितुषे जनाय सच्यासंच्य वच॑सी पस्पृधाते | 
तयोर्यत्सत्यं य॑तरद्जी यस्तदित्सोमो(ऽवति हन्त्यास॑त्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Suvijnanam cikituse janadya saccasacca vacast 
pasprdhate. Tayoryat satyam yataradrjtyastadit 
somo’ vati hantyasat. 


Words of truth and words of untruth rival and 
contend with each other. Of these, the one that is true to 
the extent it is true and that which is simple and natural, 
this Soma, lord of peace, harmony and the goodness of 
life, preserves and protects, and the untrue, he destroys. 
This simple and straight natural knowledge, the lord 
reveals for the man who has the desire and ambition to 
know the truth and reality of life. 


wars dial वृजिनं हिनोति न श्चत्रियं मिथुया धारयन्तम्‌ । 
हन्ति tall हन्त्यासदद॑न्तमुभाविनद्रस्य प्रसितौ शयाते ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. = #८1द ५८ 50716 vrjinam hinoti na ksatriyam mithuya 
dharayantam. Hanti rakso hantyasad vadantam- 
ubhavindrasya prasitau Sayate. 


Soma, lord of truth, peace and harmony, does 
not call forth the crooked to the distinction between 
truth and untruth, nor does he impel the selfish kshatriya, 
ruler administrator, who parades his power and valour 
in a false manner, nor does he incite the two toward the 
untrue. But he does destroy the evil and the wicked and 
also the one who speaks the untruth, since both the evil 
and the liar end up in the bonds of Indra, lord of justice 
and power. 


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 104 365 


ae वाहमनृतदेव आस मोघं वा देवां sitqe st 
किमस्मभ्यं जातवेदो हृणीषे द्रोघवाचस्ते Pret संच- 
न्ताम्‌॥ ९४॥ 


14. ववां vahamanrtadeva asa mogham va devan 
apyuhe agne. Kimasmabhyam jatavedo hrnise 
droghavacaste nirrtham sacantam. 


If I were a worshipper of falsehood as my divine 
ideal, or if I adore the lord and divinities falsely, 
deceiving them as if, then O lord of light and truth, Agni, 
you would be angry with me. But I have not been thus, 
then why would you, knowing everything born in 
existence, feel angry with us? Not at all, because only 
the speakers of falsehood would suffer your wrath and 
punishment. 


अद्या मुरीय यदि यातुधानो अस्मि यदि वायुस्ततप पूरुषस्य । 
अधा स वीरैर्दशधिविं gar यो मा मोघं यातुधाने- 
त्याह ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Adya muriya yadi yatudhano asmi yadi vayusta- 
tapa purusasya. Adha sa virairdasabhirvi yuya 
yo ma mogham yatudhanetyaha. 


If I were a demon on the move, and if I 
tormented any person in life, then let me suffer death 
today just now. But I am not such, nor have I done so. 
Then let that man be forsaken of all his ten faculties of 
power and prana who falsely proclaims that I am a 
demonic tormentor of others. 


यो मायातुं यातुधानेत्याह यो at र॒क्षाः शुचिर स्मीत्याहं | 
इन्द्रस्तं ह॑न्तु महता वधेन विश्व॑स्य जन्तोरंधमस्प॑दीष्ट ।॥ १६ ॥ 


366 RGVEDA 


16. Yo mayatum yatudhanetyaha yo va raksah 
sucirasmityaha. Indrastam hantu mahata vadhena 
visvasya jantor-adhamas-padista. 


Whoever says that I am a devil even though I 
am not a devil, and whoever says that he is innocent 
and immaculate even though he is a devil, may Indra, 
lord of power and justice, punish such a person with 
his mighty thunderbolt. May such a falsifier fall to the 
abyss as the worst of all living beings. 


प्र या जिगाति खर्गलेव wma द्रुहा तन्वं) गूह॑माना । 
aat अनन्तं अव सा प॑दीष्ट ग्रावाणो श्चन्तु. tara 
उपब्दैः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Pra ya jigati khargaleva naktamapa druha 
tanvam guhamana. Vavran anantan ava sa 
padista gravano ghnantu raksasa upabdaih. 


And she that goes about at night, hiding her 
person like the spirit of hate and violence, a she owl as 
if, let her fall into the bottomless deep of darkness where 
the stones of evil and darkness itself would destroy her 
with a clang. 


वि तिष्ठध्वं मरुतो fafeaiued गृभायतं रक्षसः सं 
पिनष्टन । वयो ये भूत्वी पतय॑न्ति नक्तथिर्ये वा रिपो दधिरे 
देवे अध्वरे ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Vi tisthadhvam maruto viksvicchata grbhayata 


raksasah sam pinastana. Vayo ye bhutvi patayanti 
naktabhirye va ripo dadhire deve adhvare. 


O Maruts, vibrant social powers of vigilance and 
action, stay among the people, keenly watch for the 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 367 


forces of evil and violence, and there, grab them and 
crush them all that fly about like birds over the nights 
and cause disturbance and violence in the divine 
morning yajnas of love and non-violence for creative 
production and advancement. 


प्र व॑र्तय दिवो अश्मानमिन्द्र सोम॑शितं मघवन्त्सं शिंश्ाधि। 
प्राक्तादर्पाक्तादधरादुद॑क्तादभि ज॑हि रक्षसः पर्वतेन ॥ १९॥ 


19. Pra vartaya divo aSmanamindra somasitam 


^° ^~ 


radudaktad-abhi jahi raksasah parvatena. 


Indra, lord of power and justice, from the light 
of heaven and wisdom of the sages, bring up and strike 
the thunderbolt of justice and correction tempered and 
sharpened with soma for peace and progress, and refine 
and enlighten the noble people dedicated to peace and 
happiness. From front and back, up and down, seize 
the wicked and the destroyers and punish them with the 
bolt. 


Ud उ त्ये प॑तयन्ति शवयातव इन्द्रं दिप्सन्ति दिप्सवोऽ- 
दाभ्यम्‌। शिशीते शक्रः पिशुनेभ्यो वधं नूनं संजदशनिं 
यातुमद्य॑: ॥ Ro Wl 
20. Eta u tye patayanti Svayatava indram dipsanti 
dipsavo’dabhyam. Sisite sakrah pisunebhyo 
vadham nunam srajadasanim yatumadbhyah. 
These miscreants with the mentality of street 
curs roam around, pull people down, and try to damage 


Indra, the ruler, who is otherwise indomitable. Indra 
then, commander of power and force, sharpens the 


368 RGVEDA 


thunderbolt, the edge of justice and punishment, for 
these crafty saboteurs on the prowl and strikes the fatal 
blow upon them. 


इन्द्रो यातूनाम॑भवत्पराशरो हंविर्मथी Ara विवासताम्‌ | 
अभीदु शक्रः परशुर्यथा वनं पात्रेव भिन्दन्त्सत एति 
रश्चसंः॥ २९॥ 


21.  Indro yatunam-abhavat parasaro havirmathi- 
nam-abhyavivasatam. Abhidu Sakrah parasurya- 
tha vanam patreva bhindantsata eti raksasah. 


Indra is the lordly power that throws off the 
upcoming saboteurs who damage the inputs and 
infrastructure of yajnic development, he does so for the 
peace and progress of the human community. He is 
mighty powerful just like what the axe is for the wood, 
breaking down the evil and wicked destroyers like pots 
of clay whenever they raise their head. 


seed शुशुल्यूकयातुं जहि श्वयातुमुत कोकयातुम्‌ | 
सुपर्णयातुमुत गृध्च॑यातुं grade प्र yur रक्षं इन्द्र ॥ २२॥ 


22. Ulukayatum susulukayatum jahi Ssvayatumuta 
kokayatum. Suparnayatumuta grdhrayatum drsa- 
deva pra mrna raksa indra. 


Indra, refulgent and potent ruler of the world, 
crush the evil and the wicked like pieces of clay with a 
stone: the fiend in the garb of an owl or an owlet or a 
dog or a wolf or a hawk or a vulture. They are covert, 
stealthy, clever, jealous and growling, cruel destroyers, 
cunning and voracious. 


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 369 


मानो रक्षो अभि नंड्यातुमाव॑तामपोच्छतु मिथुना या 


23. 


किंमीदिना। पृथिवी नः पार्थि्वात्पात्वंहंसोऽ न्तरिश्षं 
दिव्यात्पात्वस्मान्‌ ॥ २३ ॥ 


Ma no rakso abhi nadyatumavatamapocchatu 
mithuna ya kimidina. Prthivi nah parthivat 
patvamhaso’ntariksam divyat patvasman. 


Let no wicked demonic forces harm and destroy 


us. Let the darkness of tormentors harming us either by 
joint force or by doubt and scepticism be off. May the 
earth protect us against earthly sin and crime. Let the 
sky protect us against dangers from above. 


24. 


इन्द्र॑ जहि पुमांसं यातुधान॑मुत स्त्रियं मायया शादानाम्‌। 
विग्रीवासो मूर॑देवा ऋदन्तु मा ते दुंशान्त्सूर्य"मुच्च- 
VTL २४॥ 


Indra jahi pumamsam yatudhanamuta striyam 
mayaya s$asadanam. Vigrivaso muradeva rdantu 
ma te drsant-suryam-uccarantam. 


Indra, punish and eliminate the man demon. 


Punish and eliminate the woman demon who destroys 
by deception and crafty design. Let the stranglers of 
life who play with life and death lose their own throat 
and let them never see the rising sun. 


20; 


प्रति चक्ष्व वि चक्ष्वेन्द्रश्च सोम जागृतम्‌ । 
रक्षोभ्यो वधमस्यतमशनिं arya: ॥ २५॥ 


Prati caksva vi caksvendrasca soma jagrtam. 
Raksobhyo vadhamasyatamasanim yatumad- 
bhyah. 


Indra and Soma, lord of power and peace, justice 


370 RGVEDA 


and governance, love and majesty, watch everything that 
happens and enlighten us too. Shine, reveal and proclaim 
what is happening and warn us too. Keep awake and let 
us rise too into awakenment. Shoot the arrow upon the 
demon destroyers, strike the thunderbolt upon the covert 
saboteurs. 

॥ इति सप्तमं मण्डलकम्‌ ॥ 


371 


MANDALA 8 


Mandala 8/Sukta 1 
Indra, Danastuti, Asanga Devatah, Pragatha Ghaura 


Kanva, Medhatithi Medhyatithi Kanvas, Asanga Playogi, 
Shashvati Angirasi Rshis 


मा चिदन्यद्वि शंसत सखायो मा रिषण्यत । 
इन्द्र मित्स्तोता वृष॑णं सचां सुते मुहुरुक्था च॑ शंसत ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Ma cidanyad vi Samsata sakhayo ma risanyata. 
Indramit stota vrsanam saca sute muhuruktha ca 
Samsata. 


O friends, do not worship any other but One, be 
firm, never remiss, worship only Indra, sole lord 
absolute, omnipotent and infinitely generous, and when 
you have realised the bliss of the lord’s presence, sing 
songs of divine adoration spontaneously, profusely, 
again and again. 


अवक्रक्षिणं वृषभं य॑थाजुरं गां न चर्षणी सदह॑म्‌। 
विद्धेष॑णं सरं वन॑नो भयंकरं मंहिंष्ठमुभया विनम्‌ ॥ २॥ 
2. Avakraksinam vrsabham yathajuram gam na 


carsanisaham. Vidvesanam samvananobha-yam- 
karam mamhistham-ubhayavinam. 


Worship Indra only, who most spontaneously 
rushes to the devotee for protection and upon the evil 
for punishment, correction or destruction. He is 
profusely and potently generous, free from age and 


372 RGVEDA 


decay, patient and forbearing giver of peace and 
nourishment to people like the meek cow and motherly 
earth, saviour from hate and jealousy, most adorable, 
giver of both material well being (abhyudaya) and 
spiritual freedom (nihshreyas), most munificent and 
majestic, and lord ruler and protector of both nature 
and the soul. 


afters त्वा जना इमे नाना हव॑न्त ऊतये । 
अस्माकं ब्रह्मेदमिन्द्र भूतु तेऽहा विश्वां च वर्धनम्‌ 3 ॥ 


5 Yacciddhi tva jana ime nana havanta utaye. 
Asmakam brahmedam-indra bhiutu te’ha visava 
ca vardhanam. 


Although these many people invoke you and 
pray for protection and progress for themselves in many 
different ways, yet, we pray, our adoration and prayers 
and all this wealth, honour and excellence bestowed 
upon us by you be dedicated to you and always, day 
and night, exalt your munificence and glory. 


वि dda=a मघवन्विपश्चितोऽ af विपो जनानाम्‌। 
उप क्रमस्व पुरुरूपमा भ॑र वाजं नेदिष्ठमूतये ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Vi tarturyante maghavan vipascito’ryo vipo jana- 
nam. Upa kramasva pururupama bhara vajam 
nedistham-utaye. 


O lord of might and majesty, the wise, the noble 
and the vibrant leaders of the people, by your grace, 
cross over all obstacles of their struggle for life and 
success, whenever they face any. Pray, come lord and 
give us instant energy of versatile form for our protection 
and victory at the earliest. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 373 


महे चन त्वामंद्रिवः परा शुल्काय देयाम्‌ । 
न सहस्राय नायुताय वचिवो न श॒ताय॑ शतामघ ॥ ५॥ 


Mahe cana tvam-adrivah para sulkaya deyam. Na 
sahasraya nayutaya vajrivo na $ataya satamagha. 


O lord of infinite wealth, power and majesty, 
wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment, 
breaker of the clouds and mountains, bless me that I 
may never give up my devotion to you for the greatest 
material return, not for a thousand, not for a million, 
not even for the boundless wealth of the world. 


वस्या इन्द्रासि मे पितुरुत भ्रातुरभुञ्जतः । 
माता च॑ मे छदयथः समा व॑सो वसुत्वनाय राध॑से i 


6. Vasyan indrasi me pituruta bhratur-abhunjatah. 
Mata ca me chadayathah sama vaso vasutva-naya 
radhase. 


You command greater wealth, power and 
prestigious settlement for me than my father, you are 
closer to me than my indifferent brother. Only my mother 
and you are equal to provide me solace and protection, 
O shelter of the universe, for my wealth and celebrity 
in success (my mother as individual mother and you as 
universal mother). 


क्रेयथ क्रेद॑सि gear fates ते मन॑ः। 
अलर्षि युध्म खजकृत्पुरन्दर प्र गायत्रा अगासिषुः ॥ ७ ॥ 


ai Kveyatha kvedasi purutra ciddhi te manah. Alarsi 
yudhma khajakrt purandara pra gayatra aga- 
sisuh. 


Where do you move and reach? Where do you 


374 RGVEDA 


reside and abide? No one can say. Your mind and 
presence is everywhere, universal. O lord of the warlike 
dynamics of existence, pivot and churner of the universe, 
breaker of the citadels of darkness and ignorance, come 
and bless us, the celebrants and singers of Gayatri hymns 
invoke and adore you. 


प्रास्मै गायत्रमर्चत वावातुर्यः पुरन्दरः | 
याभिः काण्वस्योपःं बर्हिरासदं यासंद्रजी Rrreat: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Prasmai gayatram-arcata vavaturyah puran- 
darah. Yabhih kanvasyopa barhirasadam yasad 
vajri bhinat purah. 


O celebrants of Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, 
sing hymns of adoration in Gayatri music in honour of 
Indra who is breaker of the strongholds of darkness 
which oppose and oppress the lord’s devotees, so that, 
pleased by these adorations, the lord may reveal his 
presence and grace the mind and vedi of the enlightened 
sages and break through the citadels of darkness to bless 
the devotees. 


ये ते afd दशण्विन॑ः शतिनो ये संहस्िर्णः। 
अश्वासो ये ते वृष॑णो रघुद्धुवस्तेभिं्नस्तूयमा ग॑हि ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Ye te santi dasagvinah 5417110 ye sahasrinah. 
Asvaso ye te vrsano raghudruvas-tebhir-nas- 
tuyama gahi. 


Indra, breaker of the citadels of darkness and 
ignorance to light, come post haste to us with all those 
lightning powers and forces of yours which are vigorous 
and generous, radiating into all the ten directions in a 
hundred and a thousand ways. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 375 


आ aia सबर्दुघां हुवे गायत्रवेपसम्‌ | 
इन्द्रं धेनुं सुदुघामन्यामिष॑मुरुधारामरं कृत॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. A tvadya sabardugham huve gayatravepasam. 
Indram dhenum sudugham-anyam-isamur- 
udharam-aramkrtam. 


Today I invoke Indra, I invoke the motherly 
spirit of the universe, giver of total fulfilment of the 
heart’s desire, pleased and stirred by the chant of Gayatri 
songs of adoration, omnipotent and omnificent, 
generous as Mother Nature, giver of ample gifts beyond 
the earth and the earthly cow, harbinger of showers of 
the cherished nectar milk of life, all blissful and 
gracious. 


यत्तुदत्सूर wisi वङ्कू वात॑स्य पर्णिना । 
वहत्कुत्संमारजु नेयं शतक्रतुः त्सरंद्रन्धर्वमस्तुंतम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yat tudat sura etaSam vanku vatasya parnina. 
Vahat kutsam-arjuneyam Ssatakratuh tsarad 
gandharvam-astrtam. 


Indra, lord immanent, omnipresent and all 
energiser, gives the initial stroke of motion to everything 
on the move such as the sun and the cloud by the waves 
of cosmic energy. Thus the lord of countless actions of 
cosmic yajna brings the thunderstroke of cosmic energy 
to move the sun, wielder of the earth, and he brings the 
thunder stroke of lightning to break the cloud into rain. 
(Indra thus is the unmoved, all immanent, original mover 
of the universe.) 


य ऋते चिंदधिध्चिष॑ः पुरा wast sige: । 
सन्धाता सन्धिं मघवा पुरूवसुरिष्कर्ता fagd पुन॑ः ॥ ९२॥ 


376 RGVEDA 


12. Yarte cidabhisrisah pura jatrubhya atrdah. Sam- 
dhata samdhim maghava purivasur-iskarta 
vihrutam punah. 


Indra is that vibrant immanent lord of 
unbounded natural health and assertive life energy who, 
without piercing and without ligatures, provides for the 
original jointure of the series of separate vertebrae and 
collar bones and then, later, heals and sets the same back 
into healthy order if they get dislocated or fractured. 


मा भूम निछ्याइवेन्द्र त्वदरंणाइव | 
वनानि न प्रंजहितान्यद्िवो दुरोषासो अमन्महि ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Mabhumanistyad ivendra tvadaranda iva. Vanani 
na prajahitanyadrivo durosaso amanmahi. 


Indra, lord almighty, maker and breaker of 
clouds and mountains, free from anger and fear we adore 
you and pray: Give us the grace that we may never be 
like the lowest of human species with nothing to be 
proud of, let us never be like the indifferent and the 
depressed, let us never be reduced to the state of forsaken 
thickets of dead wood. 


अम॑न्मदहीदनाशवोऽ नुग्रासंश्च सृत्रहन्‌। 
सकृत्सु ते महता शुर राधसाऽनु स्तोमं मुदीमहि ॥ ९२४ ॥ 


14. Amanmahidanasavo’nugrasasca vrtrahan. Sakrt 
su te mahata Sura radhasa ’nu stomam mudimahi. 


Indra, omnipotent lord, destroyer of darkness 
and ignorance, we pray that, gently and at peace without 
anger or impatience, we always worship and meditate 
on you and, by virtue of your grandeur and glory, we 
should celebrate and exalt your honour and rejoice with 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 377 
exciting songs and yajnic sessions. 


यदि स्तोमं मम श्रव॑दस्माक्‌मिन्द्र्‌मिन्दवः । 
तिरः पवित्रं agate आशवो मन्दन्तु तुम्रयावृधंः ॥ १५ ॥ 


15. Yadi stomam mama Ssravad-asmakam-indramin- 
davah. Tirah pavitram sasrvamsa aSavo man- 
dantu tugryavrdhah. 


And if the lord omnipotent, Indra, listen to my 
song of divine celebration, then may the offers of 
homage and oblations of soma, quick and fast, 
augmented by holy waters, reaching the pure and 
immaculate lord, please and exalt him and delight us 
with success. 


आ waa सधस्तुतिं वावातुः सख्युरा ग॑हि। 
उपस्तुतिर्मघोनां प्र त्वा वत्वर्धां ते वश्मि सुष्टुतिम्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 


16. A tvadya sadhastutim vavatuh sakhyura gahi. 
Upastutir-maghonam pra tvavatvadha {८ vasmi 
sustutim. 


O lord, pray come and accept the joint praise 
and adorations of your friends and devotees. And may 
the spontaneous and heart felt prayers and adorations 
of the wealthy and powerful also reach you today. And 
now it is my time and desire to offer my song of 
adoration. 


सोता हि सोममद्विभिरेमेनमप्सु धावत। 
गव्या aaa वासयन्त इन्नरो निर्धुक्षन्वक्षणाभ्यः 11 ९७॥ 


17. Sota hi somam-adribhir-emenam-apsu dhavata. 
Gavya vastreva vasayanta innaro nirdhuksan 
vaksanabhyah. 


378 RGVEDA 


O friends and celebrants of Indra, lord 
omnipotent, extract the soma with grinders, mix and 
stir it in waters. Then leading lights of yajna, refining it 
like the concentration of sun rays, offer it into the fire 
and milk out waters in showers from space for the 
flowing streams. 


Note: This mantra is a metaphor of meditation 
and spiritual realisation also. When you churn the world 
of your sense experiences, thought and memory, extract 
the essential value and offer it into the fire of meditation, 
then the light of divinity descends on you and your life 
is changed. It is then that the light of divinity flows into 
the channels of your thought and action. 


अध ज्मो अस्व तन्वां गिरा ममाऽऽ जाता सुक्रतो पृण ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. = 44/7८ 1110 adha va divo brhato rocanadadhi. Aya 
vardhasva tanva gira mama’’ jata sukrato prna. 


O lord refulgent and omnipotent, whether on 
earth or in the regions of light or even beyond the 
expansive light of heaven, be pleased and exalted by 
this refined and radiating voice of adoration and, O lord 
presiding spirit of yajna, bless us and our children with 
perfect fulfilment. 


इन्द्राय सु मदिन्तमं सोमं सोता वरेण्यम्‌ । 
शक्र एंणं पीपय॒द्विश्व॑या धिया हिन्वानं न वाजयुम्‌ ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19. _Indraya su madintamam somam sota varenyam. 
Sakra enam pipayad visvaya dhiya hinvanam na 
vajayum. 


O celebrants of Indra, seekers of spiritual 
perfection, for the attainment of holiness of thought, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 379 


karma and vision, extract the choicest, most exhilarating 
soma from life and offer it to Indra, spirit of the universe, 
and the lord omnipotent would bless this seeker of 
fulfilment calling upon the lord with universal 
intelligence and will for a life of perfect action. 


मा त्वा सोम॑स्य गल्द॑या सदा याचन्नहं गिरा। 
भूर्णिं सगं न सव॑नेषु चुक्रुधं क ईशानं न याचिषत्‌ ॥ २०॥ 


20. Matvasomasya galdaya sada yacannaham gira. 
Bhurnim mrgam na savanesu cukrudham ka 
1sanam na yacisat. 


O lord, always beseeching you for one thing or 
another with my words of prayer as with each drop of 
soma offered to you, I pray, I may not provoke you to 
anger in yajna, you who are infinite giver and sole ruler 
of the universe like a lion of the forest. Listen, O lord, 
who doesn’t ask of the ruler and the munificent? 


मदेनेषितं मद॑मुग्रमुगरेण शव॑सा | 
विश्वेषां तरुतारं मदच्युतं मदे हि ष्पा ददाति नः ।॥ २९॥ 
21. Madenesitam madam-ugram-ugrena Savasa. 


Visvesam tarutaram madacyutam made hi sma 
dadati nah. 


When the lord is pleased with our devotion, then 
he grants us the most exciting joy along with brilliant 
strength and power which we love and pray for with 
enthusiasm and which eliminates all pride of the ego 
and helps us cross over all challenges of life. 


शेवारे art पुरु देवो मतौय दाशुषे । 
स सुन्वते च॑ स्तुवते च॑ रासते विश्वगूर्तो अरिष्टुतः ॥ २२॥ 


380 RGVEDA 


22. Sevare varya puru devo martaya dasuse. Sa sun- 
vate ca stuvate ca rasate visvagurto aristutah. 


In the treasure hold of yajna, the self-refulgent 
lord universally adored keeps wealth and excellence of 
choice for the generous mortal which he, acknowledged 
and adored even by adversaries, gives to the celebrant 
and the worshipful lover of soma for homage to the 
lord. 


एन्द्रं याहि मत्स्व॑ Fasrut देव राध॑सा | 
सरो न प्रास्युदरं सपीतिभिरा सोमेभिरुरु स्फिरम्‌॥ २३॥ 


23. Endra yahi matsva citrena deva radhasa. Saro 
na prasyudaram sapitibhira somebhiruru sphi- 
ram. 


Indra, lord of glory, come with various 
wondrous forms of wealths of the world and let us 
rejoice in the bliss of your presence. Like the universal 
reservoir, fill our vast world of existence with exciting 
and soothing wealth, honour and excellence for 
complete self-fulfilment. 


आ त्वां सहस्रमा शतं युक्ता रथे fer ण्ययें | 
ब्रह्मयुजो हर॑य इन्द्र केशिनो वर्हन्तु सोम॑पीतये ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. A tva sahasrama Satam yukta rathe hirnyaye. 
Brahmayujo haraya indra kesino vahantu soma- 
pitaye. 

May the hundreds and thousands of forces of 
nature and humanity harnessed to the golden chariot of 
the universe, radiant with light and dedicated to divinity, 
invoke and invite you hither into the heart so that we 
may experience the bliss of divine presence. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 381 


आ त्वा रथे हिरण्यये हरीं मयूरशेप्या | 
शितिपृष्ठा वहतां मध्वो अन्ध॑सो विवक्षणस्य पीतये 11 २५॥ 


25. A (व rathe hiranyaye hari mayurasepya. Siti- 
prstha vahatam madhvo andhaso vivaksanasya 
pitaye. 

May the vibrant forces of divine energy, joined 
to your golden chariot of the universe with rhythmic 
majesty like the peacock’s feather tail and mighty power 
with circuitous motion of energy currents, radiate your 
presence here so that you may acknowledge and accept 
our love and homage and we experience the bliss of 
divine presence. 


foot त्वपैस्य गिर्वणः सुतस्य gaara | 
परिष्कृतस्य र सिन॑ इयमांसुतिश्चारूर्मदाय पत्यते ॥ २६ ॥ 


26. Piba tvasya girvanah sutasya purvapa iva. 
Pariskrtasya rasina iyam-asutis-carur-madaya 
patyate. 


Like the eternal lord of love fond of the 
celebrant’s homage, come and accept the devotee’s love 
and faith distilled from life’s experience. The flow of 
the ecstatic celebrant’s clairvoyance pure and sweet is 
full of ananda and radiates from the heart for spiritual 
bliss. 


य एको अस्तिं दंसना ver उग्रो अभि aa: 1 
गमत्स शिप्री न स योषदा tea न oR वर्जति ॥ २७॥ 


27. Ya eko asti damsana mahan ugro abhi vrtaih. 
Gamat sa Sipri na sa hosada gamaddhavam na 
pari varjati. 


382 RGVEDA 


He is one, unique and incomparable, great by 
his omnipotence and action, refulgent and supreme by 
his laws and observance. May the lord, like the light of 
grace, descend on us, may he never be away, may be 
ever respond to our call and come to our yajna and never 
forsake us. 


त्वं पुरं चरिष्ण्वं वधेः शुष्ण॑स्य सं पिणक्‌ | 
त्वं भा अनु चरो अधं द्विता यदिन्द्र हव्यो भुव॑ः ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Tvam puram carisnvam vadhaih susnasya sam 
pinak. Tvam bha anu caro adha dvita yadindra 
havyo bhuvah. 


With fatal strokes of arms, you destroy the forces 
of evil and exploitation on the rampant, you are the light 
of life and bless the lights of life in action, and thus you 
are doubly adorable and worshipped in two 
complementary aspects, as destroyer and as preserver, 
O lord omnipotent and self-refulgent. 


मम॑ त्वा सूर उदिते मम॑ मध्यन्दिने fea: 1 
ममं प्रपित्वे अपिशर्वरे व॑स॒वा स्तोमासो अवृत्सत i २९ ॥ 


29. Mama tva sura udite mama madhyandine divah. 
Mama prapitve apisarvare vasava stomaso avrt- 
sata. 


O lord of the universe, shelter of life and 
existence, at the dawn of sunrise let my prayers and 
songs of exaltation reach you. At the middle of the day 
when the sun is on the high, let my prayers and songs 
of adoration reach you. And when the day is over and 
night is fallen and the stars shine, let my songs of prayer 
and peace reach you. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 383 


स्तुहि स्तुहीदेते घा ते मंहिष्ठासो मघोनाम्‌। 
निन्दिताश्वः प्रपथी प॑रमज्या म॒घस्य॑ मेध्यातिथे ii ३०॥ 


30. = 917 stuhidete gha te mamhisthaso maghonam. 
ninditasvah prapathi paramajya maghasya 
medhyatithe. 


O Medhyatithi, venerable traveller on life’s 
highway, O guest, O host, pray to Indra, adore him, and 
these too around you, all richest of the rich and mightiest 
of the mighty, should adore him: omnipresent, faster 
than the fastest, instantly moving all round over paths 
of infinity, commanding the rule and dispensation of 
the highest wealth and power of existence. 


आ यदश्वान्वनन्वतः श्रब्दयाहं रथे रुहम्‌ । 
उत वामस्य वसुंनण्चिकेतति यो अस्ति arg: पशुः ॥ ३९॥ 
31. A yadagsvan vananvatah sSraddhayaham rathe 


ruham. Uta vamasya vasunasciketati yo asti 
yadvah pasuh. 

When I control the outgoing senses and mind 
and look within riding as if the body chariot with faith, 
then in that state of experience whoever is refined and 
watchful knows the inner secrets of this beautiful world 
of existence. 


य WaT मह्यं मामहे सह त्वचा हिरण्यया । 
एष विश्वान्यभ्यस्तु सोभंगाऽऽसङ्कस्यं स्वनद्र॑थः ।॥ ३२ ॥ 


32. Yarjra mahyam mamahe saha tvaca hiranyaya. 
Esa visvanyabhyastu saubhaga’’samgasya 
svanadrathah. 


Who gives me dynamic and powerful gifts of 


384 RGVEDA 


life with a golden cover and thus does me honour may 
be blest with the highest good fortunes of the world 
and may this devoted man go forward in life by a 
resounding chariot. 


अध पलायोगिरति araa-artharst sit दशभिः सहस्रैः | 
अधोक्षणो दश॒ महयं रुशन्तो नव्डइव सरसो निर॑तिष्ठन्‌ ॥ ३३ ॥ 


33. = 44८ playogirati dasadanyanasamgo agne daSsa- 
bhih sahasraih. Adhoksano dasa mahyam rusanto 
nala iva saraso niratisthan. 


Agni, omnipresent light of life, the dedicated 
man of charity conducting yajnic and spiritual projects 
in science and spirituality exceeds others by tens and 
thousands especially when he gives to me ten highly 
brilliant and creative gifts rising like lotus from a lake. 


अन्व॑स्य स्थूरं AIT पुरस्तादनस्थ ऊरूर॑वरम्ब॑माणः । 
शश्व॑ती नार्य'थिचक्ष्याह सुभद्रमर्य भोजनं विभर्षि ।॥। ३२४ ॥ 


34. Anvasya sthuram dadrse purastad-anastha 
ururavarambamanah. Sasvati naryabhi-caksyaha 
subhadram-arya bhojanam bibharsi. 


The gross form of the universe is seen emerging 
from the infinite transphysical spiritual reality. The 
eternal Mother Nature watches and says: O lord of 
gracious charity, you alone hold the blessed food for 
the life of mortal humanity. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 385 


Mandala 8/Sukta 2 


Indra (1-40) Danastuti (41-42) Devata, Medhatithi 
Kanva and Priyamedha Angirasa (1-40), Medhatithi 
Kanva (41-42) Rshis 


इदं व॑सो सुतमन्धः पिबा सुपूर्णमुदर॑म्‌। 
अनाभयित्ररिमा ते॥ ९॥ 


॥ Idam vaso sutam-andhah piba supurnam-udaram. 
Anabhayin rarima te. 


O lord of the world’s treasure of wealth, honour 
and excellence, here is this exhilarating soma nectar of 
love and devotion distilled from the heart and soul. Pray 
drink of it to your heart’s content. We offer it to you, 
lord beyond fear. 


afiela: सुतो अश्नैरव्यो att: aga: | 
अश्वो न निक्तो नदीषु 2 

2 Nrbhirdhitah suto asnairavyo varaih pariputah. 
Asvo na nikto nadisu. 

Stirred by best of men, crushed and filtered by 
men of adamantine character, purified and guarded by 
best of the brave, it is sparkling like sun rays reflected 
on the river waters. 

तं ते यवं यथा गोभिः स्वादुम॑कर्मं श्रीणन्त॑ः। 
इन्द्रं त्वास्मिन्त्स॑धमादे॥ ३॥ 


2 Tam te yavam yatha gobhih svadumakarma 
srinantah. Indra tvasmint-sadhamade. 


That sparkling soma drink of devotion seasoned 
with barley, mixed with milk and cream, we, blenders, 


386 RGVEDA 


having prepared it, offer to you in this house of 
celebration. 


इन्द्र इत्सोमपा एक इन्द्रः सुतपा विश्वायुः | 
अन्तर्दवान्मत्यींश्च ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Indra it somapa eka indrah sutapa visvayuh. 
Antardevan martyamsca. 


Among ordinary mortals and among divines of 
wisdom and vision, Indra, the karmayogi, alone is the 
protector of soma, Indra, the man of knowledge and 
dedication, alone is the valuer of the worshipper’s 
devotion and homage as he alone has the world vision. 


न यंशुक्रोन दुराशीर्न gar ऊरुव्यच॑सम्‌। 
अ पस्यृण्वते सुहार्दम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


= Na yam sukro na durdasirna tpra uruvyacasam. 
Apasprnvate suhardam. 


Neither the most sparkling soma of devotion nor 
the most sophisticated and aromatic, nor the most 
delightful, ever satiate the lord infinite of the holiest 
heart and love. 


गोभिर्यदीमन्ये अस्मन्मृगं न त्रा मृगयंन्ते । 
अधित्सर॑न्ति धेनुभिः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Gobhir-yadimanye asmanmrgam na vra mrga- 
yante. Abhitsaranti dhenubhih. 


Multitudes of people other than us approved him 
and try to inveigle him with creamy entertainment and 
sweet flattering words of adoration just like a hunter 
baiting a lion (but they fail). 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 387 


त्रय इन्द्र॑स्य सोमाः Gard: सन्तु देवस्य | 
स्वे क्षये Gara: ॥ ७॥ 


7. Traya indrasya somah sutasah santu devasya. 
Sve ksaye sutapavnah. 


For self-refulgent and generous Indra who is 
fond of the soma dedication of devotees, there are three 
sessions of soma distilled and offered in homage in the 
devotee’s own home of yajna and prayer, at dawn, at 
mid-day and in the evening before night fall. 


त्रयः कोशासः शचोतन्ति तिस्त्रश्चम्ब ९: सुपूर्णाः | 
समाने अधि ante ui 

8. Trayah kosasah scotanti tisrascamvah supurnah. 
Samane adhi bharman. 


In the same one session of yajna, there are three 
vessels of soma dripping with the nectar and three ladles 
of ghrta overflowing with homage for the fire in honour 
of the lord. 


शुचिरसि पुरुनिःषछाः afitteaa आशीर्तः 1 
दध्ना मन्दिष्ठः शूर॑स्य ॥ ९॥ 

Sucirasi purunihsthah ksirair-madhyata asirtah. 
Daghna mandisthah surasya. 


Celestial soma, divine devotion of the dedicated, 
you are pure and potent, dedicated to the joy of many 
and the lord eternal, and seasoned in the process with 
milk, cream and curds. Surely you are the most delightful 
love of the heroic brave. 


इमे त॑ इन्द्र सोमास्तीव्रा अस्मे सुतासः | 
शुक्रा आशिरं याचन्ते Ut Qo ॥ 


388 RGVEDA 
10. Ime ta indra somastivra asme sutasah. 
Sukra asiram yacante. 
These are for you, Indra, soma oblations of the 
most potent order distilled by us. Pure and powerful 
they are, offered in homage with prayer and hope for a 
share of the celestial bliss of faith and love. 
at आशिरं पुरोव्छाश्मिन्द्रेमं सोमं श्रीणीदहि। 
रे वन्तं हि त्वा श्युणोमिं ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Tan asiram purolasam-indremam somam srinihi. 
Revantam hi tva Srnomi. 
Indra, lord of glory, come and join this soma 
celebration of milk and barley delicacies with joy. You 
command the wealth, honour, excellence and glory of 
the world, I hear. I believe, I share and celebrate. 
हृत्सु पीतासो युध्यन्ते दुर्मदासो न ata 
ऊधर्न नग्रा ज॑रन्ते ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Artsu pitaso yudhyante durmadaso na surayam. 
Udharna nagna jarante. 


Draughts of soma create exhilarations in the 
heart unlike intoxication and illusions of wine, and the 
celebrants adore the spirit divine as the ocean of ecstasy. 


रेवां sxad: स्तोता स्यात्त्वाव॑तो Wars: | 
Wg हरिवः stared ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Revan id revatah stota syat tvavato maghonah. 
Predu harivah srutasya. 


Indra, master and commander of dynamic 
forces, may the celebrant of the brilliant, bountiful and 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 2 389 


renowned like you be brilliant, prosperous and 
celebrated. That is but natural. 


उक्थं चन शस्यमानमगोररिरा चिकेत । 
न गायत्रं गीयमानम्‌ ex ॥ 


14. Uktham cana Sasyamanam-agorarira ciketa. 
Na gayatram giyamanam. 


Indra, lord of power and piety, the man attached 
to divinity in faith and opposed to doubt and disloyalty 
knows the words of praise spoken by a man of doubtful 
faith as much as he knows the songs of adoration sung 
by a man of faith (and makes a distinction between the 
two). 


मानं इन्द्र पीयल्रवे मा शर्धते ont at: | 
शिश्चां शचीवः शचीभिः ।॥ ९५॥ 


15. Mana indra piyatnave ma sardhate para dah. 
Siksa Sacivah Sacibhih. 

Indra, lord of refulgent power, give us not away 
to the scornful abuser nor to the wild tyrant. With your 
laws and powers, pray discipline, rule, instruct and 
enlighten us. 


वयमु त्वा dade इन्द्र॑ त्वायन्तः GA: | 
कण्वां उक्थेभिर्जरन्ते ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Vayamu tva radidartha indra tvayantah sakhayah. 
Kanva ukthebhir-jarante. 


Indra, we too have the same aims and objectives 
as you. We are your friends and admirers. We know and 
wish to achieve, and with all words of praise and 


390 RGVEDA 


appreciation, we adore you as others, wise devotees, 
do. 


न घेमन्यदा प॑पन वचिंत्रपसो नविं्ौ । 
तवेदु स्तोमं चिकेत ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Na ghemanyada papana vajrinnapaso navistau. 
Tavedu stomam ciketa. 


Indra, lord of thunder and justice, in the 
beginning of a new plan, action or programme of 
holiness, I adore none else but only you. I know only 
one song of adoration and that is for you alone. 


इच्छन्ति देवाः सुन्वन्तं न स्वर्प्राय स्पृहयन्ति | 
यन्ति प्रमादमतन्द्राः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18.  Icchanti devah sunvantam na svapnaya sprha- 
yanti. Yanti pramadam-atandrah. 


Divines of brilliance and holy action love those 
engaged in creative actions of piety. They care not for 
dreams and love no dreamers. Active, wakeful and 
realistic beyond illusion, they achieve the joy of success 
in life. 
ओ षु प्रयाहि वाजेभिर्मा goiter अभ्य स्मान्‌। 
महोंड॑व युवजानिः ॥ ९९॥ 

19. O su pra yahi vajebhirma hrnitha abhyasman. 
Mahan iva yuvajanih. 

Come along with us with all your strength and 
enthusiasm without hesitation or embarrassment, and 


go forward like a great hero inspired by a youthful 
maiden. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 2 391 


मो ष्व१ द्य दुर्हणावान्त्सायं करदारे अस्मत्‌। 
asia जामाता ।॥ २०॥ 

20. Mo svadya durhanavantsayam karadare asmat. 
ASrira iva jamata. 
Invincible and unconquerable, come to our 
yajnic celebrations today, delay not till the last hour, of 
evening, hesitating like an indigent son-in-law. 
विद्या dea वीरस्य॑ भूरिदावरीं सुमतिम्‌। 
त्रिषु जातस्य मनांसि ॥ २९॥ 

21. Vidma hyasya virasya bhuridavarim sumatim. 
Trisu jatasya manamsi. 

We know the mind, noble intentions and 
generous liberty of this brave hero, Indra, who is risen 


high in life’s three active fields of thought, energy and 
stability. 


आ तु षिञ्च कण्वमन्तं न at विदा शवसानात्‌। 
यशस्तरं STATA: ॥ २२॥ 

22. A 7 sifca kanvamantam na gha vidma Savasandt. 
YaSastaram Satamuteh. 


O man, with the nectar of soma, regale Indra, 
who commands wisdom and the wise and a hundred 
ways of defence, protection and progress. Indeed for 
reasons of his heroism and grandeur we know no one 
else more honourable and renowned than he. 


ज्येष्ठैन सोतरिन्द्राय सोमं वीराय श॒क्राय॑ । 
भरा पिलन्नयीय ॥ २३॥ 


392 RGVEDA 


23. Jyesthena sotarindraya somam viraya Sakraya. 
Bhara pibannaryaya. 


O maker of soma, bring and serve a drink of 
prime soma first for Indra, brave, brilliant and manly 
leader of men, and see that the lord accepts. 


यो afast अव्यथिष्वरुवावन्तं जरितुभ्यंः। 
वाजं स्तोतृभ्यो गोम॑न्तम्‌ ॥ २४॥ 
24. Yo vedistho avyathisvasvavantam jaritrbhyah. 


Vajam_ stotrbhyo gomantam. 


Among men of yajnic love and non-violence, 
he is the most venerable on the vedi, harbinger of wealth 
and success for the celebrants and giver of nourishing 
food and energy full of milk and honey of the land for 
the singers of hymns. 


पन्यंपन्यमित्सोंतार आ धावत्‌ wat 
सोमं वीराय शूराय ॥ २५॥ 
25. Panyampanyamit sotara a dhavata madyaya. 
Somam viraya suraya. 
O makers of soma, to Indra, offer the drink of 


soma, brave, ecstatic and heroic, and let each draught 
be more and more delicious and adorable. 


Ural वृत्रहा सुतमा घां गमन्नारे अस्मत्‌ | 
नि य॑मते शतमूतिः ॥ २६॥ 


26. Pata vrtraha sutama gha gamannare asmat. 
Ni yamate Satamutih. 


May the connoisseur of distilled soma, destroyer 
of darkness, dishonour and destitution, come and never 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 393 


be far away from us. The lord who commands a hundred 
forces of defence, protection and progress rules all, 
friends and foes. 


एह al ब्रह्मयुजा शग्मा aera: सखायम्‌ । 
गीर्भिः श्रुतं गिर्व॑णसम्‌ ॥ २७॥ 


27.  Ehahari brahmayuja sagma vaksatah sakhayam. 
Girbhih Srutam girvanasam. 


Let the brave veterans of knowledge and yajnic 
karma, dedicated to Veda Brahma and humanity, with 
holy songs of divinity, invoke the most venerable and 
celebrated lord here on the vedi as our friend and 
companion. 


स्वादवः सोमा आ याहि sitar: सोमा आ atte । 

शिप्रिन्नृषीवः शचीवो नायमच्छ। सधमादम्‌ ॥ २८ ॥ 
28. Svadavah soma a yahi $ritah soma a yahi. 

Siprinnrsivah sacivo nayamaccha sadha-madam. 

Indra, hero of the visor, commander of wisdom 

and powers of nature and humanity, patron of poets and 
sages, come and have a drink of delicious soma, come 
and enjoy the seasoned and matured soma with the 
celebrant’s devotion. We invoke and invite the leader, 
friend of the hall of celebration. 

स्तुत॑श्च यास्त्वा वर्धन्ति महे राध॑से Feo | 

इन्द्र॑ कारिणं वृधन्तं: ॥ २९॥ 
29. Stutasca yastva vardhanti mahe radhase nr- 

mnaya. Indra karinam vrdhantah. 


Indra, adoring and exhilarating you as the great 


394 RGVEDA 


achiever, honoured by songs of praise, the devotees 
celebrate and exalt you for the sake of greatness, wealth 
and excellence of life and their songs glorify you. 


गिर॑श्च und गिर्वाह उक्था च तुभ्यं तानिं। 
सत्रा द॑धिरे शवांसि ॥ ३०॥ 


30. Girasca yaste girvaha uktha ca tubhyam tani. 
Satra dadhire savamsi. 
O lord of voice divine and lover of holy song, 
your words of the holy Veda and the songs sung in your 


honour, all these together inspire and exalt the grandeur 
and glory of life divine. 


एवेदेष तुं विकूर्मिर्वाजां एको व्रहस्तः। 
सनादमंक्तो दयते Be 


31. Evedesa tuvikurmir-vajan eko vajrahastah. 
Sanadamrkto dayate. 


Only this lord omnipotent of universal karma, 
the one lord of thunder and justice in hand, inviolable 
and imperishable, gives us food and energy, success and 
victory since eternity. 


हन्तां oat दक्षिणेनेन्द्रः पुरू पुंरुहूतः। 
महान्महीभिः शचीभिः ॥ ३२॥ 

32. Hanta vrtram daksinenendrah puri puruhitah. 
Mahan mahibhih sacibhih. 


Destroyer of darkness and evil by his power and 
versatility, Indra is universal and universally adored and 
celebrated. great is he by his glorious majesty, sublime 
by infinite possibilities. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 395 


यस्मिन्विर्वाचर्षणयं उत wie waif a 
अनु घेन्मन्दी Ta: 133 
33. Yasmin visvaS-carsanaya uta cyautna jrayamsi 
ca. Anu ghenmandi maghonah. 
He in whom entire humanity of the world, and 
all powers and forces and expansive victories abide and 
are sustained, surely he is the giver of happiness and 


competence to humanity for wealth, honour and 
excellence. 


एष एतानि चकारेन्द्रो विश्वा योऽति श्युण्वे। 
वाजदावा मघोनाम्‌ ३२४ ॥ 

34. Esa etani cakarendro visva yo'ti 5111176. 
Vajadava maghonam. 


This Indra does all these wonders, the lord who 
is celebrated all over the world and who is the giver of 
power and prosperity to men of honour and excellence. 


प्रभर्ता रथं गव्यन्तंमपाकाच्यिद्यमवंति। 
इनो वसु स हि atoat ॥ ३५ ॥ 

35.  Prabharta ratham gavyantam-apakaccid yama- 
vati. Ino vasu sa hi volha. 


The one who sustains and supports all and 
protects the chariot of life moving on course from the 
unforeseen is the lord who is also the bearer and 
harbinger of the world’s wealth. 


सनिता विप्रो अर्व द्धिर्हन्तां वृत्रं नृभिः Be: | 
सत्यो.ऽ विता विधन्त॑म्‌॥ ३६॥ 


396 RGVEDA 


36. Sanita vipro arvadbhir-hanta vrtram nrbhih 
surah. Satyo'vita vidhantam. 


The one that commands knowledge, power and 
energy with commitment is the generator and harbinger 
of wealth by dynamic forces. He is the destroyer of 
darkness and harbinger of light. He is brave and 
commands the brave. He is ever true to himself and the 
world and he is the protector of those who are dedicated 
to work. 


यजध्वैनं प्रियमेधा इन्द्रं सत्राचा waar | 
यो yeaa: सत्यमद्वा ॥ २७॥ 
37. Yajadhvainam priyamedha indram satraca 


manasa. Yo bhit somaih satyamadva. 


O lovers and performers of yajna, honour and 
serve this Indra by homage and yajnic devotion together 
with heart and soul, he really feels honoured and exalted 
by the soma of love, devotion and commitment. 


गाथश्रवसं सत्प॑तिं श्रव॑स्कामं पुरुत्मान॑म्‌। 
कण्वासो गात वाजिन॑म्‌॥ ३८ ॥ 

38. Gathasravasam satpatim sravaskamam purut- 
manam. Kanvaso gata vajinam. 


O men of knowledge and wisdom, sing in praise 
of the lord celebrated in song, defender of truth and the 
truthful, lover of honour and excellence, versatile in 
form and spirit and instantly victorious in action. 


य ऋते चिद्रास्प देभ्यो दात्सखा नृभ्यः शचीवान्‌ | 
ये अंस्थिन्कापमश्ियन्‌॥ ३९॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 2 397 


39. Yarte cid gaspadebhyo dat sakha nrbhyah saci- 
van. Ye asmin kamamasriyan. 


Indra is a friend and mighty commander of 
forces and, without visible motion or lure of office, gives 
the gift of speech and powers of perception and 
intelligence to people who surrender their desires and 
ambitions to him and act selflessly, depending on him 
for success. 


इत्था धीवन्तमद्रिवः काण्वं मे्ध्यातिथिम्‌। 
मेषो भूतो ३ऽभि TAA: ॥ vo ॥ 


40. 117८ dhivantam-adrivah kanvam medhyatithim. 
Meso bhito’bhiyannayah. 


Thus, O lord commander of the clouds and 
mountains, do you reach and guide the celebrant sage 
of the line of the wise and bless the honoured guest, 
being a very shower of peace and pleasure of soma. 


शिक्षां विभिन्दो अस्मै चत्वार्ययुता eda 
अष्टा परः सहरस्त्रा ॥ ४९॥ 

41. Siksa vibhindo asmai catvaryayuta dadat. 
Asta parah sahasra. 


Indra, destroyer of the fortresses of evil, enmity 
and poverty, thus teaches and gives his celebrant forty 
and eight thousand powers and potentials to fight his 
battles and win. 


उत सु त्ये प॑योवृधां माकी रण॑स्य नप्त्या | 
जनित्वनाय मामहे ॥ ४२॥ 


42. Uta su tye payovrdha maki ranasya naptya. 
janitvanaya mamahe. 


398 RGVEDA 


O heaven and earth, givers of the liquid energies 
of life, sustainers of the excitement of the battle of 
existence, I pray for your favour of generating those 
powers of sustenance and advancement. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 3 


Indra (1-20), Danastuti (21-24) Devata, Medhyatithi 
Kanva Rshi 


foot सुतस्य॑ र सिनो मत्स्वा न इन्द्र गोम॑तः । 
आपिर्नो बोधि सधमाद्यो garg seat अवन्तु ते धियं: ॥ ९॥ 


i; Piba sutasya rasino matsva na indra gomatah. 
Apirno bodhi sadhamadyo vrdhe’sman avantu te 
dhiyah. 


Indra, resplendent and mighty, karma yogi, great 
performer, come and have a drink of our delicious festive 
soma distilled and mixed with milk and cream, share 
the ecstasy, enlighten us, your own people, for progress 
and prosperity, and may your thoughts and wisdom 
protect, promote and guide us in life. 


भूयाम ते सुमतौ वाजिनो! वयं मा न॑ः cae Patra । 
अस्माज्चित्राभि॑रवतादभिष्टिंभिरा न॑ः सुम्नेषु यामय ॥ २॥ 


a. Bhuyama te sumatau vajino vayam ma nah 
starabhimataye. Asman-citrabhir-avatad- 
abhistibhira nah sumnesu yamaya. 


In your guidance and goodwill may we be 
prosperous and progressive with vibrancy. Hurt us not 
lest we fall a prey to an enemy. Protect us and advance 
us to all kinds of success with fulfilment of our 
aspirations, and lead us in a life of happiness, refinement 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 3 399 
and grace. 


इमा 3 त्वा पुरूवसो गिरो वर्धन्तु या ममं। 
पावकवर्णाः शुच॑यो विपश्चितोऽभि स्तोमैरनूषत ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Ima u tva puruvaso giro vardhantu ya mama. 
Pavakavarnah sucayo vipascito’bhi stomaira- 
nusata. 


O lord of universal wealth, O shelter home of 
the world, may these words of my divine adoration 
please you and exalt you. The saints and sages of vision 
and wisdom and fiery heat and purity of light adore you 
with songs of celebration. 


अयं सहस्रमृषिभिः सह॑स्कृतः समु द्रडव पप्रथे। 
सत्यः सो अस्य महिमा गुणो शवो यज्ञेषुं विप्रराज्ये ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam sahasram-rsibhih sahaskrtah samudra iva 
paprathe. Satyah so asya mahima grne savo 
yajnesu viprardajye. 

This Indra, adored and exalted by poets and 
sages a thousand ways to power and glory, rises like 
the sea. Ever true and inviolable is he, and I celebrate 
his might and grandeur expanding in the yajnic 
programmes of the dominion of the wise. 


इन्द्रमिदेवतांतय इन्द्रं प्रयत्य॑ध्वरे । 
इन्द्रं समीके वनिनो हवामह इन्द्रं धन॑स्य सातये ।। ५ ॥ 


5. Indramid devatataya indram prayatyadhvare. 
Indram samike vanino havamaha indram dhana- 
Sya sataye. 


We invoke Indra for our programmes of natural 


400 RGVEDA 


and environmental development. We invite Indra when 
the yajna of development is inaugurated. Lovers and 
admirers dedicated to him, we pray for his grace in our 
struggles of life, and we solicit his favour and guidance 
for the achievement of wealth, honour and excellence. 


इन्द्रो Vat रोद॑सी पप्रथच्छव इन्द्रः we era 

इन्द्र ह विश्वा भुव॑नानि येमिर इन्द्र सुवानास इन्द॑वः ॥ ६ ॥ 
Indro mahna rodasi paprathac-chava indrah 
suryam-arocayat. Indre ha visva bhuvanani 
yemira indre suvanasa indavah. 


6. Indra, by the power and abundance of his 
omnipotence, expands and pervades heaven and earth. 
Indra gives the radiance of light to the sun. All regions 
of the universe and her children are sustained in life 
and order in Indra, and in the infinite power, presence 
and abundance of Indra flow all liquid energies of life’s 
evolution to their perfection and fulfilment. 


अभि त्वा पूर्वपीतय इन्द्र स्तोमेभिरायवः । 
समीचीनास ऋभवः समंस्वरच्रुद्रा गुंणन्त पूर्व्य॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
Abhi tva purvapitaya indra stomebhir-ayavah. 
Samicinasa rbhavah samasvaran rudra grnanta 
purvyam. 


7. Indra, men in general, learned experts of 
vision and wisdom, illustrious powers of law and order, 
and fighting warriors of defence and protection all 
together, raising a united voice of praise, prayer and 
appreciation, with songs of holiness and acts of piety, 
invoke and invite you, ancient, nearest and most 
excellent lord of power and lustre, to inaugurate their 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 3 401 


yajnic celebration of the soma session of peaceful and 
exciting programme of development. 


अस्येदिन्द्रो वावृधे वृष्ण्यं शवो मदे सुतस्य विष्ण॑वि । 
अद्या तम॑स्य महिमान॑मायवोऽ नुं ष्टुवन्ति पूर्वथा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asyedindro vavrdhe vrsnyam 54170 made sutasya 
visnavi. Adya tamasya mahim-anamayavo "111 
stuvanti purvatha. 


In the ecstasy of this soma success of 
achievement through the yajnic programme, Indra 
augments the strength and enthusiasm of this host and 
master of the programme, while now as ever before, 
the people appropriately adore and exalt the greatness 
of this lord. 


तत्त्वां यामि सुवीर्यं तद्‌ ब्रह पूर्व चित्तये । 
येना यतिभ्यो भृग॑वे धने हिते येन प्रस्कण्वमाविथ ॥ ९॥ 


५.१ Tat tva yami suviryam tad brahama purvacittaye. 
Yena yatibhyo bhrgave dhane hite yena praskan- 
vamavitha. 


O lord resplendent, I come to you and ask for 
that vigour and wisdom, that knowledge of reality and 
divinity, that prime acquisition and awareness of values 
by which, when the battle rages and money and materials 
are called for, you provide for the retired holy men, 
scientists, technologists and the inventors and by which 
you protect the man of advanced special knowledge. 


oot समुद्रमस्रंजो महीर्‌ पस्तदिन्द्र वृष्णिं ते शव॑ः | 
सद्यः सो shea महिमा न संनशे यं क्षोणीरनुचक्रदे ॥ ९०॥ 


402 RGVEDA 


10. Yena samudram-asrjo mahirapas-tadindra vrsni 
te Savah. Sadyah so asya mahima na samnase yam 
ksontranucakrade. 


Indra, lord omnipotent of creation, I pray for 
the knowledge and experience of that overwhelming 
power and potential of yours by which you create the 
mighty waters and the oceans to roll and flow. That 
mighty power of this lord is not easily to be realised, 
the heaven and earth obey it, and when they move they 
celebrate it in the roaring and resounding music of stars 
and spheres. 


शग्धी न॑ इन्द्‌ यत्त्वा रयिं are सुवीर्यम्‌ । 
शग्धि वाजाय प्रथमं सिषासते शग्धि स्तोमाय पूर्व्य 1122 11 


11. Sagdhi na indra yat tva rayim yami suviryam. 
Sagdhi vajaya prathamam sisasate sagdhi 
stomaya purvya. 


Indra, first and leading power of the world, give 
us the vigour, wealth and power we ask for. Give us the 
strength of the first order for the advancement and 
victory of the dedicated and law abiding, and bless him 
who celebrates your glory in song. 


शग्धी नो! अस्य aed पौरमाविथ धिय॑ इन्द्र सिषासतः | 

शग्धि यथा este श्याव॑कं puters प्रावः स्व॑ंणरिम्‌।॥ 22 ॥ 

12.  Sagdhino asya yaddha pauramavitha dhiya indra 

sisasatah. Sagdhi yatha rusamam syavakam 
krpamindra pravah svarnaram. 

Give us the strength and power by which you 


protect the citizen for this yajamana, the intelligentsia, 
and the obedient workers, the strength and power by 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 3 403 


which you protect and promote for advancement the 
brilliant, the poor, the weak and disabled and the leading 
men of the nation on way to common joy and prosperity. 


HAAN अतसीनां तुरो गणीत मर्त्य: | 
नही न्व॑स्य महिमानमिन्द्रियं catered आनशुः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Kannavyo atasinam turo grnita martyah. Nahi 
nvasya mahimanam-indriyam svargrnanta 
anasuh. 


Who among mortals, even the most ardent of 
constant celebrants, can offer a new song of homage 
and adoration? Even those who have been singing in 
praise of Indra have not been able to comprehend his 
sublime majesty. 


कदु स्तुवन्तं ऋतयन्त देवत ऋषिः को विप्रं ओहते । 
कदा हवं मघवन्निन्द्र सुन्वतः he स्तुवत आ ग॑मः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Kadu stuvanta rtayanta devata rsih ko vipra 
ohate. Kada havam maghavannindra sunvatah 
kadu stuvata a gamah. 


Who is the seer and scholar among those who 
adore you, honour you by yajna, or do homage to your 
refulgence, that can deliberate on you and understand 
you? When would you, O lord of honour and glory, 
Indra, respond to the call of the sage who presses the 
soma for you? When would you grace the yajnic home 
of the celebrant? 


उदु त्ये Veteran गिर्‌ : स्तोमास ईरते। 
सत्राजितो धनसा अश्चितोतयो वाजयन्तो रथाइव ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Udu tye madhumattama girah stomasa trate. 
Satrajito dhanasa aksitotayo vajayanto ratha iva. 


404 RGVEDA 


The sweetest of honeyed songs of praise and 
vibrations of homage rise to you flying like victorious, 
unviolated and invincible chariots laden with gold 
heading for higher destinations. 


कण्वांइव भृग॑वः सूयीडव विश्वमिन्दधीतमानशुः। 
इन्द्रं स्तोमेभिर्महयन्त आयव; प्रियमेधासो अस्वरन्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Kanva iva bhrgavah surya iva visvamid dhitam- 
anasuh. Indram stomebhir-mahayanta ayavah 
priyamedhaso asvaran. 


Brilliant scholars and sages as well as brave 
heroes of the human nation and loving and intelligent 
citizens of the land, praising and exalting Indra in one 
vaulting voice, rise and reach the presence of the lord 
in a world their own like rays of the sun filling the world 
of space they know. 


युक्ष्वा हि वुत्रहन्तम हरी! इन्द्र परावत॑ः | 
अर्वाचीनो म॑घवन्त्सोम॑पीतय उग्र ऋष्वेधिरा ग॑हि ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Yuksva hi vrtrahantama hari indra paravatah. 
Arvacino maghavant-somapitaya ugra rsvebhira 
gahi. 


O greatest destroyer of darkness, Indra, 
omnipotent lord of glory and majesty, blazing ruler and 
controller of the world, take to the chariot, harness the 
fastest vital forces of radiance and come from the 
farthest to us right here and now, with brilliant and 
indefatigable powers of light, wisdom and bravery, to 
join us in the soma celebrations of our yajnic victory. 


इमे हि ते कारवो वावशुर्धिया विप्रासो मेधसातये । 
सत्वं नो मघवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणो वेनो न श्वुणुधी हव॑म्‌ १८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 3 405 


18. Ime hi te karavo vavasurdhiya vipraso medha- 
sdtaye. Sa tvam no maghavannindra ghirvano 
veno na Srnudhi havam. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, these scientists, 
designers and workers, vibrant and intelligent all, love 
and honour you and shine with their intellect and 
expertise. O lord adorable of all, listen to our prayer 
like a lover and admirer of your own celebrants and 
receive their homage on the success of their yajnic 
endeavour. 


निरिन्द्र बृहतीभ्यों वृत्रं धनुभ्यो अस्फुरः | 
निरर्बुदस्य मृग॑यस्य मायिनो निः पर्व॑तस्य गा आजः ॥ १९॥ 


19. Nirindra brhatibhyo vrtram dhanubhyo asphurah. 
Nirarbudasya mrgayasya mayino nih parvatasya 
ga ajah. 

Indra, even from far and wide regions you 
destroy the forces of darkness and evil, free helpless 
victims of the mighty violent and crafty demon, set in 
motion showers of the cloud and open out treasures of 
the mountain. 


निर ग्रयो रुरुचुर्निरु सूर्यो निः सोमं इद्ियो ta: | 
निरन्तरिक्षादधमो महामदं कृषे तदिन्द्र पौस्य॑म्‌॥ २०॥ 


20. Niragnayo rurucurniru suryo nih soma indriyo 
rasah. Nirantariksadadhamo mahamahim 
krse tadindra paumsyam. 


When you broke the mighty cloud in showers 
from the sky and destroyed the evil from earth, the fires 
of earth shone and rose bright, the sun shone in glory 
and the soma juices for the celebration of Indra, lord of 


406 RGVEDA 


might and majesty, flowed from the herbs. That was a 
great deed of prowess worthy of the lord. 


(Similarly when Indra, lord almighty, and also 
the individual soul, throws out the evil from the heart 
and mind, then the inner light shines bright, the fire of 
good life is kindled and rises, and the soma spirit of 
divine joy flows and rolls in the heart. That indeed is a 
mighty deed of the lord’s prowess, and of the individual 
soul too.) 


a मे दुरिन्द्रो मरुतः पाकस्थामा कौरयाणः । 
विश्वेषां त्मना शोभिष्ठमुपेव दिवि धाव॑मानम्‌॥ २९॥ 


21. Yam me durindro marutah pakasthama kaura- 
yanah. Visvesam tmana Sobhisthamupeva divi 
dhavamanam. 


The light of knowledge and spiritual 
enlightenment which Indra, self-refulgent lord, and 
vibrant saints and sages have given me is stable, mature 
and universally dynamic, it is the brightest of all wealths 
of the world in the spiritual essence, and it shines within 
like the sun coursing in the spaces of light as a divine 
horse. 


रोहितं मे पाक॑स्थामा सुधुरं कक्ष्यप्राम | 
अदद्रायो विबोधंनम्‌।॥ २२॥ 


22. Rohitam me pakasthama sudhuram kaksya-pram. 
Adad rayo vibodhanam. 


Indra, lord of divine and inviolable power, has 
given me a chestnut horse, a rising sun of crimson hue, 
the mind, and a smooth axled and strongly built chariot, 
the body, and wealths of the world, intelligence, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 4 407 
awareness and enlightenment. 
यस्मां अन्ये दश प्रति धुरं वह॑न्ति ada: | 
अस्तं वयो न तुभ्य॑म्‌ ॥ २३॥ 


23. Yasma anye dasa prati dhuram vahanti vahnayah. 
Astam vayo na tugryam. 


And to me he has given ten others, carriers 
which carry me forward like birds or sun-rays bearing 
a mighty king to his royal home. These are ten senses 
of perception and volition, and the ten pranic energies. 


आत्मा पितुस्तनूर्वास ओजोदा अभ्यञ्जनम्‌ । 
तुरीयमिद्रोहिंतस्य पाक॑स्थामानं भोजं दातारंमब्रवम्‌ ॥ २४ ॥ 

24. Atma pitustaniurvasa ojoda abhyanjanam. Turtya- 
mid rohitasya pakasthamanam bhojam dataram- 
abravam. 


The individual self is but filial manifestation in 
reflection of the father, giver of the soul’s dwelling in 
body, giver of light and lustre, purifier and sanctifier, 
divine destroyer of evil, giver and cleanser of mind and 
its colourful fluctuations. I celebrate the holy father of 
purity and sanctity, giver of food and energy for the 
world of stability. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 4 


Indra (1-14), Indra or Pusha (15-18), Danastuti (19-21) 
Devatah, Devatithi Kanva Rshi 


यदिन्द्र प्रागपागुदङ् न्य॑ग्वा हूयसे नृभिः । 
सिमा पुरू नृषूतो अस्यानवेऽ सिं प्रशर्ध तुर्वशे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yadindra pragapagudan nyagva huyase nrbhih. 
Sima puru nrsuto asyanave’si prasardha turvase. 


408 RGVEDA 


Indra, illustrious lord of the world, ruler and 
commander of human forces, karmayogi, when you are 
invoked by people anywhere east or west, north or south, 
up or down, then, O lord of excellence, you feel highly 
impelled by those many and come and act as the 
destroyer of many evils for the people of reverence and 
exceptional strength. 


यद्वा रुमे esa vara कृप इन्द्र मादयसे wat 
कण्वासस्त्वा ब्रह्मभिः स्तोम॑वाहस इन्द्रा य॑च्छन्त्या 
TEN २॥ 


१.७ Yad va rume rusame syavake krpa indra mada- 
yase saca. Kanvasastva brahmabhih stomava- 
hasa indra yacchantya gahi. 


And since, O lord Indra, you go to the celebrants, 
illustrious, child-like innocent and the humble and kind 
alike, sit with them, socialise and enjoy, so the dedicated 
admirers and learned men of vision and wisdom offer 
homage and reverence, exalt you with sacred hymns 
and say : Come, O lord, and accept our tributes and 
homage. 


यथा गौरो अपा कृतं तृष्यन्नेत्यवेरिंणम्‌। 
आपित्वे नं: प्रपित्वे तूयमा ग॑हि कण्वेषु सु सचा पिब॑ ॥ २॥ 


Yatha gauro apa krtam trsyannetyaverinam. 
Apitve nah prapitve tuyama gahi kanvesu su saca 
piba. 


Just as a thirsty stag in the desert rushes to a 
pool full of water so, O friend in family of the wise, 
come morning, come evening, come fast and drink the 
soma of love and reverence in joy. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 4 409 


मन्द॑न्तु त्वा मघवच्चिन्द्रेन्दवो राधोदेयाय सुन्वते। 
आमुष्या सोम॑मपिबश्चम्‌ सुतं ज्येष्ठं तद्‌ द॑धिषे सहः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Mandantu tva maghavann-indrendavo radho- 
deyaya sunvate. Amusya somamapibascamu 
sutam jyestham tad dadhise sahah. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, may these soma 
drinks exhilarate you for the bestowal of wealth and 
honour upon the dedicated lover of the soma of honour 
and enlightenment. Having won over the soma of victory 
prize in the contests of competing parties, you drank of 
the soma of ecstasy of the highest order and for that 
reason you command the courage and confidence of 
the victor. 


प्र च॑क्र सह॑सा सहो aust मन्युमोजसा । 
विश्वे त इन्द्र पृतनायवों यहो नि वृक्षाडव येमिरे ॥ ५॥ 


a. Pra cakre sahasa saho babhanja manyumojasa. 
Visve ta indra prtanayavo yaho ni vrksa iva 
yemire. 


Indra, with courage and confidence you fight 
out challenges and win victories. With your light and 
lustre you break down anger and arrogance. O mighty 
one, all your contestants and adversaries stand 
motionless against you, fixed as trees. 


aeatia सचते यवीयुधा यस्त streetcar | 
पुत्रं प्रावर्ग कृणुते सुवीर्ये दाश्नोति नम॑उक्तिभिः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Sahasreneva sacate yaviyudha वडव analu- 


pastutim. Putram pravargam krnute suvirye das- 
noti nama-uktibhih. 


410 RGVEDA 


The youthful warrior who pays you homage and 
does honour and reverence to you, and the one who 
gives in charity, in service to you, with holy chants and 
humility receives the strength of a thousand heroes and, 
under the guidance and care of the lord, renders his 
progeny unconquerable and exclusive in merit and 
prowess. 


ar voor शरमिष्मोग्रस्य सख्ये aa 
महत्ते वृष्णो! अभिचक्ष्यं कृतं पश्येम तुर्वशं यर्म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


Des Ma bhema ma sramismograsya sakhye tava. 
Mahat te vrsno abhicaksyam krtam pasyema 
turvasam yadum. 


Let us never feel afraid, let us never tire or feel 
depressed under your kind care and friendship, 
commander of blazing lustre. Admirable is your action 
and prowess, mighty generous lord. We celebrate you 
and pray we may see that our people and our progeny 
be industrious and high achievers. 


सव्यामनु स्फिग्यं वावसे वृषा न दानो अस्य रोषति। 
मध्वा deat: सारघेण धेनवस्तूयमेहि द्रवा पिब॑ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Savyamanu sphigyam vavase vrsa na dano asya 
rosati. Madhva samprktah saraghena dhenava- 
stuyamehi drava piba. 


The joyous world of soma in relation to the earth, 
you illuminate and rule with a fraction of your prowess. 
Whoever plays his part well and renders his share to 
the refulgent ruler never regrets nor displeases the ruler 
ever. Come fast, O lord, rush in and drink the soma 
mixed with sweets of honey and seasoned with milk. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 4 411 


अण्वी रथी सुरूप इद्रोमां इदिन्द्र ते सख । 
श्वात्रभाजा वय॑सा सचते सदा चन्द्रो याति सभामुप Ut ९ ॥ 


Asvi rathi surupa id goman idindra te sakha. 
Svatrabhaja vayasa sacate sada candro yati 
sabhamupa. 


Indra, lord of light and ruling power, your 
devoted friend ever blest with the powers of life’s 
progress onwards like a chariot hero of war, enjoying 
grace of person and culture, wealth of knowledge and 
riches of the earth, has his full share of good health, 
full age and gifts of existence, and he goes forward to 
the assembly of people like the full moon among stars. 


Tava न तुष्य॑न्रवपानमा ग॑हि पिला सोमं वशो SF I 
निमेघमानो मघवन्दिवेदिव ओजिष्ठं दधिषे ad: eon 


10. RSyo na trsyannavapanama gahi piba somam 
vasan anu. Nimeghamano maghavan divediva 
ojistham dadhise sahah. 


Just like a white antelope thirsting for water, 
come to our yajna and have a drink of soma to your 
heart’s content. O lord of power, prosperity and 
blessings of grace, like a cloud of showers you bear 
and bring the most lustrous courage, patience and 
fortitude day by day to face the challenges of life. 


अध्वर्यो द्रावया त्वं सोममिन्द्रः पिपासति। 
उप॑ नूनं युयुजे वृष॑णा हरी आ चं जगाम वृत्रहा ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Adhvaryo dravaya tvam somamindrah pipasati. 
Upa nunam yuyute vrsana hari a ca jagama 
vrtraha. 


412 RGVEDA 


Hasten, O master of ceremonies, let the soma 
be prepared and flow forth for service. Indra is thirsty, 
he has harnessed his mighty chariot forces, indeed the 
thunderous breaker of clouds has arrived. 


स्वयं चित्स म॑न्यते दाशुरिर्जनो यत्रा सोम॑स्य तुम्पसिं । 
इदं ते अन्नं युज्यं समुक्षितं तस्येहि प्र gar पिब॑ ।॥ ९२॥ 
12. Svayam cit ऽव manyate dasurirjano yatra somasya 


trmpasi. Idam te annam yujyam samuksitam 
tasyehi pra drava piba. 


Indra, the devout yajamana regards himself as 
divinely blest when you visit and drink the soma of 
hospitality. Here is the soma fit for you, matured and 
poured, pray accept it and drink. 


Tastateada: सोममिन्द्राय सोतन | 
अधिं व्रध्नस्याद्रयो वि dart सुन्वन्तो दाश्व॑ध्वरम्‌ 1123 1 


13. Rathesthayadhvaryavah somamindraya sotana. 
Adhi bradhnasyadrayo vi caksate sunvanto dasva- 
dhvaram. 


O performers of the yajna of love, loyalty and 
non-violence, prepare the soma offering of devotion for 
Indra, lord of the chariot of the world. On the heights of 
space, the mighty lord’s thunder and clouds of rain are 
seen pouring forth showers of bliss on the devout 
yajamana’s love and loyalty of yajnic service. 


उप॑ ब्रध्नं वावाता वृष॑णा हरी इन्द्रमपसु वश्चतः। 
अर्वाञ्चं त्वा सप्तयोऽध्वर श्रियो वहन्तु सवनेदुप ॥ ९२४ ॥ 
14. (7८ bradhnam vavata vrsana hari indram-apasu 


vaksatah. Arvancam tva saptayo’dhvar-asriyo 
vahantu savanedupa. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 4 413 


Across heights of the firmament, mighty 
currents of divine energy transport Indra, love and power 
of the spirit of divinity. O lord, may the swift currents 
of divinity radiating your light and love to the fire of 
yajna bring you hither to us and bless us in the act of 
homage. 


प्र पूषणं वृणीमहे युज्याय पुरूवसुम्‌। 
स शक्र शिक्ष पुरुहूत नो धिया तुजे राये विमोचन ॥ १५॥ 


15. Pra pusanam vrnimahe yujyaya puruvasum. Sa 
Sakra Siksa puruhuta no dhiya tuje raye vimocana. 


For our loyalty and the lord’s favour of 
friendship, we choose to do homage to the lord of 
universal wealth and bliss of health and nourishment. 
May the lord almighty, giver of freedom from fear and 
sin, universally invoked and solicited, enlighten us with 
intelligence and bless us with the spirit of action for the 
attainment of freedom, victory and prosperity. 


सं न॑: शिशीहि भुरिजोरिव क्षुरं रास्व॑ रायो विमोचन । 
त्वे तन्नः सुवेद॑मुस्तरियं वसु यं त्वं हिनोषि मर्त्यम्‌ ee 


16. Sam nah 75707 bhurijoriva ksuram rasva rayo 
vimocana. Tve tannah suvedamusriyam vasu 
yam tvam hinosi martyam. 


Timely sharpen us and temper us, our intellect, 
will and action, like the sword in the hands of a warrior, 
give us the freedom and wealths of life, O lord deliverer 
from sin and slavery. In you lies all that well-known 
easily and freely available radiant wealth of life which 
you set in motion for humanity to achieve. 


414 RGVEDA 


afd त्वा पूषन्नूञ्जसे वेमि स्तोतव आघृणे । 
न तस्यं वेम्यर॑णं हि तद्व॑सो स्तुषे पज्राय साम्ने ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Vemi tva pusannrnjase vemi stotava aghrne. Na 
tasya vemyaranam hi tad vaso stuse pajraya 
samne. 


I know you, lord giver of health and 
nourishment, for the sake of favour and success. I know 
you, lord adorable, for the sake of worship and 
brilliance. I know no one else, none else delights me. O 
lord of world’s wealth, shelter of the universe, I offer 
homage to the divinity, adorable, omnipotent and 
blissful. 


परा गावो यव॑सं कच्िंदाघणे नित्यं Teor! अमर्त्य । 
अस्माकं पूषन्नविता शिवो भ॑व मंहिष्ठो वाज॑सातये ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Para gavo yavasam kaccidaghrne nityam rekno 
amartya. Asmakam pusannavita 57170 bhava 
mamhistho vajasataye. 


O lord of light and immortality, our cows go far 
and wide for pasture, let that wealth of ours be always 
constant and imperishable. O lord most potent giver of 
health and generous nourishment, be our protector and 
saviour, and our source of peace and well being for the 
sake of ultimate victory. 


स्थूरं राधः शताश्वं Gages दिविष्टिषु । 
राज्ञस्त्वेषस्य सुभगस्य रातिषु तुर्वशेष्वमन्महि ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Sthuram radhah satasvam kurungasya divistisu. 
Rajnastvesasya subhagasya ratisu turvase- 
svama-nmahi. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 4 415 


In our love of flight into the regions of light for 
success of the distinguished man of scientific ambition 
in his brilliant plans and programmes, and among the 
most generous gifts of the refulgent and powerful ruler 
of the earth, one unique among men of ardent action, 
we acknowledge the strongly built and perfected 
hundred horse power flying chariot as the object of 
fulfilment. 


धीभिः सातानि काण्वस्य वाजिनः प्रियेधेरभिद्युभिः। 
षष्टं सहस्रानु निर्मजामजे निर्युंथानि गवामृषिः ॥ २०॥ 


20.  Dhibhih satani kanvasya vajinah priyamedhai- 
rabhidyubhih. Sastim sahasranu nirmajamaje 
niryuthani gavamrsih. 


By virtue of the achievements of the intellectual 
pursuits of the vibrant man of exceptional intelligence 
and by the visions and conceptional imagination and 
reflections of the lovers of united programmes of yajnic 
research, the sage received sixty thousand streams of 
pure knowledge of life into his awareness and 
consolidated memory. 


वृक्षाश्चिन्मे अभिपित्वे अरारणुः | 
गां भ॑जन्त मेहनाऽर्वं भजन्त मेहना ॥ २९॥ 


21. Vrksascinme abhipitve araranuh. 
Gam bhajanta mehana’svam bhajanta mehana. 


On my attainment of the streams of knowledge, 
the selective, the indifferent, even the critics, burst into 
applause. Abundent are the streams of knowledge they 
have got, abundant the body of technology they have 
achieved! 


416 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 5 


Ashvinau (1-37), Danastuti (37-39) Devatah, 
Brahmatithi Kanva Rshi 


दूरादिहेव यत्सत्य॑रु णप्सुरशिंश्वितत्‌। 
वि भानुं विश्वर्धातनत्‌॥ ९॥ 


ls Duradiheva yat satyarunapsur-asiSsvitat. 
Vi bhanum visvadhdatanat. 


The bright red dawn from far off, which yet 
appears so close, wraps the world in crimson glory and 
then spreads it over with the light of the sun. 


Waser मनोयुजा रथेन पृथुपाजसा । 
सचेथे अश्विनोषसर॑म्‌॥ २॥ 


Ze Nrvad dasra manoyuja rathena prthupajasa. 
Sacethe asvinosasam. 


The Ashvins, wondrous charming divine 
currents of complementary energies, the yajamana and 
the participants, the yogi dedicated to knowledge and 
karma, devout men and women arise and move by the 
vast and strong chariot of the mind and spiritual energies 
and go forward to share the divine glory of the dawn 
like world leaders. 


युवाभ्यां वाजिनीवसू प्रति स्तोमा अदृक्षत। 
वाचं दूतो यथोंहिषे ॥ ३॥ 


3. Yuvabhyam vajinivasu prati stoma adrksata. 
Vacam dito yathohise. 


O Ashvins, commanders of wealth and energy 
on way, the chants of adoration in your honour you seem 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 417 


to hear, and I, too, like an appointed messenger, send 
up my voice of adoration to you and the dawn and I 
wait to hear the divine voice in response. 


पुरुप्रिया ut aaa पुरुमन्द्रा dead | 
स्तुषे कण्वासो अश्विना ॥ ४॥ 

4. Purupriya na utaye purumandra puruvasu. 
Stuse kanvaso asvina. 


Ashvins, dear and favourite with many, givers 
of joy to many, commanding great wealth of the world, 
we of the family of the learned and the wise admire and 
praise you for the sake of our protection and 
advancement. 


Hfest वाजसातमेषयन्ता शुभस्पतीं । 
गन्तारा दाशुषो गृहम्‌ UG ॥ 

a. Mamhistha vajasatamesayanta subhaspati. 
gantara dasuso grham. 

Ashvins, you are great and generous, givers of 
nourishment and energy, loving and inspiring, promoters 
and protectors of good, you visit and bless the homes 
of the generous yajakas. As such, we adore you. 

ता सुंदेवाय॑ दाशुषे सुमेधामविं तारिणीम्‌। 
घुतेर्गव्युतिमुक्षतम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Ta sudevaya dasuse sumedham-avitarinim. 
Ghrtair-gavyutim-uksatam. 
For the generous yajaka dedicated to divinity, 


we pray, bring noble intelligence of the saving order 
and sprinkle and energise his path of progress with 


418 RGVEDA 
inspiring waters and sparkling ghrta. 


आ नः Varad द्रवत्तूयं श्येनेभि॑राणुभिः। 
यातमश्वेभिरण्विना ॥ ७ ॥ 

fin A nah stomamupa dravat tayam Syenebhir-asu- 
bhih. Yatam-aSsvebhir-aSvina. 
Ashvins, fly to our congregation of yajna and 
divine adoration at the earliest on the wings of celestial 
eagles upon the instant, hasten to us by flying horses. 
येभिस्तिस्रः प॑रावतो दिवो विशवानि treat । 
त्रीरे क्तन्प॑रिदीयथः॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yebhistisrah paravato divo visvani rocana. 
Trinraktun paridtyathah. 
Come by those eagles and horses by which in 
three days and three nights you traverse over the farthest 
regions of light and beauty across the universe. 
उत नो गोम॑तीरिषं उत सातीरहर्विदा । 
वि पथः सातये सितम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

9. Uta no gomatirisa uta satiraharvida. 
Vi pathah sataye sitam. 


And bring us food and energy and inspiration 
with lands and cows and the light of knowledge, and 
bring us possibilities of victory, and clear our paths of 
progress free from difficulties. 


आ नो गोम॑न्तमश्विना सुवीरं सुरथं TAA 
वोव्व्हमर्वावतीरिषंः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ano gomantam-asvind suviram suratham rayim. 
Volham-asvavatir-isah. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 419 


Ashvins, bring us wealth of lands and cows, 
brave progeny, fast chariots and progress, and bring us 
nourishment, energy and advancement with motive 
forces of the highest order of attainment. 


वावृधाना शुभस्पती cen हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी । 
पिब॑तं सोम्यं Ae eeu 
11. Vavrdhana subhaspati dasra hiranyavartani. 


Pibatam somyam madhu. 


Rising and exalting, protectors and promoters 
of good, destroyers of enmity, moving by golden paths 
of advancement to victory, drink and enjoy the honey 
sweets of soma, peace and progress. 


अस्मभ्यं वाजिनीवसू मघव॑द्धयश्च सप्रथः | 
छर्दिर्यन्तमर्दाभ्यम्‌॥ ९२॥ 

12. Asmabhyam vajinivasu maghavadbhyasa sapra- 
thah. Chardir-yantam-adabhyam. 


And, O harbingers of wealth, victory and 
progress, bring for us and for the leading lights of power, 
honour and excellence spacious and peaceful homes free 
from fear and pressure. 


fy aa waht याविष्टं तूयमा ग॑तम्‌। 
मो ष्व पन्यां उपारतम्‌॥ 23 

13. Nisu brahma jananam yavistam tuyama gatam. 
Mo svanyan uparatam. 


Come soon to the yajna of the people and protect 
and promote their creative development, but please 
neglect not the others too, nor offend and grieve them. 


420 RGVEDA 


अस्य पिबतमश्विना युवं मद॑स्य चारुूणः। 
मध्वो रातस्य॑ धिष्ण्या ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Asya pibatam-asvana yuvam madasya carunah. 
Madhvo ratasya dhisnya. 


Adorable Ashvins, bold and resolute harbingers 
of a new dawn, drink of this charming, exciting and 
honey sweet soma offered by us as a tribute of love and 
gratitude. 


अस्मे आ व॑हतं रयिं शतवन्तं सहस्त्रि्णम्‌। 
पुरुष्ष विश्व्धायसम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 

15.  Asme a vahatam rayim Satavantam sahasrinam. 
Puruksum visvadhayasam. 


Bring us a hundredfold and a thousandfold 
wealth of universal value in abundance for all humanity 
which would sustain the world in a stable state of peace 
and progress. 


पुरुत्रा fates at नरा fagea=t मनीषिर्णः। 
वाघद्भिरश्विना ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16.  (2/1111-व ciddhi vam nara vihvayante manisinah. 


Vaghadbhir-asvina gatam. 


Learned men, thinkers and leading lights of 
humanity all over the world invoke and invite you many 
times in many ways. Ashvins, pray come by supersonic 
transports at the earliest. 


जनासो वृक्तबर्हिषो हविष्मन्तो अरं कृत॑:। 
युवां ह॑वन्ते अश्विना ॥ Vo 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 421 


17. Janaso vrktabarhiso havismanto aramkrtah. 
Yuvam havante asvind. 


Ashvins, the people in top form of readiness, 
having prepared the hall of yajnic reception in top gear 
with provisions of homage, invoke you and call upon 
you to come. 
अस्माकमद्य वामयं स्तोमो are st अन्त॑मः। 
युवाभ्यां भूत्वश्विना ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Asmakamadya vamayam stomo vahistho anta- 
mah. Yuvabhyam bhutvasvina. 


Ashvins, may this song of our invocation, 
adoration and yajnic prayer be most touching for you at 
heart and impel you to respond and come. 
at 2 at मधुनो दृतिराहिंतो रथचर्षणे | 
तत॑: पिबतमण्विना ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Yo ha vam madhuno drtirahito rathacarsane. 
Tatah pibatam-asvina. 


Ashvins, the soma cask of honey sweets 
installed in the chariot and the pathway is full. 
Therefrom drink as you come. 


तेन॑ नो वाजिनीवसु ave तोकाय शं गवं । 
add पीवरीरिषः ॥ २० ॥ 

20. Tena no vajinivasu pasve tokaya Sam gave. 
Vahatam pivaririsah. 


And thereby, O lords of power and wealth, bring 
us abundant and ever growing food, energy, wealth and 
peace for our children, our animals, our lands and cows, 


422 RGVEDA 


and for our knowledge and culture, and let all that grow 
higher. 

उत al दिव्या इष॑ उत सिन्धूर हर्विदा । 

अप Ra वर्षथः ॥ २९॥ 
21. Utano divya isa uta sindhunraharvida. 

Apa dvareva varsathah. 


And, O harbingers of a new day, while you bring 
us heavenly food and energy in plenty, open the floods 
of streams and rivers and control the flow as by doors. 
कदा वां तौग्यो विंधत्समुद्रे ज॑हितो A | 
यद्वां रथो विभिष्पतात्‌ ॥ २२॥ 

22. Kada vam taugryo vidhat samudre jahito nara. 
Yad vam ratho vibhispatat. 


O leading lights of life, some day the powers 
jettisoned or installed on the sea would glorify you when 
your chariot flying by wings would rescue them or take 
off from there. 
युवं कण्वाय नासत्याऽपिरिसाय हर्य । 
शश्व॑दूतीर्द शस्यथः ॥ २३ ॥ 

23. Yuvam kanvaya nasatya’piriptaya harmye. 
Sasvad-utir-dasasyathah. 

Ashvins, observers and protectors of truth 
without fail, you always provide protection for the 
oppressed man of knowledge and wisdom in his home. 

ताभिरा यातमूतिभिर्नव्य॑सीभिः सुशस्तिभिः 1 
यद्वां वृषण्वसू हवे ॥ २.४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 423 
24.  Tabhira yatam-utibhir-navyasibhih susastibhih. 
Yad vam vrsanvasu huve. 
O generous lords of wealth and power, come to 
us with those most modern and most admirable means 
and methods of protection whenever we call upon you. 
यथां चित्कण्वमाव॑तं प्रियमेधमुपस्तुतम्‌। 
ST शिञ्जारंमण्विना ॥ २५ ॥ 

25. Yatha cit kanvam-avatam priyamedham-upastu- 
tam. Atrim Sinjaram-asvina. 


Come the same way as you protect and save the 
man of knowledge and wisdom, the celebrated 
intellectual and the sage loud and bold who has broken 
off all his three snares of body, mind and soul. 


यथोत कृत्व्ये eis of गोष्वगस्त्य॑म्‌। 
यथा वाजेषु सोभ॑रिम्‌ RE 


26. Yathota krtvye dhanem’sum gosvagastyam. 
Yatha vajesu sobharim. 


Come the way you protect and promote the 
earnest beginner in matters of possible success in 
business, the man of moral values in matters of self- 
control, and the man of charity and social awareness in 
matters of social success. 


एतावद्वां वृषण्वसू अतो! वा भूयो अश्विना | 
गृणन्तः सुम्नमीमहे ॥ २७॥ 


17. Etavad vam vrsanvasu ato va bhuyo asvina. 
Grnantah sumnamimahe. 


O virile and generous harbingers of wealth and 


424 RGVEDA 


power, Ashvins, thus do we so far and even more, 
celebrating your glory, pray for your favour and good 
will. 
रथं हिर॑ण्यवन्धुरं दहिर॑ण्याभीशुमण्विना । 
आ हि स्थाथो दिविस्पृरम्‌॥ २८ ॥ 
28. Ratham hiranyavandhuram hiranyabhisuma- 
$vina. A hi sthatho divisprsam. 
Ashvins, you ride a chariot of golden structure 
and golden control which flies and touches the borders 
of the regions of light on high. 
हिरण्ययीं वां रभिरीषा अक्षो हिरण्ययः । 
उभा चक्रा हिरण्यया ॥ २९॥ 

29. Hiranyayi vam rabhirisa akso hiranyayah. 
Ubha cakra hiranyaya. 
O travellers of the skies, golden is the chassis 
of your chariot, golden the axle, and both the wheels 
are golden too. 
तेन॑ नो वाजिनीवसू परावतश्चिदा ग॑तम्‌। 
उपेमां सुष्टुतिं मम॑ ॥ ३०॥ 

30. Tena no vdjinivasu paravatascida gatam. 
Upemam sustutim mama. 


O winners of wealth and victory, by that golden 
chariot come from far, from the farthest wherever you 
be, and accept this holy song of mine in praise of you. 


आ व॑हेथे WHI श्नन्तावश्विना | 
इषो दासीरमर्त्या 32 ul 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 425 
31. A vahethe parakat purvirasnantavasvina. 
Iso dastramartya. 
Immortal Ashvins, winners and harbingers of 
ancient sources of wealth, you bring us food, energies 
and wealths of tremendous positive value from farthest 
places and since times beyond memory. 
आ at gent श्रवोभिरा राया यातमश्विना | 
पुरुरुचन्द्रा नास॑त्या ॥ ३२॥ 

32. A no dyumnaira Sravobhira raya yatamasvina. 
Puruscandra nasatya. 

Ashvins, observers and protectors of truth, blest 
with grace and glory of universal character, come to us 
with lights of knowledge, honour and wealth of 
imperishable value. 

एह वां प्रुषितप्स॑वो वयो वहन्तु UU: | 
अच्छा स्वध्वरं जन॑म्‌ २३ ॥ 


33. Eha vam prusitapsavo vayo vahantu parninah. 
Accha svadhvaram janam. 


May carriers consuming combustible fuel for 
energy transport you here on flying wings and you join 
the holy man at his yajna of love and non-violence. 

रथं areas य इषा वर्त॑ते Gel 
न चक्रमभि वाधते॥ २४॥ 


34. Ratham vamanugayasam ya isa vartate saha. 
Na cakramabhih badhate. 


Your chariot which moves on fuel and energy 
and the wheel of your progress thereby, no one can 


426 RGVEDA 
obstruct on course. 


हिरण्ययेन रथेन द्रवत्पाणिभिरणश्वैः | 
धीज॑वना नास॑त्या ॥ ३५॥ 


35. Hiranyayena rathena dravat-panibhir-asvaih. 
Dhijavana nasatya. 


Ashvins, ever truthful and imperishable powers, 
flying at the speed of thought by a golden chariot 
running by the power of revolving hands (like pistons, 
cranks or turbines and motors), no one can obstruct your 
course of progress. 


युवं मृगं जागृवां सं स्वद॑थो वा वृषण्वसू | 
ता न॑ः पृद्धमिषा रयिम्‌॥ ३६॥ 


36. Yuvam mrgam jagrvamsam svadatho va vrsan- 
vasu. Ta nah prnktamisa rayim. 


O generous and virile leading lights of the day, 
you take delight in hunting the hunter on the wake (not 
in ambush). Similarly join the wealth of victory with 
the taste of food and season it with the sweets of honey. 


ता में अश्विना सनीनां विद्यातं नवानाम्‌। यथां चिच्चैद्यः 
कशुः शतमुष्ट्रानां दद॑त्सहस््रा दशा गोनाम्‌ ॥ ३७॥ 


37. Tame asvind saninam vidyatam navanam. Yatha 
ciccaidyah kasuh Satamustranam dadat sahasra 
dasa gonam. 


Such as you are, Ashvins, harbingers of the 
sweets of life, please know the newest and most 
favourite gifts I love just as the perceptive ruler knew 
when he granted me a hundred camels and ten thousand 
cows. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 427 


यो मे दहिर॑ंण्यसंदुशो दशा राज्ञो अमंहत | 
अधस्पदा इच्चैद्यस्य कृष्ट य॑श्चर्मम्ना अभितो जना: ॥ ३८ ॥ 
38. Yo me hiranyasamdrso dasa rajno amamhata. 


Adhaspada iccaidyasya krstayaScarmamna 
abhito janah. 


Similarly that ruler knew who gave me ten 
estates of real beauty and value like gold. All people 
are under control of the wise ruler and men in armour 
stand round in readiness to serve and obey. 
माकिरेना पथा गाद्येनेमे यन्ति aed: | 
अन्यो नेत्सूरिरोह॑ते भूरिदाव॑त्तरो जनं: ॥ ३९ ॥ 

39. Makirena patha gad yeneme yanti cedayah. 
41110 net surirohate bhuridavattaro janah. 


No one else goes by the path by which the wise 
people go. And no one else is as brave as they, no one 
excels them in charity and generosity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 6 
Indra (1-45), Dana-stuti (46-48) Devata, 
Vatsa Kanva Rshi 
Wet इन्द्रो य ओज॑सा पर्जन्यो वृष्टिमाँ इव । 
स्तोमैर्वत्सस्य वावृधे ॥ ९॥ 
i, Mahan indro ya ojasa parjanyo vrstiman iva. 
Stomairvatsasya vavrdhe. 
Great is Indra by his power and splendour like 
the cloud charged with rain and waxes with pleasure in 


the dear devotee’s awareness by his child like hymns of 
adoration. 


428 RGVEDA 


प्रजामृतस्य पिप्र॑तः प्र यद्धर॑न्त aa: | 
faut ऋतस्य वाह॑सा ।॥ २॥ 

pA Prajamrtasya pipratah pra yad bharanta vahna- 
yah. Vipra rtasya vahasa. 


When the forces of nature carry on the laws of 
divinity and sustain the children of creation through 
evolution, and the enlightened sages too carry on the 
yajna of divine law of truth in their adorations, Indra, 
immanent divinity, waxes with pleasure. 


कण्वा इन्द्रं यदक्रत स्तोभैर्यज्ञस्य साध॑नम्‌ जामि daa 
आयुधम्‌ ३ ॥ 
i Kanva indram yadakrata stomairyajnasya sadha- 


nam. Jami bruvata ayudham. 


When the wise sages with their adorations rise 
to Indra and surrender to him as their yajnic destination, 
they exclaim: Verily the lord of thunder is our brother, 
father, mother, sister, everything. 


सम॑स्य मन्यवे विशो विश्वां नमन्त Hea: | 
समुद्रायेव सिन्ध॑वः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Samasya manyave 1750 vi$sva namanta krstayah. 


Samudrayeva sindhavah. 


The people, in fact the entire humanity, bow in 
homage and surrender to this lord of passion, power 
and splendour just as rivers flow on down and join into 
the sea. 


ओजस्तदस्य तित्विष उभे यत्समवर्तयत्‌ ॥ 
इन्द्रश्चर्मेव रोद॑सी ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 429 


> Ojastadasya titvisa ubhe yat samavartayat. 
Indrascarmeva rodast. 


When Indra, lord almighty, pervades and 
envelops both heaven and earth in the cover of light, 
the light that shines is only the lord’s divine splendour 
that blazes with glory. 


fa fag वृत्रस्य दोध॑तो astur शतपर्वणा | 
शिरो बिभेद वृष्णिना ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Vi cid vrtrasya dodhato vajrena Sataparvana. 
Siro bibheda vrsnina. 


And when the lord of might and munificence 
with his thunderbolt of a hundred potentials shatters 
the head of Vrtra, terror striking demon of darkness, 
drought and despair, the bolt is nothing but the blazing 
omnipotence of the lord. 


इमा अभि प्र णोनुमो विपामग्रेषु धीतय॑ः | 
अग्नेः शोचिर्न दिद्युतः ॥ ७॥ 

ऋआ Ima abhi pra nonumo vipamagresu dhitayah. 
Agneh 50८711८ didyutah. 


These hymns of ardent adoration like rising 
flames of radiant fire, we among the front ranks of 
vibrant sages offer are homage and surrender to the lord 
omnipotent, Indra. 


Tet सतीरुप त्मना प्र यच्छोच॑न्त धीतय॑ः | 
कण्वां ऋतस्य धारया ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Guha satirupa tmana pra yacchocanta dhitayah. 
Kanva rtasya dharaya. 


430 RGVEDA 


Hymns of adoration which abide in the depths 
of the heart, wise sages let flow and shine forth 
spontaneously with the overflowing streams of natural 
truth and law divinely embedded in the soul. 


प्र तमिन्द्र नशीमहि रयिं गोम॑न्तपण्विन॑म्‌। 
प्र ब्रह्य पूर्वचित्तये ।॥ ९ ॥ 


2. Pra tamindra nasimahi rayim gomantamasvinam. 
Pra brahma purvacittaye. 


Indra, lord of light and power, pray let us realise 
that wealth and honour of earthly character overflowing 
with motherly generosity and superfast achievement 
which is the prologue to perfect realisation of the nature 
and divinity of the ultimate reality of Brahman. 


अहमिद्धि पितुष्परि मेधामृतस्य॑ जग्रभ | 
अहं सूर्य इवाजनि ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Ahamiddhi pituspari medhamrtasya jagrabha. 
Aham surya ivajani. 
I have received from my father super 
intelligence of the universal mind and law, I have realise 
it too in the soul, and I feel reborn like the refulgent 
sun. 
अहं प्रलेन मन्म॑ना गिर॑: शुम्भामि uaa 
येनेन्द्रः शुष्ममिहधथे ॥ ९९ ॥ 

11. Aham pratnena manmana girah sumbhami kan- 
vavat. Yenendrah susmamid dadhe. 


With the realisation of ancient and eternal 
knowledge I sanctify and adorn my words and voice in 
song like a wise sage, and by that, Indra, lord of light 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 431 
and power, vests me with strength and excellence. 
ये त्वामिन्द्र न तुष्टु वुऋष॑यो ये च॑ तुष्टुवुः | 
ममेद्वर्धस्व सुष्टुतः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ye tvamindra na tustuvur-rsayo ye ca tustuvuh. 
Mamed vardhasva sustutah. 


There are men who do not adore you, and there 
are sages who adore you, (both ways you are 
acknowledged and adored by praise or protest). O lord 
thus adored by me and pleased, pray accept my adoration 
and let us rise. 
यद॑स्य मन्युरध्व॑नीद्धि वृत्रं प॑र्वशो रुजन्‌। 
अपः AYER | ९३ ॥ 

13. Yadasya manyur-adhvanid vi vrtram parvaso 
rujan. Apah samudramairayat. 


When the lord’s passion rises and roars, breaking 
the dark cloud stage by stage, showers rain and rivers 
flow to the sea. 
नि शुष्णं इन्द्र धर्णसिं ag जघन्थ दस्य॑वि । 
वृषा ह्युग्र श्रण्विषे ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Ni Susna indra dharnasim vajram jaghantha 
dasyavi. Vrsa hyugra Srnvise. 


Indra, when you strike the mighty thunderbolt 
on the devil of drought and cloud of denial, then you 
are celebrated as the lord of showers and divine passion. 


न द्याव इन्द्रमोजसा नान्तरिश्चाणि विणम्‌ 
न विव्यचन्त भूम॑यः ॥ eu UI 


432 RGVEDA 


15. Na dyava indramojasa nantariksani vajrinam. 
Na vivyacanta bhumayah. 


Neither heavens nor the middle regions nor 
earths with all their lustre and power can violate, 
comprehend or even contain Indra, lord of the 
thunderbolt of omnipotence, justice and punishment. 


यस्त॑ इन्द्र महीर पः स्त॑भूयमान आश॑यत्‌ | 
नि तं पद्यासु शिश्नथः ॥ ९६॥ 

16. {वव indra mahirapah stabhuyamana aSsayat. 
Ni tam padyasu Sisnathah. 


Whoever chooses to hold up and stand in the 
way of the mighty flow of your waters, will and action, 
you pierce and break open like the dark cloud and make 
him flow with the flow into the channels of nature, the 
universal flow. 


य इमे रोद॑सी मही स॑मीची समजंग्रभीत्‌। 
तमोभिरिन्द्र्‌ तं गुहः ॥ ९७॥ 
17. = {व 771८ rodast mahi samici samajagrabhit. 


Tamobhir-indra tam guhah. 


That nature, Prakrti, which comprehends these 
great heavens and earths together, that same you cover 
and hide in deep darkness when this universe is 
withdrawn into zero during Pralaya, annihilation. 


य इन्द्र यत॑यस्त्वा भृग॑वो ये च॑ तुष्टुवुः | 
ममेदुग्र श्रुधी हव॑म्‌ ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Ya indra yatayastva bhrgavo ye ca tustuvuh. 
Mamedugra srudhi havam. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 433 


Indra, those self-controlled sages, those veteran 
scholars of disseminative knowledge who cleanse 
themselves of negativities, all who adore and celebrate 
you, while you listen to all, among them, O lord of 
blazing resplendence, listen to my invocation, adoration 
and prayer. 


sured इन्द्र पृश्न॑यो घृतं ded आशिरम्‌ । 
एनामृतस्य पिप्युषीः ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Imasta indra prsnayo ghrtam duhata asiram. 
Enamrtasya pipyusth. 


Indra, these spotted cows of yours, various 
earths, starry skies which yield and shower honey sweets 
of milk and life giving soma are augmenters of the divine 
yajna of universal evolution. 
या इन्द्र प्रस्व॑स्त्वाऽऽसा गर्भमच॑क्रिरन्‌। 
परि धर्मेव सूर्य॑म्‌ ॥ २०॥ 

20. Ya indra prasvastva’’sa garbham-acakriran. 
Pari dharmeva suryam. 


All these stars and planets are fertile and 
creative, and all round, like the nature and action of the 
sun, they suck up vitality in by the divine mouth and 
hold the seed of life for new birth. 
त्वामिच्छवसस्पते कण्वां Saat वावृधुः | 
त्वां सुतास इन्द॑वः ॥ २९॥ 

21. Tvamic-chavasaspate kanva ukthena vavrdhuh. 
Tvam sutasa indavah. 


O lord of universal power and potential, wise 


434 RGVEDA 


sages with their hymns of adoration exalt only you, and 
so also the distilled soma offers of initiated devotees 
exhilarate you alone. 


तवेदिनदर प्रणीतिषूत प्रश॑स्तिरद्रिवः | 
यज्ञो वितन्तसाय्यः ॥ २२॥ 

22. Tavedindra pranitisuta praSsastiradrivah. 
Yajno vitantasayyah. 
Indra, in all matters of right ethics, morals, 
policy and social conduct in the world, it is your glory 
only that inspires, it is all a version of your universal 
yajna, lord mover and ruler of the world. 
आ न॑ इन्द्र महीमिषं पुरं न द॑र्षि गोम॑तीम्‌। 
उत प्रजां सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ २३ ॥ 

23. Ana [काव mahimisam puram na darsi gomatim. 
Uta prajam suviryam. 


Indra, bestow upon us abundant food and high 
quality energy as well as a great city for habitation, rich 
in cows, culture and excellence and bless us with a noble 
virile progeny. 
उत त्यदारूवर्व्यं यदिन्द्र नाहुषीष्वा | 
अगर विक्षु प्रदीद॑यत्‌॥ २४॥ 

24. Uta tyadasvasvyam yadindra nahusisva. 
Agne viksu pradidayat. 

Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent, give us 
that dynamic energy and refulgent power strategy for 


sure and certain targeted achievement which you 
bestowed upon earlier people of the world committed 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 435 


to the pursuit of truth and rectitude in the social struggle 
between good and evil, positive and negative, and 
between love and hate. 


अभि व्रजं न त॑लिषे at उपाकचंक्षसम्‌ । 
यदिन्द्र Oa नः ॥ २५॥ 

25. Abhi vrajam na tatnise sura upakacaksasam. 
Yadindra mrlayasi nah. 


For when you are kind, O lord of light and 
power, you switch on the light for us and reveal the 
target close at hand in sight and you mark the way too 
by which we must reach our aim and object of love. 


यदङ्क त॑विषीयस इन्द्र प्रराज॑सि fare: 
मर्दों अपार ओज॑सा ॥ २६॥ 

26. Yadanga tavistyasa indra prarajasi ksitth. 
Mahan apara ojasa. 
Indra, lord of life and love, dear as our very 
breath, when you shine and blaze ruling over lands and 
people, then you reveal your grandeur, you are 
incomprehensible by virtue of your self-refulgence. 
तं wat हविष्प॑तीर्विश्ा उप॑ qaa ऊतये । 
उरुज्रय॑समिन्द्थिः ॥ २७॥ 

27. Tam tva havismatirvisa upa bruvata utaye. 
Urujrayasam-indubhih. 


People with most exhilarating offers of soma in 
hand for homage invoke and adore you for protection 
and advancement, lord omnipresent and ever vibrant in 
the expansive universe. 


436 RGVEDA 


उपह्वरे गिरीणां संगथे च॑ नदीनाम्‌ । 
धिया faut अजायत ॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Upahvare girinam samgathe ca nadinam. 
Dhiya vipro ajayata. 


In seclusion over mountain slopes and in the 
caves and on the confluence of rivers, the vibrant 
presence of the lord within reveals itself by illumination 
in the self. 


अतं: समुद्रमुद्धत॑श्चिकि्त्वँ अव॑ पश्यति | 
यतों विपान एज॑ति ।॥ २९ ॥ 

29. Atah samudram-udvatascikitvan ava pasyati. 
Yato vipana ejati. 


Thence the enlightened devotee rising over the 
ocean of existence watches how and from where the 
vibrant omnipresence descends into inner 
consciousness. 


आदित््रलस्य रेत॑सो ज्योतिंष्पश्यन्ति वासरम्‌। 
परो यदिध्यते दिवा ॥ ३०॥ 


30. Adit pratnasya retaso jyotis-pasyanti vasaram. 
Paro yadidhyate diva. 

And then the devotees see like day light the self- 
refulgence of the eternal lord and source of life who 
shines above and beyond the day through the night of 
annihilation too. 


कण्वास इन्द्र ते मतिं विश्वे वर्धन्ति पौस्यम्‌। 
उतो शविष्ठ॒ वृष्ण्यम्‌ 32 ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 437 
31. Kanvasa indra te matim visve vardhanti paum- 
syam. Uto Savistha vrsnyam. 

Indra, lord most potent, all the learned sages of 
the world celebrate and exalt your omniscience, creative 
power and universal generosity. 

इमां म॑ इन्द्र सुष्टुतिं जुषस्व प्र aaa 
उत प्र वर्धया मतिम्‌॥ ३२॥ 


32. Imam ma indra sustutim jusasva pra su mamava. 
Uta pra vardhaya matim. 


Indra, just and merciful lord, pray accept this 
hymn of adoration for my sake and protect me from 
evil, and bless me that my intelligence and awareness 
may grow and rise in piety. 


उत AMV वयं तुभ्यं प्रतृन्दध ata: | 
विप्रौ अतक्ष्म जीवसे ॥ ३३॥ 


33. Uta brahmanya vayam tubhyam pravrddha 
vajrivah. Vipra ataksma jivase. 


Indra, highest and eternal lord of thunder and 
justice, we, enlightened sages dedicated to divinity with 
piety, offer these hymns of prayer and adoration for the 
sake of our life and advancement. 


अभि कण्वं अनूषताऽऽपो न प्रवता यतीः। 
इन्द्रं वन॑न्वती मतिः ॥ ३४॥ 


34. Abhi kanva anusata’’po na pravata yatth. 
Indram vananvati matih. 


Wise sages offer prayers to Indra and, like 
streams of water flowing and reaching the sea, the 


438 RGVEDA 


prayers rise and reach the lord almighty with love and 
adoration. 


saya वावृधुः समुद्रमिव सिन्ध॑वः | 
अनुंत्तमन्युमजरंम्‌॥ २५ ॥ 


35.  Indramukthani vavrdhuh samudramiva sindha- 
vah. Anuttamanyum-ajaram. 


Hymns of adoration and prayer and yajnic 
performances exalt Indra, unaging and eternal lord 
beyond anger and agitation, just as rivers augment the 
ocean beyond overflowing. 


आ नो याहि परावतो हरिभ्यां हर्यताभ्याम्‌। 
इममिन्द्र सुतं पिब ॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Ano yahi paravato haribhyam haryatabyam. 
Imamindra sutam piba. 


Indra, come hither to us to join our yajna even 
from the farthest borders of the universe by brilliant 
vibrations of natural presence and illuminating rays of 
light divine and accept this distilled soma of our prayer 
and adoration. 


त्वामिद्‌ dared जनासो वृक्तबर्हिषः | 
हव॑न्ते वाज॑सातये ॥ २७॥ 


37.  Tvamid vrtrahantama janaso vrktabarhisah. 
Havante vajasataye. 


People, dedicated celebrants, seated on the vedi 
with homage in hand, invoke and adore you, lord most 
potent destroyer of darkness and evil, and they pray for 
victory in their struggle of life for advancement. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 439 


अनु त्वा Veet उभे चक्रं न वर्त्येत॑शम्‌। 
अनुं सुवानास इन्द॑वः ॥ ३८ ॥ 


38. Anu tva rodasi ubhe cakram na vartyetasam. 
Anu suvanasa indavah. 


Just as a chariot wheel turns and moves in 
correspondence with the horse so do both heaven and 
earth and all other soma transactions of life turn and 
move in obedience to your will and law. 


मन्द॑स्वा सु स्व॑र्णर sae शर्यणाव॑ति। 
मत्स्वा विव॑स्वतो म॒ती ॥ ३९॥ 


39. Mandasva su svarnara utendra Saryanavati. 
Matsva vivasvato mati. 


And Indra, O lord of love and power, in the 
regions of the earth and its environment close to the 
middle regions of space where violence is possible, pray 
bless the people with joy and feel exalted by the pious 
thought and will of the yajnic humanity. 


वावृधान उप द्यवि तृषां वज्य॑रोरवीत्‌। 
वृत्रहा सोमपातमः ॥ ४०॥ 


40. Vavrdhana upa dyavi vrsa vajryaroravit. 
Vrtraha somapatamah. 


Exhilarated and exalted, in the heavens over the 
middle regions of the skies, the virile and munificent 
wielder of thunder, Indra, roars in response to the yajnic 
acts of humanity. He is destroyer of darkness and evil, 
drought and despair, and the greatest lover of peace and 
the soma of success. 


440 RGVEDA 


ऋषिर्हि पूर्वजा अस्येक gots ओज॑सा । 
इन्द्र॑ चोष्कूयसे ad । ४९ ॥ 

41. (र purvaja asyeka 1sana ojasa. 
Indra coskuyase vasu. 

Indra, you are the omniscient poet and visionary 
of the universe, all seer, eternal and first manifestation 
of existence in creation, sole one and absolute ruler of 
the universe by your might and majesty, and you love 
to give wealth, honour and excellence with highest joy 
to humanity. 


अस्माकं त्वा Yat उप॑ वीतपुं्ठा अभि Wa: | 
शतं व॑हन्तु RA: ॥ ४२ ॥ 

42. Asmakam tva sutan upa vitaprstha abhi prayah. 
Satam vahantu harayah. 
Indra, may the hundreds of your festive forces 
travelling like light rays transport you hither to our 
distilled soma and delicious foods offered in homage. 
इमां सु पूर्व्या धियं मधोर्घतस्य पिप्युषींम्‌। 
कण्वा उक्थेन वावृधुः ॥ ४३॥ 

43. Imam su purvyam dhiyam madhorghrtasya 
pipyusim. Kanva ukthena vavrdhuh. 


Learned sages by chanting hymns and 
performing yajna exalt the glory and efficacy of this 
ancient science of yajnic action which augments the 
honey sweets of water, ghrta and all other delicacies 
for universal nourishment. 


इन्द्रमिद्धिम॑हीनां Aa quite मर्त्यः: | 
इन्द्रं सनिष्युरूतयें tt ४४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 441 


44. Indramid vimahinam medhe vrnita martyah. 
Indram sanisyuriutaye. 


Mortals of the highest order of humanity choose 

Indra for honour in yajna, and the seeker of wealth and 
power too invokes Indra for protection and 
advancement. 

अर्वाञ्चं त्वा पुरुष्टुत प्रियमेधस्तुता हरी | 

सोमपेयाय वक्षतः ॥ ४५५ ॥ 
45. Arvancam tva purustuta priyamedhastuta hari. 

Somapeyaya vaksatah. 


O lord of universal adoration and worship, 
natural vibrations of divine energy loved and honoured 
by the devotees of social yajna transport you hither to 
the heart to accept the sweets of our love and homage. 
शतमहं तिरिन्दिरे सहस्त्रं पर्णावा द॑दे । 
राधांसि यादवानाम्‌ ॥ ४६ ॥ 

46. Satamaham tirindire sahasram parsava dade. 
Radhamsi yadvanam. 
Thousands of gifts of intellectual value and 
means of practical success I have received from Indra 
to give away to help others and for the destruction of 
darkness from humanity. 
त्रीणि शतान्यर्वतां सहस्रा दशा गोनाम्‌। 
दद्ष्यज्राय साम्ने i ४७॥ 

47. Trini Satanyarvatam sahasra dasa gonam. 
Daduspajraya samne. 


Three hundred horses and ten thousand cows 


442 RGVEDA 


the lord has given to the celebrant of Sama Veda. (Horses 

and cows are symbols of achievement and generosity.) 
उदानट्‌ ककुहो fearsivaqasit दद्‌॑त्‌। 
श्रव॑सा यादं जन॑म्‌ ॥ ४८ ॥ 

48. Udanat kakuho divam-ustran-caturyujo dadat. 
Sravasa yadvam janam. 


Having given four bullocks or camels in charity 
and raised a class of intellectuals, a prosperous devotee 
rises to divine heights of honour and fame. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 7 
Marutah Devata, Punarvatsa Kanva Rshi 


प्र यद्॑स्विष्टुभमिषं मरुतो विप्रो siete 
वि पर्वतेषु राजथ HS 


1 Pra yad vastristubham-isam maruto vipro 
aksarat. Vi parvatesu rajatha. 


O Maruts, warriors of the nation, when the 
vibrant controllers of the nation’s finances in yajnic 
management canalise national expenditure into three 
streams, physical, mental and spiritual, then you rise to 
the clouds and shine. 


aay त॑विघीयवो यामं शुभ्रा अचिध्वम्‌ । 
नि पर्व॑ता अहासत ॥ २॥ 


2 Yadanga tavistyavo yamam subhra acidhvam. 
Ni parvata ahasata. 


O dear bright Maruts, blazing bold warriors, 
when you detail your vehicles on parade for action, then 
even mountains shake with fear and awe. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 443 
उदीरयन्त वायुभिर्वाश्रासः प्रज्निंमातरः। 
धुक्षन्त पिप्युषीमिष॑म्‌॥ ३॥ 
Di Udirayanta vayubhir-vasrasah prsnimatarah. 
Dhuksanta pipyusimisam. 


Children of earth and heaven chanting holy 
songs with the winds, the Maruts bring down streams 
of food and energy from the skies. 
वप॑न्ति मरुतो fre प्र वेपयन्ति पर्वतान्‌ । 
यद्यामं यान्ति वायुभिः ॥ ४॥ 

4. Vapanti maruto miham pra vepayanti parvatan. 
Yad yamam yanti vayubhih. 


When the Maruts take to their vehicles with the 
winds, they shoot out showers of rain and shake up 
mountainous strongholds of energy. 


नि aerate वो गिरिर्नि सिन्ध॑वो विधंर्मणे। 
महे शुष्माय Afar ५ ॥ 


2. Ni yad yamaya vo girirni sindhavo vidharmane. 
Mahe susmaya yemire. 


Out of fear and awe of your motion and power 
which is opposed to their strength and character, 
mountains hold back and rivers pant and flow. 
gat उ नक्तमूतये युष्मान्दिर्वां हवामहे । 
युष्मान्प्रंयत्यंध्वरे ॥। & ॥ 

6. Yusman u naktamutaye yusman diva havamahe. 
Yusman prayatyadhvare. 


We invoke you at night for peace and protection, 


444 RGVEDA 


in the day for action and advancement, and in the 
beginning of yajna for completion and fulfilment. 
उदु त्ये अंरुणप्संवश्चित्रा सा्मेभिरीरते। 
वाश्रा अधि ष्णुना दिवः niet 
i Udu tye arunapsavascitra yamebhirirate. 
Vasra adhi snuna divah. 
And those ardent red wonderful stormy troops 
of heroes fly by their chariots roaring over mountain 
tops and over and across the skies. 
सृजन्ति रश्मिमोजसा पन्थां gee यात॑वे। 
ते भानुधिर्विं त॑स्थिरे ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Srjanti raSmimojasa pantham suryaya yatave. 
Te bhanubhirvi tasthire. 
By their might and lustre they carve bright paths 
for the radiations of vital energies of the sun and stand 
guard all over the places by their strength and the beams 
of light. 
इमां मे मरुतो गिर॑पिमं स्तोम॑मृभुक्षणः । 
इमं a वनता हव॑म्‌ ९॥ 

9. Imam me maruto giram-imam stomamrbhu- 
ksanah. Imam me vanata havam. 


O Maruts, warriors of exceptional order, listen 
to this voice of mine, accept this poetic tribute and 
cherish this invocative call of mine. 


त्रीणि सरांसि पृश्न॑यो दुदुहे वच्रिणे Tel । 
उत्सं कव॑न्धमुद्रिण॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 445 


10. Trini saramsi prsnayo duduhre vajrine madhu. 
Utsam kabandhamudrinam. 


Mothers of the Maruts distil the nectar drink of 
life for them from three reservoirs: the solar region of 
light or the sattva element of nature, the cloudy sky or 
the rajas element of nature, and the earth or the tamas 
element of nature’s balance and firmness, and they feed 
their children on the light of knowledge and culture, 
energy of the winds and generosity of rain showers, and 
the sweetness and stability of the earth. 


मरुतो teed at दिवः Gerard हर्वामहे। 
आ तू न उप॑ TAT ९९॥ 
11. Maruto yaddha vo divah sumnayanto havamahe. 


A tu na upa gantana. 


Maruts, O tempestuous heroes, as we call upon 
you for the sake of peace, progress and prosperity, pray 
come fast from the heavens through the skies close to 
us on earth. 


यूयं fest सुदानवो wat ऋभुक्षणो दमे । 
उत प्रचेतसो AA 11221 
12. Yuyam hi stha sudanavo rudra rbhuksano dame. 


Uta pracetaso made. 


You are generous, uncompromising agents of 
justice and punishment, highly intelligent and scholarly. 
Stay that in your element in the field of peace and 
discipline, and in a state of exhilaration keep your soul 
and your brains about you. 


आ नो रयिं मदच्युतं पुरुक्षुं विर्वधायसम्‌। 
saat मरुतो दिवः ॥ ९३॥ 


446 RGVEDA 


13. Ano rayim madacyutam puruksum visvadhaya- 
sam. Iyarta maruto divah. 
O Maruts, bring us from the light of heaven 
wealth, honour and excellence full of joy for all and 
amply sufficient for the sustenance of world life. 
अधीव यद्विरीणां यामं शुभ्रा अचिध्वम्‌ । 
सुवानैर्मन्दध्व इन्दुभिः ॥ ९२४॥ 

14. Adhiva yad girinam yamam subhra acidhvam. 
Suvanair-mandadhva indubhih. 
Heroes of the wind, radiant and pure, when you 
harness your chariots to ride over the mountains, then 
with the showers of soma you rejoice and move the 
world to rapture. 
एताव॑तश्चिदेषां सुम्नं fata मर्त्य: । 
अदाभ्यस्य मन्म॑भिः ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Etdavatascid-esam sumnam bhikseta martyah. 
Adabhyasya manmabhih. 


To these warriors of the winds of this high order 
of indomitable powers, let mortal man pray for peace 
and joy with thoughts and words of full awareness of 
the giver and the supplicant. 


ये द्रप्साइव रोद॑सी धमन्त्यनु वृष्टिभिः | 
उत्सं दुहन्तो अश्ितम्‌॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Ye drapsa iva rodasi dhamantyanu vrstibhih. 
Utsam duhanto aksitam. 


Milking the imperishable cloud of space oceans 
like the cow, they sprinkle heaven and earth with rain 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 447 


like showers of elixir. 


उदु स्वानेभिरीरत उद्रथेरुढ वायुभिः | 
उत्स्तोभैः पृश्निमातरः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Udu svanebhir-irata ud rathairudu vayubhih. 
Ut stomaih prsnimatarah. 


Children of the winds, heavens and the skies 
emerge and advance from their abode with winds and 
roars by chariots to the accompaniment of songs of 
jubilation. 


येनाव तुर्वशं यदुं येन कण्वं धनस्यृत॑म्‌। 
राये सु तस्य॑ धीमहि॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Yenava turvasam yadum yena kanvam dhanas- 
prtam. Raye su tasya dhimahi. 


Of the Maruts, we solicit that wealth and power 
by which they protect the man fighting against violence 
and the wise sage who too prays for wealth and honour 
in the world. 


इमा ङ वः सुदानवो ad न frei: | 
वधीन्काण्वस्य मन्म॑भिः।॥ ९९॥ 


19.  Imauvah sudanavo ghrtam na pipyusirisah. 
Vardhan kanvasya manmabhih. 


O warriors of charity and generosity, we pray 
that these animations, inspirations and exhortations of 
ours which, like ghrta, feed the fire of life and rise in 
flames, may, exalt you by the thoughts and prayers of 
the wise sage. 


448 RGVEDA 


क्व॑ नूनं सुदानवो मद॑था वृक्तबर्हिषः। 
ब्रह्मा को a: सपर्यति i २०॥ 


20. Kva nunam sudanavo madatha vrktabarhisah. 
Brahma ko vah saparyati. 


Generous Maruts, where are you now rejoicing, 
seated on the holy grass? And who is the high priest 
conducting the yajnic celebration for you? 
नहि ष्म ae वः पुरा स्तोमे भिर्वृक्त बर्हिषः | 
शर्धो ऋतस्य जिन्व॑थ ॥ २९॥ 

21. Nahi sma yaddha vah pura stomebhir-vrktabar- 
hisah. Sardhan rtasya jinvatha. 
O Maruts, isn’t it true that seated on the holy 
grass you have been augmenting the power and efficacy 
of the yajna of truth by your exhortations ever before? 
ay St म॑हतीरपः सं श्चोणी समु सूर्यम्‌। 
सं वरं पर्वशो दधुः ॥ २२॥ 

22. Samu tye mahatirapah sam ksoni samu suryam. 
Sam vajram parvaso dadhuh. 


Those Maruts support and hold together in 
cosmic balance the mighty floods of water, the earth, 
the sun, and the force and power of thunder stage by 
stage. 


fa qa पर्वशो य॑युर्विं पर्व"ताँ अराजिनः | 
चक्राणा वृष्णि UTA २३॥ 


23. Vi vrtram parvaso yayurvi parvatan arajinah. 
Cakrana vrsni paumsyam. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 449 


Doing acts of mighty vigour and splendour they 
break the clouds of darkness and evil and split open 
cavernous mountains step by step and bring light and 
showers of rain. 


अनु त्रितस्य युध्य॑तः शुष्ममावन्नुत क्रतुम्‌ । 
अन्विन्द्रं वृत्रतूर्ये ॥ २४॥ 

24. Anu tritasya yudhyatah susmam-avannuta 
kratum. Anvindram vrtraturye. 
They reinforce the powers of life struggling for 
positive forces fighting against three negativities of 
body, mind and soul, and they support and reinforce 
the ruler in his battle against evil and darkness. 
विद्युद्धस्ता अभिद्यवः शिप्राः शीर्षन्हिरण्ययीं: | 
शुभ्रा व्य॑ञ्जत श्चिये ॥ २५॥ 

29. = Vidyuddhasta abhidyavah siprah sirsan hiran- 
yayth. Subhra vyanjata Sriye. 

Thunder in hand, all round refulgent, wearing 
golden helmets on the head, they shine bright and pure 
for the beauty and glory of life. 

उशना यत्प॑रावत॑ं उक्ष्णो रन्ध्रमयातन । 
द्यौर्न च॑क्रदद्धिया॥ २६॥ 


26. Usana yat paravata uksno randhramayatana. 
Dyaurna cakradad bhiya. 


Impassioned for action when the virile Maruts 
rush to a region of low pressure in the sky from afar, 
the cloud, as the higher regions, roars under fear and 
pressure. 


450 RGVEDA 


आ नो म॒खस्य॑ दावनेऽ शवैर्हिर॑ण्यपाणिभिः। 
देवांस उप॑ गन्तन Ht २७॥ 

27. Ano makhasya davane’§vair-hiranyapanibhih. 
Devasa upa gantana. 
O divinities of power and generous splendour, 
to augment and energise our yajna, pray come by motive 
forces of golden hoof and golden wheel and bless us in 
person. 
यदेषां पृष॑ती रथे प्रष्टिर्वहति रोहिंतः। 
यान्ति शुभ्रा रिणन्नपः ॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Yadesam prsati rathe prastirvahati rohitah. 
Yanti subhra rinannapah. 


When the fiery force drives the Maruts in their 
chariot towards regions of abundant water or to the 
clouds laden with vapour, then these heroes go forward 
bright and pure splitting and flying off the vapours and 
waters. 


सुषोमे शर्यणाव॑त्याजीके पस्त्यावति | 
ययुर्निचक्रया नर॑: ॥ २९ ॥ 

29. Susome Saryanavatyarjike pastyavati. Yayur- 
nicakraya narah. 

The leading Marut forces proceed to beautiful 
regions of peace and joy on higher altitudes and to the 
simple natural planes without vehicular medium by 
direct currents of energy. 

कदा ग॑च्छाथ मरुत इत्था विप्रं हव॑मानम्‌ । 
मारईकिथिर्नाधंमानम्‌॥ ३०॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 451 


30. Kada gacchatha maruta ittha vipram hava- 
manam. Mardikebhir-nadhamanam. 


O Maruts, when would you thus reach the 
vibrant scholar who calls you to yajna and awaits, and 
carry gifts of prosperity to the supplicant? 

me नूनं कधप्रियो यदिन्द्रमजंहातन | 
को a: सखित्व ओहते ॥ ३९॥ 


31. Kaddhanunam kadhapriyo yadindramajahdatana. 
Ko vah sakhitva ohate. 


Does a friend of constancy ever forsake Indra, 
the ruler? Who thinks twice on the value of friendship 
with you? (No one forsakes you, everyone loves to be 
friends with you.) 


सहो षु णो adecd: कण्वासो sift wets: | 
स्तुषे दिर॑ण्यवाशीभिः ॥ ३२॥ 

32. Saho $ no vajrahastaih kanvaso agnim marud- 
bhih. Stuse hiranyavastbhih. 


O sages and scholars, I praise and celebrate 
Agni, fiery leader and enlightened ruler along with 
thunder-handed, golden-armed Maruts, stormy troopers 
of the nation. Let us all praise and celebrate them. 


ओ षु वृष्णा: प्रय॑ज्यूना नव्य॑से Gaara | 
ववृत्यां चित्रवांजान्‌ ॥ 33 ॥ 

33. = @ $ 11470441 prayajyuna navyase suvitaya. 
Vavrtyam citravajan. 


For the sake of latest forms of happiness, 
prosperity and well being, I turn to the virile and 


452 RGVEDA 


generous, most adorable and wondrous versatile 
warriors of the winds and abide by them. 
frafeata Riza पर्शीनासो मन्य॑मानाः | 
पर्व ताण्चितननि Afar i ae 
34.  Girayascinni jihate parsanaso manyamanah. 
Parvatascinni yemire. 

Mountains give way before them, formidable 
peaks pant and turn into chasms and clouds change their 
course under the force of Maruts. 

आश्चष्णया्वानो वहन्त्यन्तरिश्चेण Uda: | 
धार्तारः स्तुवते aa: ॥ ३५५ ॥ 


35. = Aksnayavano vahantyantariksena patatah. 
Dhatarah stuvate vayah. 


Chariots flying at the speed of eye-light over 
the paths of space transport the Maruts, harbingers of 
food, energy, health and full age for the celebrant. 


अभिर्हिं ie पूर्व्यश्छन्दो न सूरो अर्चिषां | 
ते भानुधिर्विं त॑स्थिरे ॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. 47171177 jani purvyaschando na suro arcisa. 
Te bhanubhir vi tasthire. 


Agni, earliest ruling light of the world, came 
into existence with self-refulgence like the sun and the 
music of Vedic voice, and the Maruts manifested and 
ever abided by rays of the sun and flames of fire. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 453 


Mandala 8/Sukta 8 
Ashvinan Devate, Sadhvansa Kanva Rshi 


आ नो विश््वाभिरूतिभिरश्विना गच्छ॑तं युवम्‌। 
cen हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी पिब॑तं सोम्यं मधु| ९॥ 


1. A no visvabhir-utibhir-asvina gacchatam yuvam. 
Dasra hiranyavartani pibatam somyam madhu. 


Ashvins, twin powers of natural and human 
action, destroyers of evil, travellers by paths of light on 
golden chariots, both of you come to our yajna with all 
your means and modes of protection and promotion, 
appreciate our devotion and have a drink of our honey 
sweets of soma. 


आ नूनं यातमश्विना रथेन सूर्य'त्वचा। 

भुजी दिरंण्यपेशसा कवी गम्भीरचेतसा ॥ २॥ 
2. A niinam yatamasvina rathena suryatvaca. 

Bhujt hiranyapesasa kavi gambhiracetasa. 


Ashvins, lovers of life and living, far sighted, 
imaginative and creative thinkers and makers, come sure 
to our yajna by your radiation oriented, gold coated and 
highly monitored chariot (and bless our programme). 


आ यतिं नहुषस्पयांऽऽन्तरिक्षात्सुवृक्तिभिंः । 
पिबाथो अश्विना मधु कण्वानां सव॑ने सुतम्‌॥ ३॥ 

3: A yatam nahusasparya’’ntariksat suvrktibhih. 
Pibatho asvina madhu kanvanam savane sutam. 


Ashvins, come here from the world of humanity, 
from the skies, with the best of light, knowledge and 
technique you have collected, accept and enjoy the soma 


454 RGVEDA 


sweets of the scholars’ creations achieved and perfected 
in their joint programme, and assess the taste of soma. 


आ नो यातं दिवस्पर्याऽन्तरिश्चादधप्रिया। 
पुत्रः कण्व॑स्य वामिह सुषाव सोम्यं मधुं ॥ ४॥ 


4. A no yatam divasparya’ntariksadadhapriya. 
Putrah kanvasya vamiha susava somyam madhu. 


O lovers of the earth and humanity, come to us 
from the heavens and from the skies. The son and 
disciple of the scholar has distilled for you the soma 
sweets of honey. (Pray take that and bless him to proceed 
further.) 


आ at यातमुप॑श्रुत्यश्विंना सोम॑पीतये | 
स्वाहा स्तोम॑स्य वर्धना प्र कवी धीतिभिर्नरा ॥ ५॥ 


3; A no yatamupasrutyasvina somapitaye. 
Svaha stomasya vardhana pra kavi dhitibhirnara. 


Ashvins, harbingers of complementary 
revelations, come and listen closely to what we have 
conceived and imagine and say. Come to have a taste of 
this soma of our making. By the truth of your divine 
reflections, words and actions you extend the 
possibilities of our holy achievements. O leading lights, 
visionary creators, come with your thoughts, ideas and 
imaginations for our advancement. 


यच्चिद्धि वां पुर ऋष॑यो wets व॑से नरा । 
आ यातमश्विना गतमुपेमां सुष्टुतिं मम॑॥ ६॥ 


6. Yacciddhi vam pura rsayo juhure’vase nara. 
A ydatamasvina gatamupemam sustutim mama. 


Ashvins, whenever the ancient sages called 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 455 


upon you for encouragement and advancement, you 
came and listened. O leading lights of vision and 
imagination, come and listen to this prayer and adoration 
of mine too. 


दिवणश्चिंद्रोचनादध्या नो गन्तं स्वर्विदा । 
धीभिर्व'त्सप्रचेतसा स्तोमेभिर्हवनश्रुता i ७ ॥ 


a Divascid rocanadadhya no gantam svarvida. 
Dhibhir-vatsapracetasa stomebhir-havanasruta. 


Visionaries of the light of omniscience, 
committed in conscious covenant with dear ones, 
responsive to the devotee’s call, come to us from the 
heights of heaven with refulgence, knowledge, expertise 
and action. 


किमन्ये पयीसतेऽ स्मत्स्तोमेभिर श्विना । 
पुत्रः कण्व॑स्य वामृषिं्गीर्भिर्वत्सो अवीवृधत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Kimanye paryasate’smat somebhir-aSvina. 


Putrah kanvasya vamrsir-girbhirvatso avivrdhat. 


Ashvins, harbingers of the light of heaven, do 
people other than us adore you with hymns of prayer? 
The sagely son and disciple of the wise scholar and 
devotee, dear as a child, exalts you with hymns of prayer. 


आ वां विप्र॑ इहावसेऽ हृत्स्तोमे भिरणश्विना | 
अरिप्रा वृत्रहन्तमा तानो भूतं मयोभुव।॥९॥ 


9. A vam vipra ihavase’hvat stomebhir-asvina. 
Aripra vrtrahantama ta no bhutam mayobhuva. 


Ashvins, twin harbingers of heavenly light, the 
vibrant devotee invokes you here for protection and 


456 RGVEDA 


progress with hymns of adoration. O sinless divines, 
highest dispellers of the clouds of sin and darkness, 
come here and be for us light givers of universal peace 
and happiness. 


आ यद्वां योष॑णा रथमतिंष्ठद्वाजिनीवस्‌ | 
विश्वान्यश्विना युवं प्र धी तान्य॑गच्छतम्‌॥ ९०॥ 
10. A yad vam yosana rathamatisthad vajinivasi. 
VisvanyaSsvina yuvam pra dhitanyagacchatam. 
Ashvins, when the youthful dawn of a new day 
ascends your chariot with you, then, O divine harbingers 
of wealth and energy, you reach all that what the world 
thinks of for self-fulfilment. 
अत॑ः सहस्रनिर्णिजा रथेना यातमश्विना | 
वत्सो वां मधुं मद्रचोऽ शंसीत्काव्यः कविः ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Atah sahasranirnija rathena yatamasvina. Vatso 
vam madhumad vaco’samsit kavyah kavih. 


For this reason, Ashvins, come by the chariot 
bearing a thousand beauties of wealth and divine bliss. 
The poet’s poet, a darling admirer of yours, adores and 
glorifies you with honey sweets of his sacred words. 


पुरुमन्द्रा पुरूवसू watatt रयीणाम्‌ । 
स्तोमं मे अश्विनाविममभि वही अनूषाताम्‌ ॥ १२ ॥ 


12. Purumandra puruvasu manotara rayinam. 
Stomam me asvinavimamabhi vahni anusatam. 


Ashvins, harbingers of universal peace and joy 
for all, creators and dispensers of wealth, honour and 
excellence, bless this song of mine with divine grace, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 457 


you being the burden bearers and hallowed leaders of 
the world to higher regions. 


आ नो विश्वान्यश्विना धत्तं राधांस्यहं aT | 
कृतं न॑ ऋत्वियावतो मा नो! रीरधतं निदे ॥ ९३॥ 


13. A no visvanyasvina dhattam radhamsyahraya. 
Krtam na rtviyavato ma no riradhatam nide. 


Ashvins, lead us to all bold, abundant and 
creditable honours, wealth and competence of the world, 
make us yajnic workers and observers of natural laws 
according to the seasons of time and place, and never 
let us fall to the violence of scandal, shame and 
disrepute. 


यन्नासत्या परावति यद्वा स्थो अध्यम्ब॑रे | 
अतं: सहस्रनिर्णिजा रथेना यातमश्विना ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Yannasatya paravati yad va stho adhyambare. 
Atah sahasranirnija rathena yatamasvina. 


Ashvins, ever dedicated to truth and laws of 
divinity, whether you are in far off space or in the skies, 
come form there by your chariot of thousandfold beauty 
and sanctity. 


यो at नासत्यावृषिंगीर्भिर्वत्सो अवीवृधत्‌ | 
तस्मै सहस्रनिर्णिजमिषं धत्तं gaya ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Yo vam nasatyavrsir-girbhirvatso avivrdhat. 
Tasmai sahasranirnijam-isam-dhattam ghrtascu- 
tam. 


Ever true and relentless observers of the laws 
of divinity, to the poet sage, your darling celebrant who 


458 RGVEDA 


exalts you with his words of song, bear and bring food, 
energy and vision of wisdom vibrating with divine 
illumination and grace. 


प्रास्मा ast घृतश्चु तमश्विना यच्छ तं Far | 
यो वां सुम्नाय तुष्ट व॑दरसूयाद्ानुनस्पती ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Prasma urjam ghrtascutam-asvina yacchatam 
yuvam. Yo vam sumnaya tustavad vasuyad danu- 
naspati. 


Ashvins, presiding powers of divine dispen- 
sation and charity, whoever adores you for peace and 
well being and prays for wealth, honour and excellence, 
to him, pray, give energy and power of will overflowing 
with inner light and brilliance of grace. 


आ नो गन्तं रिशादसेमं स्तोमं पुरुभुजा । 
कृतं न॑ः सुश्रियो नरेमा दातमभिष्टये ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Ano gantam risadasemam stomam purubhuja. 
Krtam nah susriyo narema datamabhistaye. 


Leading lights of life and nature, counter powers 
of violence, and harbingers of universal prosperity, 
come, listen to our adoration, assess our yajnic 
achievement, bless us with the beauty and graces of life, 
and give us all these and competence for the desired 
peace, progress and self-fulfilment. 


आ वां विश्वाभिरूतिभिः प्रियमेधा अहूषत | 
राज॑न्तावध्वराणा मश्विना यामहूतिषु ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. 4 vam visvabhirutibhih priyamedha ahisata. 
Rajantavadhvaranam-asvina yamahitisu. 


Ashvins, all the ruling lights of yajnic 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 459 


performances and programmes of creation and 
production, lovers and devotees of solemn ceremonies, 
at all stages of their mission, invoke you with all your 
means and modes of protection and promotion of the 
holy projects. 


आ नो गन्तं मयो भुवाऽश्विंना शं भुवां युवम्‌ | 
यो वां विपन्यू धीतिभिर्गीरभ््वित्सो अवीवृधत्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Ano इवाव mayobhuva’ svina Sambhuva yuvam. 
Yo vam vipanyu dhitibhir-girbhir-vatso avivrdhat. 


Ashvins, harbingers of peace, pleasure and well 
being in prosperity, lovers and admirers of joyous 
programmes, come both of you to us who, your darling 
celebrants, exalt you with our words, thoughts and 
actions. 


याभिः कण्वं मेधातिथिं याभिर्वशं estasty | 
याधिर्गोशार्यमावंतं araats वतं नरा ॥२०॥ 


20. Yabhih kanvam medhatithim yabhirvasam 
dasavrajam. Yabhir-gosSaryam-avatam tabhir- 
no’vatam nara. 


Ashvins, harbingers of health and energy, 
leading lights of life and nature, come, protect and 
promote us with all those powers, potentials and 
efficacies by which you protect the sagely scholar and 
his wisdom and promote his hospitality and good 
fellowship, by which you protect and strengthen the 
body, physical abode of ten senses and ten pranic 
energies, and by which you rejuvenate and advance the 
invalid who has lost his sense faculties and suffers from 
total debility. 


460 RGVEDA 


aaa त्रसदस्युमावतं कृत्व्ये धने । 
ताभिः ष्व१ eat अश्विना प्राव॑तं वाज॑सातये ॥ २९॥ 


21. Yabhirnara trasadasyum-avatam krtvye dhane. 
Tabhih $vasman asvina pravatam vajasataye. 

Ashvins, leading lights of law and defence of 
humanity, come with all those powers and potentials 
by which you keep the law and order and shatter the 
forces of violence and terror for the economic and social 
advancement of humanity. With those very powers and 
potentials, protect us too for the achievement of success 
in our struggles. 


wat स्तोमा: सुवृक्तयो fret वर्धन्त्वश्विना | 
पुरुत्रा वृत्रहन्तमा ता नो भूतं पुरु स्पृहा ॥ २२॥ 


22. Pravam stomah suvrktayo giro vardhantya-svina. 
Purutra vrtrahantama ta no bhutam purusprha. 


Ashvins, protectors and promoters of life and 
humanity, greatest destroyers of the forces of darkness 
and destruction, may our hymns of adoration composed 
in the choicest words, finished in finest form and sung 
in the sweetest notes and accents, please and exalt you. 
May you ever be the darling heroes of universal love 
and admiration of humanity. 


त्रीणि पदान्यश्विनोराविः सास्ति गुहां परः। 
कवी ऋतस्य पत्प॑भिर र्वाग्जीवेभ्यस्परि ॥ २३॥ 
23. Trini padanyaSsvinoravih santi guha parah. 
Kavi rtasya patmabhir-arvag-jivebhyaspari. 
Three stages of the Ashvin’s advent hidden deep 
in the cave of mystery, namely, the victory of progressive 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 461 


forces of good against the negative forces of evil, 
maintenance of peace against violence, and law and 
justice against lawlessness are thus revealed. May the 
Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge, justice, 
peace and prosperity, come by the paths of rectitude, 
divine law and the process of yajnic action for the good 
of living beings all over the world. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 9 
Ashvinau Devate, Shashakarna Kanva Rshi 


आ नूनमश्विना युवं वत्सस्य॑ गन्तमवसे । 
प्रास्मै यच्छतमवृकं पथु च्छर्दिर्युयुतं या अरातयः ॥ ९॥ 
1. A nunamasvina yuvam vatsasya gantamavase. 


Prasmai yacchatam-avrkam prthucchardir- 
yuyutam ya aratayah. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and peace, for sure 
now come for the protection and progress of your loved 
people and provide for them a spacious peaceful home 
free from violence and insecurity and ward off all forces 
of malice, adversity and enmity. 


यद्न्तरिश्चे यदिवि यत्पञ्च मानुषँ sr । 
नृम्णं तन्द॑त्तमश्विना ॥ २॥ 


2. Yadantarikse yad divi yat panca manusan anu. 
Nrmnam tad dhattamasvina. 


Whatever manly strength and wealth there be 
in heaven and mid space worthy of five classes of 
people, Ashvins, bear and bring for us. 

ये at दंसांस्यश्विना विप्रासः परिमामृशुः | 
एवेत्काण्वस्य बोधतम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


462 RGVEDA 


छ Ye vam damsamsyasvina viprasah parimamrsuh. 
Evet kanvasya bodhatam. 


Ashvins, whatever your actions and 
achievements which the scholars have known and 
thought over, reveal the same to the modern scholar 
too. 


अयं वां घमो अश्विना स्तोमेन परि षिच्यते | 
अयं सोमो मधुंमान्वाजिनीवसू येनं वृत्रं चिकेतथः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Ayam vam gharmo aSvina stomena pari sicyate. 
Ayam somo madhuman vajinivasu yena vrtram 
ciketathah. 


This is the yajnic fire of the season, Ashvins, 
which is dedicated and exalted in your honour with the 
chant of hymns, and this is the soma sweetened and 
seasoned for you, O heroes of the battle for wealth and 
victory, by which you would know and dare the enemy, 
the demon of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty. 


यदप्सु यद्वनस्पतौ यदोष॑धीषु पुरुदंससा कृतम्‌। 
तेन॑ माविष्टमण्विना ॥ ५॥ 


2; Yadapsu yad vanaspatau yadosadhisu purudam- 
sasa krtam. Tena mavistamasvina. 


Ashvins, heroic powers of nature’s 
complementary forces, the power and vitality which you 
have vested in the waters, herbs and trees is multifarious. 
Pray, with that same vitality and power, bless and protect 
me too and let me advance. 


यन्नासत्या भुरण्यथो यद्वा देव भिषज्यथः | 
अयं वां वत्सो मतिभिर्न विन्धते हविष्प॑न्तं हि गच्छ॑ थः ॥ ६ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 463 


6. Yannasatya bhuranyatho yad va deva bhisa- 
Jyathah. Ayam vam vatso matibhirna vindhate 
havismantam hi gacchathah. 


Ashvins, harbingers of energy, health and 
replenishment, ever true unfailing agents of natural law 
and life’s growth, when you vibrate, radiate and 
energise, when you nourish, heal, resuscitate and revive 
things to live and grow, this conscientious darling seeker 
of your power and presence understands you not by 
observation, analysis and thought, in your entirety, 
because you reveal yourself only to the faithful who 
come to you with homage. (Life is a mystery. You can 
know the secret of this mystery only by being what it is, 
by identifying with it in meditation.) 


आ नूनमण्विनो ऋषिः स्तोमं चिकेत area । 
आ सोमं मधुमत्तमं घर्म सिञ्चादथर्वणि no 


ve A nunamasvinor-rsih somam ciketa vamaya. 
A somam madhumattamam gharmam sincad- 
atha-rvani. 


In truth, the visionary sage has realised the song 
and story of the Ashvins, radiations of life energy, in 
every detail from inception to completion by faithful 
intention and relentless application of mind, and he has 
fed the fire of his yajnic search and research with the 
sweetest and most vibrating soma of his life’s passion 
into the vedi. 


आ नूनं रघुवर्तनिं रथं तिष्ठाथो अश्विना। 
आ वां स्तोमा इमे मम नभो न चुच्यवीरत ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A nunam raghuvartanim ratham tisthatho asvina. 
A vam stoma ime mama nabho na cucyavirata. 


464 RGVEDA 


8. Ashvins, take to the fastest chariot now and 
come by the shortest straight path. These hymns of 
adoration burst forth from me like an explosion in space, 
reach you like the sun and draw you hither. 

यदद्य वां नासत्यो क्थेराचुच्युवीमहिं । 

gl वाणीभिरण्विनेवेत्काण्वस्यं बोधतम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 
Yadadya vam nasatyokthair-acucyuvimahi. 
Yad va vanibhir-asvinevet kanvasya bodhatam. 


9. Ashvins, ever dedicated to the divine truth 
of nature’s law, when we invoke you with hymns of 
adoration or by yajnic sessions or by words of yajakas 
today, pray take it that the call is the conscientious voice 
of the visionary sage in search for the light of his 
mission. 


यद्वां कक्षीवाँ" sa salva ऋषिर्यद्वां दीर्घत॑मा जुहाव | 

प॒थी यद्वां वैन्यः सादनेष्वेवेदतो अश्विना चेतयेथाम्‌ ॥ Qo ॥ 
Yad vam kaksivan uta yad vyasva rsiryad vam 
dirghatama juhava. prthi yad vam vainyah 
sadanesvevedato asvinda cetayetham. 


10. Ashvins, when the cavalier or the 
pedestrian or the sagely seer or the long time plodder 
or the ruler or the intellectual calls on you to the yajnic 
session, you listen. Hence, pray listen to our call too 
and come. 

यातं छर्दिष्पा उत a: परस्पा भूतं जगत्पा उत नस्तनूपा । 
वर्तिस्तोकाय तन॑याय यातम्‌ १९ ॥ 

Yatam chardispa uta nah paraspa bhutam jagatpa 
uta nastanupa. Vartistokaya tanayaya yatam. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 465 


Come, be protectors of our home and family, be 
protectors of others too, be protectors of the world and 
protectors of our body’s health and social structure. 
Come home to us for the sake of our children and grand 
children. 


यदिन्द्रेण सरथं याथो अश्विना यद्वा वायुना भव॑थः 
समोकसा | यदादित्येभिंऋभुभिंः सजोष॑सा यद्वा विष्णो - 
विक्रमणेषु तिष्ठथः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yadindrena saratham yatho asvina yad va vayuna 
bhavathah samokasa. Yadadityebhir-rbhubhih 
sajosasa yad va virsnor-vikramanesu tisthathah. 


Whether you move with the cosmic force on the 
same chariot or abide with the wind in the same region, 
or you move across the sun’s zodiacs or with the cosmic 
makers, or you move and abide with the vibrance of the 
omnipresent, wherever you be, pray come to us too. 


यदद्याश्विनावहं हुवेय वाज॑सातये | 
यत्पत्सु तुर्वणो सहस्तच्छ्ठ मश्विनोरवंः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yadadyasvinavaham huveya vajasataye. Yat prtsu 
turvane sahas-tacchrestham-aSsvinoravah. 


When I call upon the Ashvins, defenders of 
humanity and protectors of life, for the sake of victory 
in our struggle for existence, or I call on them against 
the enemies in our conflicts with negativities, they 
would come, because their courage and force for the 
defence and protection of life is highest and best. 


आ नूनं यातमश्विनेमा zat वां हिता । 
इमे सोमासो अधिं तुर्वशे यदाविमे कण्वेषु वामथ ॥ ex i 


466 RGVEDA 


14. A nunam yatamasvinema havyani vam hita. Ime 
somaso adhi turvase yadavime kanvesu vamatha. 


Come, Ashvins, for sure without fail. These 
presentations, adorations and offerings of hospitality 
are reserved for you whether they are in the house of 
the stormy warrior or dynamic intellectual or artist or 
citizen or the sagely seer, they are for you and you alone. 


यन्नासत्या पराके stateh अस्ति भेषजम्‌ । 
तेन॑ नूनं विमदाय प्रचेतसा छर्दिर्वत्साय॑ यच्छतम्‌ ॥। ९५ ॥ 


15. Yannasatya parake arvake asti bhesajam. Tena 
nunam vimadaya pracetasa chardir-vatsaya 
yacchatam. 


Ashvins, versatile powers of health and 
longevity, whatever food or sanative or efficacious 
remedies be there far or near, by that without fail, O 
masters of knowledge and expertise, provide a home of 
health and peace for the dear devotee free from the pride 
and arrogance of drugs and intoxication. 


अभुत्स्यु प्र देव्या साकं वाचाहमश्विनोः | 
व्यावर्देव्या मतिं वि रातिं मर्त्ये भ्यः॥ ९६॥ 

16. Abhutsyu pra devya sakam vacaham-asvinoh. 
Vyavardevya matim vi ratim martyebhyah. 


I am awake by the divine voice of the Ashvins. 
O divine dawn of light, open the human mind to the 
light and freedom of reason and give the gift of wisdom 
to mortal humanity. 


प्र बोधयोषो अश्विना प्र देवि सूनृते महि। 
प्र य॑ज्ञहोतरानुषक्म्र मदाय श्रवों बृहत्‌ Vo 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 467 


17. Pra bodhayoso asvina pra devi sunrte mahi. 
Pra yajnahotaranusak pra madaya sravo brhat. 


O divine dawn, great lady of truth and leading 
light of a new day, awaken the Ashvins, harbingers of 
new knowledge and awareness, and O inspirer of the 
day’s yajnic activity, relentlessly exhort men and women 
to work for the joy of life and win great prosperity, 
honour and fame. 


यदुषो यासि भानुना सं सूर्येण रोचसे | 
आ हायमश्विनो रथो' वर्तिंयीति नृपाय्य॑म्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Yaduso yasi bhanuna sam suryena rocase. 
A hayamasvino ratho vartir-yati nrpayyam. 


O dawn, harbinger of a new day, when you rise 
with the first sun-rays and then join the sun and shine 
together with it, then the Ashvins’ chariot rolls on on its 
usual course of the day which preserves and promotes 
humanity in life and leads it to advancement. 


यदापीतासो अंशवो गावो न दुह eth: 
यदा वाणीरनुषत प्र देवयन्तो अश्विना ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yadapitaso amsavo gavo na duhra udhabhih. 
Yad va vaniranusata pra devayanto asvina. 


When the stout stalks of lotus receive their drink 
of green vitality from the sun as cows draw and receive 
their milk with the udders from nature, and just when 
the stalks yield pranic energy as cows yield milk, and 
when the voices of humanity rise in adoration of the 
Ashvins in prayer. 


प्र द्युम्नाय प्र शवसे प्र नृषाह्याय शर्मणे । 
प्र दकश्चाय प्रचेतसा ॥ २०॥ 


468 RGVEDA 


20. Pra dyumnaya pra Savase pra nrsahyaya Ssar- 
mane. Pra daksaya pracetasa. 


Then for wealth, honour and excellence, for 
strength and courage and joy and prosperity for the 
peace and protection of humanity and achievement of 
dexterity and competence. O harbingers of light and 
awareness, bless them. 


यन्नूनं धीभिरश्विना faqatat निषीदथः 1 
यद्वा सुम्नेभिरुक्थ्या ॥ २९॥ 


21. Yannunam dhibhir-asvina pituryona nisidathah. 
Yad va sumnebhir-ukthya. 


Adorable Ashvins, when with your thoughts and 
acts of the day you go back and sit in the parental home 
with all rest in peace, then come again and bless us with 
peace and prosperity of an active life. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 10 
Ashvinau Devate, Pragatha Kanva Rshi 


यत्स्थो दीर्घप्रंसदानि agret रोचने fea: । 
यद्वा समुद्रे अध्याकते Jes त आ यातमश्विना ।॥ ९ ॥ 


| Yat stho dirghaprasadmani yad vado rocane 
divah. Yad va samudre adhyakrte grhe ’ta a yata- 
masvina. 

Wherever you abide, in lofty halls or in the light 
of the high heaven, or rest in the sea or space or in an 
ornamented palace, wherever you are, come to us, 
Ashvins, harbingers of light and inspiration. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 10 469 


यद्रा ag मन॑वे संमिपिक्षथुरे वेत्काण्वस्य ater 
बृहस्पतिं विश्वान्देवाँ अहं हु व इन्द्राविष्णू अश्विना - 
वाशुहेष॑सा ॥ २॥ 


2. Yad va yajnam manave sammimiksathurevet 
kanvasya bodhatam. Brhaspatim visvan devan 
aham huva indravisnu asvina-vasuhesasa. 


If you sprinkle the yajna of the learned man of 
thought with ghrta and feed it with havi compounds, 
know, value and sprinkle the yajna of the children of 
the sages too the same way. Ashvins, I invoke Brhaspati, 
lord of the cosmos and cosmic knowledge, all learned 
men of the world, Indra, ruler of world powers, and 
Vishnu, lord omnipresent. 


त्या न्व¶ज्विनां हवे Gea YA कृता। 
ययोरस्ति प्र ण॑: सख्यं देवेष्वध्याप्य॑म्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 
1. Tya nvasvina huve sudamsasa grbhe krta. 
Yayorasti pra nah sakhyam devesvadhyapyam. 
I invoke the twin Ashvins, great and generous 
achievers, who are committed to receive our homage at 


yajna and whose friendship and love for us is on top of 
all divine favours we can have. 


ययोरधि प्र यज्ञा stat सन्तिं सूरयः । ता यज्ञस्याध्वरस्य 
प्रचेतसा स्वधाथिर्या पिब॑तः सोम्यं wel is i 

4. Yayoradhi pra yajna asure santi surayah. Ta 
yajnasyadhvarasya pracetasa svadhabhirya 
pibatah somyam madhu. 


The Ashvins’ yajnas are specially performed 
even in the lands of the agnostics where they shine 


470 RGVEDA 


boldly and brilliantly. They are specialists of the yajnic 
programmes of creation and production without 
violence and they come in response to invocations and 
yajnic offerings and drink the sweets of soma. 


यदद्याज्विंना वपाग्यत्प्राक्स्थो वजिनीवसू । 
यद्‌ द्ुह्यव्यन॑वि तुर्वशो यदौ हुवे वामथ मा ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

5. Yadadyasvinavapag yat prak stho vajinivasu. Yad 
druhyavyanavi turvase yadau huve vamatha ma 
gatam. 


Ashvins, commanders of the wealth of 
victorious forces, today whether you are in the west or 
in the east, in the areas of hate, opposition and conflict, 
among the fast achievers or ordinary citizens, I invoke 
and call upon you, pray come to us. 


यदन्तरिक्षे पत॑थः पुरुभुजा aga रोद॑सी 3 
यद्वा स्वधाभिरधितिष्ठथो रथमत आ ्यातमणश्विना ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yadantarikse patathah purubhuja yad veme 


rodast anu. Yad va svadhabhir-adhitisthatho 
rathamata a yatamasvina. 


Ashvins, commanders of manifold wealth, 
power and popularity, whether you fly in the firmament 
or across heaven and earth, or you stay in your chariot 
with self-contained powers and provisions, from there 
come in response to our call. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 11 
Agni Devata, Vatsa Kanva Rshi 


AAD व्रतपा sth देव आ मर्त्येष्वा | 
त्वं यज्ञेष्वीडय॑ः ॥ १॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 11 471 
। Tvamagne vratapa asi deva a martyesva. 
Tvam yajnesvidyah. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord giver of light, you are 
preserver and protector of karmic laws, moral 
commitments and sacred vows among mortals. Hence 
you are adored and worshipped in yajnas. 


त्वम॑सि प्रशस्यो विदथेषु सहन्त्य । 
अं रथीरध्वराणाम्‌ २॥ 


2 Tvamasi praSsasyo vidathesu sahantya. 
Agne rathiradhvaranam. 


Agni, you are adorable in sacred congregations, 
the one patient, challenging and victor power, and 
pioneer and leader of non-violent yajnic programmes 
of creation and production in humanity. 


स त्वमस्मदप द्विषो! युयोधि जातवेदः 1 
उदेवीरग्ने अरातीः ।॥ ३॥ 


3: Sa tvamasmadapa dviso yuyodhi jatavedah. 
Adeviragne aratth. 


O jataveda, omniscient over everything in 
existence, ward off from us all forces of hate, jealousy 
and malignity and all impiety and selfish meanness. 
sid चित्सन्तमहं ast मर्त॑स्य रिपोः। 
नोप॑ वेषि जातवेदः ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Anti cit santamaha yajnam martasya ripoh. 
Nopa vesi jatavedah. 


O Jataveda, lord omniscient, you do not join or 
bless the yajna of an enemy of humanity even if the 


472 RGVEDA 


yajna and the performer is said to be close to divinity 
otherwise. 


मर्ता अमर्त्यस्य ते भूरि नाम॑ मनामहे । 
विप्रासो जातवेदसः ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Marta amartyasya te bhuri nama manamahe. 
Vipraso jatavedasah. 


O lord immortal and omniscient, we mortals, 
dedicated sages, know and adore your many many divine 
names which describe your multiple roles in the 
universe, (names such as Agni, Vayu and Aditya and so 
on). 


विप्रं faurats da देवं मतीस ऊतयें। 
srt गीर्भिर्हवामहे ६ ॥ 

6. Vipram vipraso’vase devam martasa Uutaye. 
Agnim girbhir-havamahe. 


With songs of adoration, we, mortal sages, 
invoke and exalt Agni, lord all knowing, self-refulgent 
and generous, for our protection, progress and well 
being. 


आ a वत्सो मनो! यमत्पर माच्चिंत्सधरस्थात्‌। 
अग्ने त्वांकामया गिरा ॥ ७॥ 

Te A te vatso mano yamat paramaccit sadhasthdat. 
Agne tvam kamaya gira. 


The dear dedicated sage adores you and with 
words of love and faith prays for your attention from 
the highest heaven of light. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 11 473 


पुरुत्रा हि सदृङ्ङसि विशो विश्वा अनु प्रभुः | 
समत्सु त्वा हवामहे ।॥। ८ ॥ 


Gi Purutra hi sadrnhnasi viso visva anu prabhuh. 
Samatsu tva havamahe. 


You are the universal eye watching the entire 
humanity of the world as master and ruler. As such, O 
lord, we invoke and call upon you in our battles of life. 


समत्स्विमव॑से वाजयन्तो हवामहे । 
वाजेषु चित्रराधसम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Samatsvagnim-avase vajayanto havamahe. 
Vajesu citraradhasam. 


We, seekers of strength and fighters for victory, 
invoke and adore Agni, omnipotent power of wondrous 
munificence and achievement, for protection, defence 
and advancement in our struggles and contests of life. 


प्रतो हि कमीड्यो अध्वरेषु सनाच्य होता नव्य॑श्च सत्सि । 
स्वां चाये तन्वं पिप्रय॑स्वाऽस्मभ्यं च सोभंगमा य॑जस्व ॥ Qo 


10. Pratno hi kamidyo adhvaresu sanacca hota 
navyasca satsi. Svam cagne tanvam piprayasva- 
*smabhyam ca saubhagama yajasva. 


Agni, eternal and blissfully adorable lord, 
worshipped in sacred congregations since time 
immemorial, presiding over yajnas as the most youthful 
performer and deity ancient and latest at the newest 
occasions, carry on the cosmic yajna, nourish and 
augment the universe as your own physical 
manifestation, and bring us all good fortune and well 
being of life. 


474 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 12 
Indra Devata, Parvata Kanva Rshi 


य इन्द्र सोपपात॑मो मद॑: शविष्ठ ada | 
येना हंसि न्य१त्रिणं तमीमहे ॥ ९॥ 


ly Ya indra somapatamo madah savistha cetati. 
Yena hamsi nyatrinam tamimahe. 


Indra, lord most potent, highest protector and 
promoter of the beauty and joy of life, that ecstatic 
passion of yours which universally pervades, manifests 
and reveals your might and glory and by which you 
destroy the negative forces of life, we adore and pray for. 


येना ashanti वेपयन्तं cautery | 
येना समुद्रमाविथा तमीमहे ॥ २ ॥ 


0.0 Yena dasagvam-adhrigum vepayantam svarna- 
ram. Yena samudram-avitha tamimahe. 


That omnipotent passion and ecstasy of yours 
by which you protect and promote the individual soul 
working with ten faculties of perception and volition, 
the unchallengeable wind and electric energy, the solar 
radiation which shakes and vibrates, and the ocean of 
water on earth and in space, that we adore, that we pray 
for. 


येन सिन्धुं महीर पो र्था इव waited: | 
पन्थामृतस्य यातं वे तमीं महे nau 


3; Yena sindhum mahirapo rathan iva pracodayah. 
Panthamrtasya yatave tamimahe. 


That power and passion of ecstasy by which you 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 475 


energise and move the river and the sea, the earths and 
waters like rolling chariots to flow and follow the path 
of the divine law of nature, that we adore, that we pray 
for, to follow the path of truth and yajna ourselves too. 


इमं स्तोम॑मभिष्टये घृतं न aia: | 
येना नु सद्य ओज॑सा aafaran «ul 


4. Imam stomam-abhistaye ghrtam na putama- 
drivah. Yena nu sadya ojasa vavaksitha. 


Lord of clouds and mountains, commander of 
adamantine will and power of ecstasy, pray accept this 
song of adoration, radiant and pure like sanctified ghrta, 
by which we adore and pray for that power and ecstasy 
by which, through your splendour and glory, you reveal 
yourself in manifestation for ever. 


इमं जुंषस्व गिर्वणः समुद्र इव पिन्वते | 
इन्द्र विश्वभिरू तिभिंर्ववक्षिथ।॥ ५॥ 

>. Imam jusasva girvanah samudra iva pinvate. 
Indra visvabhir-utibhir-vavaksitha. 


O lord adorable and worshipped, accept and 
cherish this song of homage and celebration which rolls 
and rises and swells you too like the sea, and you too, O 
lord omnipotent, manifest in glory higher and higher 
with all modes of protection and promotion. 


यो al देवः Wad: सखित्वनाय मामहे I 
दिवो न वृष्टिं प्रथय॑न्ववक्धिथ neu 


6. Yo no devah paravatah sakhitvanaya mamahe. 
Divo na vrstim prathayan vavaksitha. 


The lord self-refulgent, to extend the grace of 


476 RGVEDA 


his love and friendship to us, waxes from heaven and 
blesses us like intense showers of abundant rain from 
the regions of light. 


व॒ वक्षुर॑स्य chad उत AA गभ॑स्त्योः | 
यत्सूर्यो न रोद॑सी अवर्धयत्‌  ॥७॥ 
भ Vavaksurasya ketava uta vajro gabhastyoh. 


Yat suryo na rodasi avardhayat. 


The banners of his manifestation and the 
thunderbolt in his hands exalt his glory as the sun 
illuminates and glorifies heaven and earth. 


यदि प्रवृद्ध सत्पते सहस्त्रं महिषां अघ॑ः 1 
आदत्त इद्रियं महि प्र वावृधे॥८॥ 

8. Yadi pravrddha satpate sahasram mahisan 
aghah. Adit ta indriyam mahi pra vavrdhe. 


O lord exalted, protector and defender of truth 
and positive reality, when you strike down hundreds of 
evils and great calamities, then your glory and the 
grandeur of your creation rises beyond measure. 
इन्द्रः सूर्य स्य रस्मिधिर्न्यरशसानमोंषति। 
अगिर्वनेव सासहिः प्र वावृधे nen 

9. Indrah suryasya rasmibhir-nyarsasadnamosati. 
Agnirvaneva sasahih pra vavrdhe. 


When Indra with sun-rays kills antilife agents 
such as disease carrying bacteria in the atmosphere, he 
rises victorious and exalted like fire over forests. 

इयं तं ऋत्वियांवती eftfatta नवीयसी । 
सपर्यन्ती' पुरुप्रिया िमीत इत्‌ gon 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 477 


10. Lyam ta rtviyavati dhitireti naviyasi. 
Saparyanti purupriya mimita it. 


O lord, this ever new divine intelligence of yours 
constantly operative in nature according to time and 
seasons is universally sympathetic, loving and 
honoured, serves life and the environment, and 
continues to create and cover new forms of life and 
nature. 


गर्भो aaed देवयुः sod पुनीत आनुषक्‌ | 
स्तोयैरिन्द्रस्य वावृधे भिमी'त्‌ इत्‌ ॥ eeu 


11. Garbho yajnasya devayuh kratum punita anusak. 
Stomair-indrasya vavrdhe mimita it. 


The devotee of Indra and lover of divinities of 
nature and humanity, enactor of yajna as well as shaped 
by yajna, continuously performs holy actions with 
sanctity and faith, creates new forms of holy actions 
and rises in life by divine songs and tributes in honour 
of Indra. 


सनिर्मित्रस्य पप्रथ इन्द्रः सोम॑स्य titers । 
प्राची वारीव सुन्वते मिमीत इत्‌ ॥ १२॥ 


12. Sanir-mitrasya papratha indrah somasya pitaye. 
Pract vaSiva sunvate mimita it. 


Indra, friend and benefactor of humanity and 
all loving beings, rises in omnipresent glory to watch 
and protect the beautiful world of his creation, and, like 
the prime voice of the Veda, reveals new forms of truth 
for the dedicated maker of yajnic soma. 


478 RGVEDA 


यं fant उक्थर्वांहसोऽ भिप्रमन्दुरायवंः। 
घृतं न पिप्य आसन्यृतस्य यत्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Yam vipra ukthavahaso’bhipramandurayavah. 
Ghrtam na pipya asanyrtasya yat. 


Indra is the lord whom vibrant sages and people 
in general all adore and exalt, singing hymns of worship 
in his honour, and I too offer songs of adoration while I 
offer oblations of ghrta into the vedi of yajna. 


उत स्वराजे अदितिः स्तोममिन्द्रय जीजनत्‌ | 
पुरु प्रशस्तमूतय॑ ऋतस्य यत्‌॥ ९२४ ॥ 


14. Uta svaraje aditih stomam-indraya jijanat. 
Puruprasastam-utaya rtasya yat. 


And mother Prakrti, inviolable Nature, too 
bursts into songs of adoration in honour of self-refulgent 
Indra, which, being all elevating and inspiring, moves 
him to protection and advancement of the world of his 
dynamic creation. 


अभि ada ऊतयेऽ नुंषत shea । 
न देव विव्र॑ता हरी! ऋतस्य यत्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Abhi vahnaya utaye ’nusata praSsastaye. 
Na deva vivrata hari rtasya yat. 


O lord, the sages who conduct the yajna of divine 
adoration, and nature’s powers which conduct the yajna 
of world creation, sing songs for adoration of divinity 
and for protection of life. O lord divine, let not these 
conductive powers ever relent in the creative process 
which is the dynamic course of existence, cosmic yajna. 


16. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 12 479 
arenafa-g विष्णवि ast घ frat आप्त्ये । 
यद्वा मरुत्सु मन्द॑से समिन्दुभिः ॥ ९६ ॥ 


Yat somam-indra visnavi yad va gha trita aptye. 
Yad va marutsu mandase samindubhih. 


Indra, the soma nectar which you infuse in the 


sun and in the three worlds of experience, 1.e., earth, 
heaven and firmament and which you infuse in the winds 
and enjoy to the last drop, we pray for. 


7; 


यद्वा शक्र परावति समुद्रे अधि ARSE | 
अस्माकमित्सुते रणा समिन्दुभिः ॥ ९७॥ 


Yad va Sakra paravati samudre adhi mandase. 
Asmakamit sute rana samindubhih. 


And which, O lord of power, you infuse and 


energise in the far off sea and in this soma distilled by 
us and enjoy to the last drop - we pray for. 


18. 


यद्वासि सुन्वतो get यज॑मानस्य सत्पते | 
उक्थे वा यस्य रण्य॑सि समिन्दुभिः॥ १९८ ॥ 


Yad vasi sunvato vrdho yajamanasya satpate. 
Ukthe va yasya ranyasi samindubhih. 


And you, O lord protector of eternal truth, who 


lead the yajamana maker of soma to progress in his yajna 
and songs of adoration and enjoy the soma homage to 
the last drop, we pray for. 


19; 


देवंदेवं वोऽ da इन्द्र॑मिन्द्रं गृणीषणि । 
अधां यज्ञाय॑ तुर्वणे व्यानशुः 1 ९९ ॥ 


Devamdevam vo’vasa indramindram grnisani. 
Adha yajnaya turvane vyanasuh. 


480 RGVEDA 


O dedicated performers of yajna, for the sake 
of your protection and progress in your acts of homage 
and adoration, may all these soma joys of life reach you 
to every generous and brilliant yajaka, to every yajaka 
of power and prominence, for the elimination of all 
obstructions in the way of corporate action. 


aatuadsated सोपेभिः सोमपातमम्‌ । 
होत्राभिरिन्द्रं वावृधु्व्यौ नशु: ॥ २०॥ 

20. Yajnebhir-yajnavahasam somebhih somapdata- 
mam. Hotrabhir-indram vavrdhur-vyanasuh. 


And may all participants in corporate action join 
in unison and adore and exalt Indra, greatest protector 
and promoter of the joy of soma and the united action, 
with homage, with offers of soma and oblations of havi 
into the sacred fire of joint and creative living for the 
common good. 


महीरस्य प्रणीतयः पूर्वीरुत प्रश॑स्तयः। 
विश्वा वसुनि दाशुषे व्यानशुः ॥ २१॥ 

21. Mahirasya pranitayah purviruta prasastayah. 
Visva vasuni dasuse vyanasuh. 


And may the eternal lights of this lord Indra’s 
splendour and guidance come to bless the generous 
yajaka with all wealths and honours of the world. 


इनदरं वृत्राय हन्त॑वे Sara दधिरे पुरः । 
इन्द्र वाणीरनूषता समोज॑से Rau 


22. Indram vrtraya hantave devaso dadhire purah. 
Indram vaniranusata samojase. 


Saints and sages honour and adore Indra as their 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 481 


first and foremost leader and guide for the destruction 
of darkness and evil, and their songs of homage and 
prayer too adore and glorify Indra for the attainment of 
light and splendour. 


महान्तं महिना वयं स्तोमेभिर्हवनश्रुत॑म्‌। 
अकरि प्र णोनुमः समोज॑से i २३॥ 


23. Mahantam mahina vayam stomebhir-havana- 
srutam. Arkair-abhi pra nonumah samojase. 


With highest songs of adoration and offers of 
homage we worship omnipotent Indra who listens and 
responds to our call and prayers and we bow to him for 
the attainment of strength and splendour. 


न यं विविक्तो रोद॑सी नान्तरिक्षाणि विणम्‌ । 
अमादिदस्य तित्विषे समोज॑सः ॥ २४ ॥ 

24. Na yam vivikto rodasi nantariksani vajrinam. 
Amadidasya titvise samojasah. 


Neither heaven nor earth nor the middle regions 
comprehend the lord of thunderous power, nor do they 
shake or disengage him. Indeed the universe shines and 
vibrates by the one and sole power of this lord of 
splendour. 


यदिन्द्र पृतनाज्ये देवास्त्वा दधिरे पुरः। 
आदित्ते हर्यता हरीं ववक्षतुः ॥ २५५ ॥ 


25. Yadindra prtandjye devastva dadhire purah. 
Adit te haryata hari vavaksatuh. 


Since the learned sages have accepted and 
followed you as front leader for the attainment of victory 


482 RGVEDA 


in their struggles of life, we pray, may your radiant 
currents of divine energy reveal your presence and bring 
us the vision of divinity for our illumination. 


यदा वृत्रं नदीवृतं शव॑सा वचचिज्नव॑धीः। 
आदित्ते हर्यता हरीं ववक्षतुः ॥ २६ ॥ 
26. Yada vrtram nadivrtam savasa vajrinn-avadhih. 


Adit te haryata hari vavaksatuh. 


O lord of the thunderbolt, as with your divine 
might you destroy the negativities of darkness and 
drought which obstruct the flow of the waters of life, 
we pray may your divine currents of light and will reveal 
your power and presence to us. 


यदा ते विष्णुरोजंसा त्रीणि पदा विचक्रमे । 
आदित्ते हर्यता हरी ववक्षतुः ॥ २७॥ 

27. Yada te visnurojasa trini pada vicakrame. 
Adit te haryata hari vavaksatuh. 


Since the sun, by virtue of your might and 
refulgence reaches and illuminates the three worlds of 
existence, we pray, your radiations of light reveal your 
presence and illuminate our soul. 


यदा तें हर्यता हरी वावृधाते दिवेदिवे | 
आदित्ते विश्वा भुव॑नानि येमिरे ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Yada te haryata hari vavrdhate divedive. 
Adit te visva bhuvanani yemire. 


Since the radiations of your dynamic forces 
expand day by day, the entire worlds of the expansive 
universe are sustained in order in obedience to your law. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 483 


यदा ते मारुतीर्विंशस्तुभ्य॑पिन्द्र नियेमिरे । 
आदित्ते विश्वा भुव॑नानि येमिरे ॥ २९॥ 


19. Yada te marutir-visas-tubhyamindra niyemire. 
Adit te visva bhuvanani yemire. 


Since the entire world of vibrant winds and 
humanity bow to you in obedience to the divine law, 
the entire worlds of existence are sustained in the order 
of the divine law. 


यदा सूर्य॑ममुं दिवि शुक्रं ज्योतिरधारयः। 
आदित्ते विश्वा भुवनानि येमिरे॥ zon 

30. = Yada suryam-amum divi Sukram jyotiradharayah. 
Adit te visva bhuvanani yemire. 
Since you have sustained that sun, radiant light, 
pure and powerful, the entire worlds of existence 
observe your divine law. 
इमां d इन्द्र सुष्टुतिं विप्रं sate effet: | 
जामिं पदेव पिप्र॑तीं प्राध्वरे।॥ ३९॥ 

31. Imam ta indra sustutim vipra iyarti dhitibhih. 
Jamim padeva pipratim pradhvare. 


Indra, glorious lord of existence, the vibrant sage 
raises his voice and directs this joyous hymn of 
adoration and prayer to you in sincerity of thought, word 
and deed, which rises as if step by step in Holy 
Communion of yajna to you as to his own friend and 
brother. 


यद॑स्य धाम॑नि प्रिये स॑मीचीनासो अस्व॑रन्‌। 
नाभां यनज्ञस्य॑ दोहना प्राध्वरे ॥ ३२॥ 


484 RGVEDA 


32. Yadasya dhamani priye samicinaso asvaran. 
Nabha yajnasya dohana pradhvare. 


When in the favourite hall of this lord Indra, 
the congregations on the yajna vedi, exuberant with 
soma and fragrance, raise the voice of adoration and 
prayer in unison aspiring for the milky gifts of yajna— 
सुवीर्यं स्वश्व्यं सुगव्य॑मिन्द्र दद्धि नः। 
होतेव पूर्व चित्तये प्राध्वरे 1 ३३ ॥ 

33.  Suviryam svasvyam sugavyam-indra daddhi nah. 
Hoteva purvacittaye pradhvare. 


Then O lord omnipotent and self-refulgent, like 
a generous host of cosmic yajna, bring us the wealth of 
prosperity and progress and a brave and honourable 
progeny as the first gift and attainment of the yajna. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 13 
Indra Devata, Narada Kanva Rshi 
इन्द्र॑ सुतेषु सोमेषु क्रतु पुनीत उवथ्य॑म्‌ । 
विदे वृधस्य दक्षसो महान्हि षः॥९॥ 
| Indrah sutesu somesu kratum punita ukthyam. 
Vide vrdhasya daksaso mahan hi sah. 


When a special yajnic programme for the 
realisation of special knowledge, power and expertise 
in a particular field is completed with hymns of thanks 
and praise to divinity, then Indra, lord omnipotent and 
omniscient, sanctifies the joint endeavour of holiness 
and blesses the programme with success. Great is he. 


स dae व्योमनि देवानां सद॑ने ger: | 
सुपारः सुश्रवस्तमः सम॑प्सुलित्‌॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 485 


2. Sa prathame vyomani devanam sadane vrdhah. 
Suparah susravastamah samapsujit. 


At the first expansive manifestation of space, at 
the centre of all divine mutations of nature, he is the 
efficient cause of nature’s evolution, supreme pilot, most 
abundant and most glorious, omnipotent victor over 
conflicts and negativities in the way of evolution of 
nature and humanity in relation to will and action. 


तमह्वे बाज॑सातय इन्द्रं भराय शुष्मिर्णम्‌। 
भवां नः सुम्ने अन्त॑मः सखा वृधे ॥ ३॥ 

2 Tamahve vajasataya indram bharaya Susminam. 
Bhava nah sumne antamah sakha vrdhe. 


That Indra, potent and abundant, I invoke for 
victory in the race for life, for growth and fulfilment. O 
lord, be our friend, our innermost centre of conscience 
for our progress, peace and all round well being. 


इयं त॑ इन्द्र गिर्वणो रातिः क्ष॑रति सुन्वतः। 
मन्दानो अस्य बर्हिषो वि राजसि।॥ ४॥ 


4. Tyam ta indra girvano ratih ksarati sunvatah. 
Mandano asya barhiso vi rajasi. 


O lord adorable and adored, Indra, this abundant 
generosity of yours who create and enact this soma yajna 
of the universe rains in showers and flows free, in which 
you rejoice, shine refulgent and rule over the yajnic vedi 
of nature in evolution. 


नूनं तदिन्द्र दद्दि नो यत्त्वां सुन्वन्त ईम॑हे । 
रयिं न॑श्चित्रमा भ॑रा स्वर्विदम्‌ ॥५॥ 


486 RGVEDA 


5: Nunam tadindra daddhi no yat tva sunvanta 
tmahe. Rayim nascitrama bhara svarvidam. 


Indra, lord of power and potential, bless us with 
that wealth and prosperity, abundant and versatile, bear 
and bring us that power and potential full of strength 
and light of joy which we ask of you and pray for in our 
joint yajnic efforts of creation and cooperation. 


स्तोता यत्ते feratttonfaustefater: | 
वया इवानु, रोहते जुषन्त यत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Stota yat te vicarsanir-atiprasardhayad girah. 
Vaya ivanu rohate jusanta yat. 

When the celebrant, perceptive, loud and bold, 
sings his songs with passion, then, as the songs are 
accepted and cherished, they rise in response to the 
acceptance and approval like branches of a tree. 

प्रलवज्ननया गिर॑ श्रृणुधी ज॑रितुर्हवम्‌। 

मदेमदे ववक्षिथा सुकृत्व॑ने ॥ ७ ॥ 
Pratnavajjanaya girah srnudhi jariturhavam. 

Mademade vavaksitha sukrtvane. 


Indra, listen to the celebrant’s call, create and 
speak in appreciation as before and, with every 
delightful song, give holy recognition to the man of good 
word and action. 


PUSH सूनृता आपो न Waa यतीः। 
अया धिया य उच्यते पतिर्दिवः ॥८॥ 


8. Krilantyasya sunrta apo na pravata yatth. 
Aya dhiya ya ucyate patirdivah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 487 


The divine words of this lord, Indra, sparkle and 
flow like streams down the slopes, Indra who is 
celebrated as the lord and master of the regions of light 
and joy. 


उतो पतिर्य उच्यते कृष्टीनामेकः इद्ुशी । 
नमोवृधेरंवस्युभि॑ः सुते र॑ण neu 
a, Uto patirya ucyate krstinameka idvasi. 


Namovrdhair-avasyubhih sute rana. 


And lord and master he is called, of the people 
also, the one and only master, controller and sustainer. 
O lord, delight in the soma, songs and acts of homage 
created, sung and performed by devotees who exalt you 
with homage and obedience and aspire for sustenance 
and protection. 


स्तुहि श्रुतं विपश्चितं हरी यस्यं प्रसक्षिणा। 
गन्तारा दाशुषो! गृहं नमस्विनः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Stuhi srutam vipascitam hart yasya prasaksina. 
Gantara dasuso grham namasvinah. 


Praise the lord who is wise and all watching and 
whose glory resounds all over the universe, and whose 
overwhelming gifts of blessings flow and reach the 
house of the obedient and generous giver of charity. 
तूतुजानो म॑हेमतेऽ velar: प्रुषितप्सुभिः | 
आ याहि यज्लमाणुशिः siete ते॥ ९९॥ 

11. Tutujano mahemate ’svebhih prusitapsubhih. 
A yahi yajnamasubhih samiddhi te. 


O lord instant mover and omnipresent, mighty 


488 RGVEDA 


wise, pray come to our yajna by the fastest radiations of 
light draped in beauty and majesty. Peace be with all 
celebrants, that’s your gift only. 


इन्द्र॑ शविष्ठ सत्पते र॒यिं गृणत्सुं धारय । 
श्रव॑ः सूरिभ्यो अमृतं वसुत्वनम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Indra Ssavistha satpate rayim grnatsu dharaya. 


Sravah suribhyo amrtam vasutvanam. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, protector of truth and 
promoter of the truthful, vest the celebrants with wealth 
and wisdom and bring honour and fame and riches of 
immortal value for the wise, bold and brilliant 
intellectuals. 


हवे त्वा सूर उदिते हवे मध्यन्दिने fea: | 
जुषाण इन्द्र afar आ ग॑हि ॥९३॥ 

13. Have tva sura udite have madhyandine divah. 
Jusana indra saptibhirna a gahi. 


Indra, lord of refulgence, I invoke you at the 
rise of the sun, at the middle of day from the heights of 
heaven. O lord loving and kind, come by instant 
radiations of light and take us on with divine blessings. 


आ तू ग॑हि प्र तु द्र॑व मत्स्वा सुतस्य TAA: | 
तन्तुं तनुष्व पूर्व्य यथा विदे ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. A tu gahi pra tu drava matsva sutasya gomatah. 
Tantum tanusva purvyam yatha vide. 


Come lord instantly, take us on at the yajna, be 
kind and gracious, let the flames of fire rise with the 
joyous music of Vedic hymns and oblations of the gifts 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 489 


of earth. Extend the eternal link of life so that we join 
you, we join the cosmic yajna, and we join with the life 
link of our fore-fathers and mother earth, so that we 
may know that link and live it too with our future 
generations. 


यच्छक्रासि परावति यदर्वावति वृत्रहन्‌ | 
यद्वा समुद्रे अन्ध॑सोऽ वितेद॑सि ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Yacchakrasi paravati yadarvavati vrtrahan. 
Yad va samudre andhaso’ vitedasi. 


O lord omnipotent, destroyer of darkness and 
obstruction, who are far off in space and closest at hand, 
in the sea and in the skies, wherever and everywhere 
you are the protector of life and of the food for life. 


इन्द्रं वर्धन्तु नो गिर्‌ इन्द्रं सुतास इन्द॑वः। 
इन्द्र हविष्मतीर्विशो! अराणिषुः ues 

16. Indram vardhantu no gira indram sutasa indavah. 
Indre havismatirviso aranisuh. 


Let our songs of adoration exalt the lord 
omnipotent. Let the soma essences of our yajnic 
performance in unison do honour to the lord. Let the 
citizens of the world bearing homage of self sacrifice 
in hand rejoice in the gifts and glories of Indra. 


तसिद्विप्रां अवस्यवः प्रवत्व॑तीभिरूतिभिः। 
इन्द्रं क्चोणीर॑वर्धयन्वयाडइव ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Tamid vipra avasyavah pravatvatibhir-utibhih. 
Indram ksonir-avardhayan vaya iva. 


Vibrant sages, aspirants for protection and 


490 RGVEDA 


progress of the world, exalt Indra with abundant songs 
of praise with gratitude for divine protection. Indeed, 
the earths and their children all, like growing branches 
of a tree, do him honour and celebrate his glory. 


त्रिक॑द्ुकेषु चेत॑नं card! यज्ञम॑तल्रत। 
तमिद्धर्धन्तु नो गिर॑ः सदावुंधम्‌।॥ ecu 


18. Trikadrukesu cetanam devaso yajnamatnata. 
Tamid vardhantu no girah sadavrdham. 


Brilliant people and divine forces of nature all 
enact and expand the cosmic yajna of the lord’s creation 
in all the three worlds of heaven, earth and the 
firmament. Let our voices too celebrate the same 
omniscient lord of the expansive universe and thereby 
rise in meaning and value. 


स्तोता यत्ते stad उक्शथान्युतुथा दधे | 
शुचिः पावक उच्यते सो sigan ९९॥ 

19. Stota yat te anuvrata uktthanyrtutha dadhe. 
Sucih pavaka ucyate so adbhutah. 


The real celebrant is the person dedicated to 
the observance of your discipline of divine law , the 
one who creates and sings songs of adoration according 
to the seasons of time, songs in which the lord of wonder 
and majesty is celebrated as radiant and pure who 
purifies the celebrant too into radiance and sinlessness. 


तदिद द्रस्य॑ चेतति यह WAG, धाम॑सु | 
मनो यत्रा वि तदुधुर्विचे'तसः neon 


20. (वदाव rudrasya cetati yahvam pratnesu dhamasu. 
Mano yatra vi tad dadhurvicetasah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 491 


That same omnipotence of Indra as Rudra, lord 
of natural justice, is ever awake and shines in the ancient 
regions of the universe wherein the wise and wakeful 
sages concentrate and stabilise their mind through 
meditation in thought experiments. 


afd मे सख्यमावर sued पाहयन्ध॑ंसः। 
येन विश्वा अति द्विषो अरतारिम।॥ eeu 


21. Yadi me sakhyamavara imasya pahyandasah. 
Yena visva ati dviso atarima. 


O lord, if you graciously accept me as a friend, 
then save this blind-folded world of ignorance, save 
this soma vitality of life’s positivity too by which we 
may win over all the forces of hate and enmity in the 
world. 


कदा त॑ इन्द्र गिर्वणः स्तोता भ॑वाति शन्त॑मः। 
कदा नो गव्ये अश्व्ये वसौ दधः ॥ २२॥ 

22. Kada (व indra girvanah stota bhavati santamah. 
Kada no gavye asvye vasau dadhah. 


Indra, lord adorable, lord of all adorations, when 
would your celebrant settle in perfect peace? When 
would you establish us in the stable wealth of lands, 
cows and the holy voice, horses, advancement and the 
ultimate wealth and aim of life? 


उत ते सुष्टुता हरी वृष॑णा वहतो रथ॑म्‌ । 
sated मदिन्त॑मं यमीम॑हे ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Uta te sustuta hari vrsana vahato ratham. 
Ajuryasya madintamam yamimahe. 


O lord beyond age and suffering, mighty 


492 RGVEDA 


adorable forces of nature, gravitation and radiation draw 
your cosmic chariot. We adore and pray for the favour 
of such lord of universal joy. 


तमीमहे पुरुष्टुतं यहं प्रतराभिर॑रूतिभिः। 
नि बर्हिषि प्रिये स॑ददधंद्धिता ॥२४॥ 


24. Tamimahe purustutam yahvam pratnabhir- 
utibhih. Ni barhisi priye sadadadha dvita. 


We worship that universally adored, omnipotent 
lord with his universal modes of protection and progress 
who is both just and merciful, promoter and restrainer 
and who pervades the beautiful world of cosmic 
existence and watches over the cosmic yajna. 


वर्धस्वा सु पुरुष्टुत ऋषिषु ताभिरूतिभिः। 
धुक्षस्व पिप्युषीमिषमवा च नः ॥ २५॥ 

25. Vardhasva su purustuta rsistutabhirutibhih. 
Dhuksasva pipyusim-isam-ava ca nah. 


Help us advance and prosper, lord universally 
adored and celebrated by sages, protect us with all help 
and bless us with abundant nutriments for body and 
mind. 

इन्द्र त्वम॑वितेद॑ सीत्था edaat अंद्रिवः। 

ऋतादियर्मिं ते धियं मनोयुज॑म्‌ ॥ २६॥ 
26. Indra tvamavitedasittha stuvato adrivah. 

Rtadiyarmi te dhiyam manoyujam. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, controller of clouds and 
mountains, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and 
punishment, you are the saviour and protector of the 
celebrant who thus adores you. I concentrate and direct 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 493 


my thoughtful intelligence with controlled mind arisen 
from meditation on the laws of universal truth and divine 
law to you. 


इह त्या सधमाद्या युजानः सोम॑पीतये । 
हरीं इन्द्र Uda अभि स्व॑र ॥ २७॥ 


27. Ihatya sadhamadya yujanah somapitaye. 
Hart indra pratadvasu abhi svara. 


Indra, lord all gracious, engaging your divine 
forces of cosmic dynamics working in centrifugal and 
centripetal complementarity and creating the world’s 
wealth and joy with you, pray come here, shine on top 
of our joint endeavour of creative production and bless 
our yajna. 


अभि स्व॑रन्तु ये aa ware: सक्षत श्रिय॑म्‌। 
उतो मरूत्व॑तीर्विशों अभि wal: ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Abhi svarantu ye tava rudrasah saksata sriyam. 
Uto marutvatirviso abhi prayah. 


And let your enlightened celebrants dedicated 
to the wealth of beauty, grace and culture with love and 
justice, and all the vibrant communities engaged in 
creative production come and join this delightful yajnic 
endeavour for the common good in a state of prosperity 
and progressive stability. 


इमा अस्य udda: पदं जुंषन्त afefe 
नाभां यज्ञस्य सं द॑धुर्यथां विदे ॥ २९॥ 


29. Ima asya praturtayah padam jusanta yad divi. 
Nabha yajnasya sam dadhuryatha vide. 


All these dynamic communities dedicated to this 


494 RGVEDA 


lord of glory know the highest rung of the existential 
ladder to attain that state of joy which is in the light of 
divinity, they join together here on earth on the holy 
seat of universal yajna and eliminate negativities so that 
they may attain the state of enlightenment and eternal 


JOY. 
अयं दीर्घाय चक्ष॑से प्राचि प्रयत्यध्वरे | 
मिमीते यज्ञमानुषण्विचक्ष्यं ॥ ३० ॥ 


30. Ayam dirghaya caksase praci prayatyadhvare. 
Mimite yajnam-anusag-vicaksya. 


This power of universal vision and potential in 
advance of the cosmic yajna of creative evolution 
instantly and simultaneously measures and projects the 
cosmic plan so that it can be watched and assessed on a 
long term basis from the beginning to the end. 


वृषायमिन्द्र ते रथ॑ उतो ते वृष॑णा et | 
वृषा त्वं श॑तक्रतो वृषा हवं: ॥ ३९ ॥ 


31. Vrsayamindra te ratha uto te vrsana hari. 
Vrsa tvam Satakrato vrsa havah. 


Indra, this cosmic chariot of yours moving on 
and on is exuberant and generous, the natural forces 
which carry it on are mighty, you, lord of infinite actions 
are generous and inexhaustible, and the homage and 
prayer offered to you is highly effective and infinitely 
rewarding. 


वृषा ग्रावा वृषा मदो वृषा सोमो अयं Ya: | 
aut यज्ञो यमिन्व॑सि वृषा ga: ॥ ३२॥ 


32. Vrsa grava vrsa mado vrsa somo ayam sutah. 
Vrsa yajno yaminvasi vrsa havah. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 14 495 


Abundant and mighty are your clouds of 
showers, powerful is your excitement and joy, abundant 
is the beauty and power of this soma you have created 
in the world of existence, mighty and far reaching is 
the beauty of the cosmic dynamics you have enacted 
and energise, and mighty is the order and command of 
your invitation to life. 


वर्षा त्वा वृष॑णं हुवे विंच्ित्राभिंरूतिभिंः। 
वावन्थ fe प्रतिष्टुतिं वृषा हव॑ः 133 ॥ 

33.  Vrsa tva vrsanam huve vajrin-cirabhir-utibhih. 
Vavantha hi pratistutim vrsa havah. 

Indra, I, your celebrant, am vibrant, exuberant 
and powerful too by your grace. Lord of thunder and 
clouds, [invoke you who command inexhaustible power 
and generosity along with your wonderful protections 
and modes of advancement. You listen and you love 
and bless the songs of adoration and prayer, and the 


invocation and prayers addressed to you are powerful 
and rewarding. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 14 
Indra Devata, Goshuktyashvasuktinau Kanvayanau Rshis 
यदिन्द्राहं यथा त्वमीशीय वस्व एकः इत्‌। 
स्तोता मे गोष॑खा स्यात्‌॥ ९॥ 


ie Yadindraham yatha tvamiStya vasva eka it. 
Stota me gosakha syat. 


Indra, lord of universal knowledge, power and 
prosperity, if I were, like you, the sole master of wealth, 
wisdom and power in my field, then pray may my 


496 RGVEDA 


dependent and celebrant also be blest with wealth and 
wisdom of the world. (Let all of us together be blest 
with abundance of wealth and wisdom under the social 
dispensation of our system of government and 
administration. ) 


शिक्चयमस्मै दित्सेयं शचीं पते मनीषिणे । 
यदहं गोप॑तिः स्याम्‌॥ २॥ 


2 S ikseyamasmai ditseyam Savipate manisine. 
Yadaham gopatih syam. 


O lord and master of world power and 
prosperity, Indra, if I were master of knowledge and 
controller of power, I would love to share and give 
wealth and knowledge to this noble minded person of 
vision and wisdom. 


धेनुष्ट इन्द्र सूनृता यज॑मानाय सुन्वते। 
गामश्वं पिप्युषी eeu 3 ॥ 

a. Dhenusta indra sunrta yajamanaya sunvate. 
Gamasvam pipusi duhe. 


Indra, the divine voice of your omniscience, 
omnipotence and bliss overflows with universal truth 
and rectitude of the law of existence and showers the 
abundance of prosperity and advancement upon the 
dedicated yajamana who distils and creates the soma of 
joy for the world. 


न तें वर्तास्ति राध॑स इन्द्रं देवो न ae: | 
यद्दित्स॑सि स्तुतो मघम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Na te vartasti radhasa indra devo na martyah. 
Yad ditsasi stuto magham. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 14 497 


Indra, when you are pleased to bless the 
celebrant with power, prosperity and excellence, then 
neither mortal nor immortal can restrain the abundant 
flow of your grace and generosity. 


यज्ञ इन्द्र॑मवर्धयद्य द्धूमिं व्यव॑र्तयत्‌ 
चक्छाण ओपशं दिवि।॥५॥ 

१ Yajna indram-avardhayad yad bhumim vyava- 
rtayat. Cakrana opasam divi. 


Yajna, joint creative endeavour which protects 
and replenishes the earth and environment, pleases and 
elevates Indra, the ruler, and creates a place of bliss in 
the light of heaven for the doer. 


agar ते वयं विश्वा धनानि जिग्युष॑ः। 
ऊतिमिन्द्रा चंणीमहे॥। ६ ॥ 

6. Vavrdhanasya te vayam visva dhanani jigyusah. 
Utimindra vrnimahe. 
Indra, we pray for your power and protection, 
the lord whose glory rises with the expansive universe 
and who rule over the entire wealth and power of the 
worlds of existence. 
व्य न्तरिश्चमतिरन्मदे सोम॑स्य रोचना। 
इन्द्रो Sahai ७ ॥ 

7. Vyantariksam-atiran-made somasya rocana. 
Indro yadabhinad valam. 


When Indra, lord omnipotent and blissful, 
eliminates all obstructions and negativities from our 
paths of progress, then we see the entire space in 


498 RGVEDA 


existence shines with light and overflows with the joy 
of soma bliss. 


Sal आजदद्धिरोभ्य आविष्कृण्वन्गुहा सतीः। 
अर्वाञ्चं नुनुदे वल्म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


Ud ga ajad-angirobhya aviskrnavan guha satth. 
Arvancam nunude valam. 


When the lord shakes up our psychic energies 
to the depths and throws out our darkness and 
negativities, then he sharpens our senses along with 
pranic energies and opens out our spiritual potential 
hidden in the cave of the heart. 


इन्द्रेण रोचना दिवो दुक्ठहानिं gear च । 
स्थिराणि न प॑राणुदे।॥ ९॥ 

9. Indrena rocana divo drlhani drmhitani ca. 
Sthirani na paranude. 


The bright and beautiful, blessed and blissful 
stars and planets of refulgent space, expansive, firm and 
constant by virtue of the omnipotence of Indra, no one 
can shake or dislodge from their position of stability. 


अपामूर्मिं्म॑दं fra स्तोमं इन्द्राजिरायते | 
fa ते मदां अराजिषुः ॥ ९० ॥ 
10. Apam-urmir-madanniva stoma indrajirayate. 
Vi te mada arajisuh. 
Like exulting waves of the sea, this hymn of 
adoration rises and reaches you, and the vibrations of 


your joyous response too emanate and pervade 
everywhere. 


॥ 15 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 14 499 
त्वं हि स्तोमवर्धन इन्द्रास्युंक्थवर्धं नः। 
स्तोतृणामुत भ॑द्रकृत्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


Tvam hi stomavardhana indrasyukthavar- 
dhanah. Stotrnamuta bhadrakrt. 


By you the songs of praise and adoration thrive 


and exalt, by you the songs of celebration and prayer 
vibrate and fructify. Indeed, you do all the good to the 
celebrants. 


i, 


इन्द्रमित्केशिना et सोमपेयाय aera: | 
so यज्ञं TAAL ९२॥ 


Indramit kesina hari somapeyaya vaksatah. 
Upa yajnam suradhasam. 


Radiations of light with expansive vibrations, 


herbs and trees with branches, leaves and filaments carry 
the spirit of divinity and nature’s energy to the creative 
centres of life’s bounty. 


13; 


अपां फेनैन नमुचेः शिरं इन्द्रोद॑वर्तयः। 
विश्वा यदजयः स्पृधः ॥ ९३॥ 


Apam phenena namuceh Sira indrodavartayah. 
Visva yadajayah sprdhah. 


When you fight out the adversaries of life and 


humanity, you crush the head of the demon of drought 
and famine with the sea mist and the cloud. 


14. 


मायाभिरुत्सिसरंप्सत इन्द्र द्यामारुरुक्षतः। 
अव दस्यँःरधूनुथाः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


Mayabhir-utsisrpsata indra dyam-aruruksatah. 
Ava dasyunradhunuthah. 


500 RGVEDA 


With your mysterious powers and tactics, you 
destroy the crafty thieves and saboteurs roaming around 
even if they have risen to the heights of clouds. 
असुन्वामिन्द्र संसदं fadeit व्य॑नाशयः। 
सोमपा उत्तरो भव॑न्‌ ॥ १५॥ 

15. Asunvamindra samsadam visucim vyandSsayah. 
Somapa uttaro bhavan. 

Indra, protector of the creative joy and 
prosperity of life and humanity in a state of peace, you 
being the better and higher of all others, you frustrate, 


dismiss and dissolve the factious assembly which has 
failed to be creative and cooperative as a corporate body. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 15 
Indra Devata, Goshuktyashvasuktinau Rshis 
तम्वभि प्रगायत पुरुहूतं Wes । 
इन्द्रं गीर्भिस्तविषमा विवासत ui ९॥ 


im Tamvabhi pra gayata puruhutam purustutam. 
Indram girbhis-tavisama vivasata. 


O celebrants, glorify Indra, universally invoked 
and praised, the lord who blazes with light and power, 
serve him with words and actions and let him shine forth 
in your life and achievement. 
यस्यं द्विबर्हसो बृहत्सहो arene रोद॑सी । 
गिरी अपः स्वर्वृषत्वना ॥ २ ॥ 

pn Yasya dvibarhaso brhat saho dadhara rodasi. 
Gririnrajran apah svarvrsatvana. 


Glorify Indra, who sustains the cosmic yajna in 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 15 501 


the two worlds, your life here and hereafter, whose 
cosmic potential sustains heaven, earth and the middle 
regions, who moves and controls the mighty gusts of 
winds and motions of mountainous clouds, and who 
gives us heavenly showers of rain for joy and vital 
energies. 


स राजसि पुरुष्टुतं एको वृत्राणि जिघ्नसे । 
इन्द्र जैत्रा श्रवस्या च यन्त॑वे ॥ 3 ॥ 


3 Sa rajasi purustutan eko vrtrani jighnase. 
Indra jaitra Sravasya ca yantave. 


Indra, universally praised and celebrated, you 
rule and shine alone, one, unique, without an equal, to 
destroy darkness, ignorance and adversities, to control 
and contain what is won and to manage what is heard 
and what ought to be heard. 


तं ते मदं गृणीमसि वृष॑णं पृत्सु atafer! 
उ ललोककृलुमंद्रिवो हरिश्रियम्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Tam te madam grnimasi vrsanam prtsu sasahim. 
U lokakrtnum-adrivo harisriyam. 


Indra, lord of adamantine will and generous 
disposition like clouds of rain, we celebrate and glorify 
that power and heavenly joy of yours which is virile 
and generous, heroic in battles and steadfast against 
challenges, creative in the worlds of existence and 
gracious in advancement and gifts of bliss. 


येन ज्योती्यायवे मन॑वे च विवेदिथ 1 
मन्दानो अस्य बर्हिषो वि राजसि॥ ५॥ 


5. Yena jyotimsydyave manave ca viveditha. 
Mandano asya barhiso vi rajasi. 


502 RGVEDA 


We celebrate and adore that power and divine 
joy of yours by which you reveal the light of life to the 
mortals from generation to generation and, exalted by 
which, you shine and rule over the yajnic dynamics of 
this universe. 


तदद्या feta sfeerits नुं षटुवन्ति yetert । 
वृष॑पलीर पो ज॑या दिवेदिवे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tadadya cit ta ukthino’nu stuvanti purvatha. 
Vrsapatnirapo jaya divedive. 


That divine power and joyous generosity of 
yours, today, saints and scholars of the holy Word and 
song sing and celebrate as ever before. O lord, conquer 
and control the waters of space collected in the mighty 
clouds and let them flow day by day. 


तव त्यदिद्धियं बृहत्तव शुष्म॑मुत da 
वचं शिशाति धिषणा वरेण्यम्‌ ७॥ 


ce Tava tyadindriyam brahat tava $usmamuta 
kratum. Vajram Ssisati dhisana varenyam. 


That grandeur and majesty of yours, that power 
and potential, that continuous act of divine generosity, 
that adamantine will and force of natural justice and 
dispensation of the thunderbolt which overwhelms our 
will and choice commands our sense of discrimination, 
and we glorify it, we sharpen it, we accept it with 
adoration. 


तव द्यौरिन्द्र पौस्यं पृथिवी वर्धति sta: | 
त्वामापः पर्वतासश्च हिन्विरे॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tava dyaurindra paumsyam prthivi vardhati 
sravah. Tvamapah parvatasasca hinvire. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 15 503 


The light of heaven glorifies your blazing power, 
the earth augments your honour and fame, and the 
rolling floods of water and mighty mountains of majesty 
do awesome homage to you. 


त्वां विष्णरबहनक्षयों मित्रो गुंणाति वरुणः। 
त्वां शर्धो मदत्यनु मारुतम्‌॥ ९॥ 

7, Tvam visnur-brhan ksayo mitro grnati varunah. 
Tvam sardho madatyanu marutam. 
Vishnu, cosmic dynamics of nature’s expansive 
sustenance, Mitra, loving and life giving sun, Varuna, 
soothing and energising oceans of the universe, and the 
power and force of the showers of cosmic energy all 
exalt you and receive their life and exaltation from you. 
त्वं वृषा जनानां मंहिं S इन्द्र TE । 
सत्रा fagat स्वपत्यानि दधिषे ॥ १९०॥ 

10. Tvam vrsa jananam mamhistha indra jajnise. 
Satra visva svapatyani dadhise. 
Most generous and omnificent Indra, in the heart 
of humanity you arise as the greatest and highest paternal 
power and presence who sustain the worlds of existence 
as your darling children all together as one family. 
सत्रा त्वं पुरुष्टुतं एको FAUT तोशसे | 
नान्य इन्द्रात्करणं भूय॑ इन्वति ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Satra tvam purustutan eko vrtrani toSase. 
Nanya indrat karanam bhuya invati. 


O lord universally adored, you alone dispel and 
destroy all the strong holds of darkness, ignorance and 


504 RGVEDA 


evil. There is no one else other than Indra who can 
exceed your power and performance either now or later. 


यदिन्द्र मन्मशस्त्वा नाना हव॑न्त des | 
अस्मकेथिर्नथिरत्रा स्व॑र्जय ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Yadindra manmaSastva nana havanta utaye. 
Asmakebhir-nrbhir-atra svarjaya. 


Since all people in all their different lands and 
places invoke and adore you for protection and self 
fulfilment according to the voice of their own 
conscience, O lord, be gracious to our people here on 
earth and let them win the divine gift of eternal joy. 


अरं क्षयाय नो महे विश्व। रूपाण्याविशन्‌ । 
इन्द्रं Wate हर्षया शचीपतिम्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 

13. Aram ksayaya no mahe visva rupanyavisan. 
Indram jaitraya harsaya sacipatim. 

For peace and settlement of the perfect order, 
and for honour, dignity and excellence for all of us here 
on earth, and for our final victory of self fulfilment in 
ultimate bliss, meditate on the lord’s manifestations, 


identify with his omnipresence, adore him as the lord 
of omnipotence, and win the pleasure and grace of Indra. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 16 
Indra Devata, Trimbithi Kanva Rshi 
प्र सम्राजं चर्षणीनापिन्द्रं स्तोता नव्यं गीर्भिः। 
नरं नृषाहं HASAN ९॥ 


र Pra samrajam carsaninam-indram stota navyam 
girbhih. Naram nrsaham mamhistham. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 16 505 


With songs of celebration glorify Indra, 
refulgent ruler of humanity, worthy of adoration, leader, 
destroyer of evil people, the greatest and most 
munificent. 


यस्मिंज्ुक्थानि watea विश्वानि च श्रवस्या । 
अपामवो न समुद्रे ॥ २॥ 
Yasminn-ukthani ranyanti visvani ca Sravasyd. 
Apamavo na samudre. 
Unto him all songs of adoration return, to him 
all honours and fame of the world reach, in him they 
rejoice like streams and rivers reaching and rejoicing 
in the sea. 
तं सुष्टुत्या विवासे ज्येष्ठराजं भरे कृलुम्‌। 
महो वाजिनं सनिभ्यः ॥ २३॥ 

a Tam sustutya vivase Jyestharajam bhare krtnum. 
Maho vajinam sanibhyah. 
Him with songs of adoration I glorify as the first 
and highest ruler, constantly active in cosmic dynamics, 
and the greatest warrior and winner for the celebrant’s 
good. 
यस्यानूना गभीरा मदा उरवस्तरुत्राः 1 
हर्ष॑मन्तः शूरसातौ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yasyanuna gabhira mada uravastarutrah. 
Harsumantah surasatau. 


Faultless are his joyous exploits, deep and grave, 
vast and wide, saviours across the seas of life and givers 
of victory in the battles of the brave. 


506 RGVEDA 


तपिब्नेषु हितेष्वधिवाकाय हवन्ते | 
येषामिन्द्रस्ते ज॑यन्ति ॥ ५॥ 

a: Tamid dhanesu hitesvadhivakaya havante. 
Yesam-indras-te jayanti. 


When the call is given and the battle rages, 
people invoke him for defence, and they win who enjoy 
the favour and protection of Indra. 


तमिच्च्यौलैरार्यन्ति तं कृतेभिंश्चर्षणय॑ः। 
एष इन्द्रो वरिवस्कृत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tamic-cyautnair-aryanti tam krtebhis-carsana- 
yah. Esa indro varivaskrt. 
Men of vision and wisdom celebrate him with 
inspiring songs and noble actions while average people 
please him with usual performance of their daily duties. 


This lord Indra is the creator, controller and dispenser 
of wealth and rewards. 


इन्द्रो ब्रहयनद्र ऋषिरिन्द्रः पुरू eg: | 
महान्पहीधिः शचीभिः ॥ ७॥ 

7. Indro brahmendra rsirindrah puru puruhutah. 
Mahan mahibhih sacibhih. 


Indra is Brahma, great and omniscient, the all- 
watching seer, invoked, adored and worshipped by all, 
universally in many ways. He is really great, 
magnanimous by virtue of his great actions. 


सः स्तोम्यः स हव्य॑ः सत्यः सत्वा तुविकूर्मिः | 
एकणश्चित्सन्नभिभूतिः॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 16 507 


8. Sah stomyah sa havyah satyah satva tuvikurmih. 
Ekascit sannabhibhiutih. 


He is adorable with songs of praise, worthy of 
invocation and homage, eternal, ever true, and by his 
essential nature he is omnipotent, all creator, all maker 
of forms, and all alone by himself, he is the power 
supreme over all. 


anche साम॑धिस्तं गायत्रैर्चंर्घषणयंः | 
इन्द्रं वर्धन्ति क्ितय॑ः 12 


८ Tamarkebhis-tam samabhis-tam gayatrais- 
carsanayah. Indram vardhanti ksitayah. 


All people, all communities, all nations adore 
and exalt Indra, with inspiring verses of Rgveda, with 
sweet songs of Samaveda and with the exhilarating 
gayatri verses. 


प्रणोतारं वस्यो अच्छा कतीरं ज्योतिः समत्सु । 
सासह्वांसं aera ९० ॥ 

10. Pranetaram vasyo accha kartaram jyotih sama- 
tsu. Sasahvamsam yudhamitran. 


All people, communities and nations adore and 
exalt Indra who brings wealth, peace and prosperity to 
humanity, creates light and hope for their battles of life, 
and challenges and destroys enemies by fighting them 
out. 


स नः पप्रिः पारयाति स्वस्ति नावा Gee: | 
इन्द्रो विश्वा अति द्विष॑ः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sa nah paprih parayati svasti nava puruhitah. 
Indro visva ati dvisah. 


508 RGVEDA 


He, Indra, lord of deliverance and giver of 
fulfilment, invoked and adored by all, pilots us across 
the seas of life by the boat of divine guidance and saves 
us against all jealousies, enmities and negativities of 
the world. 


सत्वं न॑ इन्द्र वाजेभिर्दशस्या च॑ गातुया च॑ । 
अच्छ च नः सुम्नं नेषि ॥ ९२॥ 
Sa tvam na indra vajebhir-daSasya ca gatuya ca. 
Accha ca nah sumnam nesi. 
Indra, lord of power and giver of fulfilment, by 
gifts of science and energy and with noble acts and 


persistent endeavour, lead us well by noble paths to 
peace, prosperity and well being. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 17 
Indra or Vastoshpati Devata, Irimbithi Kanva Rshi 


आ याहि सुषुमा हि त इन्द्र सोमं frat इमम्‌। 
एदं बर्हिः dat FAN 


Li A yahi susuma hi ta indra somam piba imam. 
Edam barhih sado mama. 


Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we 
hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service. 
Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to 
you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect 
and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life. 


आ त्वां ब्रह्मयुजा हरी वह॑तामिन्द्र केशिर्ना । 
उप ब्रह्माणि नः श्युणु ॥ २॥ 


Oe A tva brahmayuja hari vahatamindra kesina. 
Upa brahmani nah srnu. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 17 509 


Let the radiant waves of cosmic energy engaged 
in the service of divinity bring you here. Pray listen to 
our songs of prayer and adoration. 


Dedicated to divinity and the divine voice, 
meditating on the divine presence with concentrated 
mind and soul, living in truth the beauty of life and ex- 
pressing the ecstasy of soma, we invoke and wait for 
Indra, original maker and lover of soma, to come and 
bless us. 


ब्रह्माण॑स्त्वा वयं युजा सोमपामिन्द्र सोमिन॑ः। 
सुतावन्तो हवामहे ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Brahmanastva vayam yujad somapamindra 
sominah. Sutavanto havamahe. 


O lord of cosmic beauty, come to us, listen to 
our song of adoration and drink of the soma distilled by 
us with intense love and devotion. 
आ नो याहि सुताव॑तोऽ स्माकं Weed | 
पिला सु शिंप्रिन्नन्ध॑सः॥ ठ॥ 

4. A no yahi sutavato’smakam sustufirupa. 
Piba su siprinn-andhasah. 


I create and pour the soma into the body spaces 
of your creation, taste the sweets with your tongue and 
let the exhilaration of honey radiate to every particle of 
the cosmic body. 


आ ते सिञ्चामि कुक्ष्योरनु गात्रा वि धावतु। 
गृभाय जिह्यया मधुं ॥ ५॥ 


a A te sincami kuksyoranu gatra vi dhavatu. 
Grbhaya jihvaya madhu. 


510 RGVEDA 


May the soma be delicious to your taste, O 
connoisseur of soma, may the honey sweets be 
exhilarating to your body, and may the soma bring peace 
and joy to your heart. 


स्वादुष्टै अस्तु संसुदे मधुंमान्तन्वे ३ तवं । 
सोमः शम॑स्तु ते हृदे।॥ ६॥ 
6. Svaduste astu samsude madhuman tanve tava. 


Somah samastu te hrde. 


O lord of cosmic vision, let this soma distilled 
and seasoned, radiate to you from sense to the spirit, 
inspiring, soothing and beatifying like a bride on top of 
her beauty and virgin grace. 


stad त्वा विचर्षणे जनीरिवाभि deta: | 
प्र सोम॑ इन्द्र सर्पतु ॥ ७॥ 

ce Ayamu tva vicarsane janirivabhi samvrtah. 
Pra soma indra sarpatu. 

In the ecstasy and exhilaration of soma, Indra, 
lord mighty of head and arms joined at the neck and 
vast of cosmic belly space, destroys the dark forces of 
life. 

तुविग्रीवो! वपोद॑रः सुबाहुरन्ध॑सो मदे | 
इन्द्रो वृत्राणिं जिघ्नते ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tuvigrivo vapodarah subahur-andhaso made. 
Indro vrtrani jighnate. 


Indra, ruler and ordainer of the world by your 
power and splendour, come to us and, O dispeller of 
darkness, go forward, destroy the evils and adversities 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 17 511 
of ignorance, injustice and poverty. 


इन्द्र प्रहि पुरस्त्वं विश्वस्येशान sitstar । 
वृत्राणि वृत्रहञ्जहि ul ९ ॥ 

५ Indra prehi purastvam visvasyesana ojasa. 
Vrtrani vrtrahanjahi. 


Indra, ruler and ordainer of the world by your 
power and splendour, come to us and, O dispeller of 
darkness, go forward, destroy the evils and adversities 
of ignorance, injustice and poverty. 


died अस्त्वङ्कुशो येना वसुं प्रयच्छसि | 
यज॑मानाय सुन्वते ॥ १०॥ 


10. Dirghaste astvankusSo yena vasu prayacchasi. 
Yajamanaya sunvate. 


Let your arms of law and order be long and far 
reaching by which you protect and provide peace, 
prosperity and security for the self-sacrificing performer 
of yajna who creates soma for the common good. 


अयं त॑ इन्द्र सोमो निपूतो अधिं वर्हिषिं। 
एहीमस्य द्रवा fat neu 

11. Ayam ta indra somo niputo adhi barhisi. 
Ehimasya drava piba. 


Indra, this soma pure and sanctified on the holy 
grass of yajna vedi, is dedicated to you. Come fast, you 
would love it, drink and enjoy, and protect and promote 
it for the good of all. 


शाचिंगो शाचिंपूजनाऽयं रणाय ते सुतः | 
आखंण्डल्क प्र हूयसे ॥ १२ ॥ 


512 RGVEDA 


12. Sacigo Sacipujana’yam ranaya te sutah. 
Akhandala pra hiyase. 


Lord self-refulgent creator of stars and planets, 
glorious adorable, this cosmic soma of the universe of 
your creation is for the joy of life. Therefore, O lord 
imperishable, you are invoked and adored with love and 
faith. 

यस्ते शुङ्कवृषो नपात्प्रणपात्कुण्डपाय्यंः | 
न्य॑स्मिन्दध्च आ मनं: ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yaste Srngavrso napat pranapat kundapayyah. 
Nyasmin dadhra a manah. 


O lord, the sun on high which neither falls nor 
allows others, planets and satellites, to fall is your 
creation and it is the protector and sustainer of the vault 
of heaven and the firmament. On this we meditate and 
concentrate our mind. 


वास्तोष्पते ear स्थूणां ऽसत्रं सोम्यानाम्‌ । 
दरप्सो भेत्ता पुरां शश्व॑तीनामिन्द्रो मुनीनां सखा ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Vastospate dhruva sthunam’satram somyanam. 
Drapso bhetta puram Sasvatinam-indro muninam 
sakha. 


O lord of human habitations, creator of the 
cosmic home of life, may the centre column of our house 
be firm. May the lord be the protective armour of the 
makers of soma. May Indra, lover of soma to the last 
drop, be destroyer of the strongholds of evil which 
nevertheless persist through time, and may the lord be 
friends with the sages. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 18 513 


पृदाकुसानुर्यजतो गवेष॑ण एकः सन्नभि भूय॑सः। 
भूर्णिमश्वं नयत्तुजा पुरो गृभन्द्रं सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


Prdakusanur-yajato gavesana ekah sannabhi 
bhuyasah. Bhurnim-asvam nayat tuja puro 
grbhendram somasya pitaye. 


Challenger of poisonous negativities, adorable, 
giver of earthly prosperity and words of vision and 
wisdom, Indra by himself alone eliminates many evils. 
Let the devotee with inspired adoration invoke the 
refulgent omnipresence of Indra before his inner vision 
to bless his consciousness and to protect and promote it 
to universal awareness of the divine presence. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 18 
Adityah (1-3, 5, 10-22), Aditi (4, 6, 7), Ashvinau (8), 
Agni-Surya-Anilah (9) Devatah, Irimbithi Kanva Rshi 


इदं हं नूनमेषां सुम्नं भिक्षेत मर्त्यः । 
आदित्यानामपुर्व्य सवीमनि neu 
i Idam ha nunam-esam sumnam bhikseta martyah. 


Adityanam-apurvyam savimani. 


Let mortal humanity ask for unique favours of 
these Adityas, brilliant children of Mother Nature, that 
is, nature’s powers of light, energy and peace, seek for 
wealth, honour and excellence of life in a state of peace 
and progress, and live under the inspiration and 
guidance of nature, her forces of thought, energy and 
stability without violating nature’s law. 


अनर्वाणो dai पन्था आदित्यानाम्‌ । 
siden: सन्तिं पायवः सुगेवृधंः ॥ २ ॥ 


514 RGVEDA 


2: Anarvano hyesam pantha adityanam. 
Adabdhah santi payavah sugevrdhah. 


Irresistible are the paths and laws of these 
brilliant powers of nature, undaunted are they, protectors 
and promoters, and they increase the peace and 
prosperity of life (if you presume not to challenge and 
violate them). 


तत्सु न॑: सविता भगो वरुणो पित्रो अर्यमा । 
शर्म यच्छन्तु सप्रथो यदीम॑हे ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Tat su nah savita bhago varuno mitro aryama. 
Sarma yacchantu sapratho yadimahe. 


May Savita, life generating sun, Bhaga, 
inexhaustible wealth and power of divinity, Varuna, 
oceans of space and divine generosity, Mitra, divine love 
and warmth of life, and Aryaman, divine laws of the 
motions of stars, planets and galaxies, guide and lead 
us to that peace and prosperity which we pray for and 
which, we wish, may ever increase. 


देवेभिर्देव्यदितेऽरि ट भर्मन्ना गंहि। 
स्मत्सूरिभिः पुरुप्रिये सुशर्मभिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Devebhir-devyadite’ristabharmanna gahi. 
Samt suribhih purupriye susarmabhih. 


Imperishable nature, mother Infinity universally 
loved and adored, self-refulgent divinity, giver of 
security in prosperity against adversity, pray come and 
bring us best of life’s happiness and well being along 
with brilliant powers of generosity, intelligence and 
fearless rectitude. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 18 515 


ते हि पुत्रासो अदितेर्विंदुर्दषांसि योत॑वे। 
अंहोज्चिंदुरु चक्रयोऽ ने हसः ॥ ५॥ 
ध Te hi putraso aditer-vidur-dvesamsi yotave. 


Ambhoscid-urucakrayo ’nehasah. 


Those children of divinity, sages, scholars and 
redoubtable warriors, pure at heart and great performers 
of boundless possibilities, know how to remove 
jealousies, fight out enmities and eliminate sin and 
crime. 


अदितिर्नो दिवां पशुमदितिर्नक्तमद्वयाः। 
अदितिः पात्वंहसः Gerdes ॥ 


6. Aditirno diva pasum-aditir-naktamadvayah. 
Aditih patvamhasah sadavrdha. 


May Aditi, Mother Nature, her intelligence, 
energy and stability, preserve, protect and promote our 
cattle, property and perception day and night. May the 
light of divinity, always promotive of positivity, save 
us from sin. 


उत स्या नो दिवां मतिरदितिरूत्या ग॑मत्‌। 
सा शन्ताति मय॑स्कर॒दप॒ स्रिध॑ः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Uta sya no diva matir-aditir-utya gamat. 
Sa Samtati mayaskaradapa sridhah. 
May that beneficent intelligence of the light of 
divine Mother Nature come to us day by day with her 


protective faculties, do us good and ward off errors, 
obstructions, negative values and misbeliefs. 


516 RGVEDA 


उत त्या coat भिषजा शं न॑: करतो अज्विना। 
युयुयातामितो रपो अप स्रिधः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Uta tya daivya bhisaja sam nah karato asvina. 
Yuyuyatamito rapo apa sridhah. 


And may nature’s complementary powers of all 
round protection and growth bring us good and peace 
and keep off all sin and evil of body and mind from us. 


शमभिर ग्निभिः करच्छं न॑स्तपतु सूर्य | 
शां ara! वात्वरपा अप स्रिधः ॥९॥ 


१ Samagniragnibhih karacchari nastapatu suryah. 
Sam vato vatvarapa apa sridhah. 


May Agni, divine fire of life, with its radiations 
of heat and light, do us good. May the sun shine warm 
for the good of all in peace. May the wind blow fragrant 
and free and bring us the breath of life for all in peace, 
and may all the divinities of Mother Nature drive away 
and keep off all negativity and adversities from 
humanity. 


अपामीवामप स्तरिधमपं सेधत safe | 
आदित्यासो युयोतना नो अंह॑सः ॥ ९०॥ 


10... Apamivamapa sridhamapa sedhata durmatim. 
Adityaso yuyotana no amhasah. 


May the Adityas, powers of light and life in 
nature and humanity, drive away all disease of body 
and mind and keep off negativities of thought and 
intelligence from us. May the children of imperishable 
divinity keep us safe, far away from the onslaughts of 
sin and adversity. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 18 517 


युयोता शरुमस्मदां आदित्यास उताम॑ तिम्‌। 
IGA: कृणुत विषुववेदसः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yuyota sarumasmadan adityasa utamatim. 
Rdhagdvesah krnuta visvavedasah. 


May the Adityas, divine harbingers of light and 
life, drive away from us all forms of violence and enmity. 
May they ward off all those stupid fools who lack 
understanding and refuse to think positively. May the 
pioneers of enlightenment who know the world and all 
its ways eliminate hate and malignity from the world of 
humanity. 


तत्सु नः शर्म च्छताऽऽदित्यायन्मुमोचति । 
एनस्वन्तं चिदेनसः सुदानवः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tat sunah Sarma yacchata’’ditya yanmumocati. 
Enasvantam cidenasah sudanavah. 


O Adityas, children of the light of life eternal, 
holy givers of the best of life, thought and action, bring 
us that peace and joy which gives us freedom, that 
freedom which saves and liberates even the worst of 
sinners from sin and evil. 


यो नः कश्चिद्िरिं्षति रक्चस्त्वेन मर्त्यः । 
स्वैः ष एवै रिरिषीष्ट॒ युर्जन॑ः ॥ ९३ ॥ 

13. Yonah kascid ririksati raksastvena martyah. 
Svaih sa evai ririsista yurjanah. 


Let the mortal who of his own evil nature seeks 
to injure us by his evil design perish in consequence of 
his own evil actions. Let such a man be off from us. 


518 RGVEDA 


समित्तमघमंश्नवदुःशंसं मर्त्यं" रिपुम्‌। 
यो अस्मत्रा geuttat उप॑ द्युः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Samit tama-ghamasnavad duhsamsam martyam 
ripum. Yo asmatra durhanavan upa dvayuh. 


Let the sin itself consume and wholly destroy 
that sinner, evil designer, maligner, mortal enemy of 
humanity who is a treacherous double dealer and seeks 
to destroy us. 


पाकत्रा स्थ॑न देवा हृत्सु Ber Aes AL I 
उप॑ ga Usa च वसवः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Pakatra sthana deva hrtsu janitha martyam. 
Upa dvayum cadvayum ca vasavah. 


O Vasus, brilliant and benevolent providers of 
peace and settlement for humanity, stand by those who 
are simple, honest and innocent. In your heart of hearts 
you know the nature and character of mortal humanity 
and closely discriminate between the double dealer and 
the person who is not a double dealer. Stand by the pure 
at heart, we pray. 


आ शर्म पर्वतानामोतापां चुणीमहे। 
द्यार्वाक्षामारे अस्मद्रप॑स्कृतम्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. A Sarma parvatanamotapam vrnimahe. 
Dyavaksamare asmad rapaskrtam. 


We pray for the peace and protection of the 
mountains and the clouds. We pray for the peace and 
protection of the running waters. May heaven and earth, 
divine intelligence and holy mother, keep off sin and 
evil, suffering and disease from us. (Our choice and 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 18 519 
prayer is freedom from sin and suffering.) 


at भद्रेण शर्म॑णा युष्माकं नावा aaa: | 
अति विश्वानि दुरिता पिपर्तन ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Te no bhadrena Sarmana yusmakam nava 
vasavah. Ati visvani durita pipartana. 


O Vasus, providers of settlement, peace and joy, 
Adityas, holy powers of light and life in nature and 
humanity, we pray, be our guides and pilots and, by your 
saving ark of life and destiny, lead us over the sins and 
sufferings of the world with the peace and felicity of 
the life divine. 


तुचे तनाय तत्सु नो द्राघीय आयु॑र्जीवसे | 
आदित्यासः सुमहसः कृणोत॑न ॥ ९८ ॥ 
18. (11८८ tanaya tat su no draghiya ayurjivase. 


Adityasah sumahasah krnotana. 


O Adityas, refulgent lords of light and mighty 
masters of life giving energies, for the joyous living 
and longevity of our children and their off-spring, create 
and bring the holy gift of good health and long life of 
peace and felicity. 


यज्ञो हीव्ठो वो SAT आदित्या अस्तिं मृ्छत | 

युष्मे इदो अपिं ष्मसि सजात्ये ॥ ९९॥ 
19. Yajno hilo vo antara aditya asti mrlata. 

Yusme id vo api smasi sajatye. 


O Adityas, mighty masters of refulgence and 
teachers of the secrets of good health and long life of 
felicity, the yajna, holy act of creativity, is your love 


520 RGVEDA 


and inward inspiration. That act we have performed 
close to you. Pray know, appreciate and be kind and 
happy with us. We are yours, we abide in your light, 
and we are of the same order of humanity as you, one 
with you. 


बृहद्रू थं मरुतां देवं तरातारमश्विना | 
मित्रमीमहे वरुणं स्वस्तये tt २०॥ 


20. Brhad varutham marutam devam trataram- 
asvina. Mitram-imahe varunam svastaye. 


For the sake of a long life of peace and felicity, 
we approach the brilliant and benevolent lord of the 
winds of life and life’s energy, the protective and saviour 
forces of life, the Ashvins, complementary forces of the 
dynamics of development, Mitra, powers of love and 
friendship, and Varuna, powers of judgement and justice, 
all in nature as well as in humanity, we pray for 
inspiration and enact as a holy performance of yajna a 
vast home of peace and freedom for humanity on the 
earth and her environment. 


अनेहो मिंत्रार्यमन्रूवद्ध॑रुणा शंस्य॑म्‌। 
त्रिवरूथं मरुतो यन्त नश्छर्दिः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Aneho mitraryaman nrvad varuna samsyam. 
Trivarutham maruto yanta naschardih. 


O Mitra, powers of universal love and 
friendship, Aryaman, guides and pioneers of humanity, 
and Varuna, powers of universal judgement and justice, 
and all ye peoples of the world, unite, create and give 
us a happy home on earth blest with threefold freedom 
from ignorance and darkness, injustice and violence, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 521 


and poverty and inequality, admirable as free from sin 
and evil and the scourge of fear and terror. 


ये चिद्धि मृत्युब॑न्थव आदित्या मन॑वः Tara । 
प्रसून आयुर्जीवसे तिरेतन ॥ २२॥ 


22. {८ ciddhimrtyubandhava aditya manavah smasi. 
Pra su na ayurjivase tiretana. 


O Adityas, powers of light and life, givers of 
enlightenment, human as we are, all kindred of the fact 
of death, pray give us the longest span of life for the joy 
of living and then help us cross over to the life beyond 
death. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 19 


Agni (1-33), Adityah (34-35), Trasadasyu’sdana-stuti 
(36-37) Devatah, Sobhari Kanva Rshi 


तं गूर्धया स्व॑र्णरं carat देवमरतिं द॑धन्विरे । 
देवत्रा हव्यमोहिरे ॥ ९॥ 


im Tam gurdhaya svarnaram devaso devamaratim 
dadhanvire. Devatra havyamohire. 


Praise the self-refulgent lord giver of heavenly 
bliss whom the divinities of light and enlightenment 
hold and reflect in all his glory, Agni, the lord adorable, 
all pervasive yet uninvolved, whom the noble and 
learned people perceive, realise and worship as the one 
worthy of worship. 


favre विप्र चित्रशोचिषमभिमीच्छिष्व aa | 
अस्य मेध॑स्य सोम्यस्य॑ सोभरे प्रेम॑ध्वराय पूर्व्यम्‌ 2 


522 RGVEDA 


2: Vibhutaratim vipra citrasocisam-agnimilisva 
yanturam. Asya medhasya somyasya sobhare 
premadhvaraya purvyam. 


O vibrant scholar, worship Agni, lord of light 
and enlightenment, infinitely giving, awfully wondrous 
and self-refulgent, and the sole leader and controller of 
the world. Worship Him, the lord eternal, O generous 
man, in order that you may participate in this yajnic 
system of the lord’s universe which is full of love 
without violence and overflows with the blissful joy of 
soma, an inspiring invitation to live and act as the child 
of divinity. 


UMS त्वा ववृमहे देवं देवत्रा होतार मम्त्यम्‌। 
अस्य यज्ञस्य सुक्रतुम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


1 Yajistham tva vavrmahe devam devatra hotaram- 
amartyam. Asya yajnasya sukratum. 


We choose to worship you, Agni, most adorable, 
worthy of worship, self-refulgent lord over the divinities 
of existence, imperishable and eternal creator of the 
yajna of this universal order of the world. 


ऊर्जो नपातं सुभगं सुदीदिंतिमिं श्रेष्ठशोचिषम्‌ । 
सनों मित्रस्य वरुणस्य सो अपामा सुम्नं य॑क्षते fara ts i 


4. Urjo napatam subhagam sudiditimagnim 
sresthasocisam. Sa no mitrasya varunasya so apa- 
ma sumnam yaksate divi. 


We worship Agni, protector and promoter of 
energy and men of energy, lord of grandeur and glory 
and the holy refulgence of nature that shines bright with 
the highest flames of fire and light. In the light and fire 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 19 523 


of cosmic yajna, He is the giver of joy in the light of 
day and the bliss of peace in the night, and He is the 
giver of the nectar of pleasure in the liquid flow of water 
and the dynamics of karmic flow. 


a: समिधा य आहुती यो वेदेन ददाश मर्तो अग्रये। 
यो नम॑सा स्वध्वरः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


9, Yah samidha ya ahuti yo vedena वदतत marto 
agnaye. Yo namasa svadhvarah. 


The mortal man who performs yajna, creative 
activity without violence, and offers homage by giving 
in honour of Agni with holy fuel or with havi in ghrta 
and fragrant materials with the chant of Vedic verses 
enjoys the peace and bliss of life day and night. 


तस्येदर्वन्तो रंहयन्त आशवस्तस्य द्युम्नित॑मं ast: | 
न adel देवकुतं कुत॑श्चन न मर्त्य॑कृतं नशत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tasyedarvanto ramhayanta asavastasya dyumni- 


tamam yasah. Na tamamho devakrtam kutascana 
na martyakrtam nasat. 


His horses speed on at the fastest and hasten 
him to victory. His honour and fame shine the brightest. 
Whatever he does in honour of the divinities or in service 
to mortal humanity, sin and pride never touch him nor 
does it pollute his action. 


स्वग्रयो at aifata: स्याम॑ सूनो सहस्र ऊर्जा पते। 
सुवीर स्त्वम॑स्मयुः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Svagnayo vo agnibhih syama suno sahasa urjam 
pate. Suviras-tvam-asmayuh. 


O lord creator of energy and master controller 


524 RGVEDA 


of strength and power, let us, by yajnic experimentations 
of various forms of heat and light, all your gifts, be 
masters of fire energies and light radiations. You are 
the bravest holy power. Pray be ours, close to us as 
master giver and power divine. 


widart sifdfet faratsat रथो न वेद्य॑ः 1 
त्वे क्षेमासो अपिं सन्ति साधवस्त्वं राजा रयीणाम्‌ 2 ॥ 


8. Prasamsamano atithirna mitriyo’gni ratho na 
vedyah. Tve ksemaso api santi sadhavas-tvam 
raja rayinam. 

Agni is worthy of praise and admiration as a 
friendly guest of honour and worthy to be known as a 
saviour like a chariot leading to cherished destinations. 
Abiding in you and strengthened by you, O lord, 
dedicated practitioners rise to be men of perfect success 
in peace and bliss since you are the ruler and controller 
of all forms of the wealth of existence. 


सो अब्दा दाश्व॑ध्वरोऽ ग्रे मर्त: सुभग स weet: | 
स धीभिरस्तु सनिता ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. So addha dasvadhavaro’gne martah subhaga sa 
prasamsyah. Sa dhibhirastu sanita. 


O lord of universal wealth and grandeur, Agni, 
we pray, may the mortal come to sure success and good 
fortune who gives in charity and performs acts of yajnic 
creativity with love and without violence. May such a 
man be worthy of praise and appreciation with holy acts 
of intelligence and may he be rich in acquisitions and 
liberal in dispensations of charity. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 525 


यस्य waged! अध्वराय तिष्ठ॑सि aragit: स साधते । 
सो अर्वद्भिः सनिता स विंपन्युथिः स शरै: सनिता 
कृतम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yasya tvamurdhvo adhvaraya tisthasi ksayad- 
virah sa sadhate. So arvadbhih sanita sa vipan- 
yubhih sa Surah sanita krtam. 


The man for whose acts of yajna you rise high 
and stay constant is blest with brave progeny and 
achieves all round success in life. He is blest with horses 
and incoming wealth and honour. Surrounded by the 
wise, he is blest with praise and high appreciation. 
Supported by the brave, he achieves fulfilment in 
whatever he does and whatever he wants to do. 


यस्याभिर्वपुर्गहे स्तोमं चनो दधीत विश्ववार्यः | 
हव्या वा वेविंषद्िषंः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yasyagnir-vapurgrhe stomam cano dadhita 
visvavaryah. Havya va vevisad visah. 


Blest is the man in whose house Agni, lord of 
universal acceptance with faith and reverence, through 
the divine fire form of yajna, receives oblations of holy 
food and Vedic songs of praise and the fire sends up 
yajnic food to nature’s divinities. He achieves total 
fulfilment in every field of life through the bounties of 
divine nature. 


विप्र॑स्य वा स्तुवतः Geet यहो मक्षूत॑मस्य रातिषु । 
अवोदेवमुपरसिमर्त्यं कृधि वसो! विविदुषो वच॑: ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Viprasya va stuvatah sahaso yaho maksut-amasya 
ratisu. Avo-devam-uparimartyam krdhi vaso 
vividuso vacah. 


526 RGVEDA 


And O child of strength born of yajnic 
endeavour and sustainer of vitality in human affairs, O 
Vasu, all pervasive divine fire, living shelter of all, 
convert the song of the vibrant scholar celebrant to super 
mortal prayer and raise it to reach the heights of divinity. 


यो ait हव्यदातिभिर्नमोभिर्वा सुदक्ष॑माविवांसति। 
गिरा ्वाजिरशोचिषम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Yoagnim havyadatibhir-namobhir-va sudaksam- 
avivasati. Gird vajira-Socisam. 
One who lights the versatile yajnic fire and 
thereby whole heartedly serves the fire divine of 
imperishable flames with oblations of sacred havis, 
reverence and holy words of prayer never falls, never 
fails in life. 
समिधा यो निर्शिंती दाशददितिं धामभिरस्य मर्त्यः । विश्वेत्स 
धीभिः सुभगो जनाँ अति द्युम्नरुद्ग इव तारिषत्‌ ॥ ९२४ ॥ 

14. Samidha yo nisiti dasadaditim dhamabhirasya 
martyah. Visvet sa dhibhih subhago janan ati 
dyumnairudga iva tarisat. 

The mortal who serves Aditi, immortal fire of 
mother Infinity, with blazing fuel within the radiance 
of its own laws is blest with the wealth and splendour 
of all orders of intelligence, honour and fame and 


surpasses all people of the other order like a captain on 
the helm crossing the stormy seas. 


तदंग द्युम्नमा भ॑र यत्सासहत्सद ने कं चिंदत्रिण॑म्‌। 
मन्युं जन॑स्य GSA: ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Tadagne dyumnama bhara yat sahasat sadane 
kam cidatrinam. Manyum janasya diudhyah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 527 


Agni, lord of light and life, give us that 
splendour of spirit and intelligence which may challenge 
and overcome any voracious friend at the door, in the 
heart and home, and counter the wealth of any evil 
minded person anywhere in life. 


येन चष्टे वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा येन॒ नास॑त्या aT: । 
वयं तत्ते शव॑सा गातुवित्तमा इन्द्र॑त्वोता विधेमहि ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Yena caste varuno mitro aryama yena nasatya 
bhagah. Vyam tat te Savasa gatuvittama indra 
tvota vidhemahi. 


Agni, lord of light and life, we worship, pray 
for and try to acquire that light of vision and 
discrimination of intelligence of yours by which Varuna, 
man of judgement and justice, Mitra, man of love and 
friendship, Aryaman, guide and pioneer of society, the 
Ashvins, complementary agents of development and 
progress, and Bhaga, man of power, fame and honour, 
envision things in unison, discriminate right from 
wrong, and declare for all to see and follow the right so 
that thereby, O Indra, ruling lord and power version of 
Agni, we all, most keen to know the paths of progress 
and follow them, may advance with the power of our 
will and knowledge under your guidance and protection. 


ते घेद॑गे Tareas ये cat विप्र निदधिरे नृचश्च॑सम्‌। 
विप्रासो देव सुक्रतुम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Te ghedagne svadhyo ye tva vipra nidadhire 
nrcaksasam. Vipraso deva sukratum. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord of life, vibrant presence 
of the universe, surely they are the wise and holy men 


528 RGVEDA 


and they are the blessed men of noble thought and study 
worthy of reverence who hold on to the light of your 
presence in the heart and meditate on the presence as 
the lord observant of humanity and as the high priest of 
the cosmic yajna. 


त sof सुभग त आहृतिं ते सोतुं चिक्रिरे fafa 
त इद्वाजेभिर्जिग्युर्महब्दनं ये त्वे कामं न्येरिरे॥ १९८ ॥ 


18. Taid vedim subhaga ta ahutim te sotum cakrire 
divi. Ta id vajebyir-jigyur-mahad dhanam ye tve 
kamam nyerire. 


Lord of glory and divine grace, Agni, they alone 
in reality organise the yajna vedi, they really offer the 
oblations into the sacred fire, they in truth endeavour to 
distil the soma of joy in the light of divinity, they in 
ultimate terms win the wealth of life by their struggle 
of life, who concentrate their hopes and ambitions in 
you and attribute and dedicate all their success, honour 
and fame to you. 


भद्रो नों अभिराहुतो war रातिः सुभग भद्रो अंध्वरः। 
भद्रा उत प्रंस्तयः।॥ ९९॥ 


19.  Bhadro no agnirahuto bhadra ratih subhaga 
bhadro adhvarah. Bhadra uta prasastayah. 


Lord of beauty and glory, may the yajna fire with 
offers of oblations be auspicious for us. May our charity 
be auspicious. May our yajna and all other acts of 
kindness and love free from violence be auspicious. And 
may all the appreciation and praise of our acts and 
behaviour be auspicious and fruitful. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 529 


भद्रं मन॑ः कृणुष्व वृत्रतूर्ये येना समत्सु Ase: | 
अवं स्थिरा तनुहि भूरि शर्धतां वनेमा ते अभिष्टिभिः ॥ २०॥ 


20. Bhadrammanah krnusva vrtraturye yena samatsu 
sasahah. Ava sthira tanuhi bhuri Ssardhatam 
vanema te abhistibhih. 


Agni, leading light of life, turn the mind by 
which you challenge the adversary in battles and win 
for us to gracious goodness in the victory over the forces 
of darkness. Reduce the many strongholds of the violent 
adversaries to nullity so that by your kindness and 
favours we may win what we desire in peace. 


ईव्ट गिरा मनुर्हितं यं देवा दूतमरतिं न्येरिरे । 
यजिं हव्यवाहनम्‌ २१॥ 


21. Ile gira manurhitam yam deva ditam-aratim 
nyerire. Yajistham havyavahanam. 


With words of praise I celebrate Agni, sacred 
fire energy, benefactor of humanity whom brilliant 
scholars honour and elevate as messenger, speedy 
ministrant, most valuable and adorable, and bearer of 
oblations to the divinities of nature. 


तिग्मजम्भाय तरुणाय राज॑ते Wal! गायस्यग्रये। 
यः पिंशते सूनृताभिः सुवीर्यं मभिर्घुतेभिरार्हुतः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Tigmajambhaya tarunaya rajate prayo gaya- 
syagnaye. Yah pimsate sunrtabhih suviryam- 
agnir-ghrtebhir-ahutah. 

O yajaka, you sing and celebrate Agni and offer 


libations of holy food to the flaming, ever youthful and 
brilliant fire of yajna which, when fed on ghrta and sung 


530 RGVEDA 


in sacred song, gives you strength and vigour in return 
for the homage. 


यदी! घृतेभिराहंतो वाशी मभिर्भरं त उच्चाव॑ च। 
असुंरइव निर्णिजम्‌ ॥ २३॥ 


23. Yadi ghrtebhir-ahuto vasim-agnir-bharata 
uccava ca . Asura iva nirnijam. 


When the fire of yajna fed on ghrta rises in 
flames with a crackle up and down, then it displays its 
form and power like an earthly version of the sun 
radiating its light. 


यो हव्यान्यैरयता मनुर्हितो देव आसा सुं गन्धिना । 
विवासते वार्यणि स्वध्वरो होतां देवो अमर्त्यः ॥ aw ui 


24. Yo havydnyairayata manurhito deva asa 
sugandhina. Vivasate varyani svadhvaro hota 
devo amartyah. 


Agni is the divine power which receives and 
carries the holy materials to the divinities by its fragrant 
vedi-mouth of fire. It is the benefactor of humanity and 
gives the choicest good things to all. It is the agent of 
good action and illuminator of the paths of piety. It is 
the high priest of universal yajna and an immortal divine 
power. 


adn मर्त्यस्त्वं स्यामहं मित्रमहो अमर्त्यः । 
सह॑सः सूनवाहुत Be 


Yadagne martyastvam syamaham mitramaho 
amartyah. Sahasah sunavahuta. 


Agni, light and life of the world, child of 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 531 


omnipotence and creator of the mighty cosmos, mortal 
as Iam, if I could worship you and were to become like 
you, I too would be an immortal, great adorable friend 
of the world of existence. 


न cat रासीयाभिशस्तये वसो न पापत्वाय सन्त्य । 
नमे स्तोताम॑तीवा न दुर्हितः स्याद॑गरे न पापर्या ॥ २६॥ 


26. Na tva rastyabhisastaye vaso na papatvaya 
santya. Na me stotamativa na durhitah syadagne 
na papaya. 


Agni, light of life, haven and home of humanity, 
let me not worship you for the sake of something 
despicable. Lord adorable, nor must I pray to you for 
something evil. Let not my own admirer, say my son or 
my disciple, be stupid and dull, nor malignant, nor sinful. 


पितुर्न पुत्रः qual दुरोण आ gat एतु प्र णो! हविः ॥ २७॥ 
27. Piturna putrah subhrto durona a devan etu pra 
no havih. 


Just as the son is cherished in the father’s home 
and then the son looks after the parents, similarly Agni 
is cherished in the house of yajna and may Agni carry 
our oblations to the divinities. 


तवाहमंग्र ऊतिभिर्नेदिंछाभिः सचेय जोषमा व॑सो । 
सद। देवस्य मर्त्य ॥ २८. ॥ 

28. Tavahamagna utibhir-nedisthabhih saceya 
josama vaso. Sada devasya martyah. 


Agni, light of life all pervasive, shelter home of 
humanity, mortal as I am, I pray, may I, by the closest 
protections of the power divine always enjoy the love 


532 RGVEDA 
and favour of the lord. 


तव्‌ cheat सनेयं तव॑ रातिभिरग्ने तव प्रशस्तिभिः। 
त्वामिदाहुः प्रम॑तिं वसो ममाऽगरे हर्षस्व दातवे ॥ २९॥ 


29. Tava kratva saneyam tava ratibhir-agne tava 
prasastibhih. Tvamidahuh pramatim vaso 
mama’ gne harsasva datave. 


By virtue of your mercy and grace, let me love 
you with yajnic life of holy action. By virtue of your 
acceptance, appreciation and generosity, let me serve 
you with all that you have given me. The wise say that 
you are the wisest, most high, and foremost leader and 
guide, O shelter of humanity. O lord, be pleased and 
generous to bless me that I may offer and sing praises 
in honour of your glory. 


Wet अंगने तवोतिभिः सुवीराभिस्तिरते वाज॑भर्मभिः। 
यस्य त्वं सख्यमावर: ॥ ३०॥ 

30. Pra so agne tavotibhih suvirabhis-tirate vaja- 
bharmabhih. Yasya tvam sakhyamavarah. 


Agni, lord of universal love and friendship, he 
whose love and friendship, devotion and dedication, you 
accept into your kind care thrives under your protection 
and promotion and advances in life with noble and 
heroic progeny, moving from victory to glory. 


तवं द्रप्सो नीलवान्वाश ऋत्विय इन्धानः सिष्णवा द॑दे । 
त्वं महीनामुषसामसि प्रियः aot वस्तुषु राजसि ॥ ३९॥ 

31. Tava drapso nilavan vasa rtviya indhanah sisnava 
dade. Tvam mahinam-usasam-asi priyah ksapo 
vastusu rajasi. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 533 


Agni, giver of the showers of joy in life, the 
world of your creation flows on like drops of soma from 
the press, colourful, crackling voluble, exciting and 
fresh through the seasons, bright and beautiful, 
passionately lovable. You are darling of the glory of 
dawns and you shine ever in the glimmerings of the 
dusk and reflect in the ripples of water. 


तमाग॑न्म सोभ॑रयः सहस्रमुष्कं स्वथिष्टिमवंसे | 
सम्राजं त्रास॑दस्यवम्‌ ॥ ३२॥ 


32. Tamaganma sobharayah sahasramuskam sva- 
bhistim-avase. Samrajam trasadasyavam. 


Blest with wealth and knowledge and bearing 
gifts of homage, for ultimate protection and further 
advancement, we have come to the lord almighty of a 
thousand forces of light and arms, object of universal 
love and adoration, blazing ruler of the universe and a 
scourge of the evil destroyers. 


यस्य॑ ते अग्रे अन्ये अग्रय॑ं उपक्षितो aaa 
विपो न द्युम्ना नि युं वे जनानां तवं श्चत्राणिं वर्धय॑न्‌ ॥ ३३ ॥ 
33. Yasya te agne anye agnaya upaksito vaya iva. 


Vipo na dyumna ni yuve jananam tava ksatrani 
vardhayan. 


Of you, Agni, lord and light of the universe, on 
whom do other lights such as the sun depend like 
branches of the tree, I sing like a poet and, celebrating 
your ruling orders of the people, I enjoy the honour and 
pleasures of the world of your creation. 


यमादित्यासो अद्भुहः पारं नय॑थ wef LI 
मघोनां विश्वेषां सुदानवः ॥ ३४ ॥ 


534 RGVEDA 


33. | Yamadityaso adruhah param nayatha martyam. 
Maghonam visvesam sudanavah. 


O Adityas, generous givers of light and life free 
from malice and jealousy, of all the people of wealth, 
honour and power, whoever the mortal you guide and 
lead across the world of karma and consequence, he is 
the man of good fortune. 


यूयं राजानः कं चिंच्यर्षणीसहः क्षयन्तं मानुषँ अनुं । 
वयं ते वो वरुणा मित्रार्यमन्त्स्यामेदूतस्यं Teal: ॥ ३५ ॥ 


35. Yuyam rajanah kam ciccarsanisahah ksayantam 
manusan anu. Vayam te vo varuna mitraryama- 
nt-syamed-rtasya rathyah. 


Adityas, powers and givers of light and justice, 
rulers of the bright order over people, punish whoever 
does evil and violence toward the law abiding citizens. 
O Vauna, ruling power of judgement and justice, Mitra, 
men of love and friendship, and Aryaman, guides and 
pioneers of the nation, let us be cooperative participants 
to take over the reins of your law and order of the truth 
and justice of your vision. 


अदान्मे पौरुकुत्स्यः प॑ञ्चाशतं त्रसदस्युर्वधूनाम्‌ । 
महिं छो अर्यः सत्प॑तिः ॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Adanme paurukutsyah pancasatam trasadasyur- 
vadhunam. Mamhistho aryah saptih. 


May the lord sustainer of all life and destroyer 
of negativities, protector against the wicked, most 
liberal, most respectable defender of truth and goodness, 
I pray, bless us with many manly sons in the family and 
give them all noble wives. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 535 


उत मेँ प्रयियोर्वयियोंः सुवास्त्वा अधि तुग्व॑नि तिसृणां 
dead श्यावः प्र॑णेता भुंवद्वसुर्दियानां पतिः ॥ ३७॥ 


37. Uta 17८ prayiyor-vayiyoh suvastva adhi tugvani. 
Tisrnam saptatinam syavah praneta bhuvad 
vasur-diyanam patih. 


May the lord omnipresent, master ruler of all 
moving things and the three worlds, supporter of all 
liberal people, be my ultimate guide, inspiration, and 
abode at the end of my life of karma, moving as I am 
towards him with concentration on good things in 
thought and action. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 20 
Marutah Devatah, Sobhari Kanva Rshi 


आ गन्ता मा रिषण्यत प्रस्थावानो माप॑ स्थाता समन्यवः। 
स्थिरा चिंन्नमयिष्णवः॥ ९॥ 


1. A ganta ma risanyata prasthavano mapa sthata 
samanyavah. Sthira cinnamayisnavah. 


Come Maruts, warriors of nature and humanity. 
Do not hurt nor destroy the innocent. Already on the 
move as ever, pray do not tarry any more far away. 
Heroes of equal passion, will and desire to accomplish 
your mission, you can bend even the firmest forces of 
violence and bring them to reason. 


aie पविभिर्मरुत ऋशभुश्चषण आ रुद्रासः सुदीतिभिः | 
इषा नो अद्या ग॑ता पुरुस्पृहो यज्ञमा सो।भरीयवंः ॥ २॥ 


2, Vilupavibhir-maruta rbhuksana a rudrasah 
suditibhih. Isa no adya gata purusprho yajnama 
sobhartyavah. 


536 RGVEDA 


Mighty leaders of will and intelligence, lovers 
and protectors of the good, destroyers of want and 
suffering, honoured and invoked by all, come right now 
at the fastest by blazing chariots of the strongest wheel 
with forces of thunder and join our yajnic programme 
of creation and development with abundant food and 
energy. 


विद्या हि रुद्रियाणां शुष्ममुग्रं मरुतां शिमी वताम्‌ । 
विष्णो रे षस्य॑ मीव्ठ्र्षाम्‌॥ 3 ॥ 


3: Vidma hi rudriyanam Susmamugram marutam 
Simivatam. Visnoresasya milhusam. 


We know the virile Maruts dedicated to peace 
and justice against violence and injustice. They are 
harbingers of rain showers of plenty as participative 
agents of the cosmic will working in the dynamics of 
nature and humanity. 


fa draft पाप॑तन्तिषठदुच्छु नोभे asa रोद॑सी । 
प्र धन्वान्यैरत शुभ्रखादयो यदेज॑थ स्वभानवः॥ ४॥ 


4. Vi dvipani papatan tisthad ducchunobhe yujanta 
rodast. Pra dhanvanyairata subhrakhadayo 
yadejatha svabhanavah. 


O self-refulgent Maruts, when you in your 
blazing armour stir and move, islands sink at their banks, 
the evil stand still, both heaven and earth shake and the 
deserts rage with flying sands. 


stata चिद्धो अज्मन्ना नान॑दति पर्व तासो areata: । 
भूमियमिंषु रेजते ॥ ५॥ 


8 Acyuta cid vo ajmanna nanadati parvataso vana- 
spatih. Bhumiryamesu rejate. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 537 


At your move to battle, fixed mountains roar, 
ancient trees crack and crackle, and the earth shakes 
under the force of your pressure. 


अमाय वो मरुतो यात॑वे द्यौर्जिंहींत उत्तरा ged! 
यत्रा नरो देदिशते तनूष्वा त्वक्षांसि बाह्योजसः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Amaya vo maruto yatave dyaurjihita uttara brhat. 
Yatra naro dedisate tanusva tvaksamsi bahvo- 
jasah. 


O Maruts, for the expansion of your force and 
power on the march, the vast skies give way farther and 
farther as the heroes of mighty arm put on and display 
their armour on their person. 


स्वधामनु श्रियं नरो महिं त्वेषा अम॑वन्तो वृष॑प्सवः। 
वहन्ते STE AAA: ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Svadhamanu sriyam naro mahi tvesa amavanto 
vrsapsavah. Vahante ahrutapsavah. 


These mighty heroes, blazing bright in 
magnificence, commanding force and power of 
excellence, generous with moral rectitude, far from 
crookedness and unshakably upright in conduct, wear 
and express the grace of culture and behaviour in 
keeping with their innate merit and dedication to the 
defence of mother earth and her children. 


गोभिर्वाणो अज्यते सोभरीणां रथे कोशे हिरण्ययं | 
गोब॑न्धवः सुजातास इषे भुजे महान्तो A: ERAT ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Gobhirvano ajyate sobharinam rathe (८05८ 
hiranyaye. Gobandhavah sujatasa ise bhuje 
mahanto nah sparase nu. 


538 RGVEDA 


The missile of these protectors, sustainers and 
defenders of the earth is shot by the force of sounds in 
the golden interior of the carrier chariot. May these 
heroes, friends of the earth, nobly born and trained, great 
and glorious, stand for our maintenance, food and 
energy, comfort, love and cooperation. 


प्रतिं वो quassrent वृष्णो शधीय मारुताय भरध्वम्‌ | 
हव्या वृषप्रयाव्णो ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Prati vo vrsadanjayo vrsne Sardhaya marutaya 
bharadhvam. Havya vrsaprayavne. 


O generous yajakas, makers of soma, bear and 
bring homage in thankful response to the generous and 
mighty force of the Maruts led on the march by a great 
and formidable generous commander. 


वृषणश्वेनं मरुतो वृष॑प्सुना रथेन वृष॑नाभिना । आ श्येनासो 
न पक्षिणो वृथा नरो हव्या नो! वीतये गत ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Vrsanasvena maruto vrsapsuna rathena vrsana- 
bhina. 4 Syenaso na paksino vrtha naro havya no 
vitaye gata. 


O Maruts, stormy troops of nature and leading 
warriors of the human nation, come freely like the 
mighty high flying eagle birds and bring us holy yajnic 
inputs for development and human progress for our 
protection and advancement by your strongly built 
chariot drawn by mighty forces, bearing loads of riches 
in generous plenty for our spiritual and material well 
being. 


समानमञ्ज्येषां वि राजन्ते रुक्मासो अधिं बाहुषु । 
दविंद्युतत्युष्टयंः ॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 539 


11. Samanamanjyesam vi bhrajante rukmaso adhi 
bahusu. Davidyutatyrstayah. 


The turn out, uniform and movement of these 
Maruts is steady and alike. So are their golden badges 
on the shoulders, and their weapons too shine uniformly 
in their hands. 


त उग्रासो वृष॑ण उग्रबाहवो नकिष्ट नुषुं येतिरे । 
स्थिरा धन्वान्यायुधा रथेषु वोऽनीकेष्वधि fora: ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Taugraso vrsana ugrabahavo nakistanusu yetire. 
Sthira dhanvanyayudha rathesu vo’nikesvadhi 
Sriyah. 


Bold and fearsome are they, vigorous and 
generous, strong of arm, so that they don’t have to exert 
to defend their bodies and battle formations. Their arms 
and ammunitions are safe and strong, ready in position 
in their chariots, and in their battles they come out 
victorious with credit and admiration. 


येषामर्णो न सप्रथो नामं त्वेषं शश्व॑तामेकमिद्धुजे । 
वयो न पित्र्यं सह॑ः ॥ ९३ ॥ 
13. Yesamarno na sapratho nama tvesam Sasvata- 


mekamid bhuje. Vayao na pitryam sahah. 


Ever ready and on the move without relent, their 
name and fame is unique, wide as the sea and expansive. 
So is their courage and patience to be enjoyed like 
ancestral heritage. 


तान्व॑न्दस्व मरुतस्त उप॑ स्तुहि तेषां हि धुनीनाम्‌ । 
अराणां न च॑र मस्तदेषां दाना Wal तदेषाम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


540 RGVEDA 


14. Tan vandasva marutastam upa stuhi tesam hi 
dhuninam. Aranam na caramastadesam dana 
mahna tadesam. 


Honour the Maruts, celebrate them all closely 
and fervently. As the spokes of the wheel are all equal, 
so all of these shakers of the evil and the wicked are 
equal, none is the highest, none the lowest. Hence also 
the gifts of protection and security of all of them are 
equally great. 


सुभगः स व॑ ऊतिष्वास gate मरुतो व्युष्टिषु | 
यो वां नूनमुतासंति ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Subhagah sa va utisvasa purvasu maruto vyustisu. 
Yo va nunamutasati. 


Fortunate is that man, and prospers, O Maruts, 
who has been under your care and protection since early 
dawns and who for sure remains under your care for 
now and all time. 


यस्य॑ वा यूयं प्रति वाजिनो! नर॒ आ हव्या वीतये गथ | 
अभि ष द्युम्नैरुत वाजसातिभिः सुम्ना at धूतयो 
नरात्‌ ॥ LE ॥ 


16. Yasya va yuyam prati vajino nara a havya vitaye 
gatha. Abhi sa dyumnairuta vajasatibhih sumna 
vo dhitayo nasat. 


O Maruts, leading lights of life, movers and 
shakers of negativities and opposition, whoever the man 
with yajnic gift when you approach to protect and 
partake of his offerings, is blest with peace and comfort 
and he prospers with honour and fame and wins victories 
in the battles for food, energy and wealth with prestige. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 541 


यथां सद्रस्य॑ सूनवो! दिवो वशन्त्यसुरस्य वेधसः | 
यु्वानस्तथेदं सत्‌ ॥ १७॥ 


17. Yatha rudrasya sunavo divo vasantyasurasya 
vedhasah. Yuvanastathedasat. 


As the Maruts, youthful children of Rudra, 
cosmic justice, light divine and universal life-giving 
intelligence, would wish, so may it be with us and all. 


ये चार्हन्ति wed: सुदानवः स्मन्मीव््ुषश्चर॑न्ति ये। 
अतश्चिदा न उप वस्य॑सा हृदा युवान आ व॑वृध्वम्‌ ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Ye carhanti marutah sudanavah smanmilhu- 
sascaranti ye. Atascida na upa vasyasa hrda 
yuvana a vavrdhvam. 


There are those people who honour the virile 
and generous Maruts, warriors and rain bearers of the 
nation. There are also those generous and charitable 
people who act and conduct themselves according to 
the Maruts’ good wishes. For this reason, O youthful 
heroes, come and promote us with a very liberal and 
sympathetic heart as your own. 


यून॑ ऊ षु afdsen वृष्ण॑ः पावकां अभि सोभरे गिरा। 
गाय Wea चर्कृषत्‌ ॥ १९ ॥ 


19. Yuna u su navisthaya vrsnah pavakan abhi 
sobhare gira. Gaya ga iva carkrsat. 


As a farmer yokes and exhorts his bulls while 
ploughing the land, so should you, O manager of the 
nation, appreciate and celebrate the youthful, virile, 
generous and purifying Maruts, exhorting them with 
exciting words of latest praise and commendation. 


542 RGVEDA 


साहा ये सन्तिं मुष्टिहेव हव्यो विश्वासु पृत्सु होतुंषु। 
वृरष्णश्चन्द्रान्न सुश्रव॑स्तमान्‌ गिरा वन्द॑स्व मरुतो अहं ॥ Ro 


20. Saha ye santi mustiheva havyo visvasu prtsu 
hotrsu. Vrsnascandranna susravastaman gira 
vandasva maruto aha. 


Those who accept challenges of hostile and 
formidable forces in battles of the human nation in the 
world and, like a veteran celebrated boxer, repulse the 
challengers and win, those virile Maruts, generous as 
cloud bearing winds, handsome as the golden moon, 
and most reputed in humanity, O poet, sing and celebrate 
in spontaneous and most exciting words and voice. 


गाव॑ज्चिद्धा समन्यवः सजात्येन मरुतः सब॑न्धवः | 
रिहते ककुभो पिथः॥ २९॥ 


21.  Gavascid gha samanyavah sajatyena marutah 
sabandhavah. Rihate kakubho mithah. 


O Maruts, heroes of equal mind bound in 
brotherhood, even cows, by virtue of the same species 
sit together and love each other under your kind care 
even though they may be moving around in different 
directions. 


मर्तश्चिद्धो नृतवो रुक्मवक्षस उप॑ भ्रातृत्वमायं fa t अधिं 
नो गात मरुतः सदा हि व॑ आपित्वमस्ति Pata i २२॥ 
22. Martascid vo nrtavo rukmavaksasa upa bhratr- 


vamayati. Adhi no gata marutah sada hi va 
apitvamasti nidhruvi. 


Mortals too, O Maruts, singing and dancing 
celebrants of life wearing golden corselet on the chest, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 543 


come to realise their kindred unity under your kind care 
and direction. Sing and speak to us over and above us 
since our brotherhood with you is always inviolable. 


मरुतो मारुतस्य न आ Yast वहता सुदानवः। 
यूयं स॑खायः सप्तयः ॥ २३॥ 


23. = 14411110 marutasya na a bhesajasya vahata 
sudanavah. Yuyam sakhayah saptayah. 


O Maruts, sojourners of lands and skies, moving 
in formations of seven coursers, noble and generous 
friends of the community, bring in for us medicaments 
of the air for our health and environment. 


याभिः सिन्धुमवथ याभिस्तूर्वथ याभिर्दशस्यथा क्रिविंम्‌। 
मयो नो भूतोतिधिर्मयोभुवः शिवाभिंरसचद्धिषः ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. Yabhih sindhumavatha yabhisturvatha yabhir- 
dasasyatha krivim. Mayo no bhiutotibhirmayo- 
bhuvah sivabhirasacadvisah. 


O heroes of lands and seas and skies, free from 
hate, jealousy and enmity, bring us that tactic and policy 
and modes of defence and protection by which you 
guard the sea, repulse encroachment, and dig and 
construct tanks and wells and give them to people. O 
heroes of peace and well-being, be good and kind with 
safeguards of all type, safe guards and defences of 
auspicious and benevolent kind. 


यत्सिन्धौ यदसिक्न्यां यत्स॑मुद्रेषुं मरुतः सुबर्हिषः | 
AAS AT भेषजम्‌ ॥ २५॥ 


25. Yat sindhau yadasiknyam yat samudresu marutah 
subarhisah. Yat parvatesu bhesajam. 


544 RGVEDA 


O Maruts, who sit on the holy seat of yajna, bring 
us the sanatives and medicaments that are in the rivers 
and the seas, in the darkness of caves, in the oceans and 
on the mountains. 


fave पश्य॑न्तो बिभुथा तनुष्वा तेना नो अधिं वोचत | 
क्षमा रपो मरुत आतुरस्य न इष्कर्ता विदहतं GA: ॥ २६ ॥ 


26. Visvam pasyanto bibhrtha tanusva tena no adhi 
vocata. Ksama rapo maruta aturasya na iskarta 
vihrutam punah. 


O Maruts, you watch the world and all that it 
contains. You bear and bring all that knowledge and 
competence on your person, and with that pray, bless 
our physical body system and our body politic. By virtue 
of that knowledge and experience speak to us. O heroes 
of nature and humanity, cure the weakness, sin and 
suffering of our sick and restore to full health and 
efficiency whatever is broken and lost. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 21 
Indra (1-16), Chitra (17-18) Devate, Sobhari Kanva Rshi 


वयमु त्वाम॑पूर्व्य स्थूरं न कच्चि द्धर॑न्तोऽ aera: | 
वाजे चित्रं ह॑वामहे ॥ ९॥ 


if Vayamu tvamapurvya sthuram na kaccid bha- 
ranto’vasyavah. Vaje citram havamahe. 


O lord sublime, eternal, first and most excellent, 
we, bearing almost nothing substantial but praying for 
protection and advancement, invoke you in our battle 
of life for food, energy, knowledge and ultimate victory. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 21 545 


so त्वा ayaa स नो युवोग्रश्च॑क्राम यो al 
त्वामिन्द्य॑वितारं ववृमहे सखाय इन्द्र सानसिम्‌ 2 


2, Upa tva karmannitaye sa no yuvograscakrama 
yo dhrsat. Tvamiddhyavitaram vavrmahe sakhaya 
indra sanasim. 


We approach you for protection and success in 
every undertaking. O lord youthful and blazing brave 
who can challenge and subdue any difficulty, pray come 
to our help. Indra, friends and admirers of yours, we 
depend on you alone as our sole saviour and victorious 
lord and choose to pray to you only as the lord supreme. 


आ याहीम इन्दवोऽ शुव॑पते गोप॑त॒ serra | 
सोमं सोमपते पिल ।॥ 3 u 


A yahima indavo’$vapate gopata urvarapate. 
Somam somapate piba. 


Come lord of cows, horses and fertile lands, 
giver and protector of the nation and its glory, 
knowledge and wisdom and our creative activities, the 
somas of our success are for you to appreciate. O lord 
of life and life’s joy of soma, come and join the ecstasy 
of our achievement and its celebration. 


वयं हि त्वा बन्धुंमन्तमलन्धवो विप्रास इन्द्र येमिम।याते 
धामानि वृषभ तेभिरा ग॑हि विश्वेथिः सोम॑पीतये ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Vayam hi tva bandhumantam-abandhavo viprasa 


indra yemima. Ya te dhamani vrsabha tebhira 
gahi visvabhih somapitaye. 


Bereft of any permanent brotherhood in mortal 
humanity, we are drawn by ourselves to you, enlightened 


546 RGVEDA 


as we are and universal brother as you are in kinship 
divine. O lord of universal vigour and generosity, with 
all the world regions you command, come with the glory 
of all those worlds, join our soma celebrations, accept 
our devotion and protect this social order. 


सीदन्तस्ते वयो यथा गोश्रीं ते मधो afer विवक्च॑णे। 
अभि त्वामिन्द्र नोनुमः ॥ ५॥ 


2: Sidantaste vayo yatha ९05771८ madhau madire 
vivaksane. Abhi tvamindra nonumah. 


Nestled like birds in the nest, in your exuberant, 
exciting, honey sweet yajnic world of light and joy 
overflowing with delicacies of food and drink, we bow 
to you and worship you in thankfulness. 


अच्छा च त्वैना नम॑सा वदामसि कं मुहुख्चिद्धि दीधयः। 
सन्ति कामासो हरिवो ददि ष्टं स्मो वयं सन्तिं नो fart: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Accha ca tvaina namasa vadamasi kim muhuScid 
vi didhayah. Santi kamaso harivo dadistvam smo 
vayam santi no dhiyah. 


Profusely with this salutation and homage, we 
honour and praise you and pray to you again and again. 
Why do you hesitate, in thought? O lord of the moving 
world, we have our desires and ambitions. You are the 
giver of fulfilment. We are here, our prayers are here, 
and we are yours. We have our thoughts and intelligence 
too, hence we pray: Grant our prayers without delay. 


Wen इदिन्द्र ते वयमूती अभूम नहि नू तै अद्रिवः | 
विद्धा पुरा परीणसः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Nutna idindra te vayamuti abhuma nahi ni te 
adrivah. Vidma pura parinasah. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 21 547 


O lord of the thunderbolt, mountains and the 
clouds, ruler of the world, Indra, it is not that we are 
just new to your beneficence, protection and promotion, 
we have indeed enjoyed and known your wealth and 
munificence since time immemorial. 


विद्या सखित्वमुत शूर भोज्य¶मा ते ता वंचिन्नीमहे। 
उतो संमस्िन्ना शिशीहि नो वसो वाजे सुशिप्र गोम॑ति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vidma sakhitvamuta sura bhojyama te ta vajrinni- 
mahe. Uto samasminna SiSthi no vaso vaje susipra 
gomati. 


O lord of might, wielder of the thunderbolt of 
justice and power, we know and enjoy your love and 
friendship and your liberal provisions of life’s 
enjoyment, and the same we solicit of you. And we pray, 
O lord of the golden helmet, power and knowledge, 
giver of peace and settlement, establish us in this noble 
order of lands and cows, food and energy, knowledge 
and action and the holy life of freedom and happiness. 


यो न॑ इदमिदं पुरा प्र वस्य॑ आनिनाय ad वः स्तुषे । 
सखाय इन्द्रमूतये ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Yo na idamidam pura pra vasya aninaya tamu 


vah stuse. Sakhaya indramutaye. 


O friends, for the peace, freedom, progress and 
protection of you all, I pray to the same Indra, lord 
almighty, who has provided this beautiful world of joy 
for us since the very time of creation. 


हर्यश्वं सत्प॑तिं चर्षणीसहं स हि ष्मा यो अम॑न्दत 1 आ तु 
नः स व॑यति गव्यमश्व्यं स्तोतृभ्यो मघवा ़ातम्‌॥ ९० ॥ 


548 RGVEDA 


10. = Haryasvam satpatim carsanisaham sa hi sma yo 
amandata. A tu nah sa vayati gavyamasvyam 
stotrbhyo maghava Satam. 


He alone is happy indeed and prospers who 
glorifies Indra, lord of the moving universe, protector 
and promoter of truth and reality and ruler and justicier 
of humanity, who, lord almighty, weaves for us this web 
of a hundredfold variety of earthly provision and all 
attainable possibility for the celebrants. 


त्वया ह स्विद्युजा वयं प्रतिं श्वसन्तं वृषभ ब्रुवीमहि । 
संस्थे जनस्य गोम॑तः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tvayahasvidyuja vayam prati Svasantam vrsabha 
bruvimahi. Samsthe janasya gomatah. 


By you alone as our friend and comrade, O lord 
almighty, generous giver, can we counter a gasping 
contestant in this settled world order of humanity full 
of lands and cows, blest as we are with the light of 
knowledge and culture. 


जयेम ait deed कारिणोऽ भि fea ged: | 
dda gare शूशुयाम चाऽवेरिन्द्र प्रणो धियं: ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Jayema kare puruhuta karino’bhi tisthema 
dudhyah. Nrbhirvrtram hanyama susuyama 
ca’verindra pra no dhiyah. 


Indra, lord of power and light of life, universally 
invoked, let us win over the violent in the struggle of 
life, discipline and subject to rule and order the obstinate 
and intransigent with reason, dispel darkness and 
destroy evil with the help of the leading lights of society, 
and thus grow and march forward and higher. O lord, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 21 549 


protect and guide our thoughts and actions against 
temptations to go astray. 


अभ्रातृव्यो अना त्वमनापिरिन्द्र जनुषां सनाद॑सि। 
युधेदापित्वमिंच्छसे 1 ९३॥ 


13. Abhratrvyo ana tvamanapirindra janusa sana- 
dasi. Yudhedapitvamicchase. 


Indra, lord of absolute might by nature, since 
birth of the universe, indeed for eternity, you are without 
a rival, need no leader, no friend and no comrade, but 
in the dynamics of human life you do want that the 
human should be your companion in and for his struggle 
for self-evolution and social progress. 


नकीं रे वन्तं cera विन्दसे पीय॑न्ति ते ava: 
यदा कृणोषि नदनुं समूह स्यादित्पितेवं हूयसे ॥ ९४॥ 
14. Naki revantam sakhyaya vindase [7247117 te 


surasvah. Yada krnosi nadanum samuhasya- 
dit piteva hiyase. 


You do not just care to choose the rich for 
companionship, if they are swollen with drink and pride 
and violate the rules of divine discipline. But when you 
attend to the poor and alter their fortune for the better, 
you are invoked like father with gratitude which the 
voice of thunder acknowledges and approves. 


मा ते अमाजुरो यथा मूरास इन्द्र सख्ये त्वाव॑तः। 
नि ष॑दाम सचां सुते ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Ma te amajuro yatha murasa indra sakhye tva- 
vatah. Ni sadama saca sute. 


Indra, Lord of yajnic evolution and social 


550 RGVEDA 


development, let us not like stupid fools sit at home 
and grow to age in years, but let us, in enlightened 
friendship with a power like you, sit on the yajna vedi 
and grow in knowledge and wisdom. 


माते गोदत्र Prive राध॑स इन्द्र मा ते गृहामदहि। 
goa चिं दर्यः प्र मंशाभ्या भ॑र न ते दामानं आदभे i ९६॥ 


16. Ma te godatra nirarama radhasa indra ma te 
grhamahi. Drlha cidaryah pra mrsabhya bhara 
na te damana adabhe. 


Indra, lord giver of lands and cows, knowledge 
and enlightened culture, let us never fall from your gifts 
of divine munificence. Let us never take anything from 
anyone other than you. O lord of the world’s wealth, 
bear and bring us your gifts of permanent value. No 
one can ever disturb or stop the flow of your gifts of 
love and charity to humanity. 


इन्द्रो वा धेदिय॑न्मघं सर॑स्वती वा सुभगा ददिर्वसु | 
त्वं वां चित्र दाशुषे ।॥ QO 


17. Indro va ghediyanmagham sarasvati va subhaga 
dadirvasu. Tvam va citra dasuse. 


Is it Indra, ruling power of the mortal world, 
that gives so much wealth to the man of yajnic charity? 
Or is it Sarasvati, holy speech, abundant stream and 
dynamics of nature that gives so much wealth to the 
charitable humanity? Or is it you, Lord Supreme, 
sublime mystery of the world of existence, who give so 
much wealth to the liberal donor? 


चित्र इद्राजां राजका इदन्यके यके सरस्वतीमनु | 
पर्जन्यं इव ततनद्धि वृष्ट्या सहस्त्र॑मयुता दद॑त्‌ ॥ ९८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 22 551 


18. (व (व raja rajaka idanyake yake sarasvatimanu. 
Parjanya iva tatanaddhi vrstya sahasramayuta 
dadat. 


The mysterious divine power immanent and 
transcendent is the supreme ruler and ultimate giver. 
Other ruling divinities, human rulers or natural forces, 
flowing speech or rivers or river benefactors in 
consonance with Sarasvati, are but subservient to the 
supreme. Just as the cloud soaks the earth all round and 
over so does the lord of wonder and sublimity give 
thousands and tens of thousands of wealth to humanity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 22 
Ashvinau Devata, Sobhari Kanva Rshi 


ओ erig आ waiter दंसिं्टमूतयें | 
यमश्विना सुहवा रुद्रवर्तनी आ gare तस्थथुः ॥ ९॥ 


iP O tyamahva a rathamadya damsisthamutaye. 
Yamasvina suhava rudravartani a suryayai 
tasthathuh. 


Ah, on this auspicious day I invoke, imagine 
and structure that most wonderful and versatile chariot 
for protection and progress which the Ashvins, twin 
harbingers of the freshness of a new morning, most 
welcome invitees, would ascend and come by paths of 
love and justice free from violence for the advancement 
of life’s light and glory. 


पूर्वापुषं सुहवं gaurd भुज्युं वाजेषु get) 
सचनावन्तं सुमतिभिः सोभरे विद्धषसमनेहसंम्‌ 2 u 


552 RGVEDA 


2: Purvapusam sahavam purusprham bhujyum 
vajesu purvyam. Sacanavantam sumatibhih 
sobhare vidvesasam-anehasam. 


O Sobhari, scientist and technologist, with your 
best of intelligence and intention, design, structure and 
perfect the chariot which has supported the life of the 
nation since earliest times, which is welcome and 
available to all easily, universally acceptable and 
enjoyable, first and foremost in the battles of life, friend 
of all on land, sea and sky, inviolable and 
unchallengeable by the jealous rivals and enemies. 


इह त्या पुरुभूत॑मा देवा नमोभिरश्विना । 
अर्वाचीना स्वव॑से करामहे गन्तारा दाशुषो गृहम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


श Tha tya purubhutama deva namobhir-asvina. 
Arvacina svavase karamahe gantara dasuso 
grham. 


Here on the earth for the sake of protection and 
progress of the human nation, with all honours and 
reverence, we invoke, appoint and consecrate the 
Ashvins, universally acceptable, brilliant and generous 
complementary twin powers of the nation such as the 
ruler and the governing council or ruler and the 
commander of defence forces, who are harbingers of 
fresh life, energy and prosperity for humanity, who are 
latest in knowledge and competence and freely mix with 
the generous citizens at their homes. 


युवो रथ॑स्य परिं चक्रमीयत ईर्मान्यद्वामिषण्यति | 
अस्मां अच्छा सु मतिर्वी शुभस्पती आ धेनुरिव धावतु ts 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 22 993 


4. Yuvo rathasya pari cakramtiyata irmanyad vami- 
sanyati. Asman accha sumatirvam subhaspati a 
dhenuriva dhavatu. 


One chariot of yours is ever on the wheel going 
all round and round, the other serves, inspires and flies 
you anywhere when you need. O protectors of the 
auspicious good fortune of the human nation, may your 
good will and benevolence hasten to reach us like the 
mother cow rushing to her calf. 


tat at at त्रिवन्धुरो दहिरण्याभीशुरण्विना | 
परि द्यावापृथिवी भूषं ति श्रुतस्तेनं नासत्या ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5, Ratho yo vam tribandhuro hiranyabhisur-asvina. 
Pari dyavaprthivi bhusati Ssrutastena nasatya 
gatam. 


Your famous and celebrated three-stage chariot 
controlled by golden steers traverses over heaven and 
earth. O lovers of truth and righteousness, come to us 
by that glorious chariot. 


दशस्यन्ता मन॑वे yet दिवि यवं वृकेण कर्षथः | 
ar ater सुं मतिभिः शुभस्पती अश्विना प्र स्तुंवीमहि॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Dasasyanta manave purvyam divi yavam vrkena 
karsathah. Ta vamadya sumatibhih subhaspati 
asvina pra stuvimahi. 


O twin powers of socio-economic complemen- 
tarities, rulers and protectors of the nation’s auspicious 
good fortune, you till the land with the plough giving 
the people the gift of barley and setting a generous 
example of enlightened behaviour of permanent value. 
O leaders of eminence and splendour, with sincere 


554 RGVEDA 


thought, intention and action we celebrate you both this 
holy day of thanks giving for the nation. 


उप॑ नो वाजिनीवसू यातमृतस्य॑ पथिभिः । 
येभिंस्तृ्चिं वृषणा त्रासदस्यवं महे श्च त्राय जिन्व॑थः ॥ ७॥ 


a Upano vajinivasu yatamrtasya pathibhih. Yebhis- 
trksim vrsana trasadasyavam mahe ksatraya 
Jinvathah. 


Generous and victorious lords of strength and 
progress, come to us by those paths of truth and 
righteousness by which, O brilliant harbingers of rain 
showers of prosperity, you strengthen and empower the 
high command of the nation to maintain the splendour 
of the nation’s social order and keep down the forces of 
violence and terror in peace and submission. 


अयं वामद्रिभिः सुतः सोमो नरा वृषण्वसू | 
आ यातं सोम॑पीतये पिब॑तं दाशुषो! गृहे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ayam vamadribhih suta somo nara vrsanvasi. 
A yatam somapitaye pibatam dasuso grhe. 


O leading lights of humanity, generous 
harbingers of the showers of prosperity, this soma of 
pleasure and honour distilled with the complementary 
forces of our social dynamics is for you. Come to 
participate in the celebrations of the nation for the taste 
of glory and ecstasy and drink the soma in the yajnic 
house of the generous giver and performer of yajna. 


आ हि wadaiveat रथे कोशे हिरण्यये वृषण्वसू । 
युञ्जाथां पीवरीरिषः ॥ ९ ॥ 


रः A hi ruhatamasvina rathe (८०5८ hiranyaye vrsa- 
nvasu. Yunjatham pivaririsah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 22 555 


Ashvins, harbingers of the showers of 
prosperity, ascend the chariot, seat yourselves in the 
golden interior of the chariot, come and settle us into a 
powerful social order of energy and prosperity. 


याभिः पक्थमव॑थो याभिरध्रिगुं aici विजोषसम्‌। 
ताभिर्नो मक्षु तूय॑मणश्विना ग॑तं भिषज्यतं यदातुरम्‌॥ Qo ॥ 


10. = Yabhih pakthamavatho yabhiradhrigum yabhir- 
babhrum vijosasam. Tabhirno maksu tuyama- 
Svina gatam bhisajyatam yadaturam. 


Ashvins, rulers and administrators of the social 
system of health and security, come with those 
protections and securities by which you protect and 
maintain the healthy veterans of knowledge and 
practical action, by which you assist the disabled and 
help the support system for the weak and the destitute. 
Come fast without delay to sustain the weak and 
suffering in a state of emergency and provide them 
medical aid. 


यदधिंगावो अध्रिगू इदा facet अश्विना हवामहे। 
वयं गीर्भिर्विपन्यवः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yadadhrigavo adhrigu ida cidahno asvina 
havamahe. Vayam girbhirvipanyavah. 


We men of the mantra in need, celebrants of the 
irresistible Ashvins, powers of wind and electric energy, 
ministrants of succour and security, invoke them with 
voices of praise at this time of the day to come and help us. 


ताभिरा यातं वृषणोपं मे हवं विश्वप्सुं विर्ववांर्यम्‌। इषा 
fest पुरुभूतमा नरा याभिः क्रिविं are धुस्ताभिरा 
ग॑तम्‌॥ LRU 


556 RGVEDA 


12. Tabhirad yatam vrsanopa me havam visvapsum 
visvavaryam. Isa mamhistha purubhutama nara 
Yabhih krivim vavrdhus-tabhira gatam. 


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, virile 
harbingers of showers of health and life’s joy, listen to 
my manifold and persistent invocation expressive of 
universal love and devotion and come. Most generous 
and exceedingly rich all round universal presences, 
come with those foods and medications for recuperative 
energies by which you revive and strengthen the man 
fallen into utter depression. With those protective and 
promotive sanatives, pray, come in response to my call. 


ताविदा चिदहानां तावश्विना वन्द॑मान sd aa 
ता ऊ नमोंभिरीमहे।॥ ९३॥ 


13. Tavida cidahanam tavasvina vandamana upa 
bruve. Ta namobhirimahe. 


At this time of the day every morning, saluting 
and celebrating the twin powers of human and natural 
complementarity, the Ashvins, I speak to them 
intimately, and this is how with homage and prayer we 
invoke them to come and bless. 


ताविद्ोषा ता sara शुभस्पती ता area sat । मानो 
मतीय रिपवे वाजिनीवसू परो रुद्रावति ख्यतम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Tavid 4८5 ta usasi Subhaspati ta yaman rudra- 
vartani. Ma no martaya ripave vajinivasu paro 
rudravati khyatam. 


Those two lords of auspicious good fortune 
moving by paths of rectitude, justice and punishment, 
we invoke and celebrate at night, early morning at dawn 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 22 557 


and all times of the day. May they, lord commanders of 
wealth and victory, scourge of evil and violence, never 
forsake us to the mortal enemy, never throw us far off 
to the hungry wolves. 


आ सुग्म्याय सुग्म्यं प्राता रथेनाख्विनां वा सक्षणीं। 
हुवे पितेव सोभ॑री ॥ ९५॥ 


15. A sugmyaya sugmyam prata rathenasvina va 
saksani. Huve piteva sobhari. 


Like my father rich in knowledge and 
enlightenment, I invoke the Ashvins, twin, inseparable 
powers of complementarity in unison, in the morning 
to come by chariot as they please and to bring riches 
and joy for the devotee praying for riches and joy. 
मनोजवसा वृषणा मदच्युता मक्षुगमाभिरूतिभिः। 
आरात्ताच्िद्धूतमस्मे अव॑से Gat: पुरुभोजसा ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. Manojavasa vrsana madacyuta maksungama- 
bhirutibhih. Arattaccid bhutamasme avase 
purvibhih purubhojasa. 

O Ashvins, complementary harbingers of 
showers of joy, moving at the speed of mind to provide 
sustenance and pleasures of life for all, come and be at 
the closest to us for our protection and progress by 


instant modes of defence and security as you have ever 
been since the earliest times of creation. 


आ नो अश्वावदश्विना वर्तियीसिष्टं मधुपातमा नरा | 
mage हिर॑ण्यवत्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. A no asvavadasvina vartiryasistam madhupat- 
ama nara. Gomad_ dasra_ hiranyavat. 


558 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, mighty blissful complementary twin 
powers of humanity in the social order, leading lights 
of life, commanding wealth of cows and horses, lands, 
culture and advancement, givers of success in high 
attainment, greatest protectors and promoters of the 
honey sweets of life and golden wealth of the world, 
come and bless us with the wealth we pray for. 


सुप्रावर्गं सुवीर्य' सुष्ठु वार्यमनाधृष्टं रक्षस्विना । अस्मिन्ना 
वामायाने वाजिनीवसू favat वामानि धीमहि॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Supravargam suviryam susthu varyamana- 
dhrstam raksasvina. Asminna vamayane vajini- 
vasu visva vamani dhimahi. 

Ashvins, lords of wealth, power and victory, 
may we, upon this happy arrival of yours receive, value 
and meditate upon all the beauties and treasures of the 
world of distinguished wealth spontaneously given, 
creative and energetic, highly lovable and unchallenge- 
able even by the demonic strong as our prize possession. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 23 
Agni Devata, Vishvamana Vaiyashva Rshi 
stem हि प्र॑तीव्यं4 यज॑स्व जातवेदसम्‌ । 
चरिष्णुधूममगंभीतशोचिषम्‌॥ ९॥ 
॥ llisva hi prativyam yajasva jatavedasam. 
Carisnudhumam-agrbhitasocisam. 


Study, celebrate and by yajna develop the fire 
divine, immanent and omnipresent energy, versatile 
power whose smoke rises freely and whose light of 
flame no one comprehends, no one can obstruct. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 559 


दामानं fasaadtts fi विश्वमनो गिरा। 
उत स्तुषे विष्यंर्धसो र्थानाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2, Damanam visvacarsane’gnim visvamano gira. 
Uta stuse vispardhaso rathanam. 


And watching the world of existence and 
thinking and meditating at heart on its dynamics of 
evolution, I adore Agni with the holy voice of faith, 
lord and power, that giver of chariots for onward 
movement to those who vie with one another for 
progress in various ways. 


येषामाबाध ऋग्मिय इषः पृक्षश्च निग्रभे । 
उपविदा वद्िर्विन्दते वसुं ॥ ३॥ 


Yesamabadha rgmiya isah prksasca nigrabhe. 
Upavida vahnir-vindate vasu. 


Those seekers whose inputs of food and energy, 
the all powerful Agni, adored and served with Vedic 
formulae, receives, consumes and directs within the 
dynamic laws of nature, through their investigations 
receive new wealth and knowledge. 


उद॑स्य शोचिस्स्थादीदियुषो व्य जरम्‌ । 
तपुर्जम्भस्य सुद्युतो गणश्चियंः ॥  ॥ 
4. Udasya Socir-asthad didiyuso vyajaram. 
Tapurjambhasya sudyuto ganasriyah. 
And the radiance of this burning, flaming, 
consuming fire, blazing brilliant, all illuminative, rises 


high, unaging and imperishable, adding to the wealth 
and glory of all classes of people. 


560 RGVEDA 


उदु तिष्ठ स्वध्वर स्तर्वानो देव्या कृपा । 
अभिख्या भासा बुं हता शुंशुक्वनिं: ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Udu tistha svadhvara stavano devya krpa. 
Abhikhya bhasa brhata susukvanih. 


O Agni, light and fire of life, adored and served 
with yajnic service of love and non-violence, rise high 
by the laws and grace of Divinity, shining ever bright 
with wider and higher light, power and magnificence. 


(This mantra may also be interpreted as 
exhortation to the person dedicated to yajna.) 


ad याहि सुशस्तिभिः हव्या Wert आनुषक्‌ | 
यथां दूतो बभूथ हव्यवाहनः ॥ € ॥ 


6. Agne yahi susastibhirhavya juhvana anusak. 
Yatha duto babhutha havyavahanah. 


Go, Agni, with the hymns of adoration, 
constantly receiving, returning, and transmitting the holy 
materials of yajna to the divinities as, like a messenger, 
you are the carrier of fragrance of the havi offered into 
the vedi. 


sii व॑ः gef ga होतारं चर्षणीनाम्‌। 
तमया वाचा गुणो तमु वः स्तुषे ॥ ७॥ 

Agnim vah purvyam huve hotaram carsaninam. 
Tamaya vaca grne tamu vah stuse. 


O devoted people, for you I invoke Agni, eternal 
power and universal high priest of humanity. By this 
song of adoration, I worship Agni and exhort you too 
to adore the universal light and power of divinity. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 561 


यज्ञेभिरद्धुतक्रतुं यं कृपा सूदय॑न्त इत्‌। 
मित्रं न जने सुधि॑तमृताव॑नि ॥ ८ ॥ 


Gi Yajnebhir-adbhutakratum yam krpa sudayanta it. 
Mitram na jane sudhitam-rtavani. 


Agni showers his love and grace on people who 
follow the path of rectitude and light, serve and exalt 
the lord of marvellous action with yajnas as a benevolent 
friend. 


ऋता्वानमृतायवो यज्ञस्य साध॑नं गिरा। 
उपो एनं जुजुषुर्नम॑सस्पदे ॥ ९ ॥ 


ध Rtavanam-rtayavo yajnasya sadhanam gira. 
Upo enam jujusur-namasaspade. 


O men of yajna and followers of the paths of 
universal truth, with songs of holiness, in the house of 
yajna, love, exalt and closely serve this Agni, lord of 
universal truth and eternal law and the end and aim of 
the perfection of yajna. 


अच्छा नो अद्धिरस्तमं यज्ञासो! यन्तु Gea: | 
होता यो अस्तिं विक्ष्वा यशस्त॑मः॥ १०॥ 


10. Acchd no angirastamam yajnaso yantu samyatah. 
Hota yo asti viksva yasSastamah. 


May all our yajnas and other yajnic actions well 
conducted, together, reach Agni, supreme, most vital 
life breath of existence and most honourable high priest 
of yajna among people, who is the ultimate end and 
aim of the perfection of yajna. 


अग्ने तव त्ये अजरेन्धानासो TST: | 
अशुवाइव वृष॑णस्तविषीयवंः 1122 11 


562 RGVEDA 
11. Agne tava tye ajarendhanaso brhad bhah. 
Asva iva vrsanas-tavistyavah. 
O unaging and imperishable Agni, those blazing 
flames of expansive brilliance, generous and virile like 
solar radiations, are reflections of your supreme power 
and glory. 
स त्वं न॑ ऊर्जा पते रयिं रास्व सुवीर्यम्‌। 
Ure नस्तोके तन॑ये समत्स्वा ॥ ९२ ॥ 

12. Sa [दा na urjam pate rayim rasva suviryam. 
Prava nastoke tanaye samatsva. 
Agni, lord protector of universal energy, pray 
bear, bring and bless us with manly vigour, and in the 
battles of life protect us and our children and grand 
children. 
यद्वा 3 विश्पतिः शितः सुप्रीतो मनुषो विशि। 
विश्वेद्भिः प्रति रक्षांसि सेधति ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Yad va u vispatih Sitah suprito manuso ViSi. 
Visvedagnih prati raksamsi sedhati. 
When Agni, presiding spirit of human life, is 
animated, energised and sharpened by yajna, then, active 
in the human settlements, it counters and dispels all evil 
influences and forces of negativity. 
श्रुष्ट्यग्ने नव॑स्य मे स्तोम॑स्य वीर विश्पते | 
नि मायिनस्तपुंषा रक्षसो eeu ९४॥ 

14. Srustyagne navasya me stomasya vira vispate. 
Ni mayinas-tapusa raksaso daha. 


Mighty brave Agni, lord of the people, saving 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 563 


spirit of life, hearing my new song of praise and prayer, 
burn off the destructive wiles of the evil forces with 
your heat. 


न तस्य॑ माययां चन रिपुरीशीत मर्त्य । 
यो smal caret हव्यदातिभिः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Na tasya mayaya cana ripurisita martyah. 
Yo agnaye dadasa havyadatibhih. 


Whoever offers homage to Agni with sacred 
oblations into the holy fire is safe, no mortal enemy 
even with the worst of his fraudulent power or sorcery 
can prevail over him or his home. 


व्य॑श्वस्त्वा वसुविद मुश्चण्युरंप्रीणादुषिः । 
महो राये ay त्वा समिधीमहि ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Vyasvas-tva vasuvidam-uksanyur-aprinad-rsih. 
Maho raye tamu tva samidhimahi. 


The sage in search of dynamic energy and 
showers of the wealth of knowledge and bliss adores 
and serves you, giver of the world’s wealth and 
knowledge. We too light you well in the correct manner 
for the attainment of the same great wealth of life. 


उशना काव्यस्त्वा नि होतारमसादयत्‌। 
आयनिं त्वा मन॑वे जातवेदसम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 

10. USana kavyastva ni hotaram-asadayat. 
Ayajim tva manave jatavedasam. 


The lover with passion and the poet with 
paternal vision attain to you, Agni, high priest of the 
real cosmic yajna and immanent and omniscient 


564 RGVEDA 
presence in existence for the good of humanity. 


विश्वे हि त्वा स॒जोष॑सो देवासो दूतमक्रत | 
श्रुष्टी देव प्रथमो यज्ञियो! भुवः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. 751 hi tva sajosaso devaso dutamakrata. 
Srusti deva prathamo yajniyo bhuvah. 


All the brilliant sages and scholars of the world 
in unison with love accept you, Agni, as the messenger 
of Divinity, and, being the fastest carrier, O brilliant 
and generous power, you become the first adorable 
yajaka of existence. 


इमं घां वीरो अमतं दूतं कृण्वीत मर्त्य । 
पावकं कृष्णवंर्तनिं विहायसम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Imam gha viro amrtam dutam krnvita martyah. 
Pavakam krsnavartanim vihayasam. 


Let the brave mortal accept the imperishable and 
immortal Agni as the messenger of Divinity and medium 
of the dynamics of existence, purifier, agent of cosmic 
gravitation and sustenance and the mightiest natural 
power. 


तं gan यतस्रुचः सुभासं शुक्रशोचिषम्‌। 
विशामयिमजरं प्रलमीङ्य॑म्‌ ॥ 20 ॥ 

20. Tam huvema yatasrucah subhasam sukraso- 
cisam. Visam-agnim-ajaram pratnam-idyam. 


We invoke Agni and, holding ladles of ghrta and 
havi, feed and serve the divine fire blissfully shining 
bright in flames, unaging prime power adorable for the 
people. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 565 


यो अस्मै gerelfatanreta मर्तोऽ विंधत्‌। 
भूरि पोषं स ध॑त्ते वीरवद्यशः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Yo asmai havyadatibhir-ahutim marto’ vidhat. 
Bhuri posam sa dhatte viravad yaSsah. 

The mortal who, with faith and reverence, 
dedicates himself to this Agni and offers oblations into 
the fire divine with holy fragrant materials receives the 
blessings of ample health and nourishment, honour and 
fame and the gift of heroic progeny. 


प्रथमं जातवेदसम यज्ञेषु पूर्व्यम्‌ | 
प्रति स्तुगेति नम॑सा हुविष्प॑ती ॥ २२॥ 

22. Prathamam jatavedasam-agnim yajnesu pur- 
vyam. Prati srugeti namasa havismati. 
To Agni, first and prime power immanent in 
everything born in existence, every ladle full of holy 
materials moves with chant of faith, reverence and 
selfless service in yajnas. 
आभिर्विधेमाग्नये ज्येष्ठाभिर्व्यश्ववत्‌। 
मंहिं छाभिर्म तिभिः शुक्रशोचिषे ॥ २३॥ 

23. Abhir-vidhemagnaye jyesthabhir-vyasvavat. 
Mamhisthabhir-matibhih sukrasocise. 

With these oblations and the chant of highest 
and most powerful hymns, let us, like the sage of perfect 
discipline of mind and sense, offer service and 
submission to Agni, yajnic power of purest flame. 

नूनम्॑च विहायसे स्तोमेभिः eae | 
ऋषे वैयश्व दम्यायाग्रयें ui २४॥ 


566 RGVEDA 


24. Nunamarca vihayase stomebhih sthurayupavat. 
Rse vaiyasva damyayagnaye. 


Holy sage of mental and moral discipline, like 
a yajaka of eminence and unshakable faith, offer honour 
and reverence with songs of adoration and selfless 
service to Agni, presiding power of the home and infinite 
presence of the universe. 


अतिथिं मानुषाणां सूनुं वनस्पतीनाम्‌ । 
faut अथिमव॑से wailed ॥ २५॥ 

25. 41717777 manusanam sunum vanaspatinam. 
Vipra agnim-avase pratnam-ilate. 

Sages and scholars worship Agni, primeval 
presence of the universe, life giver of herbs and trees 
and honourable like a welcome guest in people’s homes 
for the sake of protection and progress. 

महो विश्वौ अभि षतोडऽ भि हव्यानि मानुषा । 
अग्ने नि षत्सि नमसाधि बर्हिषि ॥ २६॥ 


26. Maho visvan abhi sato’bhi havyani manusa. 
Agne ni satsi namasadhi barhisi. 

Great Agni, you pervade everything in existence, 
you sanctify all yajnic materials of mankind and, 
honoured with reverence and oblations of havi, you 
vibrate on the holy grass and illuminate the heart of the 
yajamana. 


deat नो वार्य पुरु वंस्व॑ रायः पुरुस्पृहः | 
सुवीर्यस्य प्रजाव॑तो यशस्वतः ॥ २७॥ 


27. Vamsva 110 varya puru vamsva rayah purusprhah. 
Suviryasya prajavato yasasvatah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 567 


Give us the gifts of our choice in abundance. 
Give us wealth and honours of the love and desire of all 
mankind, give us abundance of brave progeny, honour, 
excellence and fame. 


त्वं att सुषाम्णेऽ गरे जनाय चोदय। 
सद। वसो रातिं यविष्ठ शश्व॑ते ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Tvam varo susamne’gne janaya codaya. 
Sada vaso ratim yavistha Sasvate. 


Agni, most youthful light and life of existence, 
worthy of the first order of love and reverence for us, 
pray grant your gracious favours of wealth and 
generosity to mankind. Lord giver of wealth and peace 
and comfort of a settled life, inspire the celebrants 
through continuous generations to sing songs of 
gratitude for your generosity. 


त्वं हि सुप्रतूरसि त्वं नो गोम॑तीरिष॑ः । 
महो रायः सातिमग्ने अपा वृधि ॥ २९॥ 

29. Tvam hi supraturasi tvam no gomatirisah. 
Maho rayah satimagne apa vrdhi. 

Agni, you are the holy giver, you are the giver 
of food, energy and victory, and abundant wealth of 
lands and cows, culture and enlightenment. Give us 
liberally of our share of wealth and grandeur and 
promote our possibilities of progress. 

अग्ने त्वं यशा अस्या मित्रावरुणा वह। 
ऋतावाना स॒म्राजा पूतदक्षसा ॥ २०॥ 


30. Agne tvam yasda asya mitravaruna vaha. 
Rtavana samraja putadaksasa. 


568 RGVEDA 


Agni, you are great and glorious. Pray bring us 
Mitra and Varuna, rule of love and friendship, reason 
and justice, through scholarly Brahman as and brilliant 
Kshatriyas, men of rectitude, brilliant will and intellect 
and purity and excellence of culture and enlightenment 
in their field. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 24 
Indra, Danastuti Devata, Vishvamana Vaiyashva Rshi 


wala आ शिषामहि ब्रह्यन्द्राय वचिणें। 
स्तुष ऊ षु वो नृत॑माय धृष्णवे ॥ ९॥ 


Le Sakhaya a sisamahi brahmendraya vajrine. 
Stusa u su vo nrtamaya dhrsnave. 


Come friends, let us for your sake sing a song 
of adoration in honour of Indra, lord of power, wielder 
of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment in order to 
glorify the noblest leader of resolute will and inviolable 
command. 


शव॑सा aha श्रुतो वं तरहत्येन वृत्रहा | 
मधेर्मघोनो अति शूर दाशसि ॥ २॥ 


ps Savasa hyasi Sruto vrtrahatyena vrtrahd. 
Maghair-maghono ati Sura daSasi. 


O heroic leader and ruler, by virtue of your 
strength and will you are renowned as the destroyer of 
evil for having eliminated evil, want and suffering. You 
are famous as the lord magnanimous of glory for your 
wealth and generosity because your generosity exceeds 
the expectations of the richest generous people. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 569 


सनः स्तवान आ भ॑र रयिं चित्रश्र॑वस्तमम्‌। 
निरेके चिद्यो हरिवो वसुंर्ददिः॥३॥ 


Si Sa nah stavana a bhra rayim citrasrvastamam. 
Nireke cid yo harivo vasurdadih. 


Such as you are, O lord of glory and 
magnanimity, sung and celebrated for your munificence, 
bear and bring us wealth and honour of the highest 
renowned order of excellence since, O ruler and 
controller of the dynamics of life, you are the sole giver 
of wealth and peace and prosperity in a state of good 
life beyond all doubt and question, suspicion and fear. 


आ tena प्रियमिन्द्र aff जनानाम्‌ । 
धृषता धृष्णो स्तव॑मान आ ATU ४ ॥ 


4. A nirekamuta priyamindra darsi jananam. 
Dhrsata dhrsno stavamana a bhara. 


Indra, lord of glory, give us a vision of the 
commonwealth of humanity of the dearest and most 
eminent order and, O lord of resolute will and action, 
sung and celebrated as such, bring us that wealth and 
order with the spirit of your will and resolution beyond 
doubt and question, fear and suspicion. 


aa सव्यं न दश्चिणं हस्तं वरन्त आमुरः | 
न प॑रिलाधों हरिवो गविष्टिषु ॥ ५॥ 


8 Na te savyam na daksinam hastam varanta 
amurah. Na paribadho harivo gavistisu. 


The forces of negativity and destruction cannot 
stay your left hand of generosity nor can they resist your 
right hand. Nor do preventive forces stand in the ways 


570 RGVEDA 


of your progress and evolution, O lord controller of the 
dynamics of existence. 


आ त्वा गोभिरिव ast गीर्भि्णोम्यद्विवः। 
आ स्मा कामं जरितुरा मन॑: पृण ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. 4 tva gobhiriva vrajam girbhir-rnomyadrivah. 
A sma kamam jaritura manah prna. 


O lord of clouds and mountains, wielder of the 
thunderbolt, like a cowherd reaching the stalls along 
with the cows do I come to you with my songs of 
adoration. O lord, fulfil the desire and prayer of the 
celebrant and bless my mind with peace and divine love. 


विश्वानि विर्वम॑नसो धिया at वृत्रहन्तम | 
उग्रं प्रणेतरधि घू व॑सो TE ७॥ 

ds Visvani visvamanaso dhiya no vrtrahantama. 
Ugra pranetaradhi su vaso gahi. 


O greatest destroyer of evil and darkness, 
blazing bold and irresistible leader of the world, lord 
giver of wealth and peaceful settlement, pray sanctify 
all our thoughts and acts, well wishers of the world of 
humanity as we are, and inspire us with divine wisdom. 


वयं ते अस्य daet-aeara शूर नव्य॑सः | 
वसोः स्पार्हस्य पुरुहूत राध॑सः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Vayam te asya vrtrahan vidyama Sura navyasah. 
Vasoh sparhasya puruhuta radhasah. 


O destroyer of evil and darkness, bold and 
resolute hero universally invoked and adored, pray let 
us know and obtain the latest, most lovable and effective 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 571 


forms of your wealth and honour, peace and progressive 
modes of life. 


इन्द्र यथा ह्यस्ति तेऽ परीतं नृतो era: 1 
अमुक्ता रातिः पुरुहूत दाशुषे ।॥। ९ ॥ 


98. Indra yatha hyasti te’paritam nrto Savah. 
Amrkta ratih puruhuta dasuse. 


Indra, lord and leader of humanity, just as your 
power and force is irresistible and indestructible, O lord 
universally invoked and adored, so is your charity and 
magnanimity to the generous devotee unrestricted and 
inviolable. 


आ वुंषस्व महामह महे नुंतम राध॑से | 
दूव्हश्चिंद्‌ दृह्य मघवन्मघत्तये ॥ ९०॥ 
10. A vrsasva mahamaha mahe nrtama radhase. 


Drlhascid drhya maghavan maghattaye. 


O greatest of the great, supreme guide and leader 
of life, for the greatness and glory of humanity on earth, 
shower your munificence of knowledge, will and action 
on us and, O lord of honour and grandeur, for our honour 
and progress break down the strongholds of evil, 
darkness, ignorance and inertness. 


नू अन्यत्रा चिदद्विवस्त्वन्नो जग्मुराशसंः। 
मरधवञ्छग्धि तव तन्नं ऊतिभिंः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Nu anyatra cidadrivas-tvanno jagmurasasah. 
Maghavanchagdhi tava tanna utibhih. 


O lord of glory, wielder of the thunderbolt of 
justice and retribution, our hopes and prayers have never 


572 RGVEDA 


wandered elsewhere, to anyone other than you. Pray 
strengthen our will and action with your modes of 
protection and promotion for advancement. 


Fay नुतो त्वदन्यं विन्दामि राधंसे। 
राये द्युम्नाय शव॑से च गिर्वणः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Nahyanga nrto tvadanyam vindami radhase. 
Raye dyumnaya Savase ca girvanah. 


O lord watcher and controller of the dance of 
creation, dear as breath of life sung and celebrated in 
songs of adoration, I find none else other than you for 
inspiration and action for the sake of competence and 
success, wealth and power, honour and excellence, and 
strength and moral courage. 


एन्दुमिन्द्राय सिञ्चत पिर्बाति सोम्यं मधु | 
प्र राध॑सा चोदयाते महित्वना ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Endumindraya sincata pibati somyam madhu. 
Pra radhasa codayate mahitvana. 


Prepare, offer and regale Indra with the nectar 
drink of faith and performance. He values, enjoys and 
promotes the honey sweets of peace, pleasure and 
progress and inspires the people with will and 
competence and ambition for progress and excellence. 


उपो हरीणां पतिं cat पृजञ्चन्त॑मन्रवम्‌ | 
नूनं श्रुधि स्तुवतो अश्व्यस्य i ९२४ ॥ 


14. = (0 harinam patim daksam pricantam-abravam. 
Nunam srudhi stuvato aSvyasya. 


I reach the lord protector and controller of the 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 313 


moving worlds, the omnipotent who enjoins the soul 
with the world of nature, and I closely whisper in prayer: 
Listen to the celebrant devotee who is keen to move 
from humanity to divinity and deserves to be accepted. 


नह्य क्क पुरा चन जज्ञे वीरत॑र स्त्वत्‌। 
नकीं राया नैवथा न भन्दना ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Nahyanga pura cana jajne viratarastvat. 
Naki raya naivatha na bhandana. 


Pray listen, Indra, dearest lord of life, true it is 
that no one born ever before or after was greater or 
mightier than you, none by wealth and power, none by 
competence and advancement, none by songs of prayer 
and adoration, none like you. 


Ug मध्वो! मदिन्त॑रं सिञ्च वाध्वर्यो अन्ध॑सः | 
एवा हि वीरः स्तव॑ते सदावृधः ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Edu madhvo madintaram sinca vadhvaryo 


andhasah. Eva hi virah stavate sadavrdhah. 


And O high priest of the creative yajna of love 
and non-violence, offer the most delightful and ever 
exhilarating of honey sweets of the soma of faith and 
devotion to Indra, since thus is how the mighty hero is 
served and worshipped. 


इन्द्र॑ स्थातर्हरीणां नके पूर्व्यस्तुतिम्‌ । 
उर्दानंश् शव॑सा न भन्दन।।॥ ९७॥ 


17. Indra sthatarharinam nakiste purvyastutim. 
Udanamsa savasa na bhandana. 


Indra, glorious lord president of the moving 


574 RGVEDA 


worlds of existence, no one ever by might or by 
commanding adoration has been able to equal, much 
less excel, the prime worship offered to you. 


तं वो वाजानां पतिमहूमहि श्रवस्यवः | 
अरप्रायुभिर्यंज्ञेभि॑वरवृधेन्य॑म्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 


Tam vo vajanam patim-ahumahi sravasyavah. 
Aprayubhir-yajnebhir-vavrdhenyam. 


O people we, seekers of honour and fame, 
invoke and adore the protector and promoter of your 
food, energies and victories, by assiduous congregations 
of yajna and thereby exalt the splendour and glory of 
the lord supreme. 


एतो Fag erate erate: स्तोम्यं नर॑म्‌। 
कृष्टीर्यो विश्वां अभ्यस्त्येक इत्‌॥ ९९॥ 

19. Eto nvidram stavama sakhayah stomyam naram. 
Krstiryo visva abhyastyeka it. 


Come friends all together and let us adore Indra, 
lord and leader worthy of joint worship and exaltation, 
who, by himself alone, rules over all peoples of the 
world. 


अगोरुधाय wife द्युश्चाय दस्म्यं वचं: | 
घृतात्स्वादीयो AYALA वोचत ॥ २०॥ 

20. Agorudhaya gavise dyuksaya dasmyam vacah. 
Ghrtat svadiyo madhunasca vocata. 


Sing delightful songs of adoration in words more 
delicious than the taste of ghrta and sweetness of honey 
in honour of Indra, heavenly lord of light, who loves 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 575 


sweet speech and never feels satiated with songs of 
exaltation. 


यस्यामितानि dats न राधः waa 
ज्योतिर्न विश्वमभ्यस्ति दक्षिणा ॥ २९॥ 


21. | Yasyamitani virya na radhah paryetave. 
Jyotirna visvamabhyasti daksina. 


Let us sing in adoration of Indra whose 
wondrous deeds of divinity are unbounded, whose 
potential is unrestricted, and whose generosity radiates 
over the world like the light of the sun. 


स्तुहीन्द्रं व्यश्ववदनूर्मिं वाजिनं यम॑म्‌। 
अर्यो गयं dears वि दाशुषे ।॥ २२॥ 

22.  Stuhindram vyasva-danurmim vajinam yamam. 
Aryo gayam mamhamanam vi dasuse. 

Like the sage of perfect mental and moral 
discipline, worship Indra, constant lord of eternity 
without fluctuation, omnipresent power over universal 
energy, controller and guide of the evolution of the 


universe, omnificent lord giver of a prosperous 
household to the generous devotees of yajna. 


एवा ra स्तुहि वैयश्व दशमं नव॑म्‌। 
सुविद्वांसं चर्कृत्यं चरणींनाम्‌॥ 23 ॥ 

23. Eva nunamupa stuhi vaiyasva dasamam navam. 
Suvidvamsam carkrtyam caraninam. 


O child of the holy sage of mental and moral 
discipline, verily worship Indra only, the lord ever new 
though eternal, worshipped as the tenth supreme over 


576 RGVEDA 


all among humans, lord omniscient solely worthy of 
the worship of dynamic humanity. 


वेत्था fe निऋ तीनां वज्र॑हस्त परिवृज॑म्‌। 
अहरहः शुन्ध्युः परिपदामिव ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. 17 hi nirrtinam vajrahasta parivrjam. 
Aharahah sundhyuh paripadamiva. 


O lord of the thunderbolt of justice and right 
action, you know and wield the counter-active measures 
against adversities just as the sun, purifier of nature’s 
impurities, has the capacity to counter them day by day. 


तदिन्द्राव आ भ॑र येना दंसिष्ठ॒ कृत्व॑ने । 
द्विता कुत्साय शिश्नथो नि चोदय ॥ २५॥ 


25. Tadindrava a bhara yena damsistha krtvane. 
dvita kutsaya sisnatho ni codaya. 


Indra, wondrous lord of beauty and glory, bring 
us that protection and immunity by which you protect 
the active sage of holy action against negativities and 
destroy the twofold mental and physical ailments of 
humanity. We pray, O lord, inspire and activate those 
internal and natural defences of good health. 


तमु त्वा नूनमीमहे नव्यं दंसिष्ठ ade । 
सत्वं नो विश्वां अभिमातीः सक्षणिः ॥ २६॥ 


26. Tamu tvad nunamimahe navyam damsistha 
sanyase. Sa tvam no visva abhimatth saksanih. 


O lord of highest beauty and sublimity, for our 
acquisitions as well as for our freedom from acquisition 
we worship you only, the same lord of protection and 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 577 


defence, ever new though constant and eternal. You as 
the same lord are our friend and protector, and the 
destroyer of all our enemies of the world. 


य ऋश्चादंह॑ंसो मुचद्यो वायौत्सस सिन्धुषु | 
वधंर्दासस्य॑ तुविनृम्ण नीनमः ॥ २७॥ 


27. Yarksadamhaso mucad yo varyat sapta sindhusu. 
Vadhar-dasasya tuvinrmna ninamah. 


To Indra, who saves from sin and violence, and 
releases the waters of life into the seven seas of 
existence, we bow and pray: O lord of the world’s wealth 
and power, honour and glory, strike down the fatal 
weapon of the saboteur and the destroyer. 


यथां वरो सुषाम्णे! सनिभ्य आव॑हो र॒यिम्‌। 
ayaa: सुभगे वाजिनीवति ॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Yatha varo susamne sanibhya avaho rayim. 
Vyasvebhyah subhage vajinivati. 


Just as the lord supreme, choice of the wise for 
worship and service, brings wealth and honour to the 
Sama celebrants and supplicants, so may you, O lady 
of good fortune possessed of food, energy prosperity of 
life, and divine intelligence, bring wealth of honour and 
knowledge to the sages of mental and moral discipline. 


आ नार्यस्य दश्चिणा व्य॑श्वाँ एतु सोमिन॑ः। 
स्थूरं च राध॑ः शतव॑त्सहस्त्र॑वत्‌ ॥ २९ ॥ 


29. A naryasya daksinad vyasvan etu sominah. 
Sthuram ca radhah satavat sahasravat. 


May the gifts of soma celebrants and generous 


578 RGVEDA 


lovers of mankind reach the dynamic sages of mental 
and moral discipline who may also get gifts of 
permanent assets in hundreds and thousands. 


यत्त्वां पृच्छादीजानः कुहया कुहयाकृते। 
एषो अपंश्चितो वलो गोमतीमव तिष्ठति ॥ ३०॥ 


30. Yat tva prechadijanah kuhaya kuhayakrte. 
Eso apasrito valo gomatimava tisthati. 


O seeker of the where and why of active life, if 
someone were to ask you where the yajaka of love and 
non-violence is, then say: This man of yajnic dynamism 
is gone and lives in the region of lands and cows, culture 
and enlightenment. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 25 


Mitravarunau (1-9, 13-24), Vishvedeva Devatah, 
Vishvamana Vaiyashva Rshi 


ता वां विश्व॑स्य गोपा देवा देवेषु यज्ञिया । 
ऋतावाना यजसे पूतद॑श्चसा ॥ ९ ॥ 
il; Ta vam visvasya gopa deva devesu yajniya. 
Rtavana yajase putadaksasa. 
I join you and adore you both, Mitra and Varuna, 
protectors of the world, brilliant and generous divinities 
of sacred power, adorable among the adorable divines 


and observers of the paths of rectitude and universal 
law. 


(In Swami Dayanand’s tradition, Mitra and 
Varuna in this Sukta are interpreted as Brahmanas, 
intellectuals, teachers and researchers, and as 
Kshatriyas, rulers, administrators and the defence 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 25 579 
forces.) 


मित्रा तना न Tears वरुणो यश्च॑ सुक्रतुः 
सनात्सुंजाता तन॑या धृतव्रता ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Mitra tana na rathya varuno yasca sukratuh. 
Sanat sujata tanaya dhrtavrata. 


Mitra of the noble chariot, and Varuna who too 
is a noble performer of yajnic actions, both are leaders 
like charioteers of the nation who develop and expand 
the socio-cultural wealth and vision of humanity. They 
are nobly born and brought up and trained, children of 
humanity for all time dedicated to the sacred laws and 
discipline of life. 
ता माता विश्ववेदसाऽसुयीय प्रम॑हसा | 
मही ज॑जानादिंतितऋतावरी ॥ ३ ॥ 

a Ta mata visvavedasa’suryaya pramahasa. 
Mahi jajanaditir-rtavari. 

Great mother Aditi, inviolable Nature, concrete 
embodiment of infinite divinity and divine law operative 
in existence, brought forth these two mighty refulgent 
pioneers of life, knowing and commanding the world 
for the realisation of their innate vision and power. 

Terral पित्रावरुणा wart देवावसुरा । 
ऋतावानावृतमा घोषतो बृहत्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Mahanta mitravaruna samraja devavasura. 
Rtavanavrtama ghosato brhat. 


The great Mitra and Varuna, mighty refulgent 
rulers, are generous and divine, commanding the vision 


580 RGVEDA 


and vitality of spiritual life and vigour. Dedicated to 
the law of eternity, in their life they define and proclaim 
that universal law in the living form of yajnic action. 


नपाता शव॑सो महः सूनू दक्ष॑स्य Yond | 
सु प्र्दानू इषो वास्त्वधि fara: ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Napata savaso mahah sunu daksasya sukratu. 
Srpradanu iso vastvadhi ksitah. 


Protectors and supporters of great strength, they 
never allow a break down of the strength of law and 
order. Being products of strength and efficiency 
themselves, they are protectors of the same strength and 
efficiency. Dedicated to holy action, creation, production 
and expansive generosity, they live in the very house of 
plenty and prosperity of food, energy and advancement. 


सं या दानुनि येमथुर्दिव्याः पार्थिवीरिषः 1 
नभंस्वतीरा वां चरन्तु FEA: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sam ya danuni yemathurdivyah parthivirisah. 
Nabhasvatira vam canantu vrstayah. 


You hold, control, expand and direct the 
generous gifts of earthly and heavenly foods, energies 
and nourishments, so we pray that your showers laden 
with vapours from the sky may serve you, rain down 
and bless us. 


अधि या बुंहतो दिवो ३ऽ भि यूथेव पश्य॑तः | 
ऋतावाना सम्राजा नम॑से हिता ॥ ७॥ 


ip Adhi ya brhato divo’bhi yutheva pasyatah. 
Rtavana samraja namase hita. 


You who observe the life below on earth from 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 25 581 


the vast skies, life like hosts of people and herds of 
cattle, then you, brilliant generous rulers who maintain 
the laws of eternity, are invoked and invited for the 
presentation of homage and yajnic service. 


maar नि Wad: arabes सुक्रतुं। 
धृतव्रता क्षत्रियां क्त्रमाशतुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


oo Rtavana ni sedatuh samrajyaya sukratu. 
Dhrtavrata ksatriya ksatramasatuh. 


Committed to the universal law of eternal truth, 
dedicated to the laws and discipline of governance, 
performing every action from the yajnic point of view 
of social value, the Kshatriyas, rulers, administrators 
and commanders of the defence forces, ought to take 
on to the sovereign social order and occupy the seat of 
governance for the glory of self-governing humanity in 
the spirit of Mitra and Varuna, that is, universal love 
and justice. 


अक्ष्णज्चिंद्रातुवित्तराऽनुल्बणेन AT | 
नि चिन्मिषन्तां निचिरा नि चिक्यतुः ॥ 2 

D. Aksnascid gatuvittara’nulvanena caksasa. 
Ni cinmisanta nicira ni cikyatuh. 


With open eyes and distant vision, they know 
and watch the paths of social development better than 
the eye itself and, ever alert and vigilant, they can 
perceive, judge and decide things in the twinkling of an 
eye. 


उत AY देव्यदिंतिरूरुष्यतां नासत्या | 
उरुष्यन्तु मरुतो वृब्धश॑वसः ॥ ९०॥ 


582 RGVEDA 


10. Utano devyaditir-urusyatam nasatya. 
Urusyantu maruto vrddhasavasah. 


May Mother Nature divine and the mother 
power of humanity of inviolable strength protect and 
promote us. May the Ashvins, ever true, complementary 
powers of natural and social dynamics protect and 
promote us. May the Maruts, distinguished people of 
veteran strength and power protect and promote us. 


ते नो नावमुरुष्यत दिवा नक्त Yara: | 
अरिष्यन्तो नि पायुभिः सचेमहि॥ ९९॥ 


11. Te no navamurusyata diva naktam sudanavah. 
Arisyanto ni payubhih sacemahi. 


May they all, nobly generous and giving, protect 
our ships day and night, and may we all, unhurt and 
unviolated, ally and cooperate with our protectors. 


sad विष्ण॑वे वयमरिष्यन्तः सुदानवे | 
श्रुधि स्व॑यावन्त्सिन्धो पूर्वचित्तये ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Aghnate visnave vayam-arisyantah sudanave. 
Srudhi svayavant-sindho purvacittaye. 


Let us all, unhurt and unviolated, work for the 
unassailable and generous Vishnu, universal ruling spirit 
of the nation of humanity, who knows everything in 
advance. O lord of self-judgement and independent 
action, generous as the sea, pray listen to our prayer 
and protect us. 


तद्वार्य' वृणीमहे aks moat 
मित्रो यत्पास्ति वरुणो यदर्यमा ॥ ९३॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 25 583 


13. Tad varyam vrnimahe varistham gopayatyam. 
Mitro yat panti varuno yadaryama. 


We elect to choose that wealth and protection 
which is the best and most promotive and which Mitra, 
Varuna and Aryama, Brahmana, Kshatriya and Vaishya, 
communities of vision, judgement and determination, 
and positive creativity, value and secure for us. 


उत नः सिन्धुंरपां तन्परुतस्तदश्विनां। 
इन्द्रो विष्णर्मीद्वांस॑ः स॒जोष॑सः ॥ ९४ i 


14. Uta nah sindhur-apam tanmarutas-tadasvina. 
Indro visnur-midhvamsah sajosasah. 


And that wealth and security, we pray, may the 
ocean of waters and vapours, Maruts, winds and the 
stormy troops of the nation, Ashvins, complementary 
forces of nature and humanity, sun and moon, and Indra 
and Vishnu, universal energy and omnipresent divinity, 
all loving, cooperative and generous, protect and 
promote for us. 


ते fe wat वनुषो नरोऽ भिमांतिं कय॑स्य चित्‌। 
तिग्मं न क्षोदः प्रतिश्चन्ति sora: ९५ i 
15. Te hi sma vanuso naro’bhimatim kayasya cit. 
Tigmam na ksodah pratighnanti bhurnayah. 
All of them, adorable leaders of life, blazing 
brilliant and irresistible, counter and shatter any enemy 


as a mighty flood shatters and washes off the firmest 
obstacles. 


अयमेक॑ इत्था पुरूरु AS वि विश्पतिः 1 
तस्य॑ व्रतान्यनुं वश्चरामसि ॥ ९६ ॥ 


584 RGVEDA 


16. Ayameka ittha pururu caste vi vispatih. 
Tasya vratanyanu vascaramasi. 

O people of the world, this one Integrity of the 
two, Mitra and Varuna, lord ruler and promoter of the 
people, thus watches the vast and various wealths of 
the world for protection, and for your sake we observe 
and follow his rules and laws of discipline. 


अनु पूवीण्योक्यां साम्राज्यस्य सश्चिम | 
fared व्रता वरुणस्य दीर्घश्रुत्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Anu purvanyokya samrdajyasya sascima. 
Mitrasya vrata varunasya dirghasrut. 
We observe and follow the rules and laws of 
the discipline of Mitra and Varuna, lord of universal 
glory, in accordance with the internal statutes and 
ancient traditions of the sovereign social order. 
परि यो रश्मिना दिवोऽ न्तान्ममे पूंथिव्याः। 
उभे आ प॑प्रौ रोद॑सी महित्वा ।॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Pari yo rasmina divo’ntan mame prthivyah. 
Ubhe a paprau rodasi mahitva. 

Mitra, Brahmana, is the brilliant scholar who, 
like the sun, with his vision reaches and measures the 
bounds of heaven and earth and with his knowledge 
and grandeur traverses both earth and heaven. 

उदु ष्य शरणे दिवो ज्योतिरयंस्त सूर्य । 
अभिर्न शुक्रः स॑मिधान आहुतः ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19. Udu sya Sarane divo jyotirayamsta suryah. 
Agnirna sukrah samidhana ahutah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 25 585 


19. And that sun upto the regions of heaven 
radiates the light and, shining pure and bright, is 
invoked, invited and honoured as the holy fire. 


वचो दीर्घप्र॑सदानीशो वाज॑स्य गोम॑तः 1 
ईशो हि पित्वोऽ विषस्य दावने 1 २०॥ 

20. = Vaco dirghaprasadmanise vdjasya gomatah. 
Ise hi pitvo’visasya davane. 


Mitra, the Brahmana, rules the Word in the vast 
house of yajna, and the yajamana who is master of the 
wealth of lands and cows and prospers in food, energy 
and social achievement, as he also, rules over the food 
which is pure and poisonless and which is meant for 
gifting away. 

तत्सूर्य रोद॑सी उभे दोषा वस्तोरुप aa । 
भोजेष्वस्मों अभ्युच्च॑रा सदा ॥ २९॥ 
21. Tat suryam rodasi ubhe dosa vastorupa bruve. 


Bhojesvasman abhyuccara sada. 


That sun of light and knowledge and both 
heaven and earth, I adore day and night and pray that 
the lord may establish us in a prosperous state of food 
and enjoyment. 


ऋजमुंश्चण्याय॑ने रजतं हस्याणे | 
रथं युक्तम॑सनाम सुषामणि ॥ २२॥ 

22. Rjramuksanyayane rajatam harayane. 
Ratham yuktamasanama susamani. 


Blest with the grace of the lord of mercy, we 
receive the gift of efficient mind and senses, from the 


586 RGVEDA 


lord destroyer of darkness and suffering, we receive the 
light of knowledge, and from the lord of celestial 
Samans, we receive the versatile chariot of the human 
body. 


तामे अश्व्यानां हरीणां नितोशना | 
उतो नु Peart नृवाहसा ॥ २३ ॥ 

23. Tame asvyanam harinam nitosana. 
Uto nu krtvyanam nrvahasa. 
Among the gifts of dynamic achievables, let the 
mind, senses and knowledge be destroyers of darkness 
and suffering, and among the organs of will and action, 
let the human body be the chariot of passage to salvation 
across the world. 
स्मद॑भीशू कशावन्ता विप्रा नविंछया act | 
महो वाजिनावर्वन्ता सचासनम्‌॥ २४ ॥ 

24. Smadabhisu kasavanta vipra navisthaya mati. 
Maho vajinavarvanta sacasanam. 

From the highest lord of glory I have achieved, 
by grace, the gift of twin faculties of vibrant senses and 
mind for thought and will, equipped with the latest 
knowledge and intelligence, fast and achieving, spurred 
by enthusiasm and controlled and directed by 
discrimination. 

Mandala 8/Sukta 26 
Ashvinau (1-19), Vayu (20-25) Devate, Vishvamana 
Vaiyashva or Vyashva Angirasa Rshi 
युवोरु षू रथं हुवे सधस्तुत्याय सूरिषुं। 
std deat वृषणा वृषण्वसू 2 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 587 


a Yuvoru su ratham huve sadhastutyaya surisu. 
Aturtadaksa vrsana vrsanvasu. 


O generous and virile Ashvins, commanders of 
inviolable power and dexterity, harbingers of a new day 
of showers of bounteous wealth, I call for your noble 
chariot to bring you hither for your joint felicitation 
among distinguished men of knowledge and power. 


(In Swami Dayananda’s tradition, Ashvins, twin 
divines who drive in the dawn of a new day, are 
interpreted as the ruler and the ministers council who 
are supposed to bring in a new day of freshness, light 
and prosperity in the corporate life of the social order.) 


युवं व॑रो सुषाम्णे महे तने नासत्या । 
अवोंभिर्यांथो वृषणा वृषण्वसू ॥ २ ॥ 

2: Yuvam varo susamne mahe tane nasatya. 
Avobhiryatho vrsana vrsanvasu. 


O virile and generous Ashvins, harbingers of 
showers of wealth and enlightenment, ever true and far 
from untruth, you go forward with your protections and 
promotions for the good and exhortation of the Sama 
celebrants and men of great and expansive philanthropy 
(who work for the advancement of society). 


ता वामद्य ह॑वामहे हव्येभिर्वाजिनीवसू | 
पूर्वीरिष इषय॑न्तावतिं श्चपः॥ ३॥ 
त, Ta vamadya havamahe havyebhir-vajinivasu. 
Purvirisa isayantavati ksapah. 
Ashvins, lovers of food and energy and total 
well being of a life of universal values, harbingers of 


588 RGVEDA 


new victories in the advancement of power and 
prosperity, at this hour of the dawn when the night is 
gone, we invoke you with offers of the sweetest 
fragrances of homage and yajnic service. 


आ वां attest अश्विना रथो! यातु श्रुतो ANT । 
उप स्तोमान्तुरस्यं दर्शथः fra ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. A vam vahistho aSvind ratho yatu 51/10 nara. 
Upa stoman turasya darsathah Sriye. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light and grace, let your 
strongest chariot of renown come and transport you here 
to us where you may, we pray, listen and appreciate the 
ardent devotee’s songs of adoration and bless them with 
the honour and dignity of life. 


जुहुराणा चिंदश्विनाऽऽ म॑न्येथां वृषण्वसू | 
युवं हि रुद्धा पर्षथो अति द्विष॑ः ॥ ५॥ 

5. Juhurana cidasvina’’manyetham vrsanvasu. 
Yuvam hi rudra parsatho ati dvisah. 
And Ashvins, harbingers of generous showers 
of prosperity, know, examine, understand and fix the 
crooked antisocial elements. You are the Rudras, agents 
of justice and award. Cleanse the jealous and punish 
the enemies. 
cen हि विश्वं मानुषङ््‌ मश्चूभिः परिदीय॑थः। 
धियं जिन्वा मध्यंवर्णां शुभस्पतीं ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Dasra hi visvamanusan maksubhih paridiya-thah. 
Dhiyamjinva madhuvarna saubhaspati. 


Wonderful in person and marvellous in deeds, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 589 


promoters of men of action and intelligence, sweet of 
disposition, protectors of all that is good, you always 
fly all over the world by the fastest modes with prompt 
forces and safeguard the safety and security of the 
people. 


उप॑ नो यातमश्विना राया विंश्वपुष। ae 
मघर्वाना सुवीरावन॑पच्युता ॥ ७॥ 

ध, Upa no yatamasvina raya visvapusa saha. 
Maghavana suviravanapacyuta. 

Noble Ashvins, mighty brave and infallible 
heroes, come close to us with wealth and nourishments 
for the health and advancement of all people of the 
world, powerful and munificent as you are. 

आ मे अस्य प्र॑तीव्य4 मिन्द्र॑नासत्या aH 
देवा देवेभिरद्य सचनस्तमा ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A me asya prativyamindra 76541) त gatam. 
Deva devebhiradya sacanastama. 


Ashvins, lords of power who shun untruth, come 
in response to my prayer and adoration, O brilliant and 
generous companions in utmost harmony, come with 
other divinities and protect and promote the thoughts 
and actions of devotees. 


वयं हि at हवामह उक्षण्यन्तो व्यर्ववत्‌। 
सु मतिभिरुपं विप्राविहा ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


a Vayam hi vam havamaha uksanyanto vyasvavat. 
Sumatibhirupa vipraviha gatam. 


Like the holy sage of mental and moral 


590 RGVEDA 


discipline, we invoke and invite you, lords of the 
showers of generosity. Come to us, O vibrant powers, 
with holy thoughts and intentions and with the sages of 
noble mind. 


अश्विना tat tafe कुवित्ते श्रव॑तो हव॑म्‌ । 
नेदीयसः Hoard: Wits i go 

10. Asvind svrse stuhi kuvit te sravato havam. 
Nediyasah kulayatah paninruta. 


O sage, celebrate the Ashvins in profuse 
numbers, they would listen to your eulogy, come closest 
and punish and eliminate the niggards and evaders of 
yajnic homage. 


वैयश्वस्यं श्रुतं नरोतो WY अस्य Aeer: | 
स॒जोष॑सा वरुणो पित्रो अर्यमा ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Vaiyasvasya Srutam naroto me asya vedathah. 
Sajosasa varuno mitro aryama. 


O leaders of the nation, listen to the song of the 
holy sage and acknowledge and respond to this song of 
mine. O Varuna, Kshatriya dispenser of justice, Mitra, 
loving and friendly Brahmana, and Aryama, Vaishya 
producer and distributor pursuing the path of rectitude, 
all together in unison and cooperation, listen to me. 


युवादत्तस्य धिष्ण्या युवानीतस्य सूरिभिः | 
अह॑रहर्तृषणा महयं शिक्षतम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yuvadattasya dhisnya yuvanitasya suribhih. 
Aharaharvrsana mahyam Ssiksatam. 


O devout and benevolent harbingers of the 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 591 


showers of prosperity, of that which you have created 
and given to the nation and that what you have brought 
in, let me learn day by day and share through the wise 
and brave leaders. 


यो वां यज्ञेभिरावृतोऽधिंवस्त्रा aya । 
स पर्यन्ता शुभे च॑क्राते अश्विना ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Yo vam yajnebhiravrto’dhivastra vadhiuriva. 
Saparyanta subhe cakrate asvina. 
Ashvins, like a bride covered in sacramental 
robes, one who is robed in the fragrance of yajna 
performed in your honour, him you requite with 
fulfilment and establish him in the good life. 
यो वामुरुव्यचस्तमं चिकैतति Foray | 
वर्तिरश्विना परि यातमस्मयू ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. = {© vam-uruvyacastamam ciketati nrpayyam. 
Vartirasvind pari yatamasmayiu. 


Ashvins, lovers and benefactors of ours, one 
who reserves and assigns a spacious hall comfortably 
good for distinguished congregations of yajna in your 
honour, you oblige and visit his home in recognition. 


अस्मभ्यं सु वंषण्वसू यातं वर्तिरनृपाय्य॑म्‌। 
fay sea यज्ञमूहथुर्गिरा ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Asmabhyam su vrsanvasu yatam vartirnrpayyam. 
Visudruheva yajnam-uhathur- gira. 


Lords of the yajnic showers of prosperity, come 
straight like an arrow, visit our hall of yajna dedicated 
to the good of humanity and guide and upraise our yajna 


592 RGVEDA 

with the holy chant of Vedic voice. 
afest वां cari स्तोमो दूतो AAT | 
युवाभ्यां भूत्वश्विना ॥ ९६॥ 

16. Vahistho vam havanam stomo duto huvannara. 
Yuvabhyam bhitvasvina. 


Ashvins, rulers and leading lights of the nation, 
may the song of our invocation to you be the instant 
and most effective messenger to you and bring you here 
to the yajnic hall. 


यददो दिवो अणव इषो वा मद॑थो गृहे। 
श्रुतमिन्में मर्त्या 1 ९७॥ 


17. Yadado divo arnava iso va madatho grhe. 
Srutaminme amatrya. 


Whether you are up above in the region of light 
or surfing in the sea or enjoying yourselves in the house 
of entertainment, listen to my call and come, immortal 
ones. 


उत स्या श्वेतयाव॑री वाहिष्ठा वां नदीनाम्‌ । 
सिन्धुर्हिरं ण्यवर्तनिः॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Uta sya Svetayavari vahistha vam nadinam. 
Sindhurhiranyavartanih. 


And of the fluent media of communication, the 
most effective is that transparent, unpolluted, stream of 
thought, discrimination and judgement, the intelligence, 
Buddhi, golden stream of the speed of mind. 


स्मदेतयां सुकीर्त्याऽश्विंना vacat धिया। 
AVY शुभ्रयावाना ॥ ९९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 593 


19.  Smadetaya sukirtya’svina svetaya dhiya. 
Vahethe subhrayavana. 


And well by this glorious and highly reputed 
transparent stream of intelligence, Ashvins, travellers 
of holy paths, you move and conduct the business of 
the nation of humanity. 


युक्ष्वा हि त्वं र॑थासहां युवस्व पोष्यां वसो | 
stra वायो मधुं पिवाऽस्माकं सवना WE २०॥ 


20. = Yuksva hi tvam rathasaha yuvasva posya vaso. 
Anno vayo madhu piba’smakam savana gahi. 


O Vayu, vibrant motive power of nature and 
humanity, harness your strong chariot horses and, O 
Vasu, giver of peaceful home and settlement with 
security, yoke them to social good. Come, join our 
corporate yajna of social development, taste and 
celebrate the joy of our achievement. 


(This mantra may be applied to the head of the 
forces of law and order for internal security and the 
commander of defence forces for security against 
external forces.) 


तव॑ वायवृतस्पते त्वष्ुजमिातरद्धुत । 
अवांस्या GUTS Ul २९॥ 

21. Tava vayavrtaspate tvastur-jamatar-adbhuta. 
Avamsya vrnimahe. 


O Vayu, protector and keeper of the universal 
law of truth and wonderful valuer and refiner of the 
creations of Tvashta, maker of all fine and gross things 
of life and destroyer of dangers internal and external, 


594 RGVEDA 


we opt for and choose all your plans and modes of peace, 
defence and security. 


त्वष्ु्जामातरं वयमीशानं राय ई महे। 
सुतावन्तो वायुं द्युम्ना जनासः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Tvastur-jamataram vayam-isanam raya imahe. 
Sutavanto vayum dyumna janasah. 


For the achievement of wealth, honour and 
excellence, we, the people dedicated to yajna and the 
soma of life, adore Vayu, ruler of the world of existence 
and protector and refiner of things made by the universal 
maker. 


aral याहि शिवा दिवो वह॑स्वा सु स्वश्व्य॑म्‌ | 
aera महः पुंथुपक्ष॑सा रथं ॥ २३॥ 

23. Vayo yahi Siva divo vahasva su svasSvyam. 
Vahasva mahah prthupaksasa rathe. 
Vayu, blissful power of defence, security and 
refinement, come from the regions of light, yoke the 
great transportive forces to your chariot and bring us 
the best things we ought to obtain. 
त्वां हि qantas नुषद॑नेषु हूमहे । 
ग्रार्वाणं नाश्व॑पृष्ठं मंहना ॥ २४ ॥ 

24. Tvam hi supsarastamam nrsadanesu humahe. 
Gravanam nasvaprstham mamhana. 


Vayu, blissful of form, strong and renowned all 
round by your own strength and grandeur, we invoke 
and invite you to people’s halls of yajna, power adorable 
as a rock in its place, position and function. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 27 595 


a a al ea मन॑सा वायो मन्दानो अग्रियः। 
कृधि वाजा अपो धियं: ॥ २५॥ 


25. Satvamno deva manasa vayo mandano agriyah. 
Krdhi vajan apo dhiyah. 


O Vayu, such as you are, brilliant and generous, 
happy and joyous at heart, always in the forefront of 
defence and advancement, pray develop our resources 
of food and water, energy, power and progress, and 
extend the possibilities of the reach of our science and 
intelligence. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 27 
Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Vaivasvata Rshi 
अभ्रिरुक्थे पुरोहितो ग्रावाणो बर्हिरध्वरे | 
ऋचा यामि मरुतो ब्रह्मणस्पतिं cat अवो वरेण्यम्‌ ue 
ie Agnirukthe purohito gravano barhiradhvare. 
Rca yami maruto brahmanaspatim devan avo 
varen-yam. 


In the yajna of love and non-violence, Agni, 
prime light of life, is the first adorable, then the holy 
fire, the priest, the soma stone and the holy grass are 
cherished. Therefore with the chants of Rks I invoke 
the Maruts, cosmic energies, Brahmanaspati, giver of 
the Veda and the vedic scholar, and other venerable 
divinities for protection and promotion of our choice. 


आ पशुं गासि पृथिवीं वनस्पतीनुषासा नक्तमोषधीः । 
विश्व च नो वसवो विश्ववेदसो धीनां भुत प्रावितारः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. A pasum gasi prthivim vanaspatinusasa naktamo- 
sadhih. Visve ca no vasavo visvavedaso dhinam 
bhuta pravitarah. 


596 RGVEDA 


O yajaka, you sing of animals, the earth, herbs 
and trees, day and night. And may all the powers which 
provide us with shelter and comfort, present all over 
the world, be the protectors and promoters of our 
thoughts and actions. 


प्र सू न॑ एत्वध्वरो ३ऽगरा cag yet: | 
आदित्येषु प्र वरुणे धुतत्र॑ते मरुत्सुं विश्वभानुषु ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Pra su na etvadhvaro’gna devesu purvyah. 
Adityesu pra varune dhrtavrate marutsu visva- 
bhanusu. 


May our yajna of universal order join the fire 
and rise to the divinities of nature, the sun in progressive 
Zodiacs, the oceans of earth and space in the fixed order 
of cosmic law, and all the light radiations of the universe 
across the suns. 


विश्वे हि ष्मा मन॑वे विश्ववेदसो भुवन्वृधे Renda: | 
ash: पायुभिर्विंश्ववेदसो यन्तां नोऽ वृकं छर्दिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Visve hi sma manave visvavedaso bhuvan vrdhe 
risadasah. Aristebhih payubhir-visvavedaso 
yanta no’vrkam chardih. 


May all the divine powers of the universe, 
destroyers of negativities, be for the protection and 
progress of mankind. May all the divinities of the 
universe in possession of wealth, power and knowledge 
along with modes of protection free from hurt and injury 
bring us a peaceful home on earth free from sin and 
crime. 


आ नों अद्य सम॑नसो गन्ता विश्वे सजोष॑सः। 
ऋचा गिरा मरुतो देव्यदिं ते सदं ने पस्त्ये महि॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 27 597 


=) A no adya samanso ganta visve sajosasah. 
Rca gira maruto devyadite sadane pastye mahi. 


All powers of love and friendship of the world 
with equal mind may come in to us in our great halls 
and homes in response to our Rks, hymns of adoration, 
come all Maruts, friends and brave associates, great 
inviolable Aditi, motherly figures, come today. 


अभि प्रिया म॑रुतो या वो अश्व्यं gen मित्र प्रयाथनं। 
आ Seal वरुणस्तुरा नरं आदित्यासः सदन्तु नः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Abhi priya maruto ya vo asvya havya mitra 
prayathana. A barhirindro varunastura nara 
adityasah sadantu nah. 


O Mitra, O Maruts, sun and winds, friends and 
brave associates, come and bring us all your dear and 
lovely gifts worthy of presentation and prize possession. 
O Indra, lord of power, thunder, lightning and rain, 
Varuna, waves of cosmic energy and justice in human 
affairs, and Adityas, solar radiations of the universe, all 
leading lights of nature and humanity, come fast and 
bless our homes and seats of yajna. 


वयं at वृक्तबर्हिषो हितप्र॑यस आनुषक्‌ | 
सुतसोमासो वरुण हवामहे मनुष्वदिन्दा्र॑यः Won 


a. Vayam vo vrktabarhiso hataprayasa anusak. 
Sutasomaso varuna havamahe manusvadiddha- 
gnayah. 


O Varuna, lord of light and justice, day and night, 
and other divine powers of nature and humanity, like 
men of love and faith we invoke and adore you now as 
ever. The grass carpets are spread and occupied, the 


598 RGVEDA 


sacred fires are lit, the fragrant havis is ready for 
offering, and the soma is pressed and distilled for the 
oblation. 


आ प्र यात मरुतो विष्णो अश्विना पूषन्माकींनया धिया | 
इन्द्र आ यातु प्रथमः संनिष्युभिर्वंषा यो वृत्रहा गृणे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A pra yata maruto visno asvina pusan makinaya 
dhiya. Indra a yatu prathamah sanisyubhir-vrsa 
yo vrtraha grne. 


Come forth to us, O Maruts, stormy forces of 
nature and humanity, Vishnu, all pervasive ruling power, 
Ashvins, complementary powers of natural and social 
dynamics, and Pushan, powers of health, nourishment 
and growth, come in response to my prayers and acts of 
yajna. Indra, lord of showers who are destroyer of evil 
and darkness, first and foremost power, come with the 
first and best associate powers, I adore you and pray. 


fa al देवासो sigets च्छिद्रं ert यच्छत। 
न यद्ूराद्वसवो नू चिदन्तिंतो वरूथमादधर्षति ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Vi no devaso adruho’cchidram sarma yacchata. 


Na yad durad vasavo ni cidantito-varuthama- 
dadharsati. 


O brilliant and generous divinities of nature and 
humanity, Vasus, lord of wealth and providers of home 
and security, free from jealousy and enmity, pray give 
us a faultless home, a place of security which no power 
from far or near might dare to violate or attack and hurt. 


अस्ति हि a: सजात्यं रिशादसो देवासो अस्त्याप्य॑म्‌ । 
प्रणाः पूर्वस्मै सुविताय वोचत मक्षु सुम्नाय नव्य॑से ॥ ९०॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 27 599 


10. Asti hi vah sajatyam risadaso devaso astyapyam. 
Pra nah purvasmai suvitaya vocata maksu 
sumnaya navyase. 


O divinities of nature and humanity, destroyers 
of negativities and enmities, there is a kinship among 
yourselves and between you and ourselves. There is a 
natural affinity too among yourselves and between you 
and ourselves, a friendship and alliance. Pray enlighten 
us about our ancient welfare and prosperity and lead us 
as ever to anew phase of prosperity and well being, the 
latest way. 


इदा हि a उपस्तुतिमिदा वामस्य भक्तये । 
उप॑ वो विश्ववेदसो tae असुक्ष्यन्यामिव ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ida hi va upastutimida vamasya bhaktaye. 
Upa vo visvavedaso nasasyuran asrksyanyamiva. 


O divinities of the world who know and 
command all wealth and honours of life, just now I, 
searching for new attainments and cherished joys of life 
with all reverence and humility, compose and offer to 
you this sincere song of latest adoration like a new 
stream of spontaneous creation. 


उदु ष्य वं: सविता सुंप्रणीतयोऽ स््थादुर्ध्वो aoa: | 
नि द्विपादश्चतुष्पादो अर्थनोऽ विंश्रन्पतयिष्णवंः 11.22 11 


12. Udu sya vah savita supranitayo ’sthadurdhvo 
varenyah. Ni dvipddascatuspado arthino 
*yisran patayisnavah. 


O noble divinities of holy thought, intention and 
policy, when the lord of light and life, the sun, which is 
the love and choice of all, rises high up in heaven, then 


600 RGVEDA 


the humans, animals and birds all go about in pursuit of 
their daily business. 


देवंदेवं ats व॑से देवंदेवम॒भिष्ट॑ये। 
देवदेवं हुवेम वाज॑सातये गृणन्तो! देव्या धिया ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Devamdevam vo’vase devamdevamabhistaye. 
Devamdevam huvema vdajasataye grnanto devya 
dhiya. 

Every one of you, divines, for the sake of 
protection, every one of you, holy ones, for our 
cherished aims and objects of well being, every one of 
you, divinities, for advancement and victory in life, we 
invoke and adore, singing and praising with holy 
thoughts, words and actions. 


देवासो हि ष्मा मन॑वे समन्यवो विश्वे साकं सररातयः। 
ते नो अद्य ते अपरं तुचे तु नो भव॑न्तु वरिवोविद: ॥ ९४ ii 


14. 12८1450 hi sma manave samanyavo visve sakam 
saratayah. Te no adya te aparam tuce tu no 
bhavantu varivovidah. 


All divinities of the world in nature and 
humanity, all together with gifts of wealth, knowledge 
and excellence, with equal mind and intention, have 
been generous to men of holy thought and noble purpose 
in search of divinity. May they be, today and ever in 
future, givers of the best of life’s wealth for us and our 
future generations in peace and plenty. 


प्र व॑ः शंसाम्यद्रुहः संस्थ उप॑स्तुतीनाम्‌ । 
नतं धूर्तिर्वरुण मित्र मर्त्य यो वो धामभ्योऽविंधत्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 27 601 


15. Pravah Samsamyadruhah samstha upastuti-nam. 
Na tam dhurtir-varuna mitra martyam yo vo 
dhamabhyo ’vidhat. 


In the house of prayer and adoration, I exalt you, 
Vishvedevas, free from jealousy and enmity. O Mitra, 
loving friend, O Varuna, lord of judgement and wisdom, 
no fraud, no mischief, no damage can be done to the 
mortal who dedicates himself with the strength of his 
body, mind and soul to your light and grace. 


प्रसक्षयं तिरते वि महीरिषो यो वो arta दाति। 
प्र प्रजाभिंजयते efforts: wed’ एधते ॥ eg 


16. Pra sa ksayam tirate vi mahiriso yo vo varaya 
dasati. Pra prajabhirjayate dharmanasparya- 
ristah srava edhate. 


He thrives in his home and abounds in plenty of 
wealth, honour and excellence, who gives in charity in 
obedience to you, Vishvedevas, for the sake of progress. 
He rises higher and higher with his progeny and friends 
in Dharma and, unhurt by sin and violence, grows 
stronger and higher in life. 


ऋते स विन्दते युधः सुगेभिरयत्यध्व॑नः | 
अर्यमा पित्रो वरुणः सरातयो यं त्राय॑न्ते स॒जोष॑सः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Rte sa vindate yudhah sugebhir-yatyadhvanah. 
Aryama mitro varunah saratayo yam trayante 
sajosasah. 


Without fight and struggle, he achieves, he wins 
everything, and he goes further forward by simple and 
straight paths of honesty without obstruction whom 
Aryama, guide and pioneer of the ways of life, Mitra, 


602 RGVEDA 


enlightened friend, and Varuna, lord of judgement and 
wisdom, all generous and affluent, in love and unison 
together, favour protect and exhort to rise and advance. 


ora चिदस्मै कृणुथा न्यञ्च॑नं दुर्गे चिदा सुंसर णम्‌ | 
एषा चिंदस्मादशनिंः परो नु सास्रेधन्ती वि नश्यतु ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Ajre cidasmai krnutha nyancanam durge cida 
susaranam. Esa cidasmadasanih paro nu Sasre- 
dhanti vi nasyatu. 


Even the simple path you make simpler for him, 
and the difficult one, easy to follow and cross over. Let 
the thunder arm go far off from him and fall away 
ineffective and be destroyed. 


यदद्य सूर्य उद्यति प्रियंश्चत्रा ऋतं दध । 
यन्निम्रुचि wate विश्ववेदसो यद्वा मध्यन्दिने दिवः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yadadya surya udyati priyaksatra rtam dadha. 
Yannimruci prabudhi visvavedaso yad va 
madhyandine divah. 


Omnipresent Vishvedevas in command of the 
world’s wealth, honour and knowledge, whether it is 
the time of sun-rise or sunset or the early dawn or middle 
of the day, hold on to the law of universal truth. You are 
the committed lovers of strength. 


यद्वाभिपित्वे असुरा ऋतं यते छर्दिर्येम वि दाशुषे । 
वयं तद्रो वसवो विश्ववेदस sd स्थेयाम मध्य आ ॥ २०॥ 


20. Yad vabhipitve asura rtam yate chardiryema vi 
dasuse. Vayam tad vo vasavo viSvavedasa 
upa stheyama madhya a. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 27 603 


The devotee having offered service in worship 
of truth and divine law, morning, evening or any time, 
you bless the man of charity with a peaceful home, then, 
O harbingers of pranic energy, and commanders of the 
world’s wealth and givers of peace and shelter, pray 
may we too abide in your midst close to you under your 
protection and care. 


यदद्य सूर उदिते यन्मध्यन्दिन आतुचिं। 
वामं धत्थ मन॑वे विरूववेदसो जुह्नाय प्रचेतसे ॥ २१॥ 


21. Yadadya sura udite yanmadhyamdina 1/८. 
Vamam dhattha manave visvavedaso juhvandya 
pracetase. 


Since at sun-rise or at mid-day or in the evening, 
that is, any time, O powers of world knowledge and 
world’s wealth, you bear and bring cherished wealth 
and fulfilment to the man of holy karma, knowledge, 
wisdom and discrimination, we pray to be in your 
company under your kind protection. 


वयं dg: सम्राज आ quite पुत्रो न बं हुपास्यंम्‌। 
अश्याम तदादित्या Wed हविर्येन वस्योऽ नामे ॥ २२ ॥ 


22. Vayam tad vah samraja a vrnimahe putro na 
bahupayyam. AsSyama tadaditya juhvato havi- 
ryena vasyo ’nasamahai. 


Just as a child asks the father for manifold gifts 
of food and joy, so we choose to ask of you, O brilliant 
and generous rulers, the same boon of versatile nature: 
We who offer yajnic service pray, O lords of light and 
grace, Adityas, let us obtain that holy gift of favour by 
which we may realise whatever wealth, honour and 


604 RGVEDA 


excellence we cherish in life. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 28 
Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Vaivasvata Rshi 


ये Gora त्रय॑स्परो carat लर्हिरासंदन्‌। 
facad द्वितासंनन्‌ 2 


im Ye trimSati trayasparo devaso barhirasadan. 
Vidannaha dvitasanan. 


May thirty three divine powers come and sit on 
the holy grass of yajna vedi to join my yajna, know and 
secure for me twofold gifts of material and spiritual 
fulfilment. 


(Thirty three divine powers or divinities or 
‘gods’ are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, 
Indra and Prajapati. Swami Dayanand enumerates and 
describes these as follows: 


8 Vasus: earth, water, fire, air, space, sun, moon, 
and the stars. They are Vasus because they are the abodes 
and sustainers of life. 


11 Rudras: ten pranic energies and the soul. 


12 Adityas: twelve phases of the sun in the 
zodiacs. 


One Indra, cosmic energy, and one Prajapati, 
creative energy of nature which creates life and its 
supports. 


वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा स्मद्रातिषाचो srr: | 
पत्नीवन्तो वष॑ट्‌ कृताः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 28 605 


2. Varuno mitro aryama smadratisaco agnayah. 
Patnivanto vasatkrtah. 


May Varuna, the ocean, Mitra, the sun, Aryama, 
the cosmic law, and the vital fires with their creative 
energies for life sustenance, all givers of the cosmic 
wealth of life energy, invoked and served with yajnic 
food, arise, join the yajna and help us with material and 
spiritual fulfilment. 


(At the individual level, we may interpret Varuna 
as our sense of justice, Mitra as our sense of love and 
friendship, Aryama as our sense of judgment and will, 
and fires as our vitalities working with our will to live.) 
ते नों गोपा अपाच्यास्त उदक्त इत्था न्य॑क्‌ । 
पुरस्तात्सर्व'या विशा ॥ ३ ॥ 

a. Te no gopa apacyasta udakta ittha nyak. 
Purastat sarvaya visa. 

Be they our protectors with all their vital powers 
from the west, north, south, east, above and below. 

यथा वन्ति देवास्तथेदं सत्तदेषां नकिरा Fac 
अरावा चन मर्त्य: ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yatha vasanti devastathedasat tadesam nakira 
minat. Arava cana martyah. 


Whatever these bounties of divine nature wish 
and desire, the same does come about. No one can resist 
them, no uncharitable person can move them either. 


ससानां Ga ऋष्टय॑ः सस द्युम्नान्येंषाम्‌। 
सप्तो अधि भियो धिरे।॥ ५॥ 


606 RGVEDA 


2; Saptanam sapta rstayah sapta dyumnanyesam. 
Sapto adhi Sriyo dhire. 
Seven are the potencies of seven, seven are their 


glories and over and above, seven are the graces they 
command. 


(These seven may be interpreted as the five 
senses, mind (mana) and intelligence, (buddhi). They 
may also be interpreted as seven Maruts, nature’s stormy 
forces.) 


Mandala 8/Sukta 29 


Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Vaivasvata or Kashyapa 
Maricha Rshi 


वभुरेको विषुणः सूनरो garde हिर॒ण्यय॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ly Babhrureko visunah sunaro-yuvanjyankte hiran- 
yayam. 

One is alert and active, all inspiring and 
versatile, youthful leader, joyous and true, wrapped in 
golden hue. (The one is interpreted as Soma, moon, and 
the mind.) 


योनिमेक आ dare द्योत॑नोऽ न्तर्देवेषु मेधिरः ॥ २॥ 
2. Yonimeka a sasada dyotano’ntardevesu medhirah. 


Another, seated in its own place, wise and 
illuminant is venerable among the divinities. (This 
divinity is interpreted as Agni, the eye, and truth.) 


वाशीमेको विभर्ति हस्तं आयसीमन्तर्देवेषु निश्च विः ॥ ३॥ 


A Vasimeko bibharti hasta-ayasim-antardevesu 
nidhruvih. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 29 607 


Another, constant and unshakable among the 
divinities holds an iron axe, shaper of things. (This has 
been interpreted as Tvashta, divine shaper, maker and 
refiner of things, or the ear or Kratu, performer of holy 
acts.) 


वच्रमेकों बिभर्ति हस्त आहितं तेन॑ वत्राणि। जिष्चते ॥  ॥ 


4. Vajrameko bibharti hasta ahitam tena vrtrani 
Jighnate. 


Another holds the thunderbolt, wielded firmly, 
by which he destroys evil and dark forces of ignorance, 
want and suffering. (This is Indra, cosmic energy, or 
soul, or Daksha, omnipotent will and action.) 


तिग्ममेको fasta हस्त आयुं धं शुचिरुग्रो 
जत्छाष-भेषजः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Tigmameko bibharti hasta ayudham sucirugro 
jalasa-bhesajah. 


Another holds a razor edge weapon in hand, 
being pure, brilliant and terrible, and controls healing 
powers of medicine and immunity. (This is Rudra, also 
inner happiness, which is the essential and primary force 
of good health.) 


पथ एकः पीपाय तस्करो यथाँ एष वेद निधीनाम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Patha ekah pipaya taskaro yathan esa veda 
dhidhinam. 


Another watches and guards the paths of life 
like a sensitive watchman as it knows the secrets of the 
sources of life’s wealth. (This is Pushan, health energy, 
or the protective arm of the individual and society.) 


608 RGVEDA 


त्रीण्येकं उरुगायो वि च॑क्रमे at देवासो ada io 


ds Trinyeka urugayo vi cakrame yatra devaso 
madanti. 


And one of universal fame worthy of homage 
pervades and covers all three regions of space whereon 
all the divinities rejoice. (This is Vishnu, omnipresent 
dynamic spirit of life which wards off stagnation in the 
living world.) 


विधिर्वा च॑रत एकया सह प्र dared aaa: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vibhirdva carata ekaya saha pra pravaseva 
vasatah. 


Two with flights like desire and ambition move 
around with one, intelligence, and reach wherever they 
choose to distant places like travellers. (These are the 
Ashvins, twin divinities of nature’s dynamics, or, at the 
individual’s level, ambition and ego which fly on the 
wings of imagination.) 


सदो द्वा च॑क्राते उपमा दिवि aarst सर्पिरासुती ॥ ९॥ 
0. Sado dva cakrate upama divi samraja sarpirasutt. 


And two of royal magnificence in closest 
proximity receive and enjoy oblations of ghrta and take 
their position in the regions of heavenly light. (These 
are Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, heat and cool of 
nature, or love and judgement, or sunlight and air in 
human life.) 


अर्चन्त एके महि साम॑ मन्वत तेन PARTI ९० I 


10. Arcanta eke mahi sama manvata tena surya- 
marocayan. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 30 609 


Some of them sing great hymns of Sama and 
glorify their lord and thereby light the sun. (These are 
the Adityas or universal powers free from threefold 
suffering, or the ten pranas which strengthen the soul 
for worship of the supreme lord of life and thereby 
enlighten the soul.) 


Mandala 8/Sukta 30 
Vishvedeva Devata, Manu Vaivasvata Rshi 
नहि वो अस्त्यर्भको देवासो न Hare: | 
विश्वे, सतोमंहान्त इत्‌॥ १॥ 


1. Nahi vo astyarbhako devaso na kumarakah. 
Visve sato mahanta it. 


O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and 
humanity, none of you is a child, none an adolescent. 
All of you are equal and great. 


इति स्तुतासो असथा रिशादसो ये स्थ त्रय॑श्च Faget | 
wilder यज्ञियासः ॥ २॥ 

Zi Iti stutaso vasatha risadaso ye stha trayasca 
trimsacca. Manordeva yajniyasah. 


Three and thirty Vishvedevas thus sung and 
adored are destroyers of sin and suffering, and therefore 
you are lovable and adorable by humanity in all their 
yajnic acts. 


ते न॑स्त्राध्वं as aa त ॐ नो अधिं area 
मा न॑ः पथः पिन्रयान्मानवादधिं दूरं नैष्ट परावतं: ॥ ३॥ 


2 Te nastradhvam te’vatata u no adhi vocata. Ma 
nah pathah pitryan-manavadadhi duram naista 
paravatah. 


610 RGVEDA 


Such as you are, pray save us, protect and 
promote us, speak to us and enlighten us. Let us not 
stray out far from the right path of our ancestors or the 
right path of humanity. 


ये dara इह स्थन विश्वे वैश्वानरा sa 
अस्मभ्यं शर्म सप्रथो गवेऽश्वाय यच्छत ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ye devasa tha sthana visve vaisvanara uta. Asma- 
bhyam sarma sapratho gave’ svaya yacchata. 


All the divinities of nature and humanity who 
are here or who are anywhere in the world as leading 
lights of humanity may, we pray, give us a spacious and 
comfortable home for the advancement of our 
knowledge and culture and for our working potential, 
success and progress. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 31 


Yajna Yajamana (1-4), Dampati (5-9), and 
Dampatyashisha (10-18) Devatah, Manu Vaivasvata Rshi 


यो यजाति asta इत्सुनव॑च्य पचाति च | 
ब्रहोदिन्द्र॑स्य चाकनत्‌ ZU 


1. Yo yajati yajata it sunavacca pacati ca. 
Brahmedindrasya cakanat. 


The yajamana who performs yajna himself or 
has yajna performed by a priest, presses and prepares 
the soma himself or has it prepared through a priest 
pleases Indra and obtains the knowledge of Divinity 
and Veda. 


पुरोव्ठाशं यो sth सोमं रर॑त आशिरम्‌। 


पादित्तं शक्रो अंहसः ॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 31 611 


2. Purolasam yo asmai somam rarata aSiram. 
Padit tam sakro amhasah. 


Whoever offers food to the fire and to the 
deserving poor in honour of this omnipresent lord, Indra, 
and offers him oblations of soma mixed with fragrant 
havis, the lord almighty saves him from sin and evil. 


तस्य॑ द्युमाँ stage देवजूतः स शूशुवत्‌ । 
विश्वां वन्वन्नमित्रिया ॥ ३॥ 


3 Tasya dyuman asad ratho devajutah sa Susuvat. 
Visva vanvannamitriya. 


His chariot would shine with wealth and lustre 
and he, inspired by divinity, would rise in life with 
wealth and knowledge, honour and social prestige, 
removing obstructive difficulties and adversities from 
his path of progress. 


अस्य प्र॒जाव॑ती Wes स॑श्चन्ती दिवेदिवे | 
sot धेनुमती दुहे ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Asya prajavati grhe’sascanti divedive. 
Ila dhenumati duhe. 

Ila, constant mother stream of total prosperity, 
flows inexhaustible into his home, blessing him with 
progeny, cows, culture and enlightenment, honour and 
excellence, day in and day out. 

या दंप॑ती सम॑नसा सुनुत आ च धाव॑तः। 
देर्वासो नित्य॑याशिरां ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Ya dampati samanasa sunuta a ca dhavatah. 
Devaso nityaydsira. 


612 RGVEDA 


The couple who, with dedicated mind, perform 
yajna in unison, give in charity, and thus cleanse 
themselves and their soul, the divinities always bless 
them with sweets of milk and honey. 


प्रति प्राशव्यो इतः सम्यञ्चा बर्हिराशाते | 
न ता वाजेषु वायतः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Prati prasavyan itah samyanca barhirasdate. 
Na ta vajesu vayatah. 

Together in love and respect they sit on the holy 
grass, perform yajna and receive divine gifts of delicious 
food and drink in plenty, and never do they fail in their 
battles of life for progress. 

न देवानामपि ga: सु मतिं न Ayer: | 
श्रवो! बृहद्धिवासतः ॥ ७॥ 


ce Na devanamapi hnutah sumatim na juguksatah. 
Sravo brhad vivasatah. 


Never do they neglect the divinities nor do they 
minimize the gifts of their favour and good will, and 
thus indeed do they shine bright in glory and exalt the 
gifts of divinity. 


पुत्रिणा ता कुमारिणा विश्वमायुर्व्य'श्नुतः। 
उभा हिरण्यपेशसा ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Putrina ta kumarina visvamayur-vyasnutah. 
Ubha hiranyapesasa. 


They live a full happy life blest with sons and 
daughters and golden means of living in prosperity and 
decency. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 31 613 


वीतिहोत्रा pied दशस्यन्तामृताय कम्‌। 
समूधो रोमशं ह॑तो देवेषु कृणुतो दुव॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Vitihotra krtadvasu dasasyantamrtaya kam. 
Smudho romasam hato devesu krnuto duvah. 


Performing yajna with generous hospitality, 
creating wealth and giving in charity, contributing to 
the peace and comfort of all in general for the sake of 
divine gifts of immortality, blest with milch cows and 
woolly sheep and goats, they live the good life doing 
reverence to the divines and enjoying the liberal gifts 
of divinity. 
आ शर्म पर्व॑तानां वृणीमह ad 
आ विष्णोः सचाभुवः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. 4 Sarma parvatanam vrnimahe nadinam. 
A visnoh sacabhuvah. 

Living in the presence of Vishnu, all pervasive 
and protective Spirit divine and universal friend of all 
life, we pray for the Lord’s gift of the peace, protection, 


freedom and comfort of the rivers, mountains and the 
clouds. 


Ud पूषा thin: स्वस्ति संर्वधात॑ंमः। 
उरूरध्वां स्वस्तये 11 ९९॥ 


11. Aitu pusa rayirbhagah svasti sarvadhatamah. 
Ururadhva svastaye. 


Come Pusha, lord of health and nurture, Bhaga, 
gracious lord of wealth and power, wielder and 
controller of all power and prosperity for happiness and 
well being, and may our path of progress be wide open 


614 RGVEDA 
for all round happiness and well being. 


अरमतिरनर्वणो विश्वो देवस्य मन॑सा | 
आदित्यानांमनेह इत्‌ ॥ १२॥ 


12. Aramatir-anarvano visvo devasya manasa. 
Adityanam-aneha it. 


The world’s obedience and service to irresistible 
divinity rendered sincerely with mind and soul and the 
grace of the Adityas gives freedom from sin and 
selfishness. 


यथां नो मित्रो अर्यमा वरूणः सन्तिं wat: | 
सुगा ऋतस्य पन्थाः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. = Yatha no mitro aryama varunah santi gopah. 
Suga rtasya panthah. 


Since Mitra, lord of love, light and friendship, 
Aryama, universal guide and path maker, and Varuna, 
lord of judgement and justice, are our protectors, may 
our paths of advancement and rectitude be simple, 
straight and easy. 


aft a: gef गिरा gaia वसूनाम्‌ । 
सपर्यन्तः पुरुप्रियं मित्रं न क्षेत्रसाधंसम्‌॥ ९४॥ 


14. Agnim vah purvyam gira devamile vasunam. 
Saparyantah purupriyam mitram na ksetrasa- 
dhasam. 


With sincere word and thought I serve and adore 
Agni, eternal and gracious lord of wealth and prosperity. 
You too serve the same lord of universal love as a friend, 
the lord giver of fulfilment to us in our existential state 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 31 615 
of being. 


ug देवव॑तो रथः eat वा पृत्सु cere चित्‌। देवानां य 
इन्मनो यज॑मान इयक्षत्यभीदय॑ज्वनो भुवत्‌ ॥ ९५५ ॥ 


15. Maksu devavato rathah suro va prtsu kasu cit. 
Devanam ya inmano yajamana iyaksatyabhid- 
ayajvano bhuvat. 


The chariot of the man of reverence to divinities 
moves fast forward, and the hero himself, who, with 
sincere mind and action, performs yajna and offers 
service to the divinities, goes far forward in the battles 
of life and surpasses the uncharitables who perform no 
yajna in the service of humanity and divinity. 


न य॑जमान रिष्यसि न सुन्वान न देवयो । देवानां य इन्मनो 
यज॑मान इयंक्चत्यभीदय॑ज्वनो भुवत्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Na yajamana risyasi na sunvana na devayo. 
Devanam ya inmano yajamana iyaksatyabhid- 
ayajvano bhuvat. 


O man of charity and yajnic service to humanity 
and divinity, you will never suffer wrong or damage, O 
creator of soma dedicated to yajna to the divinities, you 
will never be hurt and never fail in your life’s mission. 
The yajamana who, with sincere mind and actions, 
performs yajna in service to the divinities of nature and 
humanity surpasses the uncharitables who never 
perform yajnic service in the field of creative fellowship 
and cooperation with others, human and divine. 


नकिष्टं कर्मणा aera प्र योषन्न योषति । देवानां य इन्मनो 
यज॑मान इयंक्षत्यभीदय॑ज्चनो भुवत्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


616 RGVEDA 


17. Nakistam karmana naSsanna pra yosanna yosati. 
Devanam ya inmano yajamana iyaksatyabhid- 
ayajvano bhuvat. 


The yajamana who with sincere mind and action, 
serves the divinities, no one can equal by action, much 
less destroy. Nor does he forsake his own path, nor can 
anyone else lead him astray. Indeed he surpasses all 
those who are uncharitable and perform no yajnic 
service to divinity and humanity. 


असदन्र सुवीर्यमुत त्यदाश्वश्व्यंम्‌। देवानां य इन्मनो 
यज॑मान इयंक्षत्यभीदय॑ज्चनो भुवत्‌ ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Asadatra suviryamuta tyadasvasvyam. Devanam 
ya inmano yajamana iyaksatyabhidayajvano 
bhuvat. 

May there be heroic power and prowess, fast 
victory and life’s fulfilment for him who performs yajna 
in service to the divinities of nature and humanity with 
truth of mind and action, and may he surpass all those 


uncharitables who perform no selfless service in creative 
action to divinity and humanity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Medhatithi Kanva Rshi 
प्र कृतान्यूंजीषिणः कण्वा इन्द्र॑स्य WATT | 
मदे सोम॑स्य वोचत ॥ ९॥ 
1. Pra krtanyrjisinah kanva indrasya gathaya. 
Made somasya vocata. 


O poets of wisdom and imagination, joyous 
lovers of life and action, in the soma ecstasy of the 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 32 617 


beauty and grandeur of life, sing and celebrate the 
wondrous works of Indra, ruler, power, energy and 
inspirer of life in nature and humanity in the world. 


यः सृलिन्दमनंर्णनिं fog दासम॑हीशुव॑म्‌। 
वधीदुग्रो रिणन्नपः॥ २॥ 


Yah srbindam-anarsanim piprum dasam- 
ahisuvam. Vadhidugro rinannapah. 


The awful lord of might and action stems the 
rising wicked, subdues the bullying exploiter, restrains 
the greedy devourer, cracks the senseless saboteur and 
the crooked deceiver, and having destroyed the negative 
forces, releases the free flow of waters and freedom of 
action, development and progress. 


न्यर्बुदस्य विष्टपं वर्ष्माणं ल॒ हतस्तिर । 
कृषे तदिन्द्र पौस्य॑म्‌॥ ३॥ 
2: Nyarbudasya vistapam varsmanam brhatastira. 


Krse tadindra paumsyam. 


Indra, cosmic power of nature, you break the 
stronghold of the cloud of showers from the tip of vast 
heaven and thus accomplish that wondrous feat of divine 
power. 


प्रतिं stare वो शृषत्तूर्णीशिं न गिरेरधिं । 
हुवे सुशिप्रमूतयें ॥ 2 ॥ 

4. Prati Srutaya vo dhrsat turnasam na gireradhi. 
Huve suSipramutaye. 


O people, for your protection and promotion, I 
invoke and call upon the victorious Indra of the glorious 


618 RGVEDA 


helmet who brings a flood of waters from the heights of 
the cloud in response to prayer and promise. 


स गोरश्व॑स्य fa व्रजं Heart: Tee: 1 
पुरं न शुर दर्षसि UI 


5. Sa gorasvasya vi vrajam mandanah somyebhyah. 
puram na Sura darsasi. 


Indra of such fame and prowess, heroic leader, 
happy and joyous, you open the gates of knowledge 
and victory in action and attainment, as you open the 
stalls of cows and horses and the gates of a fortress for 
the performers of soma yajna. 


यदि मे रारण॑ः सुत उक्थे वा दधसे चनं: | 
आरादुपं स्वधा ग॑हि।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yadi me raranah suta ukthe va dadhase canah. 
Aradupa svadha gahi. 


If you take delight in the soma distilled by me 
and feel the ecstasy of my song of homage, then come 
from far and come from near and, by your own divine 
nature, take me on for the food of life you hold for me. 


तयं घां ते अपिं ष्मसि स्तोतारं इन्द्र Frefur: 1 
त्वं नों जिन्व सोमपाः ॥ ७॥ 

(0 Vayam gha te api smasi stotara indra girvanah. 
Tvam no jinva somapah. 


Indra, lord celebrated in song, your devoted 
celebrants as we are, O lord protector and promoter of 
the beauty, honour and excellence of life, pray give us 
the food and fulfilment of life we love and aspire for. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 619 


उत a: पितुमा भ॑र संरराणो अविंक्षितम्‌। 
म्धवन्भूरि ते वसु, ॥ ८ ॥ 


Gi Uta nah pituma bhara samrarano aviksitam. 
Maghavan bhiri te vasu. 


And, O lord of the power, honour and glory of 
the world, all joyous and generous, bring us the food of 
life inexhaustible. Infinite is your wealth and boundless 
your munificence. 


उत नो गोम॑तस्कृधि हिर॑ण्यवतो अश्विनः 1 
solr: सं र॑भेमदहि।॥ ९॥ 


2, Uta no gomataskrdhi hiranyavato aSsvinah. 
Tlabhih sam rabhemahi. 


And make us rich in lands and cows, knowledge 
and culture, make us masters of the golden glories of 
life. Advance us with horses and victories of high and 
higher attainments in honour and excellence. And lead 
us to exert ourselves in unison with songs of adoration 
and libations of homage and gratitude with holy words 
of joy. 
gagaet हवामहे सृप्रकरस्नमूतये । 
साधु, कृण्वन्तमव॑से ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Brbaduktham havamahe srprakarasnam-iutaye. 
Sadhu krnvantam-avase. 


We invoke the lord divine and master ruler who 
is highly adorable, of long and supple arms of generosity, 
and always does good for the protection and promotion 
of all. 


620 RGVEDA 


यः संस्थे चिच्छतक्रतुरादीं quitta वृत्रहा | 
wae: पुरूवसुः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yah samsthe cicchatakratur-adim krnoti vrtraha. 
Jaritrbhyah puruvasuh. 


We invoke the lord adorable who does a hundred 
great favours to the man at peace and, dispelling the 
darkness in the mind and heart, sublimates the soul too 
with the spirit of a hundred good works of piety. Indeed, 
the lord is of infinite wealth, honour and bliss for all his 
devotees and destroys their evil and ignorance. 


स न॑ः शक्रश्चिदा शंकदान॑वां अन्तराभरः। 
इन्द्रो विशूवाभिरूतिभिः ।॥ ९२॥ 
12. Sanah Sakrascida Sakad-danavan antara-bharah. 
Indro visvabhir-utibhih. 
The Lord Almighty strengthens us, is generous, 


and enriches our inner self with vision and love and 
with all strength and modes of protection and progress. 


यो wats s वनिर्महान्त्सुंपारः सुन्वतः सखा । 
तमिन्द्रमभि गायत ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Yo rayo’vanirmahant-suparah sunvatah sakha. 
Tam-indram-abhi gayata. 


Sing in honour of Indra, that mighty lord and 
ruler who commands the wealth, honour and excellence 
of the world, is universal protector and preserver, 
saviour of his devotees and friend of the lovers of soma 
and yajna. 


आयन्तारं महिं स्थिरं पृत॑नासु श्रवोजित॑म्‌। 
भूरेरीरणानमोज॑सा ॥ ९४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 621 


14. Ayantaram mahi sthiram prtandasu sravojitam. 
Bhurer-isanam-ojasa. 


Honour and adore the lord and ruler who is great, 
controller of the world and its law, constant in the 
dynamics of existence wherein he is the sole conqueror 
of honour and glory and who, with his power and 
grandeur, is the ruler of the vast riches of the world. 


नकिरस्य शचींनां नियन्ता सूनूर्तानाम्‌। 
नकिर्वक्ता न दादिति॥ ९५॥ 

15. Nakirasya Sacinam niyanta sunrtanam. 
Nakirvakta na daditi. 

None is the controller of his mighty acts and 
powers universally pleasant and true, and there is none 
who can ever say: He has failed to give and bless. 

न नूनं ब्रह्मणामृणं प्राशूनामंस्ति सुन्वताम्‌। 
न सोमो अप्रता da eeu 


16. Na nunam brahmanamrnam prasunamasti 
sunvatam. Na somo aprata pape. 


There is no recompense due from men of 
divinity, from the guests and those actively working for 
yajna and the extraction of soma. The creator of soma, 
the giver of knowledge and the social worker do not 
drink for nothing (they pay with service). 


पन्य इदुप॑ Wad पन्य॑ Sao शंसत | 
ब्रह्य कृणोत पन्य इत्‌ ॥ VOU 


17. Panya idupa gayata panya ukthani samsata. 
Brahma krnota panya it. 


622 RGVEDA 


Sing in honour of adorable Indra, recite your 
hymns of praise in honour of admirable Indra, create 
your orations to celebrate the glorious Indra. 


पन्य आ दर्दिरच्छता सहस्त्र वाज्यवुंतः। 
इन्द्रौ यो यज्व॑नो वृधः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Panya व dardiracchata sahasra vajyavrtah. 
Indro yo yajvano vrdhah. 
Indra, potent lord who commands supreme 
power and, unobstructed, breaks down a hundred and a 


thousand adversaries, strengthens and exalts the 
devotees of yajna. 


fa gat स्वधा अनु कुष्टीनामन्वाहुवंः | 
इन्द्र पिबं सुतानाम्‌ ke 

19.  Visucara svadha anu krstinamanvahuvah. 
Indra piba sutanam. 


Go forward, Indra, in response to the invitation 
to yajna of the people and drink of the soma extracted, 
distilled and offered by them. 


पिब स्वधैनवानामुत यस्तुग्ये सचां । 
उतायमिन्द्र यस्तव॑ 11 २०॥ 


20. (70८ svadhainavanamuta yastugrye saca. 
Utayamindra yastava. 


Drink of the joy and exhilaration of your powers 
and perceptions which is all associated with your own 
performance, the super-power that’s you and yours. 
Indeed, it is all your own power and glory. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 623 


अतीहि मन्युषाविणं सुषुवांसंमुपारंणे | 
इमं रातं सुतं पिंब ॥ २९॥ 


21. 41/77 manyusdvinam susuvamsam-uparane. 
Imam ratam sutam piba. 


Ignore the man who offers yajnic soma in a 
mood of anger, frustration and protest. Ignore the man 
who offers yajna and soma but in a joyless and 
conflictive mood. Accept this soma of homage distilled 
and offered in a state of delight, love and faith. 


इहि तिस्रः परावतं इहि पञ्च wat अतिं। 
धेना इन्द्राव॒चाक॑शत्‌ ॥ २२॥ 

22. = 77 tisrah paravata ihi panca janan ati. 
Dhena indravacakasat. 


Indra, come from far, cross over the five classes 
of people to exhaust the possibilities of their life, 
transcend the three versions of knowledge, action and 
prayer, and listen with love and approval the sole one 
voice of my soul. 
सूर्यो cis यथां astss त्वां यच्छन्तु मे गिर॑ः । 
निम्नमापो न सध्य॑क्‌ 1 २३॥ 

23. Suryorasmim yatha srja’’tva yacchantu me girah. 
Nimnamapo na sadhryak. 

Just as the sun radiates the rays of light over 
Space, just as waters flow down swift and straight, so 
may the voice of my soul reach you. 


अध्वर्यवा तु हि षिञ्च सोमं वीराय॑ शिप्रिणे । 
ont सुतस्य पीतये ॥ २४ ॥ 


624 RGVEDA 


24. Adhvaryava tu hi siiica somam viraya Siprine. 
Bhara sutasya pitaye. 
O organiser and performer of yajna, offer the 
soma of devotion profusely to Indra, mighty lord of the 
helmet, and fill the vessel of your heart with divine love 
and pranic energy to enjoy life to the full. 
य उद्नः thfent Bran fees वासुंजत्‌। 
यो We पक्त SSA ॥ २५॥ 

25. Ya udnah phaligam bhinannyak sindhunra- 
vasrjat. Yo gosu pakvam dharayat. 


Indra breaks the clouds of rain, releases the 
waters for the rivers to flow down to the sea, and 
provides mature milk in the cows, knowledge and 
wisdom in the words of language and ripe grain in the 
fields of earth. 
अहन्वृत्रमृचींषम ओर्णवाभमंहीशुव॑म्‌ | 
हिमेनाविध्यदर्बरँदम्‌॥ २६ ॥ 

26. Ahan vrtramarcisama aurnavabham-ahisuvam. 
Himenavidhyad-arbudam. 


The refulgent sun breaks the heavy cloud of 
vapours moving around like a crooked snake, in the 
middle regions of space. 


aa sur निष्टुरेऽ षाव्व्ाय wafarat | 
देवत्तं ब्रह्म गायत ॥ २७॥ 


27. Pravaugraya nisture’salhaya prasaksine. 
Devattam brahma gayata. 


O celebrants and yajakas, sing the most heavenly 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 625 


song of praise worthy of divinity in honour of refulgent, 
impetuous, invincible and ever enduring friend, Indra, 
leader and commander of the ruling and defensive forces 
of nature and humanity. 


यो विश्वान्यभि व्रता सोम॑स्य मदे अन्ध॑सः। 
इन्द्रं देवेषु चेत॑ति ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Yo visvanyabhi vrata somasya made andhasah. 
Indro devesu cetati. 


Celebrate Indra, soul and ruling spirit in nature 
and humanity, who, in the excitement and ecstasy of 
the taste of food and soma, awakens in humans and 
divines the awareness of all the rules and laws of 
discipline and commitment to the vows of discipline in 
life. 
इह त्या सधमाद्या हरी हिर॑ण्यकेश्या | 
areata wal हितम्‌॥ २९॥ 

29. ha tya sadhamadya hari hiranyakesya. 
Volhamabhi prayo hitam. 
Here in life on earth, those two golden and 
refulgent motive powers of nature’s circuitous energy, 
jubilant and festive co-workers for the chariot of Indra, 
lord ruler of nature and humanity, may, we pray, bring 
in holy food for health and energy for the good of all 
living beings. 
अर्वाञ्चं त्वा पुरुष्टुत प्रियमेधस्तुता हरीं । 
सोमपेयाय वक्षतः ॥ ३० ॥ 

30. Arvancam tva purustuta priyamedhastuta hari. 
Somapeyaya vaksatah. 


626 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord universally sung and celebrated, may 
the two motive powers of your chariot, loved and adored 
by scholars dedicated to yajnic pursuit of knowledge 
and wisdom, bring you here to join us and share the 
ecstasy of soma celebration with humanity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 33 
Indra Devata, Medhatithi Kanva Rshi 


वयं घ॑ त्वा सुतावन्त आपो न वृक्तबंर्हिषः। 
पवित्रस्य प्रस्रवणेषु वृत्रहन्परि स्तोतारं आसते ॥ ९॥ 


Ly Vayam gha tva sutavanta apo na vrktabarhisah. 
Pavitrasya prasravanesu vrtrahan pari stotara 
asate. 


Indra, destroyer of evil, darkness and suffering, 
we, your celebrants, having distilled the soma, spread 
and occupied the holy grass, we, sit and wait on the 
vedi for your presence in the flux of life as holy 
performers, while the flow of pure immortality continues 
all round in the dynamics of existence. 


स्वरन्ति त्वा सुते नरो वसो! निरे क उक्थिनः । 
कदा सुतं PAT ओक आ ग॑म इन्द्र स्वब्दीव SAT: ॥ २॥ 


De Svaranti tva sute naro vaso nireka ukthinah. Kada 
sutam trsana oka a gama indra svabdiva vam- 
sagah. 


Indra, Vasu, giver of peace and security in self- 
settlement, while the soma of faith and love has been 
distilled in the heart and the devotees sing and celebrate 
your honour in hymns of praise, when would you, keen 
to join us at the celebration, come to the yajnic hall 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 33 627 
thirsting to meet the people you love and admire. 


कण्वेभिर्धुष्णावा धृषद्वाजं aft सहस्रिणम्‌ | 
पिशङ्करूपं मघवन्विचर्षणे मक्ष गोम॑न्तमीमहे ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Kanvebhir-dhrsnava dhrsad vajam darsi saha- 
srinam. Pisangarupam maghavan vicarsane 
maksu gomantam-imahe. 


Indra, lord of universal vision, resolute will and 
irresistible action, ruler and commander of the world’s 
wealth, power and force, we pray, conceive, plan and 
bring about for the intelligent people of action and 
ambition a social order of golden beauty and progressive 
achievement, full of a hundred-fold prosperity of lands 
and cows, education and culture, and invincible will, 
strength and advancement free from indecision and 
delay in action. 


पाहि गायान्ध॑सो मद्‌ इन्द्राय मेध्यातिथे। 
यः Sven sata: सुते सचा वज्री रथो! हिर ण्यय॑ः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Pahi gayandhaso mada indraya medhyatithe. Yah 
sammiSlo haryoryah sute saca vajri ratho 
hiranyayah. 


O man, you are a visitor and respectable guest 
on this earth of a golden order of beauty, prosperity and 
culture. Observe the rules of this order, advance the 
beauty and prosperity of it, and in the pleasure and 
ecstasy of its plenty of soma hospitality, sing and 
celebrate the glory of Indra, lord ruler of vision and 
action united, commander of the nation’s forces, 
dynamic and creative, friendly and cooperative, wielder 
of the thunderbolt of justice and retribution, burden 


628 RGVEDA 


bearer and pilot of the golden chariot of humanity. 


यः सुषव्यः सुदश्चिण इनो यः सुक्रतुर्गृणे । 
य आकरः सहस्रा यः शताम॑घ इन्द्रो यः पूर्भिदारितः ॥ ५॥ 


2: Yah susavyah sudaksina ino yah sukraturgrne. Ya 
akarah sahasra yah satamagha indro yah 
purbhidaritah. 


I sing and celebrate the glory of Indra who is 
generous with both hands right and left, magnificent, 
holy in action, treasure home of a thousandfold riches, 
who commands a hundredfold power, honour and 
excellence and who breaks down the strongholds of evil, 
darkness and suffering. Indeed he is glorious and 
adorable. 


यो effect योऽ वुंतो यो अस्ति शमश्रुषु Tera: 1 
विभूतद्युस्रश्च्यवनः पुरुष्टुतः क्रत्वा गौरिव शाकिनः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yo dhrsito yo’vrto yo asti Smasrusu Sritah. 
Vibhutadyumnascyavanah purustutah krtva 
gauriva Sakinah. 


I celebrate the glory of Indra who is bold and 
resolute, unbounded irresistible, wears the marks of 
manly vigour, commands honour and excellence, is an 
inspirer, mover and shaker, universally respected for 
his acts of piety, and who for the men of mighty 
dynamism is generous as earth, gracious as holy speech 
and loving as mother cow. 


क ई' वेद सुते सचा raat कद्वयो दधे। 
अयं यः पुरो विथिनत्योजंसा मन्दानः शिप्रयन्धंसः॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 33 629 


7. Ka im veda sute saca pibantam kad vayo dadhe. 
Ayam yah puro bibhinattyojasa mandanah 
sipryandhasah. 


Who would for certain know Indra in this 
created world of beauty and glory, how much power 
and force he wields while he rules and sustains it, Indra 
who wears the helmet and breaks down the strongholds 
of negativities with his lustrous might, the lord who 
shares and enjoys the soma of his own creation? 


दाना मृगो न वारणः ear चरथं दधे। 
नकिष्ट नि य॑मदा सुते ग॑मो महांश्च र स्योज॑सा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Dana mrgo na varanah purutra caratham dadhe. 
Nakistva ni yamada sute gamo mahanscara- 
syojasa. 


Indra is generously giving, preventive, counter- 
active and invincible like a lion, and holds and rules 
the world of immense variety in motion. O lord of 
grandeur and majesty, as you move around everywhere 
by your might and lustre, pray come, bless our yajna 
and taste the soma of our creation. No one can restrain 
you, no one counter your will. 


य उग्रः Gatisa: स्थिरो रणाय संस्कुतः। 
यदि स्तोतुर्मघवा श्णवब्दवं नेन्द्रो योषत्या ग॑मत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 
Ya ugrah sann-anistrtah sthiro ranaya samskrtah. 


Yadi stotur-maghava srnavaddha-vam nendro 
yosatya gamat. 


Indra who is blazing strong, uncountered and 
irresistible, constant and unshakable, is ever in perfect 
harness for the human’s battle of existence, and if he 


630 RGVEDA 


hears the call of the celebrant, the lord of might and 
majesty never forsakes him, he comes, he saves, he 
blesses. 


सत्यमित्था वृषेदसि वृष॑जूतिर्नोँऽ da: | 
वृषा ह्युग्र श्रण्विषे परावति वृषो! अर्वावति श्रुतः ॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Satyamittha vrsedasi vrsajutir-no’vrtah. Vrsa 
hyugra Srnvise paravati vrso arvavati Srutah. 


True it is thus you are virile and generous 
yourself and an inspiration and driving force for the 
virile and the brave, unbound, uncountered, brave and 
illustrious, harbinger of the showers of peace and joy 
and known as omnificent and sublime all over the world 
far and near. 


वृष॑णस्ते अभीरवो वृषा कां हिरण्ययीं । 
वृषा रथो मघवन्वृष॑णा हरी वृषा त्वं श॑तक्रतो ॥ ९१॥ 


11. Vrsanaste abhisavo vrsa kasa hiranyayt. Vrsa 
ratho maghavan vrsana hari vrsa tvam Satakrato. 


Indra, lord of the power, wealth and glory of 
the universe, agent of infinite acts of creation in the 
world of existence, strong and golden are the reins of 
your cosmic chariot, golden is the goad that maintains 
and controls the speed of its motion, strong and laden 
with riches is your chariot, strong and virile the motive 
powers, and you yourself are all potent and generous. 


(This mantra may be interpreted as a description 
of the human soul in its own individual sphere provided 
that it is self-controlled and free from external forces 
which bind it in the fetters of worldly interests of a 
selfish and transitory nature.) 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 33 631 


वृषा सोता सुनोतु ते वृष॑न्चजीषिन्ना ATI 
gut दधन्वे वृष॑णं नदीष्वा तुभ्यं स्थातर्हरीणाम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Vrsa sota sunotu te vrsann-rjisinna bhara. Vrsa 
dadhanve vrsanam nadisva tubhyam sthatarha- 
rinam. 


O lord of omnipotence and omnificence, may 
the brave and generous yajaka prepare the soma juice 
of devotion for you. O lord of the law of truth and lover 
of the rules of rectitude, bring us the showers of peace 
and prosperity in rectitude. O lord controller and keeper 
of world forces in order, the generous yajaka receives 
the showers of your blessings and holds them in trust 
actively in the streams of existence for yajnic offers to 
your honour for your service. 


एन्द्र याहि पीतये मधु शविष्ठ सोम्यम्‌ । 
नायमच्छा मघवां श्रुणवद्विरो ब्रह्मो क्था च॑ सुक्रतुं: ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Endra yahi pitaye madhu savistha somyam. 
Nayamaccha maghava srnavad giro brahmoktha 
ca sukratuh. 


Indra, lord most potent, come to taste the honey 
sweets of soma. Unless you come and bless with grace, 
this man of power and earthly honour, though devoted 
to good actions, would not well listen otherwise to songs 
of devotion and the voice of Veda. 


वह॑न्तु त्वा रथेष्ठामा हर॑यो रथयुजं: 1 
तिरश्चिदर्यं सव॑नानि वृत्रहन्नन्येषां या श॑तक्रतो ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Vahantu tva rathesthama harayo rathayujah. 
Tirascidaryam savanani vrtrahann-anyesam ya 
Satakrato. 


632 RGVEDA 


May the motive forces which power and drive 
your chariot, we pray, bring you hither, O lord of infinite 
acts of grace, destroyer of evil and dispeller of darkness, 
past the acts and voices of others without faith in divinity 
and prayer. 


अस्माकमद्यान्तमं स्तोमं धिष्व महामह | 
अस्माकं ते सव॑ना सन्तु शन्त॑मा मदाय द्यश्च सोमपा ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Asmakamadyantamam stomam dhisva maha- 
maha. Asmakam te savana santu Samtama 
madaya dyuksa somapah. 


O lord of heavenly light, greatest of the great, 
lover and protector of the soma pleasure and grandeur 
of life, accept our most intimate prayer and praise today 
and grant that all our acts of homage in your honour 
and service be for the peace and dignity of the life we 
live. 


नहि षस्तव नो मम॑ शास्त्रे अन्यस्य Tafa | 
यो अस्मान्वीर आन॑यत्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Nahi sastava no mama Sastre anyasya ranyati. 
Yo asman vira anayat. 


The mighty one who has brought us under his 
order of law does not accept with delight your decree 
nor mine nor anyone else’s. 


(Indra, the soul, is the ruler and controller of 
the mind and senses. It is not ruled and controlled by 
the mind or the senses or anyone else.) 


इन्द्रश्चिद्धा तद॑त्रवीस्स््िया अशास्यं मन॑ः | 
उतो अह क्रतुं THAN ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 33 633 


17. _Indrascid gha tadabravit striya asasyam manah. 
Uto aha kratum raghum. 


If Indra, the husband, were to say: “The mind 
of woman is not controllable” and, also, “that her 
thought and intellect too is inferior’, (then it is less than 
half the truth). 


wel चिद्धा मदच्युता मिथुना aedt रथ॑म्‌ । 
एवेब्ूर्तृष्णा उत्त॑रा ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Sapti cidgha madacyuta mithuna vahato ratham. 
Eved dhurvrsna uttara. 


If the two ardent horses of Indra’s chariot 
together draw the burden of the home-state, then the 
shaft of the chariot is better and stronger. 


अधः प॑श्यस्व WOR सन्तरां पादकौ ह॑र । 
मात erent दूशन्त्स्त्री हि ब्रह्मा बभूविंथ।॥ 22 


19. Adhah pasyasva mopari samtaram padakau hara. 
Ma te kasaplakau drsantstri hi brahma babhu- 
vitha. 


O man, O woman: Keep your eyes down on the 
earth, not up on the sky. Walk on with both the feet 
together (as the two wheels and the two horses draw 
the chariot together), Let your lower feet be not bare 
and exposed (cover them). Let woman be the high priest 
of the home yajna. 


(The last three mantras describe the home- 
state of the social order. The husband and the wife 
together run the home. The husband is, or may be, the 
greater burden bearer, still the wife is the chief home 


634 RGVEDA 


minister, and the husband ought to realise this in love, 
in courtesy, in chivalry, or at least in practical wisdom. 
Arrogance, pride, anger, passion, all this on either’s part 
must be subjected to reason and respectful cooperation 
with mutual recognition.) 


Mandala 8/Sukta 34 


Indra Devata, Nipatithi Kanva (1-15) and Sahasram 
Vasurochisha Angirasa (16-18) Rshis 


एन्द्र॑ याहि हरिं भिरुप कण्व॑स्य सुष्टुतिम्‌। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ९॥ 


Ls Endra yahi haribhirupa kanvasya sustutim. Divo 
amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Indra, ruler of the world, come with all your 
powers and perceptions to the sage’s adoration and 
instruction, and from the light and exhortation of the 
elevating sage, O seeker of enlightenment, go and rise 
to the heights of divinity. 


आ त्वा ग्रावा adfae सोमी घोषेण यच्छतु | 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ २॥ 


2. A tva grava vadanniha 5607077 ghosena yacchatu. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


The maker of soma, creator of the joy of a new 
life, would welcome you here with a loud proclamation 
and exalt you with the voice of thunder, and from the 
light and power of the sage’s revelation, O lover of light, 
go and rise to your own essential heaven of freedom. 


अत्रा वि नेमिरेषामुरां न धूनुते वृकः । 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 34 635 


i Atra vi nemir-esam-uram na dhunute vrkah. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Here the very edge and foundation of these sages 
of knowledge and wisdom would shake you and reveal 
you to yourself as thunder shakes the earth and lightning 
lights it up all over. And then from the light and thunder 
of these commanders you would rise, liberated, to your 
own heights of heaven, O lover and ruler of the light of 
day. 


आ त्वा कण्वां इहाव॑से हवन्ते वाज॑सातये | 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A tva kanva ihavase havante vajasdataye. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


The sages call you here for the art and science 
of defence and protection and for the victories of peace 
and progress. And from the light and wisdom of the 
enlightening sages, O lover and ruler of the light of day, 
rise to the light and heaven of your own imagination. 


दधामि ते सुतानां वृष्णो न पूंर्वपा््यम्‌। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिंवावसो ॥ ५॥ 


a, Dadhami te sutanam vrsne na purvapayyam. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


As the sun vests vapours of rain in the cloud of 
showers, so do I vest in you the first, original and eternal 
knowledge, protected, protective and enjoyable, of the 
prime order distilled by sages from experience and 
vision. Then from the light of this knowledge of the 
sages of universal law and command, O lover of light, 
rise to the heaven of light on earth. 


636 RGVEDA 


स्मत्पुरन्धिर्न आ ग॑हि विश्वतोधीर्न ऊतये । 
दिवो अमुष्य शासंतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Smatpurandirna ठ gahi visvato dhirna utaye. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Indra, enlightened with the thought and wisdom 
of universal order, equipped with the power and 
competence of a ruler of cities, come and take over the 
reins of government for our protection and 
advancement, and from the light and wisdom of the 
sages of vision and command, O lover and giver of a 
rule of peace and enlightenment, rise to the light and 
heaven of your imagination. 


आ नो याहि महेमते सहस्रोते शतामघ । 
दिवो अमुष्य शासंतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ७॥ 


7. A no yahi mahemate sahasrote Satamagha. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Come to us Indra, lord wise and great, 
commander of a thousand forces of protection and 
progress, ruler of a hundredfold wealth and power of 
the world, and from the light of the ruling master of this 
world of knowledge and wisdom, O lover of the light 
of heaven, rise to the supreme light of existence. 


आ त्वा होता मनुर्हितो देवत्रा derdted: 1 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A tva hota manurhito devatra vaksadidyah. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


The host yajaka, yajamana, well wisher of 
humanity, respectable among the noble and generous, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 34 637 


worthy of reverence, invites, exhorts and exalts you. 
Come, and from the light of the world of rule and order 
here, O lover of light and wisdom in peace, rise to the 
heights of heaven. 


आ त्वां मदच्युता हरी! श्येनं uate aera: | 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ९॥ 


a, A tva madacyuta hari $yenam pakseva vaksatah. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


And may the mighty transportive powers 
stronger than all obstructive forces of pride and 
arrogance, transport you here to us like the powerful 
wings of the eagle flying the king of birds to his 
destination, and may you, from the light and power of 
this world of rule and order, O lover of light and peace, 
rise to the light and peace of heaven. 


आ ate आ परि स्वाहा सोम॑स्य पीतये । 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिवावसो i १०॥ 


10. A yahyarya a pari svaha somasya pitaye. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


O lord ruler of the world, come to us to join the 
soma celebration of this social order offered with 
sincerity of thought and word in action, and from the 
light and joy of this world of rule and order, O lover of 
light and peace, rise to the light and peace of heaven. 


आ it याद्युप॑श्रुत्युक्थेषु रणया Se | 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो fed यय दिवावसो ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ano yahyupasrutyukthesu ranayad iha. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


638 RGVEDA 


Come close to us, listen to our songs of adoration 
of divinity, and enjoy the holy celebrations, and from 
the light and joy of the earthly world of rule and order, 
O lover of the light of divinity, rise to the light of 
heavenly peace and freedom. 


सरूपैरा सुनो गहि dad: deyfarva: | 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ १२॥ 


12. Sarupaira suno gahi sambhrtaih sambh-rtasvah. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Vested with the fullness of a dynamic personality 
with sensitive perceptions, conceptions and 
apprehensions, come to us with colleagues and 
companions of equal calibre and take over the reins of 
leadership, and from the light and wisdom of the earthly 
order, O lover of light and heaven, rise to the heavenly 
light of love and benediction. 


आ याहि पर्व॑तेभ्यः समुद्रस्याधि विष्टप॑ः। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ 2311 


13. 4 yahi parvatebhyah samudrasyadhi vistapah. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Come from the mountains and the clouds, come 
over the seas and hasten from the farthest regions of 
the globe, rule, and from the light of this order of rule, 
O lover of light and giver of peace and settlement, rise 
to the light of heaven. 


आ नो गव्यान्यश्व्या weet शूर दर्दुहि। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ९४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 34 639 


14. Ano gavyanyasvya sahasra Sura dardrhi. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Give us a thousand riches of lands and cows, 
culture and enlightenment, O brave ruler, give us and 
develop communications and transport, and from the 
light and rule of this earthly order, O lover of heavenly 
light, rise to the light of heaven and eternal joy. 


आ न॑: Geet भ॑राऽयुर्तानि शातानिं च। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिवावसो ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Anah sahasraso bhara’yutani Satani ca. 
Divo amusya Sasato divam yaya divavaso. 


Bring us, give us, riches, powers and excellences 
in hundreds, thousands and lacs, even more, unbounded 
all, and from the light and culture of this order of earthly 
rule, O lover of peace and light of heaven, rise to 
heavenly light and eternal joy. 


आ यदिन्द्रश्च ase सहस्त्रं वसुरोचिषः। 
ओजिंष्टमश्व्यं पशुम्‌ ९६॥ 

16. A yadindrasca dadvahe sahasram vasurocisah. 
Ojistham-asvyam pasum. 

Let us all, and Indra too, lovers of peace, wealth, 
honour, power and excellence, win a thousandfold 
wealth of brilliant progress and advancement. 

य ऋज्रा वात॑रंहसरोऽ रुषासो। रघुष्यदः | 
भ्राज॑न्ते सू्यीडइव i ९७॥ 


17. Yarjra vataramhaso ’rusaso raghusyadah. 
Bhrajante surya iva. 


640 RGVEDA 


Those who follow straight paths of truth and 
rectitude, advance vibrant like the winds, love brilliance 
without violence and move forward at the shortest wave 
length of speed, shine like stars. 


पारावतस्य रातिषु द्रवच्च॑क्रष्वाशुषुं। 
fas वनस्य मध्य आ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Paravatasya ratisu dravaccakresvasusu. 
Tistham vanasya madhya a. 


O lord of light and power, let me be established 
among the generous and profuse gifts of the farthest 
Spaces, moving at the fastest in the dynamics of the 
whirling wheels of time, ultimately at peace somewhere 
at the centre of eternal truth, goodness and beauty of 
divinity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 35 
Ashvinau Devate, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


अग्निनेन्द्रेण वरुणेन विष्णुनाऽऽदित्यै रुद्रैर्वसुभिः सचा- 
भुवां । स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं पिबतमश्विना ॥ ९ ॥ 


ly Agninendrena varunena visnuna’ dityai rudrair- 
vasubhih sacabhuva. Sajosasa usasa suryena ca 
somam pibatam-asvina. 


Ashvins, complementary powers and forces of 
nature and humanity working in circuit, associated with 
Agni, fire energy, Indra, electric energy, Varuna, water 
energy, Vishnu, solar energy, Adityas, seasonal energies, 
Rudras, pranic energies, and Vasus, earth energies, in 
union with the dawn and the sun, absorb, protect, 
promote and bring the soma joy of life for the benefit 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 35 641 
of humanity. 


विश्वाधिरर्धीभिर्भुव॑नेन वाजिना दिवा ofereents far: 
सचा भुवां | स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं पिलत- 
मश्विना ॥ २॥ 


2, Visvabhir-dhibhir-bhuvanena vajina diva 
prthivya-dribhih sacabhuva. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena ca somam pibatamasvina. 


Mighty and dynamic Ashvins, complementary 
powers of humanity, associated with the twin forces of 
attraction and repulsion of nature and the world, the 
regions of light in space, the earth, clouds and 
mountains, and united with the sun and dawn, receive, 
protect, promote and bring the soma energy and joy for 
the benefit of humanity. 


विश्वैर्दवस्विभिरेकादशेरिहारऽद्धिर्मरुद्धिर्भग॑भिः सचाभुवा । 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं पिलतमणश्विना ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Visvair-devais-tribhir-ekadaSsair-iha’dbhirma- 
rudbhir-bhrgubhih sacabhuva. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena ca somam pibatam-asvind. 


Ashvins, associated with all the thirty three 
brilliant, plentiful and generous divine powers of nature 
and humanity, scientifically energised liquids, vibrant 
pilots and controlled winds, intellectuals and scientists 
who dispel the darkness and ignorance of society, and 
in union with the dawn of a new sun in life, receive, 
preserve, develop and bring the soma energy for the 
peace and joy of humanity here and now. 


जुषेथां यज्ञं बोध॑तं हव॑स्य मे विश्वेह देवौ सवनाव गच्छतम्‌ | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोक्छमण्विना ॥ ४ ॥ 


642 RGVEDA 


4. Jusetham yajnam bodhatam havasya me visveha 
devau savanava gacchatam. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena cesam no volham-asvind. 


Divine Ashvins, twin harbingers of nature and 
humanity, listen to our call, know our purpose, come 
and join all our sessions of yajnic creation and, equally 
in tune with the soothing glory of the dawn and blazing 
intensity of the sun, bring us food and energy here and 
now. 


स्तोमं जुषेथां युवशोवं कन्यनां विश्वेह देवौ सवनाव 
गच्छतम्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोज्हम- 
श्विना ॥ ५॥ 


3: Stomam jusetham yuvaseva kanyanam visveha 
devau savanava gacchatam. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena cesam no volham-asvind. 


Divine Ashvins, twin complementarities of 
nature and humanity, generous brilliancies, listen and 
cherish our song of adoration as youthful lovers listen 
to a lovely brilliant maiden’s, come to our sessions, 
understand our purpose, and united with the dawn and 
the sun, transmit to us food and energy in plenty here 
and now. 


गिरो जुषेथामध्वरं ate विश्वेह देवौ सव॒नाव॑ गच्छतम्‌ । 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोक्छमण्विना ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Giro jusetham-adhvaram jusetham visveha devau 


savanava gacchatam. Sajosasa usasa suryena 
cesam no volham-asvind. 


Divine Ashvins, listen to our song and 
understand, join and cherish our yajnic project of non- 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 643 


violent creation, come to all our sessions, O generous 
harbingers of food, energy and wealth and, united with 
the dawn and the sun, bring us plenty of food, energy 
and all round advancement to our heart’s desire here 
and now. 


हारिद्रवेव पतथो वनेदुप सोमं सुतं म॑हिषेवावं गच्छथः | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च त्रिर्वर्तियीतमणश्विना ॥ ७ ॥ 


bs Haridraveva patatho vanedupa somam sutam 
mahisevava gacchathah. Sajosasd usasa suryena 
ca trir-vartir-yatam-aS$vind. 


Ashvins, you reach our yajna eagerly as a thirsty 
bird flies to water and, like a veteran scholar, you 
understand and recognise the nectar sweet soma that 
we have distilled from our yajnic project and you 
anticipate the future possibilities too. O divine twin 
powers of the circuitous energy of natural and social 
dynamics, in unison with the sun and dawn, come to 
our project thrice a day. 


हंसाविव पतथो अध्वगाविंव सोमं सुतं म॑हिषेवावं गच्छ थः | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च त्रिर्वर्तियीतमणश्विना ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Hamsaviva patatho adhvagaviva somam sutam 
mahisevava gacchathah. Sajosasd usasa suryena 
ca trir-vartir-yatam-aS$vind. 


Ashvins, just as two hansa birds fly to water 
and as two thirsty travellers rush for a drink, so do you 
two like veteran scholars fly to our soma results of yajnic 
projects, understand and assess the positives and 
negatives of merits and anticipate the possibilities. O 
twin divines, in unison with the sun and the dawn, come 


644 RGVEDA 
thrice in the day and help us advance forward. 


श्येनाविंव पतथो हव्यदातये सोमं सुतं महिषेवाव गच्छ थः | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च त्रिर्वर्तियीतमणश्विना ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Syenaviva patatho havyadataye somam sutam 
mahisevava gacchathah. Sajosasd usasa suryena 
ca trirvartiryatamasvind. 


Like falcons you fly carrying holy gifts to the 
generous yajaka. Like veteran scholars you fly to assess 
the merit of our soma distilled in yajnic experiments 
and to anticipate its future possibilities. O twin divines 
united with the sun and the dawn, come thrice in the 
day, visit our sessions and help us to advance. 


पिक॑तं च तुप्णुतं चा चं गच्छतं प्रजां च॑ धत्तं द्रविणं च 
धत्तम्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण SS नो धत्तमश्विना ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Pibatam ca trpnutam ca ca gacchatam prajam 
ca dhattam dravinam ca dhattam. Sajosasda usasa 
suryena corjam no dhattam-asvina. 


Ashvins, come, drink the soma, satisfy 
yourselves about the taste and value of it. Go to the 
people and carry wealth, strength and power for them. 
O twin divines, come, bring us energy and advancement 
in unison with the sun and the dawn of a new day. 


जय॑तं च प्र ddd च प्र चावतं प्रजां च॑ धत्तं द्रविणं च 
धत्तम्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण Ssh नो धत्तमश्विना ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Jayatam ca pra stutam ca pra cavatam prajam 
ca dhattam dravinam ca dhattam. Sajosasda usasa 
suryena corjam no dhattam-asvina. 


Win the victories of life, O divinities of the 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 645 


nation’s morning, thank and adore the Lord Supreme, 
protect the people, bear and bring wealth, strength and 
power for them and hold it too. O twin divines, come 
and bring us energy and advancement in unison with 
the sun and the dawn of a new day and hold on. 


हतं च शत्रून्यत॑तं च मित्रिणः प्रजां च॑ धत्तं द्रविणं च 
धत्तम्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चोर्ज" नो धत्तमश्विना ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Hatam ca Satrun yatatam ca mitrinah prajam ca 
dhattam dravinam ca dhattam. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena corjam no dhattam-asvina. 


Eliminate the adversaries, adversities and the 
negativities, exercise and advance the friendly forces 
with love for cooperation, sustain and maintain the 
people in a state of happiness, bear, bring and hold 
wealth and power with assets for the nation. O twin 
divines, come and bring us energy and advancement in 
unison with the sun and the dawn of a new day, hold on 
and relent not. 


पित्रावरुणवन्ता उत धर्म॑वन्ता wed=ar जरितुर्गच्छथो 
हव॑म्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाऽऽदित्यै्यौतम- 
श्विना ।॥ ९३॥ 


13. Mitravarunavanta uta dharmavanta marutvanta 
Jaritur-gacchatho havam. Sajosasa usasa suryena 
ca’ ’dityair-yatam-asvina. 


Ashvins, complementary powers of the nation’s 
social dynamics in balance for the march ahead, blest 
with Mitra, people of love and friendship, Varuna, 
distinguished people of judgement and discrimination, 
Maruts, vibrant youth and pilots of the nation, all 


646 RGVEDA 


holding on to Dharma, duty in the law of universal truth, 
listen and rise to the call of the celebrant. O twin divines, 
come with the Adityas, the sun in progressive zodias, 
and in unison with the sun and the dawn of every new 
day. 


अद्धिंरस्वन्ता उत विष्णुवन्ता मरुत्व॑न्ता Saat es at 
हव॑म्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाऽऽदित्यैयौतम- 
श्विना ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Angirasvanta uta visnuvanta marutvanta jaritur- 
gacchatho havam. Sajosasa usasa suryena 
ca’ ’dityair-yatam-asvina. 


Blest with Angirasas, continuous freshness of 
life breath and vital energy, Vishnu, omnipresent vision 
and power of divinity, Maruts, vibrant force and velocity 
of the winds, rise instantly to the call of the celebrant, 
Ashvins, and come with the Adityas in progression like 
the sun’s in the zodiacs and in unison with the sun and 
the dawn at the rise of every new day. 


ऋभुमन्तां वृषणा वाज॑वन्ता Vectra जरितुर्गच्छथो 
हव॑म्‌। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाऽऽदित्यैयीतम- 
श्विना ॥ १५॥ 


15. Rbhumanta vrsana vajavanta marutvanta 
Jariturgacchatho havam. Sajosasda usasa suryena 
ca’ ’dityair-yatam-asvina. 


Ashvins, generous divinities of humanity, blest 
with the Rbhus, engineers, technicians and craftsmen, 
Vajins, pioneers moving forward at top speed, Maruts, 
vibrant forces of defence and protection, rise to the call 
of the celebrant and go forward with the Adityas, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 647 


visionaries of the nation, children of mother earth, in 
unison with the sun and the dawn of every new day. 


wel जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं feral हतं रक्षांसि सेधंतममीवाः | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं सुन्वतो अश्विना ॥ १६ ॥ 


16. Brahma jinvatamuta jinvatam dhiyo hatam 
raksamsi sedhatam-amivah. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena ca somam sunvato asvina. 


Animate and energise the visionaries of 
universal values, animate and energise the intellectuals, 
animate and energise the people in general, destroy the 
evil and destructive forces, fight out diseases and create 
the soma of good health and joy in unison with the sun 
and the dawn of every new day. 


at जिन्वतमुत fered नन्हतं रक्चांसि Selatan: | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं सुन्वतो अश्विना ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Ksatram jinvatamuta jinvatam nrn hatam 
raksamsi sedhatam-amivah. Sajosasa usasa 
suryena ca somam sunvato asvina. 


Animate, energise and develop the defence and 
administrative forces, sustain and inspire the people in 
general whosoever they are, destroy the evil and the 
violent, eliminate ill-health and disease and in unison 
with the sun and the dawn of every new day create new 
soma of joy and life’s excitement. 


धेनूर्जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं विशो हतं रक्चांसि सेधंतममीं वाः | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं सुन्वतो अश्विना ॥ ९८. ॥ 
18. Dhenurjinvatamuta jianatam 1150 hatam raksamsi 


sedhatamamivah. Sajosasa usasa suryena ca 
somam sunvato asvind. 


648 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, complementary powers of the nation’s 
development and progress, develop the animal wealth 
for milk, develop and energise the agricultural, industrial 
and commercial classes, destroy evil and the saboteurs, 
eliminate all negativities and, in unison with the sun 
and the rise of every new day, create and recreate the 
soma of new joy and enthusiasm for life. 


अत्ररिव श्रणुतं पूर्व्यस्तुतिं श्यावाश्व॑स्य सुन्वतो म॑दच्युता । 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाऽश्विंना तिरोअंह्ययम्‌॥। ९९ ॥ 


19. Atreriva $rnutam purvyastutim Syavasvasya 
sunvato madacyuta. Sajosasd usasa suryena ca 
*§vina tiroahnyam. 


Ashvins, who humble the arrogance of the 
proud, just as you listen to the universal adorations of 
the sage of threefold freedom of body, mind and soul, 
so pray listen to the appeal and adorations of the scholar 
of solar energy, and, in unison with the sun and the dawn 
of every new day, provide for the people’s security for 
the night at the close of the day, and thus create another 
new joy for the people. 


wit ga gard सुष्टुतीरुप श्यावाश्वस्य सुन्वतो म॑दच्युता | 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाऽश्विंना तिरोअंह्ययम्‌॥ 20 


20. Sargan iva srjatam sustutirupa Syavasvasya 
sunvato madacyutd. Sajosasa usasa suryena ca- 
*svina tiro-ahnyam. 


Ashvins, breakers of pride and arrogance, listen 
to the prayer and exhortation of the scholar of solar rays 
who creates something new toward the improvement 
of life and, in unison with the sun and the dawn, support 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 649 


and augment his invention like a new creation completed 
the day before. 


रश्मीरिव यच्छतमध्वरां उप॑ श्यावाश्व॑स्य सुन्वतो म॑द- 
च्युता। स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाऽश्विना तिरोअं- 
BAAN २९॥ 


21. Rasminriva yacchatamadhvaran upa Ssyava- 
S§vasya sunvato madacyuta. Sajosasd usasa 
suryena ca’svina tiro-ahnyam. 


Ashvins who shatter the pride and arrogance of 
evil forces, take over the yajnic programmes of the 
scholar of solar science and promote them like radiations 
of the sun and steer them by controls in unison with the 
sun and the dawn to advance them further than the last 
stage completed till the last day. 


अर्वाग्रथं नि य॑च्छतं पिब॑तं सोम्यं Hel | आ यातमश्विना 
ग॑ंतमवस्युवीमहं ga धत्तं रत्नानि दाशुषे ।॥ २२॥ 


22. Arvag ratham ni yacchatam pibatam somyam 
madhu. A yatam-asvina gatam-avasyur-vamaham 
huve dhattam ratnani dasuse. 


Ashvins, divine twin powers of the social order, 
direct the chariot hitherward, drink the honey sweets of 
soma distilled by us. Come, go round and come again. 
Praying for protection and support for advancement, I 
call upon you: Come and bring the jewel gifts of life 
for the generous yajaka. 


नमोवाके प्रस्थिते अध्वरे न॑रा विवर्णस्य पीतयें। आ 
यातमश्विना ग॑तमवस्युवीमहं हवे धत्तं रत्नानि दाशुष ।॥ २३ ॥ 


650 RGVEDA 


23. Namovake prasthite adhvare nara vivaksanasya 
pitaye. A yatamaSsvinad gatam-avasyur-vamaham 
huve dhattam ratnani dasuse. 


Ashvins, complementary leading powers of 
humanity, the yajna of love and non-violence with words 
of reverence and homage is begun, the soma is 
refreshing and overflowing, pray come to drink the soma 
and join the celebration. Come and come again. Praying 
for protection and promotion, I call upon you to come 
and bless the generous yajaka with the jewels of life. 


स्वाहाकृतस्य तृम्पतं Utes देवावन्ध॑सः। आ यातमश्विना 
ग॑ंतमवस्युवीमहं ga धत्तं रत्नानि दाशुषे ।॥ २४ ॥ 

24. Svahakrtasya trmpatam sutasya-devavan-dhasah. 
A ydtam-asvind gatam-avasyur-vamaham huve 
dhattam ratnani dasuse. 


Ashvins, twin and complementary divinities of 
nature and humanity, come, drink of the soma offered 
with selfless homage and reverence to your satisfaction. 
Praying for protection and promotion I call upon you to 
come and bless the generous yajaka with the jewels of life. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 36 
Indra Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


अवितासिं सुन्वतो वृक्तबर्हिषः पिबा सोमं मर्दय कं 
र॑तक्रतो । यं तै भागमधारयन्विर्वाः सेहानः पृत॑ना उरु 
Wa: सम॑प्सुजिन्मरु्त्व। इन्द्र सत्ते ॥ ९॥ 

1. Avitasi sunvato vrktabarhisah piba somam 
madaya kam Satakrato. Yam te bhagam-adha- 
rayan visvah sehanah prtana urujrayah samap- 
sujin-marutvan indra saptate. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 36 651 


Indra, omnipotent lord of existence, omnipresent 
in wide wide space, commanding over cosmic waters 
and winds, winner of all the universal battles of 
evolution and doer of a hundred acts of divinity, you 
are the ultimate protector of the maker of soma, the 
devotee on the vedi waiting for the emergence of divine 
consciousness. O lord, arise in the heart and drink the 
soma of his devotion to your satisfaction, most 
exhilarating and reserved for you. 


ura स्तोतारं मघवन्नव त्वां पिबा सोमं मदाय कं श॑तक्रतो | 
ad भागमधारयन्विश्वाः सेहानः पृत॑ना उरु जरयः सम॑प्सु- 
जिन्मरुत्वौ इन्द्र सत्पते ॥ २॥ 


2 Prava stotaram maghavannava tvam piba somam 
madaya kam satakrato. Yam te bhagam-adhara- 
yan visvah sehanah prtana uru jrayah samap- 
sujin-marutvan indra satpate. 


Indra, lord of the wealth and power, honour and 
excellence of the world of existence, pray save the 
celebrant, he is the protector too of your presence in the 
heart. Arise in the consciousness and drink the 
exhilarating soma of his devotion, the share he has 
reserved for you, O doer of a hundred acts of grace. 
You are the ultimate winner of all the battles of 
existential evolution, lord of wide space, commander 
of cosmic waters and winds, sole lord and master ruler 
of the world of reality. 


ऊर्जां देवां अवस्योज॑सा त्वां Fra सोमं Halal कं श॑तक्रतो । 
यं तै भागमधारयन्विश्वाः सेहानः पृत॑ना उरु जरयः सम॑प्सु- 
जिन्मरुत्वौ इन्द्र सत्पते ॥ ३ ॥ 


652 RGVEDA 

Di Urja devam avasyojasa tvam piba somam madaya 
kam Satakrato. Yam te bhagam-adharayan visvah 
sehanah prtana urujrayah samapsujin-marutvan 
indra satptate. 


Indra, you protect the divine forces of existence 
and vest them with energy, lustre and grandeur, and 
thereby they reflect your presence and protect you for 
our perception therein. O lord, rejoice with them in the 
divine presence in nature and humanity and, through 
their ecstasy, drink the exhilarating soma of divine 
celebration, the share they have reserved for you in 
devotion, lord and doer of a hundred acts of majesty. 
You are the ultimate conqueror in all battles of existence, 
omnipresent in wide space, rolling in cosmic waters, 
blowing in wind shears and solely presiding over the 
worlds of reality. 


जनिता दिवो ज॑निता पृथिव्याः पिबा सोमं मदाय कं 
श॑तक्रतो । यं ते भागमर्धारयन्विरू्वाः सेहानः पृत॑ना उरू 
Wa: सम॑प्सुजिन्मरु्त्व। इन्द्र सत्ते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Janita divo janita prthivyah piba somam madaya 
kam Satakrato. Yam te bhagam-adharayan visvah 
sehanah prtana urujrayah samapsujin-marutvan 
indra satptate. 


Indra, lord omnipotent, you are the generator 
of the regions of light and happiness. You are the 
generator of the earth. O lord of a hundred great acts of 
creation, accept, enjoy and protect the exhilarating 
portion of devotion and ecstasy of the celebrants which 
they have dedicated to you, and let the ecstasy move 
their hearts too to your satisfaction. You are the 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 36 653 


conqueror in all battles of the world between good and 
evil forces. You are the immanent presence in the 
expansive space and beyond. You are the life and energy 
in cosmic waters and in the mighty storms of winds, O 
lord of truth and justice and master saviour of the good 
and holy people. 


जनिताश्वानां जनिता गवामसि पिबा ani मदाय कं 
रतक्रतो । यं त भागम्धारयन्िश्वाः सेहानः पृत॑ना se 
Wa: सम॑प्सुजिन्मरु्त्व। इन्द्र सत्ते ॥ ५ ॥ 

>. Janitasvanam janita gavamasi piba somam 
madaya kam satakrato. Yam te bhagamadharayan 
visvah sehanah prtana urujrayah samapsujin- 
marutvan indra satptate. 


You are the generator of the horses. You are the 
generator of cows. O lord of a hundred acts of divinity, 
accept the soma of the ecstasy of your creations who 
celebrate the joy of their being to the extent that they 
reflect your kindness and grace in their love of life. You 
are the conqueror in all world’s struggles for existence 
and survival, immanent in expansive spaces and beyond, 
the life of cosmic waters and the breath of mighty winds, 
lord of truth and reality of existence. 


अत्रीणां स्तोम॑मद्रिवो महस्कुधि पिबा सोमं मदाय कं 
रतक्रतो । यं त भागम्धारयन्िश्वाः सेहानः पृत॑ना se 
Wa: सम॑प्सुजिन्मरु्त्व। इन्द्र सत्ते ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Atrinam stomamadrivo mahaskrdhi piba somam 
madaya kam Satakrato. Yam te bhagamadharayan 
visvah sehanah prtana urujrayah samapsujin- 
marutvan indra satptate. 


654 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord generator of the suns, breaker of 
clouds and mover of mountains, wielding the 
thunderbolt of justice and retribution, accept and exalt 
the happy sage’s song of adoration, enjoy the 
exhilarating soma of devotion to the last note of the 
song and bless them, O lord of a hundred acts of love 
and kindness, to the utmost extent of their capacity. You 
are the victor in all the battles of existence, lord 
immanent in and transcendent beyond the expansive 
space, rolling in cosmic waters and blowing in 
tempestuous winds, O lord of the truth of existence and 
saviour of noble humanity. 


श्यावाश्व॑स्य सुन्वतस्तथां श्रुणु यथाश्रंणोरत्रेः कमणि 
कृण्वतः । प्र ्रसद॑स्युमाविथ त्वमेक SANT इन्दर ब्र्याणि 
व॒र्धय॑न्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


qs Syavasvasya sunvatastatha srnu yathasrnor-atreh 
karmani krnvatah. Pra trasadasyumavitha 
tvameka innrsahya indra brahmani vardhayan. 


Indra, mighty lord of humanity, listen to the 
prayer of the sage creator of soma and his songs of 
ecstasy created with a disciplined mind and sense as 
well as with disciplined will and imagination, just as 
you listen to the songs of the sage of threefold freedom 
doing acts of service to humanity and divinity. You 
protect the sage fighter against evil, tyranny and 
exploitation all by yourself in the battles of humanity, 
thereby exalting the songs and actions in honour of 
divinity. Won’t you listen to me? 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 37 655 


Mandala 8/Sukta 37 
Indra Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


प्रेदं wat aad sarfaat प्र सुन्वतः शचीपत इन्द्र 
विश्वाभिरूतिभिः | माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य 
पिबा सोम॑स्य विवः 2 


iP Predam brahma vrtraturyesvavitha pra sunvatah 
sacipata indra visvabhirutibhih. Madhyandinasya 
savanasya vrtrahannanedya piba somasya 
vajrivah. 


Indra, lord of song and acts of bravery, saviour 
of poets and warriors in the battles against darkness 
and evil within the personality and without in the 
objective world, with all your modes and methods of 
protection and promotion, protect and exalt this holy 
song and the creator of the song and soma for the 
betterment of life. O lord of the thunderbolt, destroyer 
of the demon of darkness, evil and suffering, impeccable 
beyond reproach, come, join us and taste the joy of 
creative soma of the mid-day session of our yajnic 
action. 


सेद्ान उग्र पृत॑ना अभि sd: शचीपत इन्द्र विर्वांभि- 
रूतिभिंः । माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य 
ana: ॥ २॥ 

2. Sehana ugra prtana abhi druhah sacipata indra 
visvabhirutibhih. Madhyandinasya savanasya 
vrtrahannanedya piba somasya vajrivah. 


Indra, lord of blazing might and glory of word 
and action, challenger of the forces of jealousy and 
enmity, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and 


656 RGVEDA 


punishment, destroyer of the demon of darkness and 
evil, want and suffering, adorable beyond reproach, 
come with all your modes and means of protection and 
promotion and taste the soma of our mid-day height of 
yajnic action. 


एकराद्छस्य भुव॑नस्य राजसि शचीपत इन्द्र favathar- 
रूतिभिः । माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य 
विवः ॥ ३॥ 


Ekaralasya bhuvanasya rajasi Sacipata indra 
visvabhirutibhih. Madhyandinasya savanasya 
vrtrahannanedya piba somasya vajrivah. 


Indra, lord of holy word and great action, with 
all your protections and promotions you shine and rule 
over the one earthly world of existence. O lord of the 
thunderbolt, destroyer of darkness and evil, adorable 
beyond criticism and calumny, come and taste the soma 
of our success at the mid-day session of our yajnic 
programme. 


सस्थावाना यवयसि त्वमेक इच्छचीपत इन्द्र favarhy- 
रूतिभिः । माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य 
वचिवः॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sasthavana yavayasi tvameka icchacipata indra 
visvabhirutibhih. Madhyandinasya savanasya 
vrtrahannanedya piba somasya vajrivah. 


Indra, ruler and master of tactics and power of 
governance, you balance, join or separate two equal 
parties from clashing all by yourself by your strength 
and protective and promotive policies. O lord of 
adamantine power, decision and action, destroyer of 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 37 657 


evil, darkness and demonic exploitation, adorable 
beyond criticism and calumny, come and taste the 
sweetness of our soma at the peak of our day’s 
cooperative programme. 


क्षेम॑स्य च waive त्वमीशिषे शचीपत इन्द्र favatfer- 
रूतिभिंः । माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य 
विवः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Ksemasya ca prayujasca tvamisise Sacipata indra 
visvabhirutibhih. Madhyandinasya savanasya 
vrtrahannanedya piba somasya vajrivah. 


Indra, mighty ruler presiding over the nation, 
master of divine eloquence and decisive action, with 
all your safeguards, precautions and tactical actions you 
govern and promote our consolidated assets, 
investments and acquisitions safely and positively. O 
lord of thunderous power, implacable law and inevitable 
justice, O destroyer of evil, suffering and poverty, 
adorable beyond question and criticism, come and taste 
the pleasure and progress of our yajnic programme at 
the peak of the day’s success. 


क्षत्राय॑ त्वमव॑सि न त्व॑माविथ शचीपत्‌ इन्द्र विर्वाभि- 
रूतिभिः । माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य 
विवः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ksatraya tvamavasi na tvamavitha Sacipata indra 
visvabhirutibhih. Madhyandinasya savanasya 
vrtrahannanedya piba somasya vajrivah. 

Indra, lord of sacred word and irresistible action, 


with all your methods and policies of protection and 
progress you deploy your forces for the defence and 


658 RGVEDA 


advancement of the nation, not for your own personal 
security. O lord of awesome power and justice, destroyer 
of demonic violence and exploitation, come and taste 
the pleasure of our soma of peace and progress at the 
peak of our day’s achievement. 


श्यावाश्वस्य रेभ॑तस्तथा श्रृणु यथाश्रुणोरत्रेः कर्मणि 
कृण्वतः प्र ्रसद॑स्युमाविथ त्वमेक SATA इन्द्र क्चत्राणिं 
व॒र्धय॑न्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


vis Syavasvasya rebhatastatha Srnu yathas-rnoratreh 
karmani krnvatah. Pra trasadas-yumavitha 
tvameka innrsahya indra ksatrani vardhayan. 


Indra, ruler of the world, listen to the eulogies 
of the dynamic scholar and poet as you listen to the 
exhortations of the man of action and threefold freedom 
of body, mind and soul. O lord, you alone by yourself 
protect and exhort the hero who destroys ogres and 
saboteurs and exalts the defence powers in the national 
meets of leaders and pioneers among people. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 38 
Indra-Agni Devate, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


aad हि स्थ ऋत्विजा सस्नी वाजेषु कर्म॑सु | 
Sah तस्य॑ बोधतम्‌।॥ ९॥ 


Ls Yajnasya hi stha rtvija sasni vajesu karmasu. 
Indragni tasya bodhatam. 


Indra, wielder of power and justice, ruler of the 
nation, Agni, enlightened sage and scholar, high priest 
and leading authority on the values of the system of 
governance, be firmly joined together in the cleanest 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 38 659 


programme of government in all decisions, actions and 
developmental plans and their completion for 
advancement, and know it well that this is the purpose 
of governance and the social order. You are two leading 
participants in this sacred yajna. Know this and abide 
in your position. 


तोशासा रथयावाना वृत्रहणाप॑राजिता | 
इन्द्रा्री तस्य॑ बोधतम्‌ 2 1 


2. Tosasa rathayavana vrtrahanaparajita. 
Indragni tasya bodhatam. 


Ruling to the satisfaction of the people, going 
by chariot and reaching fast wherever needed, 
destroying the evils of darkness, ignorance, want and 
demonic injustice and exploitation, never frustrated or 
defeated but always victorious, Indra and Agni, ruler 
and enlightened sage and scholar, know this purpose 
well, follow and never relent. 


इदं वां मदिरं मध्वधुश्चन्नद्िथिर्नरः | 
इन्द्रागी तस्य॑ बोधतम्‌ 3 ॥ 
3. Idam vam madiram madhvadhuksann-adribhir- 


narah. Indragni tasya bodhatam. 


Indra and Agni, ruler and enlightened leader, 
the people, leading lights and all, create these 
exhilarating honey sweets of soma with mountainous 
efforts to felicitate you. Know this, recognise it, and 
honour them. 


जुषेथां यज्ञमिष्टये सुतं सोमं सधस्तुती | 
इन्द्राग्नी आ ग॑तं नरा॥ ४॥ 


660 RGVEDA 


4. Jusetham yajnamistaye sutam somam sadhastuti. 
Indragni व gatam nara. 


Indra and Agni, come to the people’s house of 
yajna, honoured ruler and leader, join us and enjoy the 
honey sweets of soma distilled for you so that we may 
all realise the aim and purpose of the social order the 
way we want. 


इमा जुषेथां सव॑ना येभिवर्हव्यान्यूहधुः | 
इन्द्रामी आ ग॑तं नरा॥ ५॥ 
= Ima jusetham savana yebhirhavyanyuhathuh. 


Indragni व gatam nara. 


Indra and Agni, leaders of the nation’s 
enlightened rule and order, come, join the yajnic sessions 
of the social order and accept the holy offerings with 
the powers by which you reach out to the people and 
give them the facilities they need. 


इमां गायत्रवर्तनिं जुषेथां सुष्टुतिं aa । 
इन्द्रागी आ ग॑तं नरा॥ ६॥ 
6. Imam gayatra-vartanim jusetham sustutim mama. 
Indragni व gatam nara. 
Indra and Agni, leaders of the world order, come, 


listen and accept this exhilarating gayatri homage of 
mine in your honour. 


प्रातयविंभिरा ग॑तं safes area 
S-ahht सोम॑पीतये 91 


fn Prataryavabhira gatam devebhirjenyavasu. 
Indragni somapitaye. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 38 661 


Indra and Agni, victorious creators of wealth 
for the nation, come with the early morning divinities 
and leading lights of generosity to join the yajna and 
have a taste of the soma of the nation’s honour and 
SUCCESS. 


श्यावाश्व॑स्य सुन्वतोऽ त्रीणां श्यणु तं हव॑म्‌ । 
इन्द्रासरी सोम॑पीतये ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Syavasvasya sunvato’trinam srnutam havam. 
Indragni somapitaye. 


Indra and Agni, listen to the call of the dynamic 
scholar and poet who offers the soma of yajnic homage, 
and honour the call of the leaders of thrice won freedom 
of the body, mind and soul so that you may enjoy the 
soma celebration of the nation at the yajna vedi. 


एवा वामह्व ऊतये यथाहु वन्त APT: 1 
इन्द्रासरी सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९ ॥ 


न Eva vamahva utaye yathahuvanta medhirah. 
Indragni somapitaye. 


Indra and Agni, leaders of the nation’s light and 
fire energy, just as holy scholars and sages invoke you 
for protection and promotion, so do I invoke and call 
upon you to come and join us at the soma session of our 
yajna. 

आहं सर॑स्वतीवतोरिन्द्रागन्योरवों वृणे । 
याभ्यां गायत्रमृच्यते to 


10. Aham sarasvativator-indragnyor-avo vine. 
Yabhyam gayatram-rcyate. 


I choose and opt for the protection of Indra and 


662 RGVEDA 


Agni who value and honour the knowledge and 
enlightenment gifts of eternal and constant revelation 
of divinity by which the dynamism of human culture 
and grace and the honour and excellence of humanity 
is defined and celebrated. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 39 
Agni Devata, Nabhaka Kanva Rshi 


अभरिम॑स्तोष्युग्मिय॑मभिमीव्ठा यजध्यै | अथिर्दैवाँ st न 
उभे हि विदथे कविर न्तश्चर॑ति दूत्यं नभन्तामन्यके 
स॑मे।॥ ९॥ 


1. Agnim-astosyrgmiyam-agnimila yajadhyai. 
Agnirdevan anaktu na ubhe hi vidathe kavir- 
antascarati dutyam nabhantam-anyake same. 


I worship Agni, lord of light and fire of life, 
giver of enlightenment, adored in Rks of the Veda. I 
invoke and adore Agni to join me at yajna for 
advancement and pray that it may inspire and bring us 
the benefit of other divinities of nature and humanity. 
The poet, creator, omniscient power at yajna, traverses 
between both heaven and earth and communicates 
between body and spirit like a messenger, an inspiration, 
and while Agni is at work all adversaries and negativities 
would vanish. 


waa नव्य॑सा वच॑स्तनूषु शंस॑मेषाम्‌ । न्यराती रराव्णां विश्वां 
अर्यो अरातीरितो युंच्छन्त्वामुरो नभ॑न्तामन्यके स॑मे ।॥ २॥ 

2. Nyagne navyasa vacastanusu Samsamesam. 
Nyaratir-aravnam visva aryo aratirito yucchan- 
tvamuro nabhantam-anyake same. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 39 663 


Agni, lord of light and fire, by this new word of 
adoration may the negativities of thought and emotion 
in the personalities of these yajakas, frustrations of the 
bountiful, all adversaries and adversities, all stupidity, 
violence and enemies go away and vanish from here. 


अग्रे मन्मानि तुभ्यं कं ud न We आसनिं। स देवेषु प्र 
चिकिद्धि त्वं ह्यसि पूर्व्यः शिवो दूतो विवस्व॑तो नभ॑न्ताम- 
न्यके GAN ३॥ 


Agne manmani tubhyam kam ghrtam na juhva 
asani. Sa devesu pra cikiddhi tvam hyasi purvyah 
Sivo duto vivasvato nabhantam-anyake same. 


Agni, lord of yajna, as I offer charming oblations 
of ghrta into the fire I offer hymns of adorations to you. 
Pray know and accept these among and with other 
divinities. You are the oldest, eternal and gracious 
messenger of the sun. May all negativities and 
adversities vanish. 


तत्तदगरिर्वयों दधे यर्थायथा कृपण्यति | ऊज तिर्वसुनां 
शं च योश्च मयो दधे विश्व॑स्य देवहू त्यै नभ॑न्तामन्य॒के 
संमे॥४॥ 


4. Tattadagnirvayo dadhe yathayatha krpanyati. 
Urjahutir-vasunam sam ca yos’ca mayo dadhe 
visvasyai devahutyai nabhantam-anyake same. 


Agni bears, brings and bestows upon the 
supplicant all the food, energy, health and joy as it is 
asked for. Agni is the giver of plenty of energy, peace, 
happiness and freedom from suffering and disease for 
liberal service in honour of all the divinities of nature 
and humanity. May all negativities and adversities 


664 RGVEDA 


vanish. 


स चिकेत सहीयसाऽगिश्चित्रेण कर्मणा। a eta 
शश्व॑तीनां दक्षिणाभिर भीवृत इनोति च प्रतीव्यं 
नभन्तामन्यके संमे॥ ५॥ 


2: Sa ciketa sahiyasa’ gniscitrena karmana. Sa hota 
sasvatinam daksinabhir-abhivrta inoti ca prati- 
vyam nabhantam-anyake same. 


Agni 1s known by his powerful and marvellous 
actions. He is the initiator and original high-priest of 
the eternal yajnas of the cycles of creation. Self- 
provided, generosity incarnate, universally chosen and 
adored, he comes to bless whoever reposes faith in him 
with prayer. May all negativities and adversities vanish. 


अभिजाता देवानामथिर्वेद मतीनामपीच्यम्‌। अगिः स 
द्रविणोदा अग्िद्वारा atta स्वाहुतोनवीयसा नभन्तामन्यके 
स॑मे॥६॥ 


6. Agnirjata devanam-agnirveda martanamapt- 
cyam. Agnih sa dravinoda agnirdvara vyurnute 
svahuto naviyasa nabhantam-anyake same. 


Agni knows the origin of immortal divinities of 
nature. He knows the secrets and mysteries of the 
mortals. Agni is the treasure giver of universal wealth, 
power, honour and excellence. Invoked and served with 
latest researches into light and fire energy and its 
applications, Agni opens the doors of immense 
possibilities of wealth and power. May all negativities 
and adversities vanish. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 39 665 


अभिर्देवेषु संव॑सुः स faay afrareat स मुदा creat 
पुरु विश्वं भूमेव पुष्यति देवो देवेषु यज्ञियो नभन्तामन्यके 
Baie tt 


१९ Agnirdevesu samvasuh sa viksu yajniyasva. Sa 
muda kavya puruvisvam bhumeva pusyati devo 
devesu yajniyo nabhantam-anyake same. 


Agni pervades the divinities of nature and 
humanity as vitality, energy, plenty and generosity. He 
resides in humanity specially among those who are 
dedicated to yajna and creativity. As the earth nurtures 
and sustains the entire world life on it, so Agni nurtures 
and sustains all living beings with joy and inspiration 
for celebration in song. He is indeed the chief adorable 
divinity among divinities. May all negetavities and 
adversities vanish. 


यो aif: सप्तमानुषः चितो विश्वेषु सिन्धुषु । तमाग॑न्म 
त्रिपस्त्यं म॑न्धातुर्दस्युहन्त॑ममशिं यज्ञेषु पूर्व्य नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
स॑मे॥८॥ 


8. Yo agnih saptamanusah Srito visvesu sindhusu. 
Tamaganma tripastyam mandhatur-dasyuhan- 
tamam-agnim yajnesu purvyam nabhantam- 
anyake same. 


The Agni which pervades and vitalises the seven 
yajakas, 1.e., five senses, mind and intelligence, and also 
the seven pranic energies, among humans, which 
energises the rolling oceans and flowing rivers of the 
world, which pervades the three regions of earth, skies 
and the regions of light in the universe, which sustains 
and inspires the wise and dedicated people and which 


666 RGVEDA 


destroys the violent, to that Agni, first and foremost 
adorable power in yajnas, let us attain in worship. May 
all negativities and adversities vanish. 


अस्त्रीणि त्रिधातून्या alfa facet कविः । स त्रीरे rest 
इह यक्ष॑च्च पिप्रय॑च्च नो विप्रो दूतः परिष्कृतो नभन्तामन्यके 
सं॑मे॥ ९॥ 


9. Agnistrini tridhatunya kseti vidatha kavih. Sa 
trinrekadasan iha yaksacca piprayacca no vipro 
dutah pariskrto nabhantam-anyake same. 


Omnipresent and omniscient Agni pervades 
three regions of the universe wherein reside three 
realities worth knowing, i.e., Prakrti (nature), soul, and 
the Super Soul, Parameshvara. Here in He, the one by 
himself pure, all knowing, all vibrating like super energy 
of life, feeds and vitaslises thirty three divinities of 
nature and sustains us with all that we need and desire. 
May all negativities and adversities all vanish. 


त्वं नो अग्र आयुषु त्वं देवेषु पूर्व्य वस्व एकं इरज्यसि । 
त्वामाप॑ः परिस्रुतः परि यन्ति स्वसेतवो नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
स॑मे॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tvam no agna ayusu tvam devesu purvya vasva 
eka irajyasi. Tvamapah parisrutah pari yanti 
svasetavo nabhantam-anyake same. 


Agni, ancient and eternal power of existence, 
you alone among humanity and among divinities rule 
the entire wealth and power of existence. All around 
you the dynamic energies of life unfold and flow by 
themselves, provide vitality of life as messengers of 
Agni to forms of existence, and ultimately merge with 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 40 667 


you. May all negativities, adversities and contradictions 
vanish from our life for all time. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 40 
Indra-Agni Devate, Nabhaka kanva Rshi 


इन्द्रागी युवं सु नः Gera दास॑थो thr येन॑ दुठ्व्हा 
समत्स्वा die चिंत्सादिषीमदह्ययिर्वनव वात इन्नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
स॑मे।॥ ९॥ 


0 Indragni yuvam su nah sahanta dasatho rayim. 
Yena drlha samatsva vilu cit sahistmahyagnirva- 
neva vata innabhantam-anyake same. 


Indra, lord of power and honour, Agni, lord of 
light and knowledge, commanding lightning and fire, 
patience and endurance, strength and courage, give us 
that positive and irresistible wealth of life by which we 
may face, resist and throw off strong and violent 
adversaries as fire fanned by winds destroys forests. 
May negativities, adversities, alienations and enmities 
all vanish. 


नहि वां वत्रयामहेऽथेन्द्र Praag शविष्ठं नृणां AL स 
न॑: कदा चिदर्वता गमदा वाज॑सातये गमदा मेधसातये 
नभन्तामन्यके स॑मे॥ २॥ 


2. Nahi vam vavrayamahe’thendramid yajamahe- 
Savistham nrnam naram. Sa nah kada cidarvata 
gamada vajasataye gamada medhasataye 
nabhantam-anyake same. 


We do not shrink from you, Indra and Agni, nor 
do we in any way neglect you both. Indeed we invoke 
and invite Indra, strongest leader of the strong, to be 


668 RGVEDA 


with us. When, for sure, would the lord come to us, 
come with Agni at the speed of lightning to inspire us 
with strength for struggle and victory, to bless us with 
piety, wisdom and intelligence for corporate action with 
the spirit of yajna? May all negativities, adversities, 
alienations and enmities vanish. 


ता fe मध्यं भराणामिन्द्रागी अंधिक्षितः। ता उ कवित्वना 
कवी पृच्छ्यमाना सखीयते सं धीतमश्नुतं नरा नभंन्ताम- 
न्यके BAW ३॥ 


Ta hi madhyam bharanam-indragni adhiksitah. 
Ta u kavitvana kavi prcchyamana sakhiyate sam 
dhitam-asnutam nara nabhantam-anyake same. 


Both Indra and Agni like fire and lightning 
reside and rule at the heart of life struggles. May they, 
we pray, leading lights, prophetic voices and patriarchal 
spirits for the loving and friendly, invoked for guidance 
and answers to questions and mysteries of life, come 
and, with their vision and wisdom, resolve our doubts 
and questions to settled certainties of decisive action. 
May all negativities, adversities, frustrations and 
enmities vanish from the world. 


sad नभाकवदिन्द्राग्री यजसा गिरा। ययोर्विश्व॑मिदं 
जगदियं द्यौः पथिवी मयु पस्थ विभृतो वसु नभ॑न्तामन्य॒के 
Basi oo 

4. Abhyarca nabhakavad-indragni yajasa gira. 
Yayor-visvamidam jagad-iyam dyauh prthivi 
mahyupasthe bibhrto vasu nabhantam-anyake 
same. 


O man, with a voice friendly and inviting, like 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 40 669 


a missionary eager to eliminate the negativities and 
adversities of life, invoke and adore Indra and Agni, 
lord omnipotent and the leading light of omniscience, 
in whose treasure hold of nature are held, controlled 
and protected for promotion and progress this entire 
world, the moving expansive universe, the heaven, the 
middle regions, the great mother earth and unbounded 
wealth, power and excellence for the children of divinity. 
May all negativities, adversities, deprivations and 
alienations vanish from the face of the earth. 


प्र ब्रह्माणि नभाकवदिन्द्राधिभ्यामिरज्यत। या सप्तवुंध्न- 
मण्विं जिह्यवारमपोर्णुत इन्द्र ईशान ओज॑सा नभन्तामन्यके 
संमे।॥ ५॥ 


9, Pra brahmani nabhakavad-indragnibhyam- 
irajyata. Ya saptabudhnamarnavam jihmava- 
ram-apornuta indra 1sana ojasa nabhantam- 
anyake same. 


Like the sage eager to throw off the veils of 
ignorance, send up your prayers to Indra and Agni, lord 
omnipotent and omniscient who, ruling the world of 
existence with their lustre and majesty, open up the 
seven fold ocean of obscure and tortuous nature to 
evolution and reveal the seven stage treasure of 
mysterious knowledge across fivefold evolution of 
nature to biological and spiritual stages of knowledge. 
May all ignorance, frustrations, and alienations vanish. 


अपिं वृश्च पुराणवद्‌ addita wheres ert 
दम्भय। वयं तद॑स्य संभु तं वस्विन्द्रेण fa waste 
नभन्तामन्यके स॑मे ॥ ६॥ 


670 RGVEDA 


6. Api vrsca puranavad-vratateriva guspitamojo 
dasasya dambhaya. Vayam tadasya sambhrtam 
vasvindrena vi bhajemahi nabhantam-anyake 
same. 


Also prune, cut off and throw out like the dead 
wood of a tangled creeper the hoarded wealth, unethical 
power and outmoded knowledge of the exploiter and the 
antisocial luxury of the selfish consumer, and control and 
eliminate the fiendish force of the evil so that we may 
share and enjoy renewed and refreshing wealth, power 
and knowledge reorganised and recollected into living 
forms by Indra. May all poverty, superstitions, alienations 
and enmities vanish from progressive humanity. 


यदिन्द्राम्री sat इमे faga=a तनां गिरा । sreareb fart - 
fuda सासह्याम पृतन्यतो agar वनुष्यतो नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
स॑मे।॥ ७॥ 


ae Yadindragni jana ime vihvayante tana gira. 
Asmakebhir-nrbhirvayam sasahyama prtanyato- 
vanuyama vanusyato nabhantam-anyake same. 


When these our people, with one persistent 
voice and relentless exhortation, invoke and call upon 
Indra and Agni who command irresistible power and 
unquestionable knowledge, then with our dynamic 
people we would face and fight out all violent 
oppositions and defeat destructive forces. May all 
violence, destruction, terrorism and sabotage vanish 
from progressive society. 


या नु श्वेताववो दिव Serta उप द्युभिः । इन्द्राग्न्योरनु 
व्र तमुहाना यन्ति सिन्ध॑वो area" बन्धादमुञ्चतां 
नभन्तामन्यके BAe ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 40 671 


8. Ya nu $Svetavavo diva uccarata upa dyubhih. 
Indragnyor-anu vratam-uhana yanti sindhavo 
yantsim bandhad-amuncatam nabhantam-anyake 
same. 


Whoever Indra and Agni, commanding ruling 
power and light of knowledge, raise from lower regions 
of ignorance and darkness, and take them to the higher 
regions of knowledge and culture, and the seas which 
they release from bondage, all of them, thus raised and 
guided, observe their divine laws and live a dynamic 
life of freedom and enlightenment. May all darkness, 
ignorance, superstition and slavery vanish from the 
world, giving way to freedom and progress. 


Yate’ इन्द्रोप॑मातयः पूर्वीरुत प्रश॑स्तयः gal हिन्वस्य 
हरिवः । वस्वो वीरस्यापृचो या नु साध॑न्त नो धियो नभ॑न्ता- 
मन्यके स॑मे॥ ९॥ 


॥ Purvista indropamatayah purviruta prasastayah 
suno hinvasya harivah. Vasvo virasyaprco ya nu 
sddhanta no dhiyo nabhantam-anyake same. 


O Indra, commanding lord of perceptive and 
communicative powers of enlightenment, inspirer and 
rejuvenator of the celebrant, first, foremost and universal 
are your gifts of generosity, ancient and universal are 
your acts and songs of adoration. The grace and 
beneficence of the almighty are givers of settlement 
which may, we pray, inspire our mind, senses and actions 
and lead us to fulfilment and salvation. May poverty, 
suffering, pride and frustration vanish giving way to 
universal joy and freedom. 


672 RGVEDA 


तं शिशीता सुवृक्तिभिवस्त्वेषं सत्वानमृण्मिय॑म्‌। उतो नु चिद्य 
ओज॑सा शुष्ण॑स्याण्डानि भेदति जेषत्स्वर्वतीर पो नभ॑न्ताम- 
न्यके AA eon 


ser 


10. Tam Sisita suvrktibhistvesam satvanam-rgmiyam. 
Uto nu cid ya ojasa Susnasyandani bhedati jesat 
svarvatirapo nabhantam-anyake same. 


With hymns and holy actions adore and glorify 
Indra, resplendent lord who commands the purity and 
truth of reality, who is adorable, who with his power 
and brilliance, dries up and roots out the origins and 
products of drought, greed and exploitation and sets 
aflow the liberal streams of joy and prosperity. May all 
poverty, exploitation, greed and unhappiness vanish 
from the world of humanity. 


तं शिशीता स्वध्वरं सत्यं सर्वानमृत्विय॑म्‌। उतो नु चिद्य 
sida आण्डा शुष्णस्य भेदत्यजैः स्वर्वतीरपो नभ॑न्ताम- 
न्यके AAU ९९॥ 


11. Tam Sisita svadhvaram styam satvanam-rtviyam. 
Uto nu cid ya ohata anda Susnasya bhedatya-jaih 
svarvatirapo nabhantam-anyake same. 


Adore and glorify the lord of love, non-violence 
and holy yajnic action, who is ever true and eternal, 
who rewards acts of truth and piety and inspires us to 
think and meditate on piety and divinity, who breaks 
down the roots and fruits of impiety and exploitation 
and conquers the streams of joy and prosperity to set 
them aflow. May impiety, illiberality, untruth and 
exploitation, all vanish from the world. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 41 673 


एवेन्द्राग्िभ्यां पित॒वन्नवींयो मन्धात॒वदंद्धिरस्वदंवाचि। 
त्रिधातुना शर्म॑णा पातमस्मान्वयं स्याम पत॑यो रयी- 
णाम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Evendragnibhyam pitrvannaviyo mandhatrvad- 
angirasvad-avaci. Tridhatuna Sarmana patam- 
asman vayam syama patayo rayinam. 


Thus do I sing a new song of adoration in honour 
of Indra, lord ruler of power, and Agni, lord giver of 
light and knowledge, as I would sing to glorify the father, 
the giver of honour and enlightenment, and the lord 
giver of the breath of life. May Indra and Agni protect 
and promote us with the joy of threefold gifts of truth, 
action and stability, and may we, I pray, be masters, 
protectors and promoters of the wealth, honour and 
excellence of life on earth. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 41 
Varuna Devata, Nabhaka Kanva Rshi 


अस्मा ऊ षु प्रभूतये वरुणाय मरुद्रयोऽ ची fags tex: 1 
यो धीता मानुषाणां पश्वो wea रक्ष॑ति नभन्तामन्यके 
aan 


॥. Asma u su prabhitaye varunaya marudbhyo ’rca 
vidustrebhyah. Yo dhita manusanam [८510 ga iva 
raksati nabhantam-anyake same. 


For progress and prosperity in life, honour, adore 
and glorify Varuna, this lord supreme, ruler and 
dispenser of justice who, with his powers, judgement 
and actions, protects and promotes humans, animals, 
birds, etc., just as he protects and regulates stars, planets 
and satellites, all like the sacred cow. Honour and adore 


674 RGVEDA 


scholars and vibrant youth and warriors also and then 
all differences, oppositions, contradictions, alienations 
and enmities would vanish. 


तमू षु स॑मना गिरा पितृणां च wane: | नाभाकस्य 
प्रशस्तिथिर्यः सिन्धूनामुपोदये सप्तस्व॑सा स म॑ध्यमो 
नभन्तामन्यके संमे॥ २॥ 


2 Tamu su samana gira pitrnam ca manmabhih. 
Nabhakasya praSastibhiryah sindunam-upodaye 
saptasvasa sa madhyamo nabhantam-anyake 
same. 


Him you adore and glorify with sincere mind, 
holy voice, songs of forefathers and hymns of sages 
risen above the problems of lower world. Adore the lord 
at the heart of things, at the head of the seven streams 
of existence and at the beginning of the rise of creative 
evolution of the seven oceans of Prakrti across five gross 
elements, subtle elements and the spiritual and 
intelligential world. Do that and all oppositions, 
contraries and contradictions would disappear. 


स क्षपः UR षस्वजे =e माययां दधे स विश्वं परि 
दर्शतः । तस्य वेनीरनुं व्रतमुषस्तिस््रो अ॑वर्धयन्नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
स॑मे॥३॥ 


3 Sa ksapah pari sasvaje nyusro mayaya dadhe sa 
visvam pari darsatah. Tasya veniranu vratamu- 
sastisro avardhayan nabhantam-anyake same. 


He joins and pervades the nights, super-glorious 
sun as he is, and with his might holds and sustains the 
world. All people of the world do homage to him in 
obedience to his law and glorify him through three 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 41 675 


phases of the day and time, morning, evening and mid- 
day, past, present and future. May all phases of 
contraries, contradictions and enmities vanish from the 
world. 


यः ककुभो निधार यः पंथिव्यामधिं aga: । स माता पूर्व्य 
पदं तद्ररुणस्य सप्त्यं स हि गोपाडइवेर्यो नभन्तामन्यके 
Aas 


4. Yah kakubho nidharah prthivyamadhi darsatah. 
Sa mata purvyam padam tad varunasya saptyam 
sa hi gopa iveryo nabhantam-anyake same. 


Glorious, he holds and maintains the bounds of 
space over the earth. He is the original mother source 
of existence, he is the ultimate protector and sustainer, 
the highest adorable worthy of service for the knowledge 
and attainment of that eternal state of divine existence 
when and where all contraries, contradictions and 
enmities would disappear. 


यो धर्ता भुव॑नानां य उस्राणामपीच्या वेद्‌ नामानि गह्या । 
स कविः काव्यां पुरु रूपं द्यौरिव पुष्यति नभन्तामन्यके 
स॑मे॥५॥ 


ध Yo dharta bhuvananam ya usranamapicya veda 
namani guhya. Sa kavih kavya puru rupam 
dyauriva pusyati nabhantam-anyake same. 


Glorify Varuna who is the holder and sustainer 
of the galaxies, solar systems and worldly regions of 
the universe, who knows the nature, forms and names 
of sun rays, mysteries and even the deepest secrets of 
existence. He is the omniscient poet and with his creative 
vision inspires the mind and imagination of poets for 


676 RGVEDA 


creation as he energises and sustains the heaven of light. 
May all contraries, contradictions, oppositions and 
enmities vanish. 


यस्मिन्विश्वानि काव्यां चक्रे नाभिरिव श्चिता। त्रितं जूती 
सपर्यत व्रजे गावो न संयुजे युजे अश्वौ stata नभन्ताम- 
न्यके स॑मे ॥ ६॥ 


6. Yasmin visvani kavya cakre nabhiriva Srita. 
Tritam juti saparyata vraje gavo na samyuje yuje 
asvan ayuksata nabhantam-anyake same. 


In him originate, abide, and centre all the 
imagination, wisdom and poetic creations of the world 
as in the nave centre all spokes of the wheel. Serve and 
adore the lord of three worlds and reach him without 
delay as cows hasten to the stall or as you hasten to 
yoke the horses to the chariot. May all distortions, 
dislocations, contradictions and enmities vanish from 
our life. 


य आस्वत्कं आशये विश्वा जातान्येषाम्‌। परि धामानि 
मर्मशद्वरुणस्य पुरो गये विश्वे देवा अनुं व्रतं नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
संमे।॥ ७॥ 


Te Ya asvatka aSaye visva jatanyesam. Pari dhamani 
marmrsad varunasya puro gaye visve deva anu 
vratam nabhantam-anyake same. 


Varuna is the one who vibrates at the heart of 
all these people and pervades all things born, immanent 
in and transcending over all regions of the universe. 
Indeed the divinities of nature and humanity stand ready 
in harness before the presence of Varuna, all committed 
to his law and their duty in the law. May all negativities 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 41 677 


and enmities vanish from the world. 


ada अंपीच्य॑स्तुरो द्यामिव रोहति नि यदासु यजुर्दधे । 
स माया अर्चिना पदाऽस्तंणान्नाकमारुहन्नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
संमे॥८॥ 


8. Sa samudro apicyasturo dyamiva rohati ni yadasu 
yajurdadhe. Sa maya arcina pada’ s-trnanna- 
kamaruha-nnabhantam-anyake same. 


He is the bottomless ocean womb of existence, 
and at the heart of everything, superfast, instant reacher, 
like the light of heaven all expansive, and when he vests 
these people with the spirit of action rising to the heights 
of heaven, he dispels evil and craftiness with the touch 
of divine refulgence. May all darkness, evil and enmity 
be eliminated from life. 


यस्य॑ श्वेता विचक्षणा तिस्त्रो भूमीरधिक्षितः । त्रिरुत्त॑राणि 
पप्रतुर्वरुणस्य ya सदः स संसानामिंरज्यति नभन्तामन्यके 
स॑मे।॥९॥ 


2 Yasya sveta vicaksana tisro bhumiradhiksitah. 
Triruttarani papraturvarunasya dhruvam sadah 
sa saptanam-irajyati nabhantam-anyake same. 


The refulgent glory of Varuna who rules over 
everything illuminates the three worlds of earth, skies 
and heaven and rises over the three higher heavens. 
Indeed he pervades and rules over the constant universe 
of sevenfold order and illuminates it with light and 
beauty. May all darkness, ugliness and enmity be 
eliminated. 


678 


10. 


RGVEDA 


यः saat अधिनिणिजश्चक्रे कृष्णां अनुं व्रता। स धामं 
पूर्व्य म॑मे यः स्कम्भेन वि रोद॑सी अजो न द्यामधांरयन्न- 
भ॑न्तामन्यके स॑मे ॥ ९०॥ 

Yah svetan adhinirnijascakre krsnan anuvrata. 
Sa dhama purvyam mame yah skambhena 
virodast ajo na dyamadharayan-nabhantam- 
anyake same. 


Varuna, who creates the beautiful world of white 


and black, light and dark, and the living beings of white 
and dark character, creates the worlds as ever in 
accordance with the rules and vows of the law of 
Dharma and Dharma in action in the earlier life of human 
beings and others. Thus he, the unborn, maintains the 
world as he does heaven and the middle regions by his 
constant might. May all darkness and evil vanish 
from life. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 42 


Varuna, Ashvinau Devatah, Nabhaka Kanva or 


Archanana Atreya Rshi 
अस्तभ्नाद्‌ द्यामसुरो विश्ववेदा अमिमीत वरिमाणं 
पृथिव्याः | आसींदद्विरुवा भुव॑नानि सम्राड्‌ fase 
वरुणस्य व्रतानिं॥ ९॥ 


Astabhnad dyamasuro visvaveda amimita 
varimanam prthivyah. Asidad visva bhuvanani 
samrad visvet tani varunasya vratani. 


Varuna, lord of light and energy, omniscient and 


omnipotent ruler of the universe, makes and sustains 
the heaven of light and the wide earth. The glorious 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 42 679 


lord and ruler rules all regions of the universe and they 
all observe the laws of Varuna, infinite they are, beyond 
description. 


एवा व॑न्दस्व abut बृहन्तं नमस्या धीर॑ममूत॑स्य गोपाम्‌ । 
सनः शर्म त्रिवरूथं वि यंसत्यातं al द्यावापृथिवी 
उपस्थे ।॥ २॥ 


2: Eva vandasva varunam brhantam namasya 
dhiram-amrtasya gopam. Sa nah sarma triva- 
rutham vi yamsat patam no dyavaprthivi upasthe. 


Thus worship and adore Varuna, great and 
infinite, worthy of reverence, undisturbed, protector of 
the laws of Dharma. May the lord provide us the 
threefold world of earth, heaven and the skies as a home 
of peace and security in freedom and joy. May the 
heaven and earth hold, protect and caress us as their 
darling children in their lap. 


इमां धियं शिक्चषमाणस्य देव क्रतुं दक्षं वरुण सं शिंश्ाधि। 
ययाति विश्व। दुरिता तरेम सुतमीणमधि नावं रुहेम ॥ ३ ॥ 
EF Imam dhiyam siksamanasya deva kratum daksam 
varuna sam sisadhi. Yayati visva durita tarema 
sutarmanamadhi navam ruhema. 


Varuna, self-refulgent lord of vision and 
omniscience, a seeker of light and wisdom as I am, pray 
sharpen, energise and confirm my intelligence, will and 
expertise by which we may ride on the efficient ark of 
navigation and cross over all the evils and difficulties 
of the world. 


आ वां ग्रावाणो अश्विना धीभिर्विप्रा अचुच्यवुः 1 
नास॑त्या सोम॑पीतये नभन्तामन्यके संमे uv 


680 RGVEDA 


4. A vam gravano asvind dhibhirvipra acucyavuh. 
Nasatya somapitaye nabhantam-anyake same. 


Ashvins, complementary powers of vision and 
action, teacher and ruler, dedicated to truth and truth 
alone, to you repair the scholar and the maker of soma 
with their intelligence, will and wisdom so that they 
may have a taste of the soma of knowledge and wisdom, 
and piety. May all fears insecurities and enmities be 
eliminated. 


यथां वामत्रिरश्विना गीर्भिर्विप्रो अजोंहवीत्‌। 
नास॑त्या सोम॑पीतये नभ॑न्तामन्यके BAG 


> Yatha vamatriraSsvina girbhirvipro ajohavit. 
Nasayta somapitaye nabhantam-anyake same. 


Ashvins, powers dedicated to truth and 
rectitude, as the vibrant sage, who loves and values 
threefold freedom of body, mind and soul, calls upon 
you in holy words of freedom and discipline for the 
protection and promotion of the honour, excellence and 
joy of life, pray see that all fear, insecurity and 
adversities are eliminated. 


एवा atre ऊतये यथाहुवन्त पेधिंराः। 
नास॑त्या सोम॑पीतये नभ॑न्तामन्यके समे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Eva vamahva utaye yathahuvanta medhirah. 
Nasatya somapitaye nabhabtam-anyake same. 


Ashvins, lovers of eternal truth and the laws of 
existence, harbingers of peace, progress and happiness 
for mankind, just as sages and scholars dedicated to the 
yajnic advancement of corporate life call upon you for 
protection and promotion, so do I invoke you for peace 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 681 


and protection and invite you to share the soma 
celebration of hymn achievement. May all contraries, 
contradictions and adversities disappear, may peace, 
harmony and happiness prevail over the earth. 
Mandala 8/Sukta 43 
Agni Devata, Virupa Angirasa Rshi 
इमे विप्र॑स्य वेधसोऽ Iedaaras: | 
गिरः स्तोमास ईरते ।॥ ९॥ 


॥ ५ Ime viprasya vedhaso’ gnerastrtayajvanah. 
Girah stomasa trate. 


These swelling notes of the songs of adoration 
in honour of Agni, light of life, sung by the vibrant, 
learned and dedicated sage of indefatigable faith and 
yajnic service resound in space all round. 
अस्य॑ ते प्रतिहर्यते जात॑वेदो विचर्षणे | 
अग्ने जनामि सुष्टुतिम्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2, Asmai te pratiharyate jatavedo vicarsane. 
Agne janami sustutim. 


This holy song of worship, Agni, all-knowing, 
all pervasive lord of light, vision, and love, I raise to 
you, hoping your grace would accept and respond. 


आरोकाडइव घेदहं तिग्मा sth तव त्विष॑ः 1 
दद्धिर्वनानि बप्सति ॥ ३॥ 


3: Aroka iva ghedaha tigmd agne tava tvisah. 
Dadbhirvanani bapsati. 


3. Like the light of the sun, surely, the brilliant 
showers of your grace and splendour, with your gifts, 


682 RGVEDA 
illuminate and intensify the beauties of life. 


हर॑यो धूमकेतवो वात॑जूता उप ara | 
यतन्ते वृथ॑गग्रय॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Harayo dhumaketavo vatajuta upa dyavi. 
Yatante vrthagagnayah. 


The fire, the sun, the lightning and the falling 
stars moved around by cosmic energy, all receptive and 
transmissive in their own orbit on earth, in heaven and 
across the skies, all giving the light and shade and 
fragrance of their nature and character in their own way, 
roam around in space as versions of Agni. 


एते त्ये वृथ॑गग्रय॑ sara: समं दुक्षत | 
उषसामिव केतवः ॥ ५॥ 


१ Ete tye vrthagagnaya iddhasah samadrksata. 
Usasamiva ketavah. 


All these versions of Agni, lit up, shining, 
blazing, all in their own way, appear beautiful as ensigns 
of dawns, lights and glories of Agni. 


कृष्णा रजांसि पत्सुतः प्रयाणे STATE: | 
areata श्चमिं।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Krsna rajamsi patsutah prayane jatavedasah. 
Agniryad rodhati ksami. 


Shaded, coloured and black turn the particles, 
clusters and spheres of solid materials in the way of the 
movement of Agni, omnipresent in things born in 
existence when fire travels in and on the earth or earthly 
materials. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 683 


धासिं कुण्वान ओष॑धीर्बप्संदथि्न वायति । 
पुनर्यन्तरुणीरपिं ॥ ७॥ 


cP Dhasim krnvana osadhir-bapsad-agnirna vayati. 
Punaryan taruntrapi. 


Conducting itself into herbs and trees, making 
them as if a dwelling for itself, energising them and, as 
fire even consuming them, Agni does not feel satiated, 
and takes on to new budding ones on and on. (The life 
cycle of birth, death and rebirth, growth, decay and 
growth thus continues.) 


Raine नन्नमदर्चिषा जजञ्जणाभवन्‌। 
अग्निर्वनेषु रोचते ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Jihvabhiraha nannamadarcisa janjanabhavan. 
Agnirvanesu rocate. 


Burning and blazing with its flames of fire and 
light, subjecting things to its force and power, Agni 
shines in the forests and the beauties of life. 

अप्स्व॑गरे सधिष्टव सौष॑धीरनुं रुध्यसे | 
गर्भे सञ्जायसे पुन॑ः ॥ ९ ॥ 


ध Apsvagne sadhistava sausadhiranu rudhyase. 
Garbhe sanjayase punah. 


Agni, your home is in the waters, you dwell in 
the herbs and trees, you abide in the womb of nature 
and you are born again and again, ever youthful in 
various forms. 


sey तव तद्‌ घुतादर्चीं रोचत आहतम्‌ । 
निंसानं जुह्यो ३ मुखे gon 


684 RGVEDA 


10. Udagne tava tad ghrtadarci rocata ahutam. 
Nimsanam juhvo mukhe. 


Agni, that flame of yours fed and served with 


ghrta rises and shines, having received its beauteous 
energy from the ladle in yajna. 


उक्षान्नाय वशान्नाय सोम॑पृष्ठाय aera । 
स्तोभैर्विधेमाग्रयें ॥। ९९ ॥ 


11. Uksannaya vasannaya somaprsthaya vedhase. 
Stomairvidhemagnaye. 

With songs of adoration, let us offer honour and 
worship to Agni and develop the science of fire and 
energy which provides life and sustenance to the cow 
and the sun and all dependent forms of life in existence 
and bears and brings the soma of health and joy for all. 


उत त्वा नम॑सा वयं होतर्वरेण्यक्रतो | 
अग्रे समिद्धिरीमहे॥ ९२॥ 


12. Uta tva namasa vayam hotarvarenyakrato. 
Agne samidbhirimahe. 


Agni, lord of great divine action worthy of 
choice, high priest of cosmic yajna, we offer you service 
and worship with holy fuel and homage of humility and 
fragrant food. 
उत त्वां भृगुवच्छचे Weare आहुत । 
अङ्किर स्वन्द॑वामहे॥ ९३॥ 

13. Uta ॥1व bhrguvacchuce manusvadagna ahuta. 
Angirasvaddhavamahe. 


Agni, invoked and invited for honour and 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 685 


service, pure and unsullied by nature, like brilliant 
scholars and scientists who burn off superstition and 
dispel darkness, like dedicated humans, and like lovers 
of the breath of life and soma of joy, we invoke and 
invite you for the gifts of light and life. 


त्वं aia अगिना विप्रो विप्रेण सन्त्सता। 
सरा सख्यां समिध्यसे ।। ९४ ॥ 

14. Tvam hyagne agnina vipro viprena santsata. 
Sakha sakhya samidhyase. 


You rise and shine, O lord of light and life, as 
fire with the fiery, as vibrant scholarship with the vibrant 
scholar, as holy spirit with the holy people, and as love 
and friendship with the friend. 


a त्वं विप्राय दाशुषे रयिं देहि सहस्रिणम्‌ । 
अगे वीरवतीमिषम्‌ ॥ ९५५ ॥ 
15.  Satvam vipraya dasuse rayim dehi sahasrinam. 
Agne viravatimisam. 
So generous and responsive as you are, Agni, 
give a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence for 


the vibrant scholar and generous yajaka, give him life 
sustaining food and energy and generations of brave 


progeny. 
अग्ने भ्रातः सहस्कृत रोहिदश्व शुचिव्रत । 
इमं स्तोमं जुषस्व मे ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Agne bhratah sahaskrta rohidasva sucivrata. 
Imam stomam jusasva me. 


Agni, sustainer of the world as a brother and 


686 RGVEDA 


master, mighty creator and performer, rider of the red 
flames of fire and the sun, lord and protector of the 
unsullied laws of nature, pray accept this holy song of 
mine with love and respond with the gift of your grace. 
उत wala मम स्तुतों arate प्रतिहर्यते । 
गोष्ठं गाव॑ इवाशत ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Uta tvagne mama stuto vasraya pratiharyate. 
Gostham gava ivasata. 
Agni, lord of generosity and infinite plenty, may 
my songs of adoration reach you as cows hasten to the 


stall for the lowing calf eager to receive the motherly 
grace of sustaining milk. 


तुभ्यं ता अद्धिरस्तम विश्वाः fara: पृथ॑क्‌ । 
अग्ने कामाय येपिरे॥ ९८ ॥ 
18. Tubhyam ta angirastama visvah suksitayah 
prthak. Agne kamaya yemire. 
Agni, lord of highest light and giver of the breath 


of life, all people of the entire world pray and approach 
you, all for the fulfilment of their ambition and desire. 


sift धीभिर्मनीषिणो मेधिरासो विपश्चितः | 
अद्यसर्द्याय हिस्विरे॥ ९९॥ 
19. Agnim dhibhirmanisino medhiraso vipascitah. 
Admasadyaya hinvire. 
Thoughtful intellectuals, men of yajnic actions 
and wise sages all with their thoughts, words and actions 


invoke, invite and call upon Agni for the common 
welfare of the world. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 687 


तं त्वामचज्येषु वाजिनं तन्वाना अंगने अध्वरम्‌। 
वद्धिं होतारमीव्छते ॥ Ro ॥ 


20. Tam tvamajmesu vajinam tanvana agne adhva- 
ram. Vahnim hotaramilate. 


Agni, holy men of action, extending various and 
versatile forms of yajna in all their projects of social 
development without waste, violence and bloodshed, 
invoke and pray to you, lord of light and giver of 
universal wealth, source of knowledge, progress and 
prosperity, guide and burden bearer of the world, and 
high priest of the cosmic yajna of existence. 


पुसत्रा हि सदृङ्ङसि विशो विश्वा अनु प्रभुः | 
समत्सु त्वा BATHS २९॥ 
21.  Purutra hi sadrnhnasi 1750 visva anu prabhuh. 


Samatsu tva havamahe. 


Agni, universal presence, lord and ruler of all 
people, giving equal care and attention to all nations 
and regions, in all the battles of our life we invoke you 
and pray for justice and success. 


तमीच्ठिष्व य आ्हुतोऽ भिर्विंभ्राज॑ते yc: | 
इमं न॑: श्रणवब्दधव॑म्‌ ॥ २२॥ 
22. Tamilisva ya ahuto’gnirvibhrajate ghrtaih. 
Imam nah srnavaddhavam. 
Worship him who, lord of light and omniscience, 
invoked and served with ghrta and fragrance, shines 


and rises in the vedi and the heart. May the lord listen 
and accept this song of invocation for us. 


688 


23% 


RGVEDA 
तं त्वां वयं ह॑वामहे श्वण्वन्तं जातवेदसम्‌ । 
अग्रे घलन्तमप द्विषः 123 11 


Tam tva vayam havamahe srnvantam jata- 
vedasam. Agne ghnantamapa dvisah. 


You, Agni, we adore who are listening, 


omnipresent and omniscient, destroyer of the jealous 
and violent adversaries. 


24. 


fast राजानमद्धु तमध्य॑क्चं धर्म॑णापिमम्‌। 
अग्निमीट्टे स उ श्रवत्‌ ॥ २४॥ 


Visam rajanam-adbhutam-adhyaksam dharma- 
namimam. Agnimile sa u Sravat. 


I adore and worship the ruler of the people, 


wonderful power, lord protector and controller of 
Dharma and laws of the earth. May the lord listen to 
our prayer. 


poe 


sit विश्वायुं वेपसं मर्य न वाजिनं हितम्‌ । 
सप्तिं न वाजयामसि ॥ २५॥ 


Agnim visvayuvepasam maryam na vajinam 
hitam. Saptim na vajayamasi. 


We enthusiastically adore Agni as a friend, as a 


magnetic force that is our well wisher and giver of 
energy and success in life. 


26. 


घ्न्मृश्राण्यप द्विषो द हत्रक्षांसि विश्वहा | 
अग्ने तिग्मेन दीदिहि॥ २६॥ 


Ghnan mrdhranyapa dviso dahan raksamsi 
visvaha. Agne tigmena didihi. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 689 


Eliminating violent enemies and jealous 
adversaries, always burning off the evil, Agni, shine 
and energise this land with flames of fire and blazing 
light. 


यं त्वा जनास इन्धते म॑नुष्वदद्धिरस्तम | 
अग्रे स बोधि मे वच॑: ॥ २७॥ 


27. Yam tva janasa indhate manusvadangirastama. 
Agne sa bodhi me vacah. 


Agni, light and power dearest as life breath, 
whom people kindle, raise and adore as a friend of 
humanity, pray listen, acknowledge and appreciate the 
truth and sincerity of my word and prayer. 


यदग्रे दिविजा अस्यप्सुजा at सहस्कृत | 
तं त्वां गीर्भिर्हवामहे ut २८ ॥ 


28. Yadagne divija asyapsuja va sahaskrta. 
Tam tva girbhir-havamahe. 


Agni, whether you manifest in heaven, or in the 
waters or shine in acts of universal divine power, we 
adore, worship and invoke you in the holiest words. 


तुभ्यं घेत्ते जना इमे विश्वाः सुक्षितयः पृथ॑क्‌ । 
धासिं हिन्वन्त्यत्तवे ॥ २९॥ 


29. Tubhyam ghet te jana ime visvah suksitayah 
prthak. Dhasim hinvantyattave. 


Those people far away and all these people 
settled here, all in their own ways, offer you homage as 
their haven and home for the gift of their own food and 
sustenance. 


690 RGVEDA 


ते घेद॑ग्ने स्वाध्योऽ हा विश्वां नृचक्षसः | 
तर॑न्तः स्याम दुर्गहा ॥ Bo ॥ 
30. Te ghedagne svadhyo’ha visva nrcaksasah. 
Tarantah syama durgaha. 
Doing good works in your service, always 
watching all the people around, may we become 


breakers of the most difficult oppositions and cross over 
the challenging seas of life. 


अगिं मन्द्रं पुरुप्रियं शीरं पावकशोचिषम्‌। 
ह द्धिर्मन्द्रेभिरीमहे।॥ २९॥ 


31. Agnim mandram purupriyam Siram pavakaso- 
cisam. Hrdbhir-mandrebhir-imahe. 


With songs of heartiest love and joy, with 
enthusiasm, we invoke and adore Agni, blissful giver 
of happiness, dear to all people, omnipresent in existence 
and pure refulgent sanctifier of life. 


स त्वमग्रे विभावसुः सृजन्त्सूर्यो न र श्मिभि॑ः। 
शर्धन्तमांसि जिश्चसे ॥ ३२॥ 


32. Sa tvamagne vibhavasuh srjantsuryo na rasmi- 
bhih. Sardhan tamamsi jighnase. 


Agni, self refulgent giver of light, wealth, 
honour and excellence, rising like the sun with the rays 
of your splendour and growing in strength, you dispel 
and destroy the darkness of evil, ignorance, want and 
injustice. 


तत्ते सहस्व ईमहे दात्रं यन्नोपदस्य॑ति। 
त्वदग्रे वार्य वसुं ॥ ३३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 691 


33. Tat te sahasva imahe datram yannopadasyati. 
Tvadagne varyam vasu. 


Agni, lord of strength and life’s challenges, 
omnificent giver, of you we pray for that gift of generous 
wealth, honour and excellence of our choice and 
heartfelt preference which never diminishes, never fails. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 44 
Agni Devata, Virupa Angirasa Rshi 
समिधां दुवस्यत yeah धयतातिथिम्‌। 
आस्मिन्हव्या जुहोतन ॥ ९॥ 
1. Samidhagnim duvasyata ghrtairbodhayatatithim. 
Asmin havya juhotana. 


Feed the sacred fire with holy fuel, awaken and 
arouse it with ghrta, offer fragrant food worthy of the 
divine, and serve it as an honoured guest who visits at 
his own free will. 


अग्ने स्तोमं जुषस्व मे वर्धस्वानेन मन्म॑ना। 
प्रति सूक्तानि हर्य नः ॥ २॥ 
2. = Agne stomam jusasva me vardhasvanena man- 
mana. Prati suktani harya nah. 
Divine Agni, leading light of life, accept my 
adoration and rise, by this conscientious eulogy, listen 


in response to our songs, grow higher and let us rise 
and grow higher too. 


at दूतं पुरो द॑धे हव्यवा हमुपं ल्ुवे | 
देवां आ सादयादिह ॥ ३॥ 


692 RGVEDA 
a Agim dutam puro dadhe havyavahamupa bruve. 
Devam a sadayadiha. 

I place the divine fire in front of me, speak 
closely to the sacred bearer of oblations and pray that it 
may bring the divinities with divine blessings here to 
join us. 

उत्ते बृहन्तो अर्चयः after दीदिवः। 
ard शुक्रास ईरते US 


4. Ut te brhanto arcayah samidhanasya didivah. 
Agne Sukrasa trate. 


Agni, lord of light and fire, kindled, fed and 
rising, your lofty and expansive flames, shining and 
blazing, pure, powerful and purifying, go on rising 
higher and higher. 
sd त्वा जुह्यो ३ मम॑ घृताचीर्यन्तु हर्यत । 
अग हव्या जुंषस्व नः ॥ ५॥ 

2: Upa tva juhvo mama ghrtacir-yantu haryata. 
Aghe havya jusasva nah. 


Agni, lord of beauty and bliss, let my ladles 
overflowing with ghrta rise and move close to you. Pray 
accept and enjoy our oblations and our songs. 
मन्द्रं होतारमृत्विजं चित्रभानुं विभावसुम्‌ । 
stiri स उ श्रवत्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Mandram hotaramrtvijam citrabhanum vibha- 
vasum. Agnimile sa u Sravat. 


I adore Agni, lord of light and fire, blissful, 
generous yajaka, high priest of regular seasonal yajna, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 693 


wondrous illustrious, blazing brilliant lord of wealth 
and honour, and I pray may the lord listen and bless. 


प्रतरं होतारमीड्यं जुष्टमथिं कविक्रतुम्‌ । 
अध्वराणामधिश्चियंम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ae Pratnam hotaramidyam justam-agnim kavikra- 
tum. Adhvaranam-abhisriyam. 


I adore Agni, ancient and eternal, generous giver, 
worthy of reverence and celebration, loved and 
worshipped, poetic visionary of holy action and gracious 
performer of yajnic projects of love and non-violence 
for corporate development. 


जुषाणो अद्धिरस्तमेमा हव्यान्यानुषक्‌ | 
अग्न यज्ञं न॑य ऋतुथा ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Jusano angirastamema havyanyanusak. 
Agne yajnam naya rtutha. 
Agni, dearest life of life, constantly loving and 


cherishing the sweets of celebration and yajna, pray 
guide and extend the yajna according to the seasons. 


afer उ सन्त्य शुक्रशोच get ae 
चिकित्वान्दैव्यं जन॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


2, Samidhana u santya sukrasoca tha vaha. 
Cikitvan daivyam janam. 


Excellent and benevolent Agni, bright and 
gracious of pure and powerful flame, all knowing and 
illuminating, pray bring here on the vedi pious people 
of divine generosity and intellectual brilliance. 


694 RGVEDA 


विप्रं होतारमद्धुहं धूमकेतुं fara 
यज्ञानां केतुमीमहे ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Vipram hotaram-adruham dhumaketum vibha- 
vasum. Yajnanam ketum-imahe. 

With prayer and adoration we honour and 
approach Agni, omniscient lord vibrant in existence, 
giver of fulfilment, free from jealousy, rising in flaming 
fragrance, universal lord of light, wealth and honour, 
and symbolic ensign of yajna. 


अग्ने नि पाहि नस्त्वं प्रतिं ष्म देव्‌ tea: | 
farer द्वेष॑ः सहस्कृतः 122 11 


11. Agne ni pahi nastvam prati sma deva risatah. 
Bhindhi dvesah sahaskrta. 


Agni, self-refulgent lord of universal generosity 
and power, protect us from the violent and, O lord 
creator of the mighty universe, break down the jealous 
and the enemies. 


अभिः Wat मन्म॑ना शुम्भानस्तन्वं१ Fa 
कविर्विप्र॑ंण वावृधे ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Agnih pratnena manmana sumbhanas-tanvam 
svam. Kavirviprena vavrdhe. 


Agni, omniscient visionary of existence, 
gracious and refulgent by virtue of ancient and eternal 
light of knowledge and age-old songs of the poet, is 
exalted along with the celebrant. 


ऊर्जो नपातमा gas fii पावकशोचिषम्‌। 
अस्मिन्यज्ञे स्वध्वरे ॥ ९३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 695 


13. Urjo napatama huve’ gnim pavakaSsocisam. 
Asmin yajne svadhvare. 
In this noble yajna of love free from violence, I 
invoke and celebrate the unfailing master and protector 
of energy, blazing with holy light and fire of purity. 
स नो मित्रमहस्त्वमगर शुक्रेण शोचिषां | 
देवैरा स॑त्सि बर्हिषिं।॥ ९४॥ 

14. Sa no mitramahas-tvamagne Sukrena Socisa. 
Devaira satsi barhisi. 


Agni, greatest friend of humanity, with pure and 
purifying flames of fire, you sit on our holy seats of 
grass on the vedi alongwith the divinities. (All our senses 
and mind are suffused with the presence of divinity.) 


यो sift a-ats दमे देवं मर्तः सपर्यति । 
तस्मा इदीदयद्वसु Nee Ul 


15. Yo agnim tanvo dame devam martah saparyati. 
Tasma id didayad vasu. 


Whoever the mortal that offers devotion to self- 
refulgent Agni within his yajnic home of the body, the 
lord would bless him with the wealth of spiritual 
illumination. 


अभिर्मर्धां दिवः ककुत्पतिः पृथिव्या अयम्‌ । 
अपां रेतांसि जिन्वति ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Agnirmurdha divah kakut patih prthivya ayam. 
Apam retamsi jinvati. 
This Agni is the highest lord and master of all 
on top of heaven and earth and gives energy and 


696 RGVEDA 


sustenance to the seeds of life in the waters of the 
universe. 


san शुच॑यस्तवं शुक्रा भ्राजन्त ईरते। 
तव ज्योतीं्यर्चय॑ः ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Udagne sucayastava sukra bhrajanta trate. 
Tava jyotimsyarcayah. 


Agni, light and life of the world, your fires and 
flames, lights and lightnings, pure, white and undefiled, 
shine and radiate all over spaces. 


ईशिषे वार्यस्य हि दात्रस्याग्ने vata: | 
स्तोता स्यां तव शर्म॑णि ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. 575८ varyasya hi datrasyagne svarpatih. 
Stota syam tava Sarmani. 
Agni, you are the lord and protector of the peace 
and bliss of heaven. You rule over the wealth, honour 
and excellence of the world. I pray that I may adore and 
celebrate your divine glory and abide in heavenly peace 
and joy under your divine protection. 
त्वामग्रे मनीषिणस्त्वां हिन्वन्ति चित्तिभिः 
त्वां वर्धन्तु नो गिरः ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Tvamagne manisinastvam hinvanti cittibhih. 
Tvam vardhantu no girah. 

Agni, the intellectuals with their thoughts and 
imaginative creations move and exalt you. May our 
voices of adoration delight you and exalt your glory. 

अदब्धस्य स्वधावतो दूतस्य Ta: Tat । 
3TH: सख्यं वुंणीमहे।॥। २०॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 697 


20. Adabdhasya svadhavato ditasya rebhatah sada. 
Agneh sakhyam vrnimahe. 


We choose, claim and pray for the love and 
friendship of Agni, indestructible and benevolent, 
inherently powerful, bearer and dispenser of energy, 
light and wisdom, and omniscient lord of speech. 


अभिः शुचित्रततपः शुचिर्विप्रः शुचिं: कविः। 
शुचीं रोचत आहतः UU 

21. Agnih sucivratatamah sucirviprah sucih kavih. 
Suct rocata ahutah. 

Agni is the purest uncompromising lord of law 
and discipline, lord of purest unclouded knowledge and 
wisdom, master of purest transparent creative vision and 
imagination, and he shines ever pure, unsullied, invoked 
and worshipped. 

उत त्वां धीतयो मम fini वर्धन्तु विरुवहां । 
अग्ने सख्यस्य॑ बोधि A: २२॥ 


22. Uta tva dhitayo mama giro vardhantu visvaha. 
Agne sakhyasya bodhi nah. 


Agni, lord of united existence, may all my 
thoughts, words and actions adore, exalt and glorify you 
day and night. O lord of humanity, pray acknowledge 
and ever remember and maintain our bond of love and 
friendship with you. 


ae स्यामहं त्वं त्वं at घा स्या ste! 
स्युष्टे सत्या इहाशिषंः ॥ २३ ॥ 


23. Yadagne syamaham tvam tvam va gha sya aham. 
Syuste satya thasisah. 


698 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of love and life’s bonding, if and 
when I were you and you were me, then would your 
love and blessings for me be truly realised. 


वसुर्वसुंपतिर्हिं कमस्य॑ग्रे विभाव॑सुः। 
स्याम॑ ते सुमतावपि २४॥ 


24. Vasurvasupatirhi kamasyagne vibhavasuh. 
Syama te sumatavapi. 


Agni, you are the shelter home of all, lord 
protector and ruler of the world’s wealth, blissful, 
refulgent lord of kindness and love. We pray let us be 
under the protection of your goodwill. 


a धृतव्रताय ते समुद्रायेव सिन्ध॑वः। 
गिरो वाश्रासं ईरते ॥ २५॥ 


25. Agne dhrtavrataya te samudrayeva sindhavah. 
Giro vasrasa trate. 


Agni, lord of light and life, our yearning voices 
of love and adoration for you flow free and reach you, 
lord ruler and keeper of the laws of nature in existence, 
as rivers flow to join the sea. 


युवानं fasutd कविं favare पुरुवेप॑सम्‌। 
अगिं शुम्भामि मन्म॑भिः॥ २६॥ 


26. Yuvanam vispatim kavim visvadam puruvepasam. 
Agnim Sumbhami manmabhih. 


With my words, thoughts and reflections in 
meditation, I adore, adorn and exalt Agni, self-refulgent 
lord and leader of life, youthful creator who joins the 
soul and prakrti in living forms, rules and protects 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 699 


humanity, is the one universal poet of cosmic 
imagination, performs actions of infinite variety and 
ultimately withdraws the entire world of existence unto 
himself. 


यज्ञानां teal वयं तिग्मजम्भाय वीव्छवें | 

स्तोभैरिषेमाग्रये 11 २७॥ 
27. Yajnanam rathye vayam tigmajambhaya vilave. 

Stomairisemagnaye. 

With songs of adoration we love to celebrate 

and exalt the glory of Agni and reach him who, like a 
charioteer, is the foremost guide and high priest of all 
yajnas of creation, evolution and development, rolls his 
mighty jaws of justice and judgement, and is the highest, 
omnipotent, power. 

अयमग्ने त्वे अपिं जरिता भूतु सन्त्य । 

तस्मै पावक मृव्छय॥ २८ ॥ 
28. Ayamagne tve api jarita bhutu santya. 

Tasmai pavaka mrlaya. 


Agni, lord of light and life, may this celebrant 
be spontaneous and profuse in praise of you and, O fiery 
purifier, may you too be kind and gracious to him. 


धीरो ह्यस्य॑दयसद्धिप्रो न जागुंविः सदा । 
अग्न दीदय॑सि afa een 


29. Dhiro hyasyadmasad vipro na jagrvih sada. 
Agne didayasi dyavi. 


Agni, you are magnanimous as a vibrant sage 
at peace, ever awake in the heart’s core in the soul, and 


700 RGVEDA 


you shine refulgent on the highest heaven in the 
celebrant’s meditation. 

Gaal दुरितेभ्य॑ः पुरा weet: कवे। 

प्रण आयुर्वसो far 30 ul 


30. Puragne duritebhyah pura mrdhrebhyah kave. 
Pra na ayurvaso tira. 


Agni, cosmic poet and creator, haven and home 
of humanity, before the onslaught of sin, before the 
bloodshed of violence, pray exalt our life to fullness 
and completion with success. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 45 
Indra-Agni, Indra Devata, Trishoka Kanva Rshi 
आ घा ये अथिमिन्धते स्तृणन्ति र्हिरानुषक्‌ | 
येषामिन्द्रो युवा सरा ॥ ९॥ 
il; A gha agnimindhate strnanti barhiranusak. 
Yesamindro yuva sakha. 


Blessed are they for sure who kindle the fire of 
yajna, Agni, and spread the seats of grass open for all in 
faith and love and whose friend is Indra, the mighty 
youthful soul who brooks no nonsense and delay. 


बृहच्निदिध्म एषां भूरिं शस्तं पथु: स्वरुः | 
येषामिन्द्रो युवा सरा ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Brhannididhma esam bhuri Sastam prthuh svaruh. 
Yesamindro yuva sakha. 


Great is their fuel and fire, profuse their praise 
and song of adoration, expansive their yajna and high 
their ensign whose friend is Indra, youthful soul, their 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 45 701 


ruler and defender. 
अयुद्ध इद्युधा वृतं VC आज॑ति सत्व॑भिः 1 
येषामिन्द्रो युवा सरा ॥ २ ॥ 


3; Ayuddha id yudha vrtam Sura djati sattvabhih. 
Yesamindro yuva sakha. 


Unequalled is Indra, irresistible, even when 
there is no war. The mighty hero by the very force of 
his presence and character throws off the enemy 
supported by brave warriors all round. Blessed are they 
whose friend is Indra, the mighty youthful heroic soul. 


आ बुन्दं वृं त्रहा द॑दे जातः पुंच्छद्वि मातर॑म्‌। 
क उग्राः के हं श्युण्विरे॥४॥ 


4. A bundam vrtraha dade jatah prechad vi mata- 
ram. Ka ugrah ke ha srnvire. 


When the mighty soul, destroyer of evil, born 
to self consciousness, takes to the bow and arrow, 
blazing, fearsome, breaker of foes, he asks the mother, 
spirit of higher vision and discrimination: Who are the 
enemies renowned to be terrible and irresistible? 


प्रति त्वा शवसी व॑दद्भिरावप्सो न योधिषत्‌। 
यस्ते शत्चुत्व्माचके ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Prati tva Savasi vadad giravapso na yodhisat. 
Yaste Satrutvamacake. 


Indra, lord of power and excellence, to you then 
the mighty mother, divine intelligence, would say: 
Whoever would take a hostile attitude toward you would 
fight against you like a seductive sorceress on the magic 
mountain. 


702 RGVEDA 


उत त्वं म॑घवजञ्छरृणु यस्ते ae ववश्चि तत्‌। 
यद्वीव्ठयांसि de तत्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Uta tvam maghavanchrnu yaste vasti vavaksi tat. 
Yad vilayasi vilu tat. 


Now then, O lord of power, wealth and 
excellence, listen: Whoever asks of you something he 
desires, you bear and bring for him. Whoever you 
strengthen, he becomes strong. Are you not real mighty 
then? 


यदाजिं यात्याजिकृदिन्द्रः स्वश्वयुरुप | 
र॒थीत॑मो रथीनाम्‌॥ ७॥ 

ip Yadajim yatyajikrdindrah svasvayurupa. 
Rathi-tamo rathinam. 
And remember: When Indra goes to battle, 
fiercely armed and well provided with noble steeds, he 
is then the mightiest of chariot heroes. 
विषु विर्वा siftrastt वचिन्विष्वग्यथां वृह । 
भवा नः सुश्रवस्तमः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Vi su visva abhiyujo vajrin visvagyatha vrha. 
Bhava nah susravastamah. 

O wielder of the thunderbolt, fight out the 
enemies the way you uproot them so that you become 
the most renowned among us. 

अस्माकं सु रथं पुर इन्द्रः कृणोतु सातये | 
न यं धूर्वन्ति धूर्तयः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Asmakam su ratham pura indrah krnotu sdataye. 
Na yam dhurvanti dhurtayah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 45 703 


May Indra, mighty warring soul, turn our chariot 
of body and the body politic to the heights of the first 
and foremost order of strength and excellence for the 
achievement of success and victory in the battle of life 
so that no enemies can violate it. 


वृज्यामं ते परि द्विषोऽरं ते शक्र दावने | 
गमेमेदिन्द्र गोम॑तः ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Vrjyama te pari dviso’ram te Sakra davane. 
Gamemedindra gomatah. 

Indra, we would wholly give up those who are 
contrary and opposed to you, and surely in matters of 
your cherished love and charity, blest with lands and 
cows, literature and culture, we would come close to 
you. 

नैँश्चिद्यन्तो अद्विवोऽश्चावन्तः शत॒ग्विन॑ः | 
विवक्षणा अनेहसः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sanaiscid yanto adrivo’s$vavantah satagvinah. 
Vivaksana anehasah. 


Advancing at a steady-pace, O lord of the 
clouds, mountains and the thunderbolt, we would be 
thriving with horses and a hundredfold attainments of 
new wealth and power and, free from sin and evil, we 
would come closer to you. 


ऊर्ध्वां हि ते दिवेदिवे सहस्रा सूनुरता शता | 
wast farsa ९२॥ 


12. Urdhva hi te divedive sahasra sunrta sata. 
Jaritrbhyo vimamhate. 


Your kindness and generosity rises day by day 


704 RGVEDA 


a hundredfold and a thousandfold, higher and higher, 
and as it rises, it blesses them. 


विद्या हि त्वां धनंजयमिन्द्र tae चिंदारुजम्‌ । 
आदारिणं यथा गय॑म्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Vidma hi tva dhanamjayam-indra drlha cida- 
rujam. adarinam yatha gayam. 


We know you, Indra, as our very haven and 
home, winner of wealth, honour and excellence, strong 
and firm, destroyer of evil and breaker of the strongholds 
of darkness, superstition and misery. 


ककुहं चित्वा कवे मन्दन्तु धृष्णाविन्द॑वः। 
आ त्वां पणि यदीम॑हे।॥। ९४॥ 


14. = Kakuham cit tva kave mandantu dhrsnav-indavah. 
A tva panim yadimahe. 


While we pray to you, generous lord, and ask 
for what we want, O cosmic poet and visionary, may 
our yajnas and soma celebrations please you, most high 
and supreme lord of power, justice and award. 


यस्ते tat अदाशुरिः प्रममर्ष मघत्तये । 
तस्य॑ नो वेद्‌ आ ATU ९५॥ 


15. Yaste revan adasurih pramamarsa maghattaye. 
Tasya no veda a bhara. 


If a man is rich and yet neglects and fails to pay 
to you, generous one, wielder of power, what is due for 
social causes, in that case make up from his money or 
property what is required for our sake, 1.e., for the sake 
of society. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 45 705 


इम उ त्वा वि dere सखाय इन्द्र a: । 
पुष्टावन्तो यथा पशुम्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 
16. Imautva vi caksate sakhaya indra sominah. 


Pustavanto yatha pasum. 


Indra, these friends, celebrants of soma and 
holiness, holding offerings of precious homage, look 
and wait for you as the seeker waits for the sight of his 
wealth. 


उत त्वाब॑धिरं वयं श्रुत्कर्ण सन्तमूतये । 
दूरादिह ह॑वामहे Ut ९७ ॥ 
17. Uta tvabadhiram vayam Srutkarnam santam- 


utaye. Duradiha havamahe. 


And from afar we invoke and call upon you for 
protection and progress. You are everywhere, your ears 
are sensitive and you are eager to hear the call of the 
seeker. 


weg sr इमं हवं दुर्मर्षः चक्रिया उत । 
भवेरापिर्नो ada: eeu 


18. Yacchusruya imam havam durmarsam cakriya 
uta. Bhaverapirno antamah. 


As you hear this call of ours, take it as 
unforgettable and be our closest and ultimate friend and 
brother. 

uferke ते अपि व्यथिंर्जगन्वांसो अम॑न्महि। 
गोदा इदिन्द्र बोधि नः।॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yacciddhi te api vyathirjaganvamso amanmahi. 
Goda idindra bodhi nah. 


706 RGVEDA 


And also, when we approach you in our mind 
and, like supplicants in distress, remember you and pray, 
then attend to us and be generous. You are the giver of 
cows, lands and light of knowledge. 


आ cat रम्भं न जिव्रयो रर॒भ्मा श॑वसस्पते। 
उश्मसि त्वा सधस्थ आ ॥ २०॥ 
20. = 4 11 (वाका) na jivrayo rarabhma Savasaspate. 


Usmasi tva sadhastha a. 


O lord commander of power and prosperity, as 
weaker folks take to the staff for support, so do we 
depend on you for succour and sustenance and invoke 
your presence in our hall of yajna. 


स्तोत्रमिन्द्राय गायत Gerona सत्व॑ने । 
नकिर्यं वुंण्वते युधि ॥ २९॥ 

21. Stotram-indraya gayata purunrmnaya satvane. 
Nakiryam vrnvate yudhi. 


Sing songs of adoration and prayer in honour 
of Indra, lord of world’s power and wealth. Who can 
ignore and neglect him in the battle of life? 


अभि त्वां वृषभा सुते सुतं Para पीतये । 
तृम्पा व्य॑श्नु दही मद॑म्‌ ॥ २२॥ 
22. Abhi tva vrsabha sute sutam srjami pitaye. 
Trmpa vyasnuhi madam. 
Lord of generous and creative power, when the 
yajna is on and soma is distilled, I prepare the cup and 


offer you the drink. Pray accept, drink to your heart’s 
content and enjoy the ecstasy of bliss divine. 


22, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 45 707 
मात्वा मूरा अविष्यवो मोपहस्वान आ द॑भन्‌। 
माकीं ब्रहाद्विषों वनः ॥ २३॥ 


Ma tva mura avisyavo mopahasvana a dabhan. 
Makim brahmadviso vanah. 


Let the fools and scoffers never get round you, 


even if they profess that they are keen to please you, for 
protection and support. Never support the negationists 
of knowledge, piety, existence and divinity. 


24. 


इह त्वा गोप॑रीणसा महे म॑न्दन्तु Tels | 
सरो गौरो य्था पिल ।॥ २४॥ 


Tha tva goparinasa mahe mandantu radhase. 
Saro gauro yatha piba. 


Here may the lovers of cows entertain you with 


milk and soma for the achievement of great competence 
and success so that you may drink like the thirsty stag 
drinking at the pool. 


23. 


या वृत्रहा प॑रावति सना नवां च चुच्युवे । 
ता संसत्सु प्र वोचत ॥ २५ ॥ 


Ya vrtraha paravati sana nava ca cucyuve. 
Ta samsatsu pra vocata. 


Whatever gifts of wealth or titles of honour old 


or new, Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness, you grant 
far off or near, all those, announce in the assemblies. 


26. 


अपिबत्कद्रुवः सुतमिन्द्रः सहस््॑बाह्े। 
अत्रदिदिष्ट GREAT २६॥ 


Apibat kadruvah sutamindrah sahasrabahve. 
Atradedista paumsyam. 


708 RGVEDA 


In the thousand armed dynamic battles of the 
elements in evolution, Indra, as the sun, drinks the soma 
of the earth and therein shines the potent majesty of the 
lord. 


सत्यं तत्तुर्वशो यदौ विदानो अह्नवाय्यम्‌ | 
व्यानट्‌ तुर्वणे शमि ॥ २७॥ 


27. Satyam tat turvase yadau vidano ahnavayyam. 
Vyanat turvane Sami. 
Knowing the truth of the daily behaviour of the 


simple man of rectitude, Indra clears the path of peace 
and goodness in his battle of life. 


तरणिं वो जनानां ae वाज॑स्य गोपम॑तः। 
समानमु प्र शंसिषम्‌ ॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Taranim vo jananam tradam vajasya gomatah. 
Samanamu pra Samsisam. 

I constantly praise the lord saviour of you, 
people, and the protector of your earthly wealth, power, 
progress and freedom. 

ऋभुक्षणं न ada sary तुग्यावृध॑म्‌। 
इन्द्रं सोमे सचा सुते ॥ २९॥ 
29.  Rbhuksanam na vartava ukthesu tugryavrdham. 


Indram some saca sute. 


When the soma is distilled and seasoned and 
the hymns are sung in the yajna, then to win the company 
and favour of mighty Indra, I adore the mighty lord, a 
friend and protector of the strength and power of the 
people. 


aU. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 45 709 
यः कृन्तदिद्धि योन्यं त्रिशोकाय गिरिं पृथुम्‌। 
गोभ्यो गातुं निरेतवे ।॥ २३०॥ 


Yah krntadid vi yonyam trisokaya girim prthum. 
Gobhyo gatum niretave. 


I adore Indra who makes and breaks the cloud, 


womb of waters, and the mighty mountain for the 
humanity of threefold purity of nature, character and 
behaviour and who makes the paths for rivers to flow 
on earth. 


Sl. 


यद धिषे daeafa मन्दानः प्रेदियंक्षसि। 
मा तत्करिन्द्र Tors 1 ३९॥ 


Yad dadhise manasyasi mandanah prediya-ksasi. 
Ma tat karindra mrlaya. 


Indra, whatever you hold, whatever you think 


and desire, whatever you give, why not for me? O lord, 
pray be kind and gracious. 


a2: 


दभ्रं fates त्वाव॑तः कृतं श्रृण्वे अधि arf 
जिगात्विन्द्र ते मनं: ॥ ३२॥ 


Dabhram ciddhi tvavatah krtam srnve adhi ksami. 
Jigatvindra te manah. 


Just a little done by someone like you or 


someone protected by you resounds on the earth. O lord, 
I pray, may your gracious attention turn to me also. 


23; 


तवेदु ताः सुंकीर्तयोऽ daa प्रशस्तयः | 
यदिन्द्र मृव्टयांसि नः UBB 


Tavedu tah sukirtayo ’sannuta prasastayah. 
Yadindra mrlayasi nah. 


710 RGVEDA 


Indra, if you were kind and gracious to us and 
we were happy, all the graces would be your renown, 
they would be reflections of your glory. 


मान एकस्मिन्नागसि मा galled Bre 
वधीर्मा शुर भूरिषु ॥ ३४ ॥ 

34. Mana ekasminnagasi ma dvayoruta trisu. 
Vadhirma sura bhurisu. 


O lord of magnanimous glory among the great 
heroes, not for one trespass, not for two, not for three, 
not even for many, uncountable, pray, hurt us not, and 
strike us not. 


fastar हि carat उग्रादभिप्रभद्धिणः। 
दस्मादहमरं तीष: ।॥ ३५५ ॥ 
35. Bibhaya hi tvavata ugrad-abhiprabhanginah. 
Dasmad-aham-rtisahah. 
I would feel fear and awe for a person like you, 


illustrious, destroyer of the evil, magnificent and scourge 
of the challengers of truth and law. 


a सख्युः शूनमा विदे मा gael प्रभूवसो । 
आवृत्व॑द्धूतु ते मनं: ॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Ma sakhyuh Sunama vide ma putrasya prabhu- 
vaso. Avrtvad bhitu te manah. 


I pray I should never suffer want of friends, 
never be deprived of children. O lord of wealth, honour 
and grandeur of the world, let your mind turn to me 
with kindness. 


a7. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 45 711 
कोनु dat अमिथितः सखा सखायमब्रवीत्‌ । 
जहा को अस्मदीषते ॥ ३७॥ 


Ko nu marya amithitah sakha sakhayamabravit. 
Jaha ko asmadisate. 


O people, which friend without provocation 


would revile a friend, who would forsake a friend in 
distress, who runs away from us like that? 


38. 


var वृषभा सुतेऽ सिन्वन्भूयौ वयः | 
vaste निवता चर॑न्‌ ॥ ३८ ॥ 


Evare vrsabha sute’sinvan bhuryavayah. 
Svaghniva nivata caran. 


Generous and virile Indra, come to the yajna 


and the soma celebration, youthful, insatiable like a 
player going to the hall of contest, and give us 
inexhaustible food and energy. 


ao, 


आ त॑ एता वचोयुजा हरीं गृभ्णे सुमद्रथा | 
Gat ब्रह्मभ्य SAS: ॥ २९ ॥ 


A ta eta vacoyuja hari grbhne sumadratha. 
Yadim brahmabhya iddadah. 


I receive the word-controlled motive powers and 


steers of the chariot which fly you on high on liquid 
fuel, the ones you have given to the scholarly sages. 


40). 


भिन्धि विश्वा अप द्विषः परि बाधो जही मृध॑ः | 
वसुं स्पार्हं तदा भ॑र ॥ ४०॥ 


Bhindhi visva apa dvisah pari badho jahi mrdhah. 
Vasu sparham tada bhara. 


712 RGVEDA 


Break off all the jealous adversaries, remove all 
obstacles, eliminate the enemies and violence and fill 
the world with cherished wealth, honour and prosperity. 

यद्ीव्ाविन््र्‌ यस््थिरे acasihts artery 
वसुं स्पार्हं तदा भ॑र ॥ ४९॥ 


41. = Yadvilavindra yat sthire yat parsane parabhrtam. 
Vasu sparham tada bhara. 


Whatever wanted wealth hidden in solid 
mountains, concealed in secret and trust worthy sources 
or covered in caverns and deep in the clouds, bring that 
out in the open for the society. 


यस्य॑ ते विश्वमानुषो भूरे दत्तस्य वेद॑ति । 
वसुं स्पार्हं तदा भ॑र ॥ ४२॥ 


42. Yasya te visvamanuso bhurerdattasya vedati. 
Vasu sparham tada bhara. 


That immense wealth discovered by you and 
collected, of which the people of the world know, bring 
that cherished treasure into the open and fill the world 
with it for all. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 46 


Indra (1-20, 29-31, 33), Prthushravah Kanita, Danastuti 
(21-24), Vayu (25,-28, 32), Devatah, Vasho’ashvya Rshi 


त्वाव॑तः पुरूवसो वयमिन्द्र WT: | 
स्मसि स्थातर्हरीणाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i, Tvavatah puruvaso vayamindra pranetah. 
Smasi sthatar-harinam. 


Indra, shelter home of the world, leader of 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 713 


humanity, presiding over mutually sustained stars and 
planets in motion, we are in bond with you and so shall 
we remain. 


त्वां हि सत्यमद्रिवो विदय दातार॑मिषाम्‌। 
विदा दातारं रयीणाम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Tvam hi satyamadrivo vidma dataramisam. 
Vidma dataram rayinam. 


Lord of the thunderbolt, we know you are eternal 
and constant, ever true, giver of all foods and energies, 
and we know you are the giver of all kinds and forms of 
wealth, honour and excellence. 


आ यस्य॑ ते महिमानं शत॑मूते शत॑क्रतो | 
गीर्भिर्गुणन्तिं कारवः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध A yasya te mahimanam satamite Satakrato. 
Girbhirgrnanti karavah. 


Lord of a hundred forms of protection, high 
priest of a hundred forms of cosmic yajna, we know 
you whose majesty poets and artists celebrate with songs 
of adoration. 


सुनीथो घा स मर्त्यो यं मरुतो यमर्यमा । 
पित्रः पान्त्यद्रुहः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sunitho gha sa martyo yam maruto yamaryama. 


Mitrah pantyadruhah. 


True it is that that man is morally right, well 
guided and secure whom the Maruts, vibrant powers of 
defence and protection, Aryama, power of right conduct 
and justice, and Mitra, power of love and enlightenment, 


714 RGVEDA 


all free from hate and jealousy, lead and protect on the 
right path. 


दधानो गोमदश्व॑वत्सुवीर्य मादित्यजूंत werd | 
सद। राया पुरुस्पृहं ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Dadhano gomad-aSsvavat suviryam-ddityajuta 
edhate. Sada raya purusprha. 


Inspired and energised by Aditya, lord of light 
and enlightenment, blest with cows, lands and culture, 
horses, advancement and achievement, bearing courage 
and creative vitality of high order, he grows and goes 
forward with cherished wealth, honour and excellence. 


तमिन्द्रं दान॑मीमहे शवसानमभीर्वम्‌। 
ईशानं राय ईमटे॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tamindram danamimahe savasanamabhirvam. 
Isanam raya imahe. 


We pray to Indra, omnipotent and fearless lord 
ruler of the world, for the gift of wealth, honour and 
excellence. 


तस्मिन्हि सन्त्यूतयो विश्वा अभीरवः wat 
तमा व॑हन्तु सप्त॑यः पुरूवसुं मदाय हर॑यः सुतम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


cs Tasmin hi santyutayo visva abhiravah saca. Tama 
vahantu saptayah puruvasum madaya harayah 
sutam. 


In him centre and abide all protections free from 
fears of the world, integrated. That same lord of world’s 
wealth and peace, the waves of cosmic energy and 
vibrations of the mind may, we pray, awaken in our 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 715 


consciousness which is in tune with the lord’s 
omnipresence for spiritual joy. 


यस्ते मदो वरेण्यो य इन्द्र वृत्रहन्त॑मः। 
य आददिः स्वभैर्नुभिर्यः पृत॑नासु दुष्टरः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yaste mado varenyo ya indra vrtrahantamah. 
Ya adadih svar-nrbhir-yah prtanasu dustarah. 


That spiritual joy, Indra, which is our highest 
choice, which is the highest destroyer of moral and 
spiritual darkness, which is the giver of heavenly peace 
and which is ordinarily unattainable by people in mortal 
struggles, that joy, that ecstasy, that bliss of yours we 
ask of you. 


यो दुष्टरो विश्ववार श्रवाय्यो वाजेष्वस्ति तरुता | 
स न॑ः शविष्ठ सवना व॑सो गहि गमेम गोम॑ति व्रजे ॥ ९॥ 


ve Yo dustaro visvavara Sravayyo vajesvasti taruta. 
Sa nah savistha savana vaso gahi gamema gomati 
vraje. 

Indra, lord omnificent of the world, omnipotent, 
haven and home of the universe, that divine joy, Ananda, 
which is difficult to attain, most renowned and profuse, 
ark of success over the seas and struggles of life, that 
Ananda, O lord, come and bring us, which may we attain 
in Our yajnic sessions of meditation at the centre of our 
personality wherein the mind and senses converge and 
merge with spiritual consciousness. 


गव्यो षु णो यथां पुराऽश्वयोत स्थया | 
वरिवस्य म॑हामह ॥ gon 


716 RGVEDA 


10. Gavyo su no yatha pura’ svayota rathaya. 
Varivasya mahamaha. 


Lord greatest of the great, Indra, come now as 
ever before and bring us wealth of lands and cows and 
discipline of the mind and senses, wealth of horses, 
progress and meaningful attainments, and scientific 
transports and spiritual adventures of the soul in 
meditation and yajnic sessions. 


नहि a शूर राधसोऽ न्तं fa-erfa सत्रा। 
दशस्या नो मघवन्रू चिदद्रिवो धियो वाजेंभिराविथ ॥ 22 11 


11. Nahi te Sura radhaso’ntam vindami satra. 
DaSsasya no maghavanni cidadrivo dhiyo vaje- 
bhiravitha. 


O lord generous and brave, I do not find the 
end and bounds of your gifts of wealth and competence. 
Lord of wealth, wisdom and excellence, wielder of the 
thunderbolt of justice and power, grant us the gifts of 
material, mental and spiritual wealth, and protect and 
promote our mind and senses with speed and energy 
for progress in action and attainment. 


य ऋष्वः श्रावयत्संखा विश्वेत्स dq war पुरुष्टुतः | 
तं विश्वे मानुषा युगेन्द्रं हवन्ते तविषं यतस्रुचः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ya rsvah Sravayatsakha visvet sa veda janima 
purustutah. Tam 177517८ manusa yugendram 
havante tavisam yatasrucah. 


The lord sublime who is universally worshipped 
is a friend and promoter of the celebrants and knows 
the origins of the entire forms of existence. That same 
lord illustrious and refulgent, Indra, the entire people 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 717 


of the world with ladlefuls of ghrta in hand always 
invoke, adore and worship. 


स नो वाजेष्वविता पुरूवसुः पुरःस्थाता मघवां वृत्रहा 
Warnes ॥ 


13. Sa no vajesvavita puruvasuh purah sthata 
maghava vrtraha bhuvat. 


That lord Indra, haven and home of the world, 
ever present everywhere, we need and invoke. That 
commander of wealth and power, dispeller of darkness 
and destroyer of evil, may, we pray, be our protector 
and promoter in the material, moral and spiritual 
struggles of our life. 


अभि वों वीरमन्ध॑सो मदेषु गाय गिरा महा feria 
इन्द्रं नाम श्रुत्यं शाकिनं वचो यथा ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Abhi vo viramandhaso madesu gaya gira maha 
vicetasam. Indram nama Srutyam sakinam vaco 
yatha. 


In the ecstasy of your soma celebration, with 
the best of word and voice, sing in praise of Indra, 
mighty brave, highly knowledgeable and wise, 
renowned of name and versatile in power and 
competence. 


ददी रेक्ण॑स्तन्वे ददिर्वसुं ददिवजिषु पुरुदूत वाजिनम्‌ । 
नूनमथ ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Dadi reknastanve dadirvasu dadirvajesu puru- 
huta vajinam. Nunamatha. 


Indra, lord universally invoked and adored, give 
us health for our body, give wealth, give us power and 


718 RGVEDA 


speed in our battles of life, and give us all this soon and 
for sure. 


विश्वेषापिरज्यन्तं वसूनां सासह्वांसं चिदस्य ata: | 
कृपयतो नूनमत्यथ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Visvesam-irajyantam vasunam sasahvamsam 
cidasya varpasah. Krpayato nunamatyatha. 


Sing in praise of Indra, ruler and promoter of 
the wealth and beauty of this world as it is and as it 
might be in future. He is challenger and vanuisher of 
the enemies. 


महः सु वो अरमिषे स्तर्वामहे teed अरंगमाय जग्म॑ये । 
यज्ञेभिर्गीरभि्विश्वम॑नुषां मरुर्तामियक्षसि गाये त्वा नम॑सा 
गिरा॥ ९७॥ 


17. Mahah su vo aramise stavamahe milhuse aram- 
gamaya jagmaye. Yajnebhir-girbhir-visvam- 
anusam marutamiyaksasi gaye tva namasa gird. 


For the sake of ample food and energy for you 
all, O people, we adore, with holy yajnic hymns, the 
great, generous, all round mover and obliging visitor, 
Indra, loved of all people in general and vibrant divines 
in particular. You love to be with us, O lord, and I 
celebrate and felicitate you with hymns and homage. 


ये पातय॑न्ते अज्म॑भिर्गिरीणां SPAT | 
यज्ञं म॑हिष्वणींनां सुम्नं तुविष्वणींनां प्राध्वरे ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Ye patayante ajmabhir-girinam snubhiresam. 
Yajnam mahisvaninam sumnam tuvisvaninam 
pradhvare. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 719 


We celebrate the roaring and tempestuous 
winds, Maruts, who, with their power and force, shake 
the clouds and streams down these mountains, give us 
gifts of yajnic well-being and joy in our creative and 
developmental programmes of love and non-violence. 


प्रभद्धं दुर्मतीनामिन्द्र शविष्ठा भ॑र। 
रयिमस्मभ्यं युज्यं चोदयन्मते ज्येष्ठं चोदयन्मते ॥ १९ ॥ 


19.  Prabhangam durmatinam-indra Ssavistha bhara. 
Rayim-asmabhyam yujyam codayanmate jye- 
stham codayanmate. 


Indra, lord most potent, bring us the intelligence 
and other means to break down the negative and anti- 
social thoughts and actions of adversaries. O lord 
inspirer of right thinking, bring us the mind and 
materials usable in constructive thinking and planning 
and bring us the best and highest thought and 
competence, O lord inspirer of rational and scientific 
minds. 


सनितः सुसनितरुग्र चित्र चेतिष्ठ aaa t 
प्रासहा सम्राट्‌ BER Gerd भुज्युं वाजेषु पूर्व्य॑म्‌ ॥ Ro ॥ 


20. Sanitah susanitarugra citra cetistha sunrta. 
Prasaha samrat sahurim sahantam bhujyum 
vajesu purvyam. 


O generous lord, most charitable giver, mighty, 
wonderful, most conscientious and attentive, most 
truthful, tolerant and courageous, supreme ruler, bring 
us the mind and material, power and force which is 
patient and courageous, challenging, useful and of 
permanent value. 


720 RGVEDA 


आस Ud य gaat अदेवः पूर्तमाददे । यथां Faget अश्व्यः 
पुथुश्रव॑सि कानी ते३ऽस्या व्युरष्याददे॥ २९॥ 
21. 4 ऽव etuivadan adevah purtamadade. Yatha cid- 
vaso asvyah prthusravasi kanite’sya vyusya-dade. 
Come that sage and scholar of human virtue, 
just human, not a god, who has received the feel of full 
and universal spirit of divinity, just as the man in the 
clutches of karmic sufferance experiences the bliss of 
divinity in the twilight and beauteous glory of the dawn 
of universal light and renown. 


uf सहस्त्रार्व्य॑स्यायुतासनमुष्टानां विंशतिं gran 
Sot श्यावींनां श॒ता दश त्य॑रुषीणां दश॒ गवां Geet ॥ २२॥ 
22. Sastim sahasrasvyasyayutasanamustranam 
vimsatim sata. Dasa Syavinam sata dasa 
tryarusinam dasa gavam sahasra. 
I have got sixty-and-ten thousand horses, twenty 
hundred camels, and ten hundred dark brown, ten 
hundred tawny red, in all ten thousand cows. 
ast श्यावा ऋधद्रयो वीतवारास sista: | 
मथ्रा नेमिं नि वावृतुः ॥ २३॥ 

23. Dasa Syava rdhadrayo vitavarasa asavah. 
Mathra nemim ni vavrtuh. 

Ten fleet dark brown horses with straight long 
tails instantly rushing to the target turn the whirling 
wheels of my chariot and beat the opposing forces. 

दानासः पृथुश्रव॑सः कानीतस्य सुराध॑सः। 
रथं हिरण्ययं ददन्मंहिंष्टः सूरिर॑भूद्र्षिष्ठमकृत श्रव॑ः ॥ २४॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 721 


24.  Danasah prthusr-vasah kanitasya suradhasah. 
Ratham hiranyayam dadan-mamhisthah surira- 
bhud-varsistham-akrta sravah. 


The gifts of generosity of the supreme giver 
universally renowned, sublime and bountiful, giving a 
golden chariot to the devotee, earn him the tributes of 
being most glorious and spread his fame as the most 
munificent hero. 


आ नों वायो महे तने याहि मखाय Ursa 
वयं हि ते चकृमा भूरिं दावने Gavan दावने ।॥ २५॥ 
25. 4770 vayomahe tane yahi makhaya pajase. Vayam 


hi te cakrma bhuri davane sadyascinmahi davane. 


O Vayu, lord of mighty motion, come for the 
great expansion of the speed and power of our yajna. 
Lord of high generosity, we adore you always and glorify 
you as a great, liberal and universal ultimate giver. 


यो अश्वेभिर्वह॑ते वस्त॑ उस््रास्तिः wa सं्॑तीनाम्‌। एभिः 
सोमेभिः areas: सोमपा दानाय शुक्रपूतपाः ॥ २६॥ 
26. Yo asvebhir-vahate vasta usrastrih sapta sapta- 


tinam. Ebhih somebhih somasudbhih somapa 
danaya Sukraputapah. 

Come he who travels by radiations of cosmic 
energy, vested in and carrying thrice seven of seventy 
rays of the sun, he, protector of the pure and holy, 
protector of soma joy, come with these somas of bliss, 
with the makers of soma for giving us the gifts of joy. 


यो मं इमं fag त्मना म॑न्दच्यित्रं दावने। 
अरद्रे अश्च Al Gah सुकृत्तराय सुक्रतुं: i २७॥ 


722 RGVEDA 


27. Yoma imam cidu tmana mandaccitram davane. 
Aratve akse nahuse sukrtvani sukrttaraya sukra- 
tuh. 


He who by himself rejoices in giving me this 
wonderful gift of light and yajnic expansion, the same 
lord of holy action rejoices in giving more to enhance 
higher charity of the grown up man of holy deeds in 
practical life. 


उचथ्ये वपुषि यः स्वराव्छुत वायो Fare: | 
अश्वेषितं रजेषितं शुनेषितं प्राज्य तदिदं नु तत्‌॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Ucathye vapusi yah svaraluta vayo ghrtasnah. 
ASvesitam rajesitam Sunesitam prajma tadidam 
nu tat. 


Vayu, refulgent ruler of the world of purity, 
decency and generosity soft as consecrated in ghrta, in 
this beautiful life of admirable nature and character, 
whatever you give for social achievement, emotional 
satisfaction and spiritual realisation is the same as you 
have given to me. 


अधं प्रियपिंषिराय॑ षष्टिं सहस्रासनम्‌। 
अशुवानामिन्न वृष्णांम्‌॥ २९ ॥ 
29. Adha priyamisiraya sastim sahasrasanam. 
Asvanaminna vrsnam. 
And Ihave received sixty thousand gifts of value 


dear to the strong and ambitious, like horses of the most 
virile breed dear to the warriors. 


गावो न यूथमुप यन्ति ada उप मा य॑न्ति वश्च॑यः॥ 30 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 723 


30. Gavona yuthamupa yanti vadhraya upa ma yanti 
vadhrayah. 


As cows join the herd for protection and support 
so the weaker people come to me for sustenance and 
support, yes the needy come for succour and support. 


अध TANA गणे VATE अचिंक्रदत्‌। 
अध ज्विल्ेषु विंशतिं शाता ॥ 32 


31. Adha yaccarathe gane Satamustran acikradat. 
Adha Svitnesu vimsatim Sata. 

And then the blessed man calls for a hundred 
camels and twenty hundred from amongst the white 
herd, all out of the active and working ones, for giving 
away to the needy. 


शतं दासे deqe विप्रस्तरुश्च आ dei ते a वायविमे 
जना मदन्तीन्द्रगोपा मद॑न्ति देवगोपाः 132 u 


32. Satam dase balbithe viprastaruksa a dade. Te te 
vayavime jana madantindragopda madanti 
devagopah. 


The man of power and prosperity has given 
away a hundred, the vibrant sage and saviour has 
received. O Vayu, your beneficiaries, these people, 
protected and supported by Indra, the generous, rejoice, 
celebrate and exhilarate you. 


अध स्या योष॑णा मही प्र॑तीची वरामर्व्यम्‌। 
अधिरुक्मा वि नीयते ।॥ ३३ ॥ 


33. Adha sya yosana mahi pratict vasamasvyam. 
Adhirukma vi ntyate. 


724 RGVEDA 


Now then that youthful maiden, great and 
glamorous in golden finery, is led forth to the seasoned 
bachelor of her love and desire on the wedding vedi. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 47 
Adityah (1-13), Adityah - Ushah Devatah, Trita Aptya Rshi 


महिं वो महतामवो वरुण fast दाशुषे । यमादित्या अभि 
दरुहो tate नेमघं नंशदनेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Mahi vo mahatamavo varuna mitra ddaSase. 
Yamaditya abhi druho raksatha nemagham 
nasadanehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


O Varuna, Mitra, powers wise, just and loving, 
choice and love of all, great is your protection, noble 
ones, for the generous man of charity. O Adityas, 
brilliant powers of light and enlightenment, children of 
indestructible mother life, whoever you protect from 
the jealous and the malignant, no sin ever touches. 
Sinless are your protections, noble and holy are your 
protections (free from jealousy, anger and violence). 


विदा देवा अघानामादित्यासो अपाकुतिम्‌। पश्चा वयो 
यथोपरि व्यपैस्मे शर्म यच्छतानेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ २॥ 

me Vida deva aghanamddityaso apakrtim. Paksa 
vayo yathopari vyasme Sarma yacchatanehaso va 
utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


O divine powers of light, love and justice, you 
know how to remove sin and cleanse us of evil. As birds 
shade their young ones with wings, so give us shelter 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 47 725 


and protection all over. Sinless are your protections, 
noble and holy are your protections. 


व्य स्मे अधि srt तत्यक्षा वयो न य॑न्तन । विश्वानि 
विश्ववेदसो वरूथ्या मनामहे Agel व ऊतय॑ः सुऊतयो 
व ऊतयः ॥ ३॥ 


3 Vyasme adhi Sarma tat paksa vayo na yantana. 
Visvani visvavedaso varuthya manamahe ’nehaso 
va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


All round, all over us, spread your cover of 
protection like birds. You know and command the 
wealth and powers of the world. We pray for shelter, 
peace and protection. Sinless are your protections, free 
from evil, noble and holy are your protections, free from 
jealousy, anger and violence. 


यस्मा अरासत क्षयं जीवातुं च wera: | मनोर्विश्वस्य 
घेदिम आदित्या राय ईरते ऽनेहसों व Saad: सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Yasma arasata ksayam jivatum ca pracetasah. 
Manorvisvasya ghedima aditya raya tsate’nehaso 
va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 

Whoever these Adityas, powers of light, most 
wise, provide a peaceful shelter home for a comfortable 
living, that man’s wealth, power and honour they 
overwatch, control and rule for protection. Sinless are 
your protections, noble and holy your safeguards. 


UR णो वृणजन्नघा दुर्गाणि teal यथा । स्यामेदिन्द्रस्य 


शर्मण्यादित्यतानामुतावस्यनेहसों व ऊतयः सुतयो! व 
ऊतयः ॥ ५ ॥ 


726 RGVEDA 


2. Pari no vrnajannagha durgani rathyo yatha. 
Syamedindrasya Sarmanydadityanamutava- 
syanehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


Just as charioteers avoid difficult and impossible 
roads, so let sins and crimes go by, leaving us aside. Let 
us be in the homely protection of Indra and under the 
protective umbrella of the Adityas. O Adityas, free from 
sin and evil are your protections, noble and holy your 
safeguards. 


परिह्तेदना जनों युष्मादत्तस्य वायति | देवा अदभ्रमाश 
वो यर्मादित्या अहेतनानेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो 
ऊतयः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Parihvrtedana jano yusmadattasya vayati. Deva 
adabhramasa vo yamaditya ahetananehaso va 
utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


Adityas, powers of light and lightning speed, 
even though a person might be living in distress, he 
raises and expands what you give him and rises to higher 
joy and prosperity when you approach him and bless. 
Sinless are your protections, holy and noble your 
safeguards and securities. 


न तं तिग्मं चन त्यजो न द्रासदभि तं गुरु । यस्मा उ शर्म 
सप्रथ आदित्यासो अराध्वमनेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ७॥ 

a, Na tam tigmam cana tyajo na drasadabhi tam 


guru. Yasma u Sarma sapratha adityaso aradhva- 
manehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


Sharpest envy and violent anger do not terrify 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 47 727 


or demoralise him, O Adityas, whom you give a large 
home and wide margin of tolerance. Sinless are your 
protections, noble and holy your safeguards and 
securities. 


युष्मे देवा अपिं ष्मसि युध्य॑न्त इव वर्मसु । यूयं महो न 
एन॑सो यूयमभीदुरुष्यतानेहसो' व add: सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yusme deva api smasi yudhyanta iva varmasu. 


Yuyam maho na enaso yuyamarbhadurusyata- 
nehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 

Brilliant and brave Adityas, in you we are safe 
like warriors in armour. You save us from heinous sins 
and major crimes, you save us from minor faults and 
lighter trespasses. Sinless are your protections and holy 
and noble your safegurards. 


अदितिर्न उरुष्यत्वदितिः शर्म' यच्छतु । माता मित्रस्य 
रेवतोऽ fant वरुणस्य चानेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Aditirna urusyatvaditih Sarma yacchatu. mata 


mitrasya revato’ryamno varunasya canehaso va 
utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


May Aditi, Mother Nature, save us. May Aditi, 
mother earth, provide us a restful home. May Aditi, 
mother of Mitra, prosperous Aryama and Varuna provide 
us peace and happiness. Sinless are your protections, 
holy your safeguards, holily protected. 


यदैवाः शर्म शर णं यद्धद्रं यद॑नातुरम्‌ | त्रिधातु AST 
तदस्मासु वि यंन्तनानेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः Wot 


728 RGVEDA 


10. Yaddevah Sarma saranam yadbhadram yada- 
naturam. Tridhatu yadvaruthyam tadasmasu vi 
yantananehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


Adityas, brilliant leaders of the mother nation, 
the home that is a restful place to live in, which is 
beneficial, which is free from want and ailments, and 
three-metalled furniture and appliances, all that is 
needed in a good and comfortable home, pray provide, 
secure and insure among us, the people of the land. 
Sinless are your protections, noble your safeguards, 
holily protected. 


आदित्या अव हि ख्यताधि कूलादिव east: । सुतीर्थमर्वतो 
यथानु नो नेषथा सुगमनेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Aditya ava hi khyatadhi kiladiva spasah. Sutirtha- 
marvato yathanu no nesatha sugamane-haso va 
utayah su-utayo va utayah. 

Adityas, brilliant leaders of the nation, just as 
people stand on the bank of a river above and look below 
upon the flowing waters, so look below upon the people 
on the march, and just as they take the horses across the 
stream by the safest ford, so lead the nation forward by 
the safest paths of progress. Sinless are your protections 
and safest your securities. 


नेह भद्रं र॑क्षस्विने नावयै नोपया उत। el च भद्रं धेनवें 
वीराय च श्रवस्यतेऽनेहसो व ada: सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Neha bhadram raksasvine navayai nopaya uta. 


Gave ca bhadram dhenave viraya ca Sravasyate- 
*nehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 47 729 


No good here for friends of evil, no possibility 
of escape, no appeasement. But for the cow, the lands, 
literature and culture, for the milch cow, for creative 
and productive forces, for the brave warriors and 
philanthropists of renown, for all these, yes, all good, 
all safe, all opportunities. Sinless are your protections, 
unfailing your safeguards. 


यदाविर्यद॑पीच्यं१ cata अस्तिं दुष्कृतम्‌ । त्रिते तद्िश्वं- 
माप्त्य आरे अस्मद॑धातनानेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतयः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Yadavir-yadapicyam devaso asti duskrtam. Trite 
tadvisvamaptya are asmad dadhatananehaso va 
utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


O brilliant leaders of the world, all evil thoughts, 
deeds or practices, whether open or covert, which may 
be prevalent in the three spheres of body, mind and soul 
of the individual and society, all those, pray, ward off, 
keep away from us. Sinless are your protections, noble 
your safeguards. 


यच्य गोषु, दुष्ष्वप्न्यं sare दुहितर्दिवः 1 त्रिताय 
तद्िभावर्याप्त्याय परां वहानेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
era: ॥ ९.४ ॥ 


14. वल्लव gosu dussvapnyam yaccasme duhitardivah. 
Tritaya tadvibhavaryaptyaya para vahanehaso va 
utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


O daughter of the light of heaven, holy dawn, 
noble intelligence, holy wisdom, whatever evil thought, 
dream or ambition there be in or in relation to our mind 
and senses or in relation to anything else of our life, O 


730 RGVEDA 


light of the dawn, take away far off from us for the good 
of the self and the world of threefold virtue of body, 
mind and soul. Sinless are your protections, holy your 
safeguards. 


निष्कंवाघा कृणव॑ते स्रजं वा दुहितर्दिवः । त्रिते दुष्ष्वप्न्यं 
सर्वमाप्त्ये ut ददास्यनेहसो! व ऊतयः सुऊतयो! व 
ऊतयः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Niskam va gha krnavate srajam va duhitardivah. 
Trite dussvapnyam sarvamaptye pari dadmas- 
yanehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


O daughter of the light of dawn, heavenly 
revelation of wisdom, descent of divinity, all bad dreams 
and ambitions for the maker of gold ornaments or the 
maker of flower garlands, or in relation to the pride of 
body, mind and soul, we throw off. Sinless are your 
protections, holy your safeguards. 


तदन्नाय तद॑पसे तं भागमुंपसेदुषे | fara च द्विताय are 
दुष्ष्वप्न्यं वहानेहसो व Had: सुऊतयो व ऊतयः: ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Tadannaya tadapase tam bhagamupaseduse. 
Tritaya ca dvitaya coso dussvapnyam vaha- 
nehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


For the sake of the man whose food is bad 
dreams, whose karma it is, whose entire share of life is 
this, for the sake of the man of threefold world of body, 
mind and soul, and for the good of the twice born 
humanity, O dawn of divine light, take away the bad 
dreams far off. Sinless are your protections, holy your 
safeguards. 


1. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 48 731 
यथां कलां यथां श॒फं यथ॑ ऋणं संनयामसि । एवा दुष्ष्वप्न्यं 
सर्वमाप्त्ये सं नयामस्यनेहसो व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
Beta: ॥ ९७॥ 

Yatha kalam yatha sapham yatha rnam samna- 
yamasi. Eva dussvapnyam sarvamaptye sam 
nayamasya-nehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


Just as we throw off a dead nail and a dead hoof, 


and just as we pay off a bad debt, similarly we throw 
off tall bad dreams of our whole world far away. O 
Adityas, O dawn of light, sinless are your protections, 
holy your safeguards. 


18. 


अजैष्माद्यासनाम चाभूमानागसो aay उषो यस्मादुष्ष्व- 
प्न्यादभैष्माप तदु"च्छत्वनेहसो। व ऊतयः सुऊतयो व 
ऊतय॑ः॥ ९८ ॥ 

Ajaismadyasanama cabhumanagaso vayam. Uso 
yasmad dussvapnyddabhaismapa taducchatva- 
nehaso va utayah su-utayo va utayah. 


O Adityas, O dawn of light, we have won today, 


achieved something great, and become free of sin and 
evil. O dawn, the bad dreams which we fear, pray, throw 
off. Sinless are your protections, holy your safeguards. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 48 
Soma Devata, Pragatha Ghaura Kanva Rshi 


स्वादोर॑भधक्चि वय॑सः सुमेधाः स्वाध्यो वरिवोवित्तरस्य । 
विश्वे यं देवा उत Hehe मधुं Gaal अभि संचरन्ति ॥ ९॥ 
Svadorabhaksi vayasah sumedhah svadhyo 


varivovittarasya. Visve yam deva uta martydaso 
madhu bruvanto abhi samcaranti. 


732 RGVEDA 


An intelligent and dedicated reader of holy 
literature, I have enjoyed the delicious soma food of 
higher and holier quality which all divines and mortals 
of the world enjoy, saying ‘it is honey sweet and 
savoury’, when they meet in sacred gatherings. 


अन्तश्च प्रागा अदिंतिर्भवास्यवयाता etat दैव्य॑स्य। 
इन्दविन्द्र॑स्य सख्यं जुषाणः sista धुरमनु राय ऋध्याः ॥ २॥ 


(५१ 471145८८ praga aditirbhavasyavayata haraso 
daivyasya. Indavindrasya sakhyam jusanah 
Sraustiva dhuramanu raya rdhyah. 


O soma, reaching the core of personality, you 
are internalised, assimilated as one with the body and 
creative mind of man, dispeller of divine anger, and 
friend of Indra, the soul. O soma, just like willing and 
obedient horses of the chariot harnessed and yoked, 
inspire us toward the wealth, honour and excellence of 
life. 

अर्पाम सोम॑ममृतां अभूमाग॑न्म ज्योतिरविदाम Sart | 
किं नूनमस्मान्कणवदरांतिः किमु धूर्तिर॑मू त मर्त्य॑स्य ॥ ३॥ 


ai Apama somamamrta abhumaganma jyotira- 
vidama devan. Kim nunamasman krnavadar-datih 
kimu dhurtiramrta martyasya. 


We have drunk the soma of immortality, we have 
become immortal, attained to the light of divinity, have 
known the organs of perception and imagination, and 
realised the divinities of light, power and excellence. 
What can the enemies internal and external do now 
against us? O lord immortal, soma, what can the violence 
of mortals do against us? 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 48 733 


शं नो भव हृद आ पीत इन्दो पितेव सोम सूनवे सुशोव॑ः। 
waa सख्य॑ उरुशंस धीरः प्र ण आयुर्जीवसे सोम 
तारीः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Sam no bhava hrda ठ pita indo piteva soma sunave 
susevah. Sakheva sakhya urusamsa dhirah prana 
ayurjivase soma tarth. 


O soma, drink of immortality, be good and 
blissful for the heart. O nectar soma, when drunk, be as 
good and blissful as father is to the child. Soma, 
universally admired, brave and heroic, patient and 
constant, as a friend for the friend, give us a long age of 
good health so that we may live a full life of joy to our 
heart’s content. 


इमे मा पीता aera उरुष्यवो रथं न गावः सम॑नाह पर्वसु । 
ते मा रक्षन्तु विस््रस॑श्चरित्रादुत मा स्त्रामाद्यवयन्त्वि- 
न्द॑वः॥ ५॥ 


० Ime ma pita yaSasa urusyavo ratham na gavah 
samanaha parvasu. Te ma raksantu visrasasca- 
ritraduta ma sramadyavayantvindavah. 


These soma drinks, protective of honour, may 
secure and strengthen my joints as straps secure the 
chariots at joints, and inspire me to apply myself to noble 
projects as bullocks draw the chariot to good 
destinations. These drinks may save me from weakness 
of character and protect me from depression and disease. 


अभिंन ut मथितं सं दिदीपः प्र च॑क्षय कृणुहि वस्य॑सो 
नः। अथा fe a मद॒ आ सोम मन्ये targa u च॑रा 
पुष्टिमच्छ॑॥ ६ ॥ 


734 RGVEDA 


6. Agnim na ma mathitam sam didipah pra caksaya 
krnuhi vasyaso nah. Atha hi te mada a soma 
manye revan iva pra cara pustimaccha. 


Light and shine me like fire from wood by 
friction, give me the eye to see the light and raise us to 
be masters of wealth, honour and excellence. O soma, 
drink of immortality, in the ecstasy of exhilaration, I 
concentrate and meditate on the self in the peace of 
divinity like a wealthy man of spiritual profusion. O 
bliss of exuberance, stimulate, inspire and raise me well 
to perfect health of body, mind and soul. 


इषिरेण ते मन॑सा सुतस्य॑ भक्षीमहि पित्र्य॑स्येव wre: aire 
राजन्प्र ण आयूंषि तारीरहानीव सूर्यो वासराणि ॥ ७॥ 

a: Tsirena te manasa sutasya bhaksimahi pitryasyeva 
rayah. Soma rajan pra na ayumsi tarirahaniva 
suryo vasarani. 

O bright soma, with stimulated and inspired 
mind, let us drink at the fount of your exuberant flow 
like children enjoying on the wealth of their parents. O 
ruling light of soma divine, pray lengthen our life and 
rejuvenate our health like the sun lengthening the light 
of days. 


सोमं राजन्मृव्ठयां नः स्वस्ति तवं स्मसि Tears ee विद्धि | 
अलक्तं cet उत मन्युरिन्दो मानों अर्यो अनुकामं पररा 
दाः॥८॥ 


8. Soma rajan mrlaya nah svasti tava smasi 
vratyastasya viddhi. Alarti daksa uta manyu-rindo 
ma no aryo anukamam para dah. 


O soma, ruling light of life, be kind and gracious, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 48 735 


give us peace and well being, we are your devotees, 
observers of your rules of life in joy, pray know this. O 
fluent life of joy, pray know that confidence and 
competence and righteous passion is fresh and vibrant 
in us, do not forsake us, give us not up to the will and 
pleasure of the enemy. 


त्वं हि न॑स्तन्व॑ः सोम गोपा गात्रेगात्रे निषसत्था नृचक्षाः । 
यत्ते वयं प्रमिनाम व्रतानि सनो मृच्छ सुषखादेव 
aed: 12 


9. Tvam hi nastanvah soma gopa gatregatre nisa- 
sattha nrcaksah. Yat te vayam praminama vratani 
sa no mrla susakha deva vasyah. 


O soma, you are the protector and promoter of 
our body and personality. Watcher and leading light of 
humanity, seep in and energise every part of our body. 
And if we default on your rules of discipline, even so, 
O noble friend, generous power superior, be good and 
gracious to us and help us to be happy. 


ऋदूदरैण सख्यां सचेय यो मा न Realegeiva Uta: | अयं 
यः सोमो न्यधाय्यस्मे तस्मा इन्द्रं प्रतिर मेम्यायुः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Rdudarena sakhya saceya yo ma na risyeddhar- 
yasva pitah. Ayam yah somo nyadhayyasme tasma 
indram pratiramemyayuh. 


Indra, O soul and spirit of intelligence, let me 
be friends with soma as with a friend of noble nature 
and drink it as it would do me no harm. I pray to Indra, 
lord omnipotent giver of bliss, that the soma which I 
have drunk in may increase and enrich my life. 


736 RGVEDA 


अप त्या shen अमीवा निर॑त्रसन्तमिंषीचीरभेषुः | आ 
सोमो अस्मो अंरुहद्वि्हाया अग॑न्म यत्र प्रतिरन्त आयुः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Apatya asthuranira amiva niratrasan-tamisicira- 
bhaisuh. A somo asman aruhad vihaya aganma 
yatra pratiranta ayuh. 


Let those difficult ailments subside and go far 
from here. Even though they are strong and fearful, let 
them be off from here. Potent soma has risen up in vigour 
and has energised us, and we have reached where life 
increases and delights through age in ecstasy. 


यो न इन्दुः पितरो हृत्सु पीतोऽ deaf eat आविवेश । 
तस्मै सोमाय हविषां विधेम मृव्टीके अस्य सुमतौ 
स्याम ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Yo na induh pitaro hrtsu pito’martyo martyan 
avivesa. Tasmai somaya havisa vidhema mrlike 
asya sumatau syama. 


O parents and seniors of wisdom, the soma 
which is immortal is consumed and absorbed in the 
hearts and spirits of mortals. For that soma of 
immortality, we pray with love and homage to divinity 
and hope we shall abide in peace, pleasure and a settled 
mind, all which is the gift of this drink of immortality. 


त्वं सोम पितृभिः संविदानोऽ नु द्यार्वापृथिवी आ त॑तन्थ। 
तस्म त इन्दो हविषा विधेम वयं स्याम पत॑यो रयी- 
णाम्‌ ९३॥ 

13. Tvam soma pitrbhih samvidano’nu dyavaprthivi 
a tatantha. Tasmai ta indo havisa vidhema 
vayam syama patayo rayinam. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 48 737 


O soma, immortal joy and inspiration of 
existence, known well and abiding by the ancients and 
pranic energies of nature, you pervade over heaven and 
earth. O soma, peace, power and joy of the world, we 
pray to you for strength and joy with homage and 
oblations so that we may be masters, protectors and 
promoters of the wealths, honours and excellences of 
life. 

तरातारो देवा अधिं वोचता at ar at निद्रा ईशत मोत 
जल्पिः । वयं सोम॑स्य विश्वह प्रियासः सुवीरासो विदथमा 
व॑देम ।॥ ९४॥ 


14. Trataro deva adhi vocata no ma no nidra sata 
mota jalpih. Vayam somasya visvaha priyasah 
suviraso vidathama vadema. 


O brilliant divines, saviours and leading lights 
of humanity and life’s joy, speak over to us of the 
pleasure and power of soma so that neither sloth and 
slumber nor chatter, prattle and inarticulation may 
overtake us. We pray we may all time, seasons and days 
be favourites of immortal soma of bliss and, wide awake 
and brave, we may realise knowledge, wisdom and a 
happy well governed order of society. 


त्वं न॑ः सोम विश्वतो वयो धास्त्वं स्वर्विदा विशा नृचक्षाः | 
त्वं नं इन्द ऊतिभिः सजोषाः पाहि पश्चातादुत at 
पुरस्तात्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Tvam nah soma visvato vayodhastvam svarvida 
visa nrcaksah. Tvam na inda utibhih sajosah 
pahi pascataduta va purastat. 


Soma, immortal spirit of peace, power and bliss, 


738 RGVEDA 


you are the treasure giver of food, energy and life for 
the world. You are the treasure giver of heavenly joy 
and watcher and leading light of the people. O soma, 
fluent stream of life energy, loving and friendly, with 
all your powers and protections, safeguard and promote 
us in front, on the back and all round. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 49 
Indra Devata, Praskanva Kanva Rshi 


अभि प्र व॑ः सुराध॑समिन्द्र॑मचं यथां विदे। 
यो जरितृभ्यो मघवां पुरूवसुः खहस्त्रेणेव शिक्ष॑ति ॥ ९॥ 


1. Abhi pra vah suradhasam-indram-arca yatha 
vide. Yo jaritrbhyo maghava puruvasuh saha- 
sreneva Siksati. 


To the best of your intention and purpose and 
for whatever you wish to achieve, pray to Indra, lord of 
glory, world power and promotion and means of success, 
who gives a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence 
to his celebrants. 


शतानीकेव प्र जिंगाति धृष्णुया हन्तिं वृत्राणि दाशुषे | 
गिरेरिव प्र vat अस्य पिन्विरे दत्राणि पुरुभोजसः ॥ २॥ 


De Satanikeva pra jigati dhrsnuya hanti vrtrani 
dasuse. Gireriva pra rasa asya pinvire datrani 
purubhojasah. 


Like the commander of a hundred armies, with 
his power and force, Indra rushes forward to fight and 
win, and he destroys the demons of darkness and want 
for the charitable giver. The gifts of this universal giver 
of food and sustenance feed and support humanity like 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 49 739 
streams flowing down from the mountains. 


आ wat सुतास इन्द॑वो मदा य इन्द्र गिर्वणः | 
आपो न व॑चिन्नन्वो क्यं सर॑: पृणन्ति शूर राध॑से ॥ ३॥ 


3. A tva sutasa indavo mada ya indra girvanah. Apo 
na vajrinnanvokyam sarah prnanti sura radhase. 


Indra, celebrated lord of the thunderbolt, may 
the songs of adoration presented by the celebrant with 
prayers for desired wealth and means of success, flowing 
spontaneous like ecstatic streams of soma, please and 
exhilarate you to fullness of kindness and grace as 
flowing waters, brooks and rivers, fill their original 
home, the lake and the sea. 


अनेहसं प्रतरणं विवक्षणं मध्वः स्वादिं्मीं पिब । 
आ यथां मन्दसानः किरासि नः प्र क्षुद्रेव At धृषत्‌ ॥  ॥ 


4. Anehasam prataranam vivaksanam madhvah 
svadisthamim piba. A yatha mandasanah kirasi 
nah pra ksudreva tmana dhrsat. 


Indra, lord of joy and fulfilment, pray accept 
the innocent, overflowing, inspiring song of adoration, 
enjoy it like a draught of soma sweeter than honey, so 
that happy and joyous at heart and soul, ignoring all 
minor considerations, you may pour out your gifts of 
generosity like showers of mist. 


आ नः स्तोपमुप॑ द्रवद्दियानो अश्वो न सोतुभिः। 
यं तें स्वधावन्त्स्वदय॑न्ति धेनव इन्द्र कण्वेषु रातय: ॥ ५ ॥ 


0 A nah stomamupa dravaddhiyano asvo na 
sotrbhih. Yam te svadhavantsvadayanti dhenava 
indra kanvesu ratayah. 


740 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of joy and fulfilment, love and 
generosity, come to accept our song of adoration like a 
courser urged on and rushing to its destination, a song 
created like soma by the pressers which the profuse 
voices of the wise and your gifts showered on the 
celebrants sweeten all the more and energise. 


उग्रं न वीरं नमसोप सेदिम विभूंतिमक्चितावसुम्‌। 
उद्रीव वचिन्नरवतो न सिञ्चते क्षरन्तीन्द्र धीतयः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Ugram na viram namasopa sedima vibhutima- 
ksitavasum. Udriva vajrinnavato na sincate ksa- 
rantindra dhitayah. 


With homage and adorations, we approach 
Indra, illustrious, brave, glorious, lord of inexhaustible 
wealth, honour and ultimate shelter. As an overflowing 
spring fills a well with water, so do our thoughts and 
imagination create the flow of spontaneous praise for 
the generous lord’s satisfaction. 


यन्ं नूनं यद्वा यज्ञे यद्वा पृथिव्यामधि | 
अतो नो यज्ञमाशुभिर्महेमत उग्र उग्रेथिरा ae ७॥ 


a, Yaddha nunam yadva yajne yadva prthivyamadhi. 
Ato no yajnam-asubhir-mahemata ugra ugrebhira 
gahi. 

Illustrious Indra, whether you are at some yajna 
or somewhere on earth or anywhere else, from there 


come to our yajna by the fastest and mightiest forces, 
illustrious lord, wisest of the wise. 


अजिरासो हर॑यो ये त॑ आशवो aratsa प्रसक्षिणः | 
येभिरप॑त्यं मनुषः wre येभिर्विश्वं cadet ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 49 741 


8. Ajiraso harayo ye ta aSavo vata iva prasaksinah. 
Yebhir-apatyam manusah pariyase yebhirvisvam 
svardrse. 


Come by indefatigable forces, fastest and 
tempestuous as the winds, by which you reach the 
unwavering children of humanity and go round to see 
and reveal the light of heaven. 


Udder ईमह इन्द्र॑ सुम्नस्य TAT: | 
यथा प्रावों मघवन्मे्यातिधिं यथा नीपातिथिं धने ॥ ९ ॥ 


त Etavatasta imaha indra sumnasya gomatah. 
Yatha pravo maghavan medhyatithim yatha 
nipatithim dhane. 


Indra, lord of grandeur, glorious as you are, we 
pray of you the wealth of the peace and prosperity of 
sense, mind and wisdom by which you protect and 
promote the man of dynamic intelligence, and the sage 
of imagination who dives deep into the mysteries of 
life in the struggle to understand the riddles of existence. 


यथा कण्वे मघवन्त्रसद॑स्यवि यथा पक्थे SHAT | 
यथा गोशर्ये असंनोऋजिश्वनीन्द्र्‌ गोमद्दिर॑ण्यवत्‌॥। ९० ॥ 


10. Yatha kanve maghavan trasadasyavi yatha pakthe 
dasavraje. Yatha gosaryo asanorrjis-vanindra 
gomaddhiranyavat. 


Indra, lord of glory, we pray for that generosity 
of yours by which you award the wealth of lands and 
cows, sense, mind and wisdom, and the golden 
excellence of honour and culture, to the wise celebrant, 
the opponent of violence and terror, the veteran scholar, 
the controller of sense and mind in meditation, the 


742 RGVEDA 


energiser of perception and intelligence, and the man 
of simple and straight paths of truth and rectitude. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 50 
Indra Devata, Pushtigu Kanva Rshi 


WE Ad सुराध॑समची शक्रमभिष्टये | 
यः सुन्वते स्तुवते काम्यं वसुं सहस्रेणेव मंहं ते ॥ ९॥ 


i, Pra su srutam suradhasam-arca sakramabhi- 
staye. Yah sunvate stuvate kamyam vasu sahasre- 
neva mamhate. 


For the sake of life’s fulfilment, honour and 
adore Indra, renowned and mighty master and controller 
of the superstructure of existence, who grants desired 
wealth, power and honour, and augments it a 
thousandfold for the celebrant who seeks and works 
for the soma joy and excellence of life with yajnic effort. 


शतानीका Stal अस्य दुष्टरा इन्द्र॑स्य समिषो Tet: | 
गिरिर्न भुज्मा म॒घव॑त्सु पिन्वते यदीं सुता अम॑न्दिषुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Satanika hetayo asya dustara indrasya samiso 
mahih. Girirna bhujma maghavatsu pinvate 
yadim suta amandisuh. 


Hundreds of great and invincible forces of this 
lord almighty, protective, promotive and overladen with 
sustenance, power and prosperity like the pregnant cloud 
and abundant mountain, shower gifts of desire and 
fulfilment on the seekers of excellence and grace when 
the soma creations of the yajnic celebrants please the 
lord. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 50 743 


adh सुतास इन्द॑वोऽ भि प्रियममंन्दिषुः | 
आपो न धायि सव॑नं म आ व॑सो दुघाडइवोपं दाशुषे ॥ २ ॥ 


Di Yadim sutasa indavo’bhi priyam-amandisuh. Apo 
na dhayi savanam ma व vaso dugha ivopa-dasuse. 


When the flowing drops of yajnic homage of 
soma please and exhilarate this dear lord, then, O lord 
of wealth, excellence and grace, like the showers of rain 
and generous cow, pray bless the invocation, homage 
and oblations of the yajna with plenty for the generous 
yajamana. 


अनेहसं वो हवमानमूतये मध्व॑ः क्षरन्ति efter: । 
आ त्वां वसो हवमानास इन्द॑व उप॑ स्तोत्रेषु दधिरे ।॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Anehasam vo havamana-mutaye madhvah 
ksaranti dhitayah. A tva vaso havamanasa indava 
upa stotresu dadhire. 


O yajakas, to the incomparable lord you invoke 
for protection, your thoughts and honey sweet songs of 
adoration rise and flow. O lord of wealth, honour and 
excellence, shelter home of the universe, the soma 
celebrants who call upon you cherish your presence they 
feel in the hymns they offer in adoration. 


आ नः सोमे स्वध्वर इयानो अत्यो न तोशते । 
यं ते स्वदावन्त्स्वद॑न्ति गूर्तयः पौरे छन्दयसे हव॑म्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
त A nah some svadhvara iyano atyo na tosate. Yam 


te svadavant-svadanti gurtayah paure chanda- 
yase havam. 


Indra, lord of the holy yajna of creation, come 
to our soma yajna, reaching like the constant flow of 


744 RGVEDA 


joy where soma flows and pleases. O lord most generous 
and connoisseur of taste, the songs of praise please you, 
and while the soma flows you delight in our adoration. 


प्र वीरमुग्रं विविचिं धनस्पृतं विभूतिं राध॑सो महः | 
उद्रीव वचिन्नवतो व॑सुत्वना सदा पीपेथ दाशुषे ।॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Pra viram-ugram vivicim dhanasprtam vibhutim 
radhaso mahah. Udriva vajrinnavato vasutvana 
sada pipetha dasuse. 


I pray to Indra, brave, illustrious, discriminative, 
giver of wealth and excellence and all majestic, for 
greatness of honour and success. O lord of thunderbolt, 
action and justice, like an over-flowing spring of 
generosity, you bless the liberal giver with ample wealth 
of the world. 


ae नूनं प॑रावति यद्वा पृथिव्यां दिवि । 
युजान इन्द्र हरिभिर्महेमत ऋष्व ऋष्वेभिरा ग॑हि ॥ ७॥ 


7. Yaddha nunam paravati yad va prthivyam divi. 
Yujana indra haribhir-mahemata rsva rsvebhira 
gahi. 


Indra, lord omnipotent and omniscient, whether 
you are in a far off place or close by on earth or far 
above in the light of heaven round the sun, come, lord 
of grandeur and divine wisdom, with all your innate 
divine powers of cosmic dynamism. O lord most 
attainable and sublime, come with instant elevations of 
the spirit and bless us. 


रथिरासो हस्यो ये त अस्त्रिध ओजो वात॑स्य पिप्र॑ति। 
येभिर्नि दस्युं मनुषो निघोष॑यो येभिः स्व॑ः परीयसे ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 50 145 


8. Rathiraso harayo ye te asridha ojo vatasya 
piprati. Yebhirni dasyum manuso nighosayo 
yebhih svah pariyase. 


Instant and omnipresent are your powers of 
motion, conduction and integration, creators of the joy 
of accomplishment which, unfailing, unerring, 
unhurting and instant, swell the mighty motions of the 
winds and energise the pranic forces, by which you 
silence the violent saboteurs of humanity for our sake 
and by which you move across the regions of heaven. 


एतावतस्ते वसो विद्याम शूर नव्य॑सः। 
यथा प्राव एत॑शं कृत्व्ये धने यथा वं दश॑व्रजे ॥ ९ ॥ 


५.१ Etavataste vaso vidyama राव navyasah. Yatha 
prava etasam krtvye dhane yatha vasam dasa- 
vraje. 

O lord omnipotent, shelter home of the universe, 
adorable and worshipped, thus do we know you, thus 
do we celebrate your glory, as you protect the man of 
action and advancement when the battle of existence 
begins for him, and as you promote the man of self 
control to seek fulfilment of his mind and senses while 
his life lasts in the human body. 


यथा कण्वे मघवन्मेधे अध्वरे दीर्घनीथे दमूंनसि। 
यथा iets असिषासो अद्रिवो मयि गोत्रं हरिश्चिय॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 
10. Yatha kanve maghavan medhe adhvare dirgha- 


nithe damunasi. Yatha gosarye asisaso adrivo 
mayi gotram harisriyam. 


O lord of glory, Indra, as much as you have 
granted for the intellectual, for the scholar teacher, for 


746 RGVEDA 


the yajna, for the long time leader, for the home and for 
the man of self control, so much, O lord of the clouds 
and mountains, pray grant me too for guidance on the 
path to divinity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 51 
Indra Devata, Shrushtigu Kanva Rshi 


यथा मनौ सांव॑रणौ सोममिन्द्रापिबः Ear 
नीपातिथौ मघवन्मेध्यातिथौ पुष्टिगौ shit सचां ।॥ ९॥ 


ly Yatha manau samvaranau somam-indrapibah 
sutam. Nipatithau maghavan medhyatithau 
pustigau Srustigau saca. 


Indra, lord ruler of glory and majesty, just as 
you appreciate and protect the soma of sacred 
knowledge and wisdom treasured in the mind of the 
dedicated thinker, so pray protect, confirm and promote 
the knowledge, wisdom and values treasured in the man 
of deep introspection and spirituality, the lover of purity 
and sanctity of yajnic science, the scholar of physical 
and psychological health and advancement and the man 
of supersensuous perception and instant action. 


पार्षद्वाणः प्रस्कण्वं सम॑सादयच्छर्यानं जिब्रिमुद्दिंतम्‌। 
सहस््राण्यसिषासद्रवामृषिस्त्वोतो दस्य॑वे ges २॥ 


2. Parsadvanah praskanvam samasddayaccha- 
yanam jivrim-uddhitam. Sahasranyasisasad 
gavam-rsistvoto dasyave vrkah. 

When debility of mind and speech took over 


the old, unsettled and depressed intellectual, then the 
sage, inspired and strengthened by you as a thunderbolt 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 51 747 


made him sit in a thousand rays of the sun for treatment 
and cure. 


य उक्थेधिर्नं fared चिकिद्य ऋषिचोद॑नः। 
इन्द्रं तमच्छ वद्‌ नव्य॑स्या मत्यरिष्यन्तं न भोज॑से ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Ya ukthebhirna vindhate cikidya rsicodanah. 
Indram tamaccha vada navyasya matyarisyan- 
tam na bhojase. 


He who is not attained by mere words of song, 
who knows, and who inspires the sages to know, that 
Indra you adore and worship well with sincere mind 
and thought in order to experience the lord as one who 
never hurts anyone, who always loves and blesses. 


यस्मा अर्कं सपसशीं्षाणमानृचुस्मिधातुंमुत्तमे Ue । स त्विषमा 
विर्वा भुव॑नानि चिक्रददादिज्न॑निष्ट Gerri ४॥ 


4. Yasma arkam saptasirsanam-anrcus-tridhatum- 
uttame pade. Sa tvima visva bhuvanani cikrada- 
dadijjanista paumsyam. 

To do honour to Indra, people adore the seven- 
rayed sun in high heaven who lights and sustains three 
worlds of heaven, earth and the middle regions. He 
creates all regions of the universe and thus reveals his 
power and generosity. 


यो AY दाता वसूंनापिन्द्रं तं हूमहे aa 
विदा ह्य॑स्य सुमतिं नवीयसीं गमेम गोम॑ति व्रजे ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Yo no data vasunamindram tam humahe vayam. 
Vidma hyasya sumatim naviyasim gamema 
gomati vraje. 


We invoke and adore Indra who is the giver of 


748 RGVEDA 


wealth, honour and excellence to us. We know and adore 
the gifts of his love and good will ever new and newer 
and pray we may abide in the light of his knowledge 
and follow the paths shown by the light divine. 


यस्मै त्वं व॑सो दानाय शिक्षसि स रायस्पोष॑मश्नुते | 
तं त्वा वयं म॑घवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणः सुताव॑न्तो हवामहे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yasmai tvam vaso danaya Siksasi sa rayaspo- 
samasnute. Tam tva vayam maghavannindra 
girvanah sutavanto havamahe. 


Whoever you enlighten, enable and empower 
to give in charity, O lord of wealth and shelter home of 
the universe, he obtains wealth, sustenance and progress 
further and further. O lord of magnificence and majesty, 
Indra, most adorable and celebrated, blest as we are with 
wealth, excellence and the spirit of homage, we invoke, 
invite and adore you and pray bless us with love, charity 
and grace. 


कदा चन स्तरीरसि नेन्द्र॑ सश्चसि दाशुषे । 
उपोपेन्नु म॑घवन्भूय SF ते दानं देवस्य॑ पृच्यते ॥ ७॥ 
Kada cana starirasi nendra sascasi dasuse. 


Upopennu maghavan bhiya innu te danam deva- 
sya prcyate. 


Never are you unfruitful, never unchari-table, 
you are always with the giver, closer and closer, more 
and more, again and again, O lord of wealth and honour, 
and the charity of divinity ever grows higher and 
promotes the giver. 


प्रयो ननक्षे अभ्योजसा fafa वधेः शुष्णं निघोषयं॑न्‌ | 
यदेदस्त॑म्भीत्प्रथय॑न्नमूं दिवमादिज्जनिष्ट पार्थिवः॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 51 749 


8. Pra yo nanakse abyojasa krivim vadhaih susnam 
nighosayan. Yaded-astambhit prathayann-amum 
divam-adij-janista parthivah. 


When he had expanded and pervaded the 
heavens and firmed the higher regions, seized the cloud 
with his blazing might and struck the drought to naught, 
then he caused the earthly forms of life to emerge. 


यस्यायं विश्व आर्यो are: शेवधिपा 3th: | 
तिरश्चि दर्ये रुमे पवीरवि तुभ्येत्सो अज्यते रयिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Yasyayam visva aryo dasah sevadhipa arih. 
Tirascidarye rusame paviravi tubhet so ajyate 
rayih. 


This entire world whether it is dynamic and 
progressive, or reactionary and slavish, whether it 
guards the wealth of life or destroys it, all this wealth, 
directly or indirectly, is circulating within the presence 
of Indra, the master, awfully armed, destroyer of 
destroyers, to whom it really and ultimately belongs. 


तुरण्यवो मधुमन्तं gave तं विप्रासो अर्कमानृचुः । अस्मे 
रयिः प॑प्रथे वृष्ण्यं शवोऽ स्मे सुवानास इन्द॑वः ॥ Qo UN 


10. = Turanyavo madhumantam ghrtascutam vipraso 
arkamanrcuh. Asme rayih paprathe vrsnyam 
Savo’sme suvanasa indavah. 


Dynamic scholars and vibrant sages offer to 
Indra the song of adoration replete with honey sweets 
and liquid power of exhortation. Let the beauty and 
prosperity of life increase among us, let generous and 
virile strength and vitality grow, and let streams of 
inspiring soma flow. 


750 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 52 
Indra Devata, Ayu Kanva Rshi 


यथा मनौ विवस्वति सोमं शक्रापिंबः qa 
यर्था तरिते छन्द॑ इन्द्र जुजोषस्यायौ मादयसे सचा ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yatha manau vivasvati somam sakrapibah 51114171. 
Yatha trite chanda indra jujosasyayau madayase 
sacd. 


Omnipotent Indra, just as you drink, protect and 
promote the soma of the ecstasy of divine vision distilled 
and collected in the mind of the brilliant meditative sage, 
as you join the divine joy of the devotee who has 
achieved threefold freedom of body, mind and soul, so 
you join the divine joy and celebration at the heart of 
the sage of experience and discriminative vision. 


yaa मेध्ये waRvatiR सुवाने अमंन्दथाः। 
यथा सोयं दशशिप्रे दशोण्ये स्यूम॑रणश्मावृजुंनसि i २॥ 


0.0 Prsadhre medhye matarisvanindra suvane aman- 
dathah. Yatha somam daSasipre dasonye syuma- 
rasmavrjunasi. 

Indra, O divine soul, enjoy soma ecstasy in the 
company of the inspired celebrant, the vibrant sage of 
cosmic imagination, abundantly fulfilled devotee of 
divinity, the realised visionary of the light of knowledge, 
and the sage of natural and simple rectitude. 


य उक्था केव॑ला दधे a: सोमं धृषितापिंलत्‌ । 
यस्म विष्णुस्त्रीणि पदा विचक्रम उपं मित्रस्य धर्मभिः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 52 751 


a Ya uktha kevala dadhe yah somam dhrsitapibat. 
Yasmai visnustrini pada vicakrama upa mitrasya 
dharmabhih. 


Who loves and accepts only the pure, original, 
un-interpolated hymns of the Veda, who is keen for 
victory worthy of the brave and cherishes the joy of 
that ecstatic ambition, for whom Vishnu, lord 
omnipresent, energises the three orders of earth, skies 
and heaven in existence, out of love for him in the 
cosmic law, that is Indra, the divine soul. 


यस्य ahs स्तोमेषु चाकनो वाजे वाजिञ्छतक्रतो | 
तं त्वा वयं सुदुघामिव गोदुहों जुहूमसि श्रवस्यवः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Yasya tvamindra stomesu cakano vaje vajincha- 
takrato. Tam tva vayam sudughamiva goduho 
jJuhumasi sravasyah. 


In whose hymns of adoration and victorious 
deeds you delight, O hero of a hundred grand deeds 
and victory, the same we, seekers of sustenance, honour 
and fame, invoke, you Indra, and pray for blessings as 
milkmen love and treat a generous cow for the gift of 
milk. 


at al arent स न॑ः पिता vet उग्र ईशानकृत्‌। 
अ्यामन्ुग्रो मघवां पुरूवसुर्गोरिश्वंस्य प्र दातु नः ॥ ५ ॥ 
= Yo no data sa nah pita mahan ugra isanakrt. 


Ayamann-ugro maghava puruvasur-gorasvasya 
pra datu nah. 


He who is the giver of every thing for us, he is 
our father, great, illustrious, ruler and creator of ruling 
glory, unretreating, blazing brave, glorious, universal 


752 RGVEDA 


shelter and treasure home of wealth. May he, we pray, 
give us the wealth of lands and cows, knowledge and 
culture, and horses, achievements, success and constant 
progress. 


यस्यै त्वं व॑सो दानाय Hea स रायस्पोष॑मिन्वति। 
वसूयवो वसुपतिं शतक्रतुं स्तोभैरिन्द्रं हवामहे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yasmai tvam danaya mamhase sa rayasposa- 
minvati. Vasuyavo vasupatim Satakratum stomai- 
rindram havamahe. 


O lord of wealth and honour, whoever you ask 
and inspire to give in charity, rises in wealth, health 
and advancement. We, seekers of wealth, honour and 
fame, invoke and glorify Indra, lord ruler and protector 
of the world’s wealth and grandeur, hero of a hundred 
acts of holiness, with hymns of adoration. 


कदा चन प्र युच्छस्युभे नि alfa जन्म॑नी । 
तुरीयादित्य east त इद्धियमा त॑स्थावमूतं दिवि ।॥ ७॥ 
vis Kada cana pra yucchasyubhe ni pasi janmani. 
Turtyaditya havanam ta indriyama tasthava- 
mrtam divi. 
Eternal lord immanent and transcendent, when 
is it you neglect your devotee? Never. You bless both 
lives, this here and the next hereafter. Indeed the very 


call on you in prayer means honour and glory immortal 
which abides in heaven. 


यस्यै त्वं म॑घवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणः शिश्चो शिक्ष॑सि दाशुषे । 
अस्माकं गिर॑ उत सुष्टुतिं व॑सो कण्ववच्छरणुधी हव॑म्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 52 753 


8. Yasmai tvam maghavannindra girvanah 5750 
Siksasi dasuse. Asmakam gira uta sustutim vaso 
kanvavac-chrnudhi havam. 


Indra, lord adorable and glorified, eternal 
teacher, whoever the generous giver you inspire to give, 
and, in response to his charity, you bless, like him and 
like the divine response to prayers of the wise, pray 
listen and accept our adoration and prayer, respond to 
our invocation, O lord of world’s wealth and excellence. 


अस्तावि a पूर्व्य ब्रहयन्द्राय वोचत | 
पूर्वीत्ऋतस्यं बृहतीरनूषत स्तो तुर्मोधा असृक्षत ॥ ९ ॥ 
a Astavi manma purvyam brahmendraya vocata. 


Purvir-rtasya brhatiranusata stoturmedha asrksata. 


Eternal and adorable song of divine praise has 
been presented. Chant that for Indra, the divine soul. 
Sing the grand old hymns of divine law and glorify the 
lord. Inspire and augment the mind and soul of the 
celebrant. 


समिन्द्रो रायो! बृहतीरधूनुत सं क्षोणी समु सूर्य॑म्‌। सं 
शुक्रासः शुच॑यः सं गवाशिरः सोमा इन्द्र॑ममन्दिषुः 1 ९०॥ 


10. Samindro rayo brhatiradhunuta sam ksoni samu 
suryam. Sam sukrasah Sucayah sam gavasirah 
soma indram-amandisuh. 


Let Indra, divine soul, chant and liberate the 
grand abundance of spontaneous divine hymns in 
honour of Indra, let the earth and heaven resound, let 
the hymns reach the sun. Let the pure, powerful and 
sanctified soma abundance of divine celebration please 
Indra, lord omnipotent and omnificent. 


754 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 53 
Indra Devata, Medhya Kanva Rshi 


उपमं cat मघोनां ज्येष्ठं च वृषभाणाम्‌ 
पूर्भित्तमं मघवन्निन्द्र गोविदमीशानं राय ई'महे॥ ९ ॥ 


ly Upamam tva maghonam jyestham ca vrsabha- 
nam. Purbhittamam maghavannindra govida- 
misanam raya imahe. 

Indra, lord of royal magnificence and divine 
glory, for wealth, honour, excellence and magnanimity, 
for charity and generosity, we pray to you, prime symbol 
of the wealthy, powerful and glorious, first and highest 
of the generous and virile, most potent breaker of the 
strongholds of want and ignorance, master of the earth 
and stars and ruler of the universe. 


य आयुं कुत्संमतिधथिग्वमर्दयो वावृधानो दिवेदिंवे। 
तं त्वा वयं हर्य॑श्वं शतक्रतुं वाजयन्तो हवामहे ॥ २॥ 


pa Ya ayum kutsam-atithigvam-ardayo vavrdhano 
divedive. Tam tva vayam haryasvam Satakratum 
vajayanto havamahe. 


Seekers of food and energy, honour and 
excellence, and advancement and success in life, we 
pray to you, lord of a hundred great acts of holiness, 
commander of the dynamic forces of achievement, you 
who give life, thunderbolt of power and justice, and the 
spirit of hospitality to people while you lead them on 
the path of progress day by day. 


आ नो विश्वेषां रसं मध्व॑: सिञ्चन्त्वद्रयः | 
ये परावति सुन्विरे जनेष्वा ये अर्वावतीन्दवः ॥ ३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 53 755 


a A no visvesam rasam madhvah sincantva-drayah. 
Ye paravati sunvire janesva ye arvava-tindavah. 


May the clouds and mountains, and the generous 
sages among people, whether far off or close by who 
distil for us the honey sweet essence of all the facts of 
life, bless us like showers of rain. 


विश्वा द्वेषांसि जहि ara चा कुधि विश्वे सन्वन्त्वा वसु । 
शषटिषु चित्ते मदिरासो अंशवो यत्रा सोम॑स्य तृम्पसि ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Visva dvesamsi jahi cava ca krdhi visve sanvantva 
vasu. Sistesu citte madiraso amSavo yatra soma- 
sya trmpasi. 


Indra, divine soul, destroy all hate and enmities, 
protect the yajamana and others, do good, let all create 
all wealth and joys of the world in the heart of the 
educated and cultured where you drink and enjoy the 
exhilarating draughts of soma. 


इन्द्र नेदीय ufefe मितमेधाभिरूतिभिः। 

आ शन्तम शन्त॑माभिरभिष्िंथिरा स्वापि स्वापिभिः ॥५॥ 
Indra nediya edihi mitamedhabhir-utibhih. 

A samtama samtamabhir-abhistibhira svape 

svapibhih. 

Indra, closest power divine, come at the earliest 
with sure protections of definite resolution of mind. Lord 
of supreme peace, come with most peaceful fulfilment 
of desire, come, dear friend, with most friendly powers 
of protection and progress. 

आजितुरं सत्प॑तिं विश्वचर्षण कृधि प्रजास्वाभ॑गम्‌ । 
प्रसू तिराशचीभिर्ये त॑ उक्थिनः क्रतुं पुनत आनुषक्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


756 RGVEDA 


6. Ajituram satpatim visvacarsanim krdhi prajasva- 
bhagam. Pra si tira sacibhirye ta ukthinah kratum 
punata anusak. 


Create among the people and their coming 
generations that power, prosperity and grandeur which 
gives victory and progress, protects and promotes truth 
and the good people, and which is universally good, 
positive and creative. With your noble powers and 
actions help and save those who are your celebrants 
and perform noble yajnic actions in your honour with 
love and faith. 


यस्ते साधिष्ठोऽ da ते स्याम भरेषुते। 
वयं होत्राभिरुत देवहूतिभिः ससवांसो मनामहे ॥ ७ ॥ 


i: Yaste sadhistho’vase te syama bharesu te. Vayam 
hotrabhiruta devahutibhih sasavamso manamahe. 


Whoever is the most efficient and eligible for 
your love and protection, we pray, the same we may be 
to achieve in your divine projects and obligations. 
Seekers of honour and excellence, with all our 
invocations, homage and service to the divinities, we 
adore you and pray for protection and advancement. 


अहं हि ते हरिवो ब्रह्य वाजयुराजिं यापि सदोतिभिः। 
त्वामिदेव तममे सम॑श्वयुर्गन्युरगरे मथीनाम्‌॥ i 

8. Aham hi te harivo brahma vajayurajim yami 
sadotibhih. Tvamideva tamame samasvayur- 
gavyur-agre mathinam. 


O lord omnipotent, you are the master and 
controller of the powers and dynamics of the world. 
Seeker of strength and victory, always by virtue of your 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 54 757 


protections I go forward to any great battle. Seeker of 
victory and earthly prosperity, I depend on you only, 
first and foremost of the warriors of the world. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 54 

Indra (1, 2, 5-8), Vishvedevah (3-4) Devatah, 
Matarishva Kanva Rshi 

एतत्त इन्द्र वीर्य' गीर्भिर्गणन्तिं cara: | 

ते स्तोभन्त ऊर्जमावन्घतश्चुतं पौरासो नक्षन्धीतिभिः॥ ९॥ 


1. Etat ta indra viryam girbhir-grnanti karavah. Te 
stobhanta urjamavan ghrtascutam pauraso 
naksan dhitibhih. 


Indra, gracious lord of omnipotence, poets and 
artists with their holy voices, celebrate and exalt this 
virility, valour and heroism of yours. Singing and 
celebrating, they obtain energy and self-assurance, and 
the people, with their thoughts, actions and meditation 
realise joy, ananda, of the highest gracious order. 


नक्ष॑न्त इन्द्रमवसे सुकृत्यया येषां सुतेषु मन्द॑से | 
यथां संवर्ते अमदो यथां कृश एवास्मे इन्द्र मत्स्व ॥ २॥ 


0 Naksanta indramavase sukrtyaya yesam sutesu 
mandase. Yatha samvarte amado yatha krsa 
evasme indra matsva. 


Indra, the people, in whose realised strength and 
joy you delight, obtain honour and grace by their noble 
action. We pray just as you take delight in the acts of 
the self-controlled man and appreciate the limitations 
of the attenuated, so accept and cherish whatever 
homage we are able to offer for protection and grace. 


758 RGVEDA 


आ नो विश्वे स॒जोष॑सो देवासो गन्तनोप नः। 
वस॑वो द्रा अव॑से न आ ग॑मञ्चछण्वन्तुं मरुतो हवं॑म्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


a: A no 1751८ sajosaso devaso gantanopa nah. 
Vasavo rudra avase na ठ gamanchrnvantu maruto 
havam. 


Let all friends and divinities of the world come 
to us and bless. Let all Vasus such as earth, all Rudras 
such as pranic energies, come and bless us for our 
protection and sustenance, and may the Maruts, 
vibrations of divinity and high priests of yajna, listen to 
our call and come with gifts of grace. 


पूषा विष्णुर्हवनं मे सर॑स्वत्यवंन्तु ससर सिन्धवः | 
आपो वातः पर्वतासो वनस्पतिः श्रुणोतु पृथिवी हव॑म्‌ ॥  ॥ 


4. Pusa visnur-havanam me sarasvatyavantu sapta 
sindhavah. Apo vatah parvataso vanaspatih 
Srnotu prthivi havam. 


May Pusha, sun and other powers of 
nourishment, Vishnu, omnipresent divine power, 
Sarasvati, divine vibrations of cosmic awareness, and 
the seven seas attend to my call, honour it and protect 
me. May Apah, nature’s flow of liquid energies, Vatah, 
the winds, mountains and the clouds, herbs and trees 
and the earth perceive my call and help. 


यदिन्द्र राधो अस्तिं ते arent weer | 
तेन॑ नो बोधि सधमाद्यो वृधे भगो दानाय॑ वृत्रहन्‌ ॥ ५ UI 
= Yadindra radho asti te maghonam maghavatta- 


ma. Tena no bodhi sadhamadyo vrdhe bhago 
danaya vrtrahan. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 54 759 


Indra, lord of highest glory among the powerful, 
your munificence and power of accomplishment under 
control of your majesty is great. By that power of 
majesty, O lord of honour and liberal grandeur, friend 
of the house of yajnic celebration, destroyer of evil and 
want, enlighten us for advancement and inspire us with 
the spirit of charity. 


sufstaa नृपते त्वमिद्धि नो वाज आ afer सुक्रतो। 
तीती होत्राभिरुत देववीतिभिः ससवांसो वि श्युण्विरे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ajipate nrpate tvamiddhi no vaja a vaksi sukrato. 
Viti hotrabhiruta devavitibhih sasavamso vi 
Srnvire. 


Guide and protector of our struggles and our 
people in struggle for advancement, ruler of the human 
nation, inspirer of noble acts of charity, you alone 
conduct us successfully through our battles for progress. 
Seekers of honour and excellence win fame and glory 
by cherished yajnic performers and their service and 
devotion to the divinities of nature and humanity. 


सन्ति aie आशिष इन्द्र आयुर्जनानाम्‌ | 
अस्मान्न्॑चस्व मघवन्चुपाव॑से धुश्चस्वं पिप्युषीमिष॑म्‌॥ ७॥ 


a Santi hyarya asisa indra ayurjananam. Asman 
naksasva maghavannupavase dhuksasva pipyu- 
simisam. 


The hopes and ambitions and the health and age 
of humanity depend on Indra, lord of the world and 
humanity. O lord of glory, pray accept us close to you 
for the sake of protection and advancement and bless 
us with energy and inspiration to rise high. 


760 RGVEDA 


वयं त॑ इन्द्र स्तोमेभिर्विधेम्‌ त्वमस्माकं शतक्रतो | 
महिं स्थूरं शंशयं राधो sea प्रस्कण्वाय नि तोशय ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Vayam ta indra stomebhir-vidhema tvamasma- 


kam Satakrato. Mahi sthuram sasayam radho 
ahrayam praskanvaya ni toSaya. 


Indra, lord of glory, we do homage to you with 
hymns of adoration. O lord of a hundred acts of kindness 
and magnificence, bless the dedicated sage with great, 
lasting, dynamic competence for success which is 
creditable and honourable. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 55 
Indra, Praskanva Danastuti Devata, Krsha Kanva Rshi 
भूरीदिन्द्र॑स्य वीर्य व्यख्य॑मभ्याय॑ति। 
राधस्ते दस्यवे TH ॥ ९॥ 
im Bhuridindrasya viryam vyakhyamabhyayati. 
Radhaste dasyave vrka. 
Let me describe in detail the heroic power of 
Indra. O destroyer of the violent and wicked, your 


strength and competence against the destroyer shines 
all round, that’s your bounty and grandeur. 


शातं vaara उक्षणो दिवि तारो न रोचन्ते। 
Wat दिवं न त॑स्तभुः ॥ २॥ 


2. Satam svetasa uksano divi taro na rocante. 
Mahna divam na tastabhuh. 


Hundreds of brilliant acts of virile generosity 
shine like stars in the skies as if with your might and 
grandeur they hold up the heavens of light. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 55 761 


शतं वेणूञ्छतं we: शतं चर्मणि म्त्छातानिं। 
शतं मे बल्बजस्तुका अरुषीणां चतुःशतम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


Di Satam venunchatam sunah satam carmani 
mlatani. Satam me balbajastuka arusinam catuh- 
Satam. 


Hundred clusters of trees, hundred other such 
gifts of generosity, hundred shields well polished, 
hundred bundles of grass and four hundred fields of 
shining fertile land, that’s the gift of generous Indra. 


सुदेवाः स्थ॑ काण्वायना वयोवयो विचरन्तं: | 
अश्वासो न च॑ङ्क्रमत ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sudevah stha kanvayana vayovayo vicarantah. 
Asvaso na cankramata. 


Celebrants of knowledge and wisdom, teachers 
and students, be good, generous and brilliant, go on 
strong and stronger, moving and rising higher and higher 
like real men of ambition. 


आदित्साप्स्य॑ चकर चनानुंनस्य महि sta: । 
श्यावीरतिध्वसन्पथश्चक्षुषा चन संनशे ॥ ५॥ 


>. Adit saptasya carkirann-anunasya mahi Sravah. 
Syaviratidhvasan pathascaksusa cana samnase. 


And then do honour to the greatness and glory 
of the perfect lord of sevenfold world of existence, Indra. 
The man who can cross through the darkest paths of 
life can see and attain to the lord even through his own 
eyes. 


762 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 56 


Indra, Praskanva Danastuti (1-4), Agni-Surya Devatah, 
Prshadhra Kanva Rshi 


प्रतिं ते दस्यवे वृक teil अदश्यहयम्‌। 
art प्रथिना शवं: ॥ ९॥ 


ie Prati te dasyave vrka radho adarsyahrayam. 
Dyaurna prathina savah. 


O scourge of the evil, your power and generosity 
is blameless and admirable, and your power and glory, 
expansive as the light of heaven is seen shining through 
space. 


aol मह्यं पौतक्रतः सहस्रा दस्य॑वे वृकः । 
नित्याद्रायो अमंहत ॥ २॥ 

2. Dasa mahyam pautakratah sahasra dasyave 
vrkah. Nityadrayo amamhata. 


The heroic ruler, scourge of evil and the 
grabbers, doing good and blameless actions, gives me 
ten thousand gifts and grants from the wealth of his 
regular collections. 


शातं मे गर्दभानां शतमूणी वतीनाम्‌ । 
शातं दासां अति स्रजं: ॥ ३ ॥ 
of Sata me gardabhanam satamurnavatinam. 
Satam dasan ati srajah. 
He gives me a hundred mules, a hundred woolly 


sheep, and grants me a hundred permanent assistants 
and garlands of honour. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 57 763 


तत्रो अपि प्राणीयत पूतक्रतायै व्य॑क्ता | 
अश्वानामिन्न Feary ४ ॥ 
4. Tatro api praniyata putakratayai vyakta. 
Asvanaminna yuthyam. 
And therein too, for the sake of greater and 
nobler strength and efficiency, the dynamic leader 


infused exceptional collective strength and spirit as if 
of a regiment of horse. 


अचेत्यथिश्चिंकितुर्हव्यवादट्‌ स सुमद्र थः। अभिः शुक्रेण 
शोचिषा बृहत्सूरों अरोचत दिवि सूर्यो अरोचत ॥ ५ ॥ 
>. AcetyagniS-cikitur-havyavat sa sumadrathah. 


Agnih sukrena socisa brhat suro arocata divi 
suryo arocata. 


Agni is self-conscious, enlightens and, self- 
conducted on its own waves of radiation, carries the 
fragrance of yajnic havi as well as the light of knowledge 
from the vedi all round. Agni, brave and expansive like 
space shines with the flames of fire and purity and blazes 
with splendour like the sun in heaven. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 57 
Ashvinau Devate, Medhya Kanva Rshi 
युवं देवा क्रतुना पूर्व्येण युक्ता रथंन तविषं य॑जत्रा । 
आगच्छतं नासत्या शचीभिरिदं तृतीयं सव॑नं पिबाथः ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Yuvam deva kratuna purvyena yukta rathena 
tavisam yajatra. Agacchatam nasatya sactbhi- 
ridam trttyam savanam pibathah. 


Brilliant and generous, adorable and sociable 


764 RGVEDA 


divinities of eternal truth, Ashvins, harbingers of new 
knowledge, come with the ancient light and knowledge 
collected by forefathers and updated by you. Come fast 
as light with beauty and splendour of your powers, join 
the third session of our yajna and promote and vitalise 
it further. 


युवां देवास्त्रय एकादशासः सत्याः सत्यस्य॑ SITS पुरस्तात्‌। 
अस्माकं यज्ञं सर्व॑नं जुषाणा पातं सोम॑मण्विना दीद्य॑ग्नी ॥। २॥ 


(१ Yuvam devastraya ekadasasah satyah satyasya 
dadrse purastat. Asmakam yajnam savanam 
jusana patam somamasvina didyagni. 


Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge, 
thirty-three divinities, eternally true, have revealed to 
you the truth of their reality. Friendly and loving, 
brilliant as the light and fire of Agni, come to our yajna, 
taste, protect and promote the soma of our yajnic 
endeavour for further progress than before. 


ward तद॑श्विना कृतं वां वृषभो दिवो रज॑सः पृथिव्याः | 
सहस्रं शंसा उत ये ast सर्वा sat उप॑ याता पिब॑ध्यै ।॥ ३ ॥ 


छ Panayyam tadasvina krtam vam vrsabho divo 
rajasah prthivyah . Sahasram samsa uta ye gavi- 
stau sarvan it tan upa yata pibadhyai. 


Praiseworthy is that performance of yours, 
Ashvins, harbingers of new light, which is generous 
and rewarding, full of the light of heaven, showers of 
the cloud from the sky and generosity of the earth. Pray 
now come, assess and advance all those thousands of 
advancements we are pursuing in the field of earth 
sciences, solar energy and the development of cattle 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 58 765 
wealth, all of which are worthy of appreciation. 


अयं वां भागो निहितो यजत्रेमा गिरो area यातम्‌। 
पिब॑तं सोमं मधुमन्तमस्मे प्र दाश्वांसमवतं शचीभिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam vam bhago nihito yajatrema giro nasatyopa 
yatam. Pibatam somam madhuman-tamasme pra 
dasvamsam-avatam Sacibhih. 


Ashvins, harbingers of knowledge, adorable 
guides worthy of association and cooperation, this part 
of our yajnic pursuit of knowledge and development is 
reserved for you. O seekers of truth, committed to truth, 
come and listen to what we have to say, share and enjoy 
the soma pleasure of the honey sweets of peaceful 
advancements in knowledge, and with your powers and 
blessed actions protect and promote the generous and 
committed yajaka who surrenders to you in faith and 
obedience. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 58 
Vishvedevah or Rtvijah Devatah, Medhya Kanva Rshi 


wakes बहुधा कल्पय॑न्तः सच॑तसो यज्ञमिमं वर्ह॑न्ति। 
यो अनूचानो ब्राह्यणो युक्त आंसीत्का स्वित्तत्र यज॑मानस्य 
संवित्‌॥ ९॥ 


i Yamrtvijo bahudha kalpayantah sacetaso yajnam- 
imam vahanti. Yo anucano brahmano yukta asit 
ka svit tatra yajamanasya samvit. 


In the yajna of existence and human life, which 
the yajakas, Vishvedevas, natural forces of divinity in 
the cosmic yajna, and human senses and mind in the 
individual yajna of life, all vital, alert and expert in their 


766 RGVEDA 


own ways, organise, conduct and carry on harmoniously 
in many different participative ways, and in the same 
yajna when some pious, intelligent and fortunate soul 
in communion is joined with the supreme divinity of 
the yajna, then in that state of samadhi what is the nature 
and character of this yajamana’s state of knowledge and 
spiritual awareness? 


एकं एवाग्निर्बहुधा समिद्ध एकः सूर्यो विश्वमनु Waa: | 
wha: सर्वमिदं वि भात्येकं वा इदं वि ब॑भूव 
सर्वम्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Eka evagnir-bahudha samiddha ekah suryo 
visvamanu prabhitah. Ekaivosah sarvamidam vi 
bhatyekam va idam vi babhuva sarvam. 


The nature of awareness in communion is this, 
and this same is the understanding of an intelligent soul: 
Only one Agni, fire, lighted in many ways, only one 
sun risen all over the world, only one dawn rising daily 
anew, lights this entire world, and only one universal 
spirit pervades this entire universe, the entire existence 
is one. 


ज्योतिष्मन्तं केतुमन्तं त्रिचक्रं सुखं रथं सुषदं भूरिं वारम्‌ । 
चित्रामघा यस्य योगेऽ धिजज्ञे तं वां ga अति रिक्तं 
पिब॑ध्यै 3 


3: Jyotismantam ketumantam tricakram sukham 
ratham susadam bhurivaram. Citramagha yasya 
yoge’dhijajne tam vam huve ati riktam pibadhyai. 

Further: Of you all Vishvedevas, the one that is 


self-refulgent, self-revealing, three wheeled-one 
centred, blissful, gloriously moving, a seat of bliss, full 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 59 767 


of treasure, by the power and inspiration of which the 
dawn of light arises and illuminates the world, that 
supreme spirit I invoke for you and call you to 
experience the absolute bliss beyond the relative. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 59 
Indra-Varunau Devate, Suparna Kanva Rshi 


Sart वां भागधेर्यानि सिस्रत इन्द्रावरुणा प्र महे सुतेषु 
वाम्‌। यज्ञेयज्ञे ह सर्व॑ना भुरण्यथो यत्सुन्वते यज॑मानाय 
शिक्षथः ॥ ९॥ 


iP Imani vam bhagaheyani sisrata indravaruna pra 
mahe sutesu vam. Yajneyajne ha savana bhuran- 
yatho yat sunvate yajamanaya Ssiksathah. 


Indra and Varuna, power and judgement of 
divinity, these are your contributions to life which in 
this grand yajna of human life vibrate in the yajnic 
projects of life inspired by you: In every yajna of life 
you energise and shine the holy activities when you bless 
and inspire the yajamana who creates and contributes 
to the joy of life. 


निष्षिध्व॑रीरोष॑धीराप॑ं आस्तामिन्द्रावरुणा महिमान॑मारत। 
या frag रज॑सः पारे अध्व॑नो ययोः शत्रुर्नकिरादेव 
ओहते ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Nissadhvartrosadhirapa astam-indravaruna 
mahimanam-daSata. Ya sisratu rajasah pare adh- 
vano yayoh satrur-nakiradeva ohate. 

Indra and Varuna, powers of natural energy and 


natural selection for evolution and growth, herbs and 
trees, waters and liquid flows attain efficiency and rise 


768 RGVEDA 


higher in munificence when you cross the paths across 
the skies, come and vibrate, and there is no defiling 
power in operation to negate your efficacy. 


सत्यं तदिन्द्रावरुणा pera वां मध्व॑ ऊर्मिं दुहते सस 
वाणीं: । ताभि॑द्‌श्विांसंमवतं शुभस्पती यो वामदब्धो अभि 
पाति चित्तिंभिः॥ ३॥ 


ai Satyam tadindravaruna krsasya vam madhva 
urmim duhate sapta vanth. Tabhir-dasvamsam- 
avatam saubhaspati yo vamadabdho abhi pati 
cittibhih. 


Indra and Varuna, symbolic powers of love, 
judgement and social cohesion, true it is that for you 
the sevenfold voices of the dedicated sage distil the 
honey sweet vibrations of divine energy in your service 
and with these you, protectors and promoters of the good 
and auspiciousness of life, strengthen and advance the 
generous yajaka who, with sincere thoughts and actions, 
without fear, serves and augments you with devotion 
and resolution. 


घृतप्रुषः सौम्यां जीरदानवः wa स्वसार: wea see | 
या ह॑ वामिन्द्रावरुणा घृतश्चु तस्ताभिर्धत्तं यज॑मानाय 
शिक्षतम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ghrtaprusah saumya jiradanavah sapta svasarah 
sadana rtasya. Ya ha vamindravaruna ghrtascu- 
tas-tabhirdhattam yajamanaya siksatam. 


Endowed with gifts of goodness and grace, kind 
and generous, givers of life energy, seven sisters of 
yours, five senses, mind and intellect, O Indra and 
Varuna, loving and judicious divine powers of humanity, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 59 769 


in this house of truth and divine law of yajna in human 
life, are replete with the beauty and splendour of life. 
With these, pray bring in the knowledge and wisdom of 
divinity and nature revealed by the sages and enlighten 
the yajamana. 


अवोचाम महते Sina स॒त्यं त्वेषाभ्यां महिमान॑मिद्धियम्‌। 
अस्मान्त्स्विन्द्रावरुणा घृतश्चु तस्त्रिभिंः साप्तेभिरवतं 
शुभस्पती ॥ ५॥ 


>. Avocama mahate saubhagaya satyam tvesa- 
bhyam mahimanam-indriyam. Asmantsvin- 
dravaruna ghrtascutastribhih saptebhiravatam 
subhaspati. 


We speak and celebrate, for the sake of great 
goodness and prosperity, the truth, grandeur and power, 
honour and excellence received from the mighty and 
magnificent Indra and Varuna. O Indra and Varuna, 
gracious and benevolent protectors of the greatness and 
goodness of life, protect and promote us by the sevenfold 
voice of the seven sisters and seven sages at the three 
levels of body, mind and soul. 


इन्द्रवरुणा यदूषिभ्यो मनीषां वाचो पतिं श्रुतम॑दत्तमगर । 
यानि स्थानान्यसृजन्त धीरा यज्ञं त॑न्वानास्तप॑साभ्य॑- 
पश्यम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Indravaruna yadrsibhyo manisam vaco matim 
Srutam-adattam-agre. Yani sthananyasrjanta 
dhira yajnamtanvanas-tapasabhyapasyam. 

Indra and Varuna, divine powers of vigour and 


intelligence, judgement and imagination, what words 
of knowledge and thoughts of wisdom by virtue of 


770 RGVEDA 


meditation, study and speech you gave to the sages of 
vision earlier, and what orders of discovery and 
invention through yajnic extension of research, the 
patient, persistent sages achieved later, all these, with 
my austere discipline of study and application, let me 
see and realise for myself. 


इन्द्रावरुणा सौमनसमदुसं रायस्पोषं यज॑मानेषु TL प्रजां 
पुष्टिं भूतिमस्मासु धत्तं दीर्घायुत्वाय प्र तिरतं न आयुः ॥ ७॥ 


fe Indravarunad saumanasamadrptam rayasposam 
yajamanesu dhattam. Prajam pustim bhutim- 
asmasu dhattam dirghayuvaya pra tiratam na 
ayuh. 


Indra and Varuna, good disposition, wealth and 
advancement free from pride, bear and bring to bless 
the yajamana. Progeny, vigorous health, and prosperity, 
bring for us, prolong our life for us to enjoy the beauty 
of living for as long as possible. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 60 
Agni Devata, Bharga Pragatha Rshi 


अग्र आ atafatuetalt त्वा वृणीमहे । 
आ त्वाम॑नक्तु प्रय॑ता हविष्म॑ती यजिष्ठं बर्हिरासदे ug i 


1. Agna त yahyagnibhir-hotaram tva vrnimahe. A 
tvam-anaktu prayata havismati yajistham barhi- 
rasade. 


Agni, universal fire of life, come with other fires 
such as the sun. We opt to worship you alone, the cosmic 
yajamana. The yajaka people holding ladlefuls of havi 
would honour and celebrate you and seat you on the 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 771 
holy grass. 


अच्छा fe cat सहसः सूनो अङ्धिर : स्त्ुचश्चरन्त्यध्वरे | 
ऊर्जो नपातं घृतकेशामीमहेऽयिं यज्ञेषु, पूर्व्यम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 Accha hi tva sahasah suno angirah srucas-ca- 
rantyadhvare. Urjo napatam ghrtakesamimahe’- 
gnim yajnesu puryam. 


Agni, creator of energy and power, dear as 
breath of life omnipresent, the ladles of ghrta feed you 
well in the holy fire of yajna. We honour and adore the 
divine fire, prime power, infallible product of cosmic 
energy and rising in flames in yajnas. 


अगे कविर्वेधा असि erat ura seat: | 
मन्द्रो ast अध्वरेष्वीड्यो विप्रेभिः शुक्र aaa: 3 


3; Agne kavirvedha asi hota pavaka yaksyah. 
mandro yajistho adhvaresvidyo viprebhih sukra 
manmabhih. 


Agni is the poet of the cosmos which is his 
poem. He is maker and disposer of the universe, chief 
performer of cosmic yajna, purifier and sanctifier of the 
polluted, loving and adorable. O lord of power and 
purity, you are blissful, most honourable and 
companionable, adored by sages in yajnas with hymns 
of love and worship. 


अद्रोघमा dart dfasa cat अजस्र वीतये । अभि 
प्रयांसि सुधिता व॑सो गहि मन्द॑स्व धीतिभिर्हितः nw 
4. Adroghama vahosato yavisthya devan ajasra 


vitaye. Abhi prayamsi sudhita vaso gahi manda- 
sva dhitibhir-hitah. 


772 RGVEDA 


Most youthful Agni, eternal power and presence, 
bring the loving and generous divinities to receive the 
homage and bless the innocent and guileless yajaka. O 
lord of the world’s wealth, haven and home of all, accept 
the most cherished offerings and, adored with our 
sincere thoughts and acts of yajna, rejoice yourself. 


त्वमित्सप्रथा sre! त्रातऋतस्कविः। त्वां विप्रासः 
समिधान दीदिव आ विवासन्ति aera: ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Tvamit sapratha asyagne tratar-rtaskavih. Tvam 
viprasah samidhana didiva a vivasanti vedhasah. 


Agni, you are infinitely expansive, boundless, 
all saviour, eternally right poet of cosmic rectitude, 
omniscient creator. Self-refulgent ever, light of the 
universe, the wise sages and masters of law and right 
action glorify you as the lord supreme. 


शोचा शोचिष्ठ दीदिहि fast मयो रास्व॑ स्तोत्रे Tet असि। 
देवानां शर्मन्मम॑ सन्तु सूरयः शत्रूषाहः FATS: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Soca Socistha didihi vise mayo rasva stotre mahan 
asi. Devanam Sarman mama santu surayah 
Satrusahah svagnayah. 


Lord most pure and refulgent, rise and shine and 
enlighten the world. Bless the people and the celebrants 
with peace and goodness. You are great and glorious. 
May our wise and brilliant leaders enjoy the goodwill 
of the divinities, be keepers of the holy fire and 
controllers of hate and enmities. 


यथा चिद्‌ qed este fe arf 
एवा द॑ह मित्रमहो यो अंस्मश्ुग्दर्मन्मा कश्च वेन॑ति ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 773 


7. Yatha cid vrddham-atasm-agne samyjurvasi ksami. 
Eva daha mitramaho yo asmadhrug durmanma 
८८5८८ venati. 


Agni, just as you burn to dust the withered wood 
on the earth, so, O greatest friend, pray burn him to 
naught whoever hates us and thinks ill of us. 


मानो adda रिपवे रक्चस्विने माघशंसाय fre: | 
अस्त्रैधद्धिस्तरणिंभिर्यविछ्य शिवेभिः पाहि पायुभिः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ma no martaya ripave raksasvine maghasam- 
saya riradhah. Asredhadbhis-taranibhir- 
yavisthya Sivebhih pahi payubhih. 


Throw us not to the mortal who is an enemy, 
demoniac and a sinner. O lord most youthful, keep us 
and protect us with the non-violent, the saviours, good 
and peaceful, protectors of the good. 


पाहि नों अग्र एकया पाह्यु4त द्वितीय॑या । 
पाहि गीर्भिस्तिसृभिंरूर्जा पते पाहि च॑तसृभिर्वसो ॥ ९ ॥ 


a Pahi no agna ekaya pahyuta dvitiyaya. Pahi 
girbhis-tisrbhirurjam pate pahi catasrbhir-vaso. 


Agni, save us by the first voice, and by the 
second, by three voices, and, O lord of cosmic power, 
ultimate haven and home of existence, save us by the 
four. 


(This is a very simple and yet a most 
comprehensive verse. The first voice could be the voice 
of average humanity; second, words of the sages; third, 
voice of the soul; fourth, the voice of divinity. Another 
way to understand: One, two, three or all the four Veda’s 


7714 RGVEDA 


voice. Yet another: voice of the soul in the rising 
sequence of the four mantras of Aum as described in 
the Upanishads. And then the four stages of language 
in the descending order from divine to the human: Para, 
Pashyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari) 


ule विश्व॑स्माद्रक्षसो अराव्णः प्र स्प वाजेषु नोऽव। 
त्वामिद्धि Afes देवतातय आपिं नक्षामहे वृधे ॥ go tl 


10. Pahi visvasmad-raksaso aravnah pra sma vajesu 
no’va. Tvamiddhi nedistham devatataya apim 
naksamahe vrdhe. 


Save us from all evils of the world, from all 
selfish grabbers. Protect us in our struggles and lead us 
to victory. We approach you and pray to you, closest to 
us, our own, for the success of our divine yajna and 
rising advancement in life. 


आ नो अग्ने वयो वृधं रयिं पावक शंस्य॑म्‌। 
रास्वा च न उपमाते पुरुस्पृहं सुनीती स्वय॑शस्तरम्‌ ११ ॥ 


11. Ano agne vayovrdham rayim pavaka Samsyam. 
Rasva ca na upamate purusprham suniti svaya- 
Sastaram. 


Agni, saviour and purifier of life, closest and 
friendly, give us wealth which is admirable and leads to 
progress in food, health and age and cattle wealth. Give 
us the way of life leading to universally loved wealth, 
honour and excellence, renowned and rising. 


येन वंसाम पृत॑नासु शर्धतस्तरन्तो अर्यं safest: a त्वं 
नो वर्धं प्रय॑सा शचीवसो जिन्वा धियो वसुविद्‌: ॥ ९२॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 7715 


12. Yena vamsama prtanasu Sardhatas-taranto arya 
adisah. Sa tvam no vardha prayasa Sacivaso jinva 
dhiyo vasuvidah. 


Give us the wealth of competence by which, 
rising in strength and power, moving forward, 
countering opposite intentions, designs and plans, we 
may defeat our enemies in the battles of life. O lord of 
knowledge, power and action, help us advance with food 
and sustenance, inspire and enlighten our vision and 
intelligence in action so that we may rise to be masters 
of wealth, honour and excellence. 


शिशानो वृषभो य॑था्िः srg afaeaq | 
तिग्मा stea हन॑वो न प्रतिधृषे सुजम्भः सह॑सो य हः ॥ ९३॥ 


13.  Sigano vrsabho yathagnih 5170८ davidhvat. Tigma 
asya hanavo na pratidhrse sujambhah sahaso 
yahuh. 


Just as a bull whets and brandishes his horns 
against his rival, so does Agni shake his opponents. Fiery 
is his visor, strong his jaws, mighty his courage, he is 
invincible, uncounterable, irresistible. 


नहि a अग्रे वृषभ प्रतिधृषे जम्भासो यद्धितिष्ट॑से। 
सत्वं नो होतः Wed हविष्करधि creat नो वायीं पुरु ॥ ९४ i 
14. Nahi te agne vrsabha pratidhrse jambhaso 


yadvitisthase. Sa tvam no hotah suhutam havi- 
skrdhi vamsva no varya puru. 


Agni when you rise and expand no one can brave 
your flaming jaws. Pray accept our homage and make it 
fruitful. Give us ample wealth of our choice and desire. 


7716 RGVEDA 


शोषे वनेषु मात्रोः सं त्वा मतीस इन्धते | 
अत॑न्द्रो हव्या व॑हसि हविष्कृत आदि देवेषु राजसि ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Sese vanesu matroh sam tva martasa indhate. 
Atandro havya vahasi haviskrta adid devesu 
rajasi. 

You pervade in the forests and in the earth upto 
heaven. The mortals light and raise you holily, and, 
without sloth or delay, you carry the sacred offerings of 
the devoted celebrants to the divinities over earth and 
heaven and shine among them. 


सप्र होतौर स्तमिदीव्ते aise सुत्यजमह॑यम्‌। 
यिनत्स्यद्वं तप॑सा वि शोचिषा oral fas जनाँ sift ९६॥ 


16. Sapta hotaras-tamidilate tva’gne sutyajamahra- 
yam. Bhinatsyadrim tapasa vi Socisa pragne tistha 
janan ati. 

Agni, seven yajakas adore and serve you, all 
giver, imperishable and eternal. You cleave the 
mountains and expand and evaporate the clouds with 
your heat and flames of fire. Pray, Agni, stay among the 
people at the closest and rise high. 


sah वो अधिंगुं हुवेम वृक्तबर्हिषः | 
sift हितप्रयसः शश्वतीष्वाऽऽ होतारं चर्षणीनाम्‌ ९७॥ 
17. Agnimagnim vo adhrigum huvema vrktabar- 
hisah. Agnim hitaprayasah Sasvatisva’’ hotaram 
carsaninam. 
For your sake, O people of the world, we on the 


seats of holy grass invoke Agni, one form after another 
of the irresistible universal power of nature and divinity, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 777 


and having collected our offerings ready, we light and 
serve the fire, high priest of cosmic yajna among all the 
communities of humanity over the lands. 


केतेन शर्मन्त्सचते सुषामण्यग्ने तुभ्यं चिक्कित्वनां। 
इषण्यया नः पुरुरूपमा भ॑र॒ वाजं नेदिछमूतये।॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Ketena Sarmant-sacate susamanyagne tubhyam 
cikitvana. Isanyaya nah pururupama bhara vajam 
nedistham-utaye. 


Agni loves to associate with the house of yajna 
where Sama hymns are chanted. O lord of light, Agni, 
the yajakas wait for you with anxious expectation and 
signs of welcome. Pray come with all your love and 
desire for us and bless us with the food, energy and 
holy ambition of all forms dearest to our heart for our 
protection and advancement. 


अग्रे जरितर्विश्पतिस्तेपानो देव tara: | 
अप्रोषिवान्गृहप॑तिर्महं असि दिवस्पायुर्दुरोणयुः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Agne jaritar-vispatis-tepano deva raksasah. 
Aprosivan grhapatir-mahan asi divaspayur- 
duronayuh. 


Agni, universally adored, master ruler and 
protector of the people, scourge of the selfish and wicked, 
refulgent and generous, supreme protective presence of 
the home that never neglects or forsakes the inmates, 
you are great protector of happiness and heavens too, 
and abide in the heart and home of humanity. 


मानो ta आ वेशीदाघृणीवसो मा यातु्यीतुमाव॑ताम्‌ । 
परो गव्यूत्यनिंरामप aera Gel रक्चस्विन॑ः ॥ २०॥ 


778 RGVEDA 


20. Mano raksa a vesidaghrnivaso ma yaturyatum- 
avatam. Parogavyutyaniramapa ksudhamagne 
sedha raksasvinah. 


O refulgent lord protector of world’s wealth, let 
no evil force enter our life, let no violence of the 
malignant injure us. O lord of light, Agni, cast off 
starvation, poverty and all demoniac forces far away 
from us. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 61 
Indra Devata, Bharga Pragatha Rshi 


उभयं श्रुणव॑च्य न इन्द्रो अर्वागिदं ae: | 
wart मघवा सोम॑पीतये धिया शविष्ठ आ ग॑मत्‌॥ ९॥ 


LZ Ubhayam srnavacca na indro arvagidam vacah. 
Satracya maghava somapitaye dhiya Savistha a 
gamat. 


May Indra, lord omnipotent, master of the 
world’s wealth and power, directly listen to our joint 
prayer for worldly and spiritual advancement with 
attentive ear and sympathetic understanding, and may 
the lord of supreme power come to protect and promote 
our yajnic programme and prayer and taste the pleasure 
of success. 


तं हि स्वराजं वृषभं तमोज॑से धिषणे निष्टतक्षतुः | 
उतोपमानां प्रथमो नि षीदसि सोम॑कामं हि ते मन॑: ॥ २॥ 


2 Tam hi svarajam vrsabham tamojase dhisane 
nistataksatuh. Utopamanam prathamo ni sidasi 
somakamam hi te manah. 


That self-ruled, self-refulgent, brave and 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 61 7719 


generous human character and programme, that human 
republic, the heaven and earth vested with divine will 
and intelligence conceive, create and fashion forth for 
self-realisation of innate glory. O man, among similars 
and comparables, you stand the first and highest, and 
your mind is dedicated to the love of soma, peace, 
pleasure and excellence of life. 


आ वृषस्व पुरूवसो सुतस्येन्द्रान्धंसः। 
विदा हि त्वा हरिवः पृत्सु सांसहिमध्ष्टं चिदधूृष्वणिंम्‌॥। ३ ॥ 


3: A vrsasva purivaso sutasyendrandhasah. Vidma 
hi tva harivah prtsu sasahimadhrstam cid dadhr- 
svanim. 


Indra, lord of universal wealth, honour and 
excellence, haven and home of all life in existence, give 
us showers of the purest distilled soma, food for health 
and divine joy. O lord of the dynamics of existence, we 
know you, fearless and unconquerable hero in battles. 


अप्रामिसत्य मघवन्तथेदं सदिन्द्र्‌ क्रत्वा यथा व: | 
सनेम वाजं तव॑ शिप्रिन्नव॑सा मक्षू चिद्यन्तों अद्रिवः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Apramisatya maghavan tathedasadindra kratva 
yatha vasah. Sanema vajam tava Siprinnavasa 
maksu cidyanto adrivah. 


Indra, lord of might and majesty, unchangeable 
truth itself, imperishable, as you wish by holy thought 
and will, so does everything happen. Pray bless us to 
win the victory in our battles for life, O lord of splendid 
vizor, under your protection without delay while we 
move on, O lord of clouds and mountains. 


780 RGVEDA 


शग्ध्यू डेषु शचीपत इन्द्र॒ विश्वाभिरूतिभिः। 
भगं न हि त्वां यशसं वसुविदमनु शूर चरामसि ॥ ५॥ 


5. Sagdhyiusu Sacipata indra visvabhirutibhih. 
Bhagam na hi tva yaSasam vasuvidamanu Sura 
caramasi. 

Indra, lord of omnipotent action and infinitely 
various victories, with all powers, protections and 
inspirations, strengthen and energise us for excellent 
works without delay. As the very honour, splendour and 
treasure-home of the universe, O potent and heroic lord, 
we live in pursuit of your glory to justify our existence 
and win our destiny. 


पौरो अश्व॑स्य पुरुकृद्र्वायस्युत्सो देव fecuaa: | 
नकिर्हि दानं परिमर्धिषत्त्वे यद्यद्यामि तदा aren 


6. Pauro asvasya purukrd gavamasyutso deva 
hiranyayah. Nakirhi danam parimardhisat tve 
yadyadyami tada bhara. 


You are the sole One omnipresent citizen of the 
universe, creator of all lands, cows, lights and 
knowledges of the world, maker of the motions, 
ambitions, advancements and achievements of nature 
and humanity, fountain head of universal joy, and golden 
refulgent generous lord supreme. No one can ever impair 
or obstruct your gifts to humanity. O lord, I pray, bring 
us whatever we ask for. 


त्वं ह्येहि चेर॑वे विदा भगं वसुत्तये । 
उरद्ावृषस्व मघवन्गविष्टय उदिन्द्रार्व॑मिष्टये ॥ ७॥ 


fe Tvam hyehi cerave vida bhagam vasuttaye. Ud 
vavrsasva maghavan gavistaya udindrasvamistaye. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 61 781 


Come to give gifts of wealth and honour to the 
devotee so that the people may be happy and prosperous. 
O lord of honour and majesty, Indra, bring us showers 
of the wealth of cows, lands, knowledge and culture 
for the seekers of light, and horses, advancement and 
achievement for the seekers of progress. 


त्वं पुरू सहस्राणि शतानि च युथा area मंहसे । 
आ पुरन्दरं च॑कृम॒ विप्र॑वचस इन्द्रं गायन्तोऽ व॑से॥ ८ ॥ 


Bi Tvam puru sahasrani satani ca yutha danaya 
mamhase. A purandaram cakrma vipravacasa 
indram gayanto’vase. 


Indra, you command and grant many hundreds 
and thousands of heaps of wealth for gift to the devotees, 
and as many troops of soldiers for defence and 
protection. We, poets of holy words of adoration, do 
service to Indra, breaker of the strongholds of darkness 
and sing in praise of him and exhort him for the sake of 
protection and patronage. 


अविप्रो वा यदविंधद्विप्रों वेन्द्र ते aa: | 
स प्र ममन्दत्त्वाया शतक्रतो प्राचामन्यो अहंसन ॥ ९॥ 


9. Avipro va yad-avidhad-vipro vendra te vacah. Sa 
pra mamandat tvaya satakrato pracamanyo 
ahamsana. 


Indra, lord of infinite holy acts of kindness, 
commanding irresistible adour and passion, whether one 
is a sagely scholar or a simple unlettered person, 
whoever offers words of praise and prayer to you is 
blest with divine joy by your grace, O lord of the name 
“TAM”. 


782 RGVEDA 


उग्रबाहुर््रश्चकृत्वां पुरन्दरो यदि मे श्रुणवब्दवंम्‌। 
वसूयवो वसुपतिं शतक्रतुं स्तोमैरिन्द्रं हवामहे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ugrabahur-mraksakrtva purandaro yadi me 
srnavaddhavam. Vasuyavo vasupatim Satakra- 
tum stomair-indram havamahe. 


If the lord of mightiest arms, breaker of evil 
strongholds, divine destroyer, would listen to my 
invocation and prayer, we, seekers of wealth, honour 
and excellence in life, would adore and exalt Indra, 
protector and giver of wealth and supreme lord of 
infinite divine acts of grace, hymns of praise in his 
honour. 


न पापासो मनामहे नारायासो न esa: 1 
यदिच्िन््रं वृष॑णं सचां सुते सखायं कृणवामहे ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Na [47450 manamahe narayaso na jalhavah. 


Yadinnvindram vrsanam saca sute sakhayam 
krnavamahai. 

We are neither sinners nor uncharitable nor non- 

yajakas as we honour and adore Indra, generous lord of 


showers of grace, and win his favour as a friend in our 
holy acts of creation and yajna. 


उग्रं युयुज्म पृत॑नासु सासदहिमूणक।तिमद।भ्यम्‌। 
वेदां भूमं चित्सनिता र थीत॑मो वालिनं यमिदू नश॑त्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Ugram yuyujma prtanasu sasahim-rnakatim- 
adabhyam. Veda bhrmam cit sanita rathitamo 
vajinam yamidu naSsat. 
The blazing vibrant lord of existence, we join 
in the battles of life from strife upto communion, the 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 61 783 


power and presence most bold and courageous, 
indomitable, to whom we owe the debt of allegiance. 
Whoever approaches him thus as the ever moving spirit 
at the closest as a friend, munificent giver, sole controller 
of the chariot of life and the universe, the ultimate 
warrior and conqueror, realises him, joins him, becomes 
identified with him as the self itself. 


ad इन्द्र भयामहे ततो नो अभ॑यं कृधि। 
मघवञ्छग्धि तव तन्न ऊतिधिर्विं द्विषो वि मृधो जहि।॥ 23 ॥ 


13. Yata indra bhayamahe tato no abhayam krdhi. 
Maghavan-chagdhi tava tanna utibhir-vi dviso vi 
mrdho jahi. 


Indra, lord indomitable, whoever, whatever and 
wherever we fear, make us fearless from that. O lord of 
might and world power, pray strengthen us with your 
powers and protections of the highest order. Eliminate 
the jealous, the malignant, the disdainers and 
contemners. 


त्वं हि राधस्पते राध॑सो महः क्षयस्यासि विधतः। 
तं त्वा वयं म॑घवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणः सुतावन्तो हवामहे ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. = Tvam hi radhaspate radhaso mahah ksayasyasi 
vidhatah. Tam tva vayam maghavann-indra 
girvanah sutavanto havamahe. 


Indra, lord of the world’s wealth, munificence 
and achievement, you alone are the protector, and 
promoter of the wealth, grandeur, home and honour of 
the supplicant worshipper. O lord of all power and 
honour, adored and worshipped in hymns of glory, we 
invoke, invite and exalt you for the munificence and 


784 RGVEDA 
grandeur of life you grant, protect and advance. 


इन्द्रः स्पद्टुत तुंत्रहा परस्पा नो वरेण्यः 
स नों रक्चिषच्यर मं स म॑ध्यमं स पश्चारत्पातु नः पुरः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Indrah spaluta vrtraha paraspa no varenyah. Sa 
no raksisac-caramam sa madhyamam sa pascat 
patu nah purah. 


Indra is all cognizant, destroyer of evil and 
universal protector, and him alone we ought to choose 
for worship and prayer. May he protect us all, the 
highest, the middling and the lowest, and may he protect 
us at the far back and the farthest coming up front. 


त्वं न॑ः पश्चाद॑धरादुत्तरात्पुर इन्दर नि पाहि विश्वतंः । 
आरे अस्मत्कुणुहि दैव्यं भयमारे हेतीरदेवीः ॥ ९६॥ 


16. {वा nah pascad-adharad-uttarat pura indra ni 
pahi visvatah. Are asmat krnuhi daivyam 
bhayamare hetiradevih. 


Indra, pray you protect us back and front, up 
and down, all round. Remove from us all fear of the 
divinities, all dangers and strikes from the evil forces. 


अद्याद्या Vaya इन्द्र त्रास्व॑ परे च॑ 4:1 विष्वा च नो 
जरितृन्त्संत्पते अहा दिवा नक्तं च रक्षिषः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Adyadya svah ईव indra trasva pare (व 1८1. Visva 
ca no jaritrnt-satpate aha diva naktam ca 
raksisah. 


Day by day every today, day by day every 
tomorrow and beyond, lord saviour and protector of the 
good and true, Indra, save and protect us, your celebrants 
and supplicants, all days, day and night. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 62 185 


प्रभ्वी शूरो मघवां तुवीम॑घः Given वीयौय कम्‌ । 
उभा ते बाहू वृष॑णा शतक्रतो नि या ast मिमिक्षतुः ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Prabhangi suro maghava tuvimaghah sammislo 
viryaya kam. Ubha te bahu vrsana satakrato 
ni ya vajram mimiksatuh. 


A crushing warrior, commanding magnificence, 
power and universal riches, self-sufficient, virile, joiner 
of all with karmic destiny, O lord of infinite good 
actions, both your arms are abundantly generous and 
hold the thunderbolt of justice, reward and punishment 
both as deserved. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 62 
Indra Devata, Pragatha Ghaura Kanva Rshi 


प्रो stan उप॑स्तुतिं भरता यज्जुजोषति । उक्थेरिन्द्रस्य माहिनं 
वयो वर्धन्ति सोमिनो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय; ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Pro asma upastutim bharata yajjujosati. Ukthair- 
indrasya mahinam vayo vardhanti somino bhadra 
indrasya ratayah. 


O celebrants, sing aloud and send up your 
prayers to Indra who listens and loves them. The soma 
yajis with songs of praise exalt the great glory and 
magnificence of Indra. Great and good are the gifts of 
Indra. 


अयुजो असंमो नृभिरेकः कृष्टीर्‌ यास्य: । पूर्वीरति प्र वावृधे 
विर्वा जातान्योज॑सा भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातयः ॥ २॥ 

2. Ayujo asamo nrbhir-ekah krstir-ayasyah. 
Purvirati pra vavrdhe visva jatanyojasa bhadra 
indrasya ratayah. 


786 RGVEDA 


Sole and self-sufficient, unequal, one supreme 
among humanity, beyond the power of mortals, he excels 
and transcends all those born ever before or at present 
or to be born in future, by virtue of his lustre and 
magnanimity. Great are the powers and gifts of Indra’s 
generosity. 


अहितेन चिदर्वता जीरदानुः सिषासति । प्रवाच्यमिन्द्र्‌ तत्तवं 
वीयीणि करिष्यतो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय: ॥ ३॥ 


3 Ahitena cidarvata jiradanuh sisasati. Pravacya- 
mindra tat tava viryani karisyato bhadra indrasya 
ratayah. 


The lord of immense generosity pervades and 
rules the world moving on with its own innate law 
without external imposition. O lord, that divine 
omnipotence of yours and mighty acts of virile divinity 
are admirable. Great and good are the gifts of the lord’s 
charity. 

आ याहि कृणवाम त इन्द्र ब्रह्माणि वर्ध॑ना । af: शविष्ठ 
चाकनो भद्रमिह श्रवस्यते भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातयः ॥ ४॥ 

4. A yahi krnavama ta indra brahmani vardhana. 
Yebhih savistha cakano bhadramiha Sravasyate 
bhadra indrasya ratayah. 

Come Indra, here we sing exalting hymns in 
your honour by which, O lord most powerful, you would 


love to do immense good for the celebrant. Great and 
gracious are the charities of Indra. 


धृषतश्चिंद्‌ धृषन्मनः कृणोषीन्द्र area dra: सोभेः 
सपर्यतो नमोभिः प्रतिभूष॑तो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातयः ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 62 787 


a. Dhrsatascid dhrsanmanah krnosindra yat tvam. 
Tirvaih somaih saparyato namobhih pratibhu- 
sato bhadra indrasya ratayah. 


As you raise the man of courage at heart to a 
bolder and more courageous hero, men with homage 
and potent soma oblations serve and glorify you. Great 
and glorious are the charities of Indra. 


अव॑ चष्ट ऋचींषमोऽवतां इव Ae: । जुटी दक्ष॑स्य सोमिनः 
सायं कृणुते युजं भद्रा इन्द्रस्य UTS: UG 


6. Ava casta rcisamo’vatan iva manusah. Justvi 
daksasya sominah sakhayam krnute yujam 
bhadra indrasya ratayah. 


The lord lover of Rks and soma yajna looks 
below with love at the yajakas like a thirsty man looking 
anxiously at the water below in the well and, happy 
with the noble expert soma yaji, he accepts him as friend 
and companion. Great and good are the gifts of Indra. 


विश्वे त इन्द्र वीर्य' देवा अनु क्रतुं ददुः | भुवो विश्व॑स्य 
गोप॑तिः पुरुष्टुत भ॒द्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः ॥ ७ ॥ 

a; Visve ta indra viryam deva anu kratum daduh. 
Bhuvo visvasya gopatih purustuta bhadra indra- 
sya ratayah. 

Indra, universally celebrated and exalted, ruler 
and protector of the worlds of the universe, all divinities 
of nature and humanity in obedience and pursuit of your 
divine acts bear your generous strength and vitality. 
Great and good are the gifts of Indra. 


गृणे तदिन्द्र ते शव॑ उपमं देवतातये | यन्दंसिं वृत्रमोज॑सा 
शचीपते भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य UT: ॥ ८ ॥ 


788 RGVEDA 


8. Grne tadindra te Sava upamam devatdataye. 
Yaddhamsi vrtramojasa Sacipate bhadra indrasya 
ratayah. 


In praise of that admirable power and grandeur 
of yours, Indra, I sing for the pleasure of divine favour, 
by which, O lord of mighty noble acts, you destroy the 
demon of darkness and want by your force and 
splendour. Great and good are the gifts of Indra. 


सम॑नेव वपुष्यतः कृणवन्मानुषा युगा | 
विदे तदिन्द्रश्चेतनमध श्रुतो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातयः ॥ ९ ॥ 


2. Samaneva vapusyatah krnavan-manusa yuga. 
Vide tadindras-cetanam-adha Ssruto bhadra 
indrasya ratayah. 


Like men united in assembly or forces united in 
battle, he joins people into assemblies and communities 
unto himself. That knowledge of art, Indra knows, and 
for that he is renowned and celebrated. Great and good 
are the gifts of Indra. 


उज्नातमिन्द्र ते शव उत्वामुत्तव क्रतुंम्‌। भूरिगो भूरिं 
वावृधुर्मघ॑वन्तव शर्म॑णि भद्रा इन्द्रस्य UA: ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ujjatam-indra te Sava ut tvamut tava kratum. 
Bhurigo bhuri vavrdhur-maghavan tava Sarmani 
bhadra indrasya ratayah. 


Indra, lord of great wealth and knowledge, 
honour and excellence, the celebrants repeatedly sing 
and exalt your glory manifested around, they celebrate 
you and your holy work under the umbrella of your 
protection. Great and good are the gifts of Indra. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 63 789 


अहं च त्वं च॑ वृत्रहन्त्सं युज्याव सनिभ्य आ। अरातीवा 
चिंदद्विवोऽ नुं नौ शूर मंसते भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः ॥ ११॥ 


11. Ahamcatvam ca vrtrahant-sam yujyava sanibhya 
a. Arativa cidadrivo’nu nau sura mamsate bhadra 
indrasya ratayah. 


Let us both, I and you, destroyer of want and 
evil, join for the attainment of wealth and fulfilment. O 
lord of might, controller of clouds and breaker of 
mountains, even the malignant and niggardly would 
agree to our cooperation. Great and glorious are the gifts 
of Indra. 


सत्यमिद्वा उ तं वयमिन्द्रं स्तवाम नानूतम्‌। wet असुन्वतो 
वथो भूरि ज्योतींषि सुन्वतो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः॥ ९२॥ 
12. Satyamid va u tam vayam-indram stavama 


nanrtam. Mahan asunvato vadho bhuri jyotimsi 
sunvato bhadra indrasya ratayah. 


Let us all worship Indra and adore only truth, 
never untruth. There is the terrible thunderbolt for the 
impious uncreators, and profuse lights and showers of 
bliss for the creators of soma, divine joy and fulfilment 
for life. Great and gracious are the gifts of Indra. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 63 
Indra (1-11), Devah Devatah, Pragatha Kanva Rshi 
सर पूर्व्यो महानां वेनः HA ARTS | 
यस्य द्वारा मनुष्पिता देवेषु धिय॑ आनजे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Sa purvyo mahanam venah kratubhiranaje. 
Yasya dvara manuspita devesu dhiya anaje. 


790 RGVEDA 


He, eternal spirit of the universe, love and desire 
and indeed the ideal of the great among humanity, is 
realised through holy acts of prayer and yajna, by the 
doors of whose grace the thinking man, fatherly man 
sustainer of life, attains noble knowledge and 
competence for action among the divinities of nature 
and humanity. 


दिवो मानं नोत्स॑ दन्त्सोम॑पृष्ठासो अद्र॑यः। 
उक्था ब्रह्म च शंस्या ॥ २॥ 
0.0 Divo manam notsadant-somaprsthaso adrayah. 


Uktha brahma ca Samsya. 


The mountains overgrown with soma do not 
forsake the spirit and presence of divinity since it is 
manifested there. Hence hymns of praise and songs of 
adoration ought to be sung in honour of divinity. 


स fast अद्धिरोभ्य इन्द्रो गा अंवृणोदपं। 
स्तुषे तद॑स्य पौँस्यं॑म्‌॥ ३ ॥ 

3: Sa vidvan angirobhya indro ga avrnodapa. 
Stuse tadasya paumsyam. 


That omniscient and omnipresent Indra brought 
the earths and stars into existence for the living and 
breathing forms of being. Therefore I sing and celebrate 
his divine power and love. 


स प्रतरां कविवृध इन्द्रो वाकस्य॑ Garver: | 
शिवो अकस्य होमन्यस्मत्रा गन्त्ववसे ॥ ४॥ 


4. Sa pratnatha kavivrdha indro vakasya vaksanih. 
Sivo arkasya homanyasmatra gantvavase. 


He, Indra, as ever before, strengthens the poets 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 63 791 


and promotes and extends the divine speech. May the 
lord of peace and bliss, we pray, come and join our yajna 
of worship. 


आदू नु ते अनु क्रतुं स्वाहा ates यज्य॑वः। 
श्वात्रमकां अनू घतेन्द्र गो त्रस्य दावने ॥ ५॥ 
9, Adi nu te anu kratum svaha varasya yajyavah. 


Svatramarka anusatendra gotrasya davane. 


And then they, the yajakas, in pursuance of the 
holy act of chosen yajna offer oblations in truth of word 
and deed, and the singers immediately start the song of 
adoration in honour of Indra for the gift of wealth and 
joy. 

इन्द्रे विश्वानि diet कृतानि कत्वीनि च। 
यमर्का अध्वरं विदुः ॥ ६॥ 


6. Indre visvani virya krtani kartvani ca. 
Yamarka adhvaram viduh. 


In Indra abide all the great works done and to 
be done, and the pious sages know him as loving and, 
non-violent worthy of worship. 


यत्पाञ्च॑जन्यया विशेन्द्रे घोषा असक्षत । 
अस्तर॑णाद्वर्दणां विपो ३ऽ af मान॑स्य स ara: ॥ ७॥ 


८ Yat pancajanyaya visendre ghosa asrksata. 
Astrnad barhana vipo ’ryo manasya sa ksayah. 


When the universal community of five classes 
of people join together and raise their voices of prayer 
to Indra, then with his might he wards off their enemies 
and misfortunes. That same lord of the people, 


792 RGVEDA 
omniscient and master is the centre of my worship too. 


इयम्‌, ते अनुंष्टुतिश्चकृषे तानि diet 
प्राव॑ङ्चक्रस्यं वर्तनिम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tyamu te anustutis-cakrse tani paumsya. 
Pravas-cakrasya vartanim. 


Indra, lord of glory, this song of worship is for 
you. You alone do all those admirable grand works of 
valour I praise and you alone protect and direct the orbits 
of the moving universe. 


अस्य वृष्णो व्योदंन उरु Hae जीवसे । 
यवं न पर्व आ SATU I 


9. = Asya vrsno vyodana uru kramista jivase. 
Yavam na pasva a dade. 


On receiving the variety and versatility of food, 
energy and inspiration from this generous and virile 
Indra, life rises and springs forward for the joy of living 
as an animal gets the grass for food and energy and 
plays around. 


तदर्धाना अवस्यवो युष्माभिर्दक्षपितरः। 
स्याम॑ मरुत्व॑तो वृधे ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Taddadhana avasyavo yusmabhirdaksapitarah. 
Syama marutvato vrdhe. 


Bearing that energy in body and that divine 
source of energy in mind, let us all, seekers of protection 
and promotion, be masters of strength and expertise and 
try to be commanders of that energy and ambition to 
achieve higher progress in corporate life. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 63 793 


weirs धाम्न ऋक्व॑भिः शूर नोनुमः | 
जेषामेन्द्र त्वया युजा ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Balrtviyaya dhamna rkvabhih sura nonumah. 
Josamendra tvaya yuja. 


O mighty lord of energy, ambition and victory, 
with resounding hymns of joy in homage we bow to 
you, treasure home of life and progress, creator and 
promoter of strength and energy through seasonal 
yajnas, and we pray that joined to you in body and mind 
we may win in our struggles for life and living. 


अस्मे रुद्रा मेहना पर्वतासो वृत्रहत्ये भर॑हूतौ asirat: । यः 
शंस॑ते स्तुवते धायं wa इन्द्र॑ज्येष्ठा अस्मां अवन्तु 
देवाः UVR 


12. Asme rudro mehana parvataso vrtrahatye 
bharahutau sajosah. Yah 5477541८ stuvate dhayi 
pajra indrajyestha asman avantu devah. 


Indra, lord ruler of power and progress, for us, 
in our fight against suffering, may the Rudras, powers 
of justice and desperation, mighty generous clouds of 
shower, mountains and great men, all loving and 
cooperative, indeed whoever fast and strong may hasten 
and advance for the celebrant and worshipper, all the 
wisest and seniormost brilliant powers of generosity in 
nature and humanity, come and help us in our struggle 
for the conquest of darkness, want, evil and ignorance 
prevailing in society. 


794 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 64 
Indra Devata, Pragatha Kanva Rshi 


seat मन्दन्तु स्तोमाः कृणुष्व राधो! अद्रिवः | 
अवं ब्रह्मद्विषो जहि।॥ ९॥ 


il Ut tva mandantu stomah krnusva radho adrivah. 
Ava brahmadviso jahi. 


Indra, lord almighty, commander, controller and 
inspirer of clouds, mountains and great men of 
generosity, may our hymns of adoration win your 
pleasure. Pray create and provide means and methods 
of sustenance and progress in life, and cast off jealousies 
and enmities against divinity, knowledge and prayer, 
our bond between human and divine. 


पदा पणीर्राधसो नि बाधस्व wet अंसि। 
नहि त्वा कश्चन प्रति ।॥। २॥ 
2. Pada panimraradhaso ni badhasva mahdn asi. 


Nahi tva kascana prati. 


Keep off under foot the haves who hoard and 
share not. You are great, simply great, the only one. 
There is none equal, alike or more. 


त्वमीशिषे सुतानामिन्द्र AAT | 
त्वं राजा SAAT 3 
3: Tvamisise sutanam-indra tvam-asutanam. 
Tvam raja jananam. 
You rule over the creative and cooperative men 


of positive action. You rule over the uncreative and 
destructive men of negative action as well. Indra, you 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 64 795 


are the ruler, the ultimate ordainer of good and evil both. 


एदि प्रेहि eral fears घोष॑ञ्चर्षणीनाम्‌। 
ओभे पुंणासि रोदसी us 


4. Ehi prehi ksayo divya-ghosancarsaninam . 
Obhe prnasi radasi. 


Your presence abides in the regions of light and 
heaven, in the minds of the enlightened and the divines. 
Arise, O divine presence, to heaven and come again. 
Let the presence resound among humanity. Your 
presence fills and fulfils both earth and heaven with the 
light and joy of divinity. 


त्यं चित्पर्वतं गिरि श॒तव॑न्तं स हस्तरिणम्‌। 
वि स्तोत॒भ्यों रुरोजिथ NG 


D: Tyam cit parvatam girim Satavantam sahasrinam. 
Vi stotrbhyo rurojitha. 


You break and break open the cloud and the 
mountain bearing a hundred and a thousand gifts for 
the divine singers, celebrants and dedicated yajakas. 


aad त्वा feat सुते वयं नक्तं हवामहे | 
अस्माकं काममा DoT ६॥ 


6. Vayamu tva diva sute vayam naktam havamahe. 
Asmakam kamama prna. 


We singers, celebrants and yajakas, invoke and 
invite you in our soma yajna in the day and in the night 
and pray fulfil our prayer and desire for humanity and 
divinity. 


796 RGVEDA 
aa स्य ast युवा तुविग्रीवो अनानतः। 
ब्रह्मा कस्तं संपर्यति॥ ७॥ 


ds Kva sya vrsabho yuva tuvigrivo ananatah. 
Brahma kastam saparyati. 


Where does the generous lord of showers, ever 
youthful and eternal, of broad shoulders unbent, reside? 
Which sage and scholar can ever comprehend and serve 
him in full knowledge and competence? 


कस्य॑ स्वित्सव॑नं वृषा जुजुरष्वँ अव॑ गच्छति | 
इन्द्रं क उ स्विदा च॑के ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Kasya svit savanam vrsa jujusvan ava gacchati. 
Indram ka u svida cake. 

Whose yajna does the generous and virile Indra 
visit and bless out of love and kindness? And who really 
knows Indra, in all fairness? 

कं ते दाना असक्षत वुत्रहन्कं सुवीयीं | 
उक्थे क उ स्विदन्त॑मः॥ ९॥ 


9. Kam te dana asaksata vrtrahan kam suvirya. 
Ukthe ka u svidantamah. 


O destroyer of darkness and evil, whom do your 
gifts of generosity reach? And whom do your strength 
and energies reach? In the chant of hymns and in yajna, 
who is your closest friendliest devotee? 


अयं ते मानुषे जने सोम॑ः पूरुषु, सूयते। 
तस्येहि प्र द्र॑वा fae i ९०॥ 


10. Ayam te manuse jane somah purusu suyate. 
Tasyehi pra drava piba. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 65 797 


Indra, this soma yajna is performed and soma is 
distilled in your honour in the human communities all 
over the world. Lord, come fast, drink, protect and 
promote the soma. 
अयं a शर्यणावति सुषोमायामधिं fire: 1 
आर्जीकोये मदिन्तमः॥ eeu 

11. Ayam te Saryanavati susomayamadhi priyah. 
Arjiktye madintamah. 
In this mortal body, in this vibrant intellect, in 
these fresh and harmonious senses and mind, this lovely 
and most exhilarating yajna is being performed. 
तमद्य राध॑से महे are मदाय gas । 
एहीमिन्द्र दरवा foal 112211 

12. Tamadya radhase mahe carum madaya ghrsvaye. 
Ehimindra drava piba. 

To that soma yajna being performed for gifts of 
great wealth and power, excitement and joy, and the 


destruction of negativities, pray come fast and drink 
the soma of love, faith and homage. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 65 
Indra Devata, Pragatha Kanva Rshi 

यदिन्द्र प्रागपागु दङ्‌ न्य॑ग्वा हूयसे TAH: । 

आ याहि तूय॑माशुभिः ॥ ९॥ 
I; Yadindra prag-apag-udan nyagva huyase nrbhih. 

A yahi tuyam-asubhih. 

Indra, lord of universal power and energy, when 

you are invoked and invited east, west, north and south, 


798 RGVEDA 


front or back, up or down, by people performing yajna, 

then come fast by the fastest modes you command. 
यद्वा प्रस्रव॑णे feat मादयासे स्व॑णरि। 
यद्वा समुद्रे अन्ध॑सः ॥ २॥ 

2: Yadva prasravane divo madayase svarnare. 
Yadva samudre andhasah. 


Whether in the heavenly radiations and cascades 
of light or in the middle regions of the sky or on the 
earthly regions of food and soma, wherever you rejoice 
and rain down showers of joy: 
आ त्वां गीर्भिर्महामुरुं हुवे गामिंव भोज॑से । 
इन्द्र सोम॑स्य पीतये 1 ३॥ 

3; A tva girbhir-maham-urium huve gamiva bhojase. 
Indra somasya pitaye. 

Indra, I invoke you, glorious lord immanent in 
the vast world, to come and protect the beauty and joy 
of your creation and taste the soma of its grandeur, as I 
would call the cow to its favourite love of food. 

आ त॑ इन्द्र महिमानं हस्यो देव ते मह॑ः | 
va वहन्तु बिभ्र॑तः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A ta indra mahimanam harayo deva te mahah. 
Rathe vahantu bibhratah. 


Indra, refulgent lord, may your radiating forces 
of transport and communication bear and bring you here 
to us with your grandeur and your majesty 111 the chariot. 

इन्द्र गृणीष उ स्तुषे मर्ह उग्र ईशानकृत्‌ | 
ufe नः सुतं पिब॑ wy 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 65 799 


a Indra grnisa u stuse mahan ugra tsanakrt. 
Ehi nah sutam piba. 


Indra, great, blazing brave, ruler and glorifier 
of rulers, I adore and exalt you. Pray come, drink the 
soma of our achievement and protect and promote the 
world of your creation. 


सुतावन्तस्त्वा वयं प्रय॑स्वन्तो हवामहे । 
इदं नो बर्हिरासदे 1g ॥ 


6. Sutavantastva vayam prayasvanto havamahe. 
Idam no barhirasade. 


Dedicated to noble acts of yajna and soma 
creation, bearing havi for yajna and food for yajnic 
charity, we invoke and invite you to come and be seated 
on the holy seats of our vedi and bless our heart and 
soul. 


यच्िद्धि शश्व॑तामसीन्द्र्‌ साधारणस्त्वम्‌। 
तं त्वां वयं ह॑वामहे ।। ७॥ 
ऋ Yacciddhi sasvatamasindra sadharanas-tvam. 


Tam tva vayam havamahe. 


As you bear and sustain the common generality 
of people since time immortal and the people bear 
common allegiance to you, we invoke and adore you in 
all our holy projects of common universal value. 


इदं ते सोम्यं मध्वधुंश्चत्नद्विं are: 1 
जुषाण इन्द्र तत्पिंब ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Idam te somyam madhvadhuksann-adribhir- 
narah. Jusana indra tat piba. 


800 RGVEDA 


People have pressed and extracted this honey 
sweet of soma with stone presses for you. Happy with 
cherished soma in expectation, pray come and drink that 
soma of our achievement and divine adoration. 


fasat अर्यो विंपज्चितोऽ fa ख्यस्तूयमा ग॑हि। 
अस्मे धेहि श्रवो बृहत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Visvan aryo vipascito’ti khyas-tuyama gahi. 
Asme dhehi Sravo brhat. 
Indra, you are the ruler and controller of the 
world. Pray come soon and watch all the exceptional 
sages and scholars of the world, and bring us food, 
energy, honour and fame of universal value. 
दाता ये पृष॑तीनां राज। हिरण्यवीनाम्‌। 
मा देवा मघवां रिषत्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Data me prsatinam raja hiranyavinam. 
Ma deva maghava risat. 
Indra is the giver of golden gifts of lands and 
cows and he is the ruler and controller of the golden 
gifts of divinity. O divinities of heaven and earth, may 
Indra never be neglected, and may Indra never neglect 
and hurt us. 
सहस्त्र Wade श्चन्द्र बृहत्पृथु | 
शुक्रं हिरण्यमा ss ugg ii 

11. Sahasre prsatinam-adhiscandram brhat prthu. 
Sukram hiranyama dade. 


Besides thousands and more golden gifts of 
lands and cows, I have received beautiful, great and 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 66 801 
abundant pure gifts of gold from Indra, ruler of the earth. 


नपातो दुर्गहस्य मे सहस्त्रेण areata: | 
श्रवो देवेष्वक्रत ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Napato durgahasya me sahasrena suradhasah. 
Sravo devesvakrata. 


My honour and renown, unfallen, unmatched 
and blest as I am with a thousandfold gifts of divine 
munificence, may, I pray, reach and abide with the 
divinities. 

Mandala 8/Sukta 66 
Indra Devata, Kali Pragatha Rshi 


तरोभिर्वो विदद्वसुमिन्द्रं Ware ऊतयें। 
Geeta: सुतसोमे अध्वरे Fa भरं न कारिण॑म्‌॥ ९॥ 


| Tarobhirvo vidadvasum-indram sabadha utaye. 
Brhad-gayantah sutasome adhvare huve bharam 
na karinam. 


In the yajna of love and non-violence where 
everything is perfect and soma is distilled, I invoke Indra 
like Abundance itself, giver of wealth, honour and 
fulfilment. Singing songs of adoration with energy and 
enthusiasm for your protection and progress, O 
devotees, celebrate Indra who brings wealth, honour 
and excellence at the earliest by fastest means. 


न यं gen वरन्ते न स्थिरा सुरो मदे सुशिप्रमन्ध॑सः। 
य आदृत्या शशमानाय सुन्वते दातं जरित्र उक्थ्यम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


pA Na yam dudhra varante na sthirad muro made 
susipram-andhasah. Ya adrtya Sasamanaya 
sunvate data jaritra ukthyam. 


802 RGVEDA 


Indra whom none can stop in his state of ecstasy 
and abundant charity, neither the impetuous, nor the 
constant, nor demon nor mortal, Indra who is the giver 
of cherished wealth and joy to the celebrant, the creator 
of soma and the zealous worshipper with deep reverence 
and homage. 


यः शक्रो मृक्षो अश्व्यो यो वा कीजो हिरण्ययः | 
स ऊर्वस्य॑ रेजयत्यपावृतिमिन्द्रौ गव्य॑स्य वृत्रहा 3 


Yah sakro mrkso asvyo yo va kijo hiranyayah. Sa 
uryasya rejayatyavrtim-indro gavyasya vrtraha. 


Indra who is mighty of action, pure and 
purifying, great achiever, and wondrous rich in wealth 
and golden grace, who shakes off the erosion of land 
fertility and cattle wealth and augments produce and 
prosperity, destroyer of want, ignorance and evil as he 
15. 

निखातं चिद्यः dedyd वसूदिद्धप॑ति दाशुषे । 
व्री सुशिप्रो हर्यश्व इत्करदिन्द्रः क्रत्वा यथा asta ४ ॥ 


4. Nikhatam cidyah purusambhrtam vasudidvapati 
dasuse. Vajri susipro haryasva it karadindrah 
kratva yatha vasat. 


Indra who for the generous giver digs out and 
opens up abundant wealth deep buried, hidden and held 
in the earth, wields the thunderbolt of justice and award, 
and wears a golden vizor, commanding tempestuous 
forces, thus by his noble yajnic actions, does for us what 
he thinks right and pleases to do. 


यद्वावन्थ पुरुष्टुत पुरा चिच्छूर JU 
वयं तत्त इन्द्र सं भ॑रामसि यज्ञमुक्थं तुरं वच॑ः ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 66 803 


=) Yadvavantha purustuta pura cicchura nrnam. 
Vayam tat ta indra sam bharamasi yajnam- 
uktham turam vacah. 


Indra, lord omnipotent universally adored and 
exalted, as you wish and want of humanity at the earliest 
in the beginning of creation, that we honour, abide and 
do without doubt or delay, the yajna, songs of adoration, 
word and worship all. 


सचा सोमेषु पुरुहूत afrat मदाय wer सोमपाः | 
त्वमिद्धि ब्रह्मकृते काम्यं वसु देष्ठः सुन्वते भुवं: ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Saca somesu puruhuta vajrivo madaya dyuksa 
somapah. Tvamiddhi brahmakrte kamyam vasu 
desthah sunvate bhuvah. 

Lord all-invoked and adored, wielder and 
commander of thunder, clouds and mountains, light of 
life in heaven and on earth, connoisseur, protector and 
promoter of the soma joy of humanity, join and be with 
us in our yajnic creations of soma joy in action. 

वयर्मेनपिदा ars पीपेमेह airory | 
तस्मा उ अद्य dat सुतं भराऽऽ नूनं भूषत श्रुते ॥ ७॥ 


re Vayamenamida hyo’pipemeha vajrinam. Tasma 
u adya samana sutam bhara’’ nunam bhusata 
Srute. 


Here today as before we have regaled this lord 
of the thunderbolt. For him, again, now, all of one mind, 
bear and bring the distilled soma of homage, and 
worship him who would, for certain for joy of the song, 
grace the celebrants. 


804 RGVEDA 


वृकश्चिदस्य वारण उरामथिरा वयुनेषु भूषति। 
सेमं नः स्तोमं जुजुषाण आ गहीन्द्र प्र चित्रया धिया ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vrkascidasya varana uramathira vayunesu 
bhusati. Semam nah stomam jujusana a gahi- 
nara pra citraya dhiya. 


The wolf, its counterforce elephant, and the thief 
all have to accept and follow the laws of this lord Indra. 
May he, loving and cherishing this our song of 
adoration, listen and come with gifts of clear and un- 
illusive intelligence and understanding. 


कदू न्वै स्याकुतमिन्द्रस्यास्ति पौँस्य॑म्‌। 
केनो नुकं श्रोमतेन न शुश्रुवे जनुषः UR वृत्रहा ॥ ९॥ 


9. Kadu nvasyakrtamindrasyasti paumsyam. Keno 
nu kam Sromatena na susruve janusah pari 
vrtraha. 


What wonder work is that which is not the 
achievement of Indra’s valour? By which person hasn’t 
his glory been perceived through his wonder deeds? 
He is the destroyer of evil and darkness by his very 
nature. 


कदू Wane st अस्य तविषीः कडु aaa अस्तुतम्‌ | इन्द्रो 
विश््वान्बेकनार्टौ अहुर्दू्ण उत क्रत्वा पणीररभि ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Kadu mahiradhrsta asya tavisth kadu vrtraghno 
astrtam. Indro visvan bekanatan ahardrsa uta 
kratva paninrabhi. 


How great and irresistible are his blazing 
powers! How great and invincible is he, the destroyer 
of evil and darkness! To the usurers and the exploiters 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 66 805 


who count only their days tally he shows the light only 
for the day according to their action, not beyond. 


वयं घा ते अपूर्व्येन्द्र ब्रह्माणि वृत्रहन्‌ । 
पुरूतमांसः Gee वञिवो भृतिं न प्र भ॑रामसि ॥ ९९॥ 


11.  Vayam gha te apurvyendra brahmani vrtrahan. 
Purutamasah puruhita vajrivo bhrtim na pra 
bharamasi. 


Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness within and 
without in the outer world, universally adored, wielder 
of the thunderbolt, we, all together, old and young, offer 
you in faith new and ever fresh songs of adoration and 
exaltation as daily obligation in return as thanks for your 
favours. 


पूवीं श्चिद्ि त्वे तुविकूर्मिन्नाशसो हव॑न्त sata: | 
तिरश्चिदर्यः सवना व॑सो गहि शविंछ श्रुधि मे हव॑म्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Purvisciddhi tve tuvikurminnasaso havanta 
indrotayah. Tirascidaryah savana vaso gahi 
Savistha $rudhi me havam. 


Indra, lord of infinite acts, shelter home of the 
universe, highest and omnipotent, all hopes of humanity, 
all protections and progress for them, past, present and 
future, rest in you and emanate from you. Hence all 
people invoke you and call on you for help. O master 
protector, listen to my call and come like radiations of 
light to our yajnas of divine adoration and soma creation. 


वयं घा ते त्वे इद्धिन्द्र विप्रा अपिं ष्मसि। 
नहि त्वदन्यः पुरुहूत कश्चन wasted afar ९३ ॥ 


806 RGVEDA 


13. Vayam gha te tve idvindra vipra api smasi. 
Nahi tvadanyah puruhita kasScanamagha- 
vannasti mardita. 


Indra, we are yours. Sages and celebrants, we 
all abide in you. There is none whatever other than you, 
lord of power, honour and world’s wealth, universally 
invoked and adored, who is kind and gracious as you. 


त्वं al अस्या sticedt क्षुधो ३ऽभिशंस्तेरवं स्पृधि । त्वं न॑ 
ऊती तव॑ चित्रयां धिया शिक्षा शचिष्ठ गातुवित्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Tvam no asya amateruta ksudho’bhisasterava 
sprdhi. Tvam na uti tava citraya dhiya siksa 
Sacistha gatuvit. 


O lord, pray you save us from this ignorance, 
hunger and want, and imprecation and calumny. You 
give us protection, enlighten us with your unique 
wisdom and understanding. O most potent master of 
the knowledge of the laws and paths of life, guide us on 
the paths of the world. 


सोम इद्व॑ः सुतो अस्तु Heat मा बिभीतन । 

अपेदेष ध्वस्माय॑ति स्वयं घैषो अपायति ॥ १५॥ 
15. Soma idvah suto astu kalayo ma bibhitana. 

Apedesa dhvasmayati svayam ghaiso apayati. 


O budding scholars and sages, let the soma of 
hope and joy be distilled and poured for you. Fear not. 
This terror and destruction is going away. Self- 
destroyed, it is going away, vanishing of itself. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 67 807 


Mandala 8/Sukta 67 


Adityah Devatah, Matsya Sammada, or Manya 
Maitravaruni, or various Matsya Jalanaddhah Rshis 


त्यान्नु क्षत्रियो अव॑ आदित्यान्यांचिषामहे। 
aster अभिष्टये ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Tyan nu ksatriyan ava adityan yacisamahe. 
Sumrlikan abhistaye. 


For the sake of protection and to achieve our 
cherished objects, we call upon the Kshatriyas, warriors 
of the nation, bright as children of light and firm as 
children of Infinity, providers of peace, happiness and 
security. 


सित्रो नो अत्यंहतिं वरुणः पर्षदर्यमा । 
आदित्यासो यथा विदुः ॥ २॥ 


Zi Mitro no atyamhatim varunah parsadaryama. 
Adityaso yatha viduh. 


To the best of their knowledge and intention, 
power and purpose, may Mitra, teachers and preachers, 
intellectuals and researchers, universal friends of 
humanity, Varuna, chosen representatives, governors 
and administrators, and Aryama, leaders of law, guides 
of the nation, Adityas all, children of light and givers of 
enlightenment, protect, promote and defend us against 
violence, injustice and ignorance and cleanse us of sin 
and crime. 


तेषां हि चित्रमुक्थ्यं १ वरूथमस्ति दाशुषे । 
आदित्यानामरं कृते ii ३॥ 


808 RGVEDA 
छ Tesam hi citramukthyam varuthamasti dasuse. 
Adityanam-aramkrte. 
Ample means and materials, wonderful, various 
and admirable, vest in the brilliant Adityas, enlightened 
powers of governance and administration, for the people 
of generosity, and beauty, decency and grace. 
महिं वो महतामवो वरुण मित्रार्यमन्‌। 
अवांस्या Bonne is ॥ 

4. Mahi vo mahatamavo varuna mitraryaman. 
Avamsya vrnimahe. 


O great Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, great are 
your powers of protection and defence. We choose to 
ask and do ask for protection and defence by you. 


जीवान्नो अभि धतनाऽऽदित्यासः पुरा sata | 
कन्दं स्थ हवनश्रुतः ॥ ५५ ॥ 

5. Jivan no abhi dhetana’’dityasah pura hathat. 
Kaddha stha havanasrutah. 


Wherever you are or happen to be stationed, 
pray listen to our call and rush in for our life and 
protection before the strike of violence and possibly 
death and destruction. 


Ue: sia सुन्वते वरूथमस्ति यच्छर्दिः 1 
तेना नो अधिं area ul 


6. Yadvah srantaya sunvate varuthamasti yaccha- 
rdih. Tena no adhi vocata. 


Whatever be your defence, protection and relief 
for the worker, producer or creator of soma while he 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 67 809 


works to the point of weariness, exhaustion and 
retirement, for that plead for us and get us the relief 
needed, deserved and allowed. 


अस्तिं देवा अंहोरुर्वस्ति रत्नमनागसः | 
आदित्या अद्धतेनसः ॥ ७॥ 


a; Asti deva amhorurvasti ratnamanagasah. 
Aditya adbhutainasah. 


Adityas, children of light, rulers and 
administrators, generous and unpolluted by corruption, 
the relief for the distressed is ample freedom from 
distress, and the reward for the sinless is jewel graces 
of life. 

मा नः Ad: fase महे वंणक्तु नस्परि। 
इन्द्र इद्धि श्रुतो वशी ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ma nah setuh sisedayam mahe vrnaktu naspari. 
Indra iddhi sruto vast. 


Let this bond of sin and crime never fetter us. 
Let it fall off far from us so that we may be free to do 
great. The renowned Indra, lord supreme, is the master 
controller and dispenser of reward and punishment. 


मानो मृचा रिपूणां वरुजिनानामविष्यवः। 
देवां अभि प्र dara ९॥ 

9. Ma no mrca ripunam vrjinanam-avisyavah. 
Deva abhi pra mrksata. 


O protectors and defenders of the people, 
brilliant and generous rulers, let not the violence and 
calumny of crooked enemies ever smear and injure us. 


810 RGVEDA 
Pray cover us all round with safety and security. 


उत त्वाम॑दिते मह्य॒हं देव्युपं aa । 
सु मृव्डीकामभिष्टये ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Uta tvam-adite mahyaham devyupa bruve. 
Sumrlikam-abhistaye. 


And O great, brilliant and sovereign assembly 
of the nation, generous and gracious power, 
conscientiously I speak to you, pray save us from harm 
and injury, help us achieve our heart’s desire and 
cherished objectives. 


पर्षि दीने ग॑भीर ओं उग्र॑पुत्रे जिघांसतः। 
माकिस्तोकस्य नो रिषत्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Parsi dine gabhira an ugraputre jighamsatah. 
Makistokasya no risat. 


Aditi, mother of brave and blazing Adityas, pray 
anoint us, make us immune and help us cross the seas 
of violence both deep and shallow, let no enemy, 
violence or disease harm and injure our coming 
generations. 


अनेहो न॑ उसुत्रज sata वि weda 1 
कृधि तोकाय जीवसे ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Aneho na uruvraja urici vi prasartave. 
Krdhi tokaya jivase. 


Sacred and sovereign mother of vast extensive 
powers, save us from sin and violence to range over the 
earth and strengthen us that not only we but also our 
coming generations may live happy and free. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 67 811 


ये मूर्धानः कषितीनामदब्धासः स्वय॑शसः | 
व्रता रक्षन्ते अद्रुहंः।॥ ९३॥ 

13. Ye murdhanah ksitinam-adabdhasah svayasa- 
sah. Vrata raksante adruhah. 


Those who are on top of the average people, 
active, bold, unbending, and gifted with innate honour 
and reputation in law and personal values of virtue, free 
from jealousy and enmity, they maintain, uphold and 
protect the laws, values and commitments of the land. 
(They are the chosen children of mother earth, Adityas, 
worthy of being members of the mother’s household, 
council of the nation.) 


ते न॑ आस्नो वृकाणामादित्यासो मुमोचत | 
स्तेनं बब्दमिंवादिते।॥ ९४॥ 


14. Te na asno vrkanam-dadityaso mumocata. 
Stenam baddham-ivadite. 


Mother Aditi, caught up like thieves, we are in 
the jaws of wolves. May the Adityas save us from the 
mouth of wolfish exploiters. 
अपो षु ण॑ इयं शरुरादित्या अपं दुर्मतिः। 
अस्मदेत्वजघ्नुषी ॥ ९५ ॥ 

15. Apo suna iyam sarur-aditya apa durmatih. 
Asmadetvajaghnust. 

O Adityas, let this violent force go off from us, 
let this evil genius too get away from us, leaving us 
unhurt. 

शश्वद्दि व॑ः सुदानव आदित्या ऊतिभिर्वयम्‌। 
पुरा नूनं बुभुज्महे ॥ ९६ ॥ 


812 RGVEDA 


16. Sasvaddhi vah sudanava Gditya itibhir-vayam. 
Pura nunam bubhujmahe. 
Adityas, generous givers, by virtue of your 
protections we have been enjoying life always, now as 
ever before. 
शश्वन्तं हि प्र॑चेतसः प्रतियन्तं चिदेन॑सः। 
देवाः कृणुथ जीवसे ॥ ९७ ॥ 

17. Sasvantam hi pracetasah pratiyantam cidenasah. 
Devah krnutha jivase. 


O wise brilliancies, whoever turns to you ever 
and any time, even from sin, pray sustain and strengthen 
him to live his life to the full. 


तत्सु नो नव्यं सन्य॑स आदित्या यन्मुमोंचति। 
बन्धाद्ुब्धमिं वादिते ॥ १८ ॥ 
18. Tat suno navyam sanyasa aditya yanmumocati. 


Bandhad-baddham-ivadite. 


O Adityas, O mother Aditi, we hope and pray 
may that ever new strength and sustenance of yours, 
which you give us for our good and protection, which 
saves us like people fettered in bondage and released, 
be extended to us ever as before. 


नास्माकमस्ति तत्तर॒ आदित्यासो अतिष्कदे । 
यूयमस्मभ्यं FSA ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19.  Nasmakam-asti tat tara adityaso atiskade. 
Yuyam-asmabhyam mrlata. 


O Adityas, leaders of the human nation, that 
power and competence you give us to get over our 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 68 813 


problems is not our own, it is yours. Pray be kind and 
gracious and keep it up as ever before. 


मा at हेतिर्विवस्व॑त आदित्याः कृत्रिमा शरः | 
पुरा नु जरसो वधीत्‌ ॥ २०॥ 

20. Ma no hetir-vivasvata adityah krtrima saruh. 
Pura nu jaraso vadhit. 
O Adityas, brilliant powers of nature and 
humanity, let not the onslaught of time or an artificial 
weapon made by man strike us before we have lived 
and enjoyed a full age of fulfilment to the last day of 
old age. 
fay देषो व्यंहतिमादित्यासो fa संहिंतम्‌। 
विष्वग्वि dear रप॑ः ॥ २९॥ 

21. Vi su dveso vyamhatim-ddityaso vi samhitam. 
Visvagvi brhata rapah. 

O Adityas, brilliant rulers and leaders of the 
nation, totally destroy jealousy and enmity, eliminate 
distress and depression, sin and crime, wipe out 


organised crime, terror and combined attacks, and 
uproot all disease, infirmity and disability from the earth. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 68 


Indra (1-13), Rkshashvamedhau (14-19), Devatah, 
Priyamedha Angirasa Rshi 


आ त्वा रथं यथोतये Gara acdaraha । 
तुविकृरमिंमृ'तीषहमिन्द्र शविष्ठ॒ सत्पते ।॥ ९॥ 


i A tva ratham yathotaye sumnaya vartayamasi. 
Tuvikurmim-rtisaham-indra Savistha satpate. 


814 RGVEDA 


Indra, bravest of the brave, protector of the good 
and true, just as we turn the chariot, so do we draw your 
attention and pray you turn to us and come for our 
protection, welfare and enlightenment, lord of infinite 
action and conqueror of enemies. 


तुविशुष्म तुविक्रतो शचीवो विश्व॑या मते। 
आ पप्राथ महित्वना ॥ २॥ 

2. Tuvisusma tuvikrato Sacivo visvaya mate. 
A papratha mahitvana. 


Lord omnipotent of infinite action, infinitely 
helpful, omniscient, with your cosmic power and 
grandeur you pervade the whole universe. 


यस्य॑ ते महिना महः परि ज्मायन्तमीयतुः । 
हस्ता वचं हिरण्ययं॑म्‌॥ 3 ॥ 

3: Yasya te mahina mahah pari jmayantam-tyatuh. 
Hasta vajram hiranyayam. 


Indra who are infinitely great by virtue of your 
omnipotence, your hands wield the thunderbolt of 
justice and golden grace which reaches everywhere over 
the universe. 


विश्वानरस्य वस्पतिमनानतस्य शव॑सः । 
एवैश्च चर्षणीनामूती हुं वे र्थानाम्‌ ॥  ॥ 


4. Visvanarasya vaspatim-andnatasya savasah. 
Evaisca carsaninamuti huve rathanam. 


I pray to Indra, your lord and father, master 
controller of the irresistible powers and forces of the 
universe, for divine protection of the people by the 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 68 815 
dynamics of his moving powers of nature and humanity. 


अभिष्टये सदावुंधं स्व्॑मीच्ठेषु यं A: | 
नाना हव॑न्त ऊतये ॥ ५ ॥ 


a; Abhistaye sadavrdham svarmilhesu yam narah. 
Nana havanta utaye. 


I pray to Indra, ever more munificent in human 
struggles for light, happiness and welfare, whom people 
invoke and adore in many ways for protection and 
progress and for the fulfilment of their cherished objects 
and ambitions. 


परोमात्रमृचीषममिन्द्र मुग्रं सुराधंसम्‌। 
ईशानं चिद्धसुंनाम्‌॥ & ॥ 


6. Paromatramircisamam-indramugram sura- 
dhasam. Isanam cidvasunam. 


I invoke and pray to Indra, boundless presence, 
lover of hymns of adoration, illustrious, all competent 
and master ruler of the wealth and power of the world. 


तन्तमिद्राध॑से मह इन्द्रं चोदामि पीतयें। 
यः पूर्व्यामनुंष्ुतिमीशे कृष्टीनां Tq: ॥ ७॥ 


ह Tantamid-radhase maha indram codami pitaye. 
Yah purvyam-anustutim-ise krstinam nrtuh. 


For every great success, for all wealth and high 
competence in life and also for the joyous pleasure of it 
all, I invoke and celebrate Indra, ultimate leader and 
guide of the people who listens to the prayers and 
adorations of humanity since time immemorial and rules 
them all. 


816 RGVEDA 


न यस्य॑ ते शवसान सख्यमानंशा मर्त्य: । 
नकिः शवांसि ते नत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Na yasya te Savasana sakhyam-anamsa martyah. 
Nakih sSavamsi te naSat. 


O lord of universal power, no mortal has ever 
been able to attain equal fellowship with you, then who 
can claim to attain equality with your power and 
potential? 


त्वोतासस्त्वा युजाऽप्सु सूर्ये महनब्दन॑म्‌। 
जयेम पृत्सु ara: ९ ॥ 


८१ Tvotasastva yuja’psu surye mahaddhanam. 
Jayema prtsu vajrivah. 


O lord of thunderous energy and power, 
protected by you and in close association with you, we 
pray, we may discover great wealth in the waters and in 
the sun and win far reaching victories in our battles of 
life. 


तं त्वां यज्ञेभिरीमहे तं गीर्भिर्िर्वणस्तम। 
इन्द्र यथा चिदाविंथ वाजेषु पुरु माय्य॑म्‌॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Tam tva yajnebhir-imahe tam girbhir-girva- 
nastama. Indra yatha cidavitha vajesu puruma- 
yyam. 


Indra, lord most adorable, we honour you by 
yajnas of corporate research and development, and we 
adore you in many languages as you guide, advance 
and protect the man of knowledge in our human 
endeavours for new achievements and further advances. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 68 817 


यस्य॑ ते स्वादु सख्यं Carat प्रणींतिरद्रिवः। 
यज्ञो वितन्तसाय्यः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yasya te svadu sakhyam svadvi pranitir-adrivah. 
Yajno vitantasayyah. 


O lord of the clouds of shower, knowledge and 
wealth, delightful is your association, exciting is your 
guidance. The yajna of corporate action and advance- 
ment must go on. 


उरु Uka-as तन॑ उरु arate नस्कृधि । 
उरु णो यन्धि जीवसे 11 ९२॥ 


12. (7 nastanve tana uru ksayaya naskrdhi. 
Uru no yandhi jivase. 


Excellence for our body’s health, rise and expan- 
sion for our children and grand children, expansion, 
comfort and safety for our home, O lord, grant, grant us 
rise and advancement for life’s excellence and joy. 


उरू नृभ्य॑ उरु गव॑ Se रथाय ueahy 
देववीतिं मनामहे॥ ९३॥ 


13. Urumnrbhya urum gava urum rathaya pantham. 
Devavitim manamahe. 


Rise and advancement for the people, expansion 
and development for lands and cattle, expansion and 
improvement of highways for transport, we pray for, 
and for that we think and research and plan, and we 
seek the favour of divinity. 


उप॑ मा षड्‌ द्वाद्वा नरः सोम॑स्य हष्यी । 
तिष्टन्ति स्वादुरातय॑ः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


818 RGVEDA 
14. Upa ma sad dvadva narah somasya harsya. 
Tisthanti svaduratayah. 
In the ecstasy of soma joy and exhilaration of 
achievement, six in twos come to me, leading lights they 
are, abundant and delightful are their gifts and 
contributions. 
ऋज्राविन्द्रोत आ द॑दे हरी ऋक्ष॑स्य सूनवि । 
आश्वमेधस्य रोहिता ॥ ९५५ ॥ 

15. Rjravindrota a dade hari rksasya sunavi. 
Asvamedhasya rohita. 


I have got two sensitive and dynamic organs of 
communication protected and promoted by Indra for 
the body form of the spirit and for efficient working of 
the body system. 
सुरथा आतिथिग्वे स्व॑भीशूरार्े। 
आश्व मेधे सुपेशसः ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. Surathan atithigve svabhisunrarkse. 
Asvamedhe supesasah. 
For the body in service of the visiting resident 
soul, I get another two fast and controlled organs in 
fine shape for the systemic and yajnic working of the 
body system. 
yaval आतिथिग्व इन्द्रोते वधूम॑तः। 
सचा पूतक्रतौ सनम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Salasvan atithigva indrote vadhumatah. 
Saca putakratau sanam. 


Six organs of perception in this body system, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 819 


sophisticated and pervaded by Indra, the soul, with a 
partner house keeper, the intellectual faculty, I have 
received. They are all friendly participants in the holy 
working of the system in divine service. 


Ue चेतद्‌ GUA AAAI । 
स्वभीशुः करशावती ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. 4757 cetad-vrsanvatyantar-rjresvarusi. 
Svabhisuh kasavati. 


In the midst of these simple and straight organs 
of sense, fast but well steered, there is one which is 
extremely generous and creative, the intelligence, which 
holds the whip and the reins both, that is, the acceleration 
and the steer and the brakes for proper movement of 
the systemic chariot. 


न युष्मे वाजबन्धवो निनित्सुश्चन मर्त्य॑ः । 
अवद्यमधि। दीधरत्‌ VS 

19. Na yusme vajabandhavo ninitsuScana martyah. 
Avadyamadhi didharat. 


O brotherly team of dynamic workers and 
winners in the battles of life, no mortal even addicted 
to malignity and scandal can foist any blame or censure 
on you. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 69 


Indra (1-10, 13-18), Vishvedevah (11), Varuna (11-12) 
Devatah, Priyamedha Angirasa Rshi 


प्रप्र॑ वस्िष्टुभमिषं मन्दद्वीरायेन्द॑वे | 
धिया वो मेधसातये पुरन्ध्या विवासति ॥ ९॥ 


820 RGVEDA 


1. Prapra vas-tristubham-isam mandadvirayen- 
dave. Dhiya vo medhasataye purandhya vivasati. 


For your progress, offer libations of holy fuel 
and fragrance, triple refined and intensified, with 
trishtubh hymns of Vedic formulae in the service of 
Indra, cosmic spirit of energy and power, happy and 
exciting, who inspires the brave and shines you with 
versatile creative intellect for the advancement of your 
science of yajna for further development. 


नदं a ओद॑तीनां नदं atetadmm 
पतिं at अघ्न्यानां धेनूनामिषुध्यसि ॥ २॥ 


0. Nadam va odatinam nadam yoyuvatinam. 
Patim vo aghnyanam dhenunam-isudhyasi. 


Indra is the resounding source of fresh energies, 
roaring expression of maiden youthfulness, protector 
and promoter of sacred sources of production and 
nourishment such as cows which must not be killed or 
hurt, and he is the relentless inexhaustible keeper of 
your arrows for your targets of defence and 
development. 


ता अंस्य सूद॑दोहसः सोमं श्रीणन्ति asa: 1 
जन्मन्देवानां विश्॑स्तिष्वा रोचने fea: ३॥ 


a: Ta asya sudadohasah somam Srinanti prsnayah. 
Janman devanam visastrisva rocane divah. 


Just as on the rise of dawn in the divine heaven 
of light, the edifying rays of the sun beatify the Indra- 
born beauty and freshness of life in the three regions of 
earth, heaven and the skies, similarly, on the dawn of 
divine vision in the intelligence of the soul, the 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 821 


revelations of divinity and reflections of omniscience 
refine, intensify and edify the energy, power and beauty 
of the soma gifts of Indra, this oceanic source of matter, 
energy and excellence of life, for the trinity of body, 
mind and soul. 


अभि प्र गोप॑तिं गिरेन्द्रमर्च यथां विदे। 
सूनुं सत्यस्य सत्प॑तिम्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 

4. Abhi pra gopatim girendramarca yatha vide. 
Sunum satyasya satpatim. 


To the best of your knowledge and culture and 
with the best of your language, worship and adore Indra, 
protector of stars and planets, lands and cows, language 
and culture, creator of the dynamics of existence and 
protector of its constancy. 


आ हर॑यः ससुचिरेऽ रुषीरधि। ae Fa । 
यत्राभि संनवामहे ॥ ५ ॥ 

2 A harayah sasrjrire’rusiradhi barhisi. 
Yatrabhi samnavamahe. 


Let the vibrations of divinity, like crimson rays 
of dawn which bring the sun to the earth, bring Indra 
on to our sacred grass where we humans meet and pray 
and celebrate the lord in song together. 


sala गाव॑ आशिरं दुदु हे ahaa मधु । 
यत्सीं मुपह्वरे विदत्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Indraya gava asiram duduhre vajrine madhu. 
Yat stmupahvare vidat. 


Lands and cows, suns and planets, indeed all 


822 RGVEDA 


objects in motion, exude for Indra, wielder of thunder, 
the ichor of emotional adoration seasoned with ecstasy 
like honey sweet milk mixed with soma which he 
receives close at hand and cherishes. 


उद्यद्‌ sete fast गृहमिन्द्रश्च uafel 
मध्व॑ः पीत्वा स॑चेवहि fr: wa सख्युः पदे ॥ ७॥ 


De Udyad bradhnasya vistapam grham-indrasca 
ganvahi. Madhvah pitva sacevahi trih sapta 
sakhyuh pade. 


Up let us rise on top of the sun and vast spaces, 
reach the abode of Indra, and, having drunk the soma 
sweet of ecstasy, let us be together across and over the 
thrice seven stages of being in evolution in the purely 
spiritual state of the lord’s presence as a friend. 


(The thrice seven are the steps of physical, 
mental and pychic evolutionary phases of existence in 
three qualitative modes of being in the process of 
becoming. The seven states of evolution in descending 
order from pure being are: mahat, Ahankara and the 
five elements, akasha, vayu, agni, apah and prthivi. The 
three qualitative modes are sattva, rajas and tamas or 
thought, energy and matter. Another way to explain the 
twenty one is: five elements, five pranic energies, five 
perceptive organs and five organs of volition, the 
twenty-first is antahkarana or psychic self. When the 
psychic self or the soul in the existential state wishes to 
rise back to the purely spiritual state, it has to cross the 
twenty one stages and then be in the company of Indra, 
the cosmic self, and even later, in the transcendental 
state of absolute Being, the Spirit, the Brahmic state. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 823 


This is set out it detail in the Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta 
philosophy.) 


अर्चत प्रार्चत प्रिय॑मेधासो stefan 
अर्चन्तु पुत्रका उत पुरं न धूष्णवंर्चत ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Arcata prarcata priyamedhaso arcata. 
Arcantu putraka uta puram na dhrsnvarcata. 


O lovers of Yajna, lovers of union and 
communion with the divine, adore and worship Indra, 
adore and worship again, worship again and again. 
Worship along with your children and grand children, 
just as the citizens adore and exalt a great city and the 
glorious ruler of the celestial city. 


अवं स्वराति गर्गरो गोधा परि सनिष्वणत्‌ | 
fost परि चनिष्कददिन्द्राय ब्रह्मोद्य॑तम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 

= Ava svarati gargaro godha pari sanisvanat. 
Pinga pari caniskadad-indraya brahmodyatam. 


The drum booms aloud, the bow string strikes 
the arm guard, the string bells jingle, let the hymns rise 
in honour of Indra. 


आ यत्पत॑न्त्येन्यंः सुदुघा अनंपस्फुरः। 
अपस्फुरं गृभायत सोममिन्द्राय urda ९०॥ 

10. A yat patantyenyah sudugha anapasphurah. 
Apasphuram grbhayata somam-indraya patave. 


When the dynamic senses of perception and 
volition, controlled, unagitating and calmly withdrawn, 
concentrate in the inner mind, then you receive the 
showers of soma nectar of spiritual ananda for Indra, 


824 RGVEDA 
the soul. 


अपादिन्द्रो अपादगिर्विश्वें देवा अंमत्सत। वरुण इदिह 
क्षयत्तमापो अभ्यनूषत वत्सं संशिश्वरीरिव ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Apddindro apddagnir-visve deva amatsata. 
Varuna idiha ksayat tamapo abhyanusata vatsam 
samsSsisvaririva. 

Indra, the soul, seeking honour, fame and power, 
loves the soma of ananda. Agni, leading scholar 
advancing into the light of knowledge, loves the soma 
of ananda. All brilliancies of nature and humanity love 
the ecstasy of soma. Varuna, powers of love and justice, 
all abide in the ecstasy of soma. All seekers of yajnic 
action and divine dedication love the soma of spiritual 
ananda of their creation like the mother loving her child. 


सुदेवो अंसि वरुणा यस्य॑ ते सस्र सिन्ध॑वः। 
अनुक्षरन्ति काकुदं सूर्म्य' सुषिरामिव nee i 
12. Sudevo asi varuna yasya te sapta sindhavah. 


Anuksaranti kakudam surmyam susiramiva. 


Varuna, master scholar and teacher, you are 
divinely brilliant and generous whose seven streams of 
knowledge and wisdom flow forth in words from the 
master’s voice to the seekers, like water flowing from a 
tube into many channels. 


यो व्यतीरणयत्सुयुंक्तों उप॑ दाशुषे । 
तक्वो नेता तदिद्वपुरुपमा यो अमुच्यत ।॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Yo vyatinraphanayat suyuktan upa dasase. 
Takvo neta tadidvapurupama yo amucyata. 


That soul is Indra, man of self control and self 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 825 


power, who withdraws his scattered powers of senses 
and mind, turns them inward and applies them into 
meditation for the sake of generosity of the spirit, and 
then as their patient master and leader, with the power 
and grace of his self-possession, releases and relaxes 
them in the state of peace. He is the sovereign soul. 


अतीदु श॒क्र ओहत इन्द्रो विश्वा अति द्विष॑ः । 
भिनत्कनीन ओदनं पच्यमानं परो गिरा॥ ९४॥ 


14. Afidu sakra ohata indro visva ati dvisah. 
Bhinat kanina odanam pacyamanam paro gira. 


Indra, the sovereign soul of self-power, 
transcends all jealousy, malignity and enmity and, blest 
with top handsomeness and grace of the spirit, breaks 
open into words the mature knowledge and self-realised 
spiritual food for the seekers. 


अर्भको न कुमार कोऽ fal तिष्ठन्नवं रथ॑म्‌ । 
स पंक्षन्महिषं मृगं पित्रे मात्रे वि॑भुक्रतुंम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Arbhako na kumarako’dhi tisthan navam ratham. 
Sa paksan-mahisam mrgam pitre matre vibhukra- 
tum. 


Neither a child nor an adolescent, the man of 
mature mind abiding in a healthy body practices 
meditation and realises the great, supreme, omnipotent 
cosmic soul of universal holy action for the 
enlightenment of all about Mother Nature and the father 
of creation. 


आ तू सुशिप्र दम्पते रथं तिष्ठा दिर ण्यय॑म्‌। अधं द्युक्षं 
स॑चेवहि सहस््र॑पादमरुषं स्व॑स्तिगामंनेहसंम्‌॥ ९६॥ 


826 RGVEDA 


16. A tu susipra dampate ratham tistha hiranya-yam. 
Adha dyuksam sacevahi sahasrapadam- 
arusamsvastigam-anehasam. 


O lord of golden grace, father and sustainer of 
the house-hold of the universe, come and seat yourself 
in the golden chariot of this human body and, together 
as friends and companions, we shall ride this chariot of 
heavenly light, thousand wheeled, invincible and 
immaculate, moving on the road to peace and ultimate 
good. 


तं घेमित्था anes उप॑ स्व॒राज॑मासते | 
ste चिदस्य सुधितं यदेत॑व आवर्तयन्ति दावने ii ९७॥ 


17. Tam ghemittha namasvina upa svarajam-asate. 
Artham cidasya sudhitam yadetava avartayanti 
davane. 


Thus do yajnic and meditative souls holding 
havis for homage adore and worship self-refulgent Indra 
when, in order to realise the nature, character and 
generosity, indeed the very presence of the lord, they 
turn their self-controlled mind to the Divine Soul in 
order to reach him. 


अनुं प्रलस्यौकसः प्रियमेधास एषाम्‌। 
पूर्वामनु प्रय॑तिं वृक्तबर्हिषो हितप्र॑यस आशत ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Anu pratnasyaukasah priyamedhasa esam. 
Purvamanu prayatim vrktabarhiso hitaprayasa 
asata. 

Of these devotees of yajna and lovers of 
meditative communion, those who sit on the holy grass 
with a clean mind and offer oblations of spiritual love 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 70 827 


in the style of the sages of old as ever achieve union 
with the universal presence of the eternal Spirit. 


Mandala 8/SuKta 70 
Indra Devata, Puruhanma Angirasa Rshi 


यो राजा चर्षणीनां याता रथेभिरधिंगुः। 
विश्वासां तरुता पृत॑नानां ज्येष्ठो यो वुंत्रहा गृणे ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Yo raja carsaninam yata rathebhiradhriguh. 
Visvasam taruta prtananam jyestho yo vrtraha 
gime. 


I adore Indra, lord supreme, who rules the 
people, and who is the irresistible and universal mover 
by waves of cosmic energy, saviour of all humanity, 
supreme warrior and winner of cosmic battles of the 
elemental forces and who destroys the evil, darkness 
and poverty of the world. 


इन्द्रं तं शुम्भ पुरुहन्मन्नव॑से यस्य॑ द्विता faerie । 
हस्ताय aa: प्रतिं धायि दर्शतो महो दिवे न सूर्य: ॥ २॥ 


Indram tam sumbha puruhanmannavase yasya 
dvita vidhartari. Hastaya vajra prati dhayi darsa- 
to maho dive na suryah. 


O man of universal devotion, exalt and glorify 
that omnipotent Indra for protection and progress in 
whom, as ruler and controller of the world, both justice 
and mercy abide simultaneously, who holds the 
thunderbolt of power in hand, and who is great and 
glorious like the sun in heaven. 


नकिं कर्म॑णा नशद्यश्चकार सदावृधम्‌ । 
इन्द्रं न यजर्विंश्वगृं्तमूभ्व॑समधुंं धृष्ण्वोजसम्‌ | ३॥ 


828 RGVEDA 


Di Nakistam karmana nasadyascakara sadavr- 
dham. Indram na yajnair-visvagurtamrbhva-sam- 
adhrstam dhrsnvojasam. 


No one can equal merely by action, much less 
hurt even by yajnas, that person who has won the favour 
and grace of Indra, lord divine who is rising as well as 
raising his devotees high, who is universally adored, 
universal genius, redoubtable and invincibly illustrious. 


अरषाव्न्दमुग्रं पृत॑नासु सासहिं यस्मिन्महीरुरुज्रयंः । 
सं धेनवो जाय॑माने अनोनवु््यावः क्षामो अनोनवुः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Asalham-ugram prtanasu sasahim yasmin maht- 
rurujrayah. Sam dhenavo jayamane anonavur- 
dyavah ksamo anonavuh. 


Unchallengeable, awful, victorious in cosmic 
dynamics, in whose pervasive presence great and 
tempestuous stars and planets, earths and heavens, all 
in unison move in order and do homage in reverence, 
such is Indra. 


यद्‌ Oe इन्द्र ते Vid शातं WN Sat स्युः । न त्वां वजिन्त्सदहस्त्ं 
सूयां अनु न जातमष्ट रोद॑सी ॥५॥ 


Yaddyava indra te satam satam bhumiruta syuh. 
Na tva vajrint-sahasram suryda anu na jatamasta 
rodast. 


Indra, lord of thunder, if there were a hundred 
heavens, and if there were a hundred earths, they would 
not be able to rival you. Not a thousand suns, nor 
heavens, earths and skies together would match you at 
the rise in manifestation. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 70 829 


आ पप्राथ महिना वृष्ण्या वृषन्विर्वां शविष्ठ शव॑सा | 
अस्मां sta मघवन्गोमति व्रजे वजिंज्चित्राभिरूतिभिः॥ ६॥ 


6. A papratha mahina vrsnya vrsan visva Savistha 
Savasa. Asman ava maghavan gomati vraje 
vajrin-citrabhir-utibhih. 

O lord of the thunderbolt, master and controller 
of world’s wealth, honour and power, most potent and 
lord of showers of generosity, with your generous and 
creative power and grandeur you pervade the universe. 
Pray protect, guide and promote us by your various and 
wondrous modes of protection and progress in our 
search for development of lands and cows, knowledge, 
language and culture. 


न सीमदेव आपदिषं दीर्घायो ae: 1 
एत॑ग्वा चिद्य एत॑शा युयोज॑ ते हरी इन्द्रो युयोजते ॥ ७॥ 
a, Na simadeva apadisam dirghayo martyah. Etagva 
cidya etasa yuyojate hari indro yuyojate. 
Never can an impious, ungodly mortal find that 
food and energy in life which that other person can find 
who yokes those dynamic energies and powers in his 


search for progress which Indra deploys in his creative 
and evolutionary programme of existence. 


तं वों महो महाय्यमिन्द्रं दानाय सक्षणि॑म्‌। 
यो गाधेषुय आरणेषु हव्यो वाजेष्वस्ति हव्य॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tam vo maho mahayyam-indram danaya saksa- 
nim. Yo gadhesu ya aranesu havyo vajesvasti 
havyah. 


Invoke that great, adorable and friendly Indra 


830 RGVEDA 


for the gift of power, energy and expertise for your 
progress who is invoked and adored in the depth of the 
seas, over lands and mountains and in the battles of the 
brave for new heights. 


उदूषुणों वसो महे मृशस्व॑ शूर राध॑से। 
उदू षु मह्यै म॑घवन्मघत्तय उर्दिन्द्र श्रव॑से महे॥ ९॥ 


2. Udi su no vaso mahe mrsasva Sura radhase. Udu 
su mahyai maghavan maghattaya udindra Sravase 
mahe. 


Brave Indra, lord of the wealth, honour and 
excellence of the world, haven and home of all living 
beings, inspire our will and intelligence for the 
achievement of great wealth and competence for success 
in life and raise us to great power, honour and excellence 
to win high fame across the world. 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्र ऋतयुस्त्वानिदो नि dara | 
मध्ये वसिष्व तुविनृम्णोर्वोर्निं दासं शिश्नथो हथः ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Tvamna indra rtayustvanido ni trmpasi. Madhye 
vasisva tuvinrmnorvorni dasam sisnatho hathaih. 


Indra, lover and promoter of truth and rectitude, 
you fulfil us with your gifts and reduce the maligners 
of divinity to deprivation. O lord of boundless wealth 
and power, raise us to the heights of the skies in the 
midst of heaven and earth, and strike down the violent 
and the destroyer with blows of retribution. 


अन्यव्र॑तममानु षमय॑ज्वानमदेवयुम्‌ | 
अव स्वः सखा दुधुवीत पर्वतः सुघ्नाय दस्युं पर्व॑तः ॥ ९९॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 70 831 


11.  Anyavratam-amanusam-ayajvanam-adevayum. 
Ava svah sakha dudhuvita parvatah sughnaya 
dasyum parvatah. 


Friendly, generous but adamantine ruler, punish 
the person committed to destructive values, anti-human 
organisation, anticreative and antisocial actions and 
antinature and impious plans and programmes, punish 
him with deprivation of comfort, self-satisfaction and 
social privileges and assign him to sure elimination or 
total change. The strong uncompromising ruler should 
punish the violent, the terrorist and the killer to an equal 
and opposite fate. 


त्वं न॑ इन्द्रासां हस्ते शविष्ठ दावने । 
धानानां न सं गुभायास्मयुर्धिः सं गुभायास्पयुः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tvam na indrasam haste Savistha davane. 
Dhananam na sam grbhayasmayur-dvih sam 
grbhayasamayuh. 


Indra, most powerful ruler and leader, our 
benefactor, one of our own, in order to benefit us, pray 
take up in hand these assets of wealth just as one holds 
roasted rice in hand for distribution, and give it to us. 
Take up the wealth again, our own man, and distribute 
that too. 


सखायः ्रतुंमिच्छत कथा राधाम शारस्यं। 
उपस्तुतिं भोजः सूरिय अहयः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Sakhayah kratum-icchata katha radhama 
sarasya. Upastutim bhojah suriryo ahrayah. 


O friends, try freely to do good by way of yajna, 
else how shall we serve Indra, lord of the bow and arrow, 


832 RGVEDA 


with worship and adoration? He is the great benefactor 
and ruler, light giver, abundant and gracious. 


भूरिभिः समह ऋषिंभिर्बर्हिष्पं द्धिः स्तविष्यसे । 
यदित्थमेक॑मेकमिच्छरं वत्सान्प॑रादद॑ः ॥ ९४ ul 


14. = Bhuribhih samaha rsibhir-barhismadabhih stavi- 
syase. Yadittham-ekamekam-icchara vatsan 
paradadah. 


O lord of grandeur and glory, destroyer of 
suffering, ignorance and all difficulties in the way of 
human happiness, since thus you give gracious gifts of 
cherished wealth, light and joy to dear and holy 
beneficiaries, to one and all of them, you are adored by 
all sages of the sacred grass on the yajna vedi. 


कर्णगृह्यां मघवा शौरदेव्यो वत्सं Are ssa 
अजां GRA धात॑वे ।॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Karnagrhya maghava sauradevyo vatsam 
nastribhya anayat. Ajam surirna dhatave. 


Indra, lord of wealth, power and glory, 
benefactor of the brave and holy, holds in his power the 
cherished wealth of perceptible knowledge and 
awareness which he showers for us from the three 
regions of heaven, earth and sky, just as, at our human 
level, the master and sagely scholar holds the eternal 
Vedic Word for us to hear and enjoy. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 71 833 


Mandala 8/Sukta 71 


Agni Devata, Suditi - Purumidhau Angirasau, tayor va 
anyatara Rshi 


त्वं नो अग्ने महोभिः पाहि विश्व॑स्या arte: | 
उत द्विषो मर्त्य॑स्य ॥ ९॥ 
1. Tvam no agne mahobhih pahi visvasya arateh. 
Uta dviso martyasya. 
Agni, leading light of life, with your mighty 
powers and grandeur, protect us against all material, 


moral and social adversity and all mortal jealousy and 
enmity. 


नहि मन्युः पौरुषेय got हि व॑: प्रियजात । 
त्वमिद॑सि क्षर्पावान्‌॥ २॥ 
2. Nahi manyuh pauruseya ise hi vah priyajata. 
Tvamidasi ksapavan. 
No wrath of man rules over you, all time dear 


friend of humanity, since your very birth you are the 
master and ruler of the earth. 


स नो विश्वेभिर्दवेभिरूर्जो' नपा द्ध्र॑शोचे | 
रयिं देहि विश्ववारम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


3: Sano visvebhir-devebhir-urjo napad-bhadrasoce. 
Rayim dehi visvavaram. 

Ruler of the earth as you are, O lord of infallible 

energy and blissful flames of fire, bless us with universal 


wealth with all the light, honour and excellence of the 
world. 


834 RGVEDA 


न aay अरातयो मर्त' युवन्त रायः। 
यं त्राय॑से दाश्वांसम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Na tamagne ardtayo martam yuvanta rayah. 
Yam trayase dasvamsam. 


No adversities, no enemies, can deprive that 
generous man of his wealth, honour and excellence 
whom you protect and promote. 


a cd fay Aeratarad हिनोषि धनाय। 
स तवोती गोषु गन्ता ॥ & 

3: Yam tvam vipra medhasatavagne hinosi dhanaya. 
Sa tavoti gosu ganta. 


O vibrant power of wealth, honour and 
excellence, the man whom you inspire and exhort to 
win wealth and to dedicate himself to the service of 
divinities goes forward in the acquisition of lands, cows, 
and the light of knowledge and culture under your 
protection. 


त्वं रयिं पुरुवीरम दाशुषे मर्तीय। 
प्रणो नय वस्यो अच्छ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tvam rayim puruviram-agne dasuse martaya. 
Pra no naya vasyo accha. 

Agni, lead us to wealth, brave happy progeny 
and the perfect joy of life for men of charity and 
unbounded generosity. 

उरुष्या णो मा परा दा अघायते जातवेदः | 
दुराध्ये ३ मतय ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 71 835 


Urusya no ma para da aghayate jatavedah. 
Duradhye martaya. 


All pervasive, omniscient Agni, protect us and 


leave us not to the sinner, the criminal, and the man of 
evil thought and action. 


अग्ने माकि्टे देवस्य रातिमदेवो युयोत | 

त्वमीशिषे वसूंनाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

Agne makiste devasya ratim-adevo yuyota. 
Tvamisise vasunam. 


Agni, lord of brilliance and generosity, let no 


impious man deprive us of your generosity extended to 
us. You rule, control and protect the wealth, honour and 
excellence of the world. 


सनो वस्व उप॑ मास्यूर्जो नपान्मा्हिंनस्य । 
सरे वसो जरितृभ्यः ॥ ९॥ 


Sa no vasva upa masyurjonapan-mahinasya. 
Sakhe vaso jaritrbhyah. 


Agni, creator and treasure home of the world, 


infinite energy, giver of peace and settlement, universal 
friend, give us wealth as well as honour and glory for 
the celebrants. 


10. 


अच्छा नः शीरशोचिषं गिरो यन्तु estan 
अच्छ। यज्ञासो नम॑सा पुरूवसुं पुरुप्रशस्तमूतये ॥ ९० ॥ 


Accha nah Sirasocisam giro yantu darsatam. 
Accha yajnaso namasa puruvasum puruprasa- 
stamutaye. 


Let all our songs of adoration rise fast to the 


836 RGVEDA 


refulgent and glorious Agni. Let our yajna with homage 
and havi move and reach the universally adored and 
universally honoured Agni for the sake of universal 
protection. 


at सूनुं सह॑सो जातवेदसं दानाय वायौणाम्‌। 
द्विता यो भूदमृतो मर्त्येष्वा erat मन्द्रतमो विशि ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Agnim sunum sahaso jatavedasam danaya 
varyanam. Dvita yo bhudamrto martyesva 
hota mandratamo visi. 


Let our prayers reach Agni, all pervasive creator 
of energy, for the gift of cherished wealth and power. 
Agni is the immortal presence who appears among 
mortals in both physical and spiritual forms, universal 
yajaka, happiest and most blissful, arising in every home 
stead of the people. 


aft at देवयज्ययाऽग्नं Valea | 

sit धीषु प्र॑थममयिमर्वत्ययिं data साधंसे ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Agnim vo devayajyaya’gnim prayatyadhvare. 

Agnim dhisu prathamam-agnimarvatyagnim 

ksaitraya sadhase. 

Adore Agni for all your service of the divinities 
of nature and humanity, light agni in the process of every 
holy programme, keep Agni in the fore-front in all your 
acts of thought and will initially, and in every new 
beginning serve and rely on Agni for every plan in the 
field of life. 

sifuitet सख्ये द॑दातु न ईशो यो वा्यीणाम्‌। 
अभि तोके तन॑ये शश्व॑दीमहे वसुं सन्तं तनूपाम्‌॥ ९३ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 71 837 


13. Agnirisam sakhye daddatu na ise yo varyanam. 
Agnim toke tanaye Sasvadimahe vasum santam 
tanupam. 


May Agni as a friend give us food and energy 
for sustenance since he rules over all the wealth and 
powers of the world. We always serve and pray to Agni 
for our children and grand children, he being the 
universal giver of home and settlement as well as the 
protector and sustainer of our body’s health. 


अथिमीच्ठिष्वाव॑से गाथाभिः शीरशोचिषम्‌ । 
अभि राये dating श्रुतं नरोऽ भिं सुदीतये छर्दिः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Agnimilisvavase gathabhih Strasocisam. Agnim 
raye purumilha srutam naro’gnim suditaye 
chardhih. 


Pray to Agni of bright flames with songs and 
praise for protection and progress. O generous scholar, 
study and serve Agni for wealth, famous among people, 
Agni who provides home and happiness for the man of 
brilliance. 


अगिं sot योतवै Al गृणीमस्यभिं शं योश्च ara । 
विश्वासु विक्ष्व॑वितेव हव्यो भुवद्रस्तु ऋषूणाम्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Agnim dveso yotavai no grnimasyagnim sam 
yosca datave. Visvasu viksvaviteva havyo bhuva- 
dvastur-rsunam. 


We adore Agni for driving away our enemies 
from us and for giving us peace and settlement with 
happiness. He is like a protector among people, giver 
of home and adored by sages. 


838 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 72 
Agni or Havis Devata, Haryata Pragatha Rshi 


हविष्कुणुध्वमा गंमदध्वर्यर्व नते पुन॑ः | 
fast अस्य प्रशासंनम्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Haviskrnudhvama gamad-adhvaryur-vanate 
punah. Vidvan asya prasasanam. 


Come, devotees of yajna, celebrants of Agni: 
Prepare the havi for oblation, let the high priest come, 
he knows the ministration of this yajna, let him serve 
Agni again. 


नि ferret ot सीटब्दोतां मनावधिं। 
जुषाणो अस्य सख्यम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2: Ni tigmamabhyamsum sidaddhota manavadhi. 
Jusano asya sakhyam. 


Let the hota, offerer of oblations, come and sit 
close to the fire in bright flames, loving and honouring 
at heart the friendship of this Agni. 


अन्तरिच्छन्ति तं जने रुद्रं परो म॑नीषर्या । 
गृभ्णन्ति Real ससम्‌॥ ३॥ 


Di Antaricchanti tam jane rudram paro manisaya. 
Grbhnanti jihvaya sasam. 


Dedicated priests and scholars among people, 
with the best of their mind and intelligence, try to raise 
Agni, mighty fiery power immanent everywhere, and 
having raised it, they try to describe and adore it with 
words of homage. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 72 839 
जाम्य॑तीतपे धनुंर्वयोधा अरूह दनम्‌ । 
gad जिह्ययाव॑धीत्‌॥।  ॥ 


Jamyatitape dhanur-vayodha aruhad-vanam. 
Drsadam jihvayavadhit. 


Agni, immanent, friendly and rising as the sun, 


heats up the sky, bearing health and energy for 
nourishment, it rides the vapours of water and with its 
catalytic energy breaks the cloud. 


चर॑न्वत्सो esifae निंदातारं न विन्दते | 
वेति स्तोत॑व अम्ब्य॑म्‌॥ ५॥ 


Caran vatso rusanniha nidataram na vindate. 
Veti stotava ambyam. 


Agni, newly risen, playing as hyperactive and 


shining bright, brooks no obstruction and for its 
description and assessment needs a celebrant appraiser. 


उतो न्व॑स्य यन्महदश््वांवद्योज॑नं बृहत्‌ | 
दामा रथ॑स्य TST ॥ & ॥ 


Uto nvasya yanmahadasvavadyojanam brhat. 
Dama rathasya dadrse. 


And as its mighty boundless expansion grows 


on, intensely bright with sun-rays, its sphere of energy 
is seen like the halo of glorious light round the solar 
chariot. 


Sead सपैकामुप द्वा पञ्च॑ सृजतः | 
तीर्थे सिन्धोरधि स्वरे ॥ ७॥ 


Duhanti saptaikamupa dva panca srjatah. 
Tirthe sindhoradhi svare. 


840 RGVEDA 


Five senses of perception alongwith two others, 
mind and intelligence (i.e., mana and buddhi), at work 
distill the power and glory of Agni, like seven milk- 
maids milking one cow on the bank of a sacred river, 
and give it expression in the resounding notes of cosmic 
hymns. 


आ asifuftiacda इन्द्रः कोंमचुच्यवीत्‌। 
wea त्रिवृतां fea: neu 


8. A dasabhir-vivasvata indrah kosam-acucyavit. 
Khedaya trivrta divah. 


Just as Indra, electric energy of the sun in the 
form of lightning, breaks the cloud and brings down 
showers from the sky, so does the divine human soul by 
threefold passion of intellect, will and emotion, with 
the assistance of ten senses of perception and volition 
and ten pranic energies, distill down the treasure glory 
of Agni from the sun into threefold wealth of knowledge, 
action and prayer committed and dedicated to divinity. 


UR त्रिधातुरध्वरं SiR fa नवीयसी । 
मध्वा होतारो अञ्जते॥ ९॥ 


0. Pari tridhaturadhvaram jurnireti naviyast. 
Madhva hotaro anjate. 


Just as Agni rising in threefold flames, white, 
red and dark, comes at lightning speed to yajna with 
youthful power and the priests anoint and serve it with 
homage, so does the light of divinity with revelations 
of sattva, rajas and tamas and the values of knowledge, 
action and prayer, youthful, bright and vibrant, come to 
the mind of the celebrant, and then the yajnic senses, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 72 841 


mind and intellect and the pranic energies of the devotee 
express the power and grace of Agni in celebration. 


सिञ्चन्ति नम॑सावतमुच्याच॑क्रं परिंज्मानम्‌। 
नीचीन॑बार मर्षितम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sincanti namasavatamuccacakram parijmanam. 
Nicinavaramaksitam. 


With homage the devotees serve Agni, radiating 
and vibrating on high, pervading all round, full of peace 
and joy, just an inverted well, inexhaustible, with release 
of showers on the down side for the celebrants. 


अभ्यारमिदद्रयो निषिक्तं पुष्करे मधुं | 
अवतस्य विसर्जने ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Abhyaram-idadrayo nisiktam puskare madhu. 
Avatasya visarjane. 


When the fount of the divine reservoir is 
released toward the quiet mind of the devotee, then the 
lord of clouds and soma fills the lotus of his heart with 
the honeyed ecstasy of divine grace. 


गाव उपावतावतं मही य॒ज्ञस्य॑ र प्सुद।। 
उभा कर्णीं हिरण्यय ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Gava upavatavatam mahi yajnasya rapsuda. 
Ubha karna hiranyaya. 


The psychic base of the devoted seeker of 
meditative communion is highly creative. O mind and 
senses attended with both knowledge and action of 
divine character, rise high and reach close to the 
reservoir of divine grace and win the showers of bliss. 


842 RGVEDA 


आ सुते सिञ्चत fra रोद॑स्योरभिश्चिय॑म्‌। 
रसा द॑धीत वृषभम्‌ 23 0 


13. A sute sificata sriyam rodasyorabhisriyam. 
Rasa dadhita vrsabham. 


O seekers of communion aspiring for divine 
ecstasy, when the communion is achieved, collect and 
fill the mind to overflowing with nectar and offer the 
oblations of ananda to the heavenly glory of Agni rolling 
across and over heaven and earth. 


ते जानत स्वमोक्यं१९ सं वत्सासो न मातृभिंः। 
पिथो न॑सन्त जामिभिः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Te janata svamokyam sam vatsaso na matrbhih. 
Mitho nasanta jamibhih. 


The aspirants know the one inmate spirit of their 
common home and they all abide and move together in 
and with the one intimate spirit of their own kind as 
children move around attached with their mothers (each 
with the one that is his, but all mothers are the same, 
the one common Soul). 


उप स््रक्रैषु बप्स॑तः Hvad धरूणं दिवि | 
इन्द्र अग्रा नमः स्व॑ः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Upa srakvesu bapsatah krnvate dharunam divi. 
Indre agna namah svah. 


Agni, receiving, kindling and consuming the 
oblations in the flames, turns the havi into light in 
heaven as offering in the cup of faith to Indra. (So does 
the yogi turn his thoughts through contemplation into 
light and joy in the higher personality to offer it as 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 72 843 
homage to Indra.) 
अधुश्षप्विप्युषीमिषमूर्ज' ससप॑दीमरिः। 
सूर्य॑स्य सप्त रस्मिभिः ॥ १६॥ 
16. Adhuksat pipyusimisamurjam saptapadimarih. 
Suryasya sapta rasmibhih. 
May the lord of faith and power accept the 
offering of nourishing food and energy through seven 
stages of nature’s evolution, and by seven-rayed 
chemistry of the sun turn it into showers of spiritual 
fulfilment for the yajaka. 
सोम॑स्य मित्रावरुणोदिता सूर आ द॑दे। 
तदातुरस्य भेषजम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Somasya mitravarunodita sura a dade. 
Tadaturasya bhesajam. 


O Mitra, O Varuna, O lord of love and justice, 
may I, at the rise of the sun, receive the heavenly light 
and joy of soma, rejuvenating nectar of life for the 
supplicant yearning for fulfilment. 


उतो न्व॑स्य यत्पदं हर्यतस्य॑ निधान्य॑म्‌। 
परि द्यां जिह्ययातनत्‌॥ १८ ॥ 

18. Uto nvasya yat padam haryatasya nidhanyam. 
Pari dyam jihvayatanat. 


And then let the devotee with holy voice 
celebrate and glorify this state of divine fulfilment, 
promised of Agni, destined for man, unto heaven. 


844 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 73 
Ashvinau Devate, Gopavana Atreya or Saptavadhri Rshi 


उदीराथापतायते युञ्जाथामश्विना रथ॑म्‌। 
अन्ति Tag वामवः ॥ ९॥ 

il Udirathamrtayate yunjatham-asvina ratham. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 
O Ashvins, harbingers of the new dawn of light 
and energy, arise for the man of simple straight paths of 
rectitude, harness your chariot and come. May your 
power and protection be close to us for us. 
निमिष॑श्चिजवीयसा रथेना यातमश्विना । 
अन्ति षद्धूंतु वामवः ॥ २॥ 

2. NimisaScijjaviyasa rathena yatam-aSsvina. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 
Within a wink of the eye, come by the chariot 
of instant speed. Let your protections be with us at the 
closest. 
उप॑ स्तृणीतमत्रये feast घर्मम॑श्विना । 
अन्ति षद्धूंतु वामवः ॥ ३॥ 

६ Upa strnitamatraye himena gharmam-asvina. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


With the cool of comfort and security like snow, 
cover the misfortunes of the man bereft of threefold 
security for body, mind and soul in life. Let your 
protections be with us at the closest. 


कुहं स्थः कुहं जग्मथुः He श्येनेव पेतथुः । 
अन्ति Gag वामवः ॥ ४॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 73 845 


4. Kuha sthah kuha jagmathuh kuha Syeneva peta- 
thuh. Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Where are you staying? Where had you gone 
while we called? Where did you fly away like the eagle? 
Pray be with us always with your constant protections 
at the closest on hand. 
यदद्य कर्हि कर्हि चिच्छुश्रूयात॑मिमं हव॑म्‌। 
अन्ति Tagg वामवः ॥ ५॥ 

a, Yadadya karhi karhi cicchusruyatamimam 
havam. Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


If now anywhere, in fact any time, you hear our 
call, let your protections be instantly with us at the 
earliest at the closest. 
अश्विना यामहूत॑मा नदिं याम्याप्य॑म्‌। 
अन्ति ua ama: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. 4 51771त yamahutama nedistham yamyapyam. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 
Openly and instantly approachable Ashvins, I 
come to you as my own people at the closest. Let your 
protections be instant and sure for us at the earliest and 
closest. 
अवन्तमत्रये गृहं कुणुतं युवम॑ञ्विना। 
अन्ति षद्धूंतु वामवः ॥ ७॥ 

cP Avantamatraye grham krnutam yuvamasvina. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Ashvins, for the man of threefold deprivation 
of health care, housing and employment, provide a home 


846 RGVEDA 


of security and maintenance. Pray let your protections 
be with us always without delay at the closest. 


वरेथे अगिमातपो ada वल्ग्वत्रये | 
अन्ति tad वामवः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Varethe agnimatapo vadate valgvatraye. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Ashvins, harbingers of protection and relief for 
the deprived and underprivileged in matters of care, 
maintenance and education, bring help to the persuasive 
supplicants and remove the gusts of scorching heat and 
air from their head and heart. Let your protections be 
instantly available at the closest. 


प्र सप्तव॑धिराशसा धारामयरंशायत | 
अन्ति ua वामवः ॥ ९॥ 
9. Pra saptavadhrirasasa dharamagnerasayata. 


Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Ashvins, harbingers of peace and appreciation, 
reward and pacify the poet, master of seven metres who, 
with his hope and imagination, captures the flames of 
fire and passion in poetry and let your protection and 
patronage be with us at the closest. 


इहा ग॑तं वृषण्वसू श्रणुतं म॑ इमं salty 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. 1/1 gatam vrsanvasu srnutam ma imam havam. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


O harbingers of the showers of wealth, honour 
and excellence, pray come here and listen to my call 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 73 847 


and adoration. Let your protections and exhortations 
be with us at the closest in the heart. 


किमिदं वां पुराणवज्जरतोरिव sree | 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Kimidam vam puranavajjaratoriva sasyate. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


What sort of talk is this going round about you 
in the old outmoded style that you are nothing more 
than growing in years? O youthful harbingers of new 
light and freshness, let your protections and inspirations 
be with us at the closest and newest. 


समानं वां सजात्यं समानो बन्धुरश्विना | 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Samanam vam sajatyam samano bandhura-svina. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 
You are the same class and character as we, 
equal, the same brotherhood with us. Ashvins, let your 
protections and promotions be with us at the closest at 
the same level of class, character and species. 
यो वां रजांस्यश्विना रथों वियाति रोद॑सी । 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Yo vam rajamsyasvina ratho viyati rodasi. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 

Come by that chariot of yours which goes 
around to various regions of the universe and specially 


goes over the tracks of heaven, earth and sky. Pray let 
your protections be with us at the closest wherever you 


848 RGVEDA 
roam around. 


आ नो गव्येभिरश्व्यैः सहस्रैरुप wes | 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Ano gavyebhirasvyaih sahasrairupa gacchatam. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Come with a thousandfold wealth of cows, lands 
and cultures and horses and achievements of progressive 
victories. Let your protections and promotions be ever 
closest with us. 
मानो गव्येभिरश्व्यैः सहस्त्रभिरतिं ख्यतम्‌ । 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९५ ॥ 

15. Mano gavyebhirasvyaih sahasrebhirati khyatam. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


With all the thousandfold wealth of lands and 
cows and horses and achievements, pray do not leave 
us, do not forsake us. Let your protections and 
promotions ever remain with us at the closest. 
अरुणप्सुरुषा styecnraitdasaratt | 
अन्ति Wad aaa: ॥ ९६॥ 

16.  Arunapsurusa abhudakar-jyotir-rtavari. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


The golden glory of the dawn is risen and brings 
in the light according to the law divine. Let your 
blessings and protections ever be closest to us. 


अश्विना सु विचाकंशद्‌ gat प॑रशुमांँ इव | 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९७॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 74 849 


17. Asvina su vicakasad vrksam parasumdn iva. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Ashvins, the sun rises and dispels the darkness 
as an axeman fells the tree. Let your boons and blessings 
ever be with us at the closest. 


पुरं न gure रुज कृष्णया बाधितो विशा | 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Puram na dhrsnava ruja krsnaya badhito visa. 
Anti sadbhutu vamavah. 


Brave humanity, whenever you are obstructed 
by dark forces, arise and break them down like a fortress 
of evil. Ashvins, let your forces and protections be ever 
with us at the closest for inspiration and exhortation. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 74 


Agni (1-12), Arksha Shrutarva Danastuti (13-15) Devata, 
Gopavana Atreya Rshi 


विशोविशो at अतिंधिं वबाजयन्त॑ः पुरुप्रियम्‌। 
st वो दुर्यं वच॑ः स्तुषे शूषस्य मन्म॑भिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


th. Visoviso vo atithim vajayantah purupriyam. 
Agnim vo duryam vacah stuse Ssusasya manma- 
bhih. 


O people of the world, seekers of light and 
advancement by every community for every community, 
for the sake of you all, with sincere thoughts and 
resounding words, I adore Agni, holy power, your 
homely friend loved by all for the common good. 


850 RGVEDA 


यं जनासो हविष्मन्तो fast न सर्पिरासुतिम्‌। 
प्रशंसन्ति प्रश॑स्तिभिः॥ २॥ 


2: Yam janaso havismanto mitram na sarpira-sutim. 
Prasamsanti praSsastibhih. 


Adore and exalt Agni whom yajnic people serve 
as a friend, with havi in hand and oblations of clarified 
butter, and celebrate with songs of praise. 


पन्यांसं जातवेदसं यो देवतात्युद्यता | 
हव्यान्यैरंयदिवि ॥ ३ ॥ 

3. Panyamsam jatavedasam yo devatatyudyata. 
Havyanyairayaddivi. 


Serve and exalt the adorable Agni, all pervasive, 
who rises, strengthens all divinities of nature and 
humanity and raises the oblations to the heavens and 
heightens their vitality and power. 


आग॑न्म वृत्रहन्त॑मं ज्येष्ठ॑मयिमान॑वम्‌। 
यस्य॑ श्चुतवौ बृहन्नार्चो अनीक एध॑ते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Aganma vrtrahantamam jyestham-agnimanavam. 
Yasya srutarva brhannarkso anika edhate. 


Let us rise and reach Agni, highest divinity, 
greatest destroyer of evil and darkness and friend of 
humanity, under whose blessed shelter the great, renowned 
and distinguished heroes find inspiration and rise. 


अपरतं जातवेदसं तिरस्तमांसि este 
घृताहंवनमीड्य॑म्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Amrtam jatavedasam tirastamamsi darsatam. 
Ghrtahavanamidyam. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 74 851 


Let us rise and reach Agni, light of life, 
immortal, omnipresent, dispeller of darkness and 
ignorance, glorious, giver of delicious delicacies, and 
adorable. 


सबाधो यं जनां sass fii हव्येभिरी्ते। 
जुह्ानासो यतस्रुचः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sabadho yam jana ime’ gnim havyebhirilate. 
Juhvanaso yatasrucah. 
Let us adore Agni whom all the yajnic people, 
in spite of limitations, eagerly invoke and serve with 
ladlefuls of havi. 
इयं ते नव्य॑सी मतिरग्ने अधाय्यस्मदा | 
मन्द्र सुजात सुक्रतोऽ मूर दस्मातिथे॥ ७॥ 

a Iyam te navyasi matiragne adhayyasmada. 
Mandra sujata sukrato’mura dasmatithe. 


Agni, lord of light blissful, gloriously 
manifested, holy and divine in action, wise, majestic 
and revered as an honourable guest, this adorable light 
of your wisdom, we pray, may be vested in us. 


ard अग्ने शन्त॑मा artist भवतु firar 
त्यां वर्धस्व asta: neu 


8. Sa te agne Samtama canistha bhavatu priya. 
Taya vardhasva sustutah. 


Agni, that light and wisdom of yours, most 
blissful, most delightful, may be dear to us. And let our 
adorations too be dear to you. Exalted by that, arise and 
grow and let us grow too. 


852 RGVEDA 


सा adie geguia श्रव॑सि sta: । 
दधीत gad neu 


9. Sa dyumnair-dyumnini brhadupopa Sravasi 
Sravah. Dadhita vrtraturye. 


That light and power, splendid and boundless 
with the might and majesty of divinity, may bear greater 
and greater potential closer and closer to us in the 
progressive task of the elimination of darkness and evil. 


अशुवमिद्रां taut त्वेषमिन्द्रं न cedar 
यस्य श्रवांसि तूर्वथ पन्येपन्यं च कृष्टयः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. ASvamidgam rathapram tvesamindram na 
satpatim. Yasya Sravamsi turvatha panyampa- 
nyam ca krstayah. 


Adore Agni who gives us the wealth of earth 
and progressive achievement by chariotfuls of glory. 
Worship him, awfully brilliant, saviour and protector 
of the good and truthful like Indra, whose renowned 
victories and astonishing gifts people praise and 
celebrate one by one, one after another. 


यं त्वां गोपर्व॑नो गिरा arisen अद्धिरः। 
स पावक श्रुधी हव॑म्‌ ॥ LeU 


11. Yam tva gopavano gira canisthadagne angirah. 
Sa pavaka srudhi havam. 


Agni, light of the world, dear as breath of life, 
all purifier, whom the poet visionary of light and the 
Word celebrates, pray listen to our invocation and song 
of adoration. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 74 853 


यं त्वा जनास dee सबाधो वाजसातये | 
स बोधि aaa ue 

12. Yam tva janasa ilate sabadho vajasataye. 
Sa bodhi vrtraturye. 


Agni, O lord of light, whom people adore for 
victory and advancement enthusiastically in spite of 
limitations, pray enlighten us in the programme of the 
elimination of evil and darkness from life. 


अहं Zant suet श्रुतर्वणि मदच्युति | 

शधींसीव स्तुकाविनां yan शीर्षा चतुर्णाम्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 
13. Aham huvana arkse Srutarvani madacyuti. 

Sardhamsiva stukavinam mrksa Sirsa caturna m. 


For the good of people in general, for the 
learned, and for the joy of soma against the intoxication 
of pride, I invoke Agni as well as the light and powers 
of divinity to come and sanctify the heart and head of 
all the four classes of initiated people of the sacred hair. 


मां ara आशवः शविं्ठस्य द्रविलवंः | 
सुरथासो अभि प्रयो वक्षन्वयो न तुम्रय॑म्‌॥ ९४ ॥ 
14. Mam catvara asavah savisthasya dravitnavah. 


Surathaso abhi prayo vaksan vayo na tugryam. 


The four fast and smart celebrants of the most 
potent Agni riding the holy chariot of life may, I pray, 
bring me food and energy as well as the light and vitality 
of divine inspiration. 

सत्यमितत्वा महेनदि परुष्ण्यव देदिशम्‌। 
नेर्मापो अश्वदातरः शविष्ठादस्ति मर्त्य: ॥ ९५॥ 


854 RGVEDA 


15. Satyamit tva mahenadi parusnyava dedisam. 
Nemapo aSsvadatarah Savisthadasti martyah. 


O divine powers of light and vitality of 
perception and imagination, generous and overflowing 
with spirit and enthusiasm, I say this true of you and to 
you and of and to the dynamics of cosmic intelligence, 
there is no mortal power which is a greater giver of 
bliss and joy than the most potent and most brilliant 
Agni. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 75 
Agni Devata, Virupa Angirasa Rshi 


युक्ष्वा हि dagdat sivat अग्ने Teta 
निहोता पूर्व्यः स॑दः।॥ ९॥ 


1 Yuksva hi devahutaman asvan agne rathiriva. 
Ni hota purvyah sadah. 


Agni, light and life of the universe, as a master 
of the chariot of creation, harness your powers of cosmic 
dynamics which carry the divine wealth of life for us 
and, as the first and original high priest of creation, come 
and grace our hearth and home of familial creative 
activity in the service of divinity and observance of 
Dharma. 


उत Al देव देवां अच्छा वोचो विदुष्ट॑रः। 
श्रद्धिश्वा वायौ कृधि ॥ २॥ 

2. Uta no deva devan accha voco vidustarah. 
Sradvisva varya krdhi. 


And O light of the world, omniscient lord, speak 
graciously to us, seekers of light and divinity, and reveal 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 75 855 


in truth the facts and processes cherished and valued 
on top of everything else for the good of life in existence. 


त्वं ह यद्यविछ्य सह॑सः सूनवाहुत | 
ऋतावा यज्ञियो भुवः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Tvam ha yadyavisthya sahasah sunavahuta. 
Rtava yajniyo bhuvah. 


You alone, most youthful imperishable power, 
creator of strength and energy, we invoke, you are the 
one adorable, giver and keeper of the cosmic law of 
truth and rectitude. 


अयमभिः संहस्तरिणो वाजस्य छ़ातिनस्यतिः। 
मूर्धांकवी tao 


4. Ayamagnih sahasrino vajasya Satinaspatih. 
Murdha kavi rayinam. 


This Agni is the protector and promoter of a 
hundred and thousand forms and degrees of food, 
energy, advancement and victories of wealth, honour 
and excellence of the world, lord supreme and all time 
visionary and omniscient creator and poetic prophet and 
teacher. 


तं नेमिमृभवो! यथाऽऽ न॑मस्व aa तिभिः। 
नेदीयो यज्लम॑ङिरः WG 

Di Tam nemimrbhavo yatha’’namasva sahutibhih. 
Nediye yajnamangirah. 


Just as craftsmen bend and complete to 
perfection the felly of a wheel, so bend in homage to 
Agni, feed the fire, giver of vitality, with conjoint action 


856 RGVEDA 


and oblations, and O fire of yajna, dear as breath of life, 
closest friend, pray complete the circuit of yajnic 
regeneration for the yajakas. 


wea नूनमभिद्यवे वाचा विरूप नित्य॑या । 
वृष्णे चोदस्व सुष्टुतिम्‌ ६ ॥ 

6. Tasmai nunamabhidyave vaca virupa nityaya. 
Vrsno codasva sustutim. 

O man of diverse and conjoint forms of action, 
with words of eternal voice energise your holy song of 
adoration and let it rise to that self-refulgent omnificent 
Agni who is the harbinger of regeneration. 

wed ष्विदस्य सेन॑यागेऽरपाकचश्चसः। 
पणि गोषु स्तरामहे ॥ ७॥ 


ds Kamu svidasya senaya’gnerapakacaksasah. 
Panim gosu staramahe. 


Shall we overcome and throw out the thief 
hiding within our lands and cows by the force of this all 
watching Agni of far sighted vision? 


ur at देवानां विरः प्रस्नातीरिवोस्त्राः। 
कृशंन हासुरघ्न्याः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ma no devanam visah prasnatirivosrah. 
Krsam na hasuraghnyah. 


Let the forces of the communities of people 
protected by noble and divine powers never forsake us 
just as the radiating dawns do not neglect us, and just 
as cows too, which must not be hurt do not abandon 
their emaciated calves. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 75 857 


मा न॑ः समस्य Gea: परिद्वेषसो अंहतिः | 
ऊर्मिर्न नावमा व॑धीत्‌॥ ९॥ 


Ma nah samasya dudhyah paridvesaso amhatih. 
Urmirna navama vadhit. 


Let not the malevolent tyranny of the jealous 
smite us like billows of the sea striking the ship. 


नम॑स्ते अग्र ओज॑से गृणान्तिं देव Hea: | 
अमैरमित्रमर्दय ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Namaste agna ojase grnanti deva krstayah. 
Amair-amitram-ardaya. 


Salutations to you, Agni, refulgent lord of 
generosity. The people too adore and exalt you. Pray 
ward off and throw out the enemies and unfriendly 
forces by your laws and powers. 


कुवित्सु नो गविं्टयेऽगरं संवेषिषो र यिम्‌। 
उरुकृदुरु ण॑स्कृधि ee 


11. Kuvit ऽ 170 gavistaye’gne sanvesiso rayim. 
Urukrduru naskrdhi. 


Agni, refulgent lord, give us ample and high 
quality wealth for the development and expansion of 
our lands and cows, and let us too vastly expand and 
highly rise in life. 


मानों अस्मिन्महाधने परां वग्भार्‌ भृद्य॑था | 
संवर्ग सं रयिं Sa ९२॥ 


12. Ma no asmin mahadhane para vargbharabhr- 
dyatha. Samvargam sam rayim jaya. 


858 RGVEDA 


Agni, do not abandon us in this great battle of 
life like a tired burden bearer throwing off his burden. 
Instead, win holy wealth like the yajaka gathering sacred 
grass for the vedi to perform the yajna. 


अन्यमस्मद्धिया saan सिष॑क्तु दुच्छुना | 
वर्धी नो अम॑वच्छवंः 1123 11 


13. Anyamasmad-bhiya iyamagne sisaktu daucchuna. 
Vardha no amavac-chavah. 


Agni, let this evil and calamity fall upon 
something else opposed to us and our life and health 
and frighten all such things away. Pray promote our 
inward strength and courage like our steadfast patience 
and vitality. 


यस्याजुषन्नमस्विनः शपमीमदुर्मरवस्य वा | 
तं घेदभ्िर्वृधावंति ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Yasyajusan-namasvinah samim-adurmakhasya 
va. Tam ghedagnirvrdhavati. 


Agni loves and joins the yajnic efforts of the 
man of humility and generous offerings who, also, shuns 
negative and unproductive social acts. Such a man, 
indeed, Agni protects, promotes and advances in life. 


Ute अधिं संवतोऽ aw अभ्या त॑र। 
यत्राहमस्मि ताँ stat १५॥ 


15. Parasya adhi samvato ’varan abhya tara. 
Yatrahamasmi tan ava. 


Prior and in preference to the forces of the proud 
and high, come and help the humble and the lowly where 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 76 859 
I, too, abide better in the spirit than in the pride of power. 


विद्या fed पुरा aed पितुर्यथाव॑सः। 
अर्धा ते सुम्नमीमहे ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Vidma hi te pura vayamagne pituryathavasah. 
Adha te sumnamimahe. 
Agni, lord of light, we know and realise your 
universal acts of protection and grace and we pray for 


the peace and joy of the blessings of your fatherly 
presence for all time. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 76 
Indra Devata, Kurusuti Kanva Rshi 


इमं नु मायिनं ga इन्द्रमीशानमोज॑सा। 
मरुत्वन्तं न वृञ्जसे ॥ ९॥ 


1. Imam nu mayinam huva indram-1sanam-ojasa. 
Marutvantam na vrnjase. 


I invoke the almighty Indra, omnipotent spiritual 
power and presence of existence who commands the 
winds and pranic energies of nature and rules them by 
his lustrous vigour and vitality, and I pray that he may 
never forsake me, never abandon my spiritual salvation 
over material fluctuations of the mind. 


अयमिन्द्रो मरुत्सखा वि qaeathraresn: | 
वज्रैण शतपर्वणा ॥ २॥ 


2. Ayamindro marutsakha vi vrtrasyabhinac-chirah. 
Vajrena Sataparvana. 


This Indra, friend of winds and pranic energies, 
with hundred-fold discipline of spiritual power like the 


860 RGVEDA 


thunderbolt can destroy the dominating shadows of the 
evil of darkness and ignorance on way to the soul’s 
enlightenment. 


वावृधानो मरुत्सखेन्द्रो वि वृत्रभैरयत्‌। 
स॒जन्त्स॑मुद्रिया आपः 03 
Vavrdhano marutsakhendro vi vrtramairayat. 
Srjantsamudriya apah. 
Growing in strength, Indra, the divine soul, 
friend of winds and cosmic energies of universal prana, 
scatters the clouds of darkness there by releasing the 


streams of waters from the sky, and the streams of 
ananda from the heart. 


अयं ह येन वा इदं स्व्मरुत्व॑ता जितम्‌। 
इन्द्रेण सोम॑पीतये ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ayam ha yena va idam svarmarutvata jitam. 
Indrena somapitaye. 


This is Indra, for sure, the soul blest with the 
energy of prana, by whom is won this light of heaven 
by the grace of divinity for the enjoyment of divine joy. 


मरुत्व॑न्तम्रजीषिणमोज॑स्वन्तं farterit 
इन्द्रं गीर्भिर्हि वामहे ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Marutvantam-rjisinam-ojasvantam virapSinam. 
Indram girbhirhavamahe. 


With various songs of adoration we invoke and 
worship Indra, lord omnipotent commanding cosmic 
winds and pranic energies, gracious lover of truth and 
the truthful, lustrous and sublime. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 76 861 


इन्द्रं प्रतरेन मन्म॑ना Wedd हवामहे | 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indram pratnena manmana marutvantam hava- 
mahe. Asya somasya pitaye. 


With the ancient voice of divine revelation, we 
invoke and worship Indra, commander of cosmic winds 
and energiser of pranic energies for the protection of 
this world of the lord’s creation of joy and soma ecstasy. 


मरुत्वौं इन्द्र tig: पिबा सोमं शतक्रतो । 
अस्मिन्यज्ञे पुरुष्टुत ॥ ७॥ 

7. Marutvan indra midhvah piba somam Satakrato. 
Asmin yajne purustuta. 


Indra, lord of pranic energies and giver of 
showers of joy over a hundred divine acts of grace, 
universally sung and celebrated, pray protect and 
advance this world in this yajna of divine and human 
creation. 


तुभ्येदिन्द्र मरुत्व॑ते सुताः सोमासो अद्रिवः। 
हृदा हूयन्त उक्थिनः ॥ ८ ॥ 

ध, Tubhyedindra marutvate sutah 50771450 adrivah. 
Hrda huyanta ukthinah. 


Indra, lord of cosmic energies, commander of 
thunder and clouds of shower, in your honour only have 
these lovers of divine ecstasy enacted the soma yajna 
of divine worship where the singers of holy song adore 
you with Vedic hymns. 


पिबेदिन्द्र nectar सुतं सोमं दिविष्टिषु | 
वच्च शिर्णान ओज॑सा ।॥ ९॥ 


862 RGVEDA 


9. Pibedindra marutsakha sutam somam divistisu. 
vajram Sisana ojasa. 

Indra, friend of cosmic winds and lover of 
tempestuous humans, whetting your thunderbolt with 
the light and lustre of justice, protect and promote the 
ecstatic creations of the lovers of divinity in their 
cherished programmes of progress. 


उत्तिष्ठन्नोजसा सह पीत्वी शिप्रे अवेपयः 1 
सोम॑मिन्द्र चमू सुतम्‌॥ ९०॥ 
10. Uttisthann-ojasa saha [27117 Sipre avepayah. 
Somamindra camu sutam. 
Indra, lord of the universe, rising with your 
might and majesty, protect and energise both heaven 
and earth and promote the soma of life’s vitality created 


in both heaven and earth by nature and humanity by 
yajna. 


अनुं त्वा रोद॑सी उभे रक्षमाणमकृपेताम्‌। 
इन्द्र यह॑स्यु हाभंवः ॥ ९९ ॥ 

11. Anu tva rodasi ubhe kraksamanamakrpetam. 
Indra yaddasyuha bhavah. 


Indra, when you stimulate and energise the soma 
vitality of life created by nature and humanity, and when 
you rise as the destroyer of the negativities of the 
counterforce, then both heaven and earth vibrate and 
celebrate your majesty in awe with admiration. 


वाच॑मष्टाप॑दीमहं नव॑स््रक्तिमृतस्युम्‌। 
इन्द्रात्परि तन्वं AAU १२॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 77 863 


12. Vacam-astapadim-aham navasraktim-rtasp- 
rsam. Indrat pari tanvam mame. 


I study, measure, develop and pray for language 
revealed in eight works, 1.e., four Vedas and four 
Upavedas, spoken across four classes of humanity and 
through four stages of the individual’s development 
from birth to death, developing over nine blooming 
branches like flower garlands across nine regions of 
the earth, ultimately touching the truth of divine reality, 
the Word Imperishable descended from and ascending 
to Indra, lord of omniscience across the countless 
branches of dialects and structures. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 77 
Indra Devata, Kurusuti Kanva Rshi 
जज्ञानो नु शतक्रतुर्वि पृंच्छदितिं मातर॑म्‌। 
क उग्राः के हं श्ुण्विरे॥ ९॥ 
1 Jajnano nu satakraturvi prcchaditi mataram. 
Ka ugrah ke ha Srnvire. 


Coming to the stage of self-knowledge and 
responsibility, let Indra, world ruler, ask the mother 
power: Who are the terrible ones? Who are the notorious 
ones? 


आदीं शवस्य॑ब्रवीदोर्णवाभम॑हीशुव॑म्‌। 
ते पुत्र सन्तु निष्टुरः ॥ २॥ 


Zi Adim Savasyabravid-aurnavabham-ahisuvam. 
Te putra santu nisturah. 


Let the mother power that makes him rise to the 
office of Indra, she having the full power to create, 


864 RGVEDA 


advise and decide say: O son, ruler and protector of the 
state of humanity, one is the demonic spider-like weaver 
of sinister devouring plots, the other is the serpentine 
master of crookedness and sabotage, which two you 
should counter and eliminate. 


सपित्तान्वुत्रहाखिंदत्खे sntga खेद॑या । 
Waal दस्युहाभ॑वत्‌॥। ३ ॥ 


3; Samit tan vrtrahakhidat khe aran iva khedaya. 
Pravrddho dasyuhabhavat. 


Having known the two, the plotters and the 
saboteurs, let Indra, ruler and destroyer of evil and 
crookedness, divide them into individual roles like 
spokes of a wheel, press them down into fixed holes in 
the nave and the rim, work and reel them round to the 
point of exhaustion, and thus raising himself and the 
rule to higher power, become a successful manager and 
destroyer of evil by engagement and application. 


एकया प्रतिधापिबत्साकं सरांसि त्रिंशत॑म्‌। 
इन्द्रः सोम॑स्य काणुका ॥ ॐ ॥ 
4. Ekaya pratidhapibat sakam saramsi trimsatam. 
Indrah somasya kanuka. 
With a single stroke of policy, Indra protects 
and promotes thirty centres of exhilarating soma 


creativity all together against crooked surreptitious 
saboteurs of the nation. 


अभि ग॑न्धर्वम॑तृणदबुध्नेषु रजःस्वा। 
इन्द्रो ब्रह्मभ्य इद्‌ वृधे ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 77 865 


=) Abhi gandharvam-atrnad-abudhnesu rajahsva. 
Indro brahmabhya idvrdhe. 


For the advancement of the holy and intelligent 
people, Indra scatters the selfish forces living purely 
for physical and material values on stupid and baseless 
planes of existence. 
निराविध्यद्धिरिभ्य आ धारयत्पक्वमोदनम्‌ | 
इन्द्रो बुन्दं स्व।ततम्‌ & ॥ 

6. Niravidhyad-giribhya a dharayat pakvamod- 
anam. Indro bundam svatatam. 
Indra, the ruler, should break the clouds for 
showers of rain, open out caverns of mountains to drive 
out destructive elements, build up ample food stocks 
and expand the armaments for defence. 
waded इषुस्तवं सहस््र॑पर्णां एक इत्‌। 
यमिन्द्र चकृषे युज॑म्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

ve Satabradhna isustava sahasraparna eka it. 
Yamindra cakrse yujam. 


Let your arrow, your armour, your target plan, 
be hundred pointed and thousand phased but one, united 
and integrated, which, O ruler Indra, you take up as the 
sole, active characteristic of your rule. 


तेन॑ स्तोत॒भ्य आ भ॑र नृभ्यो नारिभ्यो अत्त॑वे। 
सद्यो जात ऋभुष्ठिर ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tena stotrbya a bhara nrbhyo naribhyo attave. 
Sadyo jata rbhusthira. 


O constant visionary of adamantine will and 


866 RGVEDA 


unshakable action, dynamic and ever new, by that plan 
and execution bring food and fulfilment for men, women 
and the celebrants. 


एता atten ते कृता वर्षानि परीणसा । 
हदा वीडद्ध॑धारयः।॥ ९॥ 


9. Eta cyautnani te krta varsisthani parinasa. 
Hrda vidvadharayah. 


All these deeds and enterprises most generous 
and creative, planned and executed, you hold firmly in 
your mind with a liberal heart. 


विश्वेत्ता विष्णुराभरदुरुक्रमस्त्वेषिंतः | 
शतं म॑हिषारक्षीरपाकमो दनं व॑राहमिन्द्र एमुषम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Visvet ta visnurabharad-urukramas-tvesitah. 
Satam mahisan ksirapakam-odanam varaham- 
indra emusam. 


Indra, Vishnu, too, lord omniscient and 
omnipotent, as wished and prayed, brings in all these 
hundreds of great things, cattle wealth, milky delicacies 
and rain laden clouds. 


तुविक्षं ते सुकृतं सूमयं धनुः साधुर्बुन्दो दिर ण्ययंः | 
उभा ते बाहू रण्या सुसंस्कृत ऋदूपे चिंदूदूवुरधा ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tuviksam te sukrtam sumayam dhanuh sadhur- 
bundo hiranyayah. Ubha te bahu ranya susam- 
skrta rdupe cidrduvrdha. 

Mighty is your bow, shooting far your arrow, 


well doing and protecting peace and well being. Safe 
and secure is your defence, golden gracious. Both your 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 78 867 


arms, internal security and external defence, are fully 
trained and civilised, they protect property, safeguard 
truth and law, and advance culture and refinement. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 78 
Indra Devata, Kurusuti Kanva Rshi 


पुरोव्ठाशं नो अन्ध॑स इन्द्र॑ सहस्रमा भ॑र । 
शाता च॑ शुर गोनाम्‌॥ ९॥ 

i, Purolasam no andhasa indra sahasrama bhara. 
Sata ca Sura gonam. 


Indra, lord ruler of life and the world, bring us a 
thousandfold gifts of delicious foods and soma drinks 
and, O lord potent and generous, bring us hundreds of 
cows and more of cattle wealth. 


आ नो भर asa गामश्व॑मभ्यञ्जंनम्‌। 
सचा मना हिरण्यया ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Ano bhara vyaiijanam-gamasvam-abhyanjanam. 
Saca mana hiranyaya. 


Bring us truth and beauty in manifestation, 
literature, culture and progress, and the ornaments of 
life, golden gracious for the peace of mind and joy of 
the heart. 


उत a: कर्णाशोभ॑ना पुरूणि धृष्णावा AT 
त्वं हि शण्विषे व॑सो ॥ २॥ 


3: Uta nah karnasobhana puruni dhrsnava bhara. 
Tvam hi $rnvise vaso. 


Lord of life, giver of peace and settlement, 
potent and invincible, bring us manifold gifts of life, 


868 RGVEDA 


sweet to the ear, blissful. We hear you alone are the lord 
of wealth, honour and beauty. 

नकीं वृधीक इन्द्रतेन सुषा न सुदा उत। 

नान्यस्त्वच्छूर ATTA: WS 


4. Nakim vrdhika indra te na susa na suda uta. 
Nanyas-tvacchura vaghatah. 


No one augments the beauty and glory of life 
other than you, none else the giver, none else is the 
sharer, none else, O brave and generous lord, a better 
guide and greater leader of the wise. 
नकीमिन्द्रो निकर्तवे न श॒क्रः परिशक्तवे | 
विश्वं शृणोति पश्य॑ति ॥ ५ ॥ 

= Nakimindro nikartave na sakrah parisaktave. 
Visvam Srnoti pasyati. 
No one can equal Indra in action, no one in 
power, he is the powerful, he hears and sees all that is 
and all that happens in the world. 
स मन्युं मरत्यीनामद॑ब्धो नि चि॑ंकीषते। 
पुरा निदश्चिकीषते ॥। ६ ॥ 

6. Sa manyum martyanam-adabdho ni cikisate. 
Pura nidascikisate. 


Undaunted and invincible, he watches the pride 
and passion of mortals, watches and humbles them 
before they can malign him. 


क्रत्व इत्पूर्णमुदरं तुरस्यास्ति विधतः। 
वृत्रघ्नः सोमपान्न॑ः ॥ ७॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 78 869 


7. Kratva it purnam-udaram turasyasti vidhatah. 
Vrtraghnah somapavnah. 


He is the doer, perfect and ever self-fulfilled is 
the passion and desire of the lord who is all conqueror, 
all ordainer, destroyer of evil and darkness, and loves 
the peace and joy of life’s beauty and ecstasy as soma. 


त्वे वसूनि संग॑ता विश्वां च सोम॒ सौभ॑गा । 
सुदात्वप॑रि्कता ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. 117८ vasuni samgata visva ca soma saubhaga. 
Sudatvaparihvrta. 


O Soma, lord of peace and joy, in you 
concentrate all wealth, honour and excellences of the 
world, all good fortunes, spontaneous generosity, free 
from crookedness and ambiguity as you are, simple and 
straight, no double dealing. 


त्वामिद्य॑वयुर्मम कामों गव्युर्हिरण्ययुः | 
त्वाम॑रुवयुरेष॑ते ॥ ९ ॥ 


2. Tvamid-yavayur-mama kamo gavyurhiranya-yuh. 
Tvamasvayur-esate. 


My desire for food and fulfilment, for lands, 
cows, literature and culture, for gold and the beauties 
of life, and for horses, transport, advancement and 
achievement, all this concentrates in you, you alone. 


तवेदिन्द्राहमाशसा हस्ते दात्रं चना द॑दे। दिनस्य वा 
मघवन्त्संभुतस्य वा पूर्धि यव॑स्य काशिना ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tavedindraham-dasasa haste datram cana dade. 
Dinasya va maghavant-sambhrtasya va purdhi 
yavasya kasina. 


870 RGVEDA 


Indra, by virtue of hope and aspiration centred 
in you, I take up the sickle in hand to reap the ripe grain 
for my portion. O lord of munificence and glory, fill up 
my hand with the day’s collection of grain and my mind 
with the light of day. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 79 
Soma Devata, Krtnu Bhargava Rshi 


अयं कृल्ुरगू/भीतो विश्वजिदुद्धिदित्सोमंः । 
ऋषिर्विप्रः काव्येन ॥ ९॥ 


ly Ayam krtnur-agrbhito visvajid-udbhidit somah. 
Rsir-viprah kavyena. 


This is Soma, lord supreme of peace and joy, 
doer, maker and creator of the universe, ruler of the 
world in existence, uncomprehended and incomprehen- 
sible yet bursting forth to our vision and knowledge by 
direct experience of his creative omnipotence. He is all 
time visionary watching and creating all, vibrant 
omnipresent power reflected and apprehended through 
his poetic creation of this world of beauty and mystery. 


अभ्यूर्णोति यन्नरं भिषक्ति विश्वं यत्तुरम्‌। 
Dare: ख्यन्निः श्रोणो भूंत्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Abhyurnoti yannagnam bhisakti visvam yat turam. 
Premandhah khyannih srono bhiut. 


Soma that clothes the naked, cures all the sick 
and suffering of the world, gives eyes to the blind to 
see and legs to the lame to walk. 

त्वं सोम तनूकृद्धयो द्वेषोभ्योऽन्यकृतेभ्यः। 
उरु यन्तासि वरूथम्‌ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 79 871 


a Tvam soma tanukrdbhyo dvesobhyo’nyakrtebh- 
yah. Uru yantasi varutham. 


You, Soma, lead the good to extensive freedom 
and protection against waste and exploitation, jealousy 
and enmity, and the evil and suffering caused by others. 


त्वं चित्ती तव edlfda आ पुंथिव्या ऋजीषिन्‌। 
यावीरघस्य॑ चिद्‌ द्वेष॑ः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tvam cittt tava daksairdiva a prthivya rjisin. 
Yaviraghasya cid dvesah. 


Soma, lover of peace and joy, protector of the 
simple and honest people of rectitude, by your divine 
love and kindness of heart and your universal potential 
of the light of heaven, drive away the jealousy and 
enmity of the sinners and criminals from all over the 
earth. 


अर्थिनो यन्ति चेदर्थं गच्छानिददुषो uf 
ववृज्युस्तुष्य॑तः काम॑म्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

5, Arthino yanti cedartham gacchanid-daduso ratim. 
Vavrjyus-trsyatah kamam. 


By the grace and munificence of Soma, the 
seekers obtain their object of desire, the needy receive 
the gift of the giver, the thirsty satisfy their thirst with 
fulfilment. 


विदद्यत्पूर्व्यं नष्टमुदीमूृतायुमीरयत्‌। 
प्रेमायुंस्तारीदतींर्णम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vidadyat purvyam nastam-udim-rtayum-trayat. 
Premayus-tarid-atirnam. 


872 RGVEDA 


By the grace of Soma, the devotee recovers what 
he lost earlier, the lord exhorts and exalts the yajnic 
performer and observer of the law of truth, and he 
increases, strengthens and fulfils the life which the 
celebrant has yet to live. 


Geral नो मृ्छयाकुरदू सक्रतुरवातः। 
भवा नः सोम शं हृदे ॥ ७॥ 

a: Susevo no mrlayakur-adrptakratur-avatah. 
Bhava nah soma sam hrde. 


Soma, you are the giver of peace and bliss for 
us, merciful, sober at heart and beyond all disturbance 
and agitation. O lord, bless us with peace and well being 
at heart. 


ara: सोम सं वीविजो मा fa बीभिषथा राजन्‌। 
मानो हार्दि त्विषा व॑धीः॥८॥ 

8. Ma nah soma sam vivijo ma vi bibhisatha rajan. 
Ma no hardi tvisa vadhih. 


O Soma, ruler and peace giver of the world, 
disturb us not from our state of settlement, strike us not 
with fear, torture us not with the flames of passion and 
pride. 


अव यत्स्वे सधस्थे देवानां TATA । 
राजन्नप द्विष॑ः सेध मीद्रो अप Feral: सेध॥ ९॥ 


9. Ava yat sve sadhasthe devanam durmatirikse. 
Rajannapa dvisah sedha midhvo apa sridhah sedha. 


O lord ruler of the world, whatever and wherever 
I happen to see the displeasure of divinities in our home, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 80 873 


pray ward that off. O generous and virile lord of peace 
and good will, throw out the jealous and the enemies, 
ward off all the violent and destructive forces from us. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 80 
Indra (1-9), Devah (10) Devatah, Ekadyu Naudhasa Rshi 


नह्यन्यं बव्ठाकरं मर्डितारं शतक्रतो | 
त्वं न॑ इन्द्र STN 

i, Nahyanyam balakaram marditaram Satakrato. 
Tvam na indra mrlaya. 


True it is, O lord of infinite good action, Indra, 
I have never seen, never accepted, anyone else more 
beneficent, more munificent, than you. O lord, we pray, 
be kind and bless us with peace. 


यो नः शश्व॑त्पुराविथाऽपश्रो वाज॑सातये । 
सत्वं न॑ इन्द्र मृव्छय।॥ २॥ 

2. Yo nah sasvat puravitha’mrdhro vajasataye. 
Sa tvam na indra mrlaya. 


O lord eternal, unassailable, indefatigable, you 
have ever protected us since time immemorial for the 
sake of advancement and victory in our battles of life. 
Pray be kind and gracious to bless us with peace and 
joy as ever before. 


किमङ्क रध्रचोदनः सुन्वानस्यावितेदंसि | 
कुविस्स्विन्द्र णः शकः ॥ ३॥ 


ध Kimanga radhracodanah sunvanasyavitedasi. 
Kuvit svindra nah sakah. 


O lord dear as breath of life, sustainer of the 


874 RGVEDA 


weak, inspiring protector of the creative and progressive 
as you are, would you not strengthen us and bless us 
more and ever more? 
इन्द्र प्र Un रथ॑मव पश्चाच्यित्सन्त॑मद्िवः। 
पुरस्तादेनं मे कृधि i ४॥ 


4. Indra pra no rathamava pascaccit santama- 
drivah. Purastadenam me krdhi. 


Indra, lord of thunderous action, pray protect 
our chariot of life even if it lag behind and let it move 
on ahead for the sake of our survival and advancement. 
हन्तो नु किमाससे प्रथमं नो रथं afer 
उपमं वाजयु श्रव॑ः ॥ ५५ ॥ 

a Hanto nu kimasase prathamam no ratham krdhi. 
Upamam vajayu sravah. 


Hey Indra, come on, why tarry behind? Move 
our chariot on to the front rank, let the honour and prize 
of victory be closer at hand. 


stat नो वाजयुं रथं सुकरं ते किमित्परि। 
अस्मान्त्सु जिग्युष॑स्कृधि ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ava no vajayum ratham sukaram te kimit pari. 
Asmantsu jigyusaskrdhi. 


Protect our chariot racing for victory. Every 
thing is easy and possible for you every way, is there 
anything beyond? Pray justify our ambition for victory 
and make it possible. 


इन्द्र Paes पूरसि भद्रा त॑ एति निष्कृतम्‌ । 
इयं धीऋत्विर्यावती ।॥। ७ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 80 875 


7. Indra drhyasva purasi bhadra ta eti niskrtam. 
Tyam dhir-rtviyavati. 


Indra, pray strengthen us as determined on good 
works. You are the stronghold of protection and giver 
of fulfilment. This conscientious prayer, in truth and 
according to time and season reaches you. Pray help us 
reach the target. 


मा सीमवद्य आ भागुर्वी काष्ठा हितं धनंम्‌। 
अपावृंक्ता SICA: US ॥ 


8. Ma simavadya ठ bhagurvi kastha hitam dhanam. 
Apavrkta aratnayah. 

The path of life is long and wide, the wealth of 

life is won. Let no malignity, calumny or dishonour fall 


to our share. Let all scandalous malcontents and 
frustrated enemy forces be uprooted. 


तुरीयं नाम॑ यज्ञियं यदा कर स्तदुश्मसि। 
आदित्पतिं्न ओहसे ॥ ९ ॥ 


Turiyam nama yajniyam yada karastadusmasi. 
Adit patirna ohase. 


The yajnic name that you have won for us is the 
best and highest we love and desire in preference to 
paternal, maternal or fraternal name, since by that name 
only you as our master and sustainer have got us the 
highest identity. 


अवींवृधद्ो अपरता अम॑न्दीदेकद्युर्देवा उत याश्च देवीः। 
तस्मा उ राध॑ः कृणुत प्रशस्तं प्रातर्मक्षू धियावसुर्ज- 
गम्यात्‌॥ ९०॥ 


876 RGVEDA 


10. Avivrdhadvo amrta amandid-ekadyur-deva uta 
yasca 4८174. Tasma u radhah krnuta prasastam 
pratarmaksu dhiyavasur-jagamyadt. 


O Immortal divinities of spirit and nature, O holy 
men and women of spotless character and generous 
disposition, let the dedicated performer of daily yajna 
exhilarate and exalt you with yajna and hospitality. You 
too, pray, create and bless him with honourable wealth, 
means and materials for success, and may the spirit of 
light and intelligence, Agni, visit and bless him every 
morning at yajna. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 81 
Indra Devata, Kusidi Kanva Rshi 
आ तू नं इन्द्र क्षुमन्तं चित्रं ग्राभं सं गंभाय। 
महाहस्ती दश्चिणेन ॥ ९॥ 


I A tu na indra ksumantam citram grabham sam 
grbhaya. Mahahasti daksinena. 


Lord of mighty arms, Indra, gather by your 
expert right hand abundant riches for us which may be 
full of nourishment, energy, wonderful beauty and grace 
worth having as a prize possession. 


विद्या हि त्वा तुविकूर्मिं तुविदेष्णं तुवीम॑घम्‌। 
तुविमात्रमवोभिः ॥ २॥ 

2. Vidma hi tva tuvikurmim tuvidesnam tuvimagham. 
Tuvimatramavobhih. 


We know you as lord of universal action, all 
giving, treasure hold of unbounded wealth and 
boundless in power and presence with your favour and 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 81 877 
protections. 


नहि त्वां शूर देवा न मतसो दित्स॑न्तम्‌। 
भीमं न गां वारय॑न्ते॥ ३॥ 

3 Nahi tva Sura deva na martaso ditsantam. 
Bhimam na gam varayante. 

When you give to bless mankind, no one can 
stop you, O brave lord, neither mortals nor immortals, 
just as no one can resist the mighty sun. 

एतो Fars स्तवामेशानं वस्व॑: स्वराज॑म्‌। 
न राध॑सा मर्धिषन्नः ४॥ 


4. Eto nvindram stavamesanam vasvah svarajam. 
Na radhasa mardhisannah. 


Come, let us sing and celebrate in honour of 
Indra, lord and ruler of wealth, self-ruler and self- 
refulgent. No one would harm us in respect of money, 
materials and power. 


प्र स्तोषदुपं गासिषच्छवत्सामं tera 
अभि राध॑सा जुगुरत्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

2; Pra stosadupa gasisac-chravat sama gtyamanam. 
Abhi radhasa jugurat. 

Let man adore and celebrate Indra, sing in 
honour of divinity, hear songs of adoration, and with 
all wealth, power and honour thank and praise Indra as 
the giver. 

आ नो भर दक्चिणेनाऽभि सव्येन प्र मशा। 
इन्द्र मा नो वसोर्निभीक्‌ ॥ ६॥ 


878 RGVEDA 


6. A no bhara daksinena’bhi savyena pra mrSa. 
Indra ma no vasornirbhak. 


Indra, bear and bring and bless us with wealth, 
power, honour and protection both by right and by left 
hand, and never deprive us of this honour and 
excellence. 


उप क्रमस्वा भ॑र ध्रुषता sort SAAT 
अदाशगृष्टरस्य वेद: ॥ ७॥ 

Te Upa kramasva bhara dhrsata dhrsno jananam. 
Adasustarasya vedah. 


Indra, generous and fearless lord of wealth, 
honour and power, come close with divine courage and 
force, bring us the honour and excellence of life, and 
let it not waste away like the wealth of the uncharitable 
and the ungrateful. 


PRATT A अस्ति वाजो विप्रेभिः aca: | 
अस्माथिः सु तं संनुहि॥ ८॥ 
8. Indra ya u nu te asti vajo viprebhih sanitvah. 


Asmabhih su tam sanuhi. 


Indra, lord of glory, the wealth and knowledge, 
honour and excellence that is yours and good for the 
vibrant sage, pray bring in for us and let it grow among 
05. 


सद्योजुवस्ते वाज। अस्मभ्यं विश्वश्चन्द्राः 1 
वर्च मक्षु ज॑रन्ते ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sadyojuvaste vaja asmabhyam visvascandrah. 
VaSsaisca maksu jarante. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 82 879 


Your wealth, honours and victories instantly 
rising, constantly moving and effective are all radiant 
over the world, they come to us without delay according 
to your will and order and celebrate and glorify you. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 82 
Indra Devata, Kusidi Kanva Rshi 


आ प्र द्र॑व परावतोऽ वावत॑श्च वृत्रहन्‌ । 
मध्वः प्रति प्रभर्मणि॥ ९॥ 


| A pra drava paravato’rvavatasca vrtrahan. 
Madhvah prati prabharmani. 


O destroyer of darkness, evil and ignorance, 
come rushing without delay, whether you are far or near, 
and join us in this vibrant yajnic economy of the divine 
order. (O man in search of the soul, rush in from roaming 
around and join the living systemic world within at the 
vibrant centre.) 


तीव्राः सोमास आ ग॑हि सुतासो मादयिष्णवः | 
fost दधरग्यथोंचिषे॥ २॥ 

2 Tivrah somasya ठ gahi sutaso madayisnavah. 
Piba dadhrgyathocise. 

Come, grab at the sharp and strong soma 
draughts of elixir, distilled, energised and most exhilara- 
ting, and drink without inhibition to your heart’s desire. 

इषा म॑न्दस्वादु तेऽरं वराय मन्यवे | 
भुव॑त्त इन्दर्‌ शं हृदे ।॥ २॥ 


2: Isa mandasvadu te’ram varadya manyave. 
Bhuvat ta indra Sam hrde. 


880 RGVEDA 


Be happy with the food, and then let it exhilarate 
you with the cherished fulfilment of your heart. Indra, 
O soul of this existential yajna, let there be peace at 
your heart unto the depth of your soul. 


आ wage ग॑हि -aqgaenrtl च हूयसे | 
उपमे रोचने दिवः॥ ४॥ 


4. A tvaSatrava gahi nyukthani ca hiyase. 
Upame rocane divah. 


Indra, happy and free from all foes, distractions 
and contradictions, come in response to the hymns of 
adoration, invited to the sublime glory of the light of 
heaven. 


तुभ्यायमद्रिभिः सुतो गोभिः श्रीतो मदाय कम्‌। 
प्र सोम॑ इन्द्र हूयते ॥ ५ ॥ 

१ Tubhyayamadribhih 51/10 gobhih 5710 madaya 
kam. Pra soma indra huyate. 
Indra, to you is offered this soma, soothing and 
exhilarating it is, distilled by celebrated admirers and 
seasoned with the spirit of light and power of divine 
ecstasy, especially for you. 
इन्द्रं श्रुधि सु मे saa सुतस्य WA: | 
वि पीतिं तृि्मश्नुहि ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Indra srudhi su me havamasme sutasya gomatah. 
Vi pitim trptimasnuhi. 


Indra, listen to my call, come and have a drink 
of our distilled soma seasoned with milk and ecstatic 
power to your total fulfilment of the heart and soul. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 82 881 


य इन्द्र चमसेष्वा सोम॑श्चमूषुं ते सुतः। 
पिबेदस्य त्वमीशिषे ॥ ७॥ 


cp Ya indra camasesva somascamusu te sutah. 
Pibedasya tvamisise. 


Indra, of the soma which is distilled and poured 
in the cups and ladles of spiritual yajna for you, drink 
to your heart’s desire since you yourself rule over the 
ecstasy of the nectar. 


यो अप्सु चन्द्र्माइव सोम॑श्चमूषु ददंश । 
पिबेद॑स्य॒ त्वमीशिषे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yo apsu candrama iva somascamusu dadrse. 
Pibedasya tvamisise. 


Drink of the soma which shines in the cups of 
yajna, in the beauty of human karma, and in the skies 
like the glory of the moon, drink freely since you alone 
rule over the nectar. 


aa श्येनः पदाभ॑रत्तिरो रजांस्यस्पुं तम्‌ । 
पिबेद॑स्य त्वमीशिषे ॥ ९॥ 


9. Yam te Syenah padabharat tiro rajamsyasprtam. 
Pibedasya tvamisise. 


Of the nectar of ecstasy which the mighty sage 
and scholar distilled by flights of spiritual imagination 
from heaven and brought in by the rays of light across 
the spaces, drink and enjoy since now you alone rule 
over the sublimity and power of this nectar. 


882 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 83 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Kusidi Kanva Rshi 


देवानामिदवो! महत्तदा वुंणीमहे वयम्‌। 
वृष्णामस्मभ्य॑मूतयें ।। ९ ॥ 


il Devanamidavo mahat tada vrnimahe vayam. 
Vrsnam-asmabhyam-utaye. 


We choose for ourselves the grand patronage 
and protection of the generous brilliancies of nature and 
humanity for our safety, security and advancement. 


aa: सन्तु युजः सदा वरुणो feat stefan । 
वृधासंश्च प्रचेतसः ॥ २॥ 


2. Te nah santu yujah sada varuno mitro aryama. 
Vrdhasasca pracetasah. 


May Varuna, powers of law and justice, wisdom 
and discrimination, Mitra, powers of light, love and 
friendship, and Aryama, dynamic forces of nature and 
humanity, guides and path makers of life, all of them 
being powers of omniscience and givers of knowledge 
and awareness, be our friends and cooperators and help 
us advance in life. 


अतिं नो विष्पिता पुरु नौभिरपो न defer | 
यूयमूतस्यं रथ्यः ॥ ३ ॥ 

3; Ati no vispita puru naubhirapo na parsatha. 
Yuyam-rtasya rathyah. 


O leaders of the knowledge and efficiency of 
truth and karma and the science of yajna, just as you 
cross the seas by boat, similarly take us by karma across 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 83 883 
the vast seas of life. 


वामं नों अस्त्वर्यमन्वामं व॑रुण शंस्य॑म्‌। 
वामं द्यावृणीमहें ux ॥ 


4. Vamam no astvaryaman vamam varuna Samsyam. 
Vamam hyavrnimahe. 


O divine leader of advancement, Aryaman, let 
our action for progress be noble and successful. O 
Varuna, divine power of judgement and value, may our 
honour and reputation be good and noble. We opt for 
only what is good, noble and gracefully successful. 


वामस्य हि daca ईशानासो रिशादसः। 
नेमादित्या अघस्य यत्‌॥ ५॥ 


a Vamasya hi pracetasa 1sanaso risadasah. 
Nemaditya aghasya yat. 


O Adityas, generous and brilliant leaders of what 
is good and noble, all-aware of good and evil, destroyers 
of violence and negativities, you are the rulers, 
controllers and guides only of the true, the good and 
the beautiful. You never favour or approve of what is 
evil and sinful. 


aatag: सुदानवः कषियन्तो यान्तो अध्वन्ना। 
देवां वृधायं हूमहे ॥। ६ ॥ 

6. Ayamidvah sudanavah ksiyanto yanto adhvanna. 
Deva vrdhaya humahe. 


O Vishvedevas, generous and leading divinities 
of earth and heaven, whether we abide in the home or 
go out on the paths of the wide world, we call upon you 


884 RGVEDA 
only, for the sake of guidance and advancement. 


अधिं न इन्द्रैषां विष्णो! सजात्यानाम्‌ 
इता मरुतो अश्विना ॥ ७॥ 


fin Adhi na indraisam visno sajatyanam. 
Ita maruto asvina. 


Indra, lord of glory, giver of power and honour, 
Vishnu, omnipresent divinity, Maruts, winds and vibrant 
humanity, Ashvins, harbingers of the new dawn, take it 
that we have come in advance of these homogeneous 
communities and accept us as your own. 


प्र भ्रातृत्वं सुंदानवोऽधं द्विता AAA | 
मातुर्गर्भे' भरामहे ॥। ८ ॥ 


8. Pra bhratrtvam sudanavo ‘dha dvita samanya. 
Maturgarbhe bharamahe. 


Brotherliness and similarity as well as duality 
and dissimilarity, O generous Vishvedevas, we acquire 
in mother Prakrti’s womb and bear from there. 


wa fe st dara इन्द्रज्येष्ठा अभिद्य॑वः। 
stat Fag Sa AAU ॥ 


9. Yuyam hi stha sudanava indrajyestha abhidyavah. 
Adha cidva uta bruve. 


O generous Vishvedevas, you, with Indra, lord 
omnipotent as supreme, are and abide as heavenly and 
brilliant in knowledge and divinity. That’s why I speak, 
celebrate and pray to you. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 84 885 


Mandala 8/Sukta 84 
Agni Devata, Ushana Kavya Rshi 


WS वो अतिथिं स्तुषे मित्रमिव प्रियम्‌ । 
अभि रथं न वेद्य॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


| ॥ Prestham vo atithim stuse mitramiva priyam. 
Agnim ratham na vedyam. 


I sing and celebrate the glories of Agni, lord 
omniscient, light and leader of the world, dearest and 
most welcome as an enlightened guest, loving as a 
friend, who like a divine harbinger, reveals the light of 
knowledge to us. 


कविपिव प्रचेतसं यं देवासो अधं far 
नि मर्त्येष्वादधुः ।॥ २॥ 
2 Kavimiva pracetasam yam devaso adha dvita. 


Ni martyesvadadhuh. 


I adore Agni whom the divinities established 
among mortals as the visionary poet and the spirit of 
enlightenment and awareness, as intelligence and mind, 
as will and passion, as perception and volition, as male 
and female and as the yajna fire and the vital heat of the 
body system, the two ways in which divine vitality 
expresses itself. 


त्वं य॑विष्ठ दाशुषो नूः पाहि श्रृणुधी Fre: | 
र्चा तोकमुत त्मना ।॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Tvam yavistha dasuso nrnh pahi srnudhi girah. 
Raksa tokamuta tmana. 


O lord eternal, ever youthful beyond age, pray 


886 RGVEDA 


protect and promote the families of the generous people, 
listen to their voices of prayer and, by all your will and 
power, protect and promote the children and grand 
children of humanity. 


कयां ते अगे अङ्धिर ऊर्जो नपादुपंस्तुतिम्‌। 
वराय देव मन्यवे is ॥ 

4. Kaya te agne angira urjo napadupastutim. 
Varaya deva manyave. 
O creator, preserver and protector of energy, dear 
as breath of life and vitality of existence, with words of 
beauty and bliss, O light of the world, we offer our 
homage and adoration to you, lord refulgent and great. 
दाशेम कस्य मन॑सा य॒ज्ञस्य॑ सहसो यहो । 
कदु वोच इदं नम॑: ॥ ५ ॥ 

१ Dasema kasya manasa yajnasya sahaso yaho. 
Kadu voca idam namah. 


Agni, to which mighty, potent, adorable power 
other than you, shall we offer our sincere homage, when 
and where present these words of prayer? 


अधा त्वं हि नस्करो विर्वा अस्मभ्यं afar: | 
वाजद्रविणसो गिर॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Adha tvam hi naskaro visva asmabhyam suksitth. 
Vajadravinaso girah. 


And you alone will provide happy homes and 
peaceful establishment for all our people and bless us 
with vitality, power, wealth and victory in response to 
our prayer. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 84 887 


कस्य॑ नूनं परीणसो feral जिन्वसि दंपते। 
गोषाता यस्य॑ ते गिरः ॥ ७॥ 


di Kasya nunam parinaso dhiyo jinvasi dampate. 
Gosata yasya te girah. 


O lord protector of the world, as a happy home 
and shelter for the people, whose sincere and abundant 
prayers do you accept and fulfil? His whose prayers to 
you are enlightened and inspired by knowledge, wisdom 
and sincere awareness of divinity. 


तं म॑र्जयन्त सुक्रतुं पुरोयावानमाजिषु | 
स्वेषु क्षयेषु वाजिन॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Tam marjayanta sukratum puroyavanamayjisu. 
Svesu ksayesu vajinam. 
In their battles of life and in their homes, people 
adore and glorify Agni, that high priest of divine action, 


first and original initiator, leader and guide and mighty 
potent creator of the universe. 


क्षेति कषेमेभिः साधुभिर्नकिर्यं ata हन्ति a: 1 
अगर सुवीरं एधते ॥ ९ ॥ 


५ Kseti ksemebhih sadhubhirnakiryam ghnanti 
hanti yah. Agne suvira edhate. 


Agni, O lord self-refulgent, the man who lives 
at peace in his home with the wealth of his peaceable 
protective good actions and wards off evil, no evil 
thoughts assail, such a man prospers, brave and blest 
with holy wealth and good progeny. 


888 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 85 
Ashvinau Devate, Krshna Angirasa Rshi 


आ मे हवं नायत्याऽश्विना गच्छ॑तं युवम्‌। 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥। ९॥ 


ly A me havam nasatya’ svina gacchatam yuvam. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


Come in response to my call, Ashvins, both 
observers and preserves of truth. Come to taste, protect 
and promote the honey sweets of the soma joy of life. 


इमं मे स्तोम॑मण्विनेमं में श्रणु तं हव॑म्‌। 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये i २॥ 


2 Imam me stomam-asvinemam me srnutam havam. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


Ashvins, listen to this call of mine, accept this 


holy song of adoration, come to taste, protect and 
promote the honey sweets of soma we have prepared. 


अयं वां Sun अश्विना हव॑ ते वाजिनीवसू । 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये 13 

3: Ayam vam krsno asvina havate vajinivasu. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 

This ardent celebrant invokes you and draws 
your attention, Ashvins, winners of wealth and victories, 
to come, enjoy, protect and promote the soma joys of 
life for peace and progress. 

श्युणुतं ज॑रितुर्हवं कृष्ण॑स्य स्तुवतो न॑रा । 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये ॥। ४ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 85 889 


4. S rnutam jariturhavam krsnasya stuvato nara. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


Listen to the call of the celebrant worshipper 
who draws your attention to the soma joys and beauties 
of life. Come, taste, protect and promote the honey sweet 
efforts of the creators, O brave leaders of the people. 


छर्दिर्यन्तमदाभ्यं विप्राय स्तुवते Aa 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये & ॥ 


a, Chardir-yantam-adabhyam vipraya stuvate nara. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


O divine leaders and harbingers of light and 
peace, give a comfortable home free from fear and 
violence for the celebrant and vibrant scholar in order 
that he and others may pursue, create and enjoy the 
honey sweets of life’s beauty of knowledge, culture and 
advancement with a drink of soma. 


गच्छ॑तं दाशुषो गृहमित्था स्तुवतो अश्विना | 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये ।। ६ ॥ 


6. Gacchatam dasuso grhamittha stuvato asvina. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


Thus with the gift of a home of peace and 
freedom, Ashvins, harbingers of light and beauty of a 
new morning, go to the yajamana who generously offers 
holy oblations into the creative yajna for new 
knowledge. Go to enjoy the soma of his achievement, 
protect and promote his efforts. 


युञ्जाथां रास॑भं रथे age वृषण्वसू । 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥। ७ ॥ 


890 RGVEDA 


4 Yunjatham rasabham rathe vidvange vrsanvasu. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


Ashvins, complementary harbingers of the 
showers of wealth, honour and excellence, harness the 
roaring motive power in your strongly built, unbreakable 
chariot and go to the house of the celebrant to promote 
the honey sweets of knowledge and power for the peace 
and joy of the world. 


त्रिवन्धुरेणं त्रिवृता रथेना यातमश्विना | 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tribandhurena trivrta rathena yatamasvina. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


Ashvins, come by a three stage chariot powered 
by a three turbine motive force to promote the honey 
sweets of new knowledge and celebrate the soma joy 
of the new achievement. 


नू मे गिरो नास॒त्याऽश्विना प्राव॑तं युवम्‌ । 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतयें॥ ९॥ 


धः Nu me giro nasatya’s$vina pravatam yuvam. 
Madhvah somasya pitaye. 


O twin divine powers, preservers and promoters 
of truth and rectitude, pray honour and fulfil my words 
of prayer for the advancement of knowledge, power and 
joy of humanity, and come to honour, protect and 
promote the soma sweets of success. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 86 891 


Mandala 8/Sukta 86 


Ashvinau Devate, Krshna Angirasa or 
Vishvaka Karshni Rshi 


उभा हि दस्रा भिषजा nate दश्च॑स्य वच॑सो बभूवुः | 
ता वां विश्व॑को हवते तनूकृथे मानो वि als सख्या 
मुमोच॑तम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Ubha hi dasra bhisaja mayobhuvobha daksasya 
vacaso babhuvathuh. Ta vam visvako havate 
tanukrthe ma no vi yaustam sakhya mumocatam. 


Both of you, Ashvins, nature’s complementary 
powers of efficacy, are destroyers of suffering, 
physicians, health givers for peace, and both of you 
abide by and honour the word of the specialist in the 
field of health and medicine. The all-prevading spirit 
of health calls on you to restore the body’s health and 
efficiency. Pray forsake us not, deprive us not of your 
natural friendship and organismic companionship in 
matters of health, release us from pain and suffering. 


कथा नूनं वां fanart उप॑ स्तवद्युवं धियं ददथुर्वस्यइष्टये । 
ता वां विश्व॑को हवते तनूकृथे मानो fa यौष्टं सख्या 
मुमोच॑तम्‌॥ २॥ 


2 Katha nunam va vimana upa stavadyuvam dhiyam 
dadathurvasya istaye. Ta vam visvako havate 
tanukrthe ma no vi yaustam sakhya mumocatam. 


How can a person disturbed in the mind study 
and honour you for the control of complementary pranic 
energies of prana and apana? When the pranic energies 
are controlled in meditation, you give the practitioner 
the intelligential capacity to achieve the desired 


892 RGVEDA 


concentration for peace and power of the mind. Ashvins, 
the universal lover of health invokes you for the system’s 
efficacy. Pray forsake us not, deprive us not of your 
natural friendship. 


युवं हि ष्मा पुरुभुजेममेधतुं विष्णाप्वे qeydeads ea | ता 
वां विश्व॑को हवते तनूकृथे मानो वि यौष्टं स॒ख्या 
मुमोच॑तम्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Yuvam hi sma purubhujemamedhatum visnapve 
dadathur-vasya istaye. Ta vam visvako havate 
tanukrthe ma no vi yaustam sakhya mumocatam. 


O givers of good health and nourishment to all 
living beings, you bring knowledge, awareness and 
wisdom to the aspiring devotee of omnipresent divinity 
for the attainment of desired honour and excellence. 
That’s why the whole world calls on you for the health 
of body and mind. Ashvins, forsake us not, deprive us 
not of your friendship. 


ऊत त्यं वीरं ध॑नसामुंजीषिणं दूरे चित्सन्तमवंसे हवामहे | 
यस्य स्वादिष्ठा सुमतिः पितुर्यथा मा नो वि ats स॒ख्या 
मुमोच॑तम्‌॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Uta tyam viram dhanasamrjisinam dure cit 
santamavase havamahe. Yasya svadistha sumatih 
pituryatha ma no vi yaustam sakhya mumocatam. 


We call for that mighty energy of prana which 
is the source of wealth, simple and natural cleanser and 
strengthener of body and mind, which though it may be 
far off, still whose sweetest gift of nourishment of 
intelligence is like the gift of nature, father, and 
omniscient God. Ashvins, pray bring us that energy, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 87 893 


forsake us not, deprive us not of your friendship, save 
us with that friendship. 


ऋतेन देवः सविता श॑मायत ऋतस्य शद्ध मुर्विया वि doe | 
ऋतं सासाह महिं चित्पृतन्यतो मा नो वि als सख्या 
मुमोच॑तम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


Rtena devah savita Samayata rtasya $rngamu- 
rviya vi paprathe. Rtam sasaha mahi cit prtanyato 
ma no vi yaustam sakhya mumocatam. 


Self-refulgent Savita, creator and energiser, 
blesses with peace, truth and the laws of life, and he 
expands the law of life with the expansive universe. 
Truth and the law of truth overcomes the challenges of 
even the mightiest opponents. Ashvins, complementary 
powers of Savita, forsake us not, deprive us not of your 
friendship, give us freedom by that friendship. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 87 


Ashvinau Devate, Krshna Angirasa, or Vasishtha 
Dyumnika or Priyamedha Angirasa Rshi 


get at स्तोमो! अश्विना क्रिविर्न सेक आ ie 
मध्व॑ः सुतस्य स दिवि प्रियो न॑रा पातं गौराविवेरिणे ug 


ls Dyumni vam stomo asvind krivirna seka a4 gatam. 
Madhvah sutasya sa divi priyo nara patam gaura- 
viverine. 


Splendid is your song of praise, Ashvins, come 
like the soothing sprinkle of a fountain, both of you, 
and drink of the honey sweets of soma, delightful as 
distilled in the light of heaven. Come, best of men, 
leaders of life, and drink like thirsty stags at a pool in 


894 RGVEDA 
the desert. 


पिल॑तं घर्म मधुमन्तमश्विना ssafé: dad नरा। 
ता मन्दसाना मनुषो दुरोण आ नि पातं वेद॑सा वय॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


(५१ Pibatam gharmam madhumantam-asvina’’ 
barhih sidatam nara. Ta mandasana manuso 
durona ठ ni patam vedasa vayah. 


Come Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, sit 
on the seats of holy grass on the vedi and enjoy and 
participate in the honey sweet warmth of yajna, social 
culture, knowledge and discipline of the human 
community. Happy and joyful in the human home, in 
the human body, enjoy, preserve and promote life with 
the wealth and knowledge you have. 


आ वां विश्वाभिरूतिभिः परियमेधा अदूषत । 

ता वर्तिंयौतमुपं वृक्तबर्हिषो जुष्टं यज्ञं दिविष्टिषु ॥ ३॥ 
a: A vam visvabhir-atibhih priyamedha ahisata. Ta 

vartiryatamupa vrktabarhiso justam yajnam 

divistisu. 


O Ashvins, the holy performers who are 
dedicated to yajna invoke and call you both with all 
your succour and promotions, so that you go to the place 
and paths of those yajakas who are ready with the grass 
spread on the vedi and there join the yajna for the 
realisation of their higher aims of life. 


पिब॑तं सोमं मधुमन्तमश्विना ssafe: सीदतं qua! 
ता वावृधाना sd सुष्टुतिं दिवो गन्तं गौराविवेरिंणम्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Pibatam somam madhumantam-asvina ’’barhih 
sidatam sumat. Ta vavrdhana upa sustutim divo 
gantam gauraviverinam. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 87 895 


Ashvins, come from the light of heaven, sit 
together on the holy grass, drink the honey sweet soma 
like thirsty deer in the forest, and, exhilarated, listen to 
the song of adoration offered in honour of divinity. 


आ नूनं यातमश्विनाऽश्वेभिः प्रुषितप्सुभिः। 
cen हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी शुभस्पती पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. A niunam yatamasvina’svebhih prusitapsubhih. 
Dasra hiranyavartani subhaspati patam somam- 
rtavrdha. 


Ashvins, holy powers of humanity and nature 
living and acting in complementarity, destroyers of evil 
and negativities, moving by golden paths of virtue, 
protectors and promoters of the good and positive values 
of life, growing to higher life by truth, observing and 
advancing the laws of truth by following paths of truth, 
come with your mind and senses inspired and 
strengthened by nature and enlightenment and enjoy the 
soma delight of life. 


वयं हि at हवामहे विपन्यवो विप्रासो वाज॑सातये । 
तावल्गू cen पुरुदंससा धियाऽश्विंना seat ग॑तम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Vayam hi vam havamahe vipanyavo vipraso 
vajasdtaye. Ta valgu dasra purudamsasa dhiya 
*§vina Srustya gatam. 


Ashvins, virile men and women, vibrant, wise 
and devout, we call upon you for victory and 
advancement in energy, food, honour and excellence. 
Ashvins, noble and cultured, destroyers of negativities, 
versatile in various actions, come without delay with 
active intelligence, full awareness and spirit of action. 


896 RGVEDA 


Mandala 8/Sukta 88 
Indra Devata, Nodha Gautama Rshi 


तं वो दस्ममृतीषहं वसोर्मन्दानमन्ध॑सः। 
अभि वत्सं न स्वसरेषु धेनव इन्द्रं गीर्भिर्नवामहे ॥ ९॥ 


ly Tam vo dasmam-rtisaham-vasor-mandanam- 
andha-sah. Abhi vatsam na svasaresu dhenava 
indram girbhir-navamahe. 


We invoke and call upon Indra eagerly as cows 
call for their calves in the stalls, and with songs of 
adoration over night and day we glorify him, lord 
glorious, omnipotent power fighting for truth against 
evil forces, and exhilarated with the bright soma of 
worship offered by celebrant humanity. 


gat सुदानुं तविषीभिरावृतं गिरिं न पुंरुभोजंसम्‌। 
क्षुमन्तं वाजं शतिनं सहस्रिणं vey गोम॑न्तमीमहे ॥ २॥ 


ps Dyuksam sudanum tavistbhir-avrtam girim na 
purubhojasam. Ksumantam vajam satinam 
sahasrinam maksu gomantam-imahe. 


We pray to Indra, lord of light, omnificent, 
hallowed with heavenly glory, universally generous like 
clouds of shower, and we ask for food abounding in 
strength and nourishment and for hundredfold and 
thousandfold wealth and prosperity abounding in lands, 
cows and the graces of literature and culture, and we 
pray for the gift instantly. 


न त्वा बृहन्तो अद्रयो वर॑न्त इन्द्र वीव्छवंः | 
यद्दित्स॑सि स्तुवते माव॑ते वसु नकिष्टदा मिनाति ते ॥ ३॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 88 897 


i Na tva brhanto adrayo varanta indra vilavah. 
Yadditsasi stuvate mavate vasu nakistada minati 
te. 


Not the mighty fixed mountains can restrain you, 
Indra, generous lord, when you come to give wealth to 
a celebrant like me. No one can stop and frustrate your 
will. 


areatfa क्रत्वा शवसोत दंसना favat जाताभि ast | 
आ rare ऊतये ववर्तति यं गोत॑मा siti ४ ॥ 


4. Yoddhasi kratva Savasota damsana visva jatabhi 


majmana. A tvayamarka utaye vavartati yam 
gotama ajijanan. 


You are a victorious warrior by your strength 
and yajnic karma. You are supreme over all things born 
of your wondrous power and majesty. This worshipper 
adores you for the sake of protection and advancement, 
the lord whom the imaginative wise realise in their soul 
at will. 


प्र हि Rar ओज॑सा दिवो अन्तेभ्यस्परि। 
न त्वा विव्याच रजं इन्द्र पार्थिवमनु स्वधां ववक्षिथ ॥ ५॥ 


9 Pra hi ririksa ojasa divo antebhyaspari. Na tva 
vivyaca raja indra parthivam-anu svadham 
vavaksitha. 


You transcend the bounds of heaven by your 
might. The regions of earth and skies encompass you 
not. Indra, lord of majesty and omnipotence, bring us 
food, strength and the divine power of sustenance for 
life. 


898 RGVEDA 


नकिः परि्टिर्मघवन्मघस्यं ते यदाशुषे दशस्यसि | 
अस्माकं बोध्युचथस्य चोदिता HST वाज॑सातये ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nakih paristirmaghavan maghasya te yaddasuse 
dasasyasi. Asmakam bodhyucathasya codita 
mamhistho vajasataye. 


Lord of world’s wealth, power, honour and 
excellence, when you bless the generous devotee with 
the gift of your profusion, there is no restraint on your 
will and power. O lord most glorious and adorable, 
inspirer and intensifier of our adoration, let us know 
the paths for our noble movement forward for the sake 
of real victory and progress. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 89 


Indra Devata, Nrmedha and Purumedha 
Angirasas Rshis 


बृहदिन्द्राय गायत मरुतो वृत्रहन्त॑मम्‌। 
येन ज्योति्रिज॑नयच्रृतावृधो! देवं देवाय TFs ९॥ 


il Brhadindraya gayata maruto vrtrahantamam. 
Yena jyotir-ajanayann-rtavrdho devam devaya 
Jagrvi. 

O Maruts, vibrant leaders of humanity in 
knowledge and action, sing the resounding songs of 
Sama which, like the sun, dispel the darkness and 
eliminate evil, the same by which the sagely servants 
of eternal law and cosmic yajna in the service of God 
vitalise, recreate and extend that divine inextinguishable 
light of life which is ever awake in the world of 
existence. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 89 899 


अपाधमदभिशंस्तीरशस्तिहाऽथेन्द्रो द्युम्न्याभ॑वत्‌। 
देवास्तं इन्द्र स॒ख्याय॑ येमिरे बृद्धानो ween २॥ 


2. Apadhamad-abhisastirasastiha’thendro dyumn- 
yabhavat. Devasta indra sakhyaya yemire brha- 
dbhano marudgana. 


Indra burns and blows away all curses and 
calumnies and shines in power and glory beyond 
scandalous criticism. O refulgent lord of power and 
force, commanding the host of Maruts, vibrant leading 
forces of nature and humanity, brilliant and generous 
sages and divines try to achieve kinship as friends with 
you. 


प्रव इन्द्राय gee मरुतो aatea 
aa ह॑नति वृत्रहा शतक्रतुर्वज्रेण शतपर्वणा ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Pra va indraya brhate Maruto brahmarcata. 
Vrtram hanati vrtraha satakratur-vajrena 
Satapar-vana. 


O Maruts, vibrant brilliant leaders of humanity, 
worship Indra, lord omnipotent beyond all bounds, and 
study the divine powers immanent in nature, with hymns 
of Vedic adoration. He is the destroyer of evil, dispels 
darkness and ignorance, and destroys the negative 
uncreative forces with his thunderbolt of hundredfold 
power. 


अभि प्र भ॑र धृषता dana: श्रवंश्चित्ते असद्‌ बृहत्‌ | 
अर्षन्त्वापो जव॑सा वि मातरो हनों वृत्रं जया स्व॑ः॥ ॥ 
4. Abhi pra bhara dhrsata dhrsanmanah Sravascit 


te asadbrhat. Arsantvapo javasa vi mataro hano 
vrtram jaya svah. 


900 RGVEDA 


O man of determined mind, boldly with 
confidence as that of Maruts, offer adorations to Indra. 
Let your honour and fame rise and ring far and wide 
and hold it well under control with a bold mind. Let the 
mother-like pranic energies run through the veins with 
vitality, destroy evil and darkness, and win the light of 
heaven. 


यज्नाय॑था अपूर्व्य मघवन्वृत्रहत्याय | 
तत्पथिवीमंप्रथयस्तद॑स्तभ्ना उत द्याम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 
श Yajjayatha apurvya maghavan vrtrahatyaya. 
Tat prthivim-aprathayas-tadastabhna uta dyam. 
O lord of glory, Indra, matchless without 
precedent, when you rise for the elimination of darkness, 
then you manifest the wide space and plan the heaven, 
earth and sky in their place in the cosmic order. 
aa Gat अआंजायत तदर्क उत हस्कुतिः। 
तद्धिश्व॑मधिभूरं सि यज्जातं यच्य जन्त्वम्‌ & ॥ 
6. Tat te yajno ajayata tadarka uta haskrtih. 
Tadvisvamabhibhurasi yajjatam yacca jantvam. 


And then proceeds the cosmic yajna, formation 
of light, sun and the joyous agni and vayu. And thus 
you remain and rule as the supreme over what has come 
into being and what is coming into being. 


आमासु पक्वमैरय आ सूर्य' रोहयो fafa 
घर्म न साम॑न्तपता सुवृक्तिभिर्जुष्टं गिर्व॑णसे बृहत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
4; Amasu pakvam-airaya वं saryam rohayo divi. 


Gharmam na saman tapata suvrktibhir-justam 
girvanase brhat. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 90 901 


You move the ripening flow of sap in the veins 
of maturing forms of life. You raise and place the sun in 
the high heaven. O celebrants, as in the heat of fire, 
temper and shine your sama songs of adoration and, 
with noble hymns of praise, sing resounding Brhat 
samans of worship with love in honour of adorable 
Indra. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 90 


Indra Devata, Nrmedha and Purumedha 
Angirasas Rshis 


आ नो विश्वासु हव्य इन्द्र॑ः समत्सु. भूषतु । 
उप ब्रह्माणि सव॑नानि वृत्रहा परमज्या ऋचींषमः।॥ १॥ 


i, A no visvasu havya indrah samatsu bhusatu. Upa 
brahmani savanani vrtraha paramajya rcisamah. 


Indra, lord of universal energy, world power and 
human forces, is worthy of reverence and invocation in 
all our joint battles of life. May the lord of strongest 
bow, destroyer of evil and dispeller of darkness and 
ignorance, great and glorious as sung in the Rks, grace 
our songs of adoration and faithful efforts with the 
beauty and glory of success. 


त्वं aren प्र॑थमो राध॑सामस्यसिं सत्य Sorter | 
तुविद्युम्नस्य युज्या वंणीमहे पुत्रस्य शव॑सो महः ॥ २॥ 
2. Tvam data prathamo radhasam-asyasi satya 


tsanakrt. Tuvidyumnasya yujya vrnimahe putra- 
sya Savaso mahah. 


You are the original giver of means of effort 
and success in all fields of life. You are the maker of 


902 RGVEDA 


leaders and giver of the wealth and honours of life. Of 
such great lord of glory and power, promoter and 
protector of strength and power, we pray for wealth, 
honour and excellence worthy of your glory. 


ब्रह्मा त इन्द्र गिर्वणः fara अन॑तिद्धुता। 
इमा जुंषस्व हर्यश्व योजनेन्द्र या ते अम॑न्महि ni ३॥ 


3; Brahma ta indra girvanah kriyante anatidbhuta. 
Ima jusasva haryasva yojanendra ya te aman- 
mahi. 


Indra, celebrated in holy voice, unsurpassed 
songs are offered in your honour. O lord commander of 
instant powers of transport, communication and 
radiation, pray accept these hymns we conceive, sing 
and offer to you in response to your glory. 


त्वं हि सत्यो म॑घवन्ननानतो वृत्रा भूरिं न्युञ्जसें। 
स त्वं शविष्ठ वचरहस्त दाशुषेऽ ्वाञ्चं रयिमा Het nt ४ ॥ 


4. Tvam hi satyo maghavann-ananato vrtra bhuri 
nyrnjase. Sa tvam Savistha vajrahasta dasuse 
*rvancam rayima krdhi. 

Indra, lord of wealth and glory, you are eternal, 
never subdued, and many a form of darkness and evil 
you rectify or destroy. O lord most potent, armed with 
thunder in hand, bear and bring the wealth of life for 
the generous yajaka who offers libations liberally into 
the yajna vedi and gives help to the needy. 


त्वमिन्द्र यशा अस्युजीषी शवसस्पते | 
त्वं वृत्राणि हंस्यप्रतीन्येक इदनुत्ता चर्षणीधृतं ॥ ५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 91 903 


=) Tvamindra yaSda asyrjist Savasaspate. Tvam 
vrtrani hamsyapratinyeka idanutta carsani-dhrta. 


Indra, lord all powerful, ruler of the world, yours 
is the honour, yours is the creation of wealth and joy. 
All by yourself, unsubdued, you eliminate irresistible 
forms of evil and darkness by the power you wield for 
the people. 


तमु त्वा Tada प्रचेतसं राधों amare । 
महीव कृत्तिः शर णा त॑ इन्द्र प्र ते सुम्ना नो! अश्नवन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tamu tva nunam-asura pracetasam radho bhaga- 
mivemahe. Mahiva krttih saranda ta indra pra te 
sumna no asnavan. 


Indra, lord of vibrant energy and power, we look 
forward to you as our partner, enlightened ruler and 
master, and competent giver of reward for our action 
and endeavour. Your very presence is our shelter, a very 
home like the great mother earth, and we pray we may 
ever enjoy the favour of your good will and benevolence. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 91 
Indra Devata, Apala Atreyi Rshi 
कन्या ३ वार॑वायती सोममपिं स्त्रुताविंदत्‌। 
अस्तं भर॑न्त्यब्रवीदिन्त्रय सुनवै त्वा शक्रायं सुनवै त्वा ॥ ९॥ 
1. Kanya varavayati somamapi srutavidat. Astam 


bharantyabravid-indraya sunavai tva sakraya 
sunavali tva. 


The maiden having consented to marry, whether 
she is emaciated in health or bubbling with energy, 
should get the soma, and while going home should speak 


904 RGVEDA 


to herself for autosuggestion: I prepare you, soma juice, 
for Indra, regenerative and procreative power, for 
shakra, strength and vigour of robust health. 


असौ य एषि वीर को गृहंगू हं विचाकशत्‌। इमं जम्भ॑सुतं 
पिब धानाव॑न्तं कर म्भिणमपूपव॑न्तमुक्विन॑म्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


0.0 Asau ya esi virako grhamgrham vicakaSat. Imam 
jambhasutam piba dhanavantam karam-bhinam- 
apupavantam-ukthinam. 


The invigorating juice of soma which gives 
strength and vigour of health and radiates from person 
to person, family to family, O maiden, O youth, drink. 
It is expressed and invigorated to the last drop. It is 
delicious, nourishing, seasoned with delicacies, fresh 
and exhilarating, and invigorating with pranic energies. 


आ चन त्वां चिकित्सामोऽ fal चन त्वा नेम॑सि। 

शनैरिव शनकरिवेन्द्रायेन्दो परि Sa ॥३॥ 
ai A cana tva cikitsamo ’dhi cana tva nemasi. 

Sanairiva Sanakairivendrayendo pari srava. 


O soma, we are trying to know you and your 
efficacy, we do not yet know you in full. Slowly, O soma, 
slowly, drop by drop, flow for Indra, health and vigour 
of life. 


कुविच्छ कत्कुवित्करंत्कुविन्नो वस्य॑सस्करत्‌। 
कुवित्प॑तिद्धिषों यतीरिन्द्रेण संगमामहै ॥ ४॥ 


4. Kuvicchakat kuvit karat kuvinno vasyasaskaradt. 
Kuvit patidviso yatirindrena samgamamahai. 


May soma give us strength and vigour. May it 
work for our all round improvement in personality. May 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 91 905 


it make us happier and wealthier. And may be then we, 
not yet in favour of matrimony and husbands, grow up, 
reconcile and regain their love. 


इमानि त्रीणि विष्टपा तानीन्द्र fa tea 
शिस्स्ततस्योर्वरामादिदं म उपोदरे nan 
9, Imani trini vistapa tanindra vi rohaya. 


Siras-tatasyorvaram-ddidam ma upodare. 


These are three vital systemic organs of the 
growing and continuous body existence which, O soma 
energy, raise and refine: One is the head, seat of the 
intelligential system, the other is heart and lungs, seat 
of pranic system, and yet another is the stomach and 
pelvic region, seat of nutritional and sexual system. 
Indra, lord of energy and power, let these three grow to 
maturity. 


असौ च या न॑ उर्वरादिमां aay aa 
अथो ततस्य यच्छिरः सर्वां ता रोमशा कुधि॥६॥ 


6. Asau ca ya na urvarddimam navam mama. 
Atho tatasya yacchirah sarva ta romasa krdhi. 


And that which is the heart region and this body 
system of mine and the head region of the body which 
is to continue in the family line, let all these grow to 
maturity. 
खे रथ॑स्य Asta: खे युगस्य॑ शतक्रतो | 
sees त्रिष्पूत्व्यकृणोः सूर्यं त्वचम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

iF Khe rathasya khe’nasah khe yugasya Satakrato. 
Apalamindra trisputvyakrnoh suryatvacam. 


Indra, giver of health and energy, O soul, agent 


906 RGVEDA 


of a hundred good actions, whatever the weakness of 
this chariot, the body system, whatever the weakness in 
the pranic energy system, and whatever weakness there 
be in the coordination of the various systems of body, 
prana and mind in relation to the soul, all these 
weaknesses of the unprotected, under nourished and 
immature maiden, I pray, make up and give her a radiant 
personality. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 92 
Indra Devata, Shrutakaksha or Sukaksha Angirasa Rshi 


पान्तमा वो sieta इन्द्रमभि प्र गायत। 
विश्वासाहं शतक्रतुं des चर्षणीनाम्‌ eu 


I; Pantama vo andhasa indramabhi pra gayata. 
Visvasaham satakratum mamhistham carsani- 
nam. 


Sing in praise and appreciation of Indra, the 
ruler, protector of your food, sustenance and 
maintenance, all tolerant, all defender and all challenger, 
hero of a hundred noble actions and the best, most 
generous and most brilliant of the people. 


Geet पुरुष्टुतं गाथान्यं १ war 
इन्द्र इतिं व्रवीतन ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Puruhutam purustutam gathanyam sanasrutam. 
Indra iti bravitana. 


Call him by the name and title of ‘Indra’, 
invoked by many, adored by all, worthy of celebration 
in story, all time famous who is also a scholar of 
universal knowledge. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 92 907 


इन्द्र इन्नो' महानां दाता वाजानां नृतुः | 
मर्दों sts य॑मत्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Indra inno mahanam data vajanam nrtuh. 
Mahan abhijnva yamat. 


Indra is a happy and joyous leader, giver of a 
high order of living, energy and life’s victories. May 
he, with love, courtesy and humility, lead us to life’s 
greatness and glory. 


अपादु शिप्यन्ध॑सः सुदक्षस्य प्रहोषिर्णः। 
SARA यवाशिरः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Apadu sipryandhasah sudaksasya prahosinah. 
Indorindro yavasirah. 


Let Indra, the ruler, value, protect and promote 
the soma homage mixed and strengthened with the 
delicacies of life and offered by the generous and 
enlightened people. (The mantra points to the circulation 
of wealth and economy of the nation managed by the 
tax payers and the ruling powers of the government.) 


तम्वभि प्राचतेन्द्रं सोम॑स्य पीतये | 
तदिन्द्य॑स्य वर्धनम्‌॥ ५॥ 


छ Tamvabhi prarcatendram somasya pitaye. 
Tadiddhyasya vardhanam. 


Honour and appreciate Indra with words of 
gratefulness and adoration for the consumption, 
protection and promotion of the soma homage offered 
by the people. That tribute of honour is the real exalting 
strength and success for the ruler. 


908 RGVEDA 


अस्य पीत्वा मदानां देवो देवस्यौजसा | 
विश्वाभि भुव॑ना भुवत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Asya [7114 madanam devo devasyaujasa. 
Visvabhi bhuvana bhuvat. 


Exalted by the joyous power of this soma 
offering of the people, the brilliant and generous Indra 
rules over all regions of the world by light and lustre 
worthy of a ruler. 


त्यमु वः सत्रासाहं विश्वासु गीर्ष्वायतम्‌ । 
आ च्यावयस्यूतये ॥ ७ ॥ 

५५ Tyamu vah satrasaham visvasu girsvayatam. 
A cyavayasyutaye. 

O people of the land, that generous and brilliant 
victor (Sudaksha) in all sessions of the enlightened 
citizens and celebrated in their universal voices, you 
elevate to the office of ruler for your defence, protection 
and progress. 

युध्मं सन्त॑मनर्वाणं सोमपामनंपच्युतम्‌। 
नरमवार्यक्रतुम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yudhmam santam-anarvanam-somapam-ana- 
pacyutam. Naram-avaryakratum. 


The ruler, warrior that hits the target, being 
irresistible, protector and valuer of life’s joy, inviolable 
and unsurpassable leader in irrevocable action: such is 
Indra, elevated ruler. 


शिक्षां ण इन्द्र राय आ पुरु fast ऋचीषम | 
stat नः पार्ये ete a 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 92 909 


ws Siksa na indra raya a puru vidvan rcisama. 
Ava nah parye dhane. 


Indra, leader in knowledge and wisdom, pursuer 
of the path of rectitude, guide and lead us to ample 
wealth and protect us through our struggle for victory 
of honour and excellence. 


अतश्चिदिन्द्र ण उपा ssalfe sraatsrer । 
इषा सहस्रवाजया ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Atascidindra na upa ’’yahi Satavajaya. 
Isa sahasravajaya. 

And from here, Indra, come to us, bring us the 
food of life for a hundredfold and a thousandfold victory 
of honour and excellence. 

अयाम धीव॑तो धियोऽर्वद्धिः शक्र गोदरे। 
जयेम पृत्सु व॑जिवः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ayama dhivato dhiyo ’rvadbhih sakra godare. 
Jayema prtsu vajrivah. 


O wielder of power and force, let us come to 
have leaders and warriors endowed with high 
intelligence and enlightened will for action and, O lord 
of thunderous power, in the development of lands and 
breaking of mountains, let us win our battles by virtue 
of our cavaliers and pioneers. 


वयमु त्वा शतक्रतो गावो न यवसेष्वा | 
उक्थेषु रणयामसि ॥ १२॥ 


12. Vayamu tva satakrato gavo na yavasesva. 
Ukthesu ranayamasi. 


910 RGVEDA 


Indra, achiever of a hundred noble victories, just 
as cows feel delight in green grass, so we give you the 
pleasure of victory in our songs of celebration. 


विश्वा fe म॑र्त्यत्वनाऽनुंकामा श॑तक्रतो | 
अग॑न्म afar: ॥ ९२॥ 


13. Visva hi martyatvana’nukama Satakrato. 
Aganma vajrinnasasah. 


O lord of a hundred noble actions, all mortals 
are moved by hopes and ambitions natural to humanity. 
O wielder of thunder and justice, let us too move forward 
and realise our hopes and ambitions. 


त्वे सु पुत्र शवसोऽ वुंत्रन्काम॑कातयः। 
न त्वायिन्द्रातिं रिच्यते i ९४॥ 


14. = Tve su putra Savaso’vrtran kamakatayah. 
Na tvamindrati ricyate. 


O protector and promoter of strength and 
courage, seekers of ambition and victory look up to you 
for inspiration and depend on you for encouragement. 
No one excels you in incentive and exhortation. 


a at वृषन्त्सनिं्ठया सं घोरया द्रविलन्वा । 
धियाविंहधि पुर॑न्ध्या ॥ ९५ ॥ 

15. Sano vrsantsanisthaya sam ghoraya dravitnva. 
Dhiya viddhi purandhya. 


O lord generous as rain showers, come and help 
us with constant and most favourable, venerable and 
sublime, instant and munificent friendly intelligence, 
planning and wisdom for action and advancement of 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 92 911 
the human community. 


यस्ते नूनं शतक्रतविन्द्र द्युम्नित॑मो मद्‌: | 
तेन॑ नूनं मदे मदेः ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Yaste nunam satakratavindra dyumnitamo 
madah. Tena nunam made madeh. 


O lord of a hundred great actions, Indra, ruler 
of the world, the most generous, brilliant and ecstatic 
will and pleasure that is yours, by that, pray, inspire us 
and let us share the joy of divine achievement. 


aed चित्रश्रवस्तमो य इन्द्र वृत्रहन्त॑मः। 
य ओंजोदात॑मो मद: ॥ ९७॥ 


17. = Yaste citrasravastamo ya indra vrtrahantamah. 
Ya ojodatamo madah. 


That ananda, will and pleasure of yours which 
is most wonderful and famous, which destroys evil and 
darkness upon the instant completely and which is most 
potent in inspiring the celebrant with the courage of 
action, honour and dignity, with that, prey, inspire us 
and let us share that ecstasy. 


विद्या हि aed अद्विवस्त्वाद॑त्तः सत्य ara: | 
विश्वासु दस्म HEA Nee ॥ 
18. Vidma hi yaste adrivastvadattah satya somapah. 


Visvasu dasma krstisu. 


O lord ruler of clouds and mountains, ever true 
and constant, lover and protector of soma, the joy and 
beauty of life, glorious destroyer of darkness, we know 
as we receive that the courage and will, the sense of 


912 RGVEDA 


honour and dignity that prevails among all the people 
of the world is yours, inspired by you, and a gift of 
yours to us. 


Sale Het सुतं परिं Steg नो Fre: | 
अर्कमर्चन्तु ara: ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Indraya madvane sutam pari stobhantu no girah. 
Arkam-arcantu karavah. 


Let all our voices of admiration flow and 
intensify the soma for the joy of Indra, and let the poets 
sing songs of adoration for him and celebrate his 
achievements. 


यस्िन्विश्वा अधि रियो cola aa संसद॑ः। 
इन्द्रं सुते ह॑वामहे ॥ २०॥ 
20. Yasmin visva adhi ९7710 rananti sapta samsadah. 


Indram sute havamahe. 


In our soma yajna of life, in meditation, and in 
the holy business of living, we invoke Indra, in whom 
all beauties and graces abide, whom all the seven seers 
in yajna adore, in whom all five senses, mind and 
intelligence subside absorbed, and under whom all the 
seven assemblies of the world unite, meet and act. 


त्रिक॑द्रुकेषु चेत॑नं देवासो! यज्ञम॑लत | 
तपिद्वर्धन्तु नो गिर॑: ॥ २९॥ 


21. Trikadrukesu cetanam 4९८1450 yajnamatnata. 
Tamidvardhantu no girah. 


In three modes of body, mind and soul, the 
devas, seven senses, the human consciousness and the 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 92 913 


noble yogis, concentrate on Indra, divine consciousness. 
In three regions of the universe, noble souls meditate 
on the universal consciousness of the divine Indra. Thus 
they perform the yajna of divinity in communion. May 
all our songs of adoration glorify that supreme 
consciousness, Indra. 


आ wat विशन्त्विन्द॑वः casita सिन्ध॑वः। 
न त्वायिन्द्रातिं रिच्यते॥ २२॥ 


22. A tva visantvindavah samudramiva sindhavah. 
Na tvamindrati ricyate. 


All the flows of soma, joys, beauties and graces 
of life concentrate in you, and thence they flow forth 
too, Indra, lord supreme, just as all rivers flow and join 
in the ocean and flow forth from there. O lord no one 
can comprehend and excel you. 


विव्यक्थ महिना वृंषन्भक्षं सोम॑स्य जागृवे । 
य इन्द्र जटरेषु ते ॥ २३॥ 

23.  Vivyaktha mahina vrsan bhaksam somasya 
jagrve. Ya indra jatharesu te. 


O lord of universal love and grace as showers 
of rain, ever awake in the world of existence, your divine 
bliss pervades all that essence of soma, joy and beauty 
of life, which is food for the human soul, and it ripples 
and rolls in the blissful reservoirs of your divine 
presence. 


अरं त इन्द्र कुक्षये सोमो! भवतु वृत्रहन्‌ । 
अरं धामभ्य इन्द॑वः ॥ २४॥ 


24. Aram ta indra kuksaye somo bhavatu vrtrahan. 
Aram dhamabhya indavah. 


914 RGVEDA 


Indra, O lord of power and joy, destroyer of evil 
and suffering, let there be ample soma to fill the space 
in the womb of existence, and let the flow of soma be 
profuse for all the forms of existence. 


अर्‌ मश्वाय गायति श्रुतक॑श्चो अरं गवे । 
अरमिन्द्रस्य धाम्ने ।। २५॥ 


25. Aramasvaya gayati srutakakso aram gave. 
Aramindrasya dhamne. 


The sage, having drunk of the soma of divine 
love, sings in praise of the dynamics of motion and 
attainment and the music overflows, he sings of the 
dynamics of creative production and power of 
communication such as waves of energy, earth and cows, 
and he sings profusely of the lord’s refulgent forms of 
wealth, beauty and excellence. 


अरं हि ष्मां सुतेषु णः सोमेष्विन्द्र ware 
अरं ते शक्र दावने ।। २६॥ 

26. Aram hi sma sutesu nah somesvindra bhusasi. 
Aram te Sakra davane. 

Indra, ruler of the world, all potent and 
competent doer of holy action, when we have distilled 
and achieved the soma of bright knowledge, action, 
wealth, honour and excellence of life, you feel highly 
glorified, and that achievement is a high tribute to your 
generous munificence also. 


पराकात्ताच्िदद्रिवस्त्वां नक्षन्त नो AT: | 
अरं गमाम ते वयम्‌ ॥ २७॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 92 915 


27. Parakattac-cid-adrivas-tvam naksanta no girah. 
Aram gamama te vayam. 


Indra, lord of clouds and mountains, wielder of 
thunder and lightning, our songs of adoration reach you 
even from far where we happen to be. We pray we may 
realise your presence intimately by direct experience 
of the spirit, beyond thought and speech. 


एवा ate वीरयुरेवा शूरं उत स्थिरः। 
एवा ते राध्यं मन॑: ॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Eva hyasi virayureva Sura uta sthirah. 
Eva te radhyam manah. 
You love and honour the brave, you are brave 
yourself, you are definite in intention and undisturbed 
in attitudes. You are now ripe for the perfection of mind 
to experience the soul’s beatitude in, divine presence. 
एवा रातिस्तुवीमघ विश्वेभिर्धायि धातुभिः। 
अधां चिदिन्द्र मे सचा ॥ २९॥ 

29. Eva ratis-tuvimagha visvebhir-dhayi dhatrbhih. 
Adha cidindra me saca. 
Indra, generous lord of the wealth and glory of 
the world, thus by practice and meditation, is divine 
generosity cultivated and achieved by all those who bear 
and bring the offerings to you. O lord of power and 
immense generosity, be my friend and companion. 
मो षु ब्रहोव॑ तन्द्रयुर्भुवो वाजानां पते। 
मत्स्वा सुतस्य गोम॑तः ॥ ३० ॥ 

30. Mo $ brahmeva tandrayurbhuvo vajanam pate. 
Matsva sutasya gomatah. 


916 RGVEDA 


O ruler, protector and promoter of the honour 
and excellence of life, just as a vibrant scholar of divine 
knowledge never slackens into sloth from wakefulness, 
so you too should never be slothful and half asleep. Be 
ever wakeful, enjoy and guard the distilled essence of 
knowledge and creative achievement of wealth, honour 
and excellence. 


मा न॑ s-atears दिशः al अक्तुष्वा य॑मन्‌। 
त्वा युजा व॑नेम॒ तत्‌ ॥ ३९ ॥ 

31. Mana indrabhya disah suro aktusva yaman. 
Tva yuja vanema tat. 


Indra, powerful friend and ally in spirit and 
conduct, let no force, howsoever strong it may be, from 
any direction come at night and overtake us by violence. 
With you as a friend and inspirer, let us counter that 
attack and win. 


त्वयेदिन्द्र युजा वयं प्रतिं ब्रुवीमहि eae: | 
त्वमस्माकं तव॑ स्मसि ॥ ३२॥ 

32. Tvayedinra yaja vayam prati bruvimahi sprdhah. 
Tvamasmakam tava smasi. 


Indra, O lord omnipotent, O intelligent soul in 
the state of divine beatitude, O mind in the state of 
perfect spiritual control, only with you as friend and 
companion do we counter and win our adversaries in 
life. You are ours, we are yours. 


त्वामिद्धि त्वायवोंऽ नुनोनुंबतश्चरान्‌। 
सर्वाय इन्द्र कारवः ॥ ३३ ॥ 


33. | Tvamiddhi tvayavo’nunonuvatascaran. 
Sakhaya indra karavah. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 93 917 


Indra, O lord omnipotent, O ruler of the world, 
O soul in divine union, O mind in perfect state of 
spiritual control, may the poets, celebrants, men in 
action, all assistant forces in unison live their life in 
dedication to you, working for you and thereby exalting 
you in song and in action as their friend, guide and 
protector. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 93 


Indra (1-33), Indra and Rbhavah (34) Devata, Sukaksha 
Angirasa Rshi 


उद्धेदभि श्रुतामघं वृषभं नसौपसम्‌। 
अस्तारमेषि सूर्य ॥ १॥ 


॥ ४ Uddhedabhi srutamagham vrsabham naryapa- 
sam. Astaramesi surya. 


O Surya, self-refulgent light of the world, you 
rise and move in the service of Indra, lord of the wealth 
of revelation, generous and virile, lover of humanity 
and dispeller of the darkness and negativities of the 
mind, soul and the universe. 


(Indra is interpreted in this Sukta as the 
omnipotent, self-refulgent lord and light of the universe, 
as the sublime soul, and as the enlightened mind 
according to the context of meaning reflected by the 
intra-structure of the mantra.) 


नव यो न॑वतिं पुरो विभेद बाह्योजसा। 
sie च वृत्रहाव॑धीत्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Nava yo navatim puro bibheda bahvojasa. 
Ahim ca vrtrahavadhit. 


918 RGVEDA 


Indra who breaks off the nine and ninty 
strongholds of darkness, ignorance and suffering by the 
force of his lustrous arms and, as the dispeller of 
darkness, destroys the crooked serpentine evil of the 
world: 


सन इन्द्र॑ः शिवः सखाऽश्वावद्रोमद्यव॑मत्‌। 
उसरुर्धारेव दोहते ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Sana indrah Ssivah sakha’svavad-gomadyavamat. 
Urudhareva dohate. 


That same Indra who is blissful, a gracious 
friend and companion, commands the wealth of cows 
and horses, nourishment and achievement, knowledge 
and enlightenment and distils for us power, honour and 
excellence from nature such as the torrential showers 
of rain. 


यदद्य कच्य॑ qaeqant अभि dat । 
सर्वं तदिन्द्र ते वो ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yadadya kacca vrtrahannudaga abhi surya. 
Sarvam tadindra te vase. 


O sun, dispeller of darkness, whatever the aim 
and purpose for which you rise today, let that be, O 
Indra, lord ruler of the world, under your command and 
control. 
यद्वां wees सत्पते न म॑रा इति Aas । 
उतो तत्सत्यमित्तव ।॥। ५॥ 


5. Yadva pravrddha satpate na mara iti manyase. 
Uto tat satyamit tava. 


Indra, O mind, O soul, ever rising as the world 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 93 919 


expands, protector of truth and reality, if you believe 
and say in all faith that “I shall not die’, then it shall be 
true, an inviolable reality. 


ये सोमासः परावति ये अर्वावति afar । 
सर्वस्तां इन्द्र गच्छसि ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ye somasah paravati ye arvavati sunvire. 
Sarvanstan indra gacchasi. 


Indra, O dynamic intelligence, protector of the 
knowledge of truth and reality, whatever somas of 
knowledge, culture and enlightenment are distilled 
either far away or close at hand, pray you move there to 
record and protect them for us. 


तमिन्द्रं वाजयामसि महे वृत्राय हन्त॑वे | 
स वूर्षा वृषभो भुवत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

4 Tamindram vajayamasi mahe vrtraya hantave. 
Sa vrsa vrsabho bhuvat. 


That Indra, dynamic and enlightened mind and 
intelligence, we cultivate and strengthen for the 
elimination of the great waste, deep ignorance and 
suffering prevailing in the world. May that light and 
mind be exuberant and generous for us with showers of 
enlightenment. 


इन्द्रः स दाम॑ने कृत ओजिष्ठः स मदे faa: | 
द्युम्नी रल्टोको स सोम्यः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Indrah sa damane krta ojisthah sa made hitah. 
Dyumni Sloki sa somyah. 


Indra, mind and intelligence, was created for 


920 RGVEDA 


enlightenment and for giving enlightenment. Most 
lustrous and powerful, it is engaged in the creation of 
joy. It is rich in the wealth of knowledge, praise-worthy, 
and cool, gentle and at peace in the state of 
enlightenment. 


गिरा amt न dda: Geet setae: | 
ववक्ष ऋष्वो अस्तुतः 8 
9. Gira vajro na sambhrtah sabalo anapacyutah. 


Vavaksa rsvo astrtah. 


Held in and by the voice of divinity like the roar 
of thunder and like the flood of sun-rays, it is powerful, 
unfallen, irrepressible and lofty with thought, so let it 
express itself freely. 


दुर्गे faa: सुगं afer गृणान इन्द्र गिर्वणः 1 
त्वं चं मघवन्वर्ाः॥ ९०॥ 

10. Durge cinnah sugam krdhi grnana indra 
girvanah. Tvam ca maghavan vasah. 


Indra, adorable lord, praised and prayed, turn 
even the difficult paths to simple and easy ones and, O 
lord of wealth, honour and power, do it as and when 
you wish, you are the master. 


यस्य॑ ते नू चिदादिशं न मिनन्ति cerry 
न देवो नाधिंगुर्जनः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yasya te nu cidadisam na minanti svarajyam. 
Na devo nadhrigurjanah. 


No power can violate your sphere of self-rule 
and sovereignty nor what you ordain, neither human 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 93 921 
nor super human howsoever irresistible it be. 
stat ते अप्रतिष्कुतं देवी शुष्मं Gaeta: | 
उभे सुशिप्र रोद॑सी ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Adha te apratiskutam devi Susmam saparyatah. 
Ubhe susipra rodasi. 


And then, O lord of glorious countenance, both 
the divine earth and heaven honour and serve your 
irresistible might. 
त्वमेतद॑धारयः कृष्णासु रोहिणीषु = | 
परुष्णीषु Seas: ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Tvam-etad-adharayah krsnasu rohinisu ca. 
Parusnisu rusat payah. 
Only you as mind and electric energy bear, hold 
and maintain in circulation this bright vital liquid energy 
as sap and blood in the dark and red life sustaining veins 
and arteries of living forms. 
fa यदहेरध त्विषो विश्वे देवासो अक्रमुः 1 
विदन्मुगस्य at अमः ॥ eeu 

14. Vi yadaheradha 11750 1151८ devaso akramuh. 
Vidan-mrgasya tan amah. 


When all the divine perceptive senses and 
conceptive faculties of the mind rise to fight the dark 
powers of evil, Indra, the soul, the higher mind, realises 
the fierce powers of evil and stirs: 


आदु मे निवरो भुवद्‌ वृच्रहार्दिष्ट पौस्य॑म्‌। 
अज।तशच्नुरस्तुतः ॥ ९५॥ 


922 RGVEDA 


15. Adu me nivaro bhuvad-vrtrahadista paumsyam. 
Ajatasatrur-astrtah. 


Then Indra, the soul, the higher mind, my 
saviour, destroyer of evil, provides me strength, and, 
undaunted, I stir and become unchallengeable by 
enemies. 


श्रुतं वो वृत्रहन्तमं प्र शर्धः चर्षणीनाम्‌ 
आ शुषे राध॑से ASU ९६॥ 


16.  Srutam vo vrtrahantamam pra sardham carsa- 
ninam. A suse radhase mahe. 


For your strength, high success and 
advancement, I strive for and try to attain to the highest 
strength of the people capable of fighting out and 
eliminating the darkness, ignorance and suffering of life. 


अया धिया च॑ गव्यया पुरुणामन्पुरुष्टुत | 
यत्सोमेसोम आभ॑वः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Aya dhiya ca gavyaya purunaman purustuta. 
Yat some soma abhavah. 

Indra, O higher mind, O soul, O awareness of 
divinity, who are adored by many, celebrated by many 
many names in many ways, arise in every person in 
every soma yajna by with virtue of this intelligence, 
this knowledge and this awareness which nature has 
given to every person. 


बोधिन्मना इद॑स्तु नो वृत्रहा भू्यीसुतिः। 
श्रुणोतु, शक्र आशिष॑म्‌॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Bodhinmana idastu no vrtraha bhuryasutih. 
Srnotu Sakra asisam. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 93 923 


May Indra, lord of universal intelligence, 
destroyer of darkness, commander of universal success 
and joy, we pray, know our mind and listen to us for our 
heart’s desire for success. 


कया त्वं न॑ ऊत्याऽभि प्र म॑न्दसे वृषन्‌। 
कयां स्तोतृभ्य आ ATU ९९॥ 

19. Kaya tvam na utya’bhi pra mandase vrsan. 
Kaya stotrbhya a bhara. 


Indra, lord of power and prosperity, generous 
as cloud showers, by which modes of protection and 
promotion do you bless us with the joys we have, by 
which methods and graces do you bear and bring the 
wealth which the celebrants enjoy? 


कस्य वृषां सुते सचा नियुत्वान्वृषभो tore | 
वृत्रहा सोम॑पीतये ॥ २० ॥ 


20. Kasya vrsa sute saca niyutvan vrsabho ranat. 
Vrtraha somapitaye. 


In whose soma yajna does Indra, generous giver 
of showers of joy, master of cosmic dynamics, virile all 
creative, destroyer of darkness, want and suffering, take 
delight as a friend and participate in the creation, 
protection and promotion of the soma joys of life? 


अभी षु णस्त्वं रयिं मन्दसानः संहस्तरिणम्‌। 
प्रयन्ता बोधि दाशुषे २९॥ 


21. Abhi sunastvam rayim mandasanah sahasrinam. 
Prayanta bodhi dasuse. 


Indra, lord all joy and bliss, our guide, delighted 


924 RGVEDA 


with the soma yajna of the generous yajamana, enlighten 
him and bring him a thousandfold wealth, honour and 
excellence. 


पत्नीवन्तः सुता इम उशन्तो यन्ति वीतये । 
अपां जम्मिर्निचुम्पुणः ॥ २२॥ 

22. Patnivantah suta ima uSanto yanti vitaye. 
Apam jagmir-nicumpunah. 

These sparkling life-giving streams of soma joys 
of life created by Indra in the world flow to the thirsty 
yajakas for their enlightenment and joy just as streams 
of water flow to the unsatiating sea. 

इष्टा होत्रा असूश्चतेन्द्रं वृधासो! अध्वरे | 
अच्छावभथमोजंसा ॥ २३ Ul 


23. Ista hotra asrksatendram vrdhaso adhvare. 
Acchavabhrthamojasa. 


Cherished and lovely offers of havi offered into 
the fire in the yajna of life exalt Indra, and with light 
and lustre lead the yajamana to the sanctifying bath on 
the completion of the yajna. 


इह त्या Geren हरी हिर॑ण्यकेश्या | 
areata wal हितम्‌ ॥ २४॥ 

24. Ilha tya sadhamadya hari hiranyakesya. 
Volhamabhi prayo hitam. 


And may those brilliant and jubilant perceptive, 
creative and communicative dynamics of yajna working 
in unison conduct Indra, the soul, onward in the business 
of living and lead the yajamana to the desired wealth 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 93 925 
and nourishment of life. 


तुभ्यं सोमाः सुता इमे स्तीर्णं बर्हिर्विभावसो । 
स्तोत॒भ्य इन्द्रमा ATU २५॥ 


25. Tubhyam somah suta ime stirnam barhirvibha- 
vaso. Stotrbhya indrama vaha. 


O lord of light, the soma delicacies distilled and 
seasoned are ready for you. The holy grass seats are 
spread on the vedi. Pray come in and bring in Indra, 
wealth, honour and excellence of life for the celebrants. 


आ a दक्षं fa रोचना दधद्रत्ला वि दाशुषे। 
स्तोत॒भ्य इन्द्रमर्चत ।॥ २६॥ 


26. A te daksam vi rocana dadhadratna vi dasuse. 
Stotrbhya indramarcata. 


O lord of light, refulgent and glorious stars and 
planets such as sun, earth and moon bear your power 
and potential and they bear the jewels of life for the 
generous yajamana. O celebrants, celebrate Indra and 
pray for the devotees that the lord may bless. 


आ ते दधामीद्दियमुक्था विश्वा शतक्रतो | 
स्तोतुभ्य॑ इन्द्र YHA ॥ २७॥ 


27. A te dadhamindriyam-uktha visva satakrato. 
Stotrbhya indra mrlaya. 


O lord of infinite acts of grace, I hold in faith 
and abide by your divine power and law and I stand by 
all the divine injunctions of holiness and piety set out 
in holy writ. O lord omnipotent, Indra, be kind and 
gracious to the devoted celebrants. 


926 RGVEDA 


wasus न आ भरेषमूर्ज' शतक्रतो | 
यदिन्द्र मृव्छ्यासि नः ॥ २८ ॥ 

28. Bhadram bhadram na a bharesamurjam Sata- 
krato. Yadindra mrlayasi nah. 


Indra, lord of infinite actions of grace, when you 
are kind to us and bless us with joy and well being, you 
give us food, energy, knowledge and enlightenment so 
that we may rise towards perfection as good human 
beings. 

स नो विश्वान्या भ॑र सुवितानि शतक्रतो । 
यदिन्द्र मृव्छ्यासि नः॥ २९॥ 
29. Sano visvanya bhara suvitani Satakrato. 
Yadindra mrlayasi nah. 
Indra, lord of infinite acts of kindness, when 


you are kind and gracious to us, bear and bring us all 
the good fortunes, prosperity and welfare of life. 


त्वामिद्‌ वु॑त्रहन्तम सुतावन्तो हवामहे। 
यदिन्द्र TSA नः ॥ ३०॥ 

30. Tvamid vrtrahantama sutavanto havamahe. 
Yadindra mrlayasi nah. 


Blest with the beauty, grace and excellence of 
life, we invoke and celebrate you only, greatest destroyer 
of the darkness, evil and suffering of life since you are 
the highest power kind and gracious to us. 


sd नो हरिभिः सुतं याहि dart पते। 
उप॑ नो हरिभिः सुतम्‌ ॥ ३९ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 93 927 


31. Upano haribhih sutam yahi madanam pate. 
Upa no haribhih sutam. 


O lord and protector of the joys of life, come to 
us to taste the soma of life prepared by us with our mind, 
imagination and senses in your honour, come to us for 
the soma distilled by our heart and mind for you. 


द्विता यो वुत्रहन्त॑मो विद इन्द्र॑ः शतक्रतुः | 
उप॑ नो हरिभिः सुतम्‌ ॥ ३२॥ 


32. Dvita yo vrtrahantamo vida indrah Satakratuh. 
Upa no haribhih sutam. 


Indra, hero of a hundred noble actions, greatest 
destroyer of darkness who know both the way of 
knowledge and the way of karma for the good life, come 
to taste our soma of homage prepared by us with our 
heart and soul for you. 


त्वं हि वुंत्रहन्नेषां पाता सोमानामसि । 
उप॑ नो हरिभिः सुतम्‌ ॥ ३३ ॥ 

33.  Tvam hi vrtrahann-esam pata somanamasi. 
Upa no haribhih sutam. 


Indra, O soul, dispeller of darkness and 
ignorance, you are the experiencer of the joyous soma 
pleasures of life. Rise and enjoy the knowledge and 
wisdom collected and offered by the senses, mind and 
intelligence. 


इन्द्र इषे द॑दातु न ऋशभुश्चण॑मृभुं रयिम्‌। 
वाजी द॑दातु वाजिन॑म्‌॥ ३४॥ 


34. Indra ise dadatu na rbhuksanam-rbhum rayim. 
Vajt dadatu vajinam. 


928 RGVEDA 


For food, energy and knowledge, may Indra, 
lord of creativity, imagination and power, give us wealth, 
honour and excellence of broad, versatile and expert 
nature. May the lord of speed and victory grant us 
sustenance, energy and advanced success in our pursuit 
of progress. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 94 
Maruts Devata, Bindu or Putadaksha Angirasa Rshi 


गौर्धयति मरुतां श्रवस्युर्माता मघोनाम्‌ । 
युक्ता बह्वी र्थानाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


1 Gaur-dhayati marutam Sravasyur-mata magho- 
nam. Yukta vahni rathanam. 


The cow, the earth, nature herself, mother of 
magnanimous Maruts, mighty men, is committed to 
provide sustenance and honourable existence for them 
and, joined with them in piety, bearing lovely gifts for 
them, provides the food of life and love as a mother 
suckles her children. 


यस्या देवा उपस्थे व्रता विश्वे धारयन्ते | 
सूर्यामासा दशो कम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Yasya deva upasthe vrata visve dharayante. 
Suryamasa drse kam. 

She in whose lap the Vishvedevas, divinities of 
humanity and nature, hold, maintain and observe their 
laws of existence, and the sun and moon wear their 
beauty and refulgence so that we may see and appreciate 
the glory of divine existence: 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 94 929 


तत्सु नो विश्वे अर्य आ सदा गृणन्ति ara: | 
मरुतः सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३॥ 


Si Tat su no visve arya a sada grnanti karavah. 
Marutah somapitaye. 


That same beauty and glory of existence and 
the mother’s magnanimity, all our poets and pioneers 
celebrate in song and heroic action. O Maruts, 
magnanimous men of might, come, act, and enjoy this 
soma of the Mother’s gift of glory. 


अस्ति सोमो! अयं सुतः पिब॑न्त्यस्य ed: | 
उत स्वराजो! अश्विना ४॥ 


4. Asti somo ayam sutah pibantyasya marutah. 
Uta svarajo asvina. 


O Maruts, mighty men of honour and action, 
this soma of glorious life is ready, created by divinity. 
Lovers of life and adventure, Ashwins, live it and enjoy, 
those who are self-refulgent, free and self-governed, 
and who are ever on the move, creating, acquiring, 
giving, like energies of nature in the cosmic circuit. 


पिब॑न्ति मित्रो stefan तना पूतस्य वरुणः। 
त्रिषधस्थस्य॒ जाव॑तः॥ ५॥ 


a Pibanti mitro aryama tana putasya varunah. 
Trisadhasthasya javatah. 


Mitra, men of universal love, Aryama, men of 
adventure on the paths of rectitude, and Varuna, men of 
judgement and right choice, continuously drink of this 
soma created and sanctified by the procreative power 
of divinity pervading in the three regions of the universe, 


930 RGVEDA 


heaven, earth and the sky. 


उतो न्व॑स्य जोषमा इन्द्रः सुतस्य गोम॑तः 
प्रातदेतिव मत्सति ।॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Uto nvasya josaman indrah sutasya gomatah. 
Pratarhoteva matsati. 


And surely the delight and exhilaration of this 
soma, Indra, the soul, inspirited with the power of 
brilliance and awareness, like a yajaka at dawn, 
experiences, and celebrates the ecstasy in dance and 
song. 


कद॑त्विषन्त सूरय स्तिर आपंइव fered: | 
अर्षन्ति पूतद॑श्चसः॥ ७॥ 


Kadatvisanta surayastira apa iva sridhah. 
Arsanti putadaksasah. 


How brilliant and blazing are the brave, we 
scholars and warriors of pure and unsullied power and 
expertise who, like turbulent waters, break the violent 
down and move forward on the paths of rectitude! 


wel अद्य महानां देवानामवो वृणे | 
wrt च दस्मवंर्चसाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Kadvo adya mahanam devanamavo vrne. 
Tmana ca dasmavarcasam. 


And when and how can I choose and hope for 
the protection and patronage of the great, noble and 
generous leaders and pioneers who are brilliant by virtue 
of their own innate power and personality? 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 94 931 


आ ये विश्वा पार्थिवानि पप्रथत्रोचना fea: | 
मरुतः सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९॥ 


A ye visva parthivani paprathan rocana divah. 
Marutah somapitaye. 


Those Maruts, pioneers of nature and humanity, 
who have extended the beauties of existence, both 
earthly and heavenly, for the experience and higher 
awareness of the joy and ecstasy of it, 


त्यान्नु पूतदक्षसो दिवो वों मरुतो हुवे । 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये 11 ९०॥ 


10. Tyan nu putadaksaso divo vo maruto huve. 
Asya somasya pitaye. 


Those, O Maruts, heroes of power and purity, I 
call from your regions of light to come and to enjoy, 
protect and promote this delight and beauty of the world 
of existence. 


wre ये वि रोद॑सी तस्तभुर्मरुतो हुवे । 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये 11 ९९॥ 


11. Tyan nu ye vi rodast tastabhurmaruto huve. 
Asya somasya pitaye. 


Those Maruts, nature’s powers of divine energy 
who stabilise the regions of heaven and earth in the 
cosmos, those Maruts, scholars, scientists and pioneers 
of vibrant nature and energy who maintain the laws and 
values of heaven and earth in human life, I call, to join 
them in the experience of the delight and ecstasy of this 
joyous world of beauty. 


932 RGVEDA 


त्यं नु मारुतं गणं गिरिष्ठां वृष॑णं हुवे । 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥ ९२॥ 
12. Tyam nu marutam ganam giristham vrsanam 
huve. Asya somasya pitaye. 
That host of Maruts generous as showers of 
clouds, abiding on high as on the peaks of mountains, I 
invoke and call to come and join us in the celebration 


of life’s beauty and glory for the experience and 
awareness of its divinity. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 95 
Indra Devata, Tirashchi Angirasa Rshi 


आ त्वा गिरो र थीरिवाऽस्थुंः Gag गिर्वणः । 
अभि त्वा समनूषतेन्द्र वत्सं न ATA Ue 

1. A tva giro rathiriva’sthuh sutesu girvanah. 
Abhi tva samanusatendra vatsam na matarah. 


Indra, adorable lord of glory, when the soma 
sense of life’s beauty and meaning is realised, let our 
voices of adoration reach you fast as a charioteer, and 
as mothers out of love incline to their children, so let 
our voices too closely abide with you. 


आ त्वां शुक्रा अचुच्यवुः सुतास इन्द्र गिर्वणः | 
पिबा त्व१ स्यान्ध॑स इन्द्र विश्वासु ते हितम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2 A tva sukra acucyavuh sutasa indra girvanah. 
Piba tvasyandhasa indra visvasu te hitam. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, adorable soul, let 
these somas of transparent knowledge and awareness 
of crystalline purity distilled from life reach in homage 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 95 933 


to you. Accept these, enjoy, protect and promote these 
rolling round in space for you as food for life and soul. 


(This mantra can also be interpreted as a divine 
blessing to the human soul in response to its karmic 
homage presented in the previous mantra. When a 
devotee offers homage of prasada in the lord’s temple, 
the lord returns it with blessings for the presenter.) 


पिबा सोमं मदाय कमिन्द्र श्येनाभूंतं सुतम्‌ । 
त्वं हि शश्व॑तीनां पती wet विशामसि ॥ ३॥ 


3. Piba somam madaya kamindra syenabhrtam 
sutam. Tvam hi Sasvatinam pati raja visamasi. 

Indra, enlightened spirit of the universe, enjoy 
the soothing and illuminating soma of joyous knowledge 
distilled from life and living literature by dynamic and 
adorable sages of enlightenment. You are the master, 
protector, sustainer and ruler of all the universal and 
eternal generations of the people. 


श्रुधी हवं तिरश्च्या इन्द्र यस्त्वां सपर्यति । 
सुवीर्यस्य गोम॑तो रायस्पूर्धि wer असि॥ ॥ 


4. Srudhi havam tirascya indra yastva saparyati. 
Suviryasya gomato rayaspurdhi mahan asi. 


Indra, listen to the invocation of the devotee’s 
voice of deep silence who offers service and homage to 
you, and bless the devotee with wealth of brave progeny, 
lands, cows, knowledge and total fulfilment. You are 
great, unbounded is your munificence. 


इन्द्र यस्ते नवीयसीं गिरं मन्द्रामजींजनत्‌। 
चि कित्विन्म॑नसं धियं प्रलामूतस्यं पिप्युषीम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


934 RGVEDA 


5. Indra yaste naviyasim giram mandram-ajijanat. 
Cikitvin-manasam dhiyam pratnam-rtasya 
pipyusim. 

Indra, whoever creates and offers you the latest 
song of joyous adoration, you bless with a mind and 
intelligence for eternal illumination, universal 
understanding and wisdom, and dedication to exuberant 
awareness of eternal truth and law. 


तमुंष्टवाम यं गिर इन्द्रमुक्थानि वावृधुः । 
पुरूण्यस्य पौंस्या सिषासन्तो वनामहे Ul ६ ॥ 


6. Tamu stavama yam gira indramukthani vavrdhuh. 
Purunyasya paumsya sisasanto vanamahe. 


We adore and worship Indra whom hymns and 
songs of adoration exalt, and we pray to him for the gift 
of many forms of strength, honour and excellence. 


एतो न्विन्द्रं स्तवाम शुब्दं शब्देन साम्ना। 
शुब्दैरु व्थेवीवृध्वांसं we आशीर्वीन्ममत्तु ॥ ७॥ 


Li Eto nvindram stavama Suddham Suddhena samna. 
Suddhair-ukthair-vavrdhvamsam suddha asirvan 
mamattu. 


Come, friends, and, with happy chant of pure 
holy Sama songs, adore Indra, pure and bright spirit 
and power of the world, who feels pleased and exalted 
by honest unsullied songs of adoration. Let the 
supplicant with a pure heart please and win the favour 
of Indra and rejoice. 


इन्द्र शुब्दो न आ ग॑हि शुद्धः शुद्दाभिरूतिभिः। 
शब्दो रयिंनि धारय शुब्दो म॑मद्धि सोम्यः॥८॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 935 


of Indra Suddho na a gahi Suddhah suddhabhiru- 
tibhih. Suddho rayim ni dharaya suddho mama- 
ddhi somyah. 


May Indra, pure and absolute spirit, come to us 
and bless us. May the pure immaculate spirit come with 
pure modes of action and protection. May the pure spirit 
bring us wealth, honour and excellence. May pure 
divinity, absolute peace and bliss, be pleased and 
exalted. 


इन्द्र॑ शुब्दो हि at रयिं Beat रत्नानि दाशुषे । 
शुद्धो वृत्राणि जिश्रसे शुद्धो वाजं सिषाससि ॥ ९॥ 

a. Indra Suddho hi no rayim suddho ratnani dasuse. 
Suddho vrtrani jighnase suddho vajam sisasasi. 


Indra, spirit pure and absolute, may bring us 
wealth, honour and excellence. The pure may bring 
jewels of life for the generous yajamana. Indra, the pure, 
in order to eliminate evil and dispel darkness and 
suffering, loves to give us strength, sustenance and 
advancement, the lord pure and blissful that he is. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 96 
Indra (1-13, 16-21), Indra-Marutah (14), Indra- 
Brhaspati (15) Devatah, Tirashchi Angirasa or Dyutana 
Maruta Rshi 


अस्मा उषास आतिरन्त याममिन्द्राय नक्तमू्यीः gare: | 
अस्मा आपो' मातरः wa तस्थुर्नभ्यस्तराय सिन्ध॑वः 
सुपाराः We त 

li, Asma usasa atiranta yamam-indraya naktam- 
uryah suvacah. Asma apo matarah sapta tasthur- 
nrbhyas-taraya sindhavah suparah. 


936 RGVEDA 


For Indra, this lord supreme ruler and ordainer 
of the universe, the dawns advance their course, for 
Indra, the last hours of the night are sanctified with 
voices of adoration, for this same lord, seven motherly 
dynamics of nature, 1.6., five elements, mind and pranic 
energies, keep to their tasks in nature’s law, and for him 
the rivers and seas ebb and flow for human navigation. 


अति विन्दधा विथुरेण। चिदस्त्रा त्रिः wa सानु संहिता 
गिरीणाम्‌। न dat न मर्त्य॑ स्तुतुर्याद्यानि प्रवृद्धो वृषभ- 
श्चकार ॥। २॥ 


pm Atividdha vithurena cidastra trih sapta sanu sam- 
hita girinam. Na taddevo na martyastuturya- 
dyani pravrddho vrsabhas-cakara. 


With staggering missile he pierced thrice seven 
mountain peaks in succession. Neither divine nor human 
can ever do what the mighty hero in the state of 
exaltation has at a stroke achieved. 


इन्द्रस्य ad आयसो se इन्द्र॑स्य बाह्लोर्भू यि मोजः | 
sitter क्रत॑वो निरेक आसन्नेष॑न्त श्रुत्या उपाके ॥ ३ ॥ 


Indrasya vajra ayaso nimisla indrasya bahvor- 
bhuyisthamojah. Sirsannindrasya kratavo nireka 
asannesanta Srutya upake. 


The thunder bolt of Indra is made of unbreakable 
steel, sharpened and integrated with his body system, 
in his arms there is tremendous force and lustre, in his 
head are definite thoughts, plans and actions of high 
degree, and in his tongue is speech which people are 
anxious to hear at the closest. 


(These two mantras are highly mystical, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 96 937 


comprehensively allegorical also. They describe the 
divine process of evolution. We may interpret the astra 
as the missile of the Big Bang of the divine will which 
formally splits integrated Prakrti into seven stages of 
mahan, ahankara and the five elements, i.e., akasha, 
vayu, agni, apah and prthivi over three modes of satva, 
rajas and tamas of each. The vajra, again is the will 
continuously operative as Rtam, the law of the dynamics 
of nature. At the human level, the same dynamic works 
as living energy of prana in the biological system and 
converts food into seven ascending stages of rasa, rakta, 
mansa, meda, majja, asthi and virya which, properly 
cultivated and preserved, shines as ojas, lustre of the 
personality.) 


मन्ये त्वा aad यज्ञियानां मन्ये त्वा च्यव॑नमच्युंतानाम्‌। 
मन्ये' त्वा सत्व॑नामिन्द्र केतुं मन्ये त्वा वृषभं चर्षणी - 
नाम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Manye tva yajniyam yajniyanam manye tva 
cyavanamacyutanam. Manye tva satvanamindra 
ketum manye tva vrsabham carsaninam. 


Indra, hero of invincible power, plan and action, 
I honour as the most revered of the powers worthy of 
love and homage in yajna. Of the unmoved and 
immovables, I honour you as the greatest mover and 
the moving at the highest velocity. Of the real, the true, 
the eternal, I honour you as the first and highest. And of 
the dynamic visionaries, I honour you as the highest 
visionary, most dynamic in power and generosity. 


आ यद्वज्रं बाह्वोरिन्द्र धत्से मदच्यु तमहं ये हन्तवा उ। 
प्र पर्व॑ता अन॑वन्त्‌ प्र गावः प्र ब्रह्माणो अभिनक्षन्त इन्द्र॑म्‌ ॥५॥ 


938 RGVEDA 


2: A yadvajram vahvorindra dhatse madacyuta- 
mahaye hantava u. Pra parvata anavanta pra 
gavah pra brahmano abhinaksanta indram. 


Indra, when you hold the pride shattering 
thunderbolt in hands for the destruction of evil forces, 
mountains bend, earths adore, and divines sing hymns 
of praise to celebrate your glory. 


aq Sara य इमा जजान विश्वां जातान्यव॑राण्यस्मात्‌। 
इन्द्र॑ण मित्रं दिधिषेम गीर्भिरूपो नमोभिर्वृषभं विशेम ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tamu stavama ya ima jajana visva jatanyava- 
ranyasmat. Indrena mitram didhisema girbhirupo 
namobhirvrsabham visema. 


We worship him that brought all these forms of 
existence into being after him. Let us win friendship 
with Indra, and with hymns of adoration presented with 
homage and humility, abide in his presence at the closest. 


qaet त्वा श्वसथादीष॑माणा fara देवा अजर्य सखायः | 
मरुद्धिरिन्द्र सख्यं त अस्त्वथेमा विश्वाः पृत॑ना जयासि ॥ ७॥ 


a Vrtrasya tva $vasathadisamana visve deva aja- 
hurye sakhayah. Marudbhirindra sakhyam te 
astvathema visvah prtana jayasi. 


O soul of man, when at the frightful breath of 
evil forces of thought and the external world all your 
noble faculties who are your friends forsake you out of 
fear and insecurity, at that time, Indra, O soul, of innate 
power and self-confidence, hold on, be friends with the 
Maruts, vital pranic powers, and surely you would win 
in all the battles against evil. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 939 


त्रिः षष्टिस्त्वा मरुतो वावृधाना sera राशयो! यज्ञियासः 1 
उप wan: कृधि at भागधेयं शुष्मं त एना हविष 
विधेम ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Trih sastistva maruto vavrdhana usra iva rasayo 
yajniyasah. Upa tvemah krdhi no bhagadheyam 
sSusmam ta ena havisa vidhema. 


Thrice sixty Maruts, pranic and psychic 
energies, venerable cooperative yajnic powers, like 
floods of light, exalting Indra, stand by Indra, the soul. 
We stand by you, say they, give us our share of attention 
and food for life in yajna, and by this very share of 
recognition and food for life and power, we shall render 
you back the strength and power you need. 


तिग्ममायुधं मरुतामनीकं कस्त॑ इन्द्र प्रति ag दधर्ष। 
अनायुधासो असुरा अदेवाश्चक्रेणा at अप॑ वप ऋजी- 
षिन्‌॥ ९॥ 


त्र Tigmam-ayudham marutamanikam kasta indra 
prati vajram dadharsa. Anayudhaso asura 
adevas-cakrena tan apa vapa rjisin. 


Indra, O soul, the powers of the Maruts, pranas, 
is really your fiery thunderbolt. Who holds a weapon 
counter to thunder? The evil forces are, in fact, without 
any force and weapon. Nor do they have anything 
positive and divine about them. Rise, move and shoot 
your wheel of concentrated force and strike them down. 


मह उग्राय॑ तवसे सुवृक्तिं tka शिवत॑माय ua: | 
freee गिर इन्द्राय पूर्वीर्धेहि तन्वं कुविदङ् वेद॑त्‌॥ ९०॥ 


940 RGVEDA 


10. Maha ugraya tavase suvrktim preraya Sivatamaya 
pasvah. Girvahase gira indraya purvir-dhehi 
tanve kuvidanga vedat. 


O man, set in motion the long range visionary 
process of uprooting the evil tendencies with songs of 
divinity for the sake of the great, lustrous, mighty and 
most beneficent and peaceable Indra, the inner soul. 
Collect and offer profuse voices of holy exhilaration 
and exhortation in honour of the divine lord of song 
and, O dear as breath of life, he would bless you with 
ample gifts of health, progeny and prosperity. 


उक्थवाहसे विभ्वे, मनीषां द्रुणा न पारमीरया नदीनाम्‌। नि 
स्पश धिया तन्वि श्रुतस्य जुष्ट॑तरस्य कुविदङ्ग वेद॑त्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ukthavahase vibhve manisam druna na para- 
miraya nadinam. Ni sprsa dhiya tanvi Srutasya 
justatarasya duvidanga vedat. 


O man, direct and send up your thoughts and 
prayers over to the great omnipotent Indra who loves 
the devotee’s songs of adoration. Send up the adorations 
as we cross over the rivers by boat. And with your vision, 
intelligence and action feel the touch of the dear divine 
lord of universal presence and glory in the very core of 
your heart. Would not the lord dear as breath of life not 
oblige and bless? 


तद्िविड्धि यत्त इन्द्रो जुजोषत्स्तुहि asta नपसा विवास । 
sd भूष जरितर्मा रुवण्यः श्रावया वाचं plata वेद॑त्‌ ॥ VR 


12. Tad-vividdhi yat ta indro jujosat stuhi sustutim 
namasa vivasa. Upa bhusa jaritarma ruvanyah 
Sravaya vacam kuvidanga vedat. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 941 


O man, do that and enter there where Indra 
desires you to be. Worship the lord adorable and serve 
him with homage and praise. O celebrant, sanctify 
yourself and be close to him, never feel sorry and 
depressed. Send up your prayers so that he may listen. 
O dear friend, would he not listen and bless? 


अवं दरप्सो signrdiafastaart: कृष्णो दशभिः सहस्रः । 
आवत्तमिन्द्रः शच्या धमन्तमप स््रेितीर्तृमणां अधत्त Ul ९३ ॥ 


13. Ava drapso amSumatim-atisthad-iyanah krsno 
dasabhih sahasraih. Avat tamindrah sacya 
dhamantam-apa snehitir-nrmana adhatta. 


The dark passion of pride with its ten thousand 
assistants and associates comes, occupies the affections 
and suppresses the emotive and creative streams of life, 
but Indra, noble leader of men, the soul, with its great 
thought and action, takes this bully over, controls its 
violence and covers it with sweetness and love. 


द्रप्समपश्यं विषुणे चर॑न्तमुपहरे नद्यो अंशुमत्याः । नभो न 
कृष्णम॑ंवतस्थिवांसमिष्यामि वो वृषणो युध्यताजौ ॥ १४ ॥ 


14. Drapsam-apasyam visune carantam-upahvare 
nadyo amsumatyah. Nabho na krsnam-avata- 
sthivamsam-isyami vo vrsano yudhyatajau. 


I have seen the dark devil of passion and pride 
roaming around widely and variously on the banks of 
the vibrant stream of life. O mighty energies of prana 
and divine potential, I wish you fight in the battle and, 
like unfailing agents of cleansing of dirt, throw out the 
dark evil standing out and working boldly as well as 
surreptitiously. 


942 RGVEDA 


अधं द्रप्सो अंशुमत्यां उपस्थेऽ्धारयत्तन्वं तित्विषाणः । विशो 
अदे वीर भ्या ३ चर॑न्तीर्बहस्पतिंना युजेन्द्रः ससाहे ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Adha drapso amsumatya upasthe ’dharayat 
tanvam titvisanah. Viso adevirabhyacarantir- 
brhaspatina yujendrah sasahe. 


When the dark passion is cleansed out, then pure 
vitality, lustrous and sparkling, sustains itself in the lap 
of creative life aflow. Indra, exuberant soul purified and 
tempered, in cooperation with wide ranging pranic 
energies, challenge and fight out the unholy tendencies 
of carnal mind ranging around. 


त्वं ह त्यत्सप्तभ्यो जाय॑मानोऽशत्रुभ्यो अभवः STARR 
Tor द्यार्वापृथिवी अन्व॑विन्दो विभुमद्धयो धुव॑नेभ्यो 
रणं धाः ॥ १६ ॥ 


16. Tvam ha tyat saptabhyo jayamano’satrubhyo 
abhavah satrurindra. Gulhe dyavaprthivi anva- 
vindo vibhumadbhyo bhuvanebhyo ranam dhah. 


Thus does Indra become a victorious enemy for 
the seven unrivalled unholy tendencies of sense and 
mind and emerges a brilliant unrivalled hero. Thus does 
he find the real joyous heaven and earth otherwise, for 
him, covered in deep darkness. Thus do you, O soul, 
bear and bring happiness to the regions of life vested in 
dignity and excellence. 


त्वं ह त्यदप्रतिमानमोजो वञ्चेण वचिन्धुषितो ज॑घन्थ । त्वं 
शुष्णस्यावातिरो वधत्रैस्त्वं गा इन्द्र शच्येद॑विन्दः ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Tvam ha tyad-apratimanamojo vajrena vajrin 
dhrsito jaghantha. Tvam Susnasyavatiro vadha- 
traistvam ga indra Sacyedavindah. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 943 


You, virile commander of thunderous strength, 
most daring hero, by your virile and thunderous force 
of personality you won unequalled lustre and dignity. 
With your deadly weapons, you overcame the ravages 
of famine, deprivation and exploitation, and with your 
courage and conscientious action you won lands and 
cows and conquered your own carnal self. 


त्वं ह त्यद्‌ gay चर्षणीनां घनो वृत्राणां तविषो ब॑भूथ | 
त्वं सिन्धुरसजस्तस्तभानान्त्वमपो अजयो दासप॑लीः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Tvam ha tyad-vrsabha carsaninam ghano 
vrtranam taviso babhutha. Tvam sindhunra-srjas- 
tastabhanan tvamapo ajayo dasapatnih. 


Indra, you are the power on top, virile and 
generous leader of the dynamic human community, 
destroyer of darkness, evil and exploitation, and a 
blazing brilliant hero. You release the streams of waters 
and social energies restrained by forces of repression 
and suppression, and you free and win over the floods 
of human potential and action locked up under the force 
of tyranny. 

स सुक्रतू रणिता यः सुतेष्वनुंत्तमन्युर्यो अहव रे वान्‌ । 

य एक इन्नर्यपांसि कर्तां स वुंत्रहा प्रतीदन्य्माहुः ॥ ९९ ॥ 
19. Sa sukratu ranita yah sutesvanuttamanyuryo 

aheva revan. Ya eka innaryapamsi karta sa vr- 

traha pratidanyamahuh. 

You are the hero of noble action, happy celebrant 
of life and divinity in yajnic gatherings of knowledge, 
enlightenment and advanced action. Unsurpassed is 
your passion for action, and your splendour and 


944 RGVEDA 
generosity is like the light of day. 


स वुत्रहेन्द्र॑श्चर्षणीधृत्तं deen हव्यं हुवेम । स प्राविता 
मघवां नोऽ धिवक्ता स वाज॑स्य श्रवस्यस्य दाता ॥ २०॥ 


20. Savrtrahendrascarsanidhrt tam sustutya havyam 
huvema. Sa pravita maghava no’dhivakta sa 
vajasya $ravasyasya data. 


With words of welcome and adoration, we 
invoke, invite and serve the brilliant leader, destroyer 
of want, ignorance and suffering, and sustainer of the 
people, He is our protector, trustee of the nation’s wealth, 
power and honour, defender of our honour and dignity 
in world forums and giver of honour, prosperity and 
excellence. He is the power and person adorable. 


स वृत्रहेन््र ऋभुश्चाः सद्यो ज॑ज्ञानो हव्यो बभूव । uaa 
नयी पुरूणि सोमो न पीतो हव्यः सखिभ्यः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Sa vrtrahendra rbhuksah sadyo jajnano havyo 
babhuva. Krnvannapamsi narya puruni somo na 
pito havyah sakhibhyah. 


Indra, destroyer of darkness, ignorance and 
exploitation, is patron of the wise and intelligent artists, 
scientists, technologists and pioneers in the fields of 
development and progress, and constantly born and 
reborn in manifested glory and dignity, he is the highest 
adorable power and person. Doing many many noble 
acts worthy of a dynamic and progressive humanity, he 
is inspiring as soma, loved, honoured and adorable for 
friends, companions and co-workers wherever he is. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 97 945 


Mandala 8/Sukta 97 
Indra Devata, Rebha Kashyapa Rshi 


या इन्द्र भुज srt: taatf असुरेभ्यः। 
स्तोतार मिन्म॑घवन्नस्य वर्धय ये च त्वे वृक्तबर्हिषः ॥ ९ ॥ 


l. Ya indra bhuja abharah svarvan asurebhyah. 
Stotaram-inmaghavann-asya vardhaya ye ca tve 
vrktabarhisah. 


Indra, lord of bliss and omnipotence, the food, 
energy and vitality which you bear and bring from the 
sources of pranic energy such as sun, air, cloud and 
cosmic intelligence is great and admirable. O lord of 
power and glory, pray advance the devotees who 
appreciate, develop and celebrate this energy and spread 
the holy grass of yajna in gratitude to you, offer homage 
to you and develop your gifts. 


यमिन्द्र दधिषे त्वमश्वं गां भागमव्य॑यम्‌। 
यज॑माने सुन्वति दक्षिणावति ahead धेहि मा पणौ ॥ २॥ 


2. Yamindra dadhise tvamasvam gam bhagam- 
avyayam. Yajamane sunvati daksinavati tasmin 
tam dhehi ma panau. 


Indra, lord of glory, the light and energy, 
nourishment, knowledge and dynamism and all our 
share of natural and spiritual gifts of divinity which you 
bear and bring for us, all that, pray, vest in the generous 
yajamana, the soma maker and the giver of charity (who 
all keep these in creative circulation) and never in the 
uncreative, miserly hoarders and selfish exploiters. 


य इन्द्र सस्त्य॑त्रतोऽ नुष्वापमदें वयुः | 
स्वैः ष एवैरमुमुर त्पोष्यं र यिं सनुतर्धेहि तं तत॑: ॥ ३ ॥ 


946 RGVEDA 


Di Ya indra sastyavrato’nusvapamadevayuh. Svaih 
sa evairmumurat posyam rayim sanutardhehi tam 
tatah. 


Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence, 
he, the hoarder and wastour, who lies idle lost in deep 
sleep, having forgotten divinity, gratitude and the law 
of divinity, he destroys that wealth by his own actions 
and behaviour, though that wealth, otherwise, deserves 
to be used and developed. Better it is you vest that wealth 
away from him, elsewhere so that it could be creatively 
used and developed. 


यच्छक्रासि परावति यदर्वावति वृत्रहन्‌। अत॑स्त्वा thet 
दिन्द्र केशिभिः सुतार्वँ आ विंवासत्ति ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yacchakrasi paravati yadarvavati vrtrahan. 
Atastva girbhirdyugadindra kesibhih sutavan a 
vivasati. 

O Shakra, lord of mighty holy action, destroyer 
of evil and darkness, whether you are far off or close 
by, the man of creative yajna invokes you and draws 
your attention and presence from there by words of 
adoration radiating like rays of light across the spaces 
of skies and heavens of light. 


यद्वासि रोचने दिवः संमुद्रस्याधिं विष्टपिं। 
यत्पार्थिवे सद॑ने वृत्रहन्तम यदन्तरिश्च आ ग॑हि॥ ५॥ 


a: Yadvasi rocane divah samudrasyadhi vistapi. Yat 
parthive sadane vrtrahantama yadanrariksa a 
gahi. 


Whether you are in some region of light in 
heaven or in some region of the skies above, or in the 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 97 947 


depth of seas or anywhere on the surface of earth, O, 
greatest destroyer of darkness, evil and suffering, come 
and be with us. 


स नः सोमेषु सोमपाः सुतेषुं शवसस्पते | 
मादयस्व राध॑सा सूनृतांवतेन्द्र राय परीणसा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa nah somesu somapah sutesu Savasaspate. 
Madayasva radhasa sunrtavatendra raya pari- 
nasa. 


O lord of strength and power, protector of the 
soma sweetness of life, beauty, vitality and joy, when 
we have distilled the soma essence of life, knowledge 
and existence, bless us with lovely, veritable wealth, 
means and modes of advancement, and all round success 
and lead us to the joy of the truth, goodness and beauty 
of life. 

मा न॑ इन्द्र परा वृणग्भवा नः Gere: | 
त्वं न॑ ऊती त्वमिन्न आप्यं मा न॑ इन्द्र परां वृणक्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
८ Mana indra para vrnagbhava nah sadhamadyah. 


Tvam na uti tvaminna aGpyam ma na indra para 
vrnak. 

Indra, lord supreme of truth, goodness and 
beauty, pray forsake us not, be with us as a friend in the 
great hall of life and joy, you are our protector, you alone 
are ultimately our end and aim worth attaining, pray do 
not forsake us. 


अस्मे इन्द्र सचा सुते नि ष॑दा पीतये मधुं । 
कृधी ज॑रित्रे म॑घवन्नवो महदस्मे इन्द्र सचा सुते ॥ ८ ॥ 


948 RGVEDA 


8. Asme indra saca sute ni sada pitaye madhu. Krdhi 
Jaritre maghavannavo mahadasme idra saca sute. 


Indra, when we have distilled the soma of life’s 
knowledge and value, be with us as a friend and let us 
be together so that we may experience the divine joy of 
achievement. O lord of glory, create the great divine 
protective band for the devotee, be our friend in 
company, the soma of celebration is ready. 


न cat Gara आशत न मत्यीसो अद्रिवः। 
विश्व॑ जातानि शव॑ंसाथिभूर॑सि न त्वां care आशत ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Na tva devasa asata na martyaso adrivah. Visva 
jatani Savasabhibhurasi na tva devasa asata. 

O lord of clouds and thunder, the divines 
comprehend you not, the mortals comprehend you not. 
By virtue of your supreme power and glory you are 
above all things born in the world of existence. O lord 
supreme, the immortal divines comprehend you not. 


विश्वाः पृत॑ना अभिभूतरं नरं सजुस्त॑तक्षुरिन्द्रं asaya 
राजसे । क्रत्वा ahs at आमुरिमुतोग्रमोजिं्ठं तवसं 
तर स्विन॑म्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Visvah prtana abhibhutaram naram sajus-tata- 
ksur-indram jajanusca rajase. Kratva varistham 
vara amurim-utogram-ojistham tavasam taras- 
vinam. 


All the citizens together, in order to elect an 
equal for the purpose of governance, create and shape 
Indra, the ruler, the leader who is superior to others in 
all battles of life, highest by noble creative action, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 97 949 


eliminator of negative and frustrative opposition, 
illustrious, most vigorous and emphatic in expression, 
courageous and passionate in action. 


समी' tara अस्वर चनिन्द्र सोम॑स्य पीतयें। 
स्वर्पतिं ad? वृधे धृतव्र॑तो ह्योजसा समूतिभिः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Samim rebhaso asvarann-indram somasya pitaye. 
Svarpatim yadim vrdhe dhrtavrato hyojasa 
samutibhih. 


Let all intelligent people cordially welcome and 
felicitate Indra for the protection of the honour, integrity, 
beauty and culture of the nation of humanity, and when 
they, together, exhort the guardian of their happiness 
and welfare to advance the beauty of corporate life, then, 
committed to the values, laws and ideals of the nation, 
he feels exalted with lustrous courage and positive 
measures of defence and protection. 


नेमिं ana aera येषं faut अभिस्वरा । 
सुदीतयो वो sigeats पि कर्णे तरस्विनः समुक्वंभिः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Nemimnamanti caksasa mesam vipra abhisvara. 
Suditayo vo adruho ’pi karne tarasvinah samrkva- 
bhih. 


Wise and vibrant sages greet the heroic ruler, 
Indra, giver of showers of peace and joy, and with vision 
of the future bow to him as the central power and force 
of the nation’s wheel. O brilliant and inspired people 
free from jealousy and calumny, smart and bold in 
action, do him honour with laudable performance. 


950 RGVEDA 


तमिन्द्रं जोहवीमि मघवानमुग्रं सत्रा दधानमप्र॑तिष्कुतं 
शवांसि । afe st गीर्भिरा च॑ यज्ञियो! ववर्तद्राये नो विश्वां 
सुपथां कृणोतु ast ९३॥ 


13. Tamindram johavimi maghavanm-ugram satra 
dadhanam-apratiskutam savamsi. Mamhistho 
girbhira ca yajniyo vavartadraye no visva supatha 
krnotu vajri. 


That Indra, ruler of the world, I invoke and 
address, illustrious, pious and true, wielder of 
unopposed powers, and I pray may the most generous 
and adorable lord of thunderous power, in response to 
our voice, turn to us constantly and clear our paths of 
advancement for the achievement of wealth, power, 
honour and excellence of the world. 


त्वं ot इन्द्र चिकिदेना व्योज॑सा शविष्ठ शक्र नाशयध्यै । 
त्वद्विर्वानि भुवनानि वचिन्द्यावां रेजेते पृथिवी च॑ 
भीषा ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. 39 Tvam pura indra cikidena vyojasa Savistha sakra 
nasayadhyai. Tvadvisvani bhuvanani vajrin dyava 
rejete prthivi ca bhisa. 

Indra, most potent hero of noble action, you 
know how to break down the strongholds of evil and 
darkness with this lustrous force of yours. O wielder of 
the force and power of thunder, by you and by the 
splendour of your power all regions of the world and 
even the earth and heaven shake with awe. 


तन्म॑ ऋतमिंन््र शूर चित्र पात्वपो न व॑जिन्दुरितातिं पर्षि 
भूरिं । कदा न॑ इन्द्र राय आ द॑शस्येर्विंश्वप्स्न्य॑स्य स्पृह- 
याय्य॑स्य राजन्‌ ॥ ९५ ॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 98 951 


15. Tanma rtamindra Sura citra patvapo na vajrin 
duritati parsi bhuri. Kada na indra raya a dasa- 
syervisvapsnyasya sprhayayyasya rajan. 


Indra, wondrous hero of universal might, may 
the constant and ever true divine law of existence, Rtam, 
protect me and guide me along the paths of rectitude. O 
lord of the thunderbolt of justice and karma, Indra, like 
my karmas, cleanse my mind and soul of all sins and 
evil. Indra, refulgent ruler of the world, when would 
you bless me with wealth, honour and excellence of 
universal form and most cherished value? 


Mandala 8/Sukta 98 
Indra Devata, Nrmedha Angirasa Rshi 


sata साम॑ गायत विप्राय gee Fed! 
धर्मकृते विपश्चिते are ॥ ₹९॥ 


le Indraya sama gayata vipraya brhate brhat. 
Dharmakrte vipascite panasyave. 


Sing Brhatsama hymns in adoration of Indra, 
vibrant spirit of the universe and giver of fulfilment, 
grand and infinite, source ordainer and keeper of the 
law of universal Dharma, giver and protector of 
knowledge and karma, the lord adorable. 


त्वमिन्द्राथिभूरंसि त्वं सूर्यमरोचयः। 
विर्वक॑र्मां विश्वदेवो महां अंसि॥ २॥ 
2. Tvamindrabhibhurasi tvam suryamarocayah. 


Visvakarma viSvadevo mahan asi. 


Indra, you are the lord supreme dominant over 
all, you give light to the sun, you are the maker of the 


952 RGVEDA 


universe, you are the one adorable light and spirit of 
the world, you are the one great and glorious life of the 
world. 


faurmraifder स्वै रग॑च्छो रोचनं fea: | 
देवास्तं इन्द्र सख्यायं येमिरे ॥ ३ ॥ 


Vibhrajanjyotisa svaragaccho rocanam divah. 
Devasta indra sakhyaya yemire. 


Refulgent with your own light you pervade the 
regions of bliss and beatify the glory of heaven. Indra, 
the lights and divinities of the world vye and struggle 
for friendship with you. 


एन्द्र नो गधि प्रियः संत्राजिदगोंह्यः। 
गिरिर्न विश्वतस्पृथुः पतिर्दिवः ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Endra no gadhi priyah satrajidagohyah. 
Girirna visvatasprthuh patirdivah. 


Indra, come, take us over as your own. Dear 
and giver of fulfilment you are, all dominant by nature, 
character and action, inconceivably open and bright, 
expansive and unbounded all round like a cloud of 
vapour, lord and master of the light of heaven. 


अभि हि स॑त्य सोमपा उभे बभूथ रोद॑सी। 
इन्द्रासि सुन्वतो ge: पतिर्दिवः ॥ ५५ ॥ 
5: Abhi hi satya somapa ubhe babhitha rodasi. 


Indrasi sunvato vrdhah patirdivah. 


Lord eternal and ever true, lover, protector and 
promoter of the beauty and joy of existence, you are 
higher and greater than both heaven and earth. Indra, 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 98 953 


omnipotent lord and master of the light of heaven, you 
are the inspirer and giver of advancement to the pursuer 
of the knowledge, beauty and power of the soma reality 
of life. 

त्वं हि शश्व॑तीनामिन्द्र दर्ता पुरामसि । 

हन्ता दस्योर्मनोर्वृधः पतिर्दिवः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Tvam hi Sasvatinamindra darta puramasi. 

Hanta dasyor-manorvrdhah patirdivah. 

Indra, you are catalyser, breaker and maker, of 

the eternal forms of existence in cosmic dynamics, 
destroyer of the destroyer and promoter of thoughtful 


people. You are the guardian of the light of life, sustainer 
of the heavens of joy. 


अधा हीन्द्र गिर्वण उप॑ त्वा कामान्महः ससृज्महे | 
उदेव यन्त॑ उदभिः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Adha hindra girvana upa tva kaman mahah 


sasrjmahe. Udeva yanta udabhih. 


And O lord lover of song and celebration, Indra, 
we send up vaulting voices of adoration and prayer to 
you like wave on waves of the flood rolling upon the 
sea. 


वार्ण cat यव्याभिर्वर्धन्ति शूर ब्रह्माणि। 
वावृध्वांसं चिदद्रिवो दिवेदिवे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Varna tva yavyabhirvadhanti Sura brahmani. 
Vavrdhvamsam cidadrivo divedive. 


O lord of clouds and oceans of space, munificent 
and brave, expansive, boundless, infinite, like streams 


954 RGVEDA 


of water augmenting the sea, our songs of adoration 
exalt you wave on wave of flood day by day, the 
knowledge about you is unending. 


युञ्जन्ति हरीं इषिरस्य treat रथ॑ seat | 
इन्द्रवाहा वचोयुजा ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Yunjanti hari isirasya gathayorau ratha uruyuge. 
Indravaha vacoyuja. 
Two motive forces like chariot horses, 
controlled by word, carry Indra, the soul, in the wide 
yoked spacious body-chariot by the power of the 
adorations of the universal mover, Indra, cosmic energy. 
त्वं न॑ इन्द्रा UE ओजो नृम्णं शतक्रतो विचर्षणे । 
आ वीरं पुंतनाषर॑म्‌॥। ९०॥ 

10. (वका na indra bharan ojo nrmnam Satakrato 
vicarsane. A viram prtanasaham. 


Indra, lord of vision and hero of a hundred great 
actions, bring us abundant and illustrious strength, 
courage and procreative energy by which we may fight 
out and win many battles of our life. 


त्वं हि न॑: पिता व॑सो त्वं माता शतक्रतो बभूविंथ। 
अर्धा ते सुम्नमीमहे ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Tvam hi nah pita vaso tvam mata Satakrato 
babhuvitha. Adha te sumnamimahe. 


O lord of infinite action, shelter home of the 
world and wealth of existence, you are our father, you 
our mother, and to you, we pray for love and peace, 
good will and grace. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 99 955 


त्वां शुष्मिन्पुरुहूत asada Fa शतक्रतो । 
सनो रास्व सुवीर्यम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tvam susmin puruhuta vajayantamupa bruve 
Satakrato. Sa no rasva suviryam. 


O lord of cosmic energy universally invoked, 
hero of infinite acts of kindness and creation, giver of 
sustenance and victory, we pray in silent sincerity of 
conscience, bring us and bless us with noble strength 
and vitality of body and mind and creativity of vision 
and imagination. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 99 
Indra Devata, Nrmedha Angirasa Rshi 


त्वापिदा द्यो नरोऽ पी॑प्यन्वचिन्भू्णीयः । 
स इन्द्र स्तोम॑वाहसरामिह श्रुध्युप स्वसं॑र्‌ मा ग॑हि ॥ ९॥ 

1. Tvamida hyo naro’pipyan vajrin bhurnayah. 
Sa indra stomavahasamiha srudhyupa svasarama 
gahi. 


Indra, lord of mind and soul, wielder of 
adamantine will and energy, zealous celebrants and 
leading lights serve and adore you today as ever before 
in the past. Thus adored and contemplated, listen to the 
prayers of the devotees in meditation, come and arise 
in your own abode of the sage’s heart. 


मत्स्वां सुशिप्र हरिवस्तदीमहे त्वे आ भुंषन्ति वेधसः | 
तव श्रवांस्युपमान्युक्थ्या सुतेष्विन्द्र गिर्वणः ॥ २॥ 
2. Matsva susipra harivastadimahe tve a bhusanti 


vedhasah. Tava sravamsyupamanyukthya sute- 
svindra_ girvanah. 


956 RGVEDA 


O lord of golden glory, moving and manifesting 
by vibrations of joyous energy, arise and exult in the 
heart. You alone, the wise sages exalt and glorify. Indra, 
lord adorable in song, when the yajnic communion of 
meditation is fulfilled, the vibrations of your ecstatic 
presence are ideal and admirable. 


श्राय॑न्तडव सूर्य विश्वेदिन्द्रस्य भक्षत | 
वसूनि जाते जनमान ओज॑सा प्रति भागं न दीधिम ।॥ ३॥ 


Srayanta iva suryam visvedindrasya bhaksata. 
Vasuni jate janamana ojasa prati bhagam na 
didhima. 


Just as the rays of light share and diffuse the 
radiance of the sun, so you too share and reflect the 
golden glories of Indra, the cosmic soul. Let us meditate 
on the divine presence and for our share enjoy the 
ecstasy of bliss vibrating in the world of past and future 
creation by virtue of Indra’s omnipresent majesty. 


अन॑र्शरातिं वसुदामुप स्तुहि भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य Ura: । 
सो अस्य कामं विधतो न रोषति मनो दानाय॑ चोद्य॑न्‌ & ॥ 


4. Anarsaratim vasudamupa stuhi bhadra indrasya 
ratayah. So asya kamam vidhato na rosati mano 
danaya codayan. 


Adore and meditate on Indra, giver of wealth, 
honour, excellence and bliss. Infinite is his generosity, 
unsatiating, auspicious his gifts. He does not displease 
the devotee, does not hurt his desire and prayer, he 
inspires his mind for the reception of divine gifts. 


त्वमिन्द्र प्रतूर्तिष्वभि fagat असि rel: | 
अशस्तिहा जनिता विंश्वतूर॑सि त्वं da तरुष्यतः ॥ ५॥ 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 99 957 


=) Tvamindra praturtisvabhi visva asi sprdhah. 
Asastiha janita visvaturasi tvam turya tarusyatah. 


Indra, O inspired soul, in the external conflicts 
of life and in the internal conflicts of mind, you are the 
superior over all assailants. You are the destroyer of 
evil and calumny, creator of goodness and eliminator 
of impediments. Pray drive off all evil thoughts and 
oppositions of life and mind. 


अनु, ते शुष्मं तुरय॑न्तमीयतुः क्षोणी शिशुं न मातरा । 
विश्वास्ते eae: श्नथयन्त मन्यवे वृत्रं यदिन्द्र तूर्व॑सि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Anu te Susmam turayantamiyatuh ksoni sisum na 
matara. Visvaste sprdhah snathayanta manyave 
vrtram yadindra turvasi. 


Just as mothers follow the desires and interests 
of children, so do the heaven and earth, all living beings 
from earth to heaven, think and act in conformity with 
you, evil destroying power. All oppositions slacken and 
fall exhausted when you strike and destroy the demons 
of evil and negativity in the interest of man. 


इत ऊती वों अजरं प्रहेतारमप्र॑हितम्‌ । 
आशुं जेतारं हेतारं र थीत॑ममतूर्त तुम्रयावृधम्‌॥ ७॥ 


a Ita uti vo ajaram prahetaramaprahitam. Asum 
jetaram hetaram rathitamam-aturtam tugryavr- 


dham. 


O men and women of the earth, for your 
protection and progress follow Indra, unaging, all 
inspirer and mover, himself unmoved and self-inspired, 
most dynamic, highest victor, thunderer, master of the 
chariot of life, inviolable augmenter of strength to 


958 RGVEDA 
victory. 


इष्कृतारि मनिंष्कृतं सह॑स्कृतं शतमूतिं शतक्रतुम्‌। 
समानमिन्द्रमवसे हवामहे वसवानं वसूजुव॑म्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Iskartaramaniskrtam sahaskrtam satamutim 
Satakratum. Samanamindramavase havamahe 
vasavanam vasujuvam. 


For our protection and progress, we invoke 
Indra, lord supreme abiding in the soul, giver of 
fulfilment, himself self-fulfilled, creator and giver of 
strength, courage and fortitude, giver of infinite 
protections, lord of a hundred good acts, equally good 
to all, all protective and kind, settler and augmenter of 
wealth and wisdom. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 100 
Indra (1-7, 12), Suparna (8), Indra or Vajra (9), 
Vak (10-11) Devatah, Nema Bhargava (1-3, 6-12), 
Indra (4-5) Rshi 


अयं तं एमि तन्वां पुरस्ताद्विश्वें देवा अभि मां यन्ति पश्चात्‌। 
यदा मह्यं दीधरो भागयिन्द्राऽऽदिन्मयौ कृणवो 
वीर्यीणि॥ ९॥ 


Ly Ayam ta emi tanva purastad-visve deva abhi ma 
yanti pascat. Yada mahyam didharo bhagamin- 
dra’’dinmaya krnavo viryani. 


Indra, here I come before you in person and all 
noble and brilliant sages follow after me. When you 
secure my portion for me, then you perform noble 
actions also through me. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 100 959 


दधामि ते मधुनो भक्षमग्रे हितस्ते भागः सुतो अस्तु सोम॑ः। 
असश्च त्वं दक्चिणतः सखा Asat वृत्राणि जङ्खनाव 
भूरिं ॥ २॥ 


2. Dadhami te madhito bhaksamagre hitaste 
bhagah suto astu somah. Asasca tvam daksina- 
tah sakha me’dha vrtrani janghanava bhiri. 


I bear my portion of the honey sweets of life 
primarily for you in gratitude, out of which the soma 
essence distilled from experience would be offered in 
homage. May you, I pray, be kind and friendly to me on 
the right and then together we shall eliminate evil and 
darkness from life. 


प्र सु स्तोमं भरत वाजयन्त इन्द्राय सत्यं यदि सत्यमस्ति | 
नेन्द्रो अस्तीति नेम॑ उ त्व आह क ई ददर्शं कमभि 
sara ३॥ 


Di Pra su stomam bharata vajayanta indraya satyam 
yadi satyamasti. Nindro astiti nema u tva aha ka 
im dadarsa kamabhi stavama. 


O seekers of strength, power and progress in 
life, offer worship and adoration in honour of Indra if it 
is your faith in heart and soul that reality is the truth 
and Indra is the reality. Only some one of raw and 
sceptical understanding would say: Indra is non-existent, 
who saw him? And if none saw Indra, who and why 
should we adore and worship? 


अयमस्मि जरितः पश्य॑ मेह विश्व॑ जातान्यभ्यस्मि महवा | 
ऋतस्य मा प्रदिशो वर्धयन्त्यादर्दिरो भुव॑ना दर्दरीमि ॥ ४॥ 


960 RGVEDA 


4. Ayamasmi jaritah pasya meha visva jatanya- 
bhyasmi mahna. Rtasya ma pradiso vardha- 
yantyddardiro bhuvana dardarimi. 


I AM. O celebrant, behold I am here. I am the 
real on top of all that is born in the world, self-existent 
by my own grandeur. The laws of existence exalt me 
with space, and scholars of the laws, Rtam, adore me 
all round. I am the creator, I am the destroyer, I split 
open the seed, I manifest the world forms and I break 
them back beyond the form into the seed state. 


आ यन्मां वेना अरुहच्रृतस्यँ एकमासींनं हर्यतस्य पृष्ठे । 
मन॑श्चिन्मे हृद आ प्रत्यवोचद्चिक्रदच्छिरशुमन्तः 
सर्वाय: ॥ ५ ॥ 


>: A yanma vend aruhann-rtasyan ekamasinam 
haryatasya prsthe. Manascinme hrda a pratya- 
vocadacikradan-chisumantah sakhayah. 


When the wise visionaries reach on top of 
thought and meditation and see me, the lone presence 
over the glorious order of existence, my mind from the 
core of my heart of love speaks out: My friends blest 
with knowledge and vision through the power of prana 
beyond sufferance have called on me. (This is the voice 
of divinity, invitation to a higher life of cosmic vision.) 


विश्वेत्ता ते सव॑नेषु प्रवाच्या या चकर्थ मघवन्निन्द्र सुन्वते | 
पारावतं यत्पुंरुसंभृतं वस्वपावृणोः शर्‌ भाय ऋषिबन्धवे I ६ ॥ 


6. Visvet ta te savanesu pravacya ya cakartha 
maghavannindra sunvate. Paravatam yat puru- 
sambhrtam vasvapavrnoh sarabhaya rsiban- 
dhave. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 100 961 


Admirable are all those acts of kindness and 
grace, laudable in yajnic meets of humanity, O lord of 
glory, Indra, which you do graciously for the meditative 
soul where by you reveal the climactic, intensely 
concentrated wealth of beatific vision and presence for 
the man of austere discipline in communion, brother of 
the omniscient, all seeing creator, the cosmic poet. 


प्र नूनं धावता पृथङ नेह यो at अ्वावरीत्‌। 
नि षीं वृत्रस्य मर्मणि वच्चमिन्द्रों अपीपतत्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
oP Pra nunam dhavata prthan neha yo vo avavarit. 
Ni sim vrtrasya marmani vajramindro apipatat. 
O friends of divinity, with determined will and 
decision, move forward and run fast, each in your own 
style, there is none to stop you. Indra, lord omnipotent, 


strikes the thunderbolt at the core of darkness and 
destroys the obstructions. 


मनोजवा अय॑मान आयसीम॑तरत्पुर॑म्‌ । 
दिवं सुपर्णो गत्वाय सोमं विण आभ॑रत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Manojava ayamana ayasimatarat puram. 


Divam suparno gatvaya somam vajrina abharat. 


Moving at the speed of mind, suparna, flying 
human imagination and vision, crosses the iron bounds 
of the fortress of the body, and having gone to the 
regions of heavenly light and bliss brings the soma, 
ecstasy of divine joy for the soul which bears the virile 
vitality of the spirit, wielder of the soul’s thunderbolt. 


समुद्रे अन्तः शयत उद्ना वज्रो! sieftea: | 
भर॑न्त्यस्मै dead: पुरःप्रस्रवणा afer ९॥ 


962 RGVEDA 


9, Samudre antah sayata udna vajro abhivrtah. 
Bharantyasmai samyatah purah prasravana 
balim. 


In the liquid vitalities of the body system 
surrounded by living waters, the virile vitality of the 
spirit, the vajra, resides in the human body. For this 
vitality, streams of energy flowing forth in the veins 
and nerves bear and bring contributive forms of physical 
and pranic nourishment of the spirit for the soul’s rise 
to divinity. 


यद्वाग्वदंन्त्यविचेतनानि wet देवानां Frere मन्द्रा । चत॑स्र 
ऊर्ज" दुदुहे पयांसि क्व॑ स्विदस्याः परमं ज॑गाम ॥ १०॥ 


10. Yadvag-vadantyavicetanani rastri devanam nisa- 
sada mandra. Catasra urjam duduhe payamsi 
kvasvidasyah paramam jagama. 


When the divine voice, joyous and refulgent, 
settles in the heart, illuminates the mind and senses, 
awakens the subconscious and the unconscious, and 
reveals the secret potentials of the soul in divine 
communion, then all the four directions of space, all 
the four Vedic voices, and all the four layers of speech 
distil the light and wisdom of divine existence for the 
soul. What is the ultimate reach of that voice? Indra 
only knows. 


देवीं वाच॑मजनयन्त देवास्तां fagarsar: पवो वदन्ति। 
सानो मन्द्रेषमूर्जं दुहाना धेनुर्वागस्मानुप wed ९९॥ 
11. 12८7 vacam-ajanayanta devastam visvarupah 
pasavo vadanti. Sa no mandresamurjam duhana 
dhenur-vag-asmanupa sustutaitu. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 963 


Sages and scholars, brilliant and wise, manifest 
and speak in human language that divine speech of 
omniscience which, then, all living and seeing forms of 
beings speak in its extended forms of variety over the 
world. That divine speech, joyous and generous like 
the milch cow, giving nourishment and energy, 
honoured, served and studied, may, we pray, come direct 
to us and bless. 


wea विष्णो वितरं fa मस्व द्यौर्दहि लोकं arta 
विष्कभे । हनाव at रिणचाव सिन्धूनिन्द्रस्य यन्तु प्रसवे 
विसुं्टाः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sakhe visno vitaram vi kramasva dyaurdehi lokam 
vajraya viskabhe. Hanava vrtram rinacava 
sindhun-indrasya yantu prasave visrstah. 


O friend, O soul progressive like universal 
Vishnu’s presence, act and advance to redeem your 
divinity. O light of heaven, give more light and space 
for the virile vitality of the soul to settle, consolidate and 
rise. Then we, the human and the immanent divine, 
together, shall eliminate evil, darkness and suffering from 
life, release the inhibited streams of life to flow freely, 
and the floods of human potential may then, we pray, 
flow abundantly in the blissful yajnic creation of Indra. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 101 
Mitra- Varuna (1-4), Mitra-Varuna-Adityah (5), Adityah 
(6), Ashvinau (7-8), Vayu (9-10), Surya (11-12), Usha or 
Sunlight (13), Pavamana (14), Gau (15-16) Devatah, 
Jamadagni Bhargava Rshi 
ऋधंगित्ा स मर्त्य॑: शशमे देवतातये | 
यो नूनं सित्रावरुणावभिष्टय आचक्रे हव्यदातये ॥ ९॥ 


964 RGVEDA 


1. Rdhagittha sa martyah 5व5वा11€ devatataye. Yo 
nunam mitravaruna-vabhistaya acakre havya- 
dataye. 


Truly does that person find peace of mind for 
the attainment of divine love and favour who thus wins 
the balance of Mitra and Varuna, i.e., prana and udana 
energies for physical, mental and spiritual good for the 
service of divinity. 


वर्षिष्ठक्षत्रा उरुचक्षसा नरा राजाना दीर्घश्रुत्तमा। 
ता बाहता न दंसना रथर्यतः साकं सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः ॥ २॥ 


2. Varsisthaksatra urucaksasa nara rajana dirgha- 
sruttama. Ta bahuta na damsana ratharyatah 
sakam suryasya rasmibhih. 


Leading men of most generous and disciplined 
strength and energy of body and mind, with broad 
vision, refulgent, and steeped in the knowledge of 
revelation over long time study and discussion, like 
heroes of mighty arms in action, rise high with the rays 
of the sun by virtue of divine love and service. 


प्रयो वां मित्रावरुणाऽजिरो दूतो अद्रवत्‌। 
अयःशीर्षा मदेरघुः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Pra yo vam mitravaruna ’jiro duto adravat. 
Ayah Sirsa maderaghuh. 


O Mitra and Varuna, love and judgement of 
divinity, light and dark of life, sun and ocean of the 
cosmos, external pranic energy and internal udanic 
energy, the person who is wise and learned and 
eliminates the negativities and undesirables of life, and 
with his wisdom and values, realises you both achieves 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 965 


the golden heights of wisdom and intrepid happiness in 
the simplest way at the shortest time. 


न यः संपृच्छे न पुनर्हवीतवे न संवादाय रम॑ते। 
तस्मान्नो अद्य AAAS Slt बाहुभ्यां न उरुष्यतम्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. Na yah samprcche na punarhavitave na samva- 
daya ramate. Tasmanno adya samrteruru-syatam 
bahubhyam na urusyatam. 


One who takes no interest in learning by 
question and answer, or in the yajnic circulation of 
wealth, or in social discourse is no good. O Mitra and 
Varuna, rulers, leaders, teachers and pioneers of love 
and judgement, save us from unnecessary encounters 
with him, protect us by your arms of love and wisdom. 


प्र मित्राय प्रार्यम्णे सचथ्यमृतावसो | 
वरूथ्यं 4 वरुणो छन्द्यं वच॑: स्तोत्रं राज॑सु गायत ॥ ५॥ 


a, Pra mitradya praryamne sacathyamrtavaso. 
Varuthyam varune chandyam vacah stotram 
rajasu gayata. 


O lover of truth and eternal laws and values of 
cosmic truth, sing together, sing in the home and sing 
on joyous occasions collective, homely and celebrative 
songs in honour of Mitra, lord of love and universal 
friendship, Aryaman, lord of the paths of rectitude, and 
Varuna, lord of judgement and wisdom. Sing hymns of 
adoration for all the refulgent divinities. 


ते हिन्विरे अरूणं जेन्यं वस्वेकं पुत्रं तिसृणाम्‌ । 
ते धामान्यमृता मरत्यीनामद॑ब्धा अभि चंक्षते।॥ ६॥ 


966 RGVEDA 


6. Te hinvire arunam jenyam vasvekam putram 
tisrnam. Te dhamanyamrta martyanamadabdha 
abhi caksate. 


They, Mitra, Varuna and Aryaman, love, 
judgement and will of divinity in nature, Aditi, bring 
forth, move and inspire the one, refulgent, victorious, 
shelter home of life, protector and illuminator of the 
three, heaven, earth and the middle regions, the sun, 
child of Aditi, and they, immortal, undaunted and 
invincible, all round watch and protect the homes and 
regions of the mortals. 


आ मे वचांस्युद्य॑ता द्युमत्तमानि कत्वीं | 
उभा यातं नासत्या स॒जोष॑सा प्रति हव्यानि वीतये io 


Ame vacamsyudyata dyumattamani kartva. Ubha 
yatam nasatya sajosasa prati havyani vitaye. 


O men and women of the mortal world engaged 
in creative and cooperative economy, committed to truth 
and immortal values, listen to my words inspired by the 
brilliance of divinity, and, together in love and 
friendship, turn them to practical application and truth 
of achievement to create valuable materials for yajnic 
enjoyment of life. 


रातिं यद्वामर्‌ क्षरं हवामहे युवाभ्यां वाजिनीवसू | 
प्राचीं होत्रां प्रतिरन्तावितं नरा गृणाना जमद॑यिना ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Ratim yadvamaraksasam havamahe yuvabhyam 
vajinivasu. Pracim hotram pratirantavitam nara 
grnana jamadagnina. 

O bright and energetic men and women of the 
world welcome as the dawn, leading lights of life, when 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 967 


we ask of you and pray for generous creativity and 
generous gifting free from evil and violence, then come 
adored by the devotee of lighted fire and advance the 
ancient and eternal call of life to the joy of living. 


आ नों यज्ञं दिविस्पृशं वायो! याहि सुमन्म॑भिः। 
अन्तः पवित्र उपरि श्रीणानो३ऽ यं शुक्रो अयामि ते ॥ ९ ॥ 


7, A no yajnam divisprsam vayo yahi sumanm-abhih. 
Antah pavitra upari $rinano ’yam sukro ayami 
te. 


O Vayu, vibrant sage of knowledge and science 
of yajna, come to our project of divine possibilities with 
your noble ideas and plans, and I, joining this 
programme with you, offer this bright performance of 
ours, pure within in purpose and bright and clear in form 
and structure. 


वेत्य॑ध्वर्युः पथिभी cS: प्रतिं get वीतये । अधां 
नियुत्व उभयंस्य नः पिब शुचिं सोमं गवाशिरम्‌ 20 11 


10. Vetyadhvaryuh pathibhi rajisthaih prati havani 
vitaye. Adha niyutva ubhayasya nah piba sucim 
somam gavasiram. 

The high priest of yajna unhurting life, moving 
with love, goes forward by the simplest and most truthful 
ways of holy working with yajnic materials to create 
the fragrances of life. Then you, master of yajnic 
creations, taste and enjoy the soma of our creations both 
in pure form and as seasoned and strengthened with 
practical applications for the good of life. 


बण्महाँ असि qa बव्ठादित्य vet sifa 
Teed सतो महिमा प॑नस्यतेऽ दा दैव Het असि ॥ ९९॥ 


968 RGVEDA 


11. Banmaham asi surya baladitya mahan asi. 
Mahaste so mahima panasyte’ddha deva mahan 
asi. 


O Surya, light of life, you are truly great, lord 
indestructible, you are undoubtedly great. O lord of 
reality, highest real, great is your glory, adorable. In 
truth, you are great, refulgent and generous. 


बट्‌ सुर्य श्रव॑सा Het असि सत्रा दैव Tet अ॑सि। 
मह्या देवानामसुर्यः पुरोहितो विभु ज्योतिरदाभ्यम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Bat surya Sravasa mahan asi satra deva mahan 
asi. Mahna devanamasuryah purohito vibhu 
Jyotiradabhyam. 


O Surya, lord self-refulgent, by honour and fame 
you are great. In truth, you are great, generous lord, by 
your grandeur among the divinities. Lord of pranic 
energy, destroyer of the evil, prime high priest of 
creation in cosmic dynamics, omnipresent and infinite, 
light unsurpassable, eternal. 


इयं या नीच्यर्किंणीं रूपा रोण्या sar | 
चित्रेव प्रत्य॑दश्यायत्यनतर्दशसुं बाहुषु ॥ ९२ ॥ 


13. Lyam ya nicyarkini rupa rohinya krta. 
Citreva pratyadarsyayatyantardasasu bahusu. 


This light of the dawn coming down, from the 
horizon, beautiful, created by the golden red rays of the 
sun, radiating over the earth below like the arms of 
divinity in the ten directions of space, looks like a 
wonder gift of divinity. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 969 


प्रजा ह॑ तिस्रो अत्याय॑मीयुन्य॑१ न्या अकमभितो! विविश्रे | 
Bee तस्थौ भुवनेष्वन्तः पव॑मानो हरित आ विवेश ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Praja ha tisro atyayamiyurnyanya arkamabhito 
vivisre. Brahaddha tasthau bhuvanesvantah 
pavamano harita व viveSa. 


Three orders of evolutionary creation, sattva or 
thought, rajas or energy, and tamas or matter, and three 
regions of the cosmos, heaven, earth and the middle 
regions proceed to expansive existence at the beginning 
of the Being manifesting into Becoming, and others, 
all biological forms depend upon the self-refulgent sun. 
The infinite spirit of divinity abides immanent in the 
cosmos, and pure, and sanctifying all forms, manifests 
in all directions of space and greenery of the earth. 


माता रुद्राणीं दुहिता वसूनां स्वसादित्यानापपृतंस्य ATP: 1 
प्रनु वोचं चिकितुषे जनाय मा गामनागामदितिं वधिष्ट ॥। ९५ ॥ 


15. Mata rudranam duhita vasunam svasadityan- 
amamrtasya nabhih. Pra nu vocam cikituse 
jJanaya ma gam-anagam-aditim vadhista. 


Mother of Rudras, pranic energies, living forms 
and scholars of the middle order, sustainer of the Vasus, 
abodes of life such as earth, and scholars of the graduate 
order, and sister of Adityas, suns and scholars of the 
highest order, the centre fount of life’s nectar and 
knowledge: that is Aditi, mother Infinity, Nature, mother 
knowledge of the Veda, and the mother cow. Speak of 
mother Aditi to the people who are keen for 
enlightenment. Do not insult, do not pollute, do not 
injure, do not kill the innocent cow, Mother Nature and 
the divine knowledge of Veda. 


970 RGVEDA 


वचोविदं वाच॑मुदीरयन्तीं विरू्वाभिरर्धीभिरूपतिष्टमानाम्‌ | 
देवीं देवेभ्यः पर्येयुषीं गामा ्मावृक्त मर्त्यो दभ्रचेताः ॥ १६ ॥ 


16. Vacovidam vacam-udirayantim visvabhir- 
dhibhir-upatisthamanam. Devim devebhyah 
paryeyusim gama mavrkta martyo dabhracetah. 


Vak is the eternal Word, the Language, bottom- 
less reservoir of omniscience, inspirer of human lan- 
guage and communication, closely and conscientiously 
studied and served by all intelligent scholars of the 
world: this divine gift revealed for the pious and wise, 
holy as mother, as earth, as the cow, as divinity, come 
as a blessing to me, no mortal should neglect. If a mor- 
tal neglects this mother language, he remains but piti- 
fully ignorant and poor in the mind. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 102 


Agni Devata, Prayoga Bhargava or Agni Pavaka 
Barhaspatya or Agni Grhapati - Yavishtha or Anyatara Rshi 


त्वमग्रे बृहद्वयो दधासि देव दाशुषे | 
क विर्गृहप॑तिर्युवां ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Tvamagne brhadvayo dadhasi deva dasuse. 
Kavir-grhapatir-yuva. 


1. ‘Agni, light of the world, brilliant giver of 
knowledge, you bear and bring abundant wealth and 
honour of the world for the generous devotee. You are 
ever young, eternal, omniscient poet creator, lord and 
master, ruler and sustainer of the house of the universe. 


स न ईव्छ॑नया सह gat अंगे दुवस्युवा | 
चिकिद्धिभानवा व॑ह।॥ २॥ 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 102 971 


2. Sana ilanaya sahadevan agne duvasyuva. 
Cikidvibhanava vaha. 


Agni, brilliant lord of omniscience, along with 
this reverent and worshipful voice of prayer and divine 
knowledge, bring us brilliant and generous divinities 
of nature and humanity. 


त्वया ह स्विद्युजा वयं चोदिष्ठेन यविष्ठ्य । 
अभि ष्मो वाज॑सातये ॥ ३ ॥ 

3 Tvaya ha svidyuja vayam codisthena yavisthya. 
Abhi smo vajasdataye. 
O most youthful catalytic power of evolution, 
only in obedience and association with you, highest 
inspiring spirit and power, shall we be able to move 
forward and win success in achieving knowledge, 
strength, wealth and honours of life. 
sid y गुवच्छचिंमघ्रवानवदा हुवे | 
sift सं॑मुद्रवांससम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Aurvabhrguvacchucimapnavanavada huve. 
Agnim samudravasasam. 


Like a mature and self-disciplined sage and 
scholar of nature and spirit, I invoke and study Agni, 
the fire energy, concealed in the sea and the sky and the 
psychic energy abiding in the mind. 


हुवे वात॑स्वनं कविं पर्जन्यक्रन्द्यं Te: | 
sift समुद्रवाससम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


>. Huve vatasvanam kavim parjanyakrandyam 
sahah. Agnim samudravasasam. 


972 RGVEDA 


I invoke the fire, passion and vision concealed 
in the whistling wind, roaring thunder, the depth of the 
sea and the cave of the heart. 


आ सवं सवितुर्यथा भग॑स्येव भुजिं हवे । 
sift समुद्रवाससम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. A savam savitur-yatha bhagasyeva bhujim huve. 


Agnim samudravasasam. 


Like the creative power of the sun and the 
inspiring lord creator, and like the pleasurable gifts of 
the lord of power, honour and excellence, I invoke and 
study the passion and fire hidden in the sea and sky and 
in the cave of the heart. 


at वों वृधन्त॑मध्वराणीं पुरूतमंम्‌। 
अच्छा नप्त्रे सह॑स्वते ॥ ७॥ 


ce Agnim vo vrdhantam-adhvaranam puriutamam. 
Accha naptre sahasvate. 


Well with joint action and yajna, serve Agni, 
most ancient power of the first order that leads you to 
the advancement of strong familial unity and tolerant 
but powerful social cooperation for your coming 
generations for ages. 


अयं यथां न आभुवत्त्वष्टा रूपेव तक्ष्या । 
अस्य क्रत्वा यशस्वतः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ayam yatha na abhuvat tvasta rupeva taksya. 
Asya kratva yasasvatah. 


Just as the artist creates all possible forms out 
of his plastic materials, giving them beauty, power and 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 102 973 


purposeful meaning, so does this Agni, universal artist, 
work on us, for us, and brings out our potentials and 
gives us forms of beauty, power and excellence as a 
family, community and common humanity for a purpose, 
a meaning and a direction. His actions are great, gracious 
and glorious. 


अयं विश्वां अभि भ्रियोऽथिर्देवेषुं aera । 
आ वाजेरुपं नो गमत्‌॥ ९॥ 


9. Ayam visva abhi Sriyo’ gnirdevesu patyate. 
A vajairupa no gamat. 


This Agni among all the divinities of nature and 
humanity creates, sustains and rules over all the beauties, 
graces and grandeurs of life. May the lord come to us 
and bless us with all kinds of knowledge, power, wealth 
and honour. 


विश्वेषामिह स्तुहि होतुंणां यस्त॑मम्‌। 
अभि यज्ञेषु पूर्व्यम्‌ Qo ॥ 
10. Visvesamiha stuhi hotrnam yasastamam. 
Agnim yajnesu purvyam. 
Of all the yajnic creative powers of the world 
here in the field of action, adore Agni, most gracious 


and glorious, and first, foremost and most ancient power 
in the eternal yajna of creation. 


शीरं पावकशोचिषं ज्येष्ठो यो दमेष्वा | 
दीदाय॑ दीर्घश्रुत्तमः 122 11 


ze 


11. Stram pavakasocisam jyestho yo damesva. 
Didaya dirghasruttamah. 


974 RGVEDA 


Adore Agni, omnipresent, pure, fiery and 
purifying. Agni is the highest divine, most famous, and 
shines in us and illuminates our homes. 


तमर्वन्तं न सानसिं Wife विप्र शुष्मिणम्‌ । 
fast न यातयज्जनम्‌॥ ९२॥ 

12. Tamarvantam na sanasim grnthi vipra Susminam. 
Mitram na yatayajjanam. 
O vibrant scholar and dedicated yajaka, adore 
and sing in praise of Agni, victorious giver of wealth 
and success like an archer getting the target, powerful 
inspirer of humanity for action and advancement as a 
friend. 
उप॑ त्वा जामयो गिरो देदिंशतीर्ह fae: । 
वायोरनीके अस्थिरन्‌ ॥ ९३ ॥ 

13. Upatva jamayo giro dedisatir-haviskrtah. 
Vayorantke asthiran. 

Moving and vibrant adorations of the 
enlightened celebrant reach you and stay by you in the 
movements of air in the middle regions. 

यस्य॑ त्रिधात्ववृतं लर्हिस्तस्थावसंदिनम्‌। 
आपंश्चिन्नि द॑धा पदम्‌ ॥ ९४॥ 


14. = Yasya tridhatvavrtam barhistasthavasamdinam. 
Apascinni dadha padam. 


The three-quality mind of the celebrant with 
sattva, rajas and tamas, open and unfettered, is the seat 
of Agni where peace and potential for action both have 
their seat. 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 102 975 


पदं देवस्य॑ मीव्व्हुषोऽ नाधृष्टाभिरूतिभिः 1 
भद्रा Gases ॥ १५ ॥ 


15. Padam devasya milhuso’nadhrstabhirutibhih. 
Bhadra surya ivopadrk. 


The seat of the refulgent, generous and virile 
divinity, Agni, with undaunted powers of protection is 
auspicious and blissful, shining like an inner sun and 
the second inner eye with inward light and vision. 


at घृतस्य॑ धीतिभिस्तेपानो da शोचिषा | 
आ देवान्व॑ष्चि aft च।॥ ९६॥ 


16. 4९८ ghrtasya dhitibhistepano deva 5०८75. 
A devan vaksi yaksi ca. 


Agni, light of life, brilliant and generous 
divinity, burning and shining by the flames of fire fed 
on ghrta, O enlightened scholars and divines, shining 
by the light of knowledge fed by your own awareness, 
bring in the divinities of nature and humanity to the 
vedi and carry on the yajna. 


तं त्वाजनन्त मातरः कविं carat अङ्किरः। 
हव्यवाहममर्त्यम्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Tam tvajananta matarah kavim devaso angirah. 
Havyavaham-amartyuam. 


Angira, omniscient Agni, immortal power, 
enlightened leading yajaka, divinities like mothers 
manifest you, create you, reveal you, visionary poet and 
maker of poetic beauties, carrier and harbinger of yajnic 
wealths of fragrances. 


976 RGVEDA 


wade त्वा कवेऽ गं दूतं वरेण्यम्‌। 
हव्यवाहं नि षेदिरे ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18.  Pracetasam tva kave’gne dutam varenyam. 
Havyavaham ni sedire. 


O wise and visionary, poetic maker, Agni, 
divinities of nature and humanity, wise sages, have 
honoured and established you as wide awake, all present 
carrier and harbinger of yajnic materials of existence, 
catalyser of evolutionary development and the power 
worthy of choice for living the good life. 


नहि मे अस्त्यघ्न्या न स्वधिंतिर्वन॑न्वति। 
अथेतादुग्भ॑रामि ते॥ ९९॥ 


19. Nahi me astyaghnya na svadhitir-vananvati. 
Athaitadrg-bharami te. 


I have neither total immunity nor any essential 
power of my own, neither milk nor ghrta, nor even the 
fire fuel to offer. Hence I adore and worship you the 
way I can, offer you myself for the service I am worth. 


यद॑गरे कानि cal चिदा ते दारूणि दध्मसि | 
ता जुषस्व यविष्ठ्य ॥ २०॥ 


20. Yadagne kani kani cida te daruni dadhmasi. T a 
jusasva yavisthya. 


Agni, whatever little fuel we possess, whatever 
potential to destroy the evil and negativities of life, we 
offer in service. Whatever weaknesses we possess, we 
offer into your powers of fiery purification. O power 
most youthful, pray accept all that with pleasure. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 103 977 


यदत्त्यंपजिदहिका agar siferad ta 
सर्व तद॑स्तु ते TTT २९॥ 

21. Yadattyupajihvika yadvamro atisarpati. 
Sarvam tadastu te ghrtam. 


Whatever your flames of fire consume, whatever 
the fumes spread over, let all that be food for your 
dynamics of existence in evolution. 


अग्निमिन्धानो मन॑सा धियं सचेत मर्त्य: । 
arnt विवस्वभिः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Agnimindhano manasa dhiyam saceta martyah. 
Agnim-idhe vivasvabhih. 


When the mortal starts lighting the fire in the 
vedi, let him, with his whole mind in concentration, call 
up all his faculties of perception, thought and action 
and say: I light the fire with all my light, will and 
awareness and awaken the divine in the soul. 


Mandala 8/Sukta 103 
Agni (1-13), Agni Marutah (14) Devatah, 
Sobahri Kanva Rshi 
अद॑शि गातुवित्तमो यस्मिंत्रतान्यादधुः । 
उपो षु जातमार्यस्य वर्धनमयिं नक्षन्त नो गिर॑: ॥ ९॥ 
I; AdarSi gatuvittamo yasmin vratanyddadhuh. Upo 


su jatamaryasya vardhanamagnim naksanta no 
girah. 


There is seen the light of Agni, best knower of 
the ways of life, where people concentrate their vows 
of piety and discipline. Let our songs of adoration rise 


978 RGVEDA 


and reach Agni, self-revealed, who opens the paths of 
progress and urges us on to reach the goal of rectitude 
for noble people. 


प्र दैवोदासो sifirdar अच्छा न मज्मना । 
अनुं मातरं पृथिवीं वि वावृते तस्थौ नाकस्य सान॑वि ui २॥ 
me Pra daivodaso agnirdevan accha na majmana. 


Anu mataram prthivim vi vavrte tasthau nakasya 
sanavi. 


Agni, the sun, lover of holy admirers, sitting as 
if on top of heaven in glory, turns his rays of light in 
circuit to the mother earth for her children. 


TASS कृष्ट य॑श्चकुत्यानि कृण्वतः । 
सहस्रसां मेधसाताविव त्मनायिं धीभिः स॑पर्यत ।॥ ३॥ 

3; Yasmad-rejanta krstayas-carkrtyani krnvatah. 
Sahasrasam medhasataviva tmana’gnim dhibhih 
saparyata. 


From that gift of light the children of earth shine 
and continue doing their daily duties. O people, do 
service in homage to Agni, giver of light and a thousand 
other gifts as in yajnic generosity. Do so with your heart 
and soul, sincerely by thought and action. 


प्र यं राये निनीषसि मर्तो यस्ते वसो दारछत्‌। 
स वीरं ध॑त्ते अग्र उक्थशंसिनं त्मना सहस्रपोषिणम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra yam raye ninisasi marto yaste vaso dasat. Sa 
viram dhatte agna ukthasamsinam tmana saha- 
sraposinam. 


O Giver of light, wealth and power of life, Agni, 


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 103 979 


the mortal who offers to serve you with self-surrender 
and gives in charity and whom you lead on the path of 
prosperity and rectitude is blest with progeny celebrated 
in song for his thousandfold generosity. 


स god चिंदभि तुंणत्ति arse at स ध॑त्ते अकिति श्रव॑ः | 
त्वे देवत्रा सद। पुरूवसो विश्वा वामानि धीमदहि।॥ ५॥ 


2: Sa drlhe cidabhi trnatti vajamarvata sa dhatte 
aksiti Sravah. Tve devatra sada puruvaso visva 
vamani dhimahi. 

The mortal you guide breaks open the strongest 
forts of wealth and honour with his power and force 
and wins immortal fame. O shelter home of the world, 
under your protection, dedicated to divinity, we pray, 
let us concentrate on and receive all good things of life. 


यो विश्वा दयते वसु eat मन्द्रो जनानाम्‌। 
मधोर्न पात्रा प्रथमान्यस्मै प्र स्तोम॑ यन्त्ययर्यें ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yo visva dayate vasu hota mandro jananam. 


Madhorna patra prathamanyasmai pra stoma 
yantyagnaye. 

Like bowls of honey let our prime songs of 

adoration reach this Agni who, blissful high priest of 


existence, gives all the wealths and joys of the world to 
humanity. 


अश्वं न गीर्भी tet सुदान॑वो मर्मृज्यन्ते देवयवः | 
उभे तोके तन॑ये दस्म विरुपते पर्षि राधो मघोनाम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
८ Asvam na girbhi rathyam sudanavo marmr-jyante 


devayavah. Ubhe toke tanaye dasma vispate parsi 
radho maghonam. 


980 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of glory, ruler and sustainer of the 
people, generous devotees dedicated to charity and love 
of divinity, with voices of adoration and prayer, exalt 
you like the motive power of the chariot of life, and 
pray: Bring us the holy power and prosperity worthy of 
the magnificent for our children and grand children. 


प्र मंहिष्ठाय गायत ऋता्नै बु हते शुक्रशोचिषे | 
उपस्तुतासो अग्रये ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pra mamhisthaya gayata rtavne brhate sukra- 
Socise. Upastutaso agnaye. 


0) celebrants of divinity, sing songs of adoration 
in honour of adorable Agni, most generous, leader of 
the paths of truth, great and glorious, lord of pure light 
of divinity and fire of action. 


आ वंसते मघर्वां divaer: समिंब्दो द्युम्न्याहुतः | 
कुविन्नो अस्य सुमतिर्न॑वीयस्यच्छा वाजेंभिरागमंत्‌॥ ९ ॥ 
9. A vamsate maghava viravadyasah samiddho 


dyumnyahutah. Kuvinno asya sumatirnaviyasya- 
ccha_ vajebhir-agamat. 

Lord of universal wealth and power, light of life, 
invoked and lighted, gives us honour and fame worthy 
of the brave. May his love and good will come and bless 
us with the latest honours, power and prosperity with 
progressive success. 


प्रेष्ठ॑मु प्रियाणां स्तुद्यासावातिथिम्‌। 
अगिं रथानां यम॑म्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Presthamu priyanam stuhyasavatithim. 
Agnim rathanam yamam. 


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 103 981 


O yajaka, creator of the soma joy of life, adore 
and worship Agni, light of life, dearest of the dear, 
harbinger of the joy of life in response to your 
endeavour, and coming up like a visitor at will any time. 


उदिता यो निदिता वेदिता वस्वा यज्ञियो aad fa 1 
दुष्टरा यस्य॑ प्रवणे नोर्मयो! धिया वाजं सिषासतः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Udita yo nidita vedita vasva yajniyo vavartati. 
Dustard yasya pravane normayo dhiya vajam 
sisasatah. 


Adore and exalt Agni, worthy of worship, who 
knows, gives and circulates wealth of the world whether 
open and developed or hidden and potential. Anxious 
as he is to give wealth and victory by thought and action, 
his generosity is difficult to surpass, like waves of the 
sea in flood. 


मानो हृणीतामतिंथिर्वसुंरयिः पुरुप्रशस्त एषः। 
यः सुहोता स्वध्वरः ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Mano hrnitamatithir-vasur-agnih puruprasasta 
esah. Yah suhota svadhvarah. 


May this Agni, welcome as a venerable visitor, 
shelter home of the world, universally adored who is 
the noble giver and generous high priest of cosmic yajna, 
never feel displeased with us, may the lord give us 
fulfilment. 


मो ते रिंषन्ये अच्छक्तिभिर्वसो sa केभिश्चिदेवैः 1 
कीरिश्चिद caries दूत्याय रातदह॑व्यः स्वध्वरः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Mo te risanye acchoktibhirvaso’gne_ kebhisci- 
devaih. Kirisciddhi tvamitte dutyaya ratahavyah 
svadhvarah. 


982 RGVEDA 


Agni, shelter home of the world, may they never 
come to harm who any way by any actions offer honour 
and worship to you in holy words. The celebrant, bearing 
havi to perform the holy yajna in service to you, prays 
to you to bring him knowledge, honour and prosperity 
in life. 


smal याहि मरुत्सखा रुद्रेथिः सोम॑पीतये । 
सोभर्या sd सुष्टुतिं मादयस्व स्व॑र्णरे ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Agne yahi marutsakha rudrebhih somapitaye. 
Sobharya upa sustutim madayasva svarnare. 


Agni, refulgent lord, friend of the mind and 
senses, come, arise in the heart with pranic energies for 
the protection and exaltation of the soul’s joy. Come, 
accept the adorations and prayers of the self-confident 
celebrant, join his golden yajna and exalt the ecstasy of 
his communion. 


॥ इत्यष्टमं मण्डलम्‌ ॥ 


