| AUM ॥ 


RIGVEDA 


ऋग्वेदः 


(With Original Sanskrit Text, Transliteration & 
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition 
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda) 


English translation by 
Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. (London, U.K.) 


(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


Sanskrit Text as per publication of 


Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer 


© Dr. Tulsi Ram 


ISBN : 978-81-7077-156-2 


Publisher : 
Vijaykumar Govindram Hasanand 
Delhi. 


Edition : First, 2013 


Price : Rs. 700.00 


RIGVEDA Vol. II by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


(५) 


CONTENTS 


S.No. Particulars Page 


1. RIGVEDA: 


10. ९,161.1 daeeesicead Seis teeeeeiasiicteectainnlentcacek 1-252 

MANDAD SS edie cy eceieeaaeteabtcisuarcattecdonnsientecs 253-564 

MANDAL. 6 scicictsciricteslocaesewcensiadtinlamiaalics 565-888 
—3:0::— 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


(vi) 


DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION 


Vowels 
अ आ 8 . i ई 7 
@ त ऊ u We r mm 7 
a oiilr aq r 
ए € tw ai aT 0 ओ au 

अनुस्वार (+) 1 विसर्ग (:) h 
(* 27 
Consonants 


Guttural 
क k ख्‌ kaw & घ्‌ gh ङ्‌ a 
Palatal 
च्‌ ८ चू ch ज्‌ } ABA jh A A 
Lingual 
zt द्‌ th 


+ 


sa 
Gu 
6 


dh ण्‌ no 
Dental 

at थू th द्‌ 0 धू dh न्‌ o 
Labial 

Tp र्‌ ph न्‌ 0 न्‌ bh म्‌ m 


others 


ay - ल्‌ 1 व्‌ ४ 
श्‌ $ Ds HAs ह्‌ 1 
CS)” ® im 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDALA 4 


Mandala 4/Sukta 1 
Agni, Agni- Varuna Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


त्वां da सदमित्स॑मन्यवो' देवासो! देवम॑रतिं न्येरिर इति 
क्रत्वा न्येरिरे। अमर्त्य यजत मर्त्येष्वा देवमादेवं जनत 
प्रचेतसं विश्वमादेवं जनत प्रचेतसम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


0 Tvam hyagne sadamit samanyavo devaso devam- 
aratim nyerira iti kratva nyerire. Amartyam 
yajata martyesva devamadevam janatapraceta- 
sam visvamadevam janata pracetasam. 


Agni, light and fire of life, brilliant and 
impassioned people always kindle you to action. Quick, 
relentless and refulgent, a very home of rest and peace 
and light as you are, they kindle and raise you with their 
best and noblest effort and action. O men, join, honour 
and respect this divine and imperishable power among 
humanity to full force of illumination, generate this holy 
power, intelligent, universal and living light for all, 
generate and develop it to full beauty and delight over 
the wide earth. 


स भ्रात॑रं वरुणमग्र आ व॑वृत्स्व tat अच्छा सुमती यज्ञवनसं 
ज्येष्ठं यज्ञव॑नसम्‌। ऋतावानमादित्यं चर्षणीधृतं राजानं 
चर्षणीधृत॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 

il, Sa bhrataram varunamagna त vavrtsva devan 
accha sumati yajnavanasam jyestham yajnava- 
nasam. Rtavanam-ddityam carsanidhrtam raja- 
nam carsanidhrtam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


2 RGVEDA 


And O light and fire of life, Agni, bring in your 
brother and complementary power, Varuna, the very 
spirit of cool, peace and justice of life, and direct him 
toward the noble and brilliant performers of yajna. Bring 
him well with best thoughts and intentions, bring the 
lover of yajna, highest and most venerable, partner in 
social organisation, observer of the laws and operations 
of universal truth and goodness, refulgent as the sun, 
sustainer of humanity, brilliant ruler, universally 
accepted and consecrated by the people. 


सखे सखायपभ्या व॑वृत्स्वाशुं न चक्रं रथ्येव रंद्यास्मभ्यं 
दस्म रंह्या | अगे मृव्टीकं वरुणे सचां विदो मरुत्सु fava- 
भानुषु । तोकाय॑ तुजे शुशुचान शं कुध्यस्मभ्यं दस्म शां 
कुधि।॥३॥ ति 


2 Sakhe sakhayamabhya vavrtsvasum na cakram 
rathyeva ranhyasmabhyam dasma ranhya. Agne 
mrlikam varune saca vido Marutsu visvabhanusu. 
Tokaya tuje susucana sam krdhyasmabhyam 
dasma sam krdhi. 


Agni, O friend, loving and gracious, destroyer 
of enemies, just as a swift horse by a fast moving chariot 
on the highway and the wheel of Time drives the master 
to the destination, so come, hasten your friend Varuna, 
power of peace and justice, to us. O refulgent master of 
knowledge, being friends with Varuna, the winds and 
the solar lights of the world, the people and brilliant 
eminences of the world, reach us, bring us the peace 
and joy of life. Blazing brilliant and gracious, bring 
peace and well-being for our children and grand 
children. O lord of light and knowledge, love and justice, 
peace and beauty, destroyer of evil, bring us peace, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 3 
beauty and the graces of life. 


त्वं नो अग्ने वरुणस्य विद्वान्देवस्य tats व॑ यासिसीष्ठाः 1 
यजिष्ठो af€an: शोशुचानो विश्वा देषांसि प्र 
मुमुग्ध्यस्मत्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvam no agne varunasya vidvan devasya helo’ va 
yasiststhah. Yajistho vahnitamah Sosucano visva 
dvesamsi pra mumugdhyasmat. 


Agni, O lord and master of knowledge and 
enlightenment, we pray, you keep off from us the 
displeasure of Varuna, highest authority of justice. Lord 
blazing brilliant and purifying power worthy of 
invocation, harbinger and disseminator of divine gifts 
and fragrances, ward away from us the entire hate and 
enmity the world might have toward us. 


सत्वं नो sms वमो भ॑वोती नेदिष्ठो अस्या उषसो east । 
अवं यक्ष्व नो वरुणं रराणो वीहि dat सुहवों न 
THT UG I 


Di Sa tvam no agne’vamo bhavoti nedistho asya 
usaso vyustau. Ava yaksva no varunam rarano 
vihi mrlikam suhavo na edhi. 


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, pray 
be our first and last preserver and protector, closest at 
this rise of the glorious dawn. Delighting, rejoicing and 
giving, join Varuna at the yajna and bring us peace and 
joy. Noble yajaka, responsive to our call, come and bless 
us with goodwill and well-being. 


अस्य श्रेष्ठां सुभग॑स्य सन्दृ्देवस्यं चित्रतमा मर्त्येषु । 
शुचिं घृतं न तस्रमघ्न्यायाः स्पार्हा देवस्य मंहनैव धेनोः ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


4 RGVEDA 


6. Asya Srestha subhagasya samdrg devasya citra- 
tama martyesu. Suci ghrtam na taptamaghnya- 
yah sparha devasya manhaneva dhenoh. 


Open, highest and most wonderful among 
mortals are the gifts and actions of this brilliant, 
generous and glorious ruler, pure and bright like the 
heated clarified ghrta of the inviolable cow, lovely and 
profuse like the liberality of the abundant cow, mother 
earth, and the inexhaustible speech of self-refulgent lord 
of omniscience. He watches all and his gifts are directly 
visible. 


त्रिरस्य ता प॑र॒मा स॑न्ति सत्या स्पार्हा देवस्य Saree: | 
अनन्ते अन्तः परिवीत आगाच्छुचिंः शुक्रो अर्योँ 
रोरुचानः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Trirasya ta parama santi satya sparha devasya 
jJanimanyagneh. Anante antah parivita aga- 
cchucih sukro aryo rorucanah. 


Three are the supreme manifestations of the 
generous refulgent Agni, true, lovely and universally 
cherished which arise and shine. Pervasive everywhere 
in endless space in the presence of the infinite divine 
lord of the universe, he shines pure, refulgent, generous 
and beautiful. 


(This mantra refers to the various manifestations 
of cosmic energy which is the existential potential of 
the Supreme Lord Creator operating at different levels 
in different modes. In other words, we may call it the 
manifestations of Adi-Shakti, the Lord’s consort Prakrti, 
originally manifesting as sattva, rajas, and tamas. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 5 


On earth, Bhuloka, it is fire and magnetic energy, 
which is agni. In the middle regions of the sky, 
Bhuvahloka, it is electrical energy, which is vayu. In 
the higher regions of light, Svahloka, it is aditya, solar 
energy. The sun too manifests in three different phases, 
at dawn, at noon and in the evening when it is setting. 
The efficacy of the sun in these three phases is different. 


At the individual human level, it is physical 
energy, mental energy and spiritual energy. In yet 
another way it is the vital heat which maintains the 
physical body, i1.e., annamaya kosha; it is pranic energy 
which maintains the pranamaya kosha and the 
manomaya kosha; and it is the higher psychic energy 
which maintains the vijnanamaya kosha and the 
anandamaya kosha. Of these three, one feeds, the other 
energises, and the third illumines. 


However, mantras such as this have to be 
interpreted in a state of meditation, and since meditation 
is the birth-right of every human being, we are free to 
divine into the mystery of the mantric vision in our 
experiential way.) 


स दूतो विश्वेदभि व॑ष्टि सद्या होता fervarent ta rE: | 
रोहिद॑श्वो वपुष्यो विभावा सद र॒ण्वः पितुमतीव 
संसत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sa dito visvedabhi vasti sadma hota hiranyaratho 


ramsujihvah. Rohidasvo vapusyo vibhava sada 
ranvah pitumativa samsat. 


That Agni, harbinger of light and warmth of life, 
destroyer of darkness and evil, loves, pervades, 
illuminates and rules over all the forms and places of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


6 RGVEDA 


the world. He is the yajamana, receiver and giver of 
sweets and fragrances. Riding a golden chariot drawn 
by ruddy horses and waves of light, delightful of tongue 
as well as flames of fire, majestic in body form, always 
rejoicing and emanating joy, he is a very treasure home 
of prosperity, happiness and excellence like an assembly 
house of power, governance and wealth of a nation in 
symbolic form. 


स चेंतयन्मनुषो यज्ञ॑न्धुः प्र तं मह्या र॑शनयां नयन्ति | 
स aera दुयौसु साध॑न्देवो मतस्य सधनित्वमांप॥ ९॥ 


9. Sa cetayanmanuso yajnabandhuh pra tam mahya 
rasanaya nayanti. Sa ksetyasya duryasu sadhan 
devo martasya sadhanitvamapa. 


A brother yajaka on the yajna vedi of creation 
and governance, he awakens and enlightens the people. 
To him they move on to consecrate him in the seat of 
power and yajna with a long rope of powers, obligations 
and controls for balance. He abides in the seat of 
governance and justice fulfilling his roles, generous and 
brilliant, achieving the dreams and realities of the 
nation’s imagination. 

सतू नो strfad प्रजानन्नच्छा te देवभक्तं यद॑स्य । धिया 
यद्विश्वे अपरता अकुण्वन्द्यौष्पिता ज॑निता सत्यमुंक्षन्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Sa tu no agnirnayatu prajanannaccha ratnam 


devabhaktam yadasya. Dhiya yad visve amrta 
akrnvan dyauspita janita satyamuksan. 


And may that Agni, leader and lord ruler, 
knowing everything full well, lead us to that valuable 
jewel wealth of this world, loved, coveted and enjoyed 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 7 


by the brilliant divinities which the immortals of all the 
world with their skill and intelligence created and which 
the heaven and father creator showered and consecrated 
as real and true. 


स जायत प्रथमः पस्त्यासु महो ge रज॑सो अस्य a 
अपादशीषां गुहमानो अन्ताऽऽयोयुवानो वृषभस्य 
AS ९९१॥ 


11. Sa jayata prathamah pastyasu maho budhne 
rajaso asya yonau. Apadasirsa guhamano anta’’- 
yoyuvano vrsabhasya nile. 


That Agni, which brings us the jewel wealth of 
the world, first arises from its original cause in the 
Mahat-tattva, the first existential evolute of Prakrti. Then 
it manifests in the sun as light, and then in the middle 
regions of space as vayu, electricity. Moving without 
head and feet, concealed yet joining youthfully the 
inmates of various regions, light in the sun, cloud in the 
sky, homes of people and depth of the earth, it operates 
everywhere. 


प्र शर्ध" आर्तं प्रथमं विंपन्यां ऋतस्य योना वृषभस्य नीचे | 
स्पार्हो युवां वपुष्यो विभावां we प्रियासोऽ जनयन्त 
तृष्णे ।॥ ९२॥ 

12. Prasardha arta prathamam vipanyan rtasya yona 
vrsabhasya nile. Sparho yuva vapusyo vibhava 
sapta priyaso janayanta vrsne. 

With study and appraisal discover and find 
energy and power in the original source of cosmic waters 


and the abode of fire, i.e., the solar energy, currents of 
wind in the sky and magnetic energy of the earth, energy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


8 RGVEDA 


and power which is lovely, youthful and unaging, 
energising body systems and giver of beauty and joy. 
For the generous human soul, seven darling yajakas, 
i.e., five pranas, mind and intellect create this vital 
energy in the body. 


अस्माकमत्र पितरों मनुष्यां अभि प्र daskaat- 
शुषाणाः । अष्मंत्रजाः सुदुघां Aa अन्तरुदुस््रा आंजन्रु- 
Wal हुवानाः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Asmakamatra pitaro manusya abhi pra sedur- 
rtamasusanah. AsSmavrajah sudugha vavre 
antarudusra ajannusaso huvanah. 


Here in our human world, in this programme of 
energy discovery, our parental seniors and thinkers 
dedicated to the yajna of natural and psychic energy sit 
at peace in a state of tranquillity, searching and invoking 
the light of the dawn and discover and open out the 
showers of energy waves locked up inside the clouds 
and mountains. 


ते मर्मृजत ददूवांसो sfx तदेषामन्ये अभितो वि वोँचन्‌। 
पश्वयन्त्रासो अभि कारमंर्चन्विदन्त ज्योतिंश्चकृ पन्तं 
धीभिः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Te marmrjata dadrvamso adrim tadesamanye 
abhito vi vocan. Pasvayantraso abhi karamarcan 
vidanta jyotiscakrpanta dhibhih. 


Those parental seniors and researchers, breakers 
of the clouds and shatterers of the mountain caves break 
open the treasures of energy and refine and intensify 
the power. Others who watch them and their programme 
fully describe their achievement how, equipped with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 9 


practical apparatuses, dedicated to their mission, they 
discover the light and thus, with their intelligence and 
sentiment, strengthen and do good to humanity. 


ater मन॑सा दुध्रमुव्धं गा यमानं परि षन्तमर्रिम्‌। eos 
नरो वच॑सा दैव्येन व्रजं गोमन्तमुशिजो वि da: neu i 


15. Te gavyata manasa drdhramubdham ga yemanam 
pari santamadrim. Drlham naro vacasa daivyena 
vrajam gomantamusijo vi vavruh. 


They, best of men, leaders and impassioned 
pioneers, with a searching mind pursuing the light 
concentrate and meditate on the sun, all pervasive, ocean 
deep, strong and bottomless treasure hold of infinite 
light, language and knowledge, holding and at the same 
time controlling and directing the radiation of light rays, 
and they, with words of divine vision and mysterious 
meaning open up and reveal the wealth of light, word 
and knowledge. 


ते म॑न्वत प्रथमं नाम॑ athe: सप्त मातुः परमाणि विन्दन्‌। 
तज्नानतीर भ्य॑नूषत त्रा आविर्भुवदरुणीर्यशसा गोः ॥ १६ ॥ 


16. Te manvata prathamam nama dhenostrih sapta 
matuh paramani vindan. Tajjanatirabhyanusat 
vra avirbhuvadaruniryaSsasa goh. 


First they study, reflect and meditate on the 
seven ultimate forms of mother speech and thus realise 
and know it in the essence through word, meaning and 
the self-existent reality behind the word. And having 
realised the content of divine speech, they celebrate the 
red lights of the dawn bearing and revealing that lord 
of speech manifesting by the splendour of the dawn of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


10 RGVEDA 
knowledge. 


नेशत्तमो दुधितं रोच॑त द्यौरुदेव्या उषसो we । आ सूर्यो 
ल्रहतस्तिष्ठदरजौ ऋजु मर्तेषु वृजिना च पश्य॑न्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. | NeSat tamo dudhitam rocata dyaurud devya usaso 
bhanurarta. A suryo brhatastisthadajran rju mar- 
tesu vrjind ca pasyan. 


The dense darkness of the night is dispelled, the 
solar region shines and the light of the dawn ascends in 
all her splendour. The sun rises and shines on over the 
fields and plains of the wide world, watching the acts 
and ways of right and wrong among the mortal 
inhabitants of the earth. 


आदित्पश्चा लुंबुधाना व्य॑ख्यन्नादिद्रलरं धारयन्त द्युभ॑क्तम्‌ | 
विश्वे विश्वासु gata देवा मित्र॑ धिये व॑रुण सत्य- 
म॑स्तु॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Adit pasca bubudhana vyakhyannadid ratnam 
dharayanta dyubhaktam. Visve visvasu duryasu 
deva mitra dhiye varuna satyamastu. 


And then men of vision, wisdom and knowledge 
light, celebrate and proclaim the might and splendour of 
Agni, bearing and enjoying the jewels of wealth gifted 
by the light and energy of the sun, fire and electricity. 
May all the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, 
and Mitra, the sun, friend of life, and Varuna, the spatial 
waters, givers of love, peace and justice, be good and 
true to the wish and desire and intellectual efforts of 
humanity in all homes and over all the paths of life. 


अच्छ वोचेय शुशुचानमयिं होतारं favasite यजिष्ठम्‌ | 
शुच्यूधों अतृणन्न गवामन्धो न पूतं GR पिक्तमंशोः ॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 11 


19. Accha voceya Susucanamagnim hotaram visva- 
bharasam yajistham. Sucyudho atrnanna gava- 
mandho na putam parisiktamamsoh. 


Let us sing and celebrate Agni in hymns of 
praise, Agni bright and pure and purifying, yajaka who 
invokes and awakens the bounties of nature for us, 
sustains the world and is most worthy of love and 
reverence, who fills the udder of the cows with milk 
without injury and augments the holy acts of humanity 
like the food purified and sanctified by the sun. 


विश्वेषामदितिर्यजियानां विश्वेषामतिंथिम्नुषाणाम्‌। 
अथिर्देवानामवं आवृणानः सुमृव्टीको भ॑वतु जात- 
वेदाः ॥ २०॥ 

20. Visvesadmaditiryajniyanam visvesamatithir- 
manusanam. Agnirdevanamava avrnanah sumr- 
liko bhavatu jatavedah. 


Like the indivisible and inviolable sky for all 
the performers of yajna, like the welcome guest for all 
the householders, Agni, universal light and lord 
omnipresent and omniscient, may, we pray, taking up 
the protection and promotion of noble humanity and 
renewal and refreshment of the environment, be the 
harbinger of peace and prosperity for children of the 
earth. (So may be the teacher and the scholar.) 


Mandala 4/Sukta 2 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


यो मर्त्येष्वमृत ऋतावा देवो देवेष्व॑र तिर्निधायं। 
होता यजिष्ठो vat शुचध्यै हव्यैर िर्मनुंष ईर यध्यै i ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


12 RGVEDA 


ly Yo martyesvamrta rtava devo devesvaratirni- 
dhayi. Hota yajistho mahna sucadhyai havyai- 
ragnirmanusa trayadhyai. 


Agni which is immortal among mortals and 
refulgent among divinities of world and nature, itself 
ever true and dynamic destroyer of evil, is fixed in the 
cosmic order of law and rectitude. By virtue of its own 
greatness it is the invoker and harbinger of natural 
bounties, most worthy of reverence with homage of 
oblations for the purification, illumination and 
inspiration of mankind. And Agni is held, recognised 
and realised in the heart. 


इह त्वं सुनो सहसो नो अद्य जातो जातां Swat अन्तस्य । 
दूत ईयसे युयुजान ऋष्व ऋलजुमुष्कान्वृष॑णः शुक्रांश्च॑ ।। २ ॥ 


eo Tha tvam suno sahaso no adya jato jatan ubhayan 
antaragne. Dita tyase yuyujana rsva rjumuskan 
vrsanah sukramsca. 


Agni, lord giver of light, child of omnipotence, 
great and sublime, giver of mighty strength, here in this 
world of ours, risen today to full glory among both 
divines and humans born and initiated, you move as 
the light and energy of yajna, carrying the fragrance, 
inspiring and engaging all who are pure and generous 
and move by the brilliant paths of nature and rectitude. 


अर्या वृधस्तरू रोहिता घृतस््रू Faced मन्ये मन॑सा जविंछा। 
अन्तरीयसे अरुषा युंजानो युष्मांश्च देवान्विश आ च 
मतीन्‌॥ 3 

3: Atya vrdhasnu rohita ghrtasnu rtasya manye 


manasa javistha. Antariyase arusa yujano 
yusmamsca devan visa ठ ca martan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 13 


Agni, light of the world, I know and realise your 
waves of cosmic energy ever moving in circuit at the 
fastest with the energy of the cosmic mind, creating and 
increasing, sprinkling and showering with water and 
energy of ghrta, red as rays of the dawn, blazing as the 
sun, with which you move across the world of existence, 
inspiring and engaging the mortals, immortals and the 
human children of the earth. 


अर्यमणं वरुणं पित्रमेषामिन्द्राविष्णुं मरुतों अणश्विनोत। 
स्वश्वो अग्ने Ural: सुराधा एदु वह सु हविषे जनाय ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Aryamanam varunam mitramesamindravisnu 
maruto asvinota. Svasvo agne surathah suradha 
edu vaha suhavise janaya. 


Agni, lord of light and power, commanding 
instant waves of communication, fastest modes of 
transport, immense wealth and infrastructure for 
development and prosperity, come and, for these people 
dedicated to the yajna of corporate programmes of 
common development and progress, bring Aryaman, 
power of justice, Varuna, spirit of freedom, choice and 
excellence, Mitra, love and friendship for all these 
people, Indra, energy of the clouds and electricity, 
Vishnu, universal spirit of cosmic unity, Maruts, energy 
of the winds, and the Ashvins, light of the sun and 
soothing beauty of the moon. 


Tint sits faut अश्वी यज्ञो नृवत्सखा सदमिदप्रमृष्यः | 
sotat एषो असुर प्रजावान्दीर्घो रयिः पृथुबुध्नः सभा- 
्वान्‌॥५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


14 RGVEDA 


=n Goman agne’viman asvi yajno nrvatsakha 
sadamidapramrsyah. Ilavan eso asura prajavan 
dirgho rayih prthubudhnah sabhavan. 


Agni, giver of light, power and prosperity, peace 
and justice, commanding wealth of cows, sheep and 
goats, horses, and unity and productive cooperation in 
yajna you are friend of the people, leaders and pioneers, 
blest with lands, knowledge and holy speech of divinity, 
possessed of vital strength, destroyer of the wicked, 
supported by the people and assistants. Presiding over 
the assembly, you know great and long lasting is this 
wealth of the nation, broad based and rising high and 
vast. Come, take over the house of government which 
is beyond pollution, corruption and destruction. 


यस्त॑ इध्मं जभर॑स्सिष्विदानो मूर्धानं वा ततपंते त्वाया । 
भुवस्तस्य vadat: पायुर विश्वंस्मात्सीमघायत 
उरुष्य ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Yasta idhmam jabharat sisvidano murdhanam va 


tatapate tvaya. Bhuvastasya svatavamh payuagne 
visvasmat simaghayata urusya. 


Whoever bears the sacred fuel for your fire of 
yajna by the sweat of his brow, or tires himself out, not 
sparing himself while coming to you to serve, Agni, 
come to your own, and rising, be the protector of his 
land and person against all violent bullies and sinners. 


यस्ते भरादन्नियते चिदन्नं निशिष॑न्मन््रमतिंथिमुदीरंत्‌। 
आ दैवयुरिनधंते दुरोणे तस्मित्रयिरश्ुवो अस्तु दास्वान्‌ 9 1 


ae Yaste bharadanniyate cidannam nisisanma-ndra- 
matithimudirat. A devayurinadhate durone tasmin 
rayirdhruvo astu dasvan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 15 


Agni, giver of light and wealth, ruler of the 
world, in the home where the generous house holder 
spares food and bears it to you for the hungry, where he 
welcomes, appreciates and regales the happy guest, 
where, dedicated to the divinities and brilliant people, 
he lights the fire and worships Ishwara in full faith, in 
that house, O lord, let there be abundant wealth, peace 
and stability. 


यस्त्वा दोषा य safe प्रशंसप्परियं at त्वा कृणवते 
हविर्ष्मान्‌। अश्वो न स्वे दम॒ आ हेम्यावान्तमंहंसः पीपरो 
दारुवांस॑म्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yastva dosa ya usasi prasamsat priyam va tva 
krnvate havisman. ASvo na sve dama a hemyavan 
tamanhasah piparo dasvamsam. 


Whoever sings in praise of you night and day, 
who with gifts in homage does you proud with things 
dear to you, save that man of generosity in his home 
from sin, come like a knight of golden horse and rescue 
him from evil. 


FAA अमूर्ताय दाशहुवस्त्वे कृणवते ATA | 
नस राया शशमानो fa योंषत्रैनमंहः परिं arearat: ९॥ 


व Yastubhyamagne amrtaya dasad duvastve 
krnavate yatasruk. Na sa raya SaSamano vi yosa- 
nnainamanhah pari varadaghayoh. 


Agni, giver of light and wealth of life, whoever 
offers you honour and service in faith, ever ready, 
holding up the ladle full of holy ghrta and offering 
oblations to the imperishable fire, overflows with wealth 
without fear of deprivation, and the sin of the evil doer 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


16 RGVEDA 


too can never pollute him. 


यस्य त्वमग्रे अध्वरं जुजोषो देवो मर्त॑स्य सुधितं रराणः। 
प्रीतेद॑सब्दोत्रा सा य॑विष्ठाऽसांम यस्य॑ विधतो वृधासः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yasya tvamagne adhvaram jujoso devo martasya 
sudhitam raranah. Pritedasaddhotra sa yavistha 
*sama yasya vidhato vrdhasah. 


Agni, youthful light of yajnic human action, 
brilliant and generous giver as you are, whatever mortal 
offers you the yajna of service, with spirit of sacrifice, 
love and non-violence, well performed with reverence 
and faith, you accept and enjoy. May that service and 
spirit of charity bring him the grace of heaven. May we 
too be performers and promoters of that yajna, and may 
that grace be ours too. 


चित्तिमचित्तिं चिनवद्वि विदवान्पृष्ठे व॑ वीता वूंलिना च ad 
राये च॑ नः स्वपत्याय देव दितिं च रास्वादिंतिमुरुष्य ॥ 22 ॥ 


11.  Cittimacittim cinavad vi vidvan prstheva vita 
vrjina ca martan. Raye ca nah svapatyaya deva 
ditim ca rasvaditimurusya. 


Let the man of knowledge and discrimination 
distinguish between sense and wisdom on the one hand 
and non-sense and ignorance on the other, between the 
broad open paths of right living and the covert ways of 
wickedness, and between mortals and mortals. And O 
giver of knowledge and light of discrimination, Agni, 
for the sake of honour and well being and for our 
children give us worldly wealth and liquid assets and 
protect our immortal merit of rectitude. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 17 


कविं शंशासुः कवयोऽ द॑ब्धा निधारय॑न्तो दुयीस्वायोः। 
अतस्त्वं दृश्या अग्र एतान्पडभिः प॑श्येरद्॑तं अर्य एवैः ॥ १२ ॥ 


12. Kavim sasasuh kavayo’dabdha nidharayanto 
duryasvayoh. Atastvam drsyan agna etan 
padbhih pasyeradbhutan arya evaih. 


Wise visionaries, bold intrepidable scholars and 
sagely teachers, maintaining the inmates, disciples and 
seekers of knowledge in their home schools, teach them 
the knowledge and discipline of life. Therefore, O master 
and ruler, Agni, by practical steps you go, observe and 
assess these wonderful schools and their people. They 
are all open and worth seeing. 


wana वाघते सुप्रणीतिः सुतसोमाय विधते य॑विष्ठ । tet 
भर शशमानाय घृष्वे पृथु श्चन्द्रमव॑से चर्षणिप्राः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Tvamagne vaghate supranitih sutasomaya vidhate 
yavistha. Ratnam bhara sSasamanaya ghrsve 
prthus-candram-avase carsaniprah. 


Agni, giver of light, knowledge and power, ever 
fresh and youthful, noble guide in proper ways of living, 
ruler of the wide world, friend of the people, bear and 
bring the beauty, peace and jewel wealth of life for the 
protection and advancement of the intelligent admirer 
who has distilled the soma of life’s joy, confidently 
conducts the business of life to success, conquers 
suffering unto overflowing happiness and refines the 
manners and graces of life. 


stat ह gay त्वाया पडभिर्हस्तेभिश्चकृमा ass: | 
रथं न क्रन्तो अप॑सा भुरिजोऋतं येमुः सुध्य॑ आशु- 
घाणाः॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


18 RGVEDA 


14.  Adha ha yad vayamagne tvaya padbhirhaste- 
bhiscakrma tanubhih. Ratham na kranto apasa 
bhurijorrtam yemuh sudhya asusanah. 


And Agni, O ruler of the world, as we, dedicated 
to you, work for you with our hands and feet and indeed 
with our body and soul, so may all the intelligent people, 
cooperating with you with the work of their dexterous 
hands, move together as by a chariot car and take you 
and all to the destination of truth and rectitude toward 
perfection. 


अधां मातुरुषसंः सप्त विप्रा जायेमहि प्रथमा वेधसो नून्‌। 
दिवस्युत्रा अद्धिरसो भवेमाऽद्रिं रुजेम धनिनं शुचन्त॑ः ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Adhd maturusasah sapta vipra jayemahi 
prathama vedhaso nrn. Divasputra angiraso 
bhavema’drim rujema dhaninam sucantah. 


And then, like the seven rainbow colours of the 
lights of mother dawn, let us raise ourselves to seven 
classes of intelligent and dynamic functionaries: ruler, 
presidents of councils, army, commanders, people, 
services and ancillaries. Let us create leaders and 
visionary pioneers of knowledge and education. Let us 
all rise to be the children of light, dexterous as divine 
architects, dear as vital breath of life, and then, cleansing 
and brightening up the well provided prosperous people 
who are wealth of the motherland, let us break the clouds 
for rain and shatter the mountains of difficulty 
converting them to opportunities. 


अधा य्था नः पितरः परासः प्रलासों अगर ऋतमांशुषाणाः। 
शुचीद॑यन्दीधितिमुक्थशासः क्षामां भिन्दन्तो अरुणीरपं 
त्रन्‌ ॥ ९६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 19 


16. = Adha yatha nah pitarah parasah pratnaso agna 
rtamasusanah. Sucidayan didhitim-ukthasasah 
ksama bhindanto arunirapa vran. 


Agni, ruler of light and humanity, let us all 
together, dedicated to truth and rectitude, rise and shine 
as did our forefathers, earliest and later ones, and pure 
and sanctified, singing songs of divine praise, breaking 
new ground upon the earth, let us rise to the heights of 
power and discover new lights of existence, and so may 
rise our future generations too. 


सुकमीणः सुरुचो देवयन्तोऽ यो न देवा जनिमा IAAT: | 
शुचन्तो अगिं व॑वृधन्त इन्द्रमूर्वं गव्यं परिषदन्तो 
अग्मन्‌ ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Sukarmanah suruco devayanto’yo na deva janima 
dhamantah. Sucanto agnim vavrdhanta indramur- 
vam gavyam parisadanto agman. 


Brilliant people of noble action, deeply 
committed to holy pursuits and aspiring to rise to the 
stars, fanning their life to light and purity in the crucibles 
of knowledge and experience as they refine gold and 
temper steel in the furnace, raising the flames of fire 
and exalting the honour and excellence of the nation, 
sitting and discussing in conferences, extend the bounds 
of terrific energy and knowledge of the earth and skies 
unto the stars. 


arya anid पश्वो अंख्यदेवानां यज्ननिमान्त्युग्र । 
मतीनां चिदुर्वशीरकृप्रन्वृधे चिंदर्य उप॑रस्यायोः ॥ १८ ॥ 
18. A yutheva ksumati pasvo akhyad devanam 


yajjanimantyugra. Martanam cidurvasirakrpran 
vrdhe cidarya uparasyayoh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


20 RGVEDA 


As the master proclaims the material wealth of 
his house of prosperity, as the commander proclaims 
the forces under his command, so do you, O lustrous 
ruler, reflect the presence around you of noble and 
brilliant leaders and scholars. And thus do the multitudes 
of people, like the rise of dawns, plan and prepare for 
the rise and progress of the land just as the producer 
master prays for the generous cloud and wishes for the 
health and age of life’s longevity. 


अक॑र्म ते स्वप॑सो अभूम ऋतम वस््रन्नुषसों विभातीः | 
अनूनमयिं पुरुधा सुश्चन्द्र देवस्य मरमू"जतश्चासु 
चक्षुः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Akarma te svapaso abhuma rtamavasrannusaso 
vibhatih. Anunamagnim purudha suscandram 
devasya marmrjatascaru caksuh. 


We act in service to you, O Lord Agni, giver of 
light and life to the world, by which alone we can be 
called good performers. The brilliant dawns, wearing 
the divine mantle of truth and showers of light, perfectly 
and variously adorn the fire-divine, perfect and glorious 
eye of the self-refulgent Lord of the universe, which is 
the sun. 


एता a अग्र उचथानि वेधोऽ वोचाम कवये ता जुंषस्व । 
उच्छो चस्व कृणुहि वस्य॑सो नो महो रायः पुरुवार प्र 
aati २०॥ 

20. Eta te agna ucathani vedho’vocama kavaye ta 


jJusasva. Ucchocasva krnuhi vasyaso no maho 
rayah puruvara pra yandhi. 


These are the words of thanks and praise we 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 21 


poets speak for you, Lord Omniscient Agni. Please to 
accept these, consider, shine and rise to reveal the light 
of your glory to our vision. Make us rich with the wealth 
of divinity. Lord universal friend of the many who 
choose, lead us to glorious honour and excellence in 
existence. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 3 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


आ वो राजानमध्वरस्य be होतारं सत्ययजं रोद॑स्योः | ST 
पुरा तनयित्नोर चित्ताद्धिरंण्यरूपमवंसे कृणुध्वम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i A vo rajanam-adhvarasya rudram hotaram satya- 
yajam rodasyoh. Agnim pura tanayitnora- 
cittaddhiranyarupam-avase krnudhvam. 


All ye people of the land, before the unexpected 
and inconceivable thunder and lightning, light the fire 
and, for the protection and advancement of your 
peaceful, non-violent yajnic social order in the midst of 
heaven and earth, appoint the golden gloried ruler, a 
very Rudra, saviour of the good, a terror for the evil, 
hota, a yajaka and not a grabber or hoarder, but one 
inviolably dedicated to truth and Dharma. 


अयं यो्निंश्चकृमा यं वयं ते जायेव पत्य॑ उशती Gara: | 
अर्वाचीनः परिवीतो नि षीदेमा उ ते स्वपाक प्रतीचीः ॥ २॥ 

Ayam yoniscakrma yam vayam te jayeva patya 
usati suvasah. Arvacinah parivito ni sidema u te 
svapaka praticth. 


This is the seat of office we create and offer to 
you. It is offered as a young loving wife dressed in her 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


22 RGVEDA 


best finery offers her love to her husband and protector. 
O ruler most modern, all round well provided, self made 
and self prepared, take this seat and see these are the 
people looking up to you. 


आश्रुण्वते अदृपिताय मन्म॑ नृचक्षसे सुमृव्टीकायं वेधः। 
देवाय शस्तिममू्ताय शंस ग्रावेव सोता मधुषुद्यमीव्े ॥ ३ ॥ 


of Asrnvate adrpitaya manma nrcaksase sumrlikaya 
vedhah. Devaya Sastim-amrtaya Samsa graveva 
sota madhusud yamile. 


I offer a hymn of praise and appreciation as an 
expression of my thought, O wise and virtuous ruler of 
the world, to you, brilliant, immortal and divinely 
blissful, who listen attentively and politely without pride 
and arrogance, watching the human situation all round 
in the interest of common good. Accept and approve of 
the hymn I present, be gracious as a cloud of showers, a 
maker of soma and a creator of honeyed joy. 


त्वं fala: रम्यां अगे अस्या ऋतस्य बोध्युतचित्स्वाधीः 1 
कदा त॑ उक्था सधमाद्यानि कदा भ॑वन्ति सख्या गृहे ते ॥।  ॥ 


4. Tvam cinnah samya agne asya rtasya bodhy- 
rtacit svadhth. Kada ta uktha sadhamadyani kada 
bhavanti sakhya grhe te. 


Agni, ruler of humanity, you know the truth and 
law of existence, you think freely and rightly too. Know 
the truth and character of this nation of ours. Let them 
know too of the truth and law of right knowledge and 
conduct for the sake of right action. When will there be 
proper and friendly discussions of yours and assemblies 
in your yajnic house of law and government? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 23 


कथा ह ageura त्वम॑गे कथा fea Wea कन्न set: 1 
कथा faara teed पृथिव्यै ब्रवः करदर्यम्णे कद्ध 
गाय।॥ ५॥ 


>. Katha ha tad varunaya tvamagne katha dive 
garhase kanna agah. Katha mitraya milhuse 
prthivyai bravah kadaryamne kad bhagaya. 


‘What is our sin, or crime or misconduct?” Agni, 
ruler of the world, when and why would you speak thus 
to Varuna, lord of justice and rectitude? to the lord of 
light and knowledge? to the bountiful? to the earth and 
the dear motherly woman? to the chief of law? to the 
man of power and prosperity? 


कद्िष्ण्यासु वृधसानो अग्रे कद्वाताय प्रत॑वसे शुभंये । 
परिज्मने नासत्याय क्षे ब्रवः कदग्ने रुद्रायं नुष्ने॥ ६॥ 


6. Kad dhisnyasu vrdhasano agne kad vataya 
pratavase Subhamye. Parijmane nasatyaya kse 
bravah kadagne rudraya nrghne. 


Agni, ruler of the world, when would you be 
growing with and among the intellectuals? And growing 
with and among them, when would you speak to and 
about the eminent in knowledge, strength, peace and 
good will, all round goers, truthful and the landed 
farmers? to the chief of justice about the killers of 
humanity? 


कथा महे पुष्टिं भराय॑ पूष्णे कटु द्राय सुम॑खाय हविर्दे | 
कद्विरष्णव उरुगायाय रेतो ब्रवः कदग्ने शर॑वे TES ॥ ७ ॥ 

a Katha mahe pustimbharaya pusne kad rudraya 
sumakhaya havirde. Kad visnava urugayaya reto 
bravah kadagne Sarave brhatyai. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


24 RGVEDA 


Agni, when and how would you speak to and 
about the great creator and producer for nourishment 
and growth, Pushan, to and about Rudra, destroyer of 
enemies, the generous yajaka, the giver of holy materials 
for yajna? How would you pray to Vishnu, universally 
celebrated lord sustainer of the world? Lord generous 
and peaceful at heart, how would you speak to and about 
the great forces of defence against violence and 
destruction? 


कथा शधीय मरुतांमृतायं कथा सूरे बुं हते पृच्छ्यमानः। 
प्रति ब्रवोऽ fora तुराय सार्धा feat जातवेदश्चि- 
कित्वान्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Katha sardhaya marutamrtaya katha sure brhate 
prcechyamanah. Prati bravo’ditaye turaya sadha 
divo jatavedascikitvan. 


Agni, O Jataveda, lord ruler and master of 
knowledge of things in existence, how would you speak 
to and about the sacred law of truth, about the forces 
swift as the winds? And when asked, what and how 
would you speak about the mighty great leaders bright 
as the sun among people? How would you speak to and 
about the excellent, abundant and inviolable sky? O 
master of knowledge, rising higher and higher in 
awareness, achieve the light, reaching unto the solar 
regions. 


ऋतेन॑ ऋतं निय॑तमीव्ठ आ गोरामा सचा मधुंमत्यक्वमंगे। 
कृष्णा सती रुश॑ता धासिनैषा जामर्येण पय॑सा पीपाय ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Rtena rtam niyatamila a4 gorama saca madhumat 
pakvamagne. Krsna sati rusata dhasinaisa jamar- 
yena payasa pipaya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 25 


Agni, O lord giver of the light and life of the 
world, I honour and respect the truth and law of 
existence by observance of the truth and law of life on 
earth as required and determined by the demands of 
life on earth and set out in the language of the earth, 
while I live on earth one with the honey sweets of the 
ripe and raw treasures of the earth. May the mother earth, 
being green and bright with nourishments, grow with 
food and drink for the sustenance of her children by the 
efforts of her children. 


ऋतेन हि ष्मा वृषभण्चिं दक्तः पुर्मौ अभिः पय॑सा yeas | 
अस्प॑न्दमानो अचरद्वयोधा वृष। शुक्रं दुदुहे पृषशनि- 
wet: WON 


10. Rtena hi sma vrsabhascidaktah puman agnih 
payasa prsthyena. Aspandamano acarad vayodha 
vrsa Sukram duduhe prsnirudhah. 


Sustained in tune by the truth of life and law of 
existence, nourished on food and drink from spaces 
above, the virile bull, manly man and lustrous Agni, 
creator of light and life on earth, ruler of the world, 
moves around with majesty, unagitated, bearing the 
dignity and vitality of health and age, replete with energy 
and generosity like the cloud, and distils the fire and 
lustre of life from the skies as milk from the mother 
cow. 


seers व्य॑सन्थिदन्तः समद्धिरसो नवन्त mPa: | 
शुनं नर: परि षदन्नुषासंमाविः स्व॑रभवच्नाते STU ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Rtenadrim vyasan bhidantah samangiraso 
navanta gobhih. Sunam narah pari sadannusasa- 
mavih svarabhavajjate agnau. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


26 RGVEDA 


Ye leaders of the world, by the force of Rtam, 
nature’s law, when the cosmic fire of energy is awake, 
then the roaring winds, breaking the cloud with their 
currents, rain down the showers, mankind on earth find 
peace and prosperity, and the light, riding the dawn, 
rises to view as the radiant sun. 


ऋतेन देवीर मृता अमरंक्ता अर्णोभिरापो मधुंमद्धिरये । वाजी 
न सर्गेषु प्रस्तुभानः प्र सदमित्स्रविंतवे दधन्युः ॥ १२॥ 


12. Rtena deviramrta amrkta arnobhirapo madhu- 
madbhiragne. Vaji na sargesu prastubhanah pra 
sadamit sravitave dadhanyuh. 


Agni, light of life, ruler of the world, by Rtam, 
force of eternal truth and nature’s law, do the celestial 
waters of life, immortal, unhurt, with currents of spatial 
oceans bearing honey sweets of life’s energy, ceaselessly 
flow on like a war horse flying on to battles, in order to 
move life on and on with energy without end or 
exhaustion. 


mT ned यक्षं सदमिद्धुरो गा मा वेशस्यं प्रमिनतो मापेः। 
मा Uda अनुंजोऋणं वेर्मा सख्युर्दश्चं रिपोर्भुजेम ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ma kasya yaksam sadmiddhuro ga ma vesasya 
praminato mapeh. Ma bhraturagne anrjorrnam 
verma sakhyurdaksam riporbhujema. 


Agni, giver of the light of intelligence, let us 
not go to the meeting place of a deceitful person, nor to 
the door of a violent grabber, nor take the debt or 
obligation of a crooked brother, and may we, we pray, 
never try to benefit from, much less depend on, the 
strength and expertise of an enemy in the garb of a 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 27 
friend. 


रक्षा णो अग्ने तव रक्षणेभी रारक्षाणः सुंमख प्रीणानः। 
प्रतिं ष्फुर वि सुज वीडवंहो जहि रक्षो महिं चिद्वावृधा- 
नम्‌॥ ९४॥ 


14. Raksa no agne tava raksanebhi raraksanah 
sumakha prinanah. Prati sphura vi ruja vidvanho 
Jahi rakso mahi cid vavrdhanam. 


Agni, ruler of the earth, blissful giver of 
happiness, all protector, presiding genius of yajna, social 
justice and noble conduct, protect us with all your 
methods and forces of protection and defence, shine 
and inspire us to good action, eliminate the blackest sin 
and hardest crime, destroy the wicked, even powerful 
ones and on the increase. 


uRnta सुमना अगे अरकैरिमान्त्स्पुंश मन्म॑भिः शूर 
वाजान्‌। उत ब्रह्माण्यद्धिरो जुषस्व सं ते शस्तिर्देवर्वाता 
जरेत ॥ १९५९ ॥ 


15. Ebhirbhava sumana agne arkair-imant-sprsa 
manmabhih sura vajan. Uta brahmanyangiro 
jusasva sam te Sastirdevavata jareta. 


Agni, giver of light and life, with these songs 
of prayer and these learned devotees, be pleased and 
happy at heart. Accept and approve of these dedicated 
people of thought and action. Brave and heroic leader 
dear as breath of life, accept and enjoy these gifts of 
homage and reverence. May this song of praise offered 
by the holy celebrants be pleasing to you and exalting. 


एता विश्वां विदुषे तुभ्यं वेधो नीथान्य॑यरे निण्या वचांसि । 
निवचना कवये काव्यान्यशंसिषं मतिधिर्विप्रं sae: 11.26 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


28 RGVEDA 


16. Eta visva viduse tubhyam vedho nithanyagne 
ninya vacamsi. Nivacana kavaye kavyanyasam- 
sisam matibhirvipra ukthaih. 


Agni, giver of life and light, lord of knowledge, 
vision and wisdom, leader, ruler, pioneer, all these songs 
of adoration, creative, deep and grave, meaningful and 
fruitful, fluent and poetic, are sincere expressions of 
the heart which I, inspired and moved to ecstasy, present 
to you, poet and scholar, with divine hymns of holiness 
in the company of the wise and dedicated celebrants. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 4 
Agni Rakshoha Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


कृणुष्व पाजः प्रसितिं न पृथ्वीं याहि राजेवामवां sh 
तष्वीमनु प्रसिति द्रूणानोऽ स्तासि विध्य॑ रक्षसस्तपिष्ठैः ॥ ९॥ 


1 Krnusva pajah prasitim na prthvim yahi rajeva- 
mavan ibhena. Trsvimanu prasitim drunano’s- 
tasi vidhya raksasastapisthaih. 


Arise, be strong and brilliant, go over and round 
the earth in orbit, spread your network over the dominion 
and, firm and powerful, move as a king by the elephant. 
Impetuous and terrible, shoot like a rocket all round 
wherever needed for thirsting and ensnared earth as it 
could be, and, like an archer as you are, fix the demons 
of violence with your blazing arrows. 


तवं ware आशुया प॑तन्त्यनुं स्पृश IAAT SIA: | 
तपूंष्यग्ने Wal पत ङ्घानसंन्दितो fa ga विष्वगुल्काः ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Tava bhramasa asuya patantyanu sprsa dhrsata 
sosucanah. Patumsyagne juhva patanganasam- 
dito vi srja visvagulkah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 4 29 


Your roving rockets whirl round impetuously. 
Shining and blazing with power and force, strike off 
the enemies wherever they be. Unhurt, whole and 
unopposed, shoot out all round burning rockets of 
defence like sparks of fire fed on ladlefuls of ghrta 
offered into the fire of the vedi. 


प्रति स्पशो वि da तूर्णितमो भवां पायुर्विशो अस्या 
अदब्धः । यो al दूरे अघशंसो यो अन्त्यग्ने माकिष्टे व्यथिरा 
दधर्षीत्‌॥३॥ ` 

Prati spaso vi srja rurnitamo bhava payurviso 
asya adabdhah. Yo no dure aghasamso yo antya- 
gne makiste vyathira dadharsit. 


Agni, brilliant ruler and blazing power, shoot 
out detectors, appoint detectives and spies, and send 
out ambassadors, be swift in action and response, and, 
bold, unhurtful and undeceived, be the protector and 
sustainer of this human nation, and whoever be the 
sinner or supporter of the wicked far or near us must 
not insult, impair or violate your rule and order. 


sen fas प्रत्या त॑नुष्व =a) frat ओषतात्तिग्महेते | यो नो 
अरातिं समिधान चक्रे नीचा तं धक्ष्यतसं न शुष्कम्‌।॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Udagne tistha pratya tanusva nyamitran osatat 
tigmahete. Yo no aratim samidhana cakre nica 
tam dhaksyatasam na Suskam. 


Agni, mighty and brilliant power, rise in flames 
and shine on, let the light spread around. O wielder of 
blazing weapons, burn off the unfriendly and the 
enemies. Shining and rising power, whoever creates 
enemies and causes adversity, burn down like a dry fibre 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


30 RGVEDA 
of flax. 


ऊर्ध्वो भ॑व प्रति विध्याध्यस्मदाविष्कुणुष्व दैव्यान्यग्ने । अवं 
स्थिरा त॑नुहि यातुजूनां जामिमजामिं प्र मुंणीहि शत्रंन्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


3: Urdhvo bhava prati vidhyadhyasmadaviskrnu-sva 
daivyanyagne. Ava sthira tanuhi yatujunam 
jJamimajamim pra mrnihi satrun. 

Rise high and shine there, having fixed the 
enemies far from us, and thus reveal the divine actions 
of your own and of the enlightened. Loosen and reduce 
the firm establishments of the gate crashers and the go- 
getters whether related or unrelated, and destroy the 
enemies of the order of enlightenment. 


aa जानाति सुमतिं य॑विष्ठ॒ य ईव॑ते ब्रह्मणे mata 
विश्वान्यस्मे सुदिनानि रायो द्युम्नान्यर्यो वि दुरो अभि 
द्यौ त्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Sa te janati sumatim yavistha ya ivate brahmane 
gatumairat. Visvanyasmai sudinani rayo dyumna- 
nyaryo vi duro abhi dyaut. 

Agni, most youthful power of enlightenment, 
that person knows and enjoys your love and good will 
who directs his voice and actions toward the magnificent 
lord supreme of the universe, who dedicates all his 
happy days and his wealth and good fortune to his 
service, and who, being master of himself and his 
fortune, wide opens and lights up his doors for his 
devotees. 


Waa अस्तु Ba: सुदानुर्यस्त्वा नित्येन हविषा य sae: | 
पिप्रीषति स्व आयुषि दुरोणे विश्वेद॑स्मै सुदिना सास॑- 
दिष्टिः ॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 4 31 


7. Sedagne astu subhagah sudanuryastva nityena 
havisa ya ukthaih. Piprisati sva ayusi durone 
Visvedasmai sudina sasadistih. 


Agni, refulgent lord ruler of the world, he would 
be highly prosperous and generously charitable who 
loves to serve you with unfailing oblations of havi and 
songs of praise and prayer. And surely for such a person, 
in his own life, within his own home, all his days would 
be happy and his yajna and all desired acts would be 
fruitful. 


अचीपि ते सुमतिं घोष्यर्वाक्सं त वावातां जरतापियं गीः। 
स्वश्वास्त्वा सुरथा मर्जयेमाऽस्मे क्षत्राणि धारयेरनु 
द्यून्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Arcami te sumatim ghosyarvak sam te vavata 
jaratamiyam gth. Svasvastva suratha marjaye- 
ma’sme ksatrani dharayeranu dyun. 


Agni, mighty ruler of the world, I pray for your 
favour and blessings of love and good will. May these 
words of my favourite voice address you and this 
adoration of mine glorify you. Blest with noble horses 
and beautiful chariots, may we exalt you, and may you, 
day by day, hold and sustain our social order and its 
systems of governance and administration. 


इह त्वा yat च॑ रे दुप त्मन्दोर्षावस्तर्दीदि वांसमनु द्यून्‌ । 
क्री्यन्तस्त्वा सुमनसः स्पेमाऽभि द्युम्ना त॑स्थिवांसो जना- 
नाम्‌॥ ९॥ 


9. Tha tva bhurya caredupa tman dosavastardi- 
divamsamanu dyun. Krilantastva sumanasah 
sapema’bhi dyumna tasthivamso jananam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


32 RGVEDA 


Let man amply and wholly serve you, refulgent 
ruler of the world, sincerely by heart and soul, day and 
night, day after day. Let us all, guardians of the total 
wealth and honour of the people, rejoicing at heart as 
playing with arms for defence of the nation, serve Agni, 
father protector of humanity. 


यस्त्वा स्वश्व॑ः सुहिरण्यो sig उपयाति aduar रथेन । 
तस्य॑ त्राता भ॑वसि तस्य सखा aed आतिथ्यमानुषग्जु- 
MALU ९०॥ 


10. = Yastva svasvah suhiranyo agna upaydati vasumata 
ratheta. Tasya trata bhavasi tasya sakha yasta 
atithyamanusag jujosat. 


Whoever possessing noble horses and golden 
gold approaches you by a chariot loaded with treasures 
of wealth, and offers service and hospitality readily and 
ceaselessly without reserve, without question, you 
accept and own as a friend, protect him as a guardian 
and save him as a redeemer. 


महो रुजामि बन्धुता वचोधिस्तन्मां पितुर्गोतिंमादन्विंयाय। 
त्वं नो अस्य वच॑सणश्चिकिद्ि होत॑र्यविष्ठ सुक्रतो 
दमूंनाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Maho rujami bandhuta vacobhistanma piturgota- 
madanviyaya. Tvam no asya vacasascikiddhi 
hotaryavistha sukrato damunah. 


I shatter great evils and open deep mysteries by 
kinship with Divinity and words of eternity which I 
inherit from my father guardian who commands all 
knowledge of existence and the language of 
omniscience. Agni, cosmic yajaka, ever youthful light, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 4 33 


master of universal dynamics, self controlled controller, 
give us the vision and knowledge of the ultimate reality 
and the Word imperishable. 


अस्वप्रजस्तरण॑यः सुशेवा अतंनद्रासोऽ वृका अश्र॑मिष्ठाः | 
ते पायवः सश्य॑ञ्चो निषद्याऽग्रे तव॑ नः पान्त्वमूर ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Asvapnajastaranayah suseva atandraso’vrka 
asramisthah. Te payavah sadhryanco nisadya 
ene tava nah pantvamura. 


Agni, life of life, light eternal, universal 
intelligence, your streams of life, your rays of light and 
waves of cosmic energy, sleepless, continuous, gracious, 
relentless, inviolent, and indefatigable, which ever flow 
integrated and together may, we pray, bless our yajnic 
home and give us a fresh lease of life every moment. 


ये पायवो! मामतेयं a अग्ने पश्य॑न्तो अन्धं दुरितादरक्षन्‌ । 
Tal तान्त्सुकृतों विश्ववेदा दिप्सन्त इद्विपवो नाहं 
देभुः ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ye payavo mamateyam te agne pasyanto andham 
durita-daraksan. Raraksa tantsukrto visvaveda 
dipsanta id ripavo naha debhuh. 


Agni, lord of universal knowledge and power, 
all those defensive powers of yours which, ever watchful 
and protective, save people from sin and protect them 
from evil and crime as their own kith and kin who cannot 
by themselves see, all those holy yajnic powers of noble 
action, O lord, protect and promote, so that the 
repressive enemies may not be able to terrorise the poor 
and the ignorant. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


34 RGVEDA 


raat वयं dea eater प्रणीत्यश्याम वार्जान्‌। उभा 
शंसा सूदय सत्यतातेऽनुष्ठुया कुणुद्यह्याण ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Tvayad vayam sadhanyastvotastava pranitya- 
Syama vajan. Ubha samsa sudaya satyatate 
*‘nusthuya krnuhyahrayana. 


Agni, ruler of the world, defender of truth and 
holiness, may we, protected by you and blest with 
knowledge and power, follow your guidance and noble 
policy and win the honour and excellence of the world. 
Guide aright, order and control both the eulogiser and 
the calumniator far and near, and, with appropriate 
measures, take us out of timidity and make us bold in 
defence of truth and rectitude without embarrassment 
or hesitation. 


अया ते अगे समिधां विधेम प्रति स्तोमं शस्यमानं ere । 
दहाशसो Cara: पाह्य १ स्मान्द्रुहो निदो मित्रमहो अव- 
द्यात्‌॥ ९५॥ 


15. Aya te agne samidha vidhema prati stomam 
Sasyamanam grbhaya. Dahasaso raksasah 
pahyasman druho nido mitramaho avadyat. 


Agni, greatest friend, adorable lord and ruler of 
the world, with this lighted fuel and enlightened 
contribution to the yajna of the social and cosmic order, 
we offer the song of homage to you. Be gracious to 
accept it. Burn down the revilers and the evil 
perpetrators of destruction and protect us against the 
jealousy, calumny and scandalous actions of the 
enemies. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 35 


Mandala 4/Sukta 5 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


वैश्वा नराय Hage सजोषाः कथा दाशेमाग्नये बृ हद्धाः | 
अनूनेन बृहता वक्षथेनोप स्तभायदुपमिन्न रोध॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


if Vaisvanaraya milhuse sajosah katha dasema- 
gnaye brhadbhah. Anunena brhata vaksathe-nopa 
stabhayadupaminna rodhah. 


How shall we, in accord with Agni, happy and 
rejoicing, offer homage, service and support to the great, 
generous Vaishvanara Agni, vital fire sustaining the 
earth, leader and ruler of humanity who, with his awful 
might and unbounded reach, mighty lustrous as he is, 
holds up this vast world like a column bearing the 
burden of a mighty structure. 


मा निन्दत य इमां मह्यं रातिं देवो ददौ मत्यीय स्वधावान्‌ । 
पाकाय गृत्सो अमतो विचेता वैश्वानरो नृत॑मो यहयो 
ST: UU 


2 Ma nindata ya imam ratim devo dadau martydya 
svadhavan. Pakaya grtso amrto viceta vaisvanaro 
nrtamo yahvo agnih. 


Never blame, censure or revile Vaishvanara 
Agni, self-refulgent and generous self-existent lord of 
his infinite wealth and power, who has given us this 
great gift of food, energy and wealth of abundant nature 
for the simple, growing, maturing world of mortal 
humanity, Agni, whois self-revealing through the beauty 
of his own creation, immortal, omniscient teacher, best 
leader of men and awfully great. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


36 RGVEDA 


सामं द्विबर्हा महिं frau: सहस्त्र॑रेता वृषभस्तुविंष्मान्‌ । 
पदं न indies विविद्वानिर्महयं प्रद बोचन्मनीषाम्‌।॥। ३ ॥ 


Sy Sama dvibraha mahi tigmabhrstih sahasrareta 
vrsabhastuvisman. Padam na gorapagulham 
vividvan-agnir-mahyam predu vocan-manisam. 


Agni, refulgent lord immanent in earth and 
heaven, commanding blazing heat and light, abundant 
a thousandfold, generous and virile as sun and cloud, 
mighty powerful, master of knowledge, may, we pray, 
speak to me of the great and deep knowledge and karma 
pertaining to earth and heaven, body and soul, deep as 
the mystery of sun and stars. 


Wat अथिर्बभसत्तिग्मजंम्भस्तपि छेन शोचिषा यः Eee: | 
प्रये पिनन्ति वरुणस्य धाम॑ परिया यित्रस्य चेत॑तो 
धुवाणि ux ॥ 


4. Pra tan agnirbabhasat tigmajambhastapisthena 
Socisa yah suradhah. Pra ye minanti varunasya 
dhama priya mitrasya cetato dhruvani. 


May Agni, blazing lord of power and stern rule 
of law, commanding the wealth, power and prosperity 
of the world with his splendour and magnificence, crush 
with the heat of his power and force of his justice the 
dear favourites and strongholds of those who sabotage 
and destroy the stability of the systems and institutions 
of the noble and friendly powers of enlightenment, 
justice, peace, unity and cooperation. 


अभ्रातरो न योष॑णो व्यन्त॑ः पतिरिपो न जन॑यो दुरेवाः । 
पापासः सन्तों अनृता असत्या इदं पदमंजनता गभी- 
रम्‌॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 37 


a Abhrataro na yosano vyantah patiripo na janayo 
durevah. Papasah santo anrta asatya idam 
padamajanata gabhiram. 


As maidens without brothers and guardians to 
care for them, as wives who deceive their husbands, go 
astray from the right path and follow a wrong course of 
life, so the misguided people, self-deceived evil doers, 
false and untrue, go astray and, following the wrong 
course, create this hellish state of life in society. 


इदं मे अग्ने किय॑ते पावकाऽमिंनते गुरुं भारंन मन्मं। 
gees धृषता ग॑भीरं ag पृष्ठं प्रय॑सा ससरधातु ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Idam me agne kiyate pavaka’minate gurum 
bharam na manma. Brhad dadhatha dhrsata 
gabhiram yahvam prstham prayasa saptadhatu. 


Agni, master of knowledge and power, purifier 
of body, mind and soul, I pray, bear and bring for me 
sevenfold knowledge of matter, mind and motion, 
knowledge which is universal, deep and grave, greatly 
powerful and wide in range and application. Bless me 
with the knowledge along with the gift of love and 
courage as a burden of great responsibility. I assure you 
I am a humble seeker and I shall bear the burden well 
without arrogance and violence. 


तमिन्वेरेव Gat संपानमभि क्रत्वा पुनती eftfertvar: | 
ससस्य ata चारू पृषश्नेरगर रुप आरुपितं जबारु ॥ ७॥ 


{+ Taminnveva samana samanamabhi kratva punati 
dhitirasyah. Sasasya carmannadhi caru prsne- 
ragre rupa arupitam jabaru. 

That equal, beautiful, constant and vital zone 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


38 RGVEDA 


of light and heat of Vaishvanara Agni fixed round and 
over the surface of the dormant and colourful earth, 
separated and condensed from the solar sphere in earlier 
times before life emerged, may our noble intelligence, 
purifying and sanctifying us by the light of the Lord, 
reach and reveal through our holy acts of study, prayer 
and holy action. 


प्रवाच्यं वच॑सः किं मे अस्य गुहा हितमुप॑ं निणिग्वंदन्ति। 
यदुसिर्याणामप वारिव ब्रन्पातिं प्रियं रुपो अग्रं पदं 
वेः॥ ८. ॥ 


8. Pravacyam vacasah kim me asya guha hitamupa 
ninig vadanti. Yadusriyanamapa variva vran pati 
priyam rupo agram padam veh. 


What is worthy of being proclaimed, hidden in 
the secret cave of this word of mine, and what the 
scholars and visionaries, purifying and sanctifying, 
mysteriously whisper closely to you is That Orb of light 
and heat which, like a liquid zone of vapours, covers, 
vitalises, sustains and reveals the dear, first, highest life 
and beauty of the dawn, of cows and the flying earth. 


इदमु त्यन्महिं महामनीं कं aefern aaa पूर्व्यं गौः | 
ऋतस्य पदे अधि drat गुहां रघुष्यद्रघुयद्विवेद ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Idamu tyanmahi mahamanikam yadusviya sacata 
purvyam gauh. Rtasya pade adhi didyanam guha 
raghusyad raghuyad viveda. 
This same orb of light and zone of vitality, 
greatest of the great, glorious, ancient and eternal, 


blazing over the regions of the waters of space and the 
facts and laws of existence, which the productive earths 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 39 


serve and follow and join as partners of the system, 
which vibrates in the depths of the heart and vibrates in 
the depths of the soul, I know, you know, all perceive. 


अधं द्युतानः पित्रोः सचासाऽम॑नुत गुह्यं चारु पृष्नेः। 
मातुष्यदे परमे अन्ति षद्रोरवृंष्णः शोचिषः प्रय॑तस्य 
Rat go ॥ 


10. Adha dyutanah pitroh sacasa’manuta guhyam 
caru prsneh. Matuspade parame anti sad gor- 
vrsnah socisah prayatasya jihva. 


And the light shines between heaven and earth, 
one with all, vibrating in the highest regions of Mother 
Nature at the closest and within, directly watching and 
knowing the raining clouds, the blazing sun, and the 
blowing wind and flowing waters. All ye men and 
women, know that lovely and wondrous mystery of the 
spirit of colourful reality of existence hidden in the cave 
of the heart. 


ऋतं वोचे नम॑सा पृच्छ्यमानस्तवाशस। जातवेदो यदीदम्‌ | 
त्वमस्य श्च॑यसि ug विष्वं दिवि यदु द्रविणं यत्पंथि- 
व्याम्‌॥ ९९॥ 


11. Rtam voce namasa prchhyamanastavasasa 
jatavedo yadidam. Tvamasya ksayasi yaddha 
visvam divi yadu dravinam yat prthivyam. 


O Jataveda, omniscient and omnipresent Agni, 
if I were asked, I would speak the truth in all humility 
by your grace: All this that is, all that exists in heaven, 
all that is in and on earth, all that is the wealth, power 
and excellence, all is yours, it abides in you, you pervade 
it all, you govern it all and, ultimately, you absorb it all 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


40 RGVEDA 
by drawing in and reducing it to the point of zero. 


fee नो अस्य द्रविंणं ag ta fa al वोचो जातवेदण्चि- 
कित्वान्‌। गुहाध्व॑नः परमं यत्नो अस्य रेकु पदं न Fart 
अग॑न्म ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Kimno asya dravinam kaddha ratnam vi no 10८0 
jatavedascikitvan. Guhadhvanah paramam yanno 
asya reku padam na nidana aganma. 


O Jataveda, you know all and everything in 
existence. Speak to us and guide us: Of all this world, 
what wealth is ours? What jewels? Speak to us of that, 
so that going by the light of divine vision and 
intelligence we may achieve the best and reach the 
highest goal that is ours, and we at the end don’t have 
to go empty handed, reviled and exposed. 


का मयदि। वयुना ee वाममच्छा गमेम रघवो न वाजंम्‌। 
कदा नो देवीर des पल्ली: सूरो वर्णेन ततनन्नुषासंः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Ka maryada vayuna kaddha vamamaccha 
gamema raghavo na vajam. Kada no devira- 
mrtasya patnih suro varnena tatanannusasah. 


What are the rules of the game of karma? What 
ultimate bounds? Speak to us, enlighten us: When could 
we, racing like a courser, moving like waves of energy, 
creditably reach our cherished goal? When would the 
sun, the dawns and the celestial vibrations of 
immortality like life-giving nurses inspire us with light 
and lustre to rise to perfection? 


अनिरेण वच॑सा फल्ग्वेन udielt कृधुनातुपासंः | अधा 
ते अग्रे किमिहा व॑दन्त्यनायुधास आस॑ता सचन्ताम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 41 


14. Anirena vacasa phalgvena pratityena krdhuna- 
trpasah. Adha te agne kimiha vadantyanayudhasa 
asata sacantam. 


Agni, light and spirit of knowledge and master 
of the language of knowledge, listeners remain 
unsatisfied, their thirst for knowledge unquenched, with 
lifeless, unsubstantial, ambiguous and deficient words. 
Then what do the speakers speak of you, or to you, or 
about you, here? Being like warriors without arms, they 
should come to you, speakers as well as listeners, for 
light, knowledge and words for effective and living 
communication. 


अस्य fara eae वृष्णो वसोरनींकं दम आ 
रुरोच । SwgA: सुदृशीकरूपः श्चितिर्न राया deat 
अद्यौत्‌ ९५ ॥ 


15. Asya Sriye samidhanasya vrsno vasoranikam 
dama व ruroca. Rusad vasanah sudrstkarupah 
ksitirna raya puruvaro adyaut. 


For the expression of the grace and majesty of 
this Agni, lord of light and ruler of the world, bright 
and blazing, generous, home and haven of all like 
mother earth, his force and splendour shines in his home. 
And he himself, refulgent giver of radiance, magnificent 
in form, treasure home and universal giver of heavenly 
and earthly gifts for all, shines with regal magnificence 
and wealth of the world like mother earth shining with 
the greenery of her abundance and generosity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


42 RGVEDA 


Mandala 4/Sukta 6 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


ऊर्ध्वं ऊ षु णो अध्वरस्य होतरग्ने fas देवताता यजीयान्‌ । 
त्वं हि विशुव॑मभ्यसि मन्म प्र वेधसंज्चित्तिरसि मनी- 
BLN ९॥ 


1. Urdhva ॥ su no adhvarasya hotaragne tistha 
devatata yajtyan. Tvam hi visvamabhyasi manma 
pra vedhasascit tirasi manisam. 


Agni, lord of light, ruler of the world, cosmic 
yajamana, sit on top of our yajna of love and non- 
violence among the divine yajakas of nature and 
humanity. You alone know the world and all our 
thoughts, intentions and will, and you, at the heart of 
all performers, comprehend and transcend the 
knowledge, intelligence and awareness of the scholar. 


अमूरो होता न्य॑सादि विक्ष्व rd at विदथेषु प्रचेताः | 
ऊर्ध्वं भानुं संवितेवा॑श्चन्मेतेव धूमं स्त॑भायदुप द्याम्‌ ॥ २॥ 
2. Amuro hota nyasadi viksvagnirmandro vidathesu 


pracetah. Urdhvam bhanum savitevasrenmeteva 
dhumam stabhayadupa dyam. 

Agni, all wise, universal yajamana, receiver and 
giver, creator of joy, brilliant in knowledge, sits and 
abides among the people in their yajnic social 
endeavours, diffuses the light and fragrance of yajna 
above close to the heavens like the sun and, like a builder 
and a column, holds the dark away. 


यता सुंजूणीं रातिनीं घृताची प्रदक्चिणिदेवतातिमुराणः | 
उदु स्वरुर्नवजा नाक्रः पश्वो अनक्ति सुधितः सुमेकः ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 6 43 


a Yata sujurni ratini ghrtacit pradaksinid devata- 
timuranah. Udu svarurnavaja nakrah pasvo 
anakti sudhitah sumekah. 


The night is come on her round vibrating with 
the wealth of rest and peace, applying a soothing balm 
to the hours of holy time and ushering in the approach 
of dawn, and the sun, harbinger of fresh energy, new 
born like a baby, self-proclaiming and enlightening the 
world, rising fast, watching all, shining beautiful, 
showering the nectar of soma, anoints the morning time 
of the day. 


स्तीर्णे बर्हिषि समिधाने अग्रा ऊर्ध्वो steaesfoparonr 
start पर्यिः पशुपा न होता fafasadta प्रदिवं 
उराणः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Stirne barhisi samidhane agna urdhvo adhvaryur- 
jJujusano asthat. Paryagnih pasupa na hota 
trivistyeti pradiva uranah. 

The sacred grass is spread over the vedi, the 
fire is lit and rises, the adhvaryu, chief priest organiser, 
is up and doing, having started the yajna. Agni, the sun, 
like the shepherd of the waking world, celestial yajaka, 
goes over the three regions of heaven, earth and sky 
radiating the light and illuminating the world. 


परि त्मना पितद्भुरेति होताभ्रर्मन्द्रो मधुवचा szarat । 
द्रव॑न्त्यस्य वाजिनो न शोका भयन्ते विश्वा भुव॑ना 
Tauren ५॥ 


a, Pari tmna mitadrureti hota’ gnirmandro madhu- 
vaca rtava. Dravantyasya vajino na soka bha- 
yante visva bhuvana yadbhrat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


44 RGVEDA 


Agni, performer of yajna, happy and 
exhilarating, honey sweet of expression, moves and 
expands at its own self-controlled speed and will, 
keeping within the laws of existence. The rays of its 
light and the flames of fire rise and radiate like the waves 
of energy, and when it shines and blazes, all the worlds 
in existence feel the pressure of its force and power. 


भद्रा a अगे स्वनीक सन्दृग्योरस्य॑ सतो विषुणस्य are: | 
न यत्ते शोचिस्तम॑सा वर॑न्त न ध्वस्मान॑स्तन्वीडे रेप आ 


धुं: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Bhadra te agne svanika samdrg ghorasya 5८410 
visunasya caruh. Na yat te Socistamasa varanta 
na dhvasmanas-tanvirepa a dhuh. 


Agni, lord blissful of light, love and justice, 
commanding divine force and power, fearsome, 
eternally true and manifesting in infinite variety of the 
world of change, equal, kind and gracious is your eye 
by which you watch every living being. No evil forces 
can cover with darkness the light that is yours, nor can 
any devil and destroyer attribute any sin or smear or 
partiality to your body of law and justice. 


नयस्य सातुर्जनिंतोरर्वारि न मातरापितरा नू चिंदिष्टौ | अधां 
मित्रो न सुधितः पावको ३ऽगिर्दीदाय मानुंषीषु विश्च ॥ ७ ॥ 
fe Na yasya saturjanitoravari na matarapitara nu 


cidistau. Adha mitro na sudhitah pavako’gnir- 
didaya manusisu viksu. 


Agni is the generous giver whose gifts cannot 
be denied or hidden as the gifts of father and mother, 
too, toward fulfilment of life’s desire cannot be denied 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 6 45 


since Agni as a friend, blazing with light and glowing 
with generosity, blissful and sanctifying, shines among 
the people over everything that concerns humanity. 


द्विर्यं पञ्च जीज॑नन्त्संवसानाः स्वसारो sii मानुषीषु विक्षु । 
उषलध॑मथर्यो ३ न दन्तं शुक्रं स्वासं परशुं न तिग्मम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Dviryam panca jijanantsamvasanah 5145610 
agnim manusisu viksu. Usarbudhamatharyo na 
dantam Sukram svasam parasum na tigmam. 


Twice do the five classes of people among all 
human communities, living happily together, moving 
on together like running streams and working together 
like fingers of the hand, kindle and raise Agni, vital 
energy waking up at dawn, voracious, blazing bright 
and beautiful, and thunderous as a bolt against darkness 
and suffering. 


तव त्ये अग्रे हरितो geren रोहितास ऋज्वञ्चः Cased: | 
अरुषासो वृष॑ण ऋलुमुष्का आ देवतांतिमहन्त दस्माः ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Tava tye agne harito ghrtasna rohitasa rjvancah 
svancah. Arusaso vrsana rjumuska a devatatim- 
ahvanta dasmah. 

Agni, ruling power of light and liberality, those 
rainbow colours of your light and seven streams of 
energy are replete with the grace and power of ghrta, 
red with the passion of life, straight and simple, natural 
and free, bright, generous, strong and right, destroyers 
of evil and harbingers of the benedictions of Divinity. 


ये ह त्ये ते सह॑माना अयासंस्त्वेषासों अगे अर्चयश्चर॑न्ति। 
श्येनासो न दवसनासो अर्थ" तुविष्वणसो मारुतं न 
र्धः WON 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


46 RGVEDA 


10. Ye ha tye-te sahamana aydasas-tvesaso agne 
arcayascaranti. Syenaso na duvasanaso artham 
tuvisvanaso marutam na Ssardhah. 


Agni, ruling power of the world, your flames of 
fire, blazing rays of light and electric waves of energy 
are patient and forbearing, yet challenging and 
victorious, awful and deeply perceptive and penetrative. 
Instant in action, they fall upon their object like falcons 
from the sky, and their force is like that of a roaring 
storm of wind shears. 


अकारि ब्रह्मं समिधान तुभ्यं शंसात्युक्थं यज॑ते व्यु धाः। 
होतारमभिं मनुषो नि षेदुर्नमस्यन्तं उशिजः शंसमायोः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Akari brahma samidhana tubhyam samsatyu- 
ktham yajate vyu dhah. Hotaram-agnim manuso 
ni sedur-namasyanta usijah Samsam-ayoh. 

Sung is the song of prayer and praise for you, O 
lord refulgent, the yajaka raises his voice in adoration 
which, pray, graciously accept for the good of the 
devotee, and bring him the object of his desire. Let 
people, loving and inspired, bearing fragrant homage 
with humility, come and sit round the vedi in worship 
of Agni, universal yajamana, loved and admired by 
humanity. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 7 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


अयपिह प्र॑थमो धायि धातृथिर्होता यजिष्ठो अध्वरेष्वीङ्य॑ः। 
यमप्र॑वानो भृग॑वो विसुरुचुर्वनिंषु चित्रं विभ्वं विशोविशो ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 7 47 


im Ayamiha prathamo dhayi dhatrbhirhota yajistho 
adhvaresvidyah. Yamapnavano bhrgavo viruru- 
curvanesu citram vibhvam viSevise. 


This Agni here is the first and foremost power 
felt, lighted, installed and glorified by the pioneers of 
knowledge and yajnic action. It is the first performer of 
the cosmic yajna of creation, most adorable, worshipped 
in yajnas and all other programmes of love and non- 
violent development. The same wonderful and all 
embracing light and power, men of science and Divinity 
blest with descendants and disciples develop and glorify 
in the forests and every household for the benefit of 
every community. 


a कदा त॑ आनुषग्भुवं देवस्य चेतनम्‌ । 
अधा हि त्वां जगृशिरे मतसो विक्ष्वीङ्य॑म्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Agne kada ta anusag bhuvad devasya cetanam. 
Adha hi tva jagrbhrire martaso viksvidyam. 


O Lord, when would people be in tune with the 
divine light, omniscience and generosity of yours in their 
consciousness? And when would the mortals hold your 
presence as adorable in every moment, in every thought 
and action, in every home? 


seals विचेतसं पश्य॑न्तो द्यामिव cater: 1 
विश्वेषामध्वराणां हस्कतरिं दमेदमे ॥३॥ 
Rtavanam vicetasam pasyanto dyamiva strbhih. 
Visvesamadhvaranam haskartaram damedame. 
When would the mortals in every home adore 


the universal Agni, watching and realising in yajna the 
presence of the lord of the order of universal law, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


48 RGVEDA 


commanding the cosmic intelligence of existence and 
lighting up all the yajnas of the world in evolutionary 
development with vital fire as he lights up the heavens 
with stars? 


आशुं दूतं विवस्व॑तो विश्वा यश्चंर्षणीर भि । 
आ ay: केतुमायवो भृग॑वाणं विशोविशो ॥ ४॥ 


4. Asum dutam vivasvato visva yascarsanirabhi. 
A jabhruh ketumayavo bhrgavanam viSevise. 


The one that sustains all people of the world, 
that vital fire, instant carrier of sunlight, the very sign 
of life, maturing everything existent, the people of the 
earth and their descendants, when would it be received 
and installed in every home? 


तमीं होर्तारमानुषक्छ्चिकित्वांसं नि षेदिरे । 
रण्वं पावकशोचिषं यजिष्ठं सप्त धाम॑भिः ।॥ ५॥ 


5. Tamim hotaramanusak cikitvamsam ni sedire. 
Ranvam pavakasocisam yajistham sapta dhama- 
bhih. 


Fully and appropriately they install, maintain 
and sit by that Agni, receiver and giver of gifts in yajna, 
enlightening, bright and happy, drying, maturing and 
vitalising things like light and fire, most lovable and 
adorable. They maintain, serve and benefit from it seven 
ways through five senses, five pranas, and mind and 
intellect, and worship the power in every home of every 
community. 


तं शश्व॑तीषु मातृषु वन आ वीतमरभ्रिंतम्‌। 
चित्रं सन्तं गुहा हितं सुवेदं कूचिदर्थिन॑म्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 7 49 


6. Tam Sasvatisu matrsu vana व vitamasritam. 
Citram santam guha hitam suvedam kucidar- 
thinam. 


That Agni, present in permanent sources, in 
forests, immanent everywhere, independent and free, 
wonderful as hidden in a cave, knowledgeable and 
deeply meaningful, they maintain and serve. 


ससस्य यद्वियुंता सस्मिन्रुध्रुतस्य धामत्रणयंन्त देवाः | 
महो अभिर्नम॑सा रातदह॑व्यो वेर॑ध्वराय सदमिदृतावां ॥ ७॥ 


ie Sasasya yad viyuta sasminnudhannrtasya dhaman 
ranayanta devah. Mahan agnirnamasa ratahavyo 
veradhvaraya sadamidrtava. 


Far from sleep, the bounties of nature rejoice in 
the entire spaces of the skies and over the celebrations 
of yajna. We pray that the great Agni, light and lord of 
yajna, fed on offerings and rich in gifts, commanding 
the laws of truth and showers of bliss may pervade our 
home for the performance and completion of yajna. 


ated दूत्यानि विद्धानुभे अन्ता रोद॑सी संचिकित्वान्‌। 
दूत ईयसे प्रदिव उराणो विदुष्टरो दिव आरोधनानि ॥ ८ ॥ 


Veradhvarasya dutyani vidvanubhe anta rodasi 
samcikitvan. Duta tyase pradiva urano vidustaro 
diva arodhanani. 


Agni, omnipresent lord of yajna fire, you know 
the motions and vibrations of yajna rising and pervading 
in both earth and skies since, being carrier of the 
fragrance, ancient and all mobile, inviolable and 
unconquerable, you rise and reach even the heights and 
caverns of secret heavens. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


50 RGVEDA 


कृष्णं त एम रुशतः पुरो भाश्च॑रिष्ण्वपैर्चिं्वपुंषामिदेकम्‌। 
यदप्र॑वीता दध॑ते ह गर्भः सद्यश्चिंज्नातो भवसीदु दूतः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Krsnam ta ema rusatah puro bhas-carisnvar- 
cirvapusamidekam. Yadapravita dadhate ha 


garbham sadyascijjato bhavasidu dutah. 


Let us know the motive force and paths of your 
brilliant light, both centripetal and centrifugal, the light 
and fire moving ahead, all round, blazing bright, unique 
among all forms of light. Just as an unpregnated female 
receives and carries the new embryo, so held in the 
unkindled vedi you light up immediately on ignition 
and rise to the heights as carrier of flames and fragrance. 


सद्यो जातस्य TEMAS यदस्य वातो! अनुवाति शोचिः। 
वृणक्ति तिग्मामंतसेषु, frei स्थिरा चिदन्ना दयते वि 
जम्भः ९०॥ 


10. Sadyo jatasya dadrsanamojo yadasya 1410 
anuvati Socih. Vrnakti tigmamatasesu jihvam 
sthira cidanna dayate vi jambhaih. 


The light and lustre of the flames of this Agni 
instantly risen becomes worth seeing when the wind 
fans its flames and spreads the blaze into the forests 
and uproots strong and firm trees and, with the flames 
as jaws it crushes and devours the strong as food. And 
when with the breeze and vital heat it fans the vegetation 
with its currents, it protects, matures and provides the 
foods for life. 


तुषु यदन्ना तुषुणां aaat TS दूतं कृणुते यह्वो अभिः । वात॑स्य 
afte स॑चते निजुर्वन्नाशं न वाजयते हिन्वे अवी ॥ १९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 8 51 


11. Trsu yadanna trsuna vavaksa trsum dutam krnute 
yahvo agnih. Vatasya melim sacate nirjuva- 
nnasum na vajayate hinve arva. 


Mighty Agni, fire and energy, fast and quick, 
speedily bears and brings food, and functions as instant 
carrier of communications. Running and rising fast, it 
joins the company of the winds and, like a galloping 
horse and current of energy, it travels over vast distances. 
I invoke Agni (for light, food and communications). 


Mandala 4/Sukta 8 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


दूतं al विश्ववेदसं हव्यवाहममर्त्यम्‌ | 
यजिष्ठमृञ्जसे गिरा ॥ ९॥ 


ie Dutam vo visvavedasam havyavahamamartyam. 
Yajisthamriijase gira. 


O scholar and master of the science of fire and 
energy, with your words and thought you study and 
develop the power of Agni, carrier of communications, 
all round operative in the universe, bearer of food and 
fragrances, imperishable, and most creative, productive, 
cooperative and valuable catalytic agent of the natural 
and human world. O men and women of the world, the 
scientist develops it for you all. 


a fe daar वसुधितिं vet आरोध॑नं fea: 
स ear एह व॑श्चति ॥ २॥ 


pa Sa hi veda vasudhitim mahan arodhanam divah. 
Sa devan eha vaksati. 


Ye men and women of the world, that knower 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


52 RGVEDA 


alone knows Agni, treasure hold of heavenly light and 
divine beneficence of universal wealth. That Agni is 
great, that alone brings us here the light and graces of 
nature and divinity. 


स वेद देव आनमं cat ऋतायते दमे। 
दातिं प्रियाणि चिद्धसु।॥ ३॥ 


2 Sa veda deva Gnamam devan rtayate dame. 
Dati priyani cid vasu. 


That brilliant scholar knows the operative 
powers of nature and knows how to respect and value 
them. He inspires the learned and noble people, and he 
energises and moves nature’s gifts for the creation of 
wealth and power in the house of yajna. Agni thus 
bestows the cherished gifts of wealth and comfort for 
the good life. 


स होता सेड्‌ दूत्यं चिकित्वाँ अन्तरीयते | 
fast आरोधंनं fea: ४॥ 


4. Sa hota sedu dutyam cikitvan antartyate. 
Vidvan arodhanam divah. 


Agni is Chikitvan, all immanent brilliant 
presence that wields and holds and knows. It is the 
yajamana as well as deity of the yajamana, which 
internally energises all motion, communication and 
activity of life and nature. The knower knows the 
treasure hold of light, energy and universal intelligence 
in concentration as well as in expansion. 


ते स्याम ये अग्रये ददाशुर्हव्यदातिभिः। 
य ई पुष्य॑न्त इन्धते ॥ ५५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 8 53 


=) Te syama ye agnaye dadasurhavyadatibhih. 
Ya im pusyanta indhate. 


Let us dedicate ourselves to you, Agni, like those 
who, with liberal offers of havi, give themselves unto 
you in devotion for the gifts and powers of universal 
energy, light the fire and make the streams of the waters 
of life flow free across the globe. 


ते राया ते gare: ससवांसो वि शुंण्विरे। 
ये अग्रा द॑धिरे दुव॑ः ॥ ६॥ 

6. Te raya te suviryaih sasavamso vi Srnvire. 
Ye agna dadhire duvah. 
They enjoy life in peace and comfort with plenty 
of wealth and noble strength and powers who study fire, 
learn about its properties and pursue it with reverence 
and self sacrifice through the yajna of research and 
development. 
अस्मे wal दिवेदिवे सं च॑रन्तु पुस स्पृहः | 
अस्मे वाजास ईरताम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 

7. Asme rayo divedive sam carantu purusprhah. 
Asme vajasa tratam. 


Let wealths of various kinds and universal value 
come and abound among us, let food and energy of all 
varieties flow and arise among us (as divine gifts of 
Agni, lord of heat and light and cosmic energy). 


स विप्र॑र्चर्षणीनां शव॑सा मानुषाणाम्‌ | 
अतिं fate विध्यति ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sa viprascarsaninam Savasa manusanam. 
Ati ksipreva vidhyati. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


54 RGVEDA 


He, Agni, is the most dynamic of brilliant 
visionaries of the world who, with his power and force, 
like a flying arrow, shoots off the sufferance and 
ailments of the people. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 9 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


अग्नौ yo महाँ sifa य ईमा tag जन॑म्‌ । 
इयेथ बर्हिरासदम्‌ 2 ॥ 


ly Agne mrla mahan asi ya ima devayum janam. 
Tyetha barhirasadam. 


Agni, be kind and gracious. Great you are as 
you come to these divinely dedicated people sitting 
round the fire of yajna and you bless them all round 
without reserve. 
स मानुषीषु gout विक्षु प्रावीरम्त्यः | 
दूतो विश्वेषां भुवत्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Sa manusisu dulabho viksu praviramartyah. 
Dito visvesam bhuvat. 

He is rare among the human people of the world 
who is kind, protective, pioneer, exceptional and 
immortal giver of light and knowledge. May this power 
be the destroyer of the suffering of entire humanity. 

स सदय परि णीयते drat मन्द्रो दिविष्टिषु । 
उत पोता नि षींदति।॥ ३॥ 
3: Sa sadma pari niyate hota mandro divistisu. 
Uta pota ni sidati. 
3. That light and power, Agni, sacrificing, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 9 55 


sanctifying, happy and rejoicing, is investigated, 
discovered and worshipped in all holy programmes of 
life, and everywhere in yajnic homes where it sits as 
the prime and central presence. 


उत ग्रा अभिरंध्वर उतो गृहपंतिर्दमें। 
उत aan नि षीदति ux iu 


4. Uta gna agniradhvara uto grhapatirdame. 
Uta brahma ni sidati. 


And Agni joins the yajna of love and non- 
violence as master of divine voice, in the home where 
he abides as the head of family, and in the yajna he 
presides over as the high priest, having mastered all the 
Vedas. 


वेषि द्य॑ध्वरीयतामुंपवक्ता जनानाम्‌ । 
हव्या च मानुषाणाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

a. Vesi hyadhvariyatam-upavakta jananam. 
Havya ca manusanam. 


You are the guide of the performers of yajna 
and teacher of the people in general, and you receive 
the respect and yajnic gifts and fragrances offered by 
humanity. 


वेषीद्व॑स्य Feat) यस्य जुजोषो अध्वरम्‌। 
हव्यं मर्तस्य Goda ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Vesidvasya dutyam yasya jujoso adhvaram. 
Havyam martasya volhave. 


You accept the message of this devotee whose 
yajna of love and social cooperation you join without 
violence, and you receive the inputs of holy fuel to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


56 RGVEDA 


communicate the meaning, message and fragrance to 
the destination where it is meant for. 
अस्माकं जोष्यध्वरमस्माकं यज्ञम॑ङधिरः। 
अस्माकं शृणुधी हव॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
ie Asmakam josyadhvaramasmakam yajnam- 
angirah. Asmakam srunudhi havam. 


You join and accomplish the ends of our holy 
acts. You expedite our yajna of love and non-violence 
for social cohesion, O life breath of humanity, Agni, O 
power omnipresent and omniscient, listen to our call 
and prayer and bless us with success. 
UR ते दूव्छभो रथोऽ Gat अश्नोतु faved: | 
येन tata दाशुष॑ः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Pari te dulabho ratho’sman asnotu visvatah. 
Yena raksasi dasusah. 


Agni, ruler of the world, may that rare invincible 
chariot of your power by which you protect the generous 
givers in yajna, we pray, be directed to us and promote 
us all round. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 10 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
अग्ने तमद्याऽश्वं AEH: क्रतुं न भ्रं ह॑दिस्पृश॑म्‌। 
ऋध्यामा त SS: ॥ ९॥ 
1. Agne tamadya’svam na stomaih kratum na 
bhadram hrdisprsam. Rdhyama ta ohaih. 


Agni, mighty power of light and motion, with 
songs of praise and prayer and with holy acts of service 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 10 57 


offered in homage to you today, we augment, celebrate 
and glorify you, fast as nature’s waves of energy, bright 
as intelligence and blissful as yajna, and dear as love 
closest to the heart. 


अधा WA Haleiacs cates साधोः। 
Teitskeel बहतो बभूथ ॥ २॥ 


2 Adha hyagne kratorbhadrasya daksasya sadhoh. 
Rathirrtasya brhato babhitha. 


And now Agni, O light and ruler of the world, 
be the rider and commander of the chariot of the plan 
and programme of our creative and developmental yajna 
of the human nation, a yajna which is blissfully fruitful, 
expertly organised and sophisticated, truthfully in 
consonance with the laws of nature and the environment 
and positively good, great and far reaching in 
consequence for life. 


एभिर्नो अर्कैर्भवां नो state स्ववैर्ण ज्योतिः 1 
अग्ने विश्वेभिः सुमना अनीं केः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Ebhirno arkairbhava no arvan svarna jyotih. 
Agne visvebhih sumana anikaih. 


Agni, light and life of the world, majestic as the 
sun’s refulgent glory, good and loving at heart, in 
response to these our songs of praise and prayer and 
acts of piety, come straight and bless us with all your 
forces of protection and promotion and give us, lead us 
to, the success of our heart’s desire. 


आभिषटं अद्य गीर्भिर्गणन्तोऽग् दाशेम | 
प्र त दिवो न स्त॑नयन्ति शुष्माः ॥ ४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


58 RGVEDA 


4. Abhiste adya girbhir-grnanto’gne dasema. 
Pra te divo na stanayanti susmah. 


Agni, brilliant ruling power of the world, 
speaking in these words of ours to you, we would pay 
homage to you in appreciation, thanks and praise for 
your gifts of protection and promotion for us. And see, 
the people, happy and bold, raise shouts of joy like the 
roar of thunder from the skies in celebration of your 
majesty. 
तव स्वादिष्ठाऽग्रे संदु्टिरिदा fae इदा चिंदक्तोः। 
fara रूक्सो न रोचत उपाक ॥ ५ ॥ 

5. Tava svadistha’gne samdrstirida cidahna ida 
cidaktoh. Sriye rukmo na rocata upake. 
Agni, glorious ruler of the world, your gracious 
eye, equal and beneficent for all, all time whether it is 
day or night, shines all round like radiance itself 
expressive of your regality. 
घृतं न पूतं तनूर॑रे पाः शुचि fava 
तत्त रुक्मो न रोचत स्वधावः॥ ६॥ 

6. Ghrtam na putam tanurarepah suci hiranyam. 
Tat te rukmo na rocata svadhavah. 

Agni, lord self-refulgent and potent in your own 
essence, the light of your presence manifesting in the 
world body is immaculate, pure as ghrta and sacred as 
celestial water, and it is unalloyed as gold which shines 


and pleases like light of the moon and dazzles as 
radiance of the sun. 


कृतं चिद्धि ष्मा सनेमि द्वेषोऽग्रं इनोषि मतीत्‌। 
इत्था यजंमानादूतावः ॥ ७ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 11 59 


7. Krtam ciddhi sma sanemi dveso ’gna inosi martat. 
Ittha yajamandadrtavah. 


Agni, lord giver, observer and commander of 
the law of natural truth and justice, you drive away from 
mortal humanity and from the man of yajnic 
performance all sin, hate and enmity even if it has been 
done and has existed since time immemorial. 


शिवाः न॑: सख्या सन्तु, भ्रात्राऽ देवेषु, युष्मे । 
सानो नाधिः सद॑ने सस्पिन्नुध॑न्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Siva nah sakhya santu bhratra’gne devesu yusme. 
Sano nabhih sadane sasminnidhan. 


Agni, lord of light and ruler of the world, may 
our friendship and fraternity among the nobilities and 
divine personalities of your rule and order be auspicious 
and blessed, and may that sacred relationship be the 
anchor and centrehold of our conduct and action in the 
entire social order of governance, administration and 
economy of the system. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 11 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 

ug त अये सहसिन्ननींकमुपाक आ रोचते सूर्यस्य । रुद्‌ 
दृशो dest नक्तया चिदरूश्ितं दृश आ रूपे अन्न॑म्‌॥ ९ ॥ 
i Bhadram te agne sahasinnanitkamupaka ठ rocate 
suryasya. Rusad drse dadrse naktaya cidariuksi- 

tam drsa ठ rupe annam. 
Agni, mighty presiding power of the world, holy 


and blissful is your splendour at the dawn of sunrise as 
it shines in majesty, and while it shines, it is seen by 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


60 RGVEDA 


night also, as glorious to the sight as by day. And in that 
bright and blissful form of beauty and majesty I see 
delicious food for life and energy for mind and soul. 


वि shan गृणते म॑नीषां खं वेप॑सा तुविजात waar: | 
विश्वेभिर्यद्ावनः शुक्र देवैस्तन्नो' रास्व सुमहो भूरि 
मन्म॑ ।॥ २॥ 


2 Vi sahyagne grnate manisam kham vepasa 
tuvijata stavanah. Visvebhiryad vavanah sukra 
devaistanno rasva sumaho bhuri manma. 


Agni, lord of light and majesty, universally 
manifest and acknowledged, while you are praised and 
honoured by the devotee with the action and inspiration 
of your light and glory, break open the locks of the mind 
and intellect of the devotee since, O lord of brilliance 
and purity, commanding the grandeur of the world and 
giving with and through all the divine powers of nature 
and humanity, you bless us with the knowledge and 
wisdom of the living world. 


त्वद॑गरे काव्या त्वन्म॑नीषास्त्वदुक्था जायन्ते राध्यानि | 
त्वदेति द्रविणं वीरपेशा इत्थाधिये दाशुषे मत्यीय 3 ॥ 


2 Tvadange kavya tanmanisastvaduktha jayante 
radhyani. Tvadeti dravinam virapesa itthadhiye 
dasuse martyaya. 


Agni, lord of light, energy and intelligence, by 
you are great poems inspired. From you flows genius 
and intelligence. By you are revealed hymns of 
celebration and holy action. From you arise the resources 
of life for development. O lord of valour and beauteous 
form, from you flow the wealths of existence in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 11 61 


circulation for the mortal man of versatile intelligence 
and generosity. 


went वाजंभरो विहाया अभिष्टिकृजनायते सत्यशुष्मः | 
त्वद्रयिर्दवजुंतो मयो भुस्त्वदाशुर्जुजुवां AH अवी ॥ ४॥ 


4. Tvad vajt vajambharo vihaya abistikrjjayate 
satyasusmah. Tvad rayirdevajuto mayobhus- 
tvadasur-jujuvan agne arva. 


From you arises heroic energy, victorious power, 
all expansive and unfailingly true which wins the desired 
object of all round success. From you is created the 
wealth produced, expanded and multiplied by noble 
experts which is full of blessings. From you is created 
the self-driven transport of high velocity which reaches 
the destination instantly. Such you are, Agni, tremendous 
source of inexhaustible energy. 


rare प्रथमं देवयन्तो देवं मतौ अमृत मन्द्रजिंहम्‌। 
दवेषोयुतमा विवासन्ति धीभिर्दमुंनसं गृहप॑ंतिममूरम्‌ & ॥ 


De Tvamagne prathamam devayanto devam marta 
amrta mandrajihvam. Dvesoyutama vivasanti 
dhibhir-damunasam grhapatim-amuram. 


You, Agni, lord and master of light and 
knowledge, energy and power, mortal men in search of 
joy and beauty, light and immortality seek, serve and 
develop you with their acts and intelligence, as first and 
foremost power of life, brilliant and generous, immortal, 
sweet and joyous of tongue, free from hate and enmity, 
self-controlled and all-controller, wise and perfect 
master of the household. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


62 RGVEDA 


आरे अस्मदम॑तिमारे अहं आरे विश्वां दुर्मतिं यन्निपासिि। 
दोषा शिवः dea: सूनो अग्रे यं देव आ farsa 
स्वस्ति ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Are asmadamatimare anha are visvam durmatim 
yannipasi. Dosa Sivah sahasah suno agne yam 
deva a cit sacase svasti. 


Agni, child of omnipotence and patience, take 
off from us callousness, take away sin, take away all 
hate and enmity from the world. Whosoever you protect, 
you promote, lord generous and refulgent, you are good 
and kind to him night and day. He is blest. May all be 
good and gracious! 


Mandala 4/Sukta 12 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


यस्त्वाम॑ग्न इनध॑ते यतस्तुक्त्रिस्ते अन्नं कृणवत्सस्मिन्र्हन्‌ | 
ससु दयुम्नैर भ्य॑स्तु प्रसश्चत्तव रत्वा जातवेदश्चि- 
कित्वान्‌॥ ९॥ 


I Yastvamagna inadhate yatasruk triste annam 
krnavat sasminnahan. Sa su dyumnairabhyastu 
prasaksat tava kratva jatavedascikitvan. 


Agni, lord and master of light, knowledge and 
wealth, he who lights and serves you with ladlefuls of 
ghrta for the offering of food thrice every day will be 
blest with wealth, honour and well being all round by 
virtue of his service to you and noble works, O Jataveda, 
lord of universal knowledge, and he will be enlightened 
with knowledge and self-awareness. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 12 63 


इध्मं यस्त जभर॑च्छश्रमाणो wer अंगने अनीकमा संपर्यन्‌। 
स इधानः प्रतिं दोषामुषासं पुष्यत्रयिं dad घ््नमित्रान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Idhmam yaste jabharacchasramano maho agne 
anikama saparyan. Sa idhanah prati dosamu- 
sasam pusyan rayim sacate ghnannamitran. 


Agni, lord sublime commanding power and 
force, any person of high endeavour who bears and takes 
you forward, serving your great force and splendour, 
he/she is blest with wealth and grandeur, rising in 
strength and power, blazing with light and fire and 
eliminating hate and enmity every day and night. 


sist बहतः क्चत्रियस्याऽथिर्वाजंस्य weet रायः। 
दधाति रल्नं विधते यविष्ठो व्यानुषड्मत्यीय स्वधार्वान्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Agnirise brhatah ksatriyasya’gnirvajasya para- 
masya rayah. Dadhati ratnam vidhate yavistho 
vyanusanmartyaya svadhavan. 


Agni rules and commands the great order of 
defence, governance and law of society. Agni rules over 
the highest wealth of food, energy and movement. 
Strongest and most youthful, Agni, holding and 
commanding his own essential sustenance, food, energy 
and power, ever in unison with the celebrant, bears and 
secures the jewel assets of life for mortal humanity all 
round. 


hate ते पुरुषत्रा य॑विष्ठाऽचित्तिभिश्चकृमा कच्िदाग॑ः। 
कृधी tea eat अदि तेरनागान्व्येनांसि शिश्रथो विष्व॑गग्ने ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yacciddhi te purusatra yavistha’ cittibhiscakrma 
kaccidagah. Krdhisvasman aditeranagan vye- 
namsi sisratho visvagagne. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


64 RGVEDA 


Agni, youthful lord of light and the world of 
light, if we, unawares or out of ignorance, happen to 
commit something sinful, whatever it be, among your 
devoted people, then free us from that sin and render us 
sinless children of the good earth. Relax the hold of all 
sin and evil from over us. 


महश्चिंदग्र एन॑सो अभीकं ऊर्वाद्िवानांमुत मरतत्यौनाम्‌। मा 
ते सखायः सदमिद्धिंषाम यच्छा तोकाय तन॑याय शां 
योः॥ ५॥ 


2; Mahascidagna enaso abhika urvad devanamuta 
martyanam. Ma te sakhayah sadamid risama 
yaccha tokaya tanayaya sam yoh. 


Agni, lord of light and purity of power, save us 
even from great and extensive sin committed or suffered 
either close to or among the noblest powers or the 
ordinary mortals, let us never be hurt or injured. We are 
your friends. Give us peace and well being for our 
children and further future generations. 


यथां ह त्यद्व॑सवो गौर्यः चित्पदि षिताममुञ्चता यजत्राः | 
एवो ष्वव स्मन्मुंञ्चता व्यंहः Walesa प्रतरं न आयुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yatha ha tyad vasavo gauryam cit padi sitama- 
muncata yajatrah. Evo svasmanmuncata vyanhah 
pra taryagne prataram na ayuh. 


Vasus, holy divines of knowledge and speech 
dedicated to Dharma and education, just as you release 
language, bonded in word, meaning and object all 
integrated, free into expression and communication, 
similarly loosen the bonds of sin from us to set us free 
and take us across the seas of life which must be crossed 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 13 65 


with merit and virtue. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 13 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


प्रत्यिरूषसामग्र॑मख्यद्विभातीनां सुमना रल्रधेय॑म्‌। 
यातमश्विना सुकृतो दुरोणमुत्सूर्यो ज्योतिषा देव एति ॥ ९ ॥ 


il. Partyagnirusasamagramakhyad vibhatinam 
sumana ratnadheyam. Yatamasvina sukrto 
duronamut suryo jyotisa deva eti. 


Agni, brilliant as sun, vibrant as wind and potent 
as electric energy, stirs in advance of the lights of rising 
dawns happy at heart, and the Ashvins, currents of 
elevating energy, move on to the house of the man of 
noble acts, a house blest with the jewels of life, while 
the refulgent sun, generous giver of the breath of life, 
moves on (on its daily round) with its light. 


ऊर्ध्वं भानुं सविता देवो sista द्रप्सं efdeagfast न सत्वां । 
अनुं व्रतं वरुणो यन्ति मित्रो यत्सूर्य' दि्व्यारोहयंन्ति ui २॥ 


2. Urdhvam bhanum savita devo asred drapsam 
davidhvad gaviso na satva. Anu vratam varuno 
yanti mitro yat suryam divyarohayanti. 


The refulgent sun, giver of light and life’s 
energy, radiates the light on high and, as if in love with 
the earth, diffuses the particles of light around in space 
with passion. And according to the laws of Nature, 
Varuna and Mitra, waters and winds, and all other causes 
which elevate the sun rise to activity by the sun on their 
appointed course. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


66 RGVEDA 


यं सीमकुण्वन्तम॑से fare श्चुवक्षमा अन॑वस्यन्तो अर्थ्‌ | 
तं सूर्य" हरितः aa aa: स्पशं विश्व॑स्य जग॑तो वहन्ति ॥ ३ ॥ 


Sy Yam stmakrnvan tamase viprche dhruvaksema 
anavasyanto artham. Tam suryam haritah sapta 
yahvih spasam visvasya jagato vahanti. 


One of the objects which for sure the fixed 
centres of cosmic energy for sustenance dedicated to 
their appointed task create for the dispulsion of darkness 
is the sun. That sun, centre, eye and light of the entire 
moving world of the solar system, seven mighty forces 
of nature carry and conduct and seven blazing rays of 
light radiate for the appointed purpose. 


वदिं्ेभिर्विंहर॑न्यासि तन्तुमवव्ययन्नसिंतं देव वस्म । 
दविध्वतो रश्मयः सूर्य॑स्य चर्मेवावाधुस्तमो अप्स्व १ न्तः ॥ 2 ॥ 
4. Vahisthebhirviharanyasi tantumavavyayanna- 


sitam deva vasma. Davidhvato rasmayah surya- 
sya carmevavadhustamo apsvantah. 


O Deva, refulgent sun, borne by seven mighty 
carriers of light, you go round in orbit radiating your 
rays and dispelling the cover of darkness. The vibrating 
rays of the sun in the middle regions of the sky remove 
the mantle of darkness. 


अनायतो अनिंबब्दः कथायं न्य॑ङ्ङ्त्तानोऽवं पद्यते न। 
कयां याति स्वधया को cast दिवः स्कम्भः समंततः पाति 
नाकम्‌॥ ५॥ 


3: Anayato anibaddhah kathayam nyannuttano’va 
padyate na. Kaya yati svadhaya ko dadarsa 
divah skambhah samrtah pati nakam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 14 67 


Unsupported and unbound, high up above yet 
looking downward, how is it sustained? Why doesn’t it 
fall down? By what strength of its own does it go on? 
Who sees it thus behave? The pillar sustainer of the 
vault of heaven with the cosmic law of Rtam sustains it 
too. Who sees that pillar of the universe which sustains 
this giver of bliss? 


Mandala 4/Sukta 14 
Agni Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


प्रत्ययिरुषसो जातवेदा अख्य॑दहेवो रोच॑माना alfa: 1 
आ नासत्योरुगाया रथे नेमं य॒ज्ञमुप॑ नो यातमच्छ॑ ।। ९॥ 


il Pratyagnirusaso jataveda akhyad devo rocamana 
mahobhih. A nasatyorugaya rathenemam yajna- 
mupa no yatamaccha. 


Refulgent Agni, omnipresent in the world of 
existence, with his own grandeur and lustre lights up 
the bright and beautiful dawns. Hey Ashvins, ever true 
and beautiful, universally praised harbingers of light, 
twofold breath of energy, teacher and preacher, come 
well by the chariot and grace this yajna of ours. 


ऊर्ध्वं केतुं स॑विता देवो अंश्रेज्योतिर्विश्व॑स्मै भुव॑नाय 
कृण्वन्‌। आप्रा द्यावापृथिवी अन्तरिश्चं वि सूर्यो रश्मि- 
यिश्चेकितानः ॥ २॥ 


2 Urdhvam ketum savita devo aSrejjyotirvisvasmai 
bhuvanaya krnvan. Apra dyavaprthivi antariksam 
vi suryo rasmibhiscekitanah. 


May Savita, brilliant and generous, giver of light 
and life’s energy, create light and radiate energy high 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


68 RGVEDA 


up and give enlightenment to the whole world, as the 
refulgent sun, with its rays, illuminates the heaven and 
earth and the skies. 


आवहं न्त्यरुणीर्ज्योतिषागन्मही चित्रा रश्मिभिश्चे- 
fart प्रबोधय॑न्ती सुवितायं देव्यु4षा faa सुयुजा 
र्थन ॥ ३॥ ति 

ai Avahantyarunirjyotisaganmahi citra rasmibhis- 
cekitana. Prabodhayanti suvitaya devyusa tyate 
suyuja rathena. 


Crimson clad in brilliance, great and glorious, 
bright with morning rays, comes the blessed dawn by 
the chariot in top-notch harness, awaking the world to 
the joy and bliss of the new day. 


आ वां afest इह ते व॑हन्तु रथा state उषसो व्युष्टौ । इमे 
हि वां मधुपेयाय सोमा अस्मिन्यज्ञे वुंषणा मादयेथाम्‌ ॥। ठ ॥ 


4. A vam vahistha tha te vahantu ratha asvasa usaso 
vyustau. Ime hi vam madhupeyaya soma asmin 
yajne vrsana madayetham. 


Come ye Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, 
breath and beauty of the morning, men and women 
dedicated to Divinity, may these strong chariots and 
horses bring you here in the light of the dawn. These 
honey drinks of soma, vital energy of life, are for you. 
Come, virile ones, and rejoice in this yajna (of the 
creation of a new day). 


अनायतो अनिंबन्दः कथायं न्य॑ङ्ङुनत्तानोऽ व॑ पद्यते न। 
कयां याति स्वधया को cast दिवः स्कम्भः समंततः पाति 
नाकम्‌॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 15 69 


=) Anayato anibaddhah kathayam nyannuttano’va 
padyate na. Kaya yati svadhaya ko dadarsa 
divah skambhah samrtah pati nakam. 


So close and unsupported, unbound and free, 
so wide and high looking down, as it is, what is that 
power which holds it up from falling down? By what 
force of its own does it go on as it does? Who sees that 
power, pillar sustainer of the vault of heaven, which 
sustains it with the cosmic law of Rtam, blissful as it 
is? Agni. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 15 


Agni, Somaka Sahadevya and Ashvinau Devata, 
Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


अगिर्होतां नो अध्वरे वाजी सन्परिं णीयते। 
देवो देवेषु afer: ॥ ९॥ 

॥. Agnirhota no adhvare vaji san pari niyate. 
Devo devesu yajniyah. 


Agni, brilliant leader, sustainer, yajaka and the 
clarion call of our yajna, most refulgent of the brilliants, 
most adorable of the adorables, being potent and warlike 
as a missile, is conducted all round and followed in the 
corporate business of our life. 


परि fifasdeat arent रथीरिव 1 
आ देवेषु प्रयो दध॑त्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


Zi Pari tvivistyadhvaram yatyagni rathiriva. 
A devesu prayo dadhat. 


Agni, leader and pioneer, like a hero of the war 
chariot goes thrice round and round the yajna of our 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


70 RGVEDA 


corporate life, bearing the wealth of peace and well- 
being among the noble powers and peoples of the world. 


परि वाजपतिः कविरगिर्हृव्यान्य॑क्रमीत्‌। 
दधद्रत्नानि दाशुषे ।॥। ३ ॥ 

Ds Pari vajapatih kavir-agnir-havyanyakramit. 
Dadhad ratnani dasuse. 
Agni, lord of food, energy and the dynamics of 
life and society, commanding a full poetic vision of 
corporate life, comprehends the gifts and oblations of 
the holy fire of the nation, bearing the jewels of life’s 
wealth for the generous giver. 
अयं यः सृञ्ज॑ये पुरो दैववाते समिध्यते | 
gat अंमित्रदम्भ॑नः ॥  ॥ 

4. Ayam yah srnjaye puro daivavate samidhyate. 
Dyuman amitradambhanah. 
This is he, that fiery and brilliant Agni, leader 
of yajna, vanquisher of the enemies of life and society, 
who is lighted and joined first of all in corporate 
struggles for the attainment of the holy gifts of Divinity. 
अस्य॑ घा वीर ईव॑तो ऽग्ेरींशीत ae: 1 
तिग्मज॑म्भस्य lee: ॥ ५ ॥ 

5: Asya gha vira ivato’ gnerisita martyah. 
Tigmajambhasya milhusah. 


Only that brave man among mortals can 
command the wealth and power of the world who is a 
yajnic follower of this Agni, dynamic leader, generous 
giver and unflinchingly just and powerful. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 15 71 


तमर्वन्तं न सानसिम॑रुषं न fea: शिशुम्‌। 
मर्मृज्यन्ते दिवेदिवे ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tamarvantam na sanasimarusam na divah Sisum. 
Marmrjyante divedive. 


Him the followers serve, adorn and adore day 
by day who is lovable and victorious like a war horse 
and brilliant as a very child of heavenly light. 


बोधद्यन्मा हरिभ्यां कुमारः साहदेव्यः | 
अच्छा न हूत उद॑रम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 
a Bodhadyanma_ haribhyam kumarah sahadev- 


yah. Accha na huta udaram. 


Neither well informed nor inspired nor fully 
prepared as I am, may the youthful Agni, companion 
power of divinity, awaken and inform me by the gifts 
of Ashvins, light and knowledge of the teacher and the 
preacher, breath and beauty of nature and the light and 
fragrance of yajna. 


उत त्या य॑जता हरीं कुमारात्साहदेव्यात्‌। 
प्रय॑ता सद्य आ द॑दे।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Uta tya yajata hari kumarat sahadevyat. 
Prayata sadya a dade. 


I readily accept the breath and beauty of nature 
and the light and fragrance of yajna, gifts of the Ashvins, 
teachers and preachers, adorable messengers of life 
coming from Agni, youthful brilliance of Divinity. 


एष वां देवावश्विना कुमारः साहदेव्यः | 
दीर्घायुरस्तु सोम॑कः ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


72 RGVEDA 


9. Esa vo devavasvina kumarah_ sahadevyah. 
Dirghayurastu somakah. 


Divine Ashvins, teachers and preachers, may 
this youth, your celebate disciple, dedicated to Divinity, 
be blest with long life, blest with the light of peace and 
well-being. 
तं युवं देवावश्विना कुमारं साहदेव्यम्‌। 
दीघायुंषं कृणोतन i ९०॥ 

10. Tam yuvam devavasvina kumarah sahadevyam. 
Dirghayusam krnotana. 

Divine Ashvins, messengers of the light of 
Divinity, brilliant and generous teachers and preachers, 


both of you bless this youth, devotee of Divinity, with 
long life. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 16 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


आ सत्यो यातु were ऋजीषी द्रव॑न्त्वस्य हर॑य sd 
नः। तस्मा इदन्ध॑ः सुषुमा सुदक्षमिहाभिरपित्वं क॑रते 
गृणानः ॥ ९॥ 


le A satyo yatu maghavan rjist dravantvasya haraya 
upa nah. Tasma idandhah susuma sudaksami- 
habhipitvam karate grnanah. 


May Indra, lord ruler of the world, ever true, 
mighty bounteous and ever righteous in natural ways, 
come to us. May his men and powers hasten to us to 
help and bless. For his sake we produce energising food 
and distil exciting soma. Praised and appreciated and 
praising and appreciating, he provides us all with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 73 
sustenance and protection in this world order. 


अवं स्य शूराध्वनो नान्तेऽ Feral अद्य सव॑ने मन्दध्य । 
शंसात्युक्थमुशनेव वेधाश्चिंकि तुषं असुयौय मन्म॑ ।॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ava sya Suradhvano nante’smin no adya savane 
mandadhyai. Samsatyukthamusaneva vedha- 
Scikituse asuryaya manma. 


Indra, such as you are, guard us in this yajnic 
programme of holy living so that we may enjoy life and 
you too be happy with us. Guard us, pray, O Ruler, as 
you would the boundaries of the path of progress. 
Forsake us not till the end. The wise celebrant like a 
poet and lover sings songs of adoration and speaks 
words of wisdom to enlighten the simple innocents eager 
to learn and pray. 


कविर्न निण्यं विदर्थानि साधन्वृषा यत्सेकं विपिपानो 
अचीत्‌। दिव इत्था जीजनत्सप्त कारूनह्य चिच्चक्रुर्वयुना 
गृणन्तः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Kavirna ninyam vidathani sadhan vrsa yat sekam 
vipipano arcat. Diva ittha jijanat sapta karu- 
nahna ciccakrurvayuna grnantah. 


The generous man of might and vision 
accomplishing the performance of various yajnas of 
science, like a poet, receiving mysteriously but surely 
the shower of light from above, preserving it with 
reverence and advancing it, creates knowledge from the 
light above, and then the scholars, admiring and 
pursuing it further by day, create seven kinds of science 
and technology and raise seven orders of scientists and 
technologists. (The mantra suggests the science of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


74 RGVEDA 
spectrum and development of light technology.) 


स्वप सदिद सुदृशी कमर्कैर्महि wad! रुरुचुर्यन्द्र वस्तो: । 
अन्धा तमांसि दुधिता विचक्षे नृभ्यश्चकार नृत॑मो 
अभिष्टौ ux ॥ 


4. Svaryad vedi sudrsikamarkairmahi jyoti ruru- 
curyaddha vastoh. Andha tamamsi dudhita 
vicakse nrbhyascakara nrtamo abhistau. 


The heavenly light and paradisal bliss that is 
revealed by the reflections of knowledge and radiations 
of the sun, the greatness and sublimity of ultimate reality 
that is revealed and shines as the dawn of the day, the 
impenetrable layers of darkness that are laid open and 
bare, all that, Indra, the best of men and highest of 
leaders and divinities, does for the sake of humanity 
for their highest good so that all may see and admire. 


ववक्च इन्द्रो अपिंतपरजीष्यु भे आ dul रोद॑सी महित्वा। 
अतजश्चिदस्य महिमा वि रेच्यभि यो विश्वा भुव॑ना 
aya uu 


5. Vavaksa indro amitamrjisyubhe a paprau rodasi 
mahitva. Atascidasya mahima vi recyabhi yo visva 
bhuvana babhiuva. 


Indra, lord supreme of nature and Rtam, the law 
of nature, wields and sustains both heaven and earth, 
immeasurable though they are. He pervades both and 
transcends them with his power and grandeur. For this 
very reason, his power and grandeur too exceeds 
everything else of the universe since he pervades, 
transcends and presides over all the regions of the 
universe in existence. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 75 


fasalf श॒क्रो नयीणि विद्धानपो रिरेच aRafarial: 1 
अश्मानं fad बिंभिदुर्वचोभिर्व्रंजं गोम॑न्तमुशिजो वि 
वंत्रुः।॥६॥ 


6. Visvani Sakro naryani vidvanapo rireca sakhi- 
bhir-nikamaih. ASmanam cid ye bibhidur- 
vacobhir-vrajam gomantam-uSijo vi vavruh. 


Indra, world ruler, commanding knowledge and 
power, exhausts all the possibilities of human action 
with his dedicated friends who, even with words of 
command, break down adamantine resistance and, 
passionate for action, open up and reveal the hidden 
treasures of wealth and energy of nations, like cowherds 
releasing cows from the stalls or winds breaking the 
clouds and releasing the waters. 


अपो qa वद्रिवांसं पराहन्प्राव॑त्ते as पृथिवी सचेताः | 
प्राणींसि समुद्विर्याण्येनोः पतिर्भवजञ्छव॑सा शूर धृष्णो ॥ ७॥ 


7. Apo vrtram vavrivamsam parahan pravat te 
vajram prthivi sacetah. Prarnamsi samudri- 
yanyainoh patirbhavanchavasa sura dhrsno. 


Indra, ruler of the world, just as, when 
thunderous rays of the sun break the dark cloud holding 
waters of rain, the earth rejoices and rivers flow to the 
sea, so O mighty one, all-aware and intrepidable hero, 
be the master protector and promoter ruler with your 
strength and power and, by virtue of the centrifugal force 
of your power and law, break open the dark strongholds 
of energy and action, and let the freedom and vitality of 
humanity flow in action unto the ocean of eternal 
Divinity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


76 RGVEDA 


अपो यदद्रिं पुरुहूत adufadlacarat पूर्व्य dia at 
नेता वाजमा द॑र्षि भूरि गोत्रा रुजन्नद्धिरोभिर्गणानः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Apo yadadrim puruhuta dardaravirbhuvat 
sarama purvyam te. Sano neta vajama darsi bhuri 
gotra rujann-angirobhir-grnanah. 


Indra, universal celebrity, when you break the 
cloud of hoarded potentials and your simple and straight 
policy of governance and administration comes into full 
view on earth, then you, such leader and commander of 
ours, sung and celebrated by scholars and scientists, 
manifest your power and policy further and break open the 
many centre-holds of human intelligence and social energy. 


अच्छा कविं anon गा अभिष्टौ स्व॑र्षाता मघवन्नाधंमानम्‌। 
ऊतिभिस्तमिंषणो द्युम्नहूतौ नि मायावानब्रह्या sear ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Accha kavim nrmano ga abhistau svarsata 
maghavan-nadhamanam. Utibhis-tamisano 
dyumnahiutau ni mayavanabrahma dasyurarta. 


Indra, winner of the light of heaven and 
harbinger of light on earth, lover of humanity, lord of 
glory, for the sake of desired goals and for the 
achievement of honour, wealth and excellence, inspire 
the poet, promote language and education, advance the 
seeker, scientist and researcher, with protection and 
incentive, and whoever be the clever exploiter opposed 
to knowledge, social good and general well being, let 
him be defeated. 


आ दस्युक्चा मन॑सा याह्यस्तं भुव॑त्ते कुत्स॑ः सख्ये Prana: | 
स्वे योनौ नि ved सरूपा वि at चिकित्सदूतचिद् 
नारी gon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 77 


10. A dasyughna manasa yahyastam bhuvat te kutsah 
sakhye nikamah. Sve yonau ni sadatam sarupavi 
vam cikitsadrtaciddha nari. 


O destroyer of the wicked, come home to your 
own with your heart and soul. May the sage and the 
warrior be eager for your friendship. May both of you, 
being of equal mind, sit together in the home. May the 
woman, discriminative and expert in the sacred law of 
Dharma, know you well and cooperate. 


यासि कुत्सेन सरथ॑मवस्युस्तोदो वात॑स्य हयरीश्ानः। 
ऋज्रा वाजं न गध्यं युयुंषन्कविर्यद हन्पायीय wet 22 ॥ 


11. Yasi kutsena sarathamavasyustodo vatasya 
haryoritsanah. Rjra vajam na gadhyam yuyusan 
kaviryadahan paryaya bhiusat. 


You advance with the thunderbolt, O protector 
of the people, destroyer of enemies, riding the chariot, 
commanding the house like currents of the winds, a very 
team of energy and velocity in hand, the lord of vision 
and creation who destroys the wicked and wins the glory 
of victory. 

कुत्साय शुष्णमशुषं नि ad: प्रपित्वे sta: कुय॑वं सहस्रा । 
सद्यो दस्यून्प्र मण कुत्स्येन प्र सूरश्चक्रं deca tes 1 22 ॥ 
12. Kutsaya susnamasusam ni barhih prapitve ahnah 
kuyavam sahasra. Sadyo dasyun pra mrna 
kutsyena pra surascakram brhatadabhike. 


For the sake of the wise and discriminate, you 
root out persistent want and drought. On the rise of the 
day you overthrow a thousand forms of pettiness and 
stinginess. You destroy the evil and the wicked by your 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


78 RGVEDA 


thunderous force and, like the solar orb, scatter the 
enemy forces all round. 


त्वं पिप्रुं मृग॑यं शृशुवां स॑मृजिश्व॑ने वैदथिनाय रन्धीः। 
पञ्चाशत्कृष्णा नि व॑पः सहस्राऽत्कं न पुरो जरिमा वि 
दर्दः ॥ ९३॥ 

13. Tvam piprum mrgayam susuvamsam-rjisv-ine 
vaidathinaya randhith. Pancasat krsna ni vapah 
sahasra ’tkam na puro jarima vi dardah. 


For the sake of the man of rectitude and 
continuance of law abiding generations of the pious 
yajnics, you subdue the swollen and wide spread 
wastours, hunters of forest wealth and destroyers of social 
good. Create a new force of fifty thousand warriors and 
like a storm of wind blow off the enemy strongholds, 
changing the old outmoded forms for the new. 


सूरं उपाके तन्वं दर्धानो वि यत्ते Sead वर्प: | 
मृगो न हस्ती तविंषीमुषाणः सिंहो न भीम आयुधानि 
fave ९४॥ 

14. Sura upake tanvam dadhano vi yat te cetya- 
mrtasya varpah. Mrgo_ na hasti tavistmusanah 
sinho na bhima ayudhani bibhrat. 

Indra, warrior hero blazing as the sun, around 

you the new form of your immortal self manifesting a 

new character wielding new arms appears like a mighty 


elephant, a ferocious lion, awfully burning off the lustre 
of enemy forces. 


इन्द्रं कामां aged अग्मन्त्स्वं्मीच्छहे न सव॑ने चकानाः | 
श्रवस्यवः शशमानास उक्थेरोको न रण्वा सुदृशींव 
पुष्टिः ॥ ९५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 79 


15. Indram kama vasuyanto agmantsvarmilhe na 
savane cakanah. Sravasyavah sasamanasa 
ukthairoko na ranva sudrsiva pustih. 


Those who love life, wish for the wealth of life, 
strive for the bliss of heaven on earth through yajnic 
action, desire for food, energy and victory in the battle 
of living, and with songs of praise and faith wish to 
achieve delightful health and nourishment in a paradisal 
home, all should go and join Indra, brilliant and potent 
ruler of the world. 


ag इन्द्रं सुहवं हुवेम यस्ता चकार नयी पुरूणि । यो 
माव॑ते जरित्र गध्यं चिन्पक्षु वाजं भरति स्पार्हराधाः ॥ ९६॥ 


16.  Tamidva indram suhavam huvema yasta cakara 
narya puruni. Yo mavate jaritre gadhyam cinma- 
ksu vajam bharati sparharadhah. 


For sure that Indra, holily invoked and 
honoured, we invoke, join and celebrate, Indra who does 
all those many wondrous things for humanity, who, for 
the celebrant like me, bears and provides all the many 
desired kinds of food, energy and victory, and who is 
the source giver of things we love for all mankind. 


तिग्मा यदन्तर शनिः पताति कस्मिच्चिच्छूर मुहुके जना- 
नाम्‌। घोरा add समृंतिर्भवात्यधं स्मा नस्तन्वो! बोधि 
गोपाः ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Tigma yadantarasanih patati kasmincicchura 


muhuke jananam. Ghora yadarya samrtir-bhava- 
tyadha sma nastanvo bodhi gopah. 


Indra, lord of excellence and glory, mighty brave 
hero, if a blazing thunderous missile falls like lightning 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


80 RGVEDA 


upon the people in the midst of some battle, or, O 
celebrated lord, some terrible battle conflicts arise on 
the earth, then you alone, O world ruler, are the protector 
of our body of humanity you know. 


भुवोऽ विता वामदेवस्य धीनां भुवः सखावृको वाज॑सातौ | 
त्वामनु प्रम॑तिमा जगन्मोरुशंसो जरित्रे विश्वध स्याः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18.  Bhuvo’vita vamdevasya dhinam bhuvah sakha- 
vrko vajasatau. Tvamanu prmtima jaganmoru- 
5477150 jaritre visvadha syah. 


Indra, ruler of the world, be protector of the holy 
and graceful scholar and promoter of arts and sciences. 
Be our friend and supporter, free from greed and 
violence in the battles of life for victory so that, O lord 
universally celebrated, we may follow our good sense 
and your guidance. Be the bearer and giver of the world’s 
wealth for the faithful celebrant. 


एभिर्नभिरिन्द्र त्वायुभिष्रा मघवद्धिर्मघवस्विशुवं आजौ । 
द्यावो न दयुम्नैर भि सन्तो! अर्यः क्षपो म॑देम शरद॑श्च 
पूर्वीः ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Ebhirnrbhirindra tyayubhistva maghvadbhir- 
maghavan visva ajau. Dyavo na dhumnairabhi 
santo aryah ksapo madema saradasca purvih. 


Indra, lord of glory, commander of the world’s 
honour and excellence, lord of wealth and grace, with 
all these leaders of men, your lovers and celebrants all, 
wealthy, powerful and honourable, and with all our 
wealth and power, we pray, let us all shine being brilliant 
as sunrays in the battle of life and let us enjoy and 
celebrate life and the lord all nights and days and seasons 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 81 
all the year round on top of the world. 


एवेदिन्द्रय वृषभाय वृष्णो ब्रह्माकर्म भृग॑वो न रथ॑म्‌। नू 
चिद्यथा नः सख्या वियोषदसंन्न उग्रोऽ विता त॑नूपाः ॥ २०॥ 


20. Evedindraya vrsabhaya vrsne brahmakarma 
bhrgavo na ratham. Nu cidyatha nah sakhya 
viyosadasanna ugro’vita tanupah. 


Thus for Indra, lord of glory, virile and generous, 
let us create wealth and offer songs of homage and 
celebration just as the Bhrgus, scientists and engineers, 
create and offer the chariot, so that he may not forsake 
us but firmly retain our friendship, and, bright and 
blazing as he is, he may continue to be our protector 
and saviour of our body and the social order. 


नू ष्टुत SS TO इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AMAT: | अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ २९॥ 


21. Nustuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 


Indra, appreciated, praised and worshipped, 
appreciating, approving and praising your devotees, 
create and give ample food and energy to the celebrants, 
like rivers flowing and swelling with waters. O lord of 
speed and transport, with the best of our intellect and 
imagination, the new homage and new song is created 
and offered to you. And, we pray, with the same intellect 
and imagination may we be chariot champions blest with 
divine gifts of prosperity and spirituality. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


82 RGVEDA 


Mandala 4/Sukta 17 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


त्वं महाँ इन्द्र तुभ्यं ह क्षा अनुं क्षत्रं Heat मन्यत द्यौः 1 
त्वं वृत्रं शव॑सा जघन्वान्त्स॒जः सिन्धूरहिना जग्रसानान्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


ly Tvam mahan indra tubhyam ha ksa anu ksatram 
manhana manyata dyauh. Tvam vrtram Savasa 
Jaghanvantsrajah sindhunrahina jagrasanan. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, you are great and 
glorious. The earths do homage to your divine order as 
do the heavens. By virtue of your glory alone are the 
earths and heavens reverenced as great. By your power 
and prowess you break the cloud and release the floods 
of water locked up and devoured by the dark and deep 
of the clouds. 


तव॑ त्विषो जनिंमत्रेजत द्यौ रेजद्धूमिंर्भियसा स्वस्य॑ मन्योः। 
ऋषघायन्त॑ सुभ्व : पर्वतास आर्दन्धन्वानि सरय॑न्त 
आप॑ः ॥ २॥ ` 

2. Tava tviso janimanrejata dyaurejadbhumir- 
bhiyasa svsya manyoh,. Rdhayanta subhvah 
parvatasa ardandhanvani sarayanta apah. 


By your blazing glory, O lord manifest, does 
the heaven shine and dazzle. By force and fear of your 
essential law and power does the earth move in order 
and the deep clouds and mighty mountains, excellent 
all bound in law, shower rain on deserts and make the 
floods of water flow. 


यिनद्विरिं शव॑सा वज्र॑पिष्णर्त्राविष्करण्वानः dear sist: | 
वधीद्‌ ga AAU मन्दसानः सर न्नापो जव॑सा हतवूंष्णीः ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 83 


a Bhinadgirim Savasa vjramisnannaviskrnvanah 
sahasana ojah. Vadhidvrtram vajrena manda- 
sanah sarannapo javasa hatavrsnih. 


Indra, hero bold and invincible, happy and 
joyous, striking thunder and lightning with his mighty 
force, thereby manifesting his lustrous blaze of power, 
destroys the cloud of darkness with the thunderbolt, 
making the floods of water flow with rapidity after the 
vapours have been unlocked and released. 


(The mantra is a metaphor of the energies of 
life, of nature as well as of humanity, being unlocked 
and released by the ruling power with a strike of the 
force of law and justice against the strongholds of 
darkness, evil and selfishness which lock up those 
energies and prevent them from flowing into channels 
of progress and evolution.) 


Gated जनिता म॑न्यत द्यौरिन्द्र॑स्य कर्तां स्वप॑स्तमो | 
य ई' जजान tat सुवज्नमन॑पच्युतं सद॑सो न भूमं ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Suviraste janita manyata dyaurindrasya karta 
svapastamo bhut. Yaim jajana svaryam suvajra- 
manapacyutam sadaso na bhuma. 


Magnificent and brave is your creator, your 
maker, to be honoured with reverence and awe, and let 
the creator, maker, of Indra, the ruler, be brilliant, the 
very light of the world, doer of great and holy deeds, 
the very epitome of the world, who gives rise to the 
great, omnificent, heavily armed and excellently 
empowered ruler, unswerving and unrelenting from his 
position, powers and obligations. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


84 RGVEDA 


य एक इच्च्यावय॑ति प्र भूमा राजां कृष्टीनां पुरुहूत इन्द्रः | 
सत्यमेनमनु विश्वे मदन्ति रातिं देवस्य गृणतो मघोनः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Ya_ eka iccyavayati pra bhuma raja krstinam 
puruhuta indrah. Satyamenamanu visve madanti 
ratim devasya grnato maghonah. 


The ruler of the people, Indra, invoked and 
celebrated by many, all by himself, alone, shakes and 
stirs many a great one, and surely all his admirers, in 
response to the munificence and generosity of the 
brilliant lord of magnificence and majesty, approve and 
support him, celebrate and rejoice with him. 


सत्रा सोम। अभवन्नस्य विश्वे सत्रा मदासो बृहतो मदिष्ठाः 1 
सत्राभ॑वो वसुपतिर्वसूनां दत्रे विष्वा अधिथा इन्द्र 
कृष्टीः ॥६॥ 


6. Satra soma abhavannasya 177517८ satra madaso 
brhato madisthah. Satrabhavo vasupatirva- 
sunam datre visva adhitha indra krstth. 


May all the members and sessions of his 
assembly be good and true and successful. May all the 
sessions of the joyous celebrations of this great ruling 
order be happier than the happiest. Indra, O ruling lord 
president of the wealth of nations, be true to the entire 
body of people in the state of prosperity and rule with a 
mind above everything you rule and possess. 


wane प्रथमं जायं॑मानोऽ मे विश्वां अधिथा इन्द्र Het: | 
त्वं प्रतिं wad आशयानमहिं वज्रेण मघवन्वि ava: ॥ ७॥ 


des Tvamadha prathamam jayamano’me viSva 
adhitha indra krstth. Tvam prati pravata asayana- 
mahim vajrena maghavan vi vrscah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 85 


Indra, lord ruler of the world and destroyer of 
evil and ignorance, rising high as the first born of the 
home land, you take over the entire body of the people 
as presiding power, and then the lowest sections of the 
people and the sleeping sloth of the population, and 
then, O lord of fire and power, strike and shake up the 
sleeping giant with the thunderbolt and root out the 
serpentine ignorance and darkness. 


सत्राहणं aelfe तुम्रमिन्द्रं महामपारं वुंषभं सुवज्रम्‌ । हन्ता 
यो aa सनितोत वाजं दाता मघानि मघवां सुराधाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Satrahanam dadhrsim tumramindram maha- 
maparam vrsabham suvajram. Hanta yo vrtram 
sanitota vajam data maghani maghava suradhah. 


Accept, honour and exalt Indra, ruler of the 
world, destroyer of untruth by the rule of truth and 
righteousness, bold, inspiring, great, unbounded, mighty 
generous, wielder of the thunderbolt of law and force, 
who is destroyer of the dark cloud of evil and selfishness, 
provider of food, energy and advancement, giver of 
honour and excellence, magnanimous and all-ways 
successful achiever of glory. 


अयं वृत॑श्चातयते समीचीर्यं आजिषु मघवां श्रृण्व wa: | 
अयं वाजं भरति यं सनोत्यस्य प्रियासः सख्ये स्याम ॥ ९॥ 
व, Ayam vrtascatayate samicirya ajisu maghava 
srnva ekah. Ayam vajam bharati yam sanotya- 
sya priyasah sakhye syama. 
This ruler, elected, accepted and exalted, 


inspires and enlightens, he stirs and moves and leads 
trained armies to the battles of life, is excellent and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


86 RGVEDA 


magnanimous, listens to people and wins fame, and 
decides and acts with unique self-confidence. He creates 
and bears food and energy and leads forward in progress 
whoever approaches and cooperates with him. Let us 
all be friends with him and win his love and confidence. 


अयं sfud अध जयंन्ुत HATA प्र HULA युधा गाः। 
यदा सत्यं कृणुते मन्युमिन्द्रो विश्वं gad भ॑यत एजंद- 
स्मात्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Ayam Srnve adha jayannuta ghnannayamuta pra 
krnute yudha gah. Yada satyam krnute manyu- 
mindro visvam drlham bhayata ejadasmat. 


This ruler is Indra, of resounding fame is he, 
winner of victories, destroyer of the killers and 
destroyers of the world, fights, and by fighting expands 
the lands of noble rule by the laws of peace. And when 
he expresses his righteous anger in action against 
misrule, the entire world, whether firm or unsettled, fears 
and shakes in awe. 


समिन्द्रो गा अजयत्सं fever सम॑श्विया मघवा यो हं पूर्वीः । 
एभिर्नथिर्नत॑मो अस्य शाकै रायो विभक्ता संभरण्च 
वस्व॑: ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Samindro ga ajayat sam hiranya samasviya 
maghava yo ha purvith. Ebhirnrbhirnrtamo asya 
Sakai rayo vibhakta sambharasca vasvah. 


By his strength and nobility, Indra wins over 
lands rich in the wealth of cows, precious gold and noble 
horses. Liberal and excellent he is and wins over the 
people ancient and far off who may be. And with these 
best of men and leaders, and by the power and talent of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 87 


these, while he shares the gains of expansion with others, 
he also continues to wield and command the wealths of 
the world. 


किय॑स्स्विदिन्त्रो अध्येति मातुः किय॑त्वितुर्जनितुर्यो aa । 
यो अस्य शुष्मं मुहुकैरियतिं वातो न जूतः स्तनय 
Farad: ९२॥ 


12.  &7)वा svidindro adhyeti matuh kiyat piturjanituryo 
jajana. Yo asya $usmam muhukairiyarti vato na 
jutah stanayadbhir-abhraih. 


How far does Indra reflect on the debt he owes 
to his mother? How far on that he owes to his father? 
How does he gratefully acknowledge the gift of his 
makers? He who refreshes and renews his power and 
influence repeatedly by virtue of these makers and 
rejuvenators and moves on like the wind pressed on 
with thundering clouds? 


क्षियन्तं त्वमक्षियन्तं कृणोतीय॑रति रेणुं मघ्वा ware 
विभञ्जनुर रशनिंर्माँडव द्यौरुत स्तोतारं मघवा वसौ! 
धात्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ksiyantam tvamaksiyantam krnotiyarti renum 
maghava samoham. Vibhanjanurasaniman iva 
dyauruta stotaram maghava vasau dhat. 


Indra settles the unsettled, gives a home to the 
homeless. Commanding power and glory, wielding 
thunder and lightning like radiance of the sun, he 
advances to battle and crushes the enemy to dust. And 
commanding wealth and honour of the world, he 
establishes the celebrant in a state of excellence and 
prosperity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


88 RGVEDA 


अयं चक्रमिंषणत्सूर्यस्य न्येत॑शं रीरमत्सस्रमाणम्‌। आ कृष्ण 
ई' जुहुराणो जिघर्ति त्वचो बुध्ने रज॑सो अस्य योनौ ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Ayam cakramisanatsurysya nyetasam rirama- 
tsasrmanam. A krsna im juhurano jigharti tvaco 
01/८4/171८ rajaso asya yonau. 


This Indra, lord ruler of cosmic energy, moves 
the wheel of the sun in orbit and then stops the 
continuance of the day’s activity for rest. By virtue of 
the same energy the dark cloud in its tortuous motions 
holds and releases the waters to shower and flow. And 
the same Indra holds the great defining dark 
concentrations of energy in its cosmic womb at the 
deepest. 


sifda-at यज॑मानो न होता ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Asiknyam yajamano na hota. 

In the great dark night of the universe, Indra is 
the yajamana of creation, the clarion call as well as the 
performer, preserving the fire eternal. 

गव्यन्त इन्द्रं सख्याय faut अश्वायन्तो वृष॑णं वाजय॑न्तः। 
जनी यन्तो जनिदामरक्चितोतिमा च्यावयामोऽवते न 
कोरम्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 

16. Gavyanta indram sakhyaya vipra asvayanto 
vrsanam vajayantah. Janiyanto janidamaksitot- 
ima cyavayamo’ vate na kosam. 

Desirous of cows, horses, speed and energy, 
science and progress, and the love of our mates, we, 


scholars, sages and intelligent people exhort and move 
Indra for friendship, hero brave and generous, giver of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 89 


birth and progeny and unfailing provider of protection 
and well-being. We move and exhort him as we lower a 
bucket into a well, shake it, fill it up with water and 
draw it up for our benefit. 


त्राता नो बोधि दङ्शान आपिरभिख्याता afar 
सोम्यानाम्‌। सखा पिता पितृतंमः पितृणां eda 
ल्लोकमुंशाते वयोधाः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Tratano bodhi dadrsana apirabhikhyata mardita 
somyanam. Sakha pita pitrtamah pitrnam kartemu 
lokamuSate vayodhah. 


Know that, O people, who is our saviour and 
protector, ever watching, always present with us as 
brother, teacher and benefactor of loving peaceful 
devotees, friend, father and progenitor of our forefathers 
and sustainer guardians, all doer and all giver of life, 
health and age to the lovers of life on earth. 


सयीयताम॑विता बोधि erat गृणान इन्द्र स्तुवते area धाः 1 
ad ad चकृमा ware आभिः शमीभिर्महय॑न्त 
इन्द्र ।॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Sakhiyatamavita bodhi sakha grnana indra 
stuvate vayo dhah. Vyam hya te cakrma sabadha 
abhih samibhirmahayanta indra. 


Indra, friend and protector of friends you are, 
know us and enlighten us. Lord admired and celebrated, 
bless the devotee with health, wealth and long age. Lord 
of power, honour and excellence, Indra, with all our 
limitations, we admire, honour and celebrate you only, 
exalting you with these our acts of love, devotion and 
worship. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


90 RGVEDA 


स्तुत इन्द्रो मघवा tee वृत्रा भूरीण्येकों अप्रतीनि हन्ति। 
अस्य प्रियो ज॑रिता यस्य शर्म॑न्नकिर्देवा वारयन्ते न 
मतीः eeu 


19. = Stuata indro maghava yaddha vrtra bhurinyeko 
apratini hanti. Asya priyo jarita yasya Sarma- 
nnakirdeva varayante na martah. 


Indra, lord of honour, power and excellence, 
ruler of the world, admired and worshipped, is the one 
who all by himself breaks and destroys many irresistible 
clouds of vapours, darkness and evil. Whoever is dear 
to him, a celebrant of this lord, and takes shelter under 
his protection, no one, no human or divine, can obstruct 
or oppose. 


एवा न इन्द्रो मघ्वा facet कर॑त्स॒त्या च॑र्षणीधृद॑नर्वां। 
त्वं राजां जनुषां धेह्यस्मे अधि श्रवो माहिनं यज्जरित्रे ॥ २०॥ 


20. Eva na indro maghava virapSi karat satya 
carsnidhrdanarva. Tvam raja janusam_ dhe- 
hyasme adhi Sravo mahinam yajjaritre. 


Thus does Indra, lord of wealth, power and 
excellence, free and irresistible, abounding and generous 
sustainer of the people, do and achieve what is good 
and true for the world. O lord of light ruling over the 
living beings, who create and bear great food, 
sustenance and honour for the celebrant, the same 
honour and excellence, pray, create and give for us all 
and bless us. 


नू ष्टुत इन्दर नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AAG: | अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्य नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ २९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 18 91 


21. Nustuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma_ navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 


Indra, lord supreme of honour and excellence, 
praised and worshipped in holy voice, create and 
augment food, energy and sustenance for the celebrant 
like streams overflowing with water for all. O lord 
omnipresent, moving yet unmoving, we create and offer 
ever new songs of praise and homage in your honour, 
and pray, give us the will and intelligence by which we 
may be masters of chariots and be thankful and obedient 
servants of Divinity. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 18 
Indraditi Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


अयं पन्था srifera: पुराणो यतों देवा उदजायन्त विश्वे । 
अतश्चिदा जनिषीष्ट प्रवृद्दो मा मातर॑ममुया पत्त॑वे कः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ayam pantha anuvittah [16110 2410 deva 
udajayanta visve. Atascada janisista pravrddho 
ma mataramamuya [411८17८ kah. 


This is the path ancient and eternal, known and 
followed, by which all saints and sages and divine facts 
and forces are born to grow and rise, from which the 
whole world comes into being and evolves to greatness 
and grandeur. Therefore, do not do anything by that way 
to insult or desecrate the mother, nature, earth, human 
mother or animal, or any source of generation. 


नाहमतो निरया वुर्गहैतत्तिर्‌ श्चत। पाश््वान्निर्ग माणि । 
बहूनि मे अकता eat युध्य त्वेन सं त्वेन पृच्छै।। २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


92 RGVEDA 


2: Nahamato niraya durgahaitat tirascata parsva- 
nnirgamani. Bahuni me akrta kartvani yudhyai 
tvena sam tvena prcchai. 


This path is dark and deep, unfathomable, yet it 
is unavoidable. Therefore, I won’t evade it, nor trespass 
it either by another tortuous route or by a wayside alley. 
Many are my jobs yet unaccomplished, many the battles 
to be fought by many, many the questions to be asked 
of many. 


परायतीं मातर मन्व॑चष्ट AA गान्यनु नू ग॑मानि। 
wats अंपिबत्सोममिन्द्रः शतधन्यं चम्बो।: सुतस्य ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: Parayatim mataramanvacasta na nanu ganyanu 
nu gamani. Tvasturgrahe apibat somamindrah 
Satadhanyam camvoh sutasya. 


I see the mother passing away, neither anyone 
going with nor anyone following after. Indra, the spirit 
of life, by itself in the house of Tvashta, divine artificer, 
receives a hundredfold joy of earthly form and drinks 
the soma of the ecstasy of living in the cup of existence 
fashioned by the maker. 


किं स ऋध॑क्कृणवद्यं सहस्त्रं मासो AN MAT पूर्वीः । 
नही न्व॑स्य प्रतिमानमस्त्यन्तजतिघूत ये wheat: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Kim sa rdhakkranavadyam sahasram maso 
Jabhara saradasca purvrth. Nahi nvasya pratima- 
namastyantarjatesuta ye janitvah. 


What would he do in truth singly, particularly 
or distinguishably, whom uncountable months and 
seasons and years have earlier borne, supported and 
cherished a hundred times? And for sure there is none 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 18 93 


exactly like or equal to him, no copy, either among those 
who have been born so far or among those who would 
be born in future. 


अवद्यमिंव मन्य॑माना गुहाकरिन्द्रं माता वीर्येणा न्यु्टम्‌। 
अथोद॑स्थात्स्वयमत्कं वसान आ रोद॑सी अपृणाजायं- 
मानः WG 


Avadyamiva manyamana_ guhakarindram mata 
viryena nyrstam. Athodasthatsvayamatkam 
vasana ठ rodasi apranajjayamanah. 


The mother, worthy of reverence and full of the 
pride and joy of motherhood, bears Indra, living foetus, 
in the womb as a silent secret nourished with her vital 
blood. This Indra, nestled by itself as a living form, 
nourished, growing and wearing its own form as a 
garment, abides, and when it is born it fulfils the purpose 
of heaven and earth (as it fulfils the purpose of father 
and mother). 


एता अर्षन्त्यलल्ाभव॑न्तीतऋतावरीरिव संक्रोशमानाः । एता 
वि पुच्छ कियिदं aaa कमापो अद्रि परिधिं रुजन्ति।॥ ६॥ 
6. Eta arsantyalalabhavantirratavaririva samkro- 


Samanah. Eta vi prcecha kimidam_  bhananti 
kamapo adrim paridhim rujanti. 


These streams of water, flowing, murmuring, 
ecstatically singing, rush on like beauteous rays of the 
dawn. Ask them what they say thus, what mounts they 
strike and circle, what banks they overflow, what 
limitations they overcome, what clouds they touch. 


feed ष्विदस्मै निविदो भनन्तेन्द्र॑स्यावद्यं दिधिषन्त sara: 1 
ममैतान्पुत्रो म॑ हता वधेनं वृत्रं saat असृजद्वि सिन्धून्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


94 RGVEDA 


fin Kimu svidasmai nivido bhanantendrasyavadyam 
didhisanta apah. Mamaitan putro mahata 
vadhena vrtram jaghanvan asrjadvi_ sindhun. 


What do the ripples, murmurs and songs of 
excitement of the streams, imaging the immanent power 
of Indra, say to the mount they hit, the cloud they touch 
and to this humanity? They speak for Mother Nature, 
Aditi: My son Indra, breaking the cloud with the mighty 
thunderbolt of solar energy released the waters and made 
the streams to flow. 


मम॑च्यन cat युवतिः wre wat त्वां Haat जगार । 
मम॑च्िदापः शिवे ममृड्चुर्मम॑च्िदिन्द्रः सहसोदं- 
तिष्ठत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Mamaccana tva yuvatih वतव mamaccana tva 
kusava jagara. Mamaccidapah sisave mamrdyur- 
mamaccidindrah sahasodatisthat. 


Once Mother Nature, a youthful female, in a 
state of passion conceives you and brings you to life 
and birth. Then another, a voracious raging demoniac 
swallows you. Yet another, cool and kind, overflowing 
with love, caresses and comforts you as a child. And 
then Indra, grown mature as a new born soul, arrives 
with his own essential strength. 


मम॑च्यन त मघवन्व्यंसो निविविर्ध्वां अप हनू Se | अधा 
निविद्द उत्तरो बभूवाच्छिरों दासस्य सं पिंणग्वधेनं ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Mamaccana te maghavanvyamso nivividhvan apa 
hanu jaghana. Adha nividdha uttaro babhu- 
vanchiro dasasya sam pinagvadhena. 


Maghavan, lord of might and excellence, when 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 18 95 


the self-deluded fool, though arms and shoulders 
broken, in a state of madness, striking right and left 
attacks your forces, then though attacked, recover, rise 
later higher and crush the head of the wicked opponent 
with a deadly strike of the thunderbolt. 


गृष्टिः dea स्थविरं तवागाम॑नाधुष्यं dust तुम्रमिन्द्रम्‌। 
अरींन््हं वत्सं चरथाय माता स्वयं गातुं तन्व इच्छमा- 
ALU ९०॥ 


10.  Grastih sasuva sthaviram tavagamandadhrsyam 
vrasabham tumramindram. Arilham vatsam 
carathaya mata svayam gatum tanva iccha- 
manam. 


Just as a young cow gives birth to the calf, so 
does the mother, Mother Nature, give birth to Indra, 
jiva, the blessed soul, essentially a lover of life, inspired 
with the will to love and live, to act, to move around 
and to know the Divine Word. A divine child is man, 
strong, unshakable, intrepidable, generous, inspiring, 
lover and winner of honour and excellence, and 
invincible, blest with the human body. 


उत माता म॑हिषमन्व॑वेनद्मी त्वां जहति पुत्र car: 1 
अथाब्रवीद्‌ वृत्रमिन्द्र हनिष्यन्त्सखे' विष्णो वितरं वि 
क्रमस्व ॥ 22 

11. Utamatamahisamanvavenadami tva jahati putra 


devah. Athabravid-vrtrmindro hanisyan-tsakhe 
visno vitaram vi kramasva. 


Then (having given birth to the soul) Mother 
Nature (inspired with divinity), loving, longing and 
yearning for the well being of the child, softly speaks, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


96 RGVEDA 


warning the great off-spring: Dear child, the devas, 
senses, mind and all, are neglecting, forsaking, 
misleading you (in your state of darkness, ignorance 
and unawareness). Indra, the born soul, dispelling 
darkness and destroying Vrtra, demon of ignorance, 
speaks loud and bold to Vishnu, intelligent spiritual self: 
Dear friend, arise and act for self redemption (through 
existence with the devas, senses, mind and the 
discriminative intelligence). 


कस्ते मातरं विधर्वामचक्रच्छयुं कस्त्वामंजिघांसच्यरन्तम्‌। 
कस्ते देवो अधिं arte आंसीद्यत्प्राक्चिणाः पितरं ure- 
Tat ९२॥ 


12. Kaste mataram vidhavamacakracchayum kastva- 
majighamsaccarantam. Kaste devo adhi mardika 
asid yatpraksinah pitaram pddagrhya. 


Indra, obedient soul, holding on to the feet of 
the father, who can render your mother a widow? Who 
can hurt you while asleep or moving about? What is 
that supernormal power over and above your state of 
grace which can corrupt you? (Answer: None.) 


अव्या शुन॑ आन्त्राणि पेचे न देवेषु विविदे मर्डितारम्‌ । 

अप॑श्यं जायाममंहीयमानामर्धां मे श्येनो मध्वा ज॑भार ॥ ९२ ॥ 

13. Avartya Suna antrani ८८८ na devesu vivide 

marditaram. Apasyam jayamamahiyamana- 
madha me syeno madhva jabhara. 

At peace beyond fluctuations of the mind, I 

ripen and refine the inner visions. I see no saviour either 


in the experience of the senses or among the external 
powers of nature. Indeed, I have seen even Mother 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 19 97 


Nature insulted and desecrated. Ultimately it is the bird 
of heaven that brings me the divine message, nectar 
sweets of the honey of real life. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 19 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


एवा त्वामिन्द्र विज्नत्र fava cara: qzata Hat: | 
महामुभे रोद॑सी वृब्दमृष्वं निरेकमिद्‌ वुंणते वृत्रहत्ये ॥ ९ ॥ 


i, Eva tvamindra vajrinnatra visve devasah suha- 
vasa umah. Mahamubhe rodasi vrddhamrsvam 
nirekamid vranate vratrahatye. 


Indra, lord ruler of power and excellence, 
wielder of the thunderbolt of law, justice and protection, 
all the scholars of the world, nobles and divines, 
defenders, holy yajakas and both earth and heaven elect 
and invite you alone, great, vast and high in grandeur, 
lord sublime, unique and incomparable. They invoke 
you for the destruction of Vrtra, demon of darkness, 
ignorance and selfishness. 


अवासृजन्त जिव्रयो न देवा भुव॑ः सम्राच्िन्द्र aerate: | 
अहन्नहिं परिश्यानमर्णः प्र वंर्तनीर॑रदो विरूवधेनाः 20 


2 Avasrjanta jivrayo na deva bhuvah samralindra 
satyayonih. Ahannahim parisayanamarnah pra 
vrtanirarado visvadhenah. 


Indra, lord of the world, men of age, experience 
and wisdom, firm in their values and conduct of life, as 
also the brilliant nobles and divines of the world, create 
and consecrate the ruler of the earth dedicated to truth 
as the very being and purpose of his existence. And like 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


98 RGVEDA 


the sun, light of the world dedicated to his eternal task 
and nature, breaking the cloud sleeping over the locked 
up vapours, and releasing the streams of water to flow 
and feed the world, the ruler destroys the demons of 
darkness and their strongholds to make the waters of 
life to flow and give new energy and freshness of life to 
the people. 


अतुप्णुवन्तं विय॑तमवुध्यमवुंध्यमानं सुषुपाणमिनदर | 
सप प्रतिं wad आशर्यानपदहिं वज्रण वि रिणा अपर्वन्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


श Atrpnuvantam viyatamabudhyamabudhya- 
manam susupanamindra. Sapta prati pravata 
asayanamahim vjrena vi rina aparvan. 


Indra, lord of light, power and excellence, ruler 
of the world, with a stroke of the thunderbolt destroy 
without relent the serpentine demon, Vrtra, insatiable, 
uncontrollable, unawakened, incorrigible, inebriated, 
blocking up and sleeping over seven streams of the 
onward flow of life. 


अक्षोदयच्छवसा क्षामं qe वारणं वातस्तविंषीभिरिन्द्रः | 
Fora usa ओजो ऽ वाभिनत्ककुभः पर्व॑ता- 
नाम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Aksodayacchavasa ksama budhnam varna 
vatastavistbhirindrah. Drlhanyaubhnadu-samana 
ojo’vabhinat kakubhah parvatanam. 


Indra, with his own strength and courage and 
by his blazing forces, shakes the earths and skies just as 
the winds beat and shear the currents of water flows 
and concentrations of vapour. Lustrous, passionate and 
inspired, he crushes mighty strongholds of the enemy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 19 99 
and breaks down the peaks of mountainous adversaries. 


अभि प्र दद्र्जन॑यो न गर्भ रथांइव प्र य॑युः साकमद्रयः। 
अत॑र्पयो विसृतं gen ऊर्मीन्त्वं gar अरिणा इन्द्र 
सिन्धून्‌ & ॥ 


a, Abhi pra dadrurjanayo na garbham ratha iva pra 
yayuh sakamadrayah. Atarpayo visrta ubja 
urmintvam vrtan arina indra sindhun. 


As mothers rush to the child to protect it, so do 
the multitudinous armies rush forward to defend you 
alongwith the chariots. You break the clouds, fill the 
rivers with water and make them flow and thus, O lord 
Indra, you set the locked up seas rolling. 


त्वं महीमवर्नि' विश्वधेनां तुर्वीतये aeata क्षर॑न्तीम्‌ । 
अर॑मयो नमसेजदर्णः Gaunt अकृणोरिन्द्र सिन्धून्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam mahimavanim visvadhenam turvitaye 
vayyaya ksarantim. Aramayo namasaijadarnah 
sutaranan akrnorindra sindhun. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, with thanks and 
homage to nature and her maker, serve the earth, great 
protective mother of her children, universal sustainer 
of life overflowing with nourishment for the defender of 
humanity and destroyer of enmity for the sake of peace 
and well being of all. Fill the earth with food and plenty, 
make her a lovely place for living, let the streams ripple 
and flow, make the seas roll, inviting all to surf and 
swim and navigate, and cross the storms of existence. 


प्राग्रुवो। नभन्वो३ न वक्वां ध्वस्त्रा अंपिन्वद्युवतीऋतज्ञाः। 
धन्वान्य अपृणक्तृषाणों अधोगिन्द्र॑ः eats दंसु- 
पत्नीः ॥ ७ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


100 RGVEDA 


a Pragruvo nabhanvo na vakva dhvasra apinvad- 
yuvatrrtajnah. Dhanvanyajran aprnaktrsa-nan 
adhogindrah staryo damsupatnih. 


Like the winding streams of rushing waters, let 
Indra, ruler of the world, develop the fatal armour as 
the destructive and defensive force. Let him enlist young 
and intelligent women dedicated to truth and progress. 
Let him plan and provide irrigation projects for the 
desert lands to restore their fertility. Similarly let him 
develop the cattle wealth and take care of the wives of 
the warriors and make them play a creative role in 
development. 


पूर्वीरुषसंः श॒रद॑श्च गूर्ता aa staat असुंजद्ि सिन्धूंन्‌। 
परिछठिता अतृणद्वद्वधानाः सीरा इन्द्र: स्रवितवे 
पृथिव्या ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Purvirusasah Saradasca gurta vrtram jaghanvan 
asrjadvi sindhun. Paristhita atrnad badbadhanah 
stra indrah sravitave prthivya. 


Just as the sun causes the ancient dawns to rise 
and moves the cycle of the seasons such as winter and 
others and move them on and on, and just as solar energy 
breaks the clouds and makes the rivers flow, so let Indra, 
ruler of the world, break open the locked up energy of 
still waters and make it flow in streams for the 
development and progress of the earth and her children. 


वम्रीभिः qaagal अदानं frasmreRa आ ज॑भर्थं। 
व्य4 न्धो अंख्यद्हिंमाददानो निभु^दुखच्छित्सम॑रन्त 
ad neu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 19 101 


0. Vamribhih putramagruvo adanamnivesandad- 
dhariva a jabhartha. Vyandho akhyadahima- 
dadano nirbhidukhacchit samaranta parva. 


Indra, master of motive energies and controller 
of the speed and direction of resources, by rising hills 
hold the unused and unusable water of the streams 
emerging from the source from further flow, collect and 
lift the flows together, redirect the water so that the fields 
and crops receiving the water proclaim the gift as it 
flows out from the reservoir filling the canals. 


प्रते पू्वीणि कर॑णानि faors sfagt atte विदुषे करांसि। 
यर्थायथा वृष्ण्यानि स्वगृर्ताऽपांसि राजन्न्यांविंवेषीः it ९०॥ 


10. Prate purvani karanani vipra’’vidvan aha vidu- 
se karamsi. Yathayatha vrsnyani svagurta’pam- 
si rajannaryavivesth. 


Rajan, glorious ruler of the world, the deeds of 
ancient and eternal value you have done, the 
programmes you have accomplished, and the self- 
proclaiming acts of generosity and noble adventures you 
have performed, the noble scholar and poet sings and 
celebrates in your honour, O wise leader and master, 
exactly as you have performed in the interest of 
humanity. 


नू ष्टुत इन्दर नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो A: 1 अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम रथ्य॑: सदासाः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Nu stuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 

Sung and celebrated thus, Indra, O ruler of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


102 RGVEDA 


world, create, bear and bring food, energy and 
knowledge for the celebrants just as the rivers flow for 
us all. And thus, this the latest song of homage and 
adoration is offered to you to the best of our knowledge 
and intelligence. Bless us, we pray, with intelligence 
and knowledge so that we may be warriors of the chariot 
in the service of Divinity and humanity. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 20 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


आ न इन्द्रो दूरादा न॑ आसाद॑भिष्टिकृदवंसे यासदुग्रः। 
ओजि्ेभिर्नृपतिर्वज्र॑ बाहः सङ्के समत्सु तुर्वणिः ga- 
SITU I | त 

i, A na indro durada na asadabhistikrdavase 
yasadugrah. Ojisthebhirnrpatirvajrabahuh sange 
samatsu turvanih pratanyun. 


May Indra, strong and blazing hero, impetuous 
and impassioned warrior of the arms of thunder, ruler 
and sustainer of the people, harbinger of the cherished 
fruits of noble desire and peace, come to us from far 
and near for our defence and protection. Lovers of the 
battles of life as we are, join us in our heats and meets 
and battles of action for progress with the most powerful 
weapons and warriors of the time. 


आ न इन्द्रो हरिंभिर्यात्वच्छऽर्वाचीनोऽ aa राध॑से च। 
तिष्ठाति ast मघवां विरष्छीमं यज्ञमनु नो वाज॑सातौ ॥ २॥ 

De A na indro haribhiryatvaccha’rvacino’vase_ra- 
dhase ca. Tisthati vajri maghava virapsimam 
yajnamanu no vajasatau. 


May Indra, lord great and glorious, commanding 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 20 103 


wealth, honour and excellence, wielding thunderous 
arms of latest design and power, come to us with his 
forces, come well at the fastest for our protection and 
all round success, and may he, we pray, stand by us in 
the conduct of this yajna of ours for victory in our battle 
of peace and progress in the field of production, 
development of energy, and advancement in arts and 
sciences. 


इमं यज्ञं त्वमस्माकमिन्द्र पुरो दधंत्सनिष्यसि क्रतुं नः। 
varie वचिन्त्सनये धनानां त्वयां वयमर्य आजिं ज॑येम ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Imam yajnam tvamasmakamindra puro dadhat- 
sanisyasi kratum nah. Svaghniva vajrintsanaye 
dhananam tvaya vayamarya ajim jayema. 


This yajna of our social order, Indra, lord 
commander of wealth and power, honour and 
excellence, ruling, guiding and sharing the governance 
of our cities, you would join and share with us in our 
plans and discussions throughout the holy programme 
of ours. And we hope, O wielder of the thunderbolt, 
that with you as the leader and pioneer we shall fight 
like hunters of the wild and win the battle for the 
achievement of the wealth and values of the good life. 


उशन्नु षु णः सुमना उपाके सोम॑स्य नु सुषुतस्य स्वधावः | 
पा इन्द्र प्रतिंभ॒तस्य मध्वः समन्ध॑सा ममदः USWA ४॥ 


4. Usannu sunah sumana upake somasya nu susu- 
tasya svadhavah. Pa indra pratibhrtasya madh- 
vah samandhasa mamadah prsthyena. 


Indra, brilliant ruler, wielding your own essential 
wealth and strength and power, glowing with love and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


104 RGVEDA 


kindness for us, happy and joyous at heart close by us, 
preserve, protect and promote the plenty and prosperity 
of the nation’s honour fought for and won for every 
partner and then, after the battle and struggle, enjoy the 
honey sweets of life with a taste of the food and pleasure 
of peace and progress. 


वियोर॑रष्छाऋषिंभिर्नवेभिर्वृक्षो न पक्वः Goat न जेतां । 
मर्यो न योषामभि मन्य॑मानोऽ च्छ विवक्मि पुरुहूत- 
मिन्द्र॑म्‌॥५॥ 


2; Vi yo rarapSa rsibhirnavebhirvrkso na pakvah 
sranyo na jeta. Maryo na yosamabhi manyama- 
no’ccha vivakmi puruhutamindram. 


Mighty and full abundant is Indra who is praised 
and celebrated by the latest sages and scholars like a 
tree laden with ripe fruit, like a victor putting the enemy 
to flight. Like a man loving and honouring his beloved, 
knowing, loving and respecting Indra at the closest and 
highest, I too celebrate and exalt Indra invoked and 
glorified by the whole humanity. 


गिरिर्न यः स्वत॑वाँ ऋष्व इन्द्रः सनादेव सह॑से जात उग्रः। 
आदर्ता agi स्थविरं न भीम ska कोशं वसुना न्युं्टम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Girirna yah svatavam rsva indrah sanadeva 
sahase jata ugrah. Adarta vajram sthaviram na 
bhima udneva kosam vasuna nyrstam. 


Inherently mighty like a cloud and a mountain, 
dynamic and sublime, Indra is blazing glorious, ever 
known for his power and patience, destroyer of enemies, 
thunderous of arms, awful as an invincible warrior, 
abundant as the sea and overflowing with the wealth of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 20 105 


life. 
न यस्य॑ वर्ता जनुषा न्वस्ति न राध॑स आमरीता म॒घस्य॑ | 
उद्वावृषाणस्त॑विषीव उग्रास्मभ्यं दद्धि पुरुहूत रायः ॥ ७॥ 
7. Na yasya varta janusa nvasti na radhasa amarita 
maghasya. Udvavrsanastavisiva ugra’smabhyam 
daddhi puruhita rayah. 


By birth and by nature, there is none to resist 
him and to turn his back, none to destroy the wealth 
and power of his glory and majesty. Ever pouring forth 
the showers of favours, blazing with forces under 
command, O lord of might and passion, universally 
invoked and exalted, bear and bring for us the wealths 
and honours of the good life. 


ईक्षे रायः क्षय॑स्य चर्षणीनामुत व्रजम॑पवर्तासि गोनाम्‌। 
शिक्षानरः समिथेषु प्रहावान्वस्वो' राशिम॑धिनेतासि 
भूरिम्‌ ८ ॥ 

8. Ikse rayah ksayasya carsaninamuta vrajama- 
pavartasi gonam. Siksanarah samithesu praha- 
vanvasvo rasimabhinetasi bhurim. 


I see you watch over the treasures of the wealth 
and home of the people and open up the treasures of the 
languages and learning of the earths. You are the leader 
of knowledge and education, warrior and victor of wars, 
and director of the circulation of the collective wealth 
and assets of the world in many ways. 


कया तच्छरण्वे शच्या vifdst saat कृणोति मुहु का 
चिंदृष्वः। पुरु दाशुषे विच॑यिष्ठो अंहोऽथा दधाति द्रविणं 
जरित्रे ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


106 RGVEDA 


9. Kaya tacchrnve Sacya Sacistho yaya krnoti muhu 
ka cidrsvah. Puru dasuse vicayistho anho’tha 
dadhati dravinam jaritre. 


What is that knowledge and expertise, what sort 
after all, by which, let me hear, you, mighty majestic 
and most versatile, somehow achieve success and 
victory again and again, and by which, being the greatest 
breaker and destroyer of sin and evil and crime, you 
bear and bring plenty of wealth for the generous 
celebrant? 


मानों मर्धीरा भ॑रा दद्दि aa: प्रदाशुषे दात॑वे भूरि ara । 
wal ot शास्ते अस्मिन्‌त॑ं उक्थे प्र ब्र॑वाम वयमिन्द्र 
स्तुवन्तं: Qo Ul 


10. Mano mardhira bhara daddhi tannah pra dasuse 
datave bhuri yatte. Navye desne Saste asmin ta 
ukthe pra bravama vayamindra stuvantah. 


Indra, lord of majesty and generosity, we pray, 
forsake us not, bear and bring and give us that plenty 
and variety of wealth which is yours meant for a gift to 
the generous devotee in this new, productive, admirable 
and well directed yajnic song of celebration in your 
honour, and may we, we pray, continue to speak and 
sing in praise of your glory. 


नू ष्टुत इन्दर नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AMG: 1 अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Nu stuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 

Indra, generous lord of knowledge, wealth, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 21 107 


honour and excellence, sung and celebrated thus by the 
devotees, bear and bring and increase your gift of the 
wealth of food, energy and knowledge of arts and 
sciences for the celebrants like the overflowing streams 
of water across the earth. This new homage of song and 
adoration is created and offered to your honour so that, 
O lord of horse and armour, we pray, we may rise as a 
nation of chariot warriors, generous and obedient to 
Divinity. 
Mandala 4/Sukta 21 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


आ यात्विन्द्रोऽ de su न इह स्तुतः स॑धमादस्तु शूरः | 
वावृधानस्तविंषीर्यस्यं yates श्चत्रमभिभूति पुष्यात्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 A yatvindro’vasa upa na iha stutah sadhamadastu 
surah. Vavrdhanas-tavisir-yasya purvir-dyaurna 
ksatram-abhibhiuti pusydt. 


May Indra, ruler and protector of the people, 
come here to us for our protection and advancement 
and, praised and sung, may the brave hero share our joy 
of celebration. Exalted and ascending he is, time tested 
his forces, bright and blazing as light of the sun. May 
he, we pray, strengthen our social order and raise it to 
the heights of prosperity. 


तस्येदिह स्त॑वथ वृष्ण्यानि तुविद्युम्नस्य तुविराध॑सो + 
यस्य क्रतुर्विंदथ्यो ई न सम्राट्‌ साह्वान्तखत्रो अभ्यस्ति 
Pst: ॥ २॥ 

2. Tasyediha stavatha vrsnyani tuvidyumnasya 
tuviradhaso nrn. Yasya kraturvidathyo na samrat 
sahvantarutro abhyasti krstth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


108 RGVEDA 


Here on this earth praise Indra, celebrate his acts 
of bravery and generosity, appreciate and honour the 
leaders and commanders of the mighty and majestic 
glorious achiever, whose yajnic rule over the social order 
is worth knowing and holy as an umbrella over the 
people like the cover of universal and effulgent sunlight, 
challenging, fighting, winning, forbearing and 
redeeming. 


आ यात्विन्द्रो दिव आ पंथिव्या मक्षु समुद्रादुत वा पुरीषात्‌। 
स्व॑र्ण॑रादव॑से नो मरुत्वान्परावतो वा सद॑ नादूतस्यं ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: A yatvindro diva a prthivya maksu samudraduta 
va purisat. Svarnaradavase no marutvan para- 
vato va sadandadrtasya. 


Let Indra, with vision, power and energy to rule, 
come instantly from the heavens, from the earth, from 
the sea or from the orb of the sun and from the ethereal 
spaces for our protection and promotion. Let the lord 
of the winds come from afar or from the vedi of cosmic 
yajna and from the centre of truth and rectitude. 


wed रायो बहतो य ईशो तसुं टवाम विदथेष्विन्द्र॑म्‌। यो 
वायुना जय॑ति गोमं॑तीषु प्र ्चंष्णुया नय॑ति वस्यो अच्छ॑ UX UN 


4. Sthurasya rayo brhato ya ise tamu stavama 
vidathesvindram. Yo vayuna jayati gomatisu pra 
dhrsnuya nayati vasyo accha. 


In the holiest programmes of our daily business 
of life, we honour and celebrate Indra who rules the 
great and permanent assets of the nation, who wins 
victories by the winds in the battles of the lands and 
movable wealth and who, with bold and intrepidable 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 21 109 


confidence and initiative, wholly and faultlessly directs 
the circulation of the nation’s wealth for development. 


उप॒ यो नमो नम॑सि erased वाचं जनयन्यज॑ध्यै । 
ऋञ्जसानः पुरु वारं SRR कृण्वीत सद॑नेषु होता ॥ ५ ॥ 


a. Upa yo namo namasi stabhayanniyarti vacam 
jJanayan yajadhyai. Rnjasanah puruvara ukthai- 
rendram krnvita sadanesu hota. 


He who moves forward, who creates and holds 
food stocks for the sake of consumption in emergency 
and establishes courtesy and mutual respect as a value 
of social culture, who creates and uses the language of 
cooperation and social cohesion for the unity and 
cooperation of the common wealth of order, who is 
accepted and celebrated by many many people with 
words of reverence, and who, by all these ways, creates 
honour and prestige for the nation of humanity, calls 
for the shots in world assemblies and rises higher as 
ruler, as Indra above all. 


धिषा यदि धिषण्यन्तः सरण्यान्त्सद॑न्तो अद्विंमौशिजस्य 
गोदे । आ दुरोर्षाः पास्त्यस्य होता यो नो महान्त्संवरणेषु 
af#: ॥ ६॥ ति 

6. Dhisa yadi dhisnyantah saranyan tsadanto adri- 
mausijasya gohe. A durosah pastyasya hota yo 
no mahantsamvaranesu vahnih. 


If the wise people sitting in the house of a loving 
and nobly ambitious man of yajna, were to do homage 
with their intelligence and wisdom to the generous giver 
and yajaka and to those who are realised souls worthy 
of company, then the one, Indra himself, really great, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


110 RGVEDA 


beyond anger and fear, would come and join there as 
the leader and high priest, as indeed the very fire, winner 
and carrier of fragrance, in the battles of life in the house 
of the yajamana taking it as his own affair in his own 
house. 


सत्रा यदी" भार्वरस्य वृष्णः सिष॑क्ति शुष्मः स्तुवते arte 
गुहा यदींमोशिजस्य गोहे प्र यद्धिये प्राय॑से मदाय ॥ ७॥ 


7. Satra yadim bharvarasya vrsnah sisakti Susmah 
stuvate bharaya. Guha yadimausijasya gohe pra 
yaddhiye prayase madaya. 


When truly in yajnic session in honour of the 
lord sustainer of humanity, Indra, the light and power 
of the generous lord showers upon the celebrant for his 
fulfilment, then the hidden wealth and potential in the 
mind and home of the loving and faithful yajamana 
blooms forth for the fruition of his intelligence, 
advancement and life’s joy. 


वि यद्वरांसि पर्वतस्य वृण्वे पयोभिर्जिन्वे अपां जवांसि । 
विदद्रौरस्य॑ गवयस्य गोहे यदी वाजाय सुध्यो ई वहन्ति ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Vi yad varamsi parvatasya vrnve payobhirjinve 
apam javamsi. Vidadgaurasya gavayasya gohe 
yadi vajaya sudhyo vahanti. 


When I open the flood gates of the cloud and 
break open the path of the mountain, I augment the flow 
of the rivers with fresh reservoirs. And then the wise 
pioneers diving deep and reaching the depths of the 
brilliance and generosity of nature’s resources carry on 
researches for the food, energy and speed of life’s 
progress. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 21 111 


भद्रा ते हस्ता सुकुतोत पाणी प्र॑यन्तारां स्तुवते राध॑ इन्द्र | 
काते निषत्तिः किमु नो duce किं नोदुदु eta दातवा 
उ॥ ९॥ 


2 Bhadra te hasta sukrtota pani prayantara stuvate 
radha indra. Ka te nisattih kimu no mamatsi kim 
noduhu harsase datava u. 


Noble are your arms, O lord Indra, as 
instruments of noble deeds, gracious your hands 
generously giving the wealth of life to the celebrant. 
What and where is the seat of your dispensation? Why 
not bless us with joy? Why not rejoice and give us the 
thrill and the ecstasy? 


एवा वस्व इन्द्रः सत्यः सम्राइन्तां Gat वरिवः पूरवे कः। 
पुरुष्टुत क्रत्वा नः शग्धि रायो भक्षीय तेऽ व॑सो दैव्य॑- 
FIN ९०॥ 


10. Eva vasva indrah satyah samraddhanta 1117८77 
varivah purave kah. Purustuta kratva nah sagdhi 
rayo bhakstya te’vaso daivyasya. 


Thus does Indra, ruler of the world, brilliant and 
ever true, destroyer of the demons of darkness and 
enmity, give us abundant wealth for the devotee. O lord 
praised and universally celebrated, give us the wealth 
of the world by virtue of noble and creative actions. 
Pray give us the privilege of your divine protection so 
that we may enjoy the gift of life. 


नू ष्टुत इन्द्र नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AAG: 1 अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


112 RGVEDA 


11. Nua stuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 


Indra, lord of knowledge, honour and excellence 
of wealth and well being, praised and celebrated, bear 
and bring the wealth of food, energy, knowledge and 
progress for the devotee like the flowing streams of 
living waters. This new song of homage is offered to 
you, O lord of speed and advancement, so that with 
action and intelligence we may be masters of chariots 
and noble servants of Divinity. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 22 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


यन्न इन्द्रो जुजुषे यच्च वष्टि तन्नं महान्करति शुष्म्या Fa 
ब्रह्म स्तोमं मघवा सोम॑मुक्था यो अश्मानं शव॑सा 
बिश्चदेतिं।॥ ९॥ 


iL Yanna indro jujuse yacca vasti tanno mahan 
karati Susmya_ cit. Brahma stomam maghava 
somamuktha yo asmanam Savasa bibhradeti. 


Indra, lord of light and power, supreme ruler of 
the world, commanding honour and majesty, who is ever 
with us as a friend, who loves us, who does great things 
for us and, bearing the awful might of thunder and 
generosity of the cloud, and bestowing on us food, 
energy and knowledge, honour and fame, greatness of 
wealth and grandeur, peace of mind and joy of health, 
and admirable art and poetry, goes on and on with his 
glory and majesty. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 22 113 


वृषा वृष॑न्धिं चतुरश्चिमस्य॑न्नुग्रो agent नृत॑मः शचीवान्‌ । 
Bra परुष्णीमुषमाण ऊर्णां यस्याः weiter स॒ख्याय 
विव्ये॥ २॥ 


2. Vrsa vrsandhim caturasrimasyannugro bahu- 
bhyam nrtamah sacivan. Sriye parusnimusama- 
na urnam yasyah parvani sakhyaya vivye. 


Indra, brave and generous, fierce and mighty 
brilliant but kind and generous, best and highest of 
leaders, blazing with his majesty and shooting out the 
vibrations of his four-winged forceful power of thunder 
directed all round by his arms of protection and progress, 
interweaves the harsh and variegated regions of the earth 
into a unified pattern under the warm cover of a single 
umbrella for the sake of mutual harmony and beauty of 
life. 


यो देवो देवत॑मो जाय॑मानो महो वाजेभिर्मद्धिंश्च शष्पैः । 
दर्धानो व्रं बाह्योरुशन्तं द्याममेन रेजयत्प्र yt ३ ॥ 


a Yo devo devatamo jayamano maho vajebhir- 
mahadbhisca susmaih. Dadhano vajram bahvo- 
rusantam dyamamena rejayat pra bhuma. 


Indra is the leader who, brilliant ruler, most 
majestic among brilliant ones, newly rising, great, 
wielding the blazing thunderbolt in hands, makes the 
earth and skies shine with his grandeur, and, with his 
great forces and dynamic intelligence, makes the proud 
and passionate tremble and the loving and shining ones 
shine more brilliant. 


विश्वा रोधांसि प्रवत॑श्च पृर्वी्यौऋष्वाज्ननिंमत्रेजत क्षाः | 
आ मातरा भर॑ति शुष्म्या गोर्नृवत्परिंज्मन्नोनुवन्त वाताः ॥  ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


114 RGVEDA 


4. Visva rodhamsi pravatasca purvirdyaurrsvdjja- 
niman-rejata ksah. A matara bharati Susmya gor- 
nrvat-parijman-nonuvanta vatah. 


All the solid spheres and mountains of the world, 
the floods and waves of liquid motions, the regions of 
light ancient as time, the earths, all born of the dynamics 
of Prakrti, the source mothers of the earth such as heat 
and water and oceans of space, or the roaring winds of 
the interspaces, all these like the world of humanity, the 
lord of omnipotence, Indra, bears, moves and sustains. 


add Ss महतो महानि विश्वेष्वित्सव॑नेषु wart | 
यच्छूर धृष्णो धृषता द॑धृष्वानहिं AMT शवसाविंवेषीः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Ta tu ta indra mahato mahani visvesvitsavanesu 
pravacya. Yacchura dhrsno dhrsata dadhrsvan- 
ahim vajrena Savasavivesth. 


Indra, lord and presence omnipotent, invincible 
and intrepidable, those acts of yours greater than the 
greatest are worth admiration and exaltation in all 
celebrations of the world which, with your might, 
bearing and sustaining the fixed stars and moving forces 
of the universe, you perform with your power and force 
of thunder to break the clouds holding up the process 
of evolution. 


aw aa सत्या dean विश्वा प्र aad: सिस्रते वृष्णा 
ऊध्न॑ः । अधा ह त्वद्‌ वुंषमणो भियानाः प्र सिन्ध॑वो जव॑सा 
चक्रमन्त ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ta tu te satya tuvinrmna visva pra dhenavah 


sisrate vrsna udhnah. Adha ha tvad-vrsamano 
bhiyanah pra sindhavo javasa cakramanta. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 22 115 


Indra, lord of great valour and magnificence, 
generous as rain showers and magnanimous at heart, 
all those universal acts of yours are great and true. The 
cows, the earths and the words of vision stream forth 
with nourishment, energy and inspiration. And by your 
fear and force of law the rivers rush on with rapidity 
and the seas roll round with awe. 


अत्राहं ते हरिवस्ता 3 देवीरवोंभिरिन्द्र स्तवन्त स्वसारः | 
यत्सीमनु प्र मुचो agen दीर्घामनु प्रसितिं स्यन्द्‌- 
य्यै।॥ ७॥ 


7. Atraha te harivasta u deviravobhirindra stavanta 
svasarah. Yat stmanu pra muco badbadhana 
dirghamanu prasitim syandaya-dhyai. 


And surely, O lord of horse and armour and 
speed of progress, Indra, those sisterly and forward 
looking dynamic forces of yours in the land, noble and 
brilliant all, managing the resources along disciplined 
and determined lines, forces which you released to move 
forward at freedom on the long and high road to their 
goal, rush on with pleasure, favour and hopes for 
protection and exhort and exalt you. 


forties अंशर्मद्यो न सिन्धुरा त्वा शमीं शशमानस्य BF: । 
अस्मद्रय॑ क्शुशुचानस्य॑ यम्या आशुर्नं रश्मिं तुव्योजंसं 
गोः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pipile amsurmadyo na sindhura tva Sami Sasama- 
nasya Saktih. Asmadryak-susucanasya yamya 
asurna rasmim tuvyojasam goh. 

Distilled is the soma of exciting joy of life’s 
action as homage to you. May it reach you like the sea. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


116 RGVEDA 


And O lord, bring us the peace and power of the 
omnipotent and self-refulgent Divinity at the fastest like 
a driver controlling the reins of a tempestuous courser. 


अस्मे वर्षिष्ठा कृणुहि ज्येष्ठा Fon सत्रा संहरे etfs । 
अस्मभ्यं वृत्रा सुहनानि रन्धि जहि वधर्वनुषो मर्त्य॑स्य ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Asme varsistha krnuhi jyestha nrmnani satra 
sahure sahamsi. Asmabhyam vrtra suhanani 
randhi jahi vadharvanuso martyasya. 


O lord of peace, patience, power and victory, 
bless us with all those gifts of yours which are 
permanent, challenging, highest and most generous. For 
us, destroy the demons of darkness and enmity which 
deserve to be destroyed, and ward off and annihilate 
the onslaughts on the worshipful humanity. 


अस्माकमित्सु surfs त्वमिन्द्राऽस्पभ्यं feat उप॑ माहि 
वाजान्‌ । अस्मभ्यं विशव इषणः पुरन्धीर स्माकं सु 
म॑घवन्बोधि गोदाः ॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Asmakamitsu Srnuhi tvamindra’smabhyam citran 
upa mahi vajan. Asmabhyam visva isanah 
purandhirasmakam su maghavan bodhi godah. 


Indra, ruler of the world, commanding wealth 
and valour and honour, giver of the speech of wisdom, 
lands and cows, listen to our voice, measure, mark out, 
plan, and apportion for us vast and wondrous successes 
in the field of food, energy and victory. Inspire us with 
all the possibilities of intellectual and scientific 
achievement, and let us awake into a heaven of light 
and freedom. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 23 117 


नू ष्टुत इन्दर नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AG: | अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Nu stuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 


Thus faithfully praised, celebrated and 
worshipped in song, O lord of power and progress, Indra, 
bless the supplicant worshipper with food, energy and 
advancement like the streams that flow abundant. This 
homage of worship is created and offered with the best 
of our intention and intelligence praying that with the 
divine gift of latest genius we may be warriors of the 
chariot and obedient servants of Divinity. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 23 
Indra, Indra Rtadeva Devata, Vamadava Gautama Rshi 


कथा महाम॑वृधत्कस्य होतुर्यज्ञं Varo अभि सोममूधः । 
Prager जुषर्माणो अन्धो ववक्च ऋष्वः शुंचते धनाय ॥ ९॥ 


6 Katha mahamavrdhatkasya hoturyajnam jusano 
abhi somamudhah. Pibannusano jusam-ano 
andho vavaksa rsvah_ sucate dhanaya. 


How to evolve and exalt the grandeur of life? 
Which creative yajaka’s holy programme of yajnic 
instruction and evolution to join? Which milky drink 
of soma to drink from the mother’s breast? 


The great, generous and protective lord of 
sublimity, Indra, commanding knowledge, wealth, 
honour and excellence, loving and owning up the 
devoted disciple supplicant, cherishing his offer of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


118 RGVEDA 


homage, blesses him with the gift of refinement and 
exaltation of his innate wealth of honour and grandeur. 


को ster वीरः स॑धमाद॑ंमाप स्पानंश सुमतिभिः को Stet | 
कद॑स्य fat चिकिते कदूती वृधे भुंवच्छशमानस्य 
यज्योः ॥ २॥ 


pA Ko asya virah sadhamadamapa samanamsa 
sumatibhih ko asya. Kadasya citram cikite kaduti 
vrdhe bhuvacchasamanasya yajyoh. 


Who is the brave who reaches the ecstasy of the 
lord’s company? Who attains to him and shares the 
manifestations of his vision and intelligence? When does 
he know and realise the wonder and variety of this lord’s 
benediction? When does the lord’s grace flow for the 
protection and advancement of the supplicant in yajna? 


कथा शुंणोति हूयमानमिन्द्र॑ः कथा शृण्वन्नव॑सामस्य वेद । 
का अस्य पूर्वीरुप॑ंमातयो ह कथेन॑माहुः पपुरिं जरित्रे ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Katha srnoti hayamanamindrah katha srnvanna- 
vasamasya veda. Ka asya purvirupamatayo ha 
kathainamahuh papurim jaritre. 


When does Indra listen to the supplicant? And 
while he listens, when does he grant that the time for 
his liberation and ultimate protection is come? What 
are, for sure, the ultimate bounds (if any) of the lord’s 
gifts of grace? How do the celebrants sing of the 
gracious lord for the supplicant? 


कथा Gare: शशमानो अस्य नशदभि द्रविणं दी्ध्यानः। 
देवो Yanda म ऋतानां नमो जगृभ्वां अभि 
यज्नु जोषत्‌ YU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 23 119 


4. Katha sabadhah sasamano asya nasadabhi 
dravinam didhyanah. Devo bhuvannaveda ma 
rtanam namo jagrbhvan abhi yajjujosat. 


When does the supplicant, though bound in his 
limitations yet intent upon his search for Divinity, attain 
to the wealth of the lord’s grace? 


When the lord self-refulgent and infinitely 
generous becomes cognizant of my yajnas of service 
and devotion, accepts my offers of food and fragrance 
in the vedi, and owns me as his child and disciple in 
faith, then does his grace shower on me. 


कथा कदस्या उषसो ast देवो मर्त॑स्य सख्यं जुंजोष। 
कथा कद॑स्य सख्यं सखिभ्यो ये अस्मिन्कामं सुयुजं 
ततस्रे ॥ ५ ॥ 

5: Katha kadasya usaso vyustau devo martasya 


sakhyam jujosa. Katha kadasya sakhyam 
sakhibhyo ye asmin kamam suyujam tatasre. 


When would the refulgent and generous lord in 
this light of the dawn accept and cherish the devotion 
and friendship of mortal humanity? When would his 
love and friendship extend to the human friends who in 
this yajna of love and covenant extend their love and 
ambition over practical work in divine service? 


किमादम॑त्रं सख्यं सखिभ्यः कदा नु ते uri प्र dam 
fra सुदृशो वपुरस्य सर्गाः स्ववर्णं चित्रत॑ममिष आ 
गोः॥ ६॥ 

6. Kimadamatram sakhyam sakhibhyah kada nu te 
bhratram pra bravama. Sriye sudrso vapuras- 
ya sargah svarna citratamamisa ठ goh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


120 RGVEDA 


O lord, when and how shall we describe your 
firm and protective love and friendship and your 
brotherly affection to our friends? 


The cosmic body of this gracious lord and the 
various stages of his creation are for the beauty and 
glory of existence, blissful as heaven, various and most 
wondrous. So also are the beauties and generosities of 
the sun for the love and sustenance of life. 


32 जिघांसन्ध्वरसंमनिन््रां तेतिक्ते तिग्मा तुजसे अनी का | 
ऋणा चिद्यत्र ऋणया न॑ उग्रो दूरे अज्ञाता उषसो बबाधे ॥ ७ ॥ 


a, Druham jighamsan-dhvarasamanindram tetikte 
tigma tujase anika. Rna cidyatra rnayd na ugro 
dure ajnata usaso babadhe. 


Keen to eliminate the hateful, destructive and 
rebellious elements, Indra sharpens his blazing armies 
to greater force, and where the existing forces thus grow 
fiercer, our ruler, awesome and bold as terror, like a 
man under pressure of an obligation, wipes out unknown 
fears like the dawns dispelling darkness. 


ऋतस्य fe शुरुधः सन्तिं पूर्वीत्हतस्य धीतिर्तृजिनानिं हन्ति। 
ऋतस्य शलोको बधिरा dad कणी बुधानः शुचमान 
आयोः॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Rtasya hi surudhah santi purvirrtasya dhitirvrji- 
nani hanti. Rtasya sloko badhira tatarda karna 
budhanah Sucamana ayoh. 


The protective forces of truth are everlasting. 
The vision and understanding rooted in truth removes 
all hurdles and breaks the clouds of darkness. The word 
and message of truth clears up the ears of the deaf, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 23 121 


awakening and brightening up the man who hears, 
giving him the light of Divinity. 


तस्यं oe धरुूणानि सन्ति पुरूणि चन्द्रा वपुंषे वपूंषि | 
ऋतेन दीर्घपिंषणन्त vet ऋतेन गाव॑ ऋतमा विविशुः ॥ ९ ॥ 


2. Rtasya drlha dharunani santi puruni candra 
vapuse vapumsi. Rtena dirgham-isananta prksa 
rtena gava rtama vivesuh. 


The foundations of Truth and Eternal Law are 
unshakable, boundless and beautiful, the very 
embodiments of truth, beauty and Dharma for life forms. 
By the Law of truth do people enjoy long life and 
showers of joy. By the Law of truth do our voice and 
senses follow truth and reach the very source of reality 
and the seat of the law of eternal truth. 


ऋतं यमान ऋतमिद्धनोत्यतस्य HEAL उ गव्युः । 
ऋताय पृथ्वी dees ग॑भीरे ऋताय धेनू प॑र मे दुहाते ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Rtam yemana rtamidvanotyrtasya Susmasturaya 
u gavyuh. Rtaya prthvi bahule gabhire rtaya 
dhenu parame duhdate. 


The pursuant of truth attains to truth. The 
operation of the eternal law of truth is fast, 
instantaneous, so fast that it is omnipresent, all operative. 
The abundant earth, deep interspaces and the high 
heavens all like the mother cow yield the milk of life in 
service of the eternal law of truth. 


नू ष्टुत इन्द्र नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AG: | अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


122 RGVEDA 


11. Nu stuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 


Indra, world ruler, omnipotent lord of universal 
truth and abundance, thus praised and worshipped, bear 
and bring food, energy, and the sustaining power of life 
for the celebrant in abundance like the rivers 
overflowing with life giving waters. This new song of 
homage and fragrant yajna is offered in worship, O lord 
of the universal dynamics of nature, in hope with prayer 
that with vision and intelligence we may be masters of 
the chariot and dedicated workers in your service of the 
law of truth. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 24 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


का सुष्टुतिः शव॑सः सूनुमिन्द्रमर्वाचीनं राध॑स आ dada | 
ददिर्हि वीरो wore वसूनि स गोपंतिर्निष्षिधां नो जनासः ॥ ९॥ 


i Ka sustutih savasah sunumindramarvacinam 
radhasa a vavartat. Dadirhi viro grnate vasuni 
sa gopatirnissidham no janasah. 


O citizens of the land, what is that order of praise 
and approbation which would persuade and move Indra 
toward us for our joint success and prosperity? A very 
child of might is he, inspirer of the brave, most youthful 
hero of latest knowledge and modern tactic, eminent 
warrior, creator and munificent giver of wealth for his 
supporters, manager and promoter of the earth and its 
resources, and leader and commander of the generous 
producers, our own pioneers. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 24 123 


स वृत्रहत्ये हव्यः स ईड्यः स सुष्टुत इन्द्र॑ः सत्यराधाः | 
स यामन्ना मघवा मरत्यीय ब्रह्यण्यते सुष्व॑ये वरिवो धात्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Sa vrtrahatye havyah saidyah sa sustuta indrah 
satyaradhah. Sa yamanna maghava martyaya 
brahmanyate susvaye varivo dhdat. 


He is to be invoked in the battles against 
darkness, evil and crime, lord adorable as he is, profusely 
adored, Indra, lord of honour and excellence, achiever 
of truth and giver of noble riches. He, lord of wealth, 
might and majesty, bears and bestows choice gifts of 
honour and freedom upon the mortals who dedicate 
themselves to the lord of existence and pray for success 
and divine grace in the ways of life. 


तमिन्नरो वि ह्यन्ते समीके रिं रिक्वांसंस्तन्व॑ः कृण्वत त्राम्‌। 
मिथो यत्त्यागमुभर्यांसो अग्मन्नर॑स्तोकस्य तन॑यस्य सातौ ॥ ३ ॥ 


६ Taminnaro vi hvayante samike ririkvamsastanvah 
krnvata tram. Mitho yattyagamubhayaso agman 
narastokasya tanayasya satau. 


People and leaders both call upon him in their 
battles of life in search of freedom, those who seek 
release and those who look to him for the protection of 
their bodies. Together, men and women, men and 
leaders, go to him for freedom from suffering as well as 
for the well being of their children and grand children. 


क्रतूयन्ति क्षितयो योग॑ उग्राऽऽशुषाणासो मिथो अर्णसातौ। 
सं यद्विशोऽवंवृत्रन्त gem आदिन्ेमं इन्द्रयन्ते अभीक ॥ ठ ॥। 


4. Kratuyanti ksitayo yoga ugra’’susanaso mitho 
arnasatau. Sam yadviso’vavrtranta yudhma 
adinnema indrayante abhike. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


124 RGVEDA 


People of the land, both bright and blazing as 
well as impetuous in action, together, joining in the 
pursuit of knowledge and yajnic action do their best 
and holiest in faith in their own fields of social 
development freely, and when all the citizens thus 
engage in battle against the demons of darkness, evil 
and poverty and conduct themselves with discipline on 
a war footing, they unitedly and unanimously choose 
Indra as their guide and leader in action. 


आदिग्ध Aa इद्धियं aura आदित्यक्तिः पुरोव्छाशां 
रिरिच्यात्‌। आदित्सोमो वि प॑पृच्यादसुंष्वीनादिजनुंजोष वृषभं 
यजध्यै ॥ ५॥ 


>. Adiddha nema indriyam yajanta aditpaktih 
purolasam riricyat. Aditsomo vi paprcyddasusvt- 
nadijjujosa vrsabham yajadhyai. 


And then the warriors all work for the honour 
and excellence of the nation through joint action. And 
then let the fruit of the action and struggle, like delicious 
pudding seasoned, be consolidated and reserved. And 
then when the present and future is secured, let the soma 
of joy be prepared and ripened for the warriors of 
courage and valour, and then let all join Indra, virile 
and generous leader, in the celebration. 


puree वरिवो य इत्थेन्द्राय सोमंमुशते Gitta | 
सध्रीचीनेन मनसाविंवेनन्‌ तमित्सरवायं कृणुते समत्सु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Krnotyasmai varivo ya itthendraya somamusSate 
sunoti. Sadhricinena manasdavivenan tamitsa- 
khayam krnute samatsu. 


One who thus does honour and distinguished 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 24 125 


service for Indra, ruler of the world, and ५181115 the soma 
of excellence and joy for him who, of course, loves 
honour and excellence and joy for humanity, and one 
who, with an undivided dedicated mind, without any 
selfish axe to grind, acts as a friend and supportive 
warrior for him in the battles of humanity: Indra too for 
such a person creates and awards rare and choicest gifts 
of honour and dignity like a friend. 


य इन्द्राय सुनवत्सोम॑मद्य पचात्यक्तीरुत भृञ्जातिं धानाः | 
प्रतिं मनायोरु चथानि हर्यन्तस्मिन्दधद्‌ वृष॑णं शुष्प- 
fare: ७॥ 


7. Ya indraya sunavatsomamadya pacatpaktiruta 
bhrjjati dhanah. Prati manayorucathani haryan 
tasmin dadhadvrsanam Susmamindrah. 


Whoever for Indra, today, distils and ripens the 
soma of honour and excellence, confirms and 
consolidates the gains of victory over darkness, evil and 
want, and perfects the production for national 
consumption: to such a person Indra responds, loving 
and listening to his songs of praise arising from the heart, 
and the lord in-vests him with inner strength of valour 
and showers of unbounded generosity. 


यदा स॑मर्य व्यचेदूरघावा दीर्घं warhead: 1 
अचिक्रदद्‌ वृष॑णं पल्यच्छ दुरोण आ निशितं सोम- 
af: ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yada samaryam vyacedrghava dirgham yadaji- 
mabhyakhyadryah. Acikradadvrsanam patnya- 
ccha durona व nisitam somasudbhih. 


When the ruler of the land and noble head of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


126 RGVEDA 


his people and destroyer of the enemies perceives a 
tumult of battle around and afar, he displays his long 
range deployment of arms and armies, while the 
citizenry at home, as a sustaining and supportive force, 
exhorts him and proclaims aloud his internal strength 
of morale created and sharpened by the creators and 
refiners of national energy. 


भूय॑सा वस्नम॑चरत्कनीयोऽ विक्रीतो अकानिषं पुनर्यन्‌। 
स भूय॑सा कनीयो नारिरेचीदीना दक्षा वि दुहन्ति प्र 
वाणम्‌॥ ९॥ 


2. Bhuyasa vasnamacarat kaniyo’vikrito akanisam 
punaryan. Sa bhuyasa kaniyo narirecid dina 
daksa vi duhanti pra vanam. 


The poor ignorant trader buys the pleasure of 
glitter and sense at the great price of the spirit. Drained 
out, exhausted and disvalued, he goes back: “I want 
back what I had parted with in exchange for what I had 
got.” No, not now. With all that he can surrender, he 
cannot redeem even a little of what he has lost. The 
poor as well as the intelligent get back only what they 
bargain for in word and action. 


क इमं दरभिर्ममेन्द्रं क्रीणाति धेनुभिः। 
यदा वृत्राणि जङ्घं नदथैनं मे पुनंर्दद॑त्‌॥ ९०॥ 


||॥ Kaimam dasabhirmamendram krinati dhenubhih. 
Yada vrtrani janghanadathainam me punardadat. 


Who can buy this Indra, this spiritual glory, from 
me for all time with the ten senses and their pleasure? 
None. Yes, when one dispels the evils of darkness, 
ignorance and indulgence, then the lord gives it back to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 25 127 


me. 
नू ष्टुत इन्दर नू गणान इषं जरित्रे नद्यो AAG: | अकारि 
ते हरिवो ब्रह्मा नव्यं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Nu stuta indra nu grnana isam jaritre nadyo na 
pipeh. Akari te harivo brahma navyam dhiya 
syama rathyah sadasah. 


Indra, lord of glory, thus praised and celebrated, 
bless the supplicant with food, energy and enlightenment 
just as overflowing streams bring living waters for 
humanity. O lord of power and progress at high speed, 
thus is the song of celebration and yajnic homage offered 
to you, the newest presentation, so that with your 
blessings of intelligence and action we may be master 
warriors of the chariot and great servants of Divinity. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 25 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


को अद्य नर्यो देवकाम sores सख्यं ASST । 
को वां महेऽव॑से पायीय समिद्धे अग्रौ सुतसोम SEU ९ ॥ 


iF Ko adyanaryo devakama usnnindrasya sakhyam 
Jojosa. Ko va mahe’vase paryaya samiddhe agnau 
sutasoma titte. 


Who today among noble humanity, lover of the 
light of divinity, inspired with holy ambition and 
enthusiasm, enjoys the favour and friendship of Indra? 
Or, who, having offered oblations of distilled soma into 
the lighted fire for the achievement of great redeeming 
divine protection, enjoys the honour and excellence of 
life? Answer: The friend and lover of humanity who is 
dedicated to Indra, the supreme ruler. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


128 RGVEDA 


को नानाम वच॑सा सोम्याय मनायुवौ भवति aed Sear: 1 
क इन्द्रस्य युज्यं कः सखित्वं को भ्रात्रं die कवये क 
ऊती ॥ २॥ 


2. Ko nanama vacasa somyaya manayurva bhavati 
vasta usrah. Ka indrasya yujyam kah sakhitvam 
ko bhratram vasti kavaye ka uti. 


Who bows with words of prayer to Indra for the 
gift of peace, pleasure, honour and excellence of body, 
mind and soul? And who submits to him in search of 
knowledge and self-awareness? Who loves the lights 
of the dawn and the lovely cows in the morning? Who 
waits on Indra for help and protection? Who feels 
anxious for friendship and fraternity with him? Who 
prays for security and poetic vision to the lord of 
omniscience? Answer: Who ever wants to do good unto 
all including the self as servant of Divinity. 


को देवानामवो अद्या वृणीते क आदित्यां अदितिं 
wits । कस्याश्विनाविन्द्रो अभिः सुतस्यांऽशोः पिबन्ति 
मनसाविवेनम्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Ko devanamavo adya vrnite ka adityan aditim 
Jyotiritte. Kasyasvinavindro agnih sutasyam’soh 
pibanti manasavivenam. 


Who these days opts for and wins the protection 
and benedictions of the divine powers of nature? Who 
pursues and prays for the light of the suns in orbital 
phases, the generosity of nature and mother earth, and 
the secrets and mysteries of light? Whose achievement 
of knowledge and contribution to life’s peace and joy 
is favourably in tune with the nature and operation of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 25 129 


the laws and properties of the Ashvins, earth and the 
skies, Indra, the sun, and Agni, heat and magnetic energy 
of the earth? Answer: One who acts in cooperation with 
nature for life and in the service of Divinity. 


तस्मा अथिभारं तः ort यंखज्न्योक्प॑श्यात्सूर्य मुच्यर॑न्तम्‌। 
य इन्द्राय सुनवामेत्याह नरे नयीय नृत॑माय नृणाम्‌ ॥  ॥ 


4. Tasma agnirbharatah Sarma yamsajjyok pasyat 
suryam-uccarantam. Ya indraya sunavametyaha 
nare naryaya nrtamaya nrnam. 


To him Agni, the cosmic power and presence 
that holds, sustains and governs the world of nature and 
humanity, provides a happy home, and he would watch 
the rising sun for a long long time who is able to say 
this with confidence: We pursue knowledge and create 
the means of comfort and happiness for humanity, the 
world of human interests, and the highest qualities and 
attainments of human values among the people of the 
world, and this we do for Indra, Lord of humanity and 
the entire world of existence. 


न तं जिनन्ति बहवो न eur उर्वस्मा अदितिः orf यंसत्‌। 
प्रियः सुकृस्िय इन्द्र मनायुः प्रियः सुप्रावीः प्रियो अ॑स्य 
सोमी ॥ ५॥ 


Di Na tam jinanti bahavo na dabhra urvasma aditih 
Sarma yamsat. Priyah sukrtpriya indre manayuh 
priyah supravih priyo asya somi. 


Neither many nor few, nor even the fiercest, can 
overpower him who acts in the service of Indra, 
governing power and presence of the universe. Indeed 
mother earth, in fact mother nature of imperishable 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


130 RGVEDA 


wealth, blesses him with abundant peace and joy in a 
happy home, for, to Indra, the one who does good is 
dear, the lover of Divinity is dear, the follower of the 
path of rectitude is dear, and the creator of comfort, joy 
and enlightenment for life is dear to this lord. 


सुप्राव्यः ureparae वीरः सुष्वेः पक्तिं hora केवलेन्द्रः | 
नासुंष्वेरापिर्न सखा न जामिरदुष्प्राव्योऽवहन्तेदर्वाचः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Supravyah prasusdlesa virah susveh paktim 
krnute kevalendrah. Nasusverapirna sakha na 
jamirduspravyo’vahantedavacah. 


Indra, leader and ruler, instant destroyer of 
enmity, 1s openly accessible to the person who creates 
and produces good things and thus contributes positively 
to the peace, progress and happiness of life, and he fully 
protects and promotes such people and raises them to 
maturity as the sun ripens grain. But to the person who 
is uncreative, and malignant scandalizer, he is not 
accessible, not a friend, or a brother, or protector, in 
fact he is awfully opposed to such negatives. 

(Creativity and a positive, contributive attitude 
to life is a value, while uncreativeness and a negative, 
destructive attitude is a dangerous disvalue. The former 
is to be protected and promoted, but the latter has to be 
opposed and eliminated.) 


न रेवता पणिना सख्यमिन्द्रोऽ सुन्वता सुतपाः सं Wore 
आस्य वेद॑: खिदति हन्ति नग्रं वि सुष्व॑ये पक्तये केव॑लो 
भूत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


ds Na revata panina sakhymindro’sunvata sutapah 
sam grnite. Asya vedah khidati hanti nagnam vi 
susvaye paktaye kevalo bhut. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 26 131 


Not with the miserly man of wealth does Indra 
bargain any friendship since he is the master creator of 
peace and joy and lover of honour and excellence. He 
does not acknowledge, much less approve of the wealth 
of the ungenerous. In fact, he exposes the wealth of the 
hoarder until, exposed and ashamed, he is reduced to 
nullity, because, basically and exclusively he is for the 
creative and generous who produce and mature the 
wealth of the nation to the state of honour and dignity. 


इन्द्रं परेऽ व॑रे मध्यमास इन्द्रं यान्तोऽ व॑सितास इन्द्रम्‌ | 
इन्द्रं क्षियन्तं उत युध्य॑माना इन्द्रं नरो वाजयन्तो! हवन्ते ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Indram pare’vare madhyamasa indram yanto’- 
vasitasa indram. Indram ksiyanta uta yudhya- 
mana indram naro vajayanto havante. 


People at the farthest and at the nearest, highest 
and lowest, and people at the middle, all call upon Indra, 
lord of honour and excellence. People on the move and 
those at the end of the journey call upon Indra, lord of 
peace and security. People settled in the home and 
warriors on the battle field call upon Indra, lord of 
prosperity and victory. And the leaders of the people 
and the men fighting for food, struggling for energy 
and panting for speed and progress call upon Indra, lord 
giver of food, energy and advancement. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 26 


Indra Suparna Brahma Devata, 
Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


अहं मनुरभवं सूर्यश्चाऽहं Heitat safeties विप्र॑ः । 
अहं कुत्समार्जुनेयं sas हं कविरूराना पश्य॑ता मा ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


132 RGVEDA 


1. Aham manurabhavam suryasca’ham kaksivan 
rsirasmi viprah. Aham kutsamarjuneyam nyrnje’- 
ham kavirusana pasyata ma. 


I am the thinker and law-giver of existence, I 
am the light of life, I comprehend the time and space of 
the universe, I am the visionary, I am the centre and 
shaker at the core. I create the thunder and light and I 
make the thunderbolt. I am the poet of omniscience and 
passionate lover of my creation. Come ye all and see. 


अहं भूमिंमददामायीयाऽहं वृष्टं दाशुषे veils 
अहमपो अनयं वावशाना ममं देवासो अनु केत॑मायन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


pa Aham bhumimadadamaryaya’ham vrstim dasuse 
martyaya. Ahamapo anayam vavasand mama 
devaso anu ketamayan. 


I give the earth for noble humanity, and I bring 
rain and rolling oceans and waves of energy for the 
mortals who give in charity, and, in consequence, saints 
and sages who love are blest with light divine. 


अहं पुरों मन्दसानो At नव॑ साकं नवतीः शम्ब॑रस्य । 
शततमं वेश्यं सर्वताता दिवोंदासमतिधिग्वं यदाव॑म्‌।॥ 3 


a Aham puro mandasdno vyairam nava sakam 
navatith Sambarasya. Satatamam vesyam sarvat- 
ata divodasamatithigvam yadavam. 


In the state of perfect bliss, I first move ninty 
and nine streams of cloud showers together, and as I 
protect and promote the man of hospitality and the giver 
of enlightenment, I open hundred-fold gates of delight 
and prosperity for the whole world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 26 133 


प्रसुष विभ्यो मरुतो विर॑स्तु प्र श्येनः श्येनेभ्य॑ आशुपत्वा । 
अचक्रया यत्स्वधयां सुपर्णो हव्यं भरन्मन॑वे Sa It ४ ॥ 


4. Pra su sa vibhyo maruto virastu pra Syenah 
Syenebhya asupatva. Acakraya yatsvadhaya 
suparno havyam bharanmanave devajustam. 


Just as the eagle bird is the fastest of all the birds 
of prey in flight and descent so may that glorious 
heavenly bird of light wings, the sun, which moves by 
its own mighty force without wheels and which is prime 
among the powers of nature, the Maruts, may bring for 
humanity food and energy blest by the best and brilliant 
bounties of Divinity. 


भरद्यदि विरतो वेविंजानः पथोरुणा मनोजवा असर्जिं। 
तूयं ययौ मधुना सोम्येनोत श्रवो विविदे श्येनो अत्र॑ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Bharadyadi virato vevijanah pathoruna manojava 
asarji. Tuyam yayau madhuna somyenota sravo 
vivide Syeno atra. 


When the bird of the wings of light, vibrating 
as sunrays, flying fast as thought by the wide paths of 
space brings and releases food and energy here, and 
then from here itself flies back fast with earthly, sweets 
of soma juices (to bring them back, reinvigorated), thus 
this eagle wins thanks and praise from earthly humanity. 


ऋजीपी श्येनो दद॑मानो अंशुं परावतं: शकुनो मन्द्रं मद॑म्‌। 
सोमं भरदादुहाणो देवावान्दिवो अमुष्पादुत्तरादादायं।। ६ ॥ 


6. Ryjipt Syeno dadamano amsum paravatah sakuno 
mandram madam. Somam bharaddadr-hano 
devavan divo amusmaduttaradadaya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


134 RGVEDA 


The eagle bird of light, enjoying the company 
of heavenly planets, coming from far off country by 
simple paths, having taken from that distant region of 
light sweet celestial delights of soma energies of life, 
gives us that nectar and, taking the soma sweets of earth 
grows stronger and more generous. 


आदाय श्येनो stares सहस्रं सवां अयुतं च साकम्‌। 
अत्रा पुर॑न्धिरजहादरातीर्मदे सोम॑स्य मूरा अमूरः ॥ ७॥ 


बृ Adaya syeno abhart somam sahasram savan 
ayutam ca sakam. Atra purandhir-ajahad- 
aratirmade somasya mura amurah. 


The eagle bird of light, ruler and illuminator of 
the world, bears and brings a thousand delights of soma 
for life with unbounded yajnic creations of organic 
tonics for health and, in the ecstasy of the drink of soma 
on earth, doing noble actions and maintaining human 
habitations with wisdom and equanimity of mind, 
eliminates all stupidity and negativities! 


Mandala 4/Sukta 27 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
गर्थे नु सन्नन्वेषामवेदमहं देवानां जनिमानि विष्वा । 
शतं मा पुर आय॑सीररक्चन्नधं श्येनो जवसा निर॑दीयम्‌ ९॥ 


॥ Garbhe nu sannanvesamavedamaham devanam 
jJanimani visva. Satam ma pura ayasiraraksa- 
nnadha syeno javasa niradiyam. 


Having been in the mother’s womb, I have 
witnessed and known the birth and growth of all these 
divine creations (such as the elements, earth, water, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 27 135 


senses, and mind, etc.). Hundreds of golden cities and 
iron walls have protected me. And having lived all this, 
Ihave got out to freedom like a falcon bird of the winds 
with impetuous speed. 


(The mantra describes the soul’s journey through 
births and death’s across the body forms and then the 
release to the freedom of Moksha.) 


Ta a Ara जोषं जभाराऽभीमास त्वश्च॑सा वीर्येण। 
ईर्मा पुरन्धिरजहादरातीरुत वात अतर च्छरशुवानः॥ २॥ 


2 Na gha sa mamapa josam jabhara’bhimasa 
tvaksasa viryena. Irma purandhirajahadaratir- 
uta vatan ataracchusuvanah. 


That womb of nature couldn’t hold me against 
my will and pleasure. I sat in there with all my vigour 
and penetrative vision. And when the Lord inspirer who 
sustains the hundreds of golden cities and iron walls of 
prison wards off the contraries of flesh and blood, then 
the falcon bird of the spirit, rising up and high, crosses 
the storms and shears of winds to freedom. 


अव यच्छ्येनो अस्व॑नीदध ane यद्यदि वात॑ me: पुरन्धिम्‌ । 
सृ जद्यद॑स्मा अवं ह faust कृ शानुरस्ता मन॑सा 
WUT ३॥ 

3 Ava yacchyeno asvanidadha dyorvi yadyadi vata 
uhuh purandhim. Srjadyadasma ava ha ksipa- 
Jjyam krsanurasta manasa bhuranyan. 

When the falcon bird of the spirit descends from 
heaven singing and roaring with energy, then if the 


winds and storms of existence hijack the master of the 
golden city, then, just as the warrior draws the string of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


136 RGVEDA 


the bows and shoots off the arrow, so the soul, archer 
subduer of contraries, with the light radiating from the 
flame of the heart, draws up the string of yoga meditation 
and shoots away the fluctuations. 


ऋजिप्य ईमिन्द्र॑वतो न भुज्युं श्येनो ज॑भार बृहतो अधि 
wot: | अन्तः प॑तत्पतत्र्य॑स्य पण्मध याम॑नि प्रसिंतस्य 
तद्वेः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Rjipya tmindravato na bhujyum syeno jabhara 
brhato adhi snoh. Antah patatpatatryasya parna- 
madha yamani prasitasya tadveh. 


The falcon bird of the spirit, going by the path 
of rectitude always under the protection of Indra, lord 
of life, bears the sacred vessel of the body like a prize 
from the vast regions of joy and energy and, at the end, 
flying up, the bird on the wing jettisons the sacred vessel 
like the plume of a bird bound down to the nest. 


अधं श्वेतं कलशं गोभिर क्तमापिप्यानं मघर्वां शुक्रमन्धंः | 
stead fu: प्रय॑तं मध्वो अग्रमिन्द्रो मर्दय प्रतिं धत्पिबध्यै 
शुरो मदाय प्रतिं धत्पिब॑ध्यै ।॥ ५५ ॥ 


a: Adha svetam kalasam gobhiraktamapipyanam 
maghava Sukramandhah. Adhvaryubhih pra- 
yatam madhvo agramindro madaya prati 
dhatpibadhyai suro madaya prati dhatpi-badhyai. 


Let Indra, the brave soul, blest with and 
commanding honour and prosperity, bear, in response 
to the Lord’s grace, the bright and beauteous body vessel 
nourished by mother earth and cows, satisfying, pure 
and powerful, and let him enjoy the food seasoned and 
sanctified by holy yajakas, and prime delicious drink 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 28 137 


for realising the beauty and ecstasy of existence. Yes, 
let the fearless brave spirit bear the body vessel to drink 
of the joy of life and to celebrate the gift of divine 
rapture. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 28 
Indra-Soma Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


त्वा युजा तव तत्सोम सख्य इन्द्रो अपो मन॑वे सस्तुत॑स्कः | 
अहन्नहिमरिंणात्सस सिन्धूनपांवृणोदपिंहितेव खानि ut ९॥ 


il; Tva yuja tava tatsoma sakhya indro apo manave 
sasrutaskah. Ahannahimarinat sapta sindhuna- 
pavrnodapthiteva khani. 


With you and for your friendship, O Soma, 
power, pleasure and excellence of life, did Indra, 
resplendent ruler of the world, set the spatial waters 
afloat, broke the cloud, made the seven streams of water 
flow and opened up the hidden treasures of life. 


त्वा युजा नि खिंदत्सूर्यस्येन्द्रश्चक्रं सह॑सा सद्य इन्दो । अधि 
ष्णुना बु हता वर्तमानं महो द्रुहो अप॑ विश्वायु धायि ॥ २॥ 

2: Tva yuja ni khidat-suryasyendracsakram sahasa 
sadya indo. Adhi snuna_ brhata vartama-nam 
maho druho apa visvayu dhayi. 

Soma, power of cool and bliss of nature’s cosmic 
energy, with force, constantly counters the cycle of solar 
radiations operating with mighty catalysis and coming 
from higher regions, and thus the great all round 
negativity of sun rays against life is warded off. 

अहन्निन्द्रो अद॑हदभ्िरिन्दो पुरा दस्युन्मध्यब्दिंनादभीके। 
दुर्गे दुरोणे रत्वा न यातां पुरू सहस्त्रा शवां नि बर्हीत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


138 RGVEDA 


Di Ahann-indro adahad-agnir-indro pura dasyun 
madhyandinadabhike. Durge durone kratva na 
yatam puri sahasra Sarva ni barhit. 


Indu, Soma, cool and bliss of mind, nature and 
people of the land and forces of peace, with your 
balancing action, Indra, powerful and blazing, destroys 
darkness and evil, as fire burns off the demoniac forces 
before the mid-day yajna in the battle of life. Thus does 
the spirit of life, with Indra and Soma, hot and cold in 
the existential circuit of nature, destroy and ward off a 
thousand onslaughts of impending dangers and attacks. 
And so do the acts of yajna in the home of the family 
and fortress of the ruler. 


विश्व॑स्मात्सीमधर्मोँ इन्द्र दस्यून्विशो दासीरकृणोरप्रशस्ताः | 
अबांधेथाममुंणतं नि शच्रूनविंन्देथामप॑चितिं वधत्रे ॥  ॥ 


4. Visvasmat stmadhaman indra dasyun 1750 dasir- 
akrnorapraSsastah. Abadhethamamrnatam ni 
Satrun-avindetham-apacitim vadhatraih. 


Indra, ruler of the world blazing as the sun, 
reduce the evil and wicked to nullity all round, and save 
the people and the forces of generosity from ignominy. 
Indra and Soma, power and peace of the land, ruler and 
people, bind down the enemy forces, give peace and 
security to the good, and thus win honour and fame with 
your weapons of protection. 


एवा सत्यं म॑घवाना युवं तदिन्द्र॑श्च सोमोर्वमश्व्यं गोः। 
आद॑दूतमपिंहितान्यश्नां रिरिचथुः क्षाश्चित्ततृदाना ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Eva satyam maghavana yuvam tadindrasca 
somorvam-asvyam goh. Adardrtam-apihitany-sna 
riricathuh ksascit-tatrdana. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 29 139 


It is true, O potent commanders of honour and 
excellence, Indra and Soma, destroyer of evil and creator 
of peace and prosperity, together you release the earth’s 
vast energy and progressive forces, break open the 
resources of wealth and fertility, and release the lands 
from oppression into freedom. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 29 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


आ नं: स्तुत उप वाजेभिरूती इन्द्र॑ याहि हरिंभिर्मन्दसानः। 
तिरश्चिदर्यः सव॑ना पुरूण्याङ्गृषेभिर्गणानः सत्यराधाः ॥ ९॥ 


| Anah stuta upa vajebhiruti indra yahi haribhir- 
mandasanah. TiraScidaryah savana purun- 
yangu-sebhirgrnanah satyaradhah. 


Indra, lord ruler of honour and excellence, spirit 
incarnate of power and prosperity, come with all the 
vigour and velocity for our protection and progress. 
Invoked and invited, happy and rejoicing, come with 
the fastest achievements. You are the wealth of the nation 
incarnate, truly the harbinger of success. Praised, 
appraised and pursued by the highpriests of knowledge 
and action, come directly and indirectly by all paths of 
centripetal movement to bless our manifold yajnic 
programmes of creation and production. 


आ हि ष्मा याति नर्यश्चिकित्वान्हूयमानः सोतुभिरुपं यज्ञम्‌। 
स्वश्वो यो अभीसर्मन्यमानः सुष्वाणेभिर्मदतिसंदहं 
वीरैः ॥ २॥ 

2. A hi sma yati naryascikitvan hiayamanah sotrbhi- 
rupa yajnam. Svasvo yo abhirur-man-yamanah 
susvanebhir-madati sam ha viraih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


140 RGVEDA 


And he does come, lord of men and master of 
knowledge all-aware, when he is invoked and invited 
to the yajna by those who distil the soma for yajna and 
sprinkle the vedi with holy water and ghrta. Then, 
commanding the horse and speed of the chariot, brave 
and fearless, self-confident and honoured, he rejoices 
with the heroes who create the soma, honour, grandeur 
and the joy of life for humanity. 


श्रावयेद॑स्य कणौ वाजयध्यै जुष्टामनु प्र दिशं मन्दयध्यै | 
उद्ावृषाणो राधसे तुविष्मान्करत्र इन्द्रः सुतीर्थाभयं च ॥ ३ ॥ 


28 Sravayedasya karna vajayadhyai justamanu pra 
disam mandayadhyai. Udvavrsano radhaso 
tuvisman karanna indrah._ sutirthabhayam ca. 


Speak to him, let him hear, he loves to hear of 
the cherished policy and direction for the sake of speed 
and success in action so that he may be happy and rejoice 
with you all. And then he, Indra, ruler of all and creator 
of honour and excellence, generous as showers and 
blazing brave in action, would create paths of progress 
into a state of freedom from fear and success, and thence 
would flow the ultimate release. 


अच्छा यो गन्ता नाध॑मानमूती इत्था विप्रं हव॑मानं गणन्त॑म्‌। 
उप त्मनि दधानो धुर्या ई शून्त्सहस््राणि शतानि ARATE: ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Accha yo ganta nadhamanamuti ittha vipram 
havamanam grnantam. Upa tmani dadhano 
dhuryasuntsahasrani Satani vajrabahuh. 


With grace, he goes to the supplicant with 
protection, thus, to bless the earnest seeker invoking 
him and singing in praise. He holds the supplicant and 
celebrant closest to his heart and, yoking a hundred 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 141 


thousand horses to his chariot, wielding the thunderbolt 

for creation and protection, he hastens to the devotees. 
त्वोतासो मघवन्निन्द्र विप्रा वयं ते स्याम सूरयो गृणन्तः । 
भेजानासो gears राय आ काय्य॑स्य दावने पुरुक्षोः ॥ ५ ॥ 

2. Tvotaso maghavannindra vipra vayam te syama 
surayo grnantah. Bhejanaso brhaddivasya raya 
akayyasya davane puruksoh. 

Under your protection, O lord of power and 
glory, Indra, lord ruler and giver of honour and 
excellence, let us be earnest seekers of knowledge, brave 
and brilliant celebrants of Divinity, so that we may be 


dedicated sharers of the abundance of the lord of light, 
wealth, and generosity of sustenance incarnate. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 30 
Indra, Indra and Usha Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
नकिशरिन्द्र्‌ त्वदुत्तरो न ज्यार्योँ अस्ति वृत्रहन्‌ । 
नकिरेवा यथा त्वम्‌॥ ९॥ 


॥ ५ Nakirindra tvaduttaro na jyayan asti vrtrahan. 
Nakireva yatha tvam. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, destroyer of evil 
and breaker of the cloud like the sun, there is none higher 
than you, none beyond, none greater, none even equal 
to you as you are. 
सत्रा ते अनु कृष्टयो favat aha वावृतुः | 
सत्रा महाँ असि श्रुतः॥ २॥ 

2. Satra te anu krstayo visva cakreva vavrtuh. 
Satra mahan asi srutah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


142 RGVEDA 


In truth and honour of conduct, all the people 
together move around you in orbit, harmoniously, as 
do the wheels of the chariot revolve round the axle. 
Truly you are great, commanding honour and universal 
fame. 


विश्वे चनेदना त्वां Sara इन्द्र युयुधुः । 
यदहा नक्तमातिरः ॥ ३॥ 


Visve canedana tva devasa indra yuyudhuh. 
Yadaha naktamatirah. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, all the nobilities 
of humanity and divinities of nature, with all their 
wisdom and resolution, relentlessly fight for you day 
and night so that you are always victorious over the 
enmities and negativities of life. 
यत्रोत बाधितेभ्य॑श्चक्र कुत्साय युध्य॑ते | 
मुषाय इन्द्र सूर्यम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Yatrota badhitebhyascakram kutsaya yudhyate. 
Musaya indra suryam. 


Where the battle rages in support of the warriors 
fighting in defence of the oppressed and the wise, there 
Indra, O lord of honour, power and justice, take up the 
solar disc of thunder and crush the wicked. 


यत्रं देवाँ ऋधायतो विश्वँ अयुध्य एक इत्‌। 
त्वमिन्द्र GRATING ॥ 


a: Yatra devan rghayato visvan ayudhya eka it. 
Tvamindra vanunrahan. 


Where in the battle against the evil and the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 143 


violent oppressing and fighting against all the nobilities 
of the world you take up arms, you destroy the wicked 
forces all alone. 


यत्रोत मरत्यीय aon इन्द्र सूर्यम्‌। 
प्रावः शचींभिरेत॑शम्‌।॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Yatrota martyaya kamarina indra suryam. 
Pravah Sacitbhiretasam. 


Where you set in motion the streams and breezes 
of comfort and joy for humanity, there also you move 
and protect the sun orbiting at terrible speed with your 
actions of omnipotence. 


किमादुतासिं वृत्रहन्मघ॑वन्मन्युमत्तमः | 
अत्राह दानुमा्तिररः Wo 


cr Kimadutasi vrtrahan maghavan manyumat- 
tamah. Atraha danumatirah. 


And what more! You are, O lord ruler and 
commander of the wealth and power of the world, you 
are the most passionate lover of rectitude and fiercest 
destroyer of evil. And lo! you are the top redeemer of 
the generous and shatterer of the selfish. 


एतद्‌ घेदुत वीर्य xk चकर्थ पौँस्यंम्‌। 
fara यहुर्दणायुवं aeildfect दिवः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Etad gheduta viryamindra cakartha paumsyam. 


Striyam yaddurhanayuvam vadhirduhitaram 
divah. 


This truly is the manly valour you display in 
action. In addition, this too is your wonder that you 
dispel and ward off the rays of the malevolent star which, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


144 RGVEDA 


though, is the daughter of heaven like the dawn, the 
light of which, too, you overcome. 


featvee घा दुहितरं महान्म॑हीय्मानाम्‌। 
उषास॑मिन्द्र्‌ सं पिणक्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
9. Divascid-gha duhitaram mahan mahiyamanam. 
Usasamindra sam pinak. 
Indra, great you are. Surely the dawn is glorious, 


daughter of heaven, which you refine, adorn and glorify, 
and then make her disappear when she waxes with pride. 


अपोषा अन॑सः सरत्संपिंष्टादहं बिभ्युषी । 
नि यत्स शिश्नथद्‌ aati ९० ॥ 
10.  Aposa anasah saratsampistadaha bibhyusti. 
Ni yatsim sisnathad vrsa. 
Indra, mighty ruler of heavens, breaks the 
chariot of the dawn as she waxes, but when the chariot 
is broken, she withdraws from the broken chariot in 


fear and awe. (So do the forces of gate-crashing pride 
withdraw under the blazing power of the ruler.) 


एतदस्या अन॑ः शये सुसंपिष्टं विपाश्या । 
ससार सीं परावतं: ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Etadasya anah Saye susampistam vipasya. 
Sasara sim paravatah. 
When the chariot of this dawn is broken and 
lies in unobstructed path ways of space and the dawn is 


gone far away, then the sun, coming from afar, radiates 
its glory far and wide. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 145 


उत सिन्धुं विबाल्यं वितस्थानामधि क्षपिं। 
परि छा इन्द्र मायया ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Uta sindhum vibdlyam vitasthanamadhi ksami. 
Pari stha indra mayaya. 


Indra, lord of the elements, with your 
inexhaustible force and power, you sustain the flow of 
full and overflowing turbulent rivers on the earth. 


उत शुष्णस्य धृष्णुया प्र मृक्षो अभि वेद॑नम्‌। 
पुरो यद॑स्य संपिणक््‌ ॥ ९३॥ 
13. Uta Susnasya dhrsnuya pra mrkso abhi vedanam. 


Puro yadasya sampinak. 


And when with your force and power you break 
down the strongholds of this demon of drought and 
sprinkle the land with water, then you acquire the wealth 
of the land and the knowledge of science for the people. 


उत दासं कौलितरं बुं हृतः पर्व तादधिं। 
अवाहन्निन्द्र STAT ९४ ॥ 


14. Uta dasam kaulitaram brhatah parvatadadhi. 
Avahannindra sambaram. 


Indra, ruler of the elements and vast spaces on 
earth, you break the dark cloud of rain from the vast 
skies on high and make the rivers flow from the 
mountains, thereby rendering the generous people and 
venerable families stronger and more generous. 


उत creed वर्चिनः सहस्राणि शताव॑धीः। 
अधि use प्रधींरिव ॥ ९५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


146 RGVEDA 


15. Uta dasasya varcinah sahasrani satavadhih. 
Adhi panca pradhinriva. 


But destroy the hundreds and thousands of the 
violent demons who are fixed in society like five fellies 
fixed round the spokes of a wheel. 


उत त्यं पुत्रमग्रुवः परावृक्तं शतक्रतुः | 
उक्थेष्विन्द्र आभ॑जत्‌ ९६ ॥ 
16. Utatyam putramagruvah paravrktam Satakratuh. 


Ukthesvindra abhajat. 


And Indra, who performs hundreds of yajnic acts 
of creation and generosity with his knowledge of the 
Shastras, invites the formidable children of leading 
pioneers of the nation to participate in the theoretical 
and practical affairs of the state. 


उत त्या तुर्वशायदू अस्नातारा शची पतिः । 
इन्द्रो विद्धां अपारयत्‌ ॥ 20 01 

17. Uta tya turvasayadu asnatara Ssacipatih. 
Indro vidvan aparayat. 
Indra, lord of the people and the sacred voice, 
ruler of the world and master of knowledge, helps the 
man of efficiency, the man of effort, and also the simple 
folk who do not know how to swim and enables them 
all to cross the hurdles of life over to the shore. 
उत त्या Gel आयौ सरयोरिन्द्र ard: 1 
अणीचित्रर॑थावधीः॥ ९८ ॥ 

18. Utatyd sadya arya sarayorindra paratah. 
Arnacitrarathavadhih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 147 


Indra, lord of goodness and nobility of power, 
always smashes the grabber and the smuggler in 
possession of wondrous transport across the world of 
movement and communication over the border. 


अनु द्वा ज॑हिता न॑योऽ न्धं श्रोणं च॑ वृत्रहन्‌ । 
न तत्ते सुम्नमष्टवे॥ ९९॥ 


19. Anu dva jahita nayo’ndham sronam ca vrtrahan. 
Na tatte sumnamastave. 


Indra, destroyer of evil and want, leader of 
humanity, you restore and rehabilitate the two, the blind 
and the disabled abandoned by society. None can reach 
that level of service and philanthropy. 


शतमंश्मन्मयीनां पुरामिन्द्रो व्यांस्यत्‌। 
दिवोदासाय दाशुषे ॥ २० ॥ 

20. Satamasmanmayinarh puramindro vyasyat. 
Divodasaya dasuse. 


Indra, lord of power, justice and generosity, for 
the sake of the creative and the generous giver you break 
a hundred adamantine strongholds of hoarded wealth 
like the sun that breaks the cloud concentrations of rain 
to bless the generous earth. 


अस्वापयद्‌भीत॑ये deat त्रिंशतं हथः । 
दासानामिन्द्रों मायया ॥ २९॥ 

21. Asvapayad-dabhitaye sahasra trimsatam hathaih. 
Dasanamindro mayaya. 


Indra, the ruler, should smash three hundred 
thousand of social saboteurs with weapons of far 
reaching calibre for the peace and security of the law- 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


148 RGVEDA 


abiding servants of the nation and for keeping down of 
the violent. 


स घेदुतासिं वुत्रहन्त्समान ईन्द्र THA: | 
यस्ता विश्वानि चिच्युषे tl २२॥ 


22. Sa ghedutasi vrtrahantsamana indra gopatih. 
Yasta visvani cicyuse. 


Indra, such as you are, ruler and protector of 
the earth, destroyer of evil and promoter of the good, 
you are equal and kind, like the sun, for all in treatment 
since you bring about all that you do and achieve for all 
of them as they deserve according to law and justice. 


उत नूनं adie करिष्या इन्द्र पौस्य॑म्‌। 
अद्या नकिष्टदा पिंनत्‌॥ २३॥ 


23. Uta nunam yadindriyam karisya indra pauams- 
yam. Adya nakistada minat. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, for sure whatever 
deeds of courage and valour and of manly honour and 
excellence you do for the good or against the wicked, 
none can deny, resist or undo. 


वामंवामं त आदुरे देवो द॑दात्वर्यमा। 
वामं पूषा वामं भगो वामं देवः करूव्ती ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. Vamam vamam ta adure devo dadatvaryama . 
Vamam pusa vamam bhago vamam devah 
darulati. 


Indra, lord of glory, ruler of the world, destroyer 
of evil, may Aryama, ordainer of the world’s law and 
justice, give you the highest and most admirable gifts 
of honour. May Pusha, lord of health and sustenance 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 31 149 


bless you with the best of vigour and strength. May 
Bhaga, lord of grandeur and excellence, grant you the 
highest prosperity and dignity. May the generous lord 
of art and beauty give you the best of art and craft and 
creative beauty. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 31 
Indra Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


कयां नश्चित्र आ भुवदूती सदावृधः cat 
च्या शचिंछछया वरूता ॥ ९ ॥ 

it, Kaya nascitra a bhuvaduti sadavrdhah sakha. 
Kaya Sacisthaya vrta. 


When would the Lord, sublime and wondrous, 
ever greater, ever friendly, shine in our consciousness 
and bless us? With what gifts of protection and 
promotion? What highest favour of our choice? What 
order of grace? 


कस्त्वां सत्यो मदानां Hest मत्सदन्ध॑ंसः। 
goa चिदारुजे वसु ॥ २॥ 
2 Kastva satyo madanam manhistho matsadan- 


dhasah. Drlha cidaruje vasu. 


What is the truest and highest of joys and foods 
for body, mind and soul that may please you? What 
wealth and value of life to help you break through the 
limitations and settle on the rock-bed foundation of 
permanence? 


अभी षुणः सखीनामविता ज॑रितृणाम्‌। 
शतं भ॑वास्यूतिभि॑ः ॥ ३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


150 RGVEDA 
ai Abhi su nah sakhinamavita jaritrnam. 
Satam bhavasyutibhih. 
Friend of friends and protector of celebrants you 
are, come and bless us too with a hundred modes of 
protection and advancement. Be ours, O lord! 
अभी न आ व॑वृत्स्व चक्रं न aaa a: | 
नियुदद्धिंश्चर्षणीनाम्‌॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Abhi na ठ vavrtsva cakram na vrttamarvatah. 
Niyudbhis-carsninam. 
Ruler of the world, turn and come to us on the 
wheels of a chariot in motion. Come lord and help us 
turn the wheel of the social order at the speed of winds. 
प्रवता हि ्रतुनामा हां पदेव गच्छ॑सि | 
अभ॑क्षि सूर्ये सच ॥ ५५॥ 

5. Pravata hi kratunama ha padeva gacchasi. 
Abhaksi surye saca. 


You walk down to the people, as one walks on 
foot, by the paths of their holy words and actions of 
yajnic offerings. I worship you and serve you like the 
sun with the light of the sun. 


Gad इन्द्र मन्यवः सं चक्राणि ceafrar 
अध त्वे अध सूर्ये॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Sam yatta indra manyavah sam cakrani dadhan- 
vire. Adha tve adha surye. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, all the ardour, 
passions and yajnic offerings of men offered in honour 
and service to you move like wheels continuously and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 31 151 


reach you and then later to the sun. 


उत स्मा हि त्वामाहरिन्पघर्वानं शचीपते | 
दातार मविंदीधयुम्‌।॥। ७ ॥ 


ds Uta sma hi tvamahurinmaghavanam Sacipate. 
Dataramavididhayum. 


O lord of beauty and grace, power, intelligence 
and will, sages of vision and devotion celebrate you as 
lord of infinite honour and excellence in existence, 
boundless giver and self-refulgent beyond imagination. 


उत eat सद्य इत्परि srsrararal सुन्वते | 
पुरू चिन्मंहसे वसु ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Uta sma sadya itpari SaSamanaya sunvate. 
Puru cinmanhase vasu. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, you give 
immense wealth for the celebrant devotee and creator 
of soma instantly, and ever more augment it many ways 
all round. 


नदि ष्पा ते शातं चन राधो वर॑न्त आमुरः | 
न ater करिष्यतः ॥ ९॥ 


2; Nahi sma te Satam cana radho varanta amurah. 
Na cyautnani_ karisyatah. 


Indra, lord omnipotent of infinite wealth and 
generosity, the violent and the destroyers can never get, 
nor do they choose to receive, the hundreds of gifts and 
successes you bestow upon humanity, nor can they ever 
stall the wondrous deeds you do for the devotee. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


152 RGVEDA 


अस्मां अवन्तु ते श्॒तमस्मान्त्सहस्त्र॑मूतय॑ः | 
अस्मान्विश्वां अभिष्टयः 1120 11 

10. | Asman avantu te Satam-asmant-sahasram-utayah. 
Asman-visva abhistayah. 


Indra, lord of infinite love, the hundred ways of 
your divine protection, we pray, may protect us, the 
thousand ways of promotion advance us, the infinite 
blessings and good wishes lead us to fulfilment. 


अस्मां इहा वंणीष्व स॒ख्याय स्वस्तये । 
महो राये दिवित्म॑ते॥ ९९॥ 


11. Asman tha vrnisva sakhyaya svastaye. 
Maho raye divitmate. 


Take us up, O lord, and receive us under your 
divine protection for friendship, all round well being, 
and for the great gift of the immense wealth of this 
heavenly world right here. 


अस्मां अविहि विश्वहेन्द्र राया परीणसा । 
अस्माच्विशूवांभिरूतिभिंः।॥ ९२॥ 

12. Asman aviddhi visvahendra raya parinasa. 
Asman visvabhir-utibhih. 
Ruler of the world, Indra, lead us on day and 
night with abundant wealth of all kinds, lead us on and 
on with all the protection and favours of divinity. 
अस्मभ्यं at अपां वृधि व्रजो अस्तेव गोम॑तः। 
नवाभिरिन्द्रोतिभिः।॥ ९३॥ 

13. Asmabhyam tan apa vrdhi vrajan asteva gomatah. 
Navabhirindrotibhih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 153 


Indra, lord ruler of the wealth of the world, open 
for us the gates of the cow stalls like the cow herd, open 
the secrets of the Divine Word like the Omniscient, open 
the treasures of the earth like the earth’s ruler and 
protector, open the doors for us with the latest safeguards 
and methods of protection. 


अस्माकं धृष्णुया रथो द्युमाँ SATA: | 
गव्युर॑शुवयुरीं यते ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14.  Asmakam dhrsnuya ratho dyumam indrana- 
pacyutah. Gavyurasvayuriyate. 
Indra, unchallengeable ruler of the world, our 
chariot of progress goes on advancing, bold and 
unobstructed, blazing bright, irresistible and 
imperishable, winning the wealth of the holy earth with 
unbounded speed and energy. 
अस्माकमुत्तमं कुधि श्रवो देवेषु सूर्य । 
वर्षिष्ठं द्यामिवोपरि ॥ ९५ ॥ 

15. Asmakamuttamam krdhi 57410 devesu surya. 
Varsistham dyamivopari. 


Indra, refulgent sun, ruler of the world, lead us 
to the highest heights of glory, our fame resounding 
among the divinities, as in the most generous heavens 
far above. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 32 
Indra, Indra-Ashva Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


आ तू न॑ इन्द्र वृत्रहन्नस्माकसमर्धमा गंहि। 
महान्महीभिंरूतिभिंः॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


154 RGVEDA 
1. A tina indra vrtrahannasmakamardhama gahi. 
Mahan mhibhirutibhih. 
Indra, lord and ruler of the world, mighty 
destroyer of darkness and evil, come with all great 
powers and protections, join and guide our progress. 
भूमिज्चिद्धासि तूतुंजिरा चित्र चित्रिणीष्वा | 
चित्रं कुणोष्यूतयें ॥ २ ॥ 

2: Bhrmiscidghasi tutujira citra citrinisva. 
Citram krnosyutaye. 

You are ever on the move, harbinger of good, 
instant promoter, wondrous great in the fighting forces 


of awful power, and you do wonders in matters of 
protection and all round human progress. 


दभ्रेभिंण्चिच्छशींयांसं हंसि व्राध॑न्तमोज॑सा। 
arate त्वे सचा ॥ ३॥ 


3; Dabhrebhiscicchastyamsam hamsi vradhanta- 
mojasa. Sakhibhirye tve saca. 


You stand by friends who are dedicated to you 
even though they be the humblest and few, and with 
your mighty power and lustre punish the violator of the 
law and values of Dharma howsoever strong and 
powerful he be. 

वयमिन्द्र त्वे सचां वयं त्वाभि Sa: | 
अस्माअस्मा इदुद॑व ।॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Vayamindra tve sacha vayam tvabhi nonumah. 
Asman asman idudava. 
Indra, ruler of the world, we are with you, wholly 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 155 


dedicated in word and deed. We bow to you in 
obedience, without reserve. Help us all, save us all, 
protect us all. 


स न॑जश्चित्राभिरद्रिवोऽनवद्याभिरूतिभिंः। 
अनांधृष्टाथिरा ग॑हि॥ ५॥ 
Sa nascitrabhiradrivo ’navadyabhirutibhih. 
Anadhrstabhira gahi. 
Wielder of the thunderbolt of law and justice, 


come and join us with marvellous, irreproachable, and 
irresistible modes of defence, protection and promotion. 


भूयामो षु त्वाव॑तः सखाय इन्द्र TAA: | 
युजो वाजाय घृष्व॑ये ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Bhuyamo su tvavatah sakhaya indra gomatah. 
Yujo vajaya ghrsvaye. 


Indra, mighty ruler, let us be well protected 
friends of yours, loyal and dedicated to you, blest with 
cows and lands, knowledge and culture for the sake of 
strength and speed of progress to resist and crush the 
negative forces. 


त्वं होक ईर्शिंष इन्द्र वाजस्य गोम॑तः। 
स नो यन्धि महीमिषंम्‌॥ ७॥ 


7. Tvam hyeka [ककव indra vajasya gomatah. 
Sa no yandhi mahimisam. 
Indra, you alone rule over power and prosperity 


and the speed of progress. Pray bring us ample food 
and energy and the high speed of progress. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


156 RGVEDA 


न त्वां वरन्ते अन्यथा afer स्तुतो WEL | 
स्तोतृभ्य इन्द्र गिर्वणः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Na tva varante anyatha yadditsasi stuto magham. 
Stotrbhya indra girvanah. 


The supplicants do not ask of you anything 
otherwise since, O lord of power and world’s wealth, 
Indra, praised and celebrated, you liberally grant ample 
wealth of power and prosperity, honour and excellence 
to the celebrants and devotees. 


अभि त्वा गोत॑मा गिराऽनुषत प्र दावने। 
इन्द्र वाजाय TSA ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Abhi tva gotama gira’nusata pra davane. 
Indra vajaya ghrsvaye. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world and its wealth and 
power, the most enlightened scholars and celebrants 
praise and pray to you in the holiest words for the gift 
of food and energy, power and progress beyond 
challenge. 


प्र त वोचाम dats या म॑न्दसान आरुजः। 
पुरो दासीर भीत्य॑।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Pra {८ vocama virya ya mandasana arujah. 
Puro dasirabhitya. 


Indra, lord of might, joyous and brilliant victor, 
we sing and celebrate those warlike exploits of yours in 
which you stormed the fortresses of slavery and broke 
them open into freedom. 


ताते गृणन्ति वेधसो यानि चकर्थ diet 
सुतेष्विन्द्र गिर्वणः ॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 157 


11. Tate grnanti vedhaso yani cakartha paumsya. 
Sutesvindra girvanah. 


Indra, lord of victorious might, in those lands 
which you awakened into the joy of freedom, the 
celebrants, men of knowledge and wisdom all, sing in 
praise of you and celebrate those valorous deeds of yours 
which you performed in there as for your children. 


अवीवृधन्त गोत॑मा इन्द्र त्वे Saree: | 
Ue धा वीरवद्यशः ॥ १२॥ 

12. Avivrdhanta gotama indra tve stomavahasah. 
Aisu dha viravad yasah. 


Indra, lord of light and splendour, men of light 
and wisdom, best of them all, and the singers of song 
sing in praise of you and exalt your honour and fame. 
Pray bless them all with honour and excellence worthy 
of the brave. 


areas शश्व॑तामसीन्द्र्‌ सार्धारणस्त्वम्‌ | 
तं cat वयं garage 23.11 

13. Yacciddhi SaSvatamasindra sadharanastvam. 
Tam tva vayam havamahe. 


Indra, lord of love and justice, fatherly 
omnipresence for all, since you are general and 
universal power of all the eternal presences, equal and 
universal for all, we invoke and pray to you as the one 
father figure for our good. 


अर्वाचीनो व॑सो भवाऽस्मे सु मत्स्वान्ध॑सः। 
सो्मानासिन्द्र सोमपाः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


158 RGVEDA 


14. = Arvacino vaso bhava’sme su matsvandhasah. 
Somanamindra somapah. 

Indra, ancient, eternal and latest and immediate 
power and presence, haven and home for all, turn to us 
with divine favours, rejoice with us as guardian of the 
honour and excellence of humanity, giver and augmenter 
of food and freshness of energy and the creator and 
protector of the joy of life and ecstasy of living. 


अस्माकं त्वा मतीनामा स्तोमं इन्द्र यच्छतु | 
stat व॑र्तया हरीं ।॥ ९५५ ॥ 

15. Asmakam tva matinama stoma indra yacchatu. 
Arvaga vartaya hari. 


Indra, may the song of praise and prayer 
composed by our wise poets rise and reach you, and 
then, we pray, turn the horses of your chariot hitherward 
to us. 


पुरोव्ठाशं च नो घसो! जोषयासे गिर॑श्च a: | 
वधूयुरिव योष॑णाम्‌ ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Purolasam ca no ghaso josayase girasca nah. 
Vadhuyuriva yosanam. 


And then taste the delicious sweets of our yajnic 
hospitality and enjoy the music of our song like a lover 
cherishing the company of his beloved. 


सहस्रं व्यतीनां युक्तानामिन्द्र॑मीमहे। 
शतं सोम॑स्य खार्यः ॥ ९७॥ 
17. Sahasram vyatinam yuktanamindramimahe. 


Satam somasya kharyah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 159 


Indra, leader of power, pleasure and excellence, 
we pray for a thousand top speed generalists and a 
thousand intensive specialists and a hundred barrels of 
the soma of national excellence and celebrative joy. 


Geet ते शता वयं गवामा च्यावयामसि। 
अस्मत्रा राध॑ एतु TU ९८ ॥ 

18. Sahasra te Sata vayam gavama cyavayamasi. 
Asmatra radha etu te. 


Indra, lord of excellence and beneficence, we 
activate and accelerate a hundred and thousand schemes 
of development of research and extension of knowledge, 
enrichment and fertility of lands and improvement of 
cows, other cattle wealth and milk products, and hope 
that the wealth and prosperity of your social order would 
benefit us all. 


ast ते कलशानां हिरंण्यानामधीमदहि। 
भूरिदा असि वुत्रहन्‌॥ ९९॥ 


19. Dasa te kalasanam hiranyanamadhimahi. 
Bhurida asi vrtrahan. 


We study, research and produce tens of jars of 
liquid gold. Destroyer of ignorance and poverty, you 
are the giver and creator of unbounded wealth. 
भूरिदा भूरि देहि नो मा दभ्रं भूर्या भ॑र। 
भूरि घेदिन्द्र दित्ससि it २०॥ 

20. Bhurida bhuri dehi no ma dabhram bhurya bhara. 
Bhuri ghedindra ditsasi. 

Indra, giver of unbounded wealth, give us 
immense wealth, withhold not, give us not little, bear 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


160 RGVEDA 


and bring us profuse amounts of wealth. For you give 
and wish to give nothing less than immensity. 


भूरिदा ह्यसि श्रुतः deat शुर वुत्रहन्‌। 
आ at भजस्व राध॑सि।॥ २९॥ 


21. Bhurida hyasi srutah purutra Sura vrtrahan. 
A no bhajasva radhasi. 


Indra, destroyer of want and darkness, for sure 
you are the giver of immensity. Brave and magnificent, 
you command universal fame and glory. Come, we pray, 
bless us, you are the giver of success and glory. 


प्रते ay विचक्षण शंसामि गोषणो नपात्‌। 
माभ्यां गा अनुं शिश्रथः ॥ २२॥ 


22.  Prate babhru vicaksana Samsami ९054110 napat. 
Mabhyam ga anu Ssisrathah. 


Lord of omniscience and the universal eye, giver 
of the Divine Word and the earth and her wealth, power 
and presence imperishable, I praise and celebrate your 
divine agencies that bear and bring us the wealth of 
life. Let these divinities keep it up, and allow not the 
earths and inspirations to slacken. 


कनीनकेवं विद्रधे नवं द्रुपदे sist | 
ay यामेषु शोभेते ॥ २३॥ 


23. Kaninakeva vidradhe nave drupade arbhake. 
Babhru yamesu Sobhete. 


Like the two pupils of the eyes, overly strong 
and lasting, ever new, ever cherished and subtle divine 
harbingers of the truth, goodness and beauty of 
existence, let nature’s complementaries ever shine 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 33 161 
blissfully in the hours of human yajna. 


अरं म उस्त्रयामग्णेऽरमनुंस्रयाम्णे । बश्रू या्ेष्वस्तरिर्धां ॥ २४ ॥ 


24. Aram ma usrayamne’ramanusrayamne. 
Babhru_ yamesvasridha. 


May the waves of divine energy, instant, 
constant and never failing, never hurtful, travelling in 
the day and in the night, to the upper solstice and the 
nether solstice, be ever blissful to me in the hours of 
yajnic life. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 33 
Rbhavah Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


प्र ऋभुभ्यो! दूतमिंव वाचंमिष्य उपस्तिरे श्वैत॑रीं Aas । 
ये वात॑जूतास्तर्णिंभिरेवैः परि दयां सद्यो अपसो बभूवुः ॥ ९ ॥ 


i Pra rbhubhyo dutamiva vacamisya upastire 
svaitarim dhenumile. Ye vatajutastaranibhire- 
vaih pari dyam sadyo apaso babhuvuh. 


I send up my words to the Rbhus, scientists, as 
a messenger, in order that they be broadcast around, 
and I hope that they would be converted into a subtle, 
clearer and more powerful message—words which, 
carried up by currents of energy by their own floating 
vibrations, immediately rise to the upper layers of space 
and become acts of nature to come back in the finer 
form I want. 


यदार मक्रन्चभव॑ः पितृभ्यां परिविष्टी वेषणा दंसनाभिः | 
आदिदेवानामुपं सख्यमायन्धीरांसः पुष्टिम॑वहन्मनाये॥। २॥ 

2 Yadaramakrannrbhavah pitrbhyam parivisti 
vesana damsanabhih. Adiddevanamupa_ sakhya- 
mayan dhirasah pustimavahan manayai. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


162 RGVEDA 


When the Rbhus, sages and scientists, through 
service and action, receive instruction from parents and 
teachers, and have done enough to their own satisfaction 
and satisfaction of the seniors, they graduate to join the 
fraternity of the enlightened, and then, constant in study 
and meditation, bring about maturity and fullness of 
mind and spirit for independent work. 


पुनर्ये चक्रुः पितरा युवाना सना ada जरणा श्याना a 
वाजो विभ्वं ऋ भुरिन्द्र॑वन्तो मधुप्सरसो नोऽ वन्तु 
यज्ञम्‌॥ ३॥ 


a Punarye cakruh pitard yuvana sana yupeva 
jarana Sayana. Te vajo vibhvan rbhurindra-vanto 
madhupsaraso no’vantu yajnam. 


And then they, the Rbhus, who, with their 
knowledge and dedicated service, rejuvenate their 
parents and senior generation grown old, nerveless and 
almost lying like a broken pillar, and bring them back 
to their youthful time, thus keeping the tradition young 
and alive: may they, vigorous geniuses, far reaching in 
imagination, marvellous in invention, mighty and 
majestic in achievement, and brilliant and blissful in 
conduct, come to our yajna of science and research, 
protect us and promote our progress and advancement 
far ahead. 


यत्संवत्स॑मभवो गामरश्चन्यत्संवत्स॑मृभवो मा अपिं'शान्‌। 
यत्संवत्समभरन्भासो' अस्यास्ताथिः शमीभिरमृतत्व- 
माशु: wes i 

4. Yat samvatsamrbhavo gamaraksan yat samva- 
tsamrbhavo ma apimsan. Yat sanvatsama-bharan 
bhaso asyastabhih samibhir-amrtatva-masuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 33 163 


The Rbhus, sages and scholars of genius and 
knowledge, bold and blissful, who protect the cow, 
mother knowledge and the speech of knowledge, and 
also the mother earth like nursing a holy child, those 
who serve the mother tradition and rejuvenate and 
strengthen every part of its body like a darling love, 
who bring new vigour and new lights to its body of 
science and knowledge, they, the Rbhus, attain to 
immortality in the living history of the advancement of 
human civilisation by these noble acts of holiness. 


ज्येष्ठ आह चमसा st करेति कनी यान्तरीन्कुणवामेत्याह | 
कनिष्ठ आह चतुरस्करेति as ऋभवस्तत्प॑नयद्वचों वः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Jyestha aha camasa dva kareti kaniyan trin 
krnavametyaha. Kanistha aha caturaskareti 
tvasta rbhavastat panayad vaco vah. 


The eldest of the Rbhus says: Let us make two 
cups for the drink of soma for the celebration of life’s 
enlightenment. The younger, more brilliant, says: Let 
us make three. The youngest, most brilliant, says: Let 
us make four. Tvashta, the teacher, universal lord maker 
of forms, O Rbhus, honours and praises these words of 
yours. (Thus knowledge, science and technology grows 
from one generation of scholars to another.) 


The four cups of life may be interpreted as 
Dharma, righteousness, artha, material goods, ‘kama’, 
material and mental fulfilment, and Moksha, ultimate 
purpose of living and ultimate freedom. 


सत्यमूचुर्नरं एवा हि चक्रुरनु स्वधामृभवों जग्मुरे ताम्‌ | 
विभ्राजंमानांश्चमसों अहेवाऽवेनतत्वष्टौ चतुरो ददुश्वान्‌ & ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


164 RGVEDA 


6. Satyamucurnara eva hi cakruranu svadham- 
rbhavo jagmuretam. Vibhrajamanamscamasan 
aheva’venattvasta caturo dadrsvan. 


The Rbhus, brave and blessed, speak true what 
they speak, then they accomplish what they say, and 
then they achieve this reward of their action. Tvashta, 
the divine maker, wise and all-seeing eye of the world, 
who sees the Rbhus’ cups of life shining as daylight 
sees them, loves them and blesses the makers. Thus 
should men do in life. 


द्वाद॑श द्यून्यदगोंह्यस्याऽऽतिथ्ये रण॑च्भवंः ward: । सुश्चेत्रा 
कृण्वन्नन॑यन्त सिन्धून्धन्वातिं्टन्नोष॑धीर्निम्नमापंः ॥ ७॥ 


0 Dvadasa_ dyun yadagohyasya’’tithye ranann- 
rbhavah sasantah. Suksetrakrnvannanayanta 
sindhun dhanvatisthann-osadhir-nimnamapah. 


When the scholars and sages of the science of 
yajna remain on holiday for twelve days in the years, 
resting and refreshing themselves, enjoying the 
hospitality of a prominent host, then the sky is overcast, 
the showers pour, fields are made fertile, the rivers flow 
and vegetation grows on barren lands, (and this by rain 
yajna). 
रथं ये चक्रुः सुवृतं नरेष्ठां ये धेनुं विश्वजुवं विरूवरूपाम्‌। 
त आ तक्षन्त्वृभवों रयिं नः स्वव॑सः स्वप॑सः सुहस्ताः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Ratham ye cakruh suvrtam narestham ye dhenum 
visvajuvam visvarupam. Ta a taksantvrbhavo 
rayim nah svavasah svapasah suhastah. 


The Rbhus, who design and manufacture a 
strong built chariot for people to travel by, create a 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 33 165 


universal language of universal knowledge for the world 
prevailing all over the world. May they create universal 
wealth for us all — heroes of noble action, noble 
protection, and dexterous of hand as they are. 


अपो द्यंषामजुंषन्त देवा अभि क्रत्वा मन॑सा दीध्यानाः 1 
वाजो' दे वानामभवत्सुकर्मेन्द्र॑स्य ऋभुक्षा वरुणस्य 
विभ्वा॥ ९॥ 


ध Apo hyesamajusanta deva abhi kratva manasa 
didhyanah. Vajo devanamabhavat sukarmen- 
drasya rbhuksa varunasya vibhva. 


The wonderful acts and products of these Rbhus, 
exceptional scientists, later, the younger intellectuals, 
themselves brilliant with their mind and work, honour 
and apply for further development: thus the food and 
energy becomes the favourite input for the ‘devas’, 
following researchers, for higher outputs of finer food 
and energy, the powerful thunderbolt becomes the arm 
for Indra, ruler and defender, and the extensive waves 
of subtle transmission become the perceptive and active 
agencies of Varuna, the presiding power. 


ये हरीं मेधयोक्था मदन्त इन्द्राय चक्रुः सुयुजा ये अश्वा | 
ते रायस्पोषं द्रविंणान्यस्मे धत्त ऋभवः क्षेमयन्तो न 
मित्रम्‌॥ ९०॥ 

10. Ye hari medhayoktha madanta indraya cakruh 
suyuja ye asva. Te rayasposam dravinanyasme 
dhatta rbhavah ksemayanto na mitram. 

The Rbhus, holy thinkers, creators and makers, 


who, using their intellect and imagination and rejoicing 
with the revelations of the chants of sacred verses, create 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


166 RGVEDA 


the circuit of energies, produce the motive powers, and 
construct the chariot for Indra, ruler and the nation, may, 
we pray, bring us health and nourishment and wealth 
and build permanent assets for us as protective and 
promotive friends doing good to friends. 


sala: पीतिमुत वो मदं धुर्न ऋते श्रान्तस्य स॒ख्याय॑ 
देवाः। ते नूनमस्मे ऋभवो वसूनि तृतीये अस्मिन्त्सव॑ने 
दधात॥ ९९॥ 

11. Idahnah pitimuta vo madam dhurna rte srantasya 
sakhyaya devah. Te nunamasme rbhavo vasuni 
trttye asmintsavane dadhata. 

O Rbhus, noble creators and makers, today the 
holy men bring you soma to celebrate and enjoy. The 
divines favour not the slothfuls, they extend no hand of 
friendship unless you are tested in the crucibles of hard 
work and self sacrifice. May the Rbhus bring us, 111 truth, 
the wealths of life in the third session of yajna. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 34 
Rbhavah Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
ऋभुर्विभ्वा वाज इन्द्रो नो अच्छेमं यज्ञं Yaerard यात। 
इदा हि वो! धिषण देव्यह्वामधात्पीतिं सं मद। अग्मता 
वः।॥ ९॥ 


i, Rbhurvibhva vaja indro no acchemam yajnam 
ratnadheyopa yata. Ida hi vo dhisana devyahna- 
madhat pitim sam mada agmata vah. 


Rbhu, the technologist, Vibhva, specialist of 
natural energy, Vaja, specialist of food and vitality, and 
Indra, specialist of electricity and power, all harbingers 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 34 167 


of the jewels of wealth, may come and grace this science 
yajna of ours. Today, the divinity of intelligence brings 
you the nectar of joy and celebration of success for a 
drink. May the joy of the occasion inspire you. 


विदानासो जन्म॑नो वाजरत्ना उत ऋतुभिंतऋभवो मादयध्वम्‌ | 
सं वो मदा अग्म॑त सं पुर॑न्धिः सुवीरांमस्मे र॒यिमेर॑यध्वम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Vidanaso janmano vajaratna uta rtubhirrbhavo 
madayadhvam. Sam vo mada agmata sam 
purandhih suviramasme rayimerayadhvam. 


O Rbhus, blest from your very birth with the 
love of knowledge, commanding knowledge and the 
power of knowledge, work and rejoice with the scholars 
according to the seasons. May the peace and pleasure 
of life reach you, may divine intelligence and the ruling 
powers of the world with munificence bless you. And 
may you, for our sake, arouse the wealth of the nations, 
brave citizens and the coming generations. 


अयं al यज्ञ ऋभवोऽ कारि यमा म॑नुष्वत्प्रदिवों दधिध्वे। 
प्र वोऽ च्छा जुजुषाणासो! अस्थुरभूत विश्वे अग्रियोत 
aist: ३॥ ति 

2 Ayam vo yajna rbhavo’kari yama manusvat- 
pradivo dadhidhve. Pra vo’ccha jujusanaso 
asthurabhuta visve agriyota vajah. 


O Rbhus, this yajna is enacted for you which, 
come and take over like the best of men inspired with 
the bright light of knowledge and expertise. Friends and 
devotees would stand by you, and you would be the 
front leaders of the world at the speed of winds. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


168 RGVEDA 


अभूदु वो विधते रल्नधेय॑यिदा न॑रो दाशुषे मर्त्यीय। 
पिब॑त वाजा ऋभवो ददे वो महि तृतीयं सव॑नं मदाय ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Abhiudu vo vidhate ratnadheyamida naro dasuse 
martyaya. Pibata vaja rbhavo dade vo mahi trti- 
yam savanam madaya. 


O Rbhus, leaders of humanity, may the yajna of 
yours be a source of jewel wealth for the common man, 
for the generous giver and for the organiser and sustainer 
of the programme. O leaders and pioneers of the speed 
of winds, carry on with joy, let all enjoy the fruits. I 
dedicate the final session of the yajna to the ecstatic joy 
of you all. 


आ वाजा यातोप॑ं न ऋभुक्षा महो न॑रो द्रविणसो wore: | 
आ व॑ः पीतयोऽ भिपित्वे अह्वामिमा अस्तं नवस्व॑ंइव 
ग्मन्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5. A vaja yatopa na rabhuksa maho naro dravinaso 
grnanah. A vah pitayo’bhipitve ahnamima astam 
navasva iva gman. 

Come, O potent, brilliant and great Rbhus, best 
of the leaders of men, commanding the wealth and 
knowledge of the world, praised and celebrated, come 
as arising glowing youth comes home at the end of the 
day, and may these exhilarating drinks offered to you 
delight you. 


आ न॑पातः शवसो यातनोपेमं ast नम॑सा हूयमानाः 1 
स॒जोष॑सः सूरयो यस्य॑ च स्थ मध्व॑: पात रत्नधा इन्द्र॑ 
ard: US ॥ 

6. A napatah Savaso yatanopemam yajiam namasa 
huyamanah. Sajosasah surayo yasya ca stha 
madhvah pata ratnadha indravantah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 34 169 


Rbhus, strong, imperishable heroes and leaders 
of science and knowledge, invoked and invited with 
reverence, come and join this yajnic programme of 
development and production. Loved and loving, eminent 
scholars, commanding wealth, honour and power, come 
and accept the delicious treat of the host and protect 
and promote the good fortune of the community. 


सजोषा इन्द्र वरुणेन सोमं सजोषाः पाहि गिर्वणो wets: । 
अग्रे पाभिंऋतुपाभिः सजोषा ग्रास्पल्ींभी रत्नधाभिः 
सजोषाः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Sajosa indra varunena somam sajosah pahi 
girvano marudbhih. Agrepabhirrtupabhih sajosa 
gnaspatnibhi ratnadhabhih sajosah. 


Loved and loving Indra, lord of power and 
honour, come, share and promote the joy of the soma 
celebration of honour with Varuna, men of high 
endeavour and success. Loving friend, praised and 
celebrated, come, celebrate with the Rudras, people of 
justice and rectitude in the land, and protect and promote 
their honour and prestige. Loving, joining, socialising 
and celebrating with the leading pioneers, planning 
guardians of the nation according to the change of 
seasons, wedded couples, households and trustees of the 
jewel wealth of the land, protect and promote the honour 
and excellence of life with soma celebrations of joy. 


सजोष॑स आदित्येमीदयध्वं asia ऋभवः ce ats: | 
Tatar cat सवित्रा सजोष॑ंसः सिन्धुंभी raat: ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Sajosasa dadityairmadayadhvam sajosasa 


rbhavah parvatebhih. Sajosaso daivyena savitra 
sajosasah sindhubhi ratnadhebhih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


170 RGVEDA 


O Rbhus, scientists and intellectuals, create joy 
and rejoice: Rejoice with the Adityas, scholars of the 
top order of brilliance in accord with the various phases 
of the sun, rejoice in harmony with the clouds and the 
mountains, rejoice together with the divine energy of 
nature and the life-sustaining light of the sun, and rejoice 
in confluence with the flowing rivers and the rolling 
seas and the treasures of the jewel wealth of nature, and 
share the joy with us too. 


ये अश्विना a पितराय ऊती धेनुं daaseevat ये sivat | 
ये अंसत्रा य ऋधग्रोदसी ये विभ्वो नर॑ः स्वपत्यानि 
चक्रुः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Ye asvina ye pitara ya uti dhenum tataksur- 
rbhavo ye asva. Ye amsatra ya rdhagrodasi ye 
vibhvo narah svapatyani cakruh. 


Who are the Rbhus? Those who create and 
activate complementary circuits of energies, who serve 
the parents and sustain and rejuvenate health anew, who 
provide protection and promotion, who refine and 
extend knowledge and the language of knowledge, 
develop cattle wealth and renew the earth resources, 
who design and structure fast modes of travel and 
communication, who design and construct armour 
against external attacks, who cross the globe unto the 
sky and space and who command universal knowledge: 
pioneers and leaders of the best of men who can raise, 
train and organise a noble younger generation. 


ये गोम॑न्तं वाज॑वन्तं सुवीरं र यिं धत्थ वसुमन्तं Gea । 
ते अग्रेपा ऋभवो मन्दसाना अस्मे ध॑त्त ये च॑ रातिं 
गृणन्ति i ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 35 171 


10. Ye gomantam vajavantam suviram rayim dhattha 
vasumantam puruksum. Te agrepa rbhavo 
mandasana asme dhatta ye ca ratim grnanti. 


Those who create, bear and bring life’s wealth 
full of cows and horses, food and energy, knowledge 
and speed of progress, all round prosperity, all round 
sustenance and security, and a brave new generation, 
and who create, praise and celebrate all such wealth of 
the world, such Rbhus, heroic scholars, leaders and 
pioneers, happy creators of joy, may bear and bring such 
wealth, honour and prosperity for us. 


नापाभूत न वोऽतीतृषामाऽनिंः शस्ता ऋभवो यज्ञे अस्मिन्‌। 
समिन्द्र॑ण मद॑थ सं मरुद्भिः सं राज॑भी रल्नधेर्याय देवाः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Napabhuta na vo ’titrsama’nihsasta rbhavo yajiie 
asmin. Samindrena madatha sam marudbhih sam 
rajabhi ratnadheyaya devah. 


O Rbhus, never go away, never feel depreciated, 
never depressed. We shall never let you feel deprived, 
never thirsty for anything, you will ever feel praised and 
appreciated in this yajnic programme of creative life. 
Rejoice with Indra, ruler and commander of honour and 
power, rejoice with the Maruts, dynamic youthful citizens, 
and with the brilliant ruling leaders, O generous and 
refulgent creators of joy and prosperity, rejoice for the 
creation of the jewels of life’s beauty more and ever more. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 35 
Rbhavah Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


Sard यात शवसो नपातः सौध॑न्वना ऋभवो AT भूत । 
अस्मिन्हि वः सव॑ने रत्नधेयं गमन्त्विन्द्रमनुं वो मदासः ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


172 RGVEDA 


1. Thopa yata Savaso napatah saudhanvana rbhavo 
mapa bhuta. Asmin hi vah savane ratnadheyam 
gamantvindramanu vo madasah. 


O Rbhus, mighty strong, imperishable warriors 
of the bow, come here close to us, do not stay away, 
never feel dispraised. In this yajna enacted for you, let 
the honour and joy of creation and celebration be as 
much for you as for Indra, resplendent lord giver of 
wealth. 


आगंन्रभूणामिह र॑त्रधयमभूत्सोमंस्य FIAT पीतिः। 
सुकृत्यया यत्स्व॑पस्ययां चं एकं विचक्र चमसं च॑तुर्धां ॥ २॥ 


pa Agannrbhinamiha ratnadheyam-abhitsomasya 
susutasya pitih. Sukrtyaya yatsvapasyaya cam 
ekam vicakra camasam caturdha. 


Let the jewel wealth of the Rbhus’ performance 
come and let the joy of the soma success distilled from 
nature be here for the people to share who deserve the 
prize, since with their admirable action and brilliant 
intelligence and will they have designed and 
manufactured one chariot fourfold in performance. 


व्य॑कृणोत चमसं च॑तुर्धां सखे वि शि्चेत्य॑ब्रवीत । staat 
वाजा अमरत॑स्य पन्थां गणं देवानामभवः सुहस्ताः ॥ ३॥ 


Vyakrnota camasam caturdha sakhe vi Sikset- 
yabravita. Athaita vaja amrtasya pantham ganam 
devanamrbhavah suhastah. 


You develop the cup of life to fourfold success 
of completion and perfection: Dharma, artha (material 
development), kama (self-fulfilment), and Moksha 
(ultimate freedom). O friend, teach and say: This is it, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 35 173 


this is the art of living. And then, O eminent scholars, 
dynamic scientists, dexterous technologists, join the 
fraternity of divines and move on to the path of 
immortality. 


fara: स्विच्चम॒स एष आंस यं काव्येन चतुरो विचक्र । 
अर्था सुनुध्वं सव॑नं मदाय पात ऋभवो मधुनः सोम्य- 
eae 


4. Kimmayah sviccamasa esa asa yam kavyena 
caturo vicakra. Atha sunudhvam savanam mada- 
ya pata rbhavo madhunah somyasya. 


What in truth is this cup of life which, with your 
wisdom, you analyse, specify and realise as four-in-one? 
O sages of vision and imagination, distil the soma- 
essence of it for the joy of life and drink as well as 
protect and promote the nectar sweet of honey. 


sreaterd पितरा qatt created चमसं दे वपान॑म्‌। 
च्या हरी धनुतरावतषटेन्द्रवाहावृभवो वाजरत्नाः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


a Sacyakarta pitara yuvana Sacyakarta camasam 
devapanam. Sacya hari dhanutaravatastendra- 
vahavrbhavo vajaratnah. 


O Rbhus, with your truth of knowledge and holy 
science, you rejuvenate your parents to youthful health. 
With truth of vision and imagination, you reveal the 
fourfold cup of life’s beauty and joy for the drink of 
divinities. With your truth of science and technology 
you create the power and construct the chariot faster 
than bullet speed for the ride of Indra, world’s presiding 
power of rule and law. You are really the master creators 
and controllers of the speed and jewels of life on earth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


174 RGVEDA 


aa: सुनोत्य॑भिपित्वे stat dis वाजासः सव॑नं मदाय | 
तस्म रयिपरंभवः सर्व वीरमा dara वृषणो मन्दसानाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yo vah sunotyabhipitve ahnam tivram vajasah 
savanam madaya. Tasmai rayimrbhavah sarva- 
virama taksata vrsano mandasanah. 


Whoever for you distils at the end of the day 
the exciting soma juice of the beauty and joy of life for 
the celebration of the holiness of existence, for him, O 
Rbhus, thinkers and wonder workers of the speed of 
winds, generous as showers from the clouds, spirits of 
ecstasy, create and give the wealth of an all round brave 
progeny for times to come. 


प्रातः सुतम॑पिबो हर्यश्व माध्यन्दिनं सव॑नं केव॑लं ते। 
समृ भुभिंः पिबस्व रत्रधेथिः स्खीर्यौ इन्द्र चकृषे 
सुकृत्या ॥ ७॥ 


Pratah sutamapibo haryasva madhyandinam 
savanam kevalam te. Samrbhubhih pibasva 
ratnadhebhih sakhin yan indra cakrse sukrtya. 


Indra, world ruler of honour and majesty, rider 
of the chariot of sun rays, drink the soma distilled in 
the morning. Drink the soma distilled at midday only 
for you. Drink with the Rbhus, men of science and 
wisdom, creators of the jewels of wealth, whom you 
have drafted as friends by your noble action. 


ये देवासो अभ॑वता सुकृत्या श्येनाइवेदधिं दिवि निंषेद | 
ते रलं धात शवसो नपातः सौध॑न्वना अभ॑वतामतांसः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ye devaso abhavata sukrtya syena ivedadhi divi 
niseda. Te ratnam dhata Savaso napatah saudhan- 
vana abhavatamrtasah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 36 175 


The Rbhus who rise to divine virtues by noble 
actions and, like the eagle, soar to the skies, create and 
bestow jewels of life on others and, bold and 
courageous, infallible and imperishable warriors of the 
bow, they rise on and become immortal. 


यत्तृतीयं सव॑नं रलधेयमकुणुध्वं स्वपस्या सुहस्ताः । तदूभवः 
परिंषिक्तं व एतत्सं मदेभिरिद्दरियेभिः पिबध्वम्‌ eu 


9. Yat trttyam savanam ratnadheyam-akrnudhvam 
svapasya suhastah. Tadrbhavah parisiktam va 
etat sam madebhirindr-iyebhih pibadhvam. 


O Rbhus, generous at heart and dexterous of 
hand, the third yajnic session and creation of soma 
replete with the jewel wealth of life’s essence which 
you have accomplished with your noble action, that 
nectar sweet of soma seasoned and reinforced is here 
for you. Drink it with the exciting pleasure of your 
senses, mind and soul. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 36 
Rbhavah Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
अनश्वो जातो अंनभीशुरुक्थ्यो ३ रथ॑स्तिचक्रः परि वर्तते 
रज॑: | eda! देव्य॑स्य प्रवाचनं area: पृथिवीं यच्च 
पुष्य॑थ ॥ ९॥ 
ie Anasvo jato anabhisurukthyo rathastricakrah 


pari vartate rajah. Mahattadvo devyasya prava- 
canam dyamrbhavah prthivim yacca pusyatha. 


O Rbhus, divine engineers of superhuman order, 
that admirable three wheel, three engine, three stage 
chariot of yours, powered without horse, controlled 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


176 RGVEDA 


without reins, created as your grand realisation of the 
divine formula, goes round and round over the earth, 
across the skies unto the regions of space without erring, 
and the same you control and feed. 


रथं ये चक्रुः सुवृतं सुचेतसोऽ विहरन्तं मन॑सस्परि ध्यया । 
ताँ ऊ न्व॑स्य सव॑नस्य पीतय आ वों वाजा ऋभवो 
वेदयामसि ॥ २॥ 


2: Ratham ye cakruh suvrtam sucetaso’vihvaran- 
tam manasaspari dhyaya. Tan u nvasya sava- 
nasya pitaya a vo vaja rbhavo vedayamasi. 


Those Rbhus, scientists and engineers of 
exceptional genius, alert of mind and vision, who created 
the well structured, well controlled unerring chariot with 
their thought, imagination and meditation beyond the 
mind, we recognise and invite to this soma session of 
scientific yajna for the order of national honour. 


तद्रो वाजा ऋभवः सुप्रवाचनं देवेषु विभ्वो अभवन्म- 
हित्वनम्‌। जिव्री यत्सन्तां पितरा सनाजुरा पुनर्य॒वाना 
चरथाय Tatar ३॥ 


2; Tadvo vaja rbhavah supravacanam devesu vibhvo 
abhavanmahitvanam. Jivri yatsanta pitara 
sanajura punaryuvana carathaya taksatha. 


O Rbhus, fast and imaginative scientists and 
engineers universally recognised and honoured, that 
practical realisation of yours of the divine word and 
formula becomes a great news for the brilliant leaders 
and scholars, since by that you rejuvenate the parental 
ancestors old and worn out for long and equip them 
with new life and energy of youth to go about and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 36 177 
onward in time. 


एकं fa च॑क्र चमसं adda निश्चर्मणो गाम॑रिणीत 
धीतिभिः । अथां देवेष्व॑मृतत्वमांनश श्रुष्टी वाजा ऋभवस्तद्व 
उक्थ्यम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ekam vi cakra camasam caturvayam niscarmano 
gamarinita dhitibhih. Atha devesvamrtatvama- 
nasa 5111517 vaja rbhavas-tadva ukthyam. 


You develop one cup of soma into four, make 
one versatile chariot into fourfold efficiency, and reclaim 
and develop barren and eroded land back to fertility 
with your thought and imagination, and thus 
immediately you attain to a status of immortality among 
the divine benefactors of humanity. Rbhus of world fame 
and high speed of action, such achievement of yours is 
admirable. 


ऋभुतो र यिः प्र॑थमश्र॑वस्तमो वाजश्रुतासो यमजीं STAT: | 
विभ्वतष्टो विदथेषु प्रवाच्यो यं देवासोऽव॑था स 
विचर्षणिः ॥ ५॥ 


9 Rbhuto rayih prathamasravastamo vajasrutaso 
yamajijanannarah. Vibhvatasto vidathesu pra- 
vacyo yam devaso’vatha sa vicarsanih. 


The wealth most meritorious, received through 
the Rbhus, that which is created by the most famous 
and dynamic leaders, that which is created by the world 
famous Rbhus themselves, the person wide awake and 
perceptive whom the wise and generous divinities 
protect and promote: this is worthy of honour and 
celebration at public assemblies. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


178 RGVEDA 


स वाज्यवां स ऋषिंर्वचस्यया स शूरो अस्ता पृत॑नासु FBX: | 
स रायस्पोषं स सुवीर्य' दधे यं वाजो fasat ऋभवो 
यमाविंषुः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa vajyarva sa rsirvacasyaya sa Suro asta prta- 
nasu dustarah. Sa rayasposam sa suviryan dadhe 
yam vajo vibhvam rbhavo yamavisuh. 


He is the hero, he is the pioneer, he is the 
visionary prophet by eloquence, he is the brave, he is 
the warrior, unchallengeable in battle contests, he wins 
health and wealth, and he wins strength and prowess 
whom the Rbhus, world heroes of the speed of winds, 
protect and patronise. 


श्रेष्ठं a: पेशो अधिं धायि दर्शतं स्तोमों वाजा ऋभवस्तं 
जुजुष्टन । धीरासो हि st कवयो विपश्चितस्तान्वं एना 
ब्रह्मणा वेदयामसि । ७॥ 


Te Srestham vah peso adhi dhayi darsatarh stomo 
vaja rbhavastam jujustana. Dhiraso hi stha 
kavayo vipascitastan va ena brahmana veda- 
yamasi. 

Most distinguished and elevating is the form and 
position held by you, Rbhus, masters of art and science 
and pioneers of progress. Accept and appreciate the song 
of celebration. Stay constant, poets and visionaries, 
scholars of high wisdom. Such we recognise and honour 
you by this holy song of praise. 


यूयमस्मभ्यं धिषणाभ्यस्परिं विद्वांसो विश्वा न्यीणि 
भोज॑ना । द्युमन्तं वाजं वृष॑शुष्ममुत्तममा नों र यिमूभवस्तश्चता 
वयं: ॥ ८ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 37 179 


8. Yuyamasmabhyam dhisanabhyaspari vidvamso 
visva naryani bhojana. Dyumantam vajam 
vrsasusmamuttamama no rayimrbhavastaksata 
vayah. 


O Rbhus, scholars and scientists of high order, 
with your knowledge, art and wisdom, create and 
provide for us the food, energy and modes of care and 
comfort we need for the sustenance of humanity. Create 
and bring us the light of science and progress of 
technology, strength and power coupled with generosity, 
highest form of life’s wealth and health and age. 


इह प्रजामिह रयिं रराणा इह श्रवो वीरव॑त्तश्चता a: | 
येन॑ वयं चितयेमात्यन्यान्तं वाजं चित्रम्ंभवो ददा नः॥ ९॥ 

Tha prajamiha rayim rarana tha Sravo viravatta- 
ksata nah. Yena vayam citayematyanyan tam 
vajam citramrbhavo dada nah. 


Happy, joyous and generous, O Rbhus, create 
and prepare for us here a noble progeny and a prosperous 
nation, create wealth here, food, knowledge and honour 
worthy of the brave here itself by which we may 
enlighten others too full well. O scholars of science and 
wisdom, give us that wonderful art and knowledge and 
all round progress. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 37 
Rbhavah Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


उप॑ नो वाजा अध्वरमरंभुक्षा देवां यात पथिभिर्देवयानैः 1 
यर्था यज्ञं मनुषो विक्ष्वा ङेसु द॑धिध्वे र॑ण्वाः सुदिनेष्व- 
ह्यम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


180 RGVEDA 


॥; Upa no vaja adhvaramrbhuksa deva yata pathi- 
bhirdevayanaih. Yatha yajnam manuso viksvasu 
dadhidhve ranvah sudinesvahnam. 


O generous Rbhus, brilliant sages, eminent 
scholars and leaders of science and progress, come and 
grace our yajnic programme of non-violent develop- 
ment, come by the paths of divinity so that, happy and 
joyous, you may take over the humanistic project of the 
people in these happy days of the season. 


ते वों हृदे मन॑से सन्तु यज्ञा जुष्टासो अद्य gahfirsit 
गुः । प्र व॑ः सुतासो हरयन्त पूर्णाः क्रत्वे दक्षाय हर्षयन्त 
पीताः ॥ २॥ 


2: Te vo hrde manase santu yajna justaso adya 
ghrtanirnijo guh. Pra vah sutaso harayanta 
purnah kratve daksaya harsayanta pitah. 


May those yajnic projects of yours for the 
creation of happiness and prosperity be satisfying and 
delightful to your heart and mind, and may the fruits of 
yajnas served by holy men and fed with ghrta flow to 
you with fragrance. May the soma cups of joy full to 
the brim enrapture you and, drunk to the leas, excite 
and exhilarate you to your best performance. 


त्युदायं cated sat वः स्तोमो वाजा ऋशभुश्चषणो ददे a: | 
जह म॑नुष्वदुप॑रासु विक्षु युष्मे wat बृहदिवेषु सोमं॑म्‌॥ ३ ॥ 
६0 Tryudayam devahitam yatha vah stomo vaja 
rbhuksano dade vah. Juhve manusvaduparasu 

viksu yusme saca brhaddivesu somam. 
Rbhus, eminent scholars and miraculous 
makers, as your threefold gift of science, technology 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 37 181 


and wealth of power and excellence for the highest of 
people is a source of bliss and comfort, so do I as one 
among the same people high and low, dedicated to the 
vast divinities, offer you the treat of soma, best of wealth 
and joy as gift, in truth of thought, word and deed, 
offering loved by the noblest divine souls, the Rbhus. 


पीवोअश्वाः शुचद्रथा हि भूताऽयं-शिप्रा वाजिनः सुनिष्काः | 
इन्द्र॑स्य सूनो शवसो नपातोऽ नुं वश्चेत्यग्रियं मदाय ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pivo asvah sucadratha hi bhuta’yahsipra vajinah 
suniskah. Indrasya suno Savaso napato ’nu vasce- 
tyagriyam madaya. 


O Rbhus, commanding mighty horse power, 
riding brilliant chariots, clad in corselets of steel, be 
golden great, tempestuous as winds. Consequently, O 
children of Indra, universal energy, unassailable images 
of strength and power, for your joy and celebration, the 
first and foremost tribute of soma yajna is selected and 
offered. 


ऋभुम्‌भुक्षणो रयिं वाजे वाजिन्तमं युज॑म्‌ । 
इन्द्र॑स्वन्तं हवामहे सदासात॑ममण्विन॑म्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


a. Rbhumrbhuksano rayim vaje vajintamam yujam. 
Indrasvantamam havamahe sadasatamama- 
Svinam. 


O Rbhus, in the struggle of life we invoke and 
call upon the wonder visionary man of art and science, 
wealth of all kinds, most heroic warrior, cooperative 
ally, most powerful leader, and furious fighting force 
ever dependable, inalienable. (That is the Rbhu we 
want.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


182 RGVEDA 


सेदुभवो यमव॑थ यूयमिन््र॑शच मर्त्य॑म्‌ । 
स धीभिर॑स्तु सनिता मेधसाता सो अर्व॑ता ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sedrbhavo yamavatha yuyamindrasca martyam. 
Sa dhibhirastu sanita medhasata so arvata. 


O Rbhus, visionaries of science, power and 
action, whoever the man you and the ruler, Indra, protect 
and promote, would be the man of dedication and 
discrimination with actions and intelligence, an 
admirable ally in the business of life with the fastest 
modes of movement and progress. 


fa नों वाजा ऋभुक्षणः पथणश्चिंतन ase 
अस्मभ्यं सूरयः स्तुता विश्वा आशा॑स्तरीषणिं ॥ ७ ॥ 


ip Vi no vaja rbhuksanah pathascitana yastave. 
Asmabhyam surayah stuta visva asastarisani. 


O Rbhus, visionaries and craftsmen of the art 
and science of life, leaders of the speed of winds, 
teachers and pioneers bright and brave, open and reveal 
for us our paths of progress in our yajna of corporate 
living. We rightfully admire you and humbly pray to 
you so that we may realise all our hopes and ambitions 
and ultimately cross the ocean of life. 


तं नों वाजा ऋभुक्षण इन्द्र नासत्या रयिम्‌। 
समश्वं चर्षणिभ्य आ पुरु श॑स्त मघत्तये ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tam no vaja rbhuksana indra nasatya rayim. 
Samasvam carsanibhya a puru Sasta maghattaye. 
O Rbhus, leaders and pioneers of vision and 


progress, O lord ruler of the world, Indra, never failing, 
ever true, teach us, give us that order of wealth and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 38 183 


speedy progress with power and horse which leads the 
people to honour and prosperity in life to the full. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 38 


Dyavaprthivi, Dadhikra Devata, Vamadeva 
Gautama Rshi 


उतो हि वां दात्रा सन्ति gat या पूरुभ्य॑स्त्रसदंस्युर्नितोशे | 
gare द॑दथुरूर्वरासां घनं दस्युभ्यो अभिभूंतिमुग्रम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


i. Uto hi vam datra santi purva ya purubhyastra- 
sadasyurnitose. Ksetrasam dadathururvarasam 
ghanam dasyubhyo abhibhutimugram. 


O heaven and earth, ruler and commander, 
generous givers, whatever the gifts of munificence 
earlier than the earliest for the many recipients, they 
are all yours: whether they are gifts of fields and fertile 
lands with generous grants or, as terror for the wicked, 
you give to the evil doer the crushing bolt and intense 
fall from grace. 


उत वाजिनं पुरुनिष्षिध्वानं दधिक्रामु ददथुर्विश्वकुष्िम्‌। 
mia श्येनं प्धितप्सुमाशु चकुत्य॑मर्योँ नृपतिं न 
शू्म्‌॥ २ ॥ 


2. Uta vajinam purunissidhvanam dadhikramu 
dadathurvisvakrstim. Rjipyam Syenam prusita- 
psumasum carkrtyamaryo nrpatim na Suram. 


Or, like the brave parental master, you give the 
war horse, destroyer of many enemies, or the roaring 
war craft, winner of victories for many people of the 
world, and the refulgent hero like the rising sun, 
supporter and defender of humanity, or the simple man 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


184 RGVEDA 


of rectitude, or the eagle like fighter that pounces upon 
the target, or the instant flier and pilot or the relentless 
doer of the master’s order. 


यं सीमनुं प्रवतेव द्रवन्तं विश्व॑ः पूरूर्मदति हर्ष॑माणः। 
पड्भिर्गृध्यन्तं मेधयुं न शूरं रथतुरं वात॑मिव ध्रज॑न्तम्‌ ॥ २३ ॥ 


a: Yam simanu pravateva dravantam visvah purur- 
madati harsamanah. Padbhirgrdhyantam medha- 
yum na Suram rathaturam vatamiva dhrajantam. 


War horse or the aircraft which, rushing like 
turbulent waters to the sea, the people of the world 
admire and celebrate with joy, which, like a brave and 
tempestuous warrior, advances to the heat of battle by 
leaps and bounds and grabs the enemy and which, 
rushing like a wind sheer tears the enemy force apart. 


यः स्मारुन्धानो teat समत्सु सनुंतर श्चरति गोषु गच्छन्‌ | 
आविऋजीको विदथा निचिक््य॑त्तिरो अरतिं पर्याप॑ 
sat: usu 

4. Yah smarundhano gadhya samatsu sanutara- 


Scarati gosu gacchan. Avirrjtko vidatha nicikyat 
tiro aratim paryapa ayoh. 


Which in battles stems the united force of the 
enemy and goes over lands and seas of the earth in 
majesty, which openly displays its strength of arms and 
thrust openly, and watches over the grand yajnic 
programmes of humanity and wards off the enemies and 
adversities from the life of noble people. 


उत स्मैनं वस्त्रमथिं न तायुमनुं क्रोशन्ति क्षितयो भरेषु । 
नीचायमानं जसुरिं न श्येनं श्रवश्चाच्छ। पशुमच्च 
यूथम्‌॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 38 185 


a. Uta smainam vastramathim na tayumanu krosanti 
ksitayo bharesu. Nicadyamanam jasurim na 
Syenam Sravascaccha pasumacca yutham. 


Just as people cry out for help when a thief 
attacks their cloth and hearth and home, so do people 
call out to the fighter warrior in battles for the safety of 
their hearth and home and herds of cattle wealth when 
they see the terrible enemy descending like a hawk 
intending to attack. 


उत स्मासु प्रथमः स॑रिष्यन्नि वेवेति sfoteh tartar । स्रजं 
कृण्वानो जन्यो न शुभ्वा रेणा रेरि हत्किरणं दद्श्वान्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta smasu prathamah sarisyan ni veveti Srenibhi 
rathanam. Srajam krnvano janyo na subhva 
renum rerihat kiranam dadasvan. 


Keen to be the first and prime leader in front of 
these battle formations of the war chariots, creating a 
garland pattern, graceful like a bridegroom in 
procession, he goes like the wind raising a cloud of dust 
and radiating beams of light like the sun. 


उत स्य वाजी ae Rekarar शुश्रंषमाणस्तन्वां समर्ये | 
तुरं यतीषु तुरयंन्रजिप्योऽधिं yar: किरते TOSS ॥ ७ ॥ 


samarye. Turam yatisu turayannrjipyo ’dhi bhru- 
voh kirate renumrnjan. 


And that hero, mighty and brilliant, dedicated 
to truth, keen for service in battle in his own person, 
commanding the strong and smart warriors on fronts, 
going up and forward by straight paths, tossing up dust 
in battle, shaking it off from the eyebrows, goes on 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


186 RGVEDA 
making things straight and favourable for all. 


उत स्मास्य तन्यतोरिंव द्योऋघायतो अंधथियुजो भयन्ते । 
यदा सहस््र॑मभि षीमयोधीदुर्व॑तु": स्मा भवति भीम 
ऋञ्जन्‌ ८ ॥ 


8. Uta smasya tanyatoriva dyorrghayato abhiyujo 
bhayante. Yada sahasramabhi simayodhid 
durvartuh sma bhavati bhima rnjan. 


And when the hero in passion takes up arms in 
battle, those who face him shake in fear as from the 
thunder of lightning from the skies, and then when he 
engages thousands of adversaries he grows terrible and 
irresistible and comes out victorious. 


उत स्मास्य पनयन्ति जना जूतिं कुष्टिप्रो अभिभूतिमाशोः | 
serine: समिथे वियन्तः परां दधिक्रा stare: ॥ ९ ॥ 

0. Uta smasya panayanti jana jutim krstipro 
abhibhutimasoh. Utainamahuh samithe viyantah 
para dadhikra asarat sahasraih. 


And people praise the drive and superior power 
of this hero of human endeavour and accomplishment 
for humanity, and the warriors going to battle describe 
him as the roaring war horse, the booming war craft of 
the skies and the supreme of arms going with but ahead 
of thousands. 


आ दधिक्राः शव॑सा use कृष्टीः सूर्यंइव ज्योतिषाप- 
स्त॑तान । सहस्रसाः शतसा वाज्यवी पृणक्तु मध्वा समिमा 
वचांसि ॥ Qo ul 

10. A dadhikrah savasa pajica krstih surya iva 
Jyotisapastatana. Sahasrasah satasa vajyarva 
prnaktu madhva samima vacamsi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 49 187 


Just as the sun with its rays fills the skies and 
space, so does Dadhikra, the roaring war horse, the 
booming war-craft and the superior war hero with 
characteristic power and majesty fascinate all the five 
classes of people. May this hero, tempestuous mover, 
giver of a hundred and thousand favours to the people 
bring our words of praise to golden honey sweets of 
success and fulfilment. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 39 
Dadhikra Devata, Vamadava Gautama Rshi 


आशुं दधिक्रां तमु नु ष्टवाम दिवस्पूंथिव्या उत च॑किराम। 
उच्छन्तीर्मामुषसंः सूदयन्त्वति विश्वानि दुरितानि पर्षन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


IP Asum dadhikram tamu nu stavama divasprthivya 
uta carkirama. Ucchantir-mamusasah sudaya- 
ntvati visvani duritani parsan. 


Varily we praise the swift Dadhikra, the war 
horse of earth and skies, and we sing in praise of earth 
and heaven too. May the glorious dawns inspire and 
mature me, cleansing me of all the evils and weaknesses 
of earthly existence. 


महश्च॑करम्य्वं तः क्रतुप्रा द॑धिक्राव्णः पुरू वारस्य वृष्ण॑ः | 
यं पूरुभ्यो दीदिवांसं नाभिं ददथुरमित्रावरूणा ततुरिम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Mahascarkarmyarvatah kratupra dadhikravnah 


puruvarasya vrsnah. Yam purubhyo didivam-sam 
nagnim dadathur-mitravaruna taturim. 


O Mitra and Varuna, President of the Council 
and commander of the army, dear as pranic energies of 
life, inspired and enlightened, I praise the mighty war 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


188 RGVEDA 


horse, Dadhikra, sustainer of sustainers, a shower of 
blessings, saviour of the people, a gift swift and blazing 
as fire, which you have given for the sake of noble 
humanity. 


यो अश्व॑स्य दधिक्राव्णो अकारीत्समिंब्दे अग्रा उषसो 
व्युष्टौ । अनागसं तमदितिः कृणोतु स मित्रेण वरुणेना 
सजोषाः ॥ २३ ॥ 


ai Yo asvasya dadhikravno akarit samiddhe agna 
usaso vyustau. Anagasam tamaditih krnotu sa 
mitrena varunena sajosah. 


Whoever does honour and worship to Dadhikra, 
mighty life sustaining energy of the Divine and offers 
oblations into the burning fire at the rise of dawn, him 
Aditi, mother earth and the skies and space, lead to a 
state of purity from sin and evil and elevate him to a 
state of love and friendship with Mitra and Varuna, 
friend and highest authority of humanity. 


दधिक्राव्ण इष ऊर्जो महो यदम॑न्महि मरुतां नाम॑ भद्रम्‌। 
स्वस्तये वरुणं पित्रमथिं हर्वामह इन्द्रं वज्र॑बाहुम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Dadhikravna isa urjo maho yadamanmahi 
marutam nama bhadram. Svastaye varunam 
mitramagnim havamaha indram vajrabahum. 


While we study and discover the food, energy 
and power gifts of the great Dadhikra, cosmic sustainer 
of sustaining energies and of the good that the Maruts, 
powerful people, for sure do for our good and 
advancement, we at the same time study with devotion 
Varuna, water energy, Mitra, solar energy, Agni, fire 
power, and Indra, electricity which wields the arms of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 40 189 


thunder. 


इन्द्र॑मिवेदुभये वि ga-d उदीराणा यज्ञमुपप्रयन्तः | 
दधिक्रामु Yat मत्य ददशुरमित्रावरुणा नो अश्व॑म्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2. Indramivedubhaye vi hvayanta udirana yajnamu- 
paprayantah. Dadhikramu sudanam martyaya 
dadathurmitravaruna no asvam. 


Science researchers and engineers and technolo- 
gists going to centres of production, and both the rulers 
and the people, all invoke and develop Indra, electrical 
energy, Dadhikra, basic energy, flow of waters, and 
awareness of the modes of comfort which the friendly 
and generous powers, Mitra and Varuna, at national and 
international levels, give us as gifts for the people. 


दधिक्राव्णो अकारिषं जिष्णोरश्वस्य arise: 1 

सुरभि नो सुखा aera णा आयूंषि तारिषत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Dadhikravno akarisam jisnorasvasya vajinah. 

Surabhi no mukha karat pra na ayumsi tarisat. 


We sing in praise of Dadhikra, divine energy, 
victorious, all achieving spirit and power, who may, we 
pray, refine our sense of taste and other refinements and 
may help us live a full and healthy life across the floods 
of existence. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 40 
Dadhikra, Surya Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


दधिक्राव्ण इदु नु च॑किंराम विश्वा इन्मामुषसंः सूदयन्तु | 
अपामगरुषसः सूर्य स्य बृहस्पतेराङ्धिरसस्यं जिष्णोः ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


190 RGVEDA 


1; Dadhikravna idu nu carkirama visva inma- 
musasah sudayantu. Apamagnerusasah suryas- 
ya brhaspaterangirasasya jisnoh. 


We study and develop for human purposes the 
forces of Dadhikra, all victorious cosmic energy which 
impels various forms of natural energy, and we tap and 
develop the power sources of water, fire, dawns, sun, 
Brhaspati and pranas. May all the lights of the dawns 
and new revelations inspire me and mature my projects. 


सत्वा भरिषो ग॑विषो दुवन्यसच्छं वस्यादिष उषसंस्तु- 
रण्यसत्‌। सत्यो द्रवो द्रवरः Vag द॑धिक्रावेषमूर्जं 
स्व॑र्जनत्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2: Satva bhariso gaviso duvanyasacchravasyadisa 
usasasturanyasat. Satyo dravo dravarah patan- 
garo dadhikravesamurjam svarjanat. 


Dadhikrava, cosmic energy, potent and 
omnipresent, all sustaining, all inspiring of sense and 
mind, responsive to the dedicated enquirer, acting fast 
in foods, power sources and light of the dawns, true 
and imperishable, dynamic, flowing, heating, flying, 
may respond and create food, energy and the joy of life. 


उत स्मास्य द्रव॑तस्तुरण्यतः पर्ण न वेरनु वाति wafer: 1 
श्ये नस्येव श्चज॑तो अङ्कसं परि दधिक्राव्णः सहोजां 
तरित्रतः ॥ ३॥ 

3; Uta smasya dravatasturanyatah parnam na 


veranu vati pragardhinah. Syenasyeva dhrajato 
ankasam pari dadhikravnah sahorja taritratah. 


And like the wings of an arrow, everything 
follows the curves and waves of the motion of this 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 40 191 


Dadhikra, cosmic energy, flowing, running, 
accelerating, flying, driving and pressing forward like 
an eagle, and traversing the spaces with terrific power 
and velocity. 


उत स्य वाजी क्षिपणि तुरण्यति ग्रीवायां seat अपिकक्ष 
आसनि । क्रतुं दधिक्रा अनुं सन्तवींत्वत्पथामङ्कस्यन्वापनी- 
फणत्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Uta sya vaji ksipanim turanyati grivayam baddho 
api kaksa asani. Kratum dadhika anu santavitvat 
pathamankamsyanvapaniphanat. 


And that flying horse, missile of terrific power, 
Dadhikra, tied and programmed at the mouth, neck and 
the flanks, carries a warhead at terrific speed, and, 
following its programmed action, crosses the marks of 
its course to the target. 


हंसः शुचिषद्सुरन्तरिश्चसब्दोर्ता वेदिषदतिधथिर्दुरोणसत्‌। 
नृषद्वर सदु'त सद्वयोमसदन्जा गोजा ऋतजा अद्रिजा 
ऋतम्‌ ॥ UI 


Di Hamsah sucisad vasurantariksasaddhota vedisa- 
datithirduronasat. Nrsad varasadrtasad vyoma- 
sadabja goja rtaja adrija rtam. 


Hansa, the divine bird, soul unpolluted, resides 
in purity in biological forms in the skies, and, as yajnic 
doer, sits on the vedi in family home among people, the 
best ones, and rises up to the heights of heavens. It is 
born of the waters on the earth from the Law of existence 
and from the clouds. That is the truth, the Law. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


192 RGVEDA 


Mandala 4/Sukta 41 
Indra-Varuna Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


इन्द्रा को वां वरुणा सुम्नमाप स्तोमो हविष्पौ staat न 
होता at वां हृदि क्रतुमाँ अस्मदुक्तः पस्पशदिन्द्रावरूणा 
नम॑स्वान्‌ 2 


1. Indra ko vam varunad sumnamapa stomo havi- 
sman amrto na hota. Yo vam hrdi kratuman 
asmaduktah pasparsadindravaruna namasvan. 


Indra, O lord of power and glory, O Varuna, lord 
of justice and rectitude, who could win the favour of 
your blessing, which song of praise and prayer, 
expressive of yajnic reverence like an immortal yajaka 
would win your favour? Which song and tribute, O Indra 
and Varuna, sung in your honour, expressing humility 
and surrender as holy offering would touch your heart? 


इन्द्रा ह यो वरुणा चक्र आपी देवौ मर्त: सख्याय WAAL | 
स र्हन्ति वृत्रा समिथेषु शत्रूनवोभिर्वां महद्भिः सप्र 
शुंण्वे ॥ २॥ 

0. Indra ha yo varuna_ cakra api devau martah 


sakhyaya prayasvan. Sa hanti vrtra samithesu 
satrun-avobhirva mahadbhih sa pra srnve. 


Indra and Varuna, lord of power and of justice, 
abounding in strength and grace, generous and refulgent, 
the man who tries in honest action to win your friendship 
destroys darkness and evil and wins over enemies in 
battles with great weapons of defence and protection. 


इन्द्र ह रत्नं वरुणा धेष्ठेत्था नृभ्य॑: शरमानेभ्यस्ता। यदी 
सखाया सख्याय सोमैः सुतेभिः सुप्रयसा मादयैते ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 41 193 


2. Indra ha ratnam varuna dhesthettha nrbhyah 
sasamanebhyasta. Yadi sakhaya sakhyaya somaih 
sutebhih suprayasa madayaite. 


Indra and Varuna, ruler and the elected people 
in power, if they hold and govern the jewel wealth of 
the nation in trust for the people, and the people would 
then appreciate, approve and admire them, then this way, 
they, both friends in agreement, for friendship of the 
people, would be happy and rejoice with the honour 
and prosperity of the law created with the honest effort 
of all in unison. 


इन्द्रा युवं व॑रुणा दिद्युम॑स्मिन्नोजिं्मुग्रा नि व॑धिष्टं वर॑म्‌ | 
यो at दुरेवो वृकतिंर्दभीतिस्तस्मिन्मिमाथामभि- 
भूत्योजंः Ws ॥ 


4. Indra yuvam varuna didyum-asminnojistham- 
ugrani vadhistam vajram. Yo no durevo vrkatir- 
dabhitis-tasmin mimatham-abhibhutyojah. 


Indra, ruler, and Varuna, chief of justice, mighty 
impassioned powers in this system, wield the light of 
knowledge and law in the social order. Who ever is 
malignant, evil doer and terror monger against us, strike 
the shattering blow of justice and punishment on him 
and create faith and confidence in the light and lustrous 
power of the law. 


इन्द्रा युवं व॑रुणा भूतमस्या धियः Dart aaa St: | 
सा नो दुहीयद्यव॑सेव गत्वी सहस्त्र॑धारा पय॑सा मही गौः ॥ ५ ॥ 


9, Indra yuvam varuna bhutamasya dhiyah pretara 
vrsabheva dhenoh. Sa no duhiyadyava-seva gatvi 
sahasradhara payasa mahi gauh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


194 RGVEDA 


Indra, leader and giver of knowledge and power, 
and Varuna, embodiment of cherished virtue and 
intelligence, as Indra, lord of clouds sends down rain 
showers on earth and fertilises her, so, be the promoters 
of the intelligence and enlightenment of the children of 
the earth so that, as the earth, rich in vegetation, 
overflows with food in a thousand ways, so the 
knowledge, language and enlightenment of the 
community may grow a thousandfold and overflow with 
creative work on the great moving earth. 


तोके हिते तन॑य उर्वरासु सूरो eile वृष॑णश्च diet 
इन्द्रा नो अत्र वरुणा स्यातामवोभिर्दस्मा परिंतक्स्या- 
याम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Toke hite tanaya urvarasu suro drsike vrsanasca 
paumsye. Indra no atra varuna syatamavobhir- 
dasma paritakmyayam. 


Indra and Varuna, ruler and administrator, for 
the good of our children and grand children on these 
fertile lands on this moving and progressive earth, be 
the sun for the health and beauty of life, be the cloud 
for the fertility and virility of the nation. Indra, giver of 
light and energy, Varuna, lord of law and justice, with 
all your protections and promotions, be the destroyers 
of want and suffering, be the harbingers of health and 
plenty and enlightenment. 


युवामिच्छ्यव॑से पूर्व्याय परि प्रभूती गविष॑ः स्वापी | 
वृणीमह सख्याय प्रियाय शूरा मंदा पितरेव शंभू ॥ ७॥ 

dei Yuvamiddhyavase purvyaya pari prabhuti gavi- 
sah svapt. Vrnimahe sakhyaya priyaya sura man- 
histha pitareva sambhu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 41 195 


Indra and Varuna, ruler and sustainer, lord of 
life and power, giver of freedom and justice, we choose 
to dedicate ourselves to you for the sake of protection 
and progress as ever before, great and beneficent friends 
like brothers, brave and fearless, greatest majestic, and 
kind as parents as you are. Lovers of the earth and cows, 
knowledge and the language of Divinity as we are, we 
opt for you in freedom for the sake of love and 
friendship. 


wat frets da वाजयन्तींराजिं न ज॑गमुर्युवयूः ders । 
frat न गाव उप aaah गिरो वरुणं मे 
मनीषाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ta vam dhiyo’vase vajayantirajim na jagmuryu- 
vayuh sudanu. Sriye na gava upa somamasthur- 
indram giro varunam me manisah. 


Indra and Varuna, benevolent energy and 
inspiration of nature and Divinity, all senses, mind and 
intelligence in search of efficiency and refinement in 
the business of life flow to you for the sake of protection 
and promotion. So may my mind, senses, vision and 
voices of exploration and celebration turn to Indra and 
Varuna for light and inspiration and abide by them for 
beauty and delicacy like the earth and other planets 
relating to the moon for the sweetness and beauty of 
their products. 


इमा इन्द्रं वरुणं मे मनीषा अग्मन्नुप द्रविंणपिच्छ्मानाः। 
उपेमस्थुर्जो्टारंइव वस्वो रघ्वीरिव श्रव॑सो भिक्षमाणाः ॥ ९ ॥ 

0. Ima indram varunam me manisa agmannupa 
dravinamicchamanah. Upemasthurjostara iva 
vasvo raghviriva Sravaso bhiksamanah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


196 RGVEDA 


These senses and mind of mine keenly desiring 
to win the wealth and vision of life may proceed to Indra 
and Varuna, light and power and inspiration of nature 
and Divinity, and abide thereby, awaiting, getting and 
enjoying the wealth and wisdom of life like little 
Brahmacharinis of a girls’ institution of education 
waiting upon their teacher mother. 


अश्व्य॑स्य त्मना रथ्य॑स्य पुष्र्नित्य॑स्य रायः पत॑यः CTA 
ता चक्राणा ऊतिभिर्नव्य॑सीभिरस्मत्रा रायो नियुतः 
सचन्ताम्‌ Qo I 


10. Asvyasya tmana rathyasya pusternityasya rayah 
patayah syama. Ta cakrana utibhirnavyasibhir- 
asmatra rayo niyutah sacantam. 


May we, with our mind and soul, be masters of 
the lasting wealth of horses and chariots, of achievement 
and further progress, of health and nourishment, and 
may those two, Indra and Varuna, ruler and 
administrator, teacher and preacher, ever active with 
their latest modes of protection, promotion and progress 
join us and share our health. 


आ नों बृहन्ता बृहतीभिरूती इन्द्र॑ यातं व॑रुण वाज॑सातौ । 
यदिद्यवः पृत॑नासु Ulam तस्य॑ वां स्याम सनितारं 
आजेः॥ ९९१॥ 

11. A no brhanta brhatibhirati indra yatam varuna 
vajasatau. Yad didyavah prtanasu prakrilan 
tasya vam syama sanitara ajeh. 


Indra ruler, and Varuna, administrator and 
commander, great and majestic, come to us with the 
best of protection, promotion, progress and welfare and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 42 197 


join our battle of life so that, participating in the 
struggles of that battle, joining and shining together with 
you, we may play our game with the best of capacities. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 42 
Atma, Indra- Varuna Devata, 
Trasadasyu Paurukutsya Rshi 


ममं द्विता us afaes विषश्वायोर्विश्वें अमृता यथा नः। 
क्रतुं सचन्ते वरुणस्य देवा राजामि कृष्टेईपमस्य॑ aa: ॥ ९ ॥ 


॥. Mama dvita rastram ksatriyasya visvayorvisve 
amrta yatha nah. Kratum sacante varunasya deva 
rajami krsterupamasya vavreh. 


I am Indra, sovereign spirit of the universe. 
Twofold is my kingdom: heaven and earth, or, the world 
of nature and the world of humanity. I am Varuna, 
highest Intelligence and the Ruling Power of the 
universe. All the Immortals, divine forces in the service 
of Varuna are ours, they comprise and conduct the 
mighty yajna system of the universe. Thus I rule all: the 
world of humanity, all that is highest and closest in the 
world of forms, and all that is hidden. 


(This mantra is a metaphor of the living, 
breathing, intelligent, self-organising, autonomous and 
sovereign system of the universe as macrocosm as well 
as microcosm. At the macrocosmic level, Indra is the 
Supreme Sovereign, immanent and transcendent Spirit, 
and Varuna is the immanent ruling force, intelligence 
and the law of Rtam. Indra-varuna is a functional version 
of the Supreme Spirit which is both immanent and 
transcendent. At the microcosmic level, Indra- Varuna 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


198 RGVEDA 


is the individual soul with all its faculties of awareness, 
intelligence, mind and senses. At the world level too, 
Indra- Varuna may be interpreted as the Ruler and the 
President-in-council.) 


अहं राजा वरुणो मह्यं तान्य॑सु्यौणि प्रथमा धारयन्त । 
क्रतुं सचन्ते वरुणस्य देवा राजामि sou aa: ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Aham raja varuno mahyam tanyasuryani pra- 
thama dharayanta. Kratum sacante varunasya 
deva rajami krsterupamasya vavreh. 


I am Varuna, ruling spirit of the world, best and 
highest. For me do the first manifestations of the spirit 
in nature hold the wealth and power of existence. They 
are the divine immortals who comprise and conduct the 
creative yajna, the spirit in body form. I rule the world 
of humanity, the phenomenal forms and all that is hidden 
in potentiality. 


अहमिन्द्रो वरुणस्ते म॑हित्वोर्वीं ग॑भीरे रज॑सी सुमेक । त्वष्ट व 
विश्वा भुव॑नानि विद्धान्त्समैरयं रोद॑सी धारयं च ॥ ३॥ 


श Ahamindro varunaste mahitvorvi gabhire rajast 
sumeke. Tvasteva visva bhuvanani vidvant- 
samairayam rodasi dharayam ca. 


I am Indra, the highest, omnipotent, and 
transcendent. I am Varuna, highest and best immanent 
and omniscient. Happy and exalted, having created the 
vast and deep and firm heaven and earth as Tvashta, 
cosmic maker, I hold and move in unison the sun and 
earth and all other regions of the universe. 


अहमपो अंपिन्वमुक्षमाणा धारयं दिवं सद॑न ऋतस्य । 
ऋतेन पुत्रो अदिंतेऋतावोत त्रिधातुं प्रथयद्वि wus i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 42 199 


4. Ahamapo apinvamuksamana dharayam divam 
sadana rtasya. Rtena putro aditerrtavota tridhatu 
prathayad vi bhuma. 


I shower the rains of energising and fertilising 
waters. I hold and rule the sun and cosmic energy in the 
space of nature within eternal law. By the same eternal 
law of mine, the child of eternity, the threefold world of 
natural constituents, sattva, rajas and tamas (thought, 
energy and matter) manifests and expands and keeps to 
the law. Thus do I create, hold and rule the universe. 


मां नर: स्वश्वा वाजयन्तो मां वृताः स॒मर॑णे हवन्ते। 
कृणोम्याजिं मघवाहमिन्द्र Sart रेणुमभिभूंत्योजाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


9, Mam narah svasva vajayanto mam vrtah sama- 
rane havante. Krnomyajim maghavahamindra 
iyarmi renum-abhibhutyojah. 


The best of men and leaders, equipped with good 
horses and modes of transport and communication, 
fighting for strength and sustenance, the chosen ones, 
knowing me and struggling to attain to me call upon 
me in the battle of existence. I, Indra, commanding the 
wealth and power of the world, highest of the lustre 
and glory in existence, create the battle for their victory 
and raise the heat of action. 


अहं ता favat चकरं नकिर्मा दैव्यं सहो वरते अप्र॑तीतम्‌ । 

यन्मा सोमासो ममदन्यदुक्थोभे भ॑येते रज॑सी अपारे ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Aham ta visva cakaram nakirma daivyam 54/10 

varate apratitam. Yanma somaso mamadanyad- 
ukthobhe bhayete rajasi apare. 

I do all those acts of creation, sustenance and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


200 RGVEDA 


victory. None can restrain or resist the supernal power 
that’s mine, mysterious and unknown. When the flames 
of my soma yajna rise, the fire crackles and the hymns 
of celebration reverberate, the boundless heaven and 
earth shake in fear. There is none that equals me. 


विदुष्टे विश्वा ve तस्य ता प्र ब्र॑वीषि वरुणाय वेधः। 
त्वं वृत्राणि शृण्विषे जघन्वान्त्वं वृताँ अरिणा इन्द्र 
सिन्धून्‌ ॥ ७॥ ति 

qa; Viduste visva bhuvanani tasya ta pra bravisi 
varunaya vedhah. Tvam vrtrani 5111714८ jaghan- 
van tvam vrtan arina indra sindhun. 


That greatness and grandeur of yours all the 
scholars of the worlds know. O lord omniscient, you 
yourself speak of it to the selected men of vision. You 
are the breaker of the clouds, we hear, and you set the 
rivers aflow and release the waters locked up in lakes 
and clouds. 


अस्माकमत्र frace आंसन्त्सप्त ऋष॑यो दौर्गहे बध्य्मानि। 
त आय॑जन्त त्रसदस्युमस्या इन्द्रं न वृत्रतुर॑मध्ेवम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asmakamatra pitarasta asantsapta rsayo daur- 
gahe badhyamane. Ta ayajanta trasadasyu-masya 
indram na vrtraturam-ardhadevam. 


When the seven sages, senses, pranic energies 
and flowing streams, which are our feeding and 
sustaining powers like father and mother, are locked up 
in darkness then, as they join Indra, so they join the sun 
(wakefulness), who is superior to the darkness of Vrtra 
and presides over half of this world with his light (until 
light and life is restored). 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 43 201 


पुरुकुत्सानी हि वामदशब्छव्येभिरिनद्रावरुणा THA: | 
अथा राजानं त्रसदस्युमस्या वृत्रहणं ददथुरध्देवम्‌॥ ९॥ 


Purukutsani hi vamadasaddhavyebhirindra- 
varuna namobhih. Atha rajanam trasada-syuma- 
sya vrtrahanam dadathur-ardhadevam. 


O Indra and Varuna, the abundant power of the 
thunderbolt, light and showers offer you the homage of 
yajnic inputs of food for consumption and holistic 
expansion of creative nourishment. And thence, further, 
you give it on to this earth’s ruler, destroyer of darkness 
and evil, who presides over half the world (and rises in 
majesty with the break of dawn). 


राया वयं स॑सवांसों मदेम gat देवा waa गाव॑ः | तां 
धेनुमिन्द्रावरुणा युवं नो विश्वाहा धत्तमनंपस्फुरन्तीम्‌ ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Raya vayam sasavamso madema havyena deva 
yavasena gavah. Tam dhenum-indravaruna 
yuvam no visvaha dhattam-anapasphurantim. 


Let us rejoice with the wealth of peace and 
refreshment with energy while we sleep, just as the 
devas, divine powers of nature, are replenished with 
spirit and joy by the offer of yajnic homage, and cows 
rejoice with grass. That vibrating energy of life, Indra 
and Varuna, you bear and bring for us day and night 
without break. Reveal that language of enlightenment, 
all calm and undisturbed. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 43 
Ashvinau Devate, Purumidhajamidhau Sauhotrau Rshis 
क उ श्रवत्कतमो यज्िर्यानां वन्दारु देवः कतमो Ware | 
कस्येमां देवीमयुतेषु wet हदि star सुष्टुतिं सुंहव्याम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


202 RGVEDA 


1. Ka u Sravatkatamo yajniyanam vandaru devah 
katamo jusate. Kasyemam devimamrtesu pre- 
stham hrdi $resama sustutim suhavyam. 


Who listens? Which of the adorables? Which 
brilliant divinity loves and entertains the song of prayer 
and adoration? To whose heart shall we dedicate this 
eulogy, divine, highly presentable, and dearest to the 
immortals. 


को dara कतम आग॑मिष्ठो देवानामु कतमः शंभ॑विष्ठः 1 
रथं क्माहुरद्रवद॑श्वमाशं यं सूर्यस्य दुहितावुंणीत ॥ २॥ 


2. Ko mrlati katama agamistho devanamu katamah 
sambhavisthah. Ratham kamahurdravadasva- 
masum yam suryasya duhitavrnita. 


Who is kind and blissful? Which one comes at 
the fastest and earliest? Which one of the adorable 
divinities is the most benevolent? Which one is the 
chariot, power driven, which moves instantly at the 
fastest, they say, which the daughter of the sun, the 
Dawn, chooses for the ride? 


मक्षू हि ष्पा गच्छथ ईव॑तो द्यूनिन्द्रो न शक्तिं URAL | 
fea आजाता दिव्या सुपर्णा कया शचीनां भवथः 
शचिं्ठा ॥ ३॥ 


छ Maksu hi sma gacchatha ivato dyunindro na 
Saktim paritakmyayam. Diva ajata divya suparna 
kaya sacinam bhavathah sacistha. 

Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and 
humanity, magnificent on the move, you come instantly 
at the call of time like rays of the sun displaying his 
power over the smiling earth at the end of night. Coming 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 43 203 


from the heavens, divine with wings of light, by which 
one of nature’s immaculate forces do you become the 
most powerful and eloquent? 


का वां भृदुप॑मातिः कयां न आश्विना गमथो हूयमाना । 
को वां महण्चित्यज॑सो अभीकं उरुष्यतं माध्वी दस््रान 
ऊती usu 


4. Ka vam bhudupamatih kaya na asvina gamatho 
huyamana. Ko vam mahascit-tyajaso abhika 
urusyatam madhvi dasra na uti. 


Ashvins, what could be the simile or metaphor 
to describe or define you? On whose invocation and 
invitation would you come to us? Even though someone 
might be great, who could be as great and selfless around 
as you? Sweet powers, destroyers of evil, rise higher 
and higher for our defence and protection. 


उरु वां ta: परि नक्चति द्यामा यत्स॑मुद्रादभि वर्तते वाम्‌। 
मध्वा माध्वी मधुं वां प्ुषायन्यत्सीं' वां पृक्षो भुरज॑न्त 
पक्वाः ॥ ५॥ 


Di Uru vam rathah pari naksati dhyama yatsamu- 
dradabhi vartate vam. Madhva madhvi madhu 
vam prusayan yat sim vam prkso bhurajanta 
pakvah. 


Great and grand is your chariot that goes round 
the regions of light, it comes to you from the oceans 
and from the oceans of spatial waters. Honey sweet you 
are, honey sweet is your wisdom. You and your wisdom 
shower us with sweetness of honey when your people 
at the stage of ripeness reach you for company and 
advice. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


204 RGVEDA 


सिन्धुं्हं वां र सयां सिज्चदश््वान्धृणा वयोंऽरुषासः परिं 
ग्मन्‌। तदू षु. वामजिरं चेति यानं येन पती भव॑थः 
सूर्यायाः ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sindhurha vam rasaya sinjadasvan ghrna vayo’- 
rusasah_ pari gman. Tadu su vamajiram ceti 
yanam yena pati bhavathah suryayah. 


The waters of the flowing rivers and rolling seas 
evaporate and lend moisture to your horses of sun rays 
which rise like birds bright and red, and then your 
chariot, quick and soaring, coming and rising, is seen 
and known by which you become masters of the dawns. 


see यद्वां समना dua सेयमस्मे सुंमतिर्वीजरलना | 
उरुष्यतं जरितारं युवं हं Sta: कामो नासत्या FAH ॥। ७ ॥ 


1, Theha yadvam samana paprkse seyamasme 
sumatir-vajaratna. Urusyatam jaritaram yuvam 
ha Sritah kamo nasatya yuvadrik. 


Here itself in this world, O Ashvins, both of you, 
ever correct and true as you are, of equal mind and rich 
with the treasures of wealth and speed of light, may 
that holy and dynamic intelligence and wisdom which 
attends on you may, we pray, be for us too and may it 
bless and promote the celebrant who, looking to you 
with surrender and faith, may achieve the desire of his 
heart. Our ambition and fulfilment is centred on you 
only. 

Mandala 4/Sukta 44 


Ashvinau Devate, Purumidhajamidhau Sauhotrau Rshis 
तं वां रथं वयमद्या gan पृथुञ्रय॑मश्विना संग॑तिं गोः | 
यः सूर्या वहति वन्धुरायुर्गिवीहसं पुरुतमं वसूयुम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 44 205 


im Tam vam ratham vayamadya huvema prthujra- 
yamasvina sangatim goh. Yah suryam vahati 
vandhurayur-girvahasam purutamam vasuyum. 


Ashvins, complementary currents of cosmic 
energy of the Divine, today we invoke you and call for 
that chariot of yours which is wide extended, joins earth 
and heaven, carries the light and energy of sunrays, ages 
not, carries the sound and which is abundant in various 
wealth which never diminishes but continuously 
enriches the earth. 


युवं श्रिय॑मश्विना देवता तां दिवो नपाता वनथः शचीभिः | 
युवोर्वपुर्‌भि पृक्षः सचन्ते वर्ह॑न्ति यत्ककुहासो रथे 
वाम्‌॥ २॥ 


2, Yuvam Sriyam-aSsvina devata tam divo napata 
vanathah sacibhih. Yuvor-vapur-abhi prksah 
sacante vahanti yatkakuhaso rathe vam. 


Ashvins, children of light, infallible and 
imperishable, generous and brilliant divinities, with your 
intelligence, power and expertise, you win that treasure 
of wealth which the spaces conduct and concentrate in 
your chariot and thereby provide food and nourishment 
for your body and mind. 


को वामद्या करते रातह॑व्य ऊतये वा सुतपेर्याय वार्कः | 
were वा वनुषे पूर्व्याय नमो येमानो अश्विना व॑वर्तत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 

2. Ko vamadya karate ratahavya utaye va sutape- 
yaya varkaih. Rtasya va vanuse purvyaya namo 
yemano asvina vavartat. 


Ashvins, who with the offer of homage today 
directs his thoughts and prayers to you for the sake of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


206 RGVEDA 


protection and advancement, or for the drink of soma 
in celebration of success, or to learn and win the truth 
of eternal Dharma of existence, Rtam? Who with 
salutations and liberal hospitality prays for favour of 
your attention toward him? 


दिर ण्ययेन yey रथेनेमं यज्ञं नासत्योप यातम्‌ । 
पिबाथ इन्पधुंनः सोम्यस्य दध॑थो tet विधते जनाय ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Hiranyayena purubhu rathenemam yajnam 
nasatyopa yatam. Pibatha inmadhunah somyasya 
dadhatho ratnam vidhate janaya. 


Ashvins, twin powers of the Divine, universal 
of form and presence, ever constant in thought and 
action, come by the golden chariot to join this yajna of 
ours, drink of this honey sweet of the soma of success 
and bring the jewels of wealth for the supplicant people 
of action and endeavour. 


आ नो यातं दिवो अच्छा पृथिव्या हिरण्ययेन सुवृता रथेन | 
मा वामन्ये नि यमन्देवयन्तः सं aed नाभिः पूर्व्या वाम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 
शः A no ydtam devo accha prthivya hiranyayena 
suvrta rathena. Ma vamanye ni yaman deva- 
yantah sam yaddade_ nabhih purvya vam. 


Come well and soon to us by the paths of heaven 
and earth riding your well structured chariot of gold. 
Let not others detain you, nor divert you from the natural 
life link which the forefathers and teachers of old gave 
you in pursuit of Divinity. 


Zw ch पुरुवीरं बृहन्तं cen मिमाथामुभयेंष्वस्मे | 
नरो यद्वामश्विना स्तोममाव॑न्त्सधस्तु ferarsmiteerayt 
अग्मन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 45 207 


6. Nino rayim puruviram brhantam dasra mimatha- 
mubhayesvasme. Naro yad vamasvind stomama- 
vantsadhastutim-ajamilhaso agman. 


Ashivns, destroyers of evil and misery, brilliant 
as the sun and gracious cool as the moon, give us the 
wealth of life comprising brave children, great and vast 
prosperity for all of us, rulers as well as the people, 
since the leaders of the nation offer you songs of 
adoration and teachers of the people shower you with 
words of prayer in praise of Divinity. 


इदेह यद्वां समना dye सेयमस्मे सुंमतिर्वौजरलना | 
उरुष्यतं जरितारं युवं ह॑ श्रितः कामों नासत्या FAH ॥। ७ ॥ 


4; Theha yadvam samana paprkse seyamasme 
sumatir-vajaratna. Urusyatam jaritaram yuvam 
ha Sritah kamo nasatya yuvadrik. 


Ashvins, ever constant and true, here itself in 
this world, may this holy wisdom and knowledge of 
yours which is peaceable and procurative of science and 
speed of prosperity and progress, bless us, we pray. Both 
of you, we pray, protect, promote and elevate the 
celebrant. Our desire and ambition depends on you and 
we look forward up to you alone. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 45 
Ashivns Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


एष स्य भानुरुदि यर्तिं युज्यते रथः परिज्मा दिवो अस्य 
सान॑वि । पृक्षासो अस्मिन्मिथुना अधि त्रयो दृतिस्तुरीयो 
मधुनो वि tera ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


208 RGVEDA 


I Esa sya bhanurudiyarti yujyate rathah parijma 
divo asya sanavi. Prksaso asmin mithuna adhi 
trayo drtisturtyo madhuno vi rapSate. 


There rises the sun, chariot of the Ashvins in 
motion. It goes high up on top of the heavens, gaining 
heights and leaving the regions below. In this are three 
analogous kinds of food and energy: wind, water and 
electricity. And there is the fourth, the cloud on top of 
all, laden with the honey sweets of showers. 


Sat पृक्षासो मधुमन्त ईरते रथा अश्वांस उषसो व्यु्टिषु | 
अपोर्णुवन्तस्तम आ परीवृतं स्वर्णं शुक्रं तन्वन्त आ 
रज॑: ॥ २॥ 

2: Udvam prksaso madhumanta trate ratha asvasa 


usaso vyustisu. Apornuvantastama a parivrtam 
svarna $ukram tanvanta ठ rajah. 


On the rise of dawns, honey sweets of foods 
and energies and the horses and the chariots raise you 
high up, Ashvins, while they remove the veil of darkness 
and spread the brilliance of morning light like the glory 
of heaven all round. 


मध्व॑ः पिबतं मधुपेभिंरासभिरुत प्रियं मधुने युञ्जाथां रथ॑म्‌ | 
आ वर्तनिं मधुना जिन्वथस्यथो ef वहेथे मधुंमन्तम- 
श्विना॥ ३॥ 


Madhvah pibatam madhupebhirasabhiruta 
priyam madhune yunjatham ratham. A vartanim 
madhuna jinvathaspatho drtim vahethe madhu- 
mantamasvind. 


Ashvins, drink the sweets with lips addicted to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 45 209 


the taste of honey. Start the chariot to reach the dear 
sweets of life. Take to the high road on the way home 
by the chariot bearing the sweets of success as the sun 
and wind bear the cloud of showers. 


हंसासो ये वां मधुमन्तो अस्रिधो हिरण्यपर्णा seal उषर्बुधः 1 
aud मन्दिनो मन्दिनिस्पृशो मध्वो न मक्षः सव॑नानि 
गच्छथः YU 


4. Hamsaso ye vam madhumanto asridho hiranya- 
parna uhuva usarbudhah. Udapruto mandino 
mandinisprso madhvo na maksah savanani 
gacchathah. 


Flying gracefully like hansa birds, pleasant and 
agreeable, fleet and comfortable, golden winged 
morning birds floating across mists and waters, giving 
the luxurious feel of breezy ecstasy: such are your horses 
which transport you across the spaces like bees flying 
to the honey cups of flowers, by which you proceed to 
the yajnic programmes of humanity creating the honour 
and excellence of life. 


स्वध्वरासो Hella अग्रय॑ Set ज॑रन्ते प्रति वस्तोरश्विना । 
यञ्चिक्तर॑स्तस्तरणिर्विंचक्चणः सोमं सुषाव मधुमन्त- 
मरद्िभिः॥ ५॥ 


5. Svadhvaraso madhumanto agnaya usra jarante 
prati vastorasvina. Yanniktahastas-taranirvica- 
ksanah somam susava madhumantam-adribhih. 


Holy yajnic performers, creating and bearing 
honey sweets of vitality, leaders and pioneers brilliant 
as fire, every morning, welcome and praise the first rays 
of the sun, while the clean handed, clear eyed, wise 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


210 RGVEDA 


priest, saviour from sin and disease, grinds with stones 
the holy plant of soma for honey juice and all wait for 
your arrival, O Ashvins, harbingers of morning joy. 


आकेनिपासो अहंभिर्दविंध्वतः cay ut शुक्रं तन्वन्त आ 
रज॑: | सूर॑ख्चिदश्वान्युयुजान ईयते विश्वां अनुं स्वधया 
चेतथस्प॒थः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Akenipaso ahabhir-davidhvatah svarna sukram 
tanvanta a rajah. Surascidasvan yuyujana tyate 
visvan anu svadhaya cetathaspathah. 


While the approaching and vitalising morning 
rays everyday dispel the darkness and spread the brilliant 
light across the skies like regions of heaven, and the 
sun, using the rays as chariot horses, goes in majesty, 
you show the paths of the world by virtue of your own 
power. 


प्र वामवोचमणश्विना धियंधा रथः स्वश्वो अजरो यो sted | 
येन॑ सद्यः परि रजांसि याथो हविष्प॑न्तं तरणिं भोज- 
मच्छ 1119 11 


cr Pra vam-avocam-asvina dhiyandha rathah svasvo 
ajaro yo asti. Yena sadyah pari rajamsi yatho 
havismantam taranim bhojamaccha. 


Ashvins, path makers of the world, having the 
knowledge and intelligence that I have attained, I speak 
to you of the chariot that’s yours, which is imperishable, 
equipped with unfailing horse power, by which you 
instantly and all time go over the skies and spaces and 
by which you bear and bring excellent food and energy 
full of sacrificial vitality that carries us across the seas 
of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 46 211 


Mandala 4/Sukta 46 
Indra- Vayu Devate, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
(Indra and Vayu are open-ended symbols to be 
interpreted according to the context of life which the 
mantra shows: Indra may be interpreted as power and 
protection, and Vayu as power in motion, energy for 
motion and advancement.) 
अग्रं पिबा मधूनां सुतं वायो fafateg | 
त्वं हि पूर्वपा असिं ॥ १॥ 

iF Agram piba madhunam sutam vayo divistisu. 
Tvam hi purvapa asi. 

Vayu, fast as waves of energy, drink the first 
and best of honeyed drinks distilled in the best of our 
heavenly acts, since you are the protector and promoter 
of the earliest arts, acts and nobilities of humanity. 

great नो sfutsturtacar s-starta: | 
वायो सुतस्य॑ तृम्पतम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Satena no abhistibhir-niyutvan indrasarathih. 
Vayo sutasya trmpatam. 


Vayu, strong in command of vast forces with 
Indra as your charioteer, come with hundreds of choice 
acts and gifts, and enjoy a drink of the best of our 
preparations to your heart’s content. 


आ वां सहस्रं हर॑य इन्द्र॑वायू अभि wet: 1 
वह॑न्तु सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३॥ 


3: A vam sahasram haraya indravayi abhi prayah. 
Vahantu somapitaye. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


212 RGVEDA 


Indra and Vayu, may a thousand horses moving 
to the choice delicacies transport you hither for a drink 
of soma. 

रथं हिर॑ण्यवन्धुर Ra स्वध्वरम्‌। 
आ हि स्थाथो दिविस्पराम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Ratham hiranyavandhuram-indravayu svadhva- 
ram. A hi sthatho divisprsam. 


Indra and Vayu, come, take to the chariot of 
golden frame, rising and touching the heavens, serviced 
and heading to a holy yajnic programme, be there. 


रथेन पृथुपाजसा ava ayy गच्छतम्‌ | 
इन्द्र॑वायू इहा ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
a Rathena prthupdjasa dasvamsamupa gaccha-tam. 


Indravayu iha gatam. 


Indra and Vayu, come here by the chariot, big 
and spacious and powerful, and go to reach the man of 
charity. 


इन्द्र॑वायू अयं सुतस्तं देवेभिः सजोष॑सा। 
पिब॑तं दाशुषो गृहे ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Indravayu ayam stutastam devebhih sajosasa . 
Pibatam dasuso grhe. 


Indra and Vayu, friends with the devas, generous 
brilliancies of nature and humanity, distilled is this soma, 
the best in the house of the generous yajaka, drink to 
your heart’s content. 


इह प्रयाणमस्तु वामिन्द्र॑वायू विमोच॑नम्‌। 
इह वां सोम॑पीतये ॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 47 213 


7. Tha prayanamastu vamindravayu vimocanam. 
Tha vam somapitaye. 


Indra and Vayu, here may be the end of your 
journey for the drink of soma and here may the chariot 
and the horses be released so that you may drink the 
soma of Moksha. 


(This sukta may be interpreted in another way 
in the light of this mantra: Indra as the soul, Vayu as the 
prana energy of breath and blood circulation, the chariot 
as the body and horses as the organs of perception and 
volition, distillation of soma as creative yajnic action, 
drinking as the fruit of action, and release of chariot 
and horses as the freedom of the soul from the body 
and senses.) 


Mandala 4/Sukta 47 
Indra, Indra- Vayu Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 

वायो! शुक्रो अयामि ते मध्वो अग्रं दिविष्टिषु । 

आ याहि सोम॑पीतये स्पार्हो देव नियुत्व॑ता॥ ९॥ 
॥, Vayo sukro ayami te madhvo agram divistisu. 

A yahi somapitaye sparho deva niyutvata. 

Vayu, lord omnipotent, self-refulgent and 

generous centre object of universal love, I come to the 
top of the honey sweets of yajnic creations of light and 
joy for the life divine, cleansed and pure as I am now. 
Come for a drink of soma by the chariot and the team of 
horses. 

इन्द्र॑श्च वायवेषां सोमानां पीतिमर्हथः | 

युवां हि यन्तीन्द॑वो निम्नमापो न Gets ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


214 RGVEDA 


2: Indrasca vayavesam somanam pitimarhathah. 
Yuvam hi yantindavo nimnamapo na sadhryak. 


Indra and Vayu, you two love and deserve the 
drink of these somas distilled in yajnas. Just as waters 
all together flow to the sea, so do all flows of soma and 
all movements of dedicated devotees end up when they 
join you. 


वायविन्द्रश्च शुष्मिण सरथं शवसस्पती | 
नियुत्वन्ता न ऊतय आ यातं सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Vayavindrasca susmina saratham Savasaspati. 
Niyutvanta na utaya a yatam somapitaye. 


Vayu and Indra, most powerful, commander and 
ruler of the power and force of existence, controllers of 
the dynamics of energy, come hither together by the 
same chariot as two in one for the protection and 
promotion of our yajna of production, honour and 
excellence. 


या वां सन्ति Geral नियुतो दाशुषे नरा | 
अस्मे ता य॑ज्ञवाहसेन्द्र॑वायू नि य॑च्छतम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ya vam santi purusprho niyuto dasuse nara. 
Asme ta yajnavahasendravayu ni yacchatam. 


Indra and Vayu, omnipotent power and most 
dynamics Divinity, power and energy of nature, ruler 
and controller of humanity, leaders and pioneers of the 
community, and lords of the accomplishment of yajnas, 
loved and honoured of all, bless us with all those acts 
and gifts of yours which are surely and certainly divine 
for the sake of the generous and charitable devotees. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 48 215 


Mandala 4/Sukta 48 
Vayu Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 
विहि होत्रा अवीता विपो न xa? अर्यः। 
वायवा चन्द्रेण रथेन याहि सुतस्य पीतये ॥ ९॥ 
| ॥ Vihi hotra avita vipo na rayo aryah. 
Vayava candrena rathena yahi sutasya pitaye. 
Vayu, receiver of the inputs of yajna and carrier 
of the fragrance, imperishable, lord of wealth as the 
vibrant scholar, come by the golden chariot as glorious 
as the moon to our yajna for a drink of soma and for 


protection and promotion of the honour and excellence 
of our programme. 


निर्युवाणो अशंस्तीर्नियुत्वां इन्द्रसारथिः। 
वायवा चन्द्रेण रथेन याहि सुतस्य पीतये ui २॥ 

2. Niryuvano aSastirniyutvan indrasarathih. 
Vayava candrena rathena yahi sutasya pitaye. 


Perennial young, ineffable, constant in motion 
and velocity, mover of fire, electricity and the sun, Vayu, 
highpriest of cosmic yajna, come by the golden chariot 
of the moon for a drink of soma and for protection and 
promotion of the finest creations of humanity. 


am कृष्णे वसुधिती येमाते विश्वपेशसा । 
वायवा चन्द्रेण रथेन याहि सुतस्य पीतये ॥ ३॥ 


६ Anu krsne_ vasudhiti yemdate visvapesasa. 
Vayava candrena rathena yahi sutasya pitaye. 


Vayu, both heaven and earth, sustained by your 
cosmic energy, hold and sustain the wealth of the world 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


216 RGVEDA 


and are themselves the form and wielders of the forms 
of the world, moving in accord with your force and law. 
Come by the chariot of the golden beauty of the moon 
and drink the soma distilled by us in our yajna. 
aed त्वा मनोयुजो युक्तासो! नवतिर्नव | 
वायवा चन्द्रेण रथन याहि सुतस्य पीतये uw 
4. Vahantu tva manoyujo yuktaso navatirnava. 
Vayava candrena rathena yahi sutasya pitaye. 


Vayu, may the ninety nine forces of cosmic 
energy yoked to your chariot transport you by the golden 
chariot of the moon controlled by thought of the mind. 
Come to our yajna for a drink of soma. 

वायो शतं हरीणां युवस्व पोष्याणाम्‌ | 

sa at ते सहस्तरिणो रथ आ यातु पाज॑सा ॥ ५॥ 
= Vayo Satam harinam yuvasva posyanam. 

Uta va te sahasrino ratha व yatu pajasa. 

Vayu, vibrant ruler of power, force and yajnic 
development, use a hundred of the best of force and 
people in your project of development, and let your 
chariot of a thousandfold wealth and power come to us 
for our yajna. 

Mandala 4/Sukta 49 
Indra-Brhaspati Devate, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


इदं वामास्ये हविः प्रियमिन्द्रालृहस्पती । 
उक्थं मद॑श्च शस्यते ।॥ ९॥ 


es Idam vamasye havih priyamindrabrhaspati. 
Uktham madasca Sasyate. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 49 217 


Indra, O lord intrepidable of ruling power, 
Brhaspati, O lord protector and promoter of the wide 
world and its comprehensive knowledge, this is the holy 
offering of food and this the heartfelt offering of happy 
tribute made for your acceptance and enjoyment. 


अयं वां परि षिच्यते सोम॑ इन्द्राबृहस्पती । 
चारुर्मदाय पीतये ॥ २॥ 

2. Ayam vam pari sicyate soma indrabrhaspati. 
Carurmadaya pitaye. 
Indra and Brhaspati, ruler and scholar of 
eminence, this soma for you is offered as a drink of 
pleasure and ecstasy of the highest order. 
आ न॑ इन्द्राबृहस्पती गृहमिन्द्रश्च गच्छतम्‌ | 
सोमपा सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३ ॥ 

ध A na indrabrspati grhamindrasca gacchatam. 
Somapa somapitaye. 


May Indra-Brhaspati, ruler scholar of eminence, 
and Indra, controller and defender of power, honour and 
excellence, connoisseurs of the delight of soma, come 
to our home for a drink of soma. May they protect and 
promote the honour and prestige of the land. 


अस्मे इन्द्राबहस्यती रयिं ध॑त्तं शतण्विन॑म्‌। 
अश्वावन्तं सहस्रिणम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asme indrabrhaspti rayim dhattam Satagvinam. 
Asvavantam sahasrinam. 


May Indra and Brhaspati bear and bring for us 
a hundredfold wealth of cows, lands and knowledge, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


218 RGVEDA 


and may they bring us a thousandfold wealth of horses, 

transport and progress in science and technology. 
इन्द्राव हस्पती वयं सुते A arse । 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥ ५॥ 

5. Indrabrhaspati vayam sute girbhirhavamahe. 
Asya somasya pitaye. 


Indra and Brhaspati, the soma is extracted and 
distilled. We invoke and invite you for a drink of this 
soma. 
सोमंमिन्द्रावृहस्पती पिब॑तं दाशुषो गृहे | 
मादयेथां तदोकसा i ६ ॥ 

6. Somamindrabrhaspati pibatam dasuso grhe. 
Madayetham tadokasa. 

Indra and Brhaspati of the house of honour and 
power, drink the soma in the home of the generous 


yajamana as your own and give us the honour and 
pleasure of your company. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 50 
Brhaspati, Indra-Brhaspati Devate, Vamadeva 
Gautama Rshi 
यस्तस्तम्भ सह॑सा वि ज्मो अन्तान्बृहस्पतिंस्तिषधस्थो 
रवेण । तं Ware ऋष॑यो दीध्यानाः पुरो विप्रां दधिरे 
मन्द्रजिंहम्‌॥। ९॥ 
iL Yastastambha sahasa vi 110 antan brhaspatis- 


trisadhastho ravena. Tam pratnasa rsayo didhya- 
nah puro vipra dadhire mandrajihvam. 


Brhaspati, the sun, which, positioned in the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 50 219 


midst of the three regions of earth, skies and heaven, 
sustains the earth and other planets to the ends with its 
force and its rays of light and gravitation; 


Or, the Lord of mighty universe who is 
omnipresent in the worlds of earth, skies and the heavens 
of light and rules the universe to the ends of it with his 
omnipotence and Word of revelation; 


Or, the ruler, who, self-established in 
knowledge, action, and prayer, rules the world to the 
ends of the earth with his power and word and force of 
law; 


Or, the eminent scholar, who, master of the three 
realms of knowledge, Divinity, Prakrti, and the soul with 
the word of the Veda, rules the heart and intellect of the 
people to the ends of the earth with his knowledge that 
is power and his word: 


Him, lord of sweet voice and vibrations of 
communication and gravitation, the ancient seers, 
shining since the first moments of human existence, 
vibrant with living knowledge and holy desire, sing, 
celebrate and advance in human consciousness. 


धुनेतयः सुप्रकेतं मद॑न्तो बृह॑स्पते अभि ये न॑स्ततस्त्े । 
पृष॑न्तं सुप्रमद॑ब्धमूर्व बृह॑स्पते रक्षतादस्य योनिम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Dhunetayah supraketam mandanto brhaspate 
aghi ye nastatasre. Prsantam srpramadabdhamu- 
rvam brhaspate raksatadasya yonim. 


O Brhaspati, vibrant scholars and heroes are they 
who inspire the holy and brilliant man of knowledge 
and centres of advancement, and help us progress in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


220 RGVEDA 


culture and achievement. O lord of progress and 
advancement, protect and promote the home and 
profession of every such person and institution, creative, 
brilliant, fearless, and generous and extensive in 
possibilities. 


बृह॑स्पते या प॑र॒मा परावदत आ त॑ seaegett नि We: 1 
तुभ्यं खाता staat अद्विंदुग्धा मध्व॑ः श्चोतन्त्यभितो 
विरष्छाम्‌॥ २॥ 


a. Brhaspate ya parama paravadata a ta rtasprso 
ni seduh. Tubhyam khata avata adridugdha 
madhvah scotantyabhito virapsam. 


Brhaspati, far off and most high is your seat of 
majesty whence travel and ever abide your rays of light 
and Law which then touch the oceans of water to break 
them into vapours so that, like deep dug wells and clouds 
laden with milky showers of honey sweets, they pour 
down in abundant rain in your service for you and your 
people. 


बहस्पतिः प्रथमं जाय॑मानो महो ज्योतिषः परमे व्योमन्‌ | 
सप्तास्य॑स्तुविजातो रवेण वि सप्तर॑श्मिरधयत्तमांसि ux ॥ 


4. Brhaspatih prathamam jayamano maho jyotisah 
parame vyoman. Saptasyas-tuvijato ravena vi 
saptarasmir-adhamat-tamamsi. 


Brhaspati, the cosmic sun, first born of the 
supreme light of existence in the highest heaven, with 
seven mouths for consumption of materials and seven 
rays of light for creation of energy, born among many 
the mightiest, dispels the darknesses from the world with 
the thunder and lightning power of its majesty. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 50 221 


(So should the ruler and the scholar be in 
knowledge and power.) 


स सुष्टुभा GRAM गणेन aes रुरोज फक्ठिगं रवण | 
बहुस्पतिरुस्रियां हव्यसूदः कनिंक्रदद्वाव॑ंशतीरु्दाजत्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


। Sa sustubha sa rkvata ganena valam ruroja phali- 
gam ravena. Brhaspatirusriya havyasudah kani- 
kradad_ vavasatirudajat. 


With a mighty jubilant roar of thunder and 
terrible shower of electric energy, Brhaspati breaks the 
crooked cloud, releases the showers, activates the 
production of food for holy offerings and wins the 
gratitude of the green earth, fertile cows and rejoicing 
humanity. 


एवा पित्रे विश्वदेवाय वृष्णे य्नर्विधेम नम॑सा हविर्भिः | 
बृह॑स्पते सुप्रजा वीरवन्तो वयं स्याम पत॑यो रयीणाम्‌ & ॥ 

6. Eva pitre visvadevaya vrsne yajnairvidhema 
namasa havirbhih. Brhaspate supraja viravanto 
vayam syama patayo rayinam. 

Thus do we, O lord Brhaspati, offer homage to 
the father, divine giver of light and rain showers, with 
food, and salutations, yajnas and oblations of fragrant 
havis, and we pray that we may be blest with noble and 


brave progeny, and we may be masters of the wealths 
of life. 


स इद्राजा प्रतिंजन्यानि विश्वा शुष्पण तस्थावभि वीर्येण। 
बृहस्पतिं यः सुभूतं बिभर्ति" वल्गूयति वन्द॑ते पूर्व 
भाज॑म्‌॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


222 RGVEDA 


in Sa id raja pratijanyani visva Susmena tasthavabhi 
viryena. Brhaspatim yah subhrtam bibharti 
valguyati vandate purvabhajam. 


He surely is ruler of the world who faces all the 
practical battles of life with his own strength and 
courage, and who holds in faith, honours and worships 
Brhaspati, lord supreme sustainer of the universe, most 
cherished and the first immanent lord of life. 


स इत्क्षेति सुधित ओकसि स्वे तस्मा goat पिन्वते 
विश्वदानीम्‌। तस्यै fast: स्वयमेवा न॑मन्ते यस्मिन्ब्रह्मा 
राज॑नि पूर्वं एति॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sa itkseti sudhita okasi sve tasma ila pinvate 
visvadanim. Tasmai visah svayameva namante 
yasmin brahma rajani purva eti. 


Surely he dwells with peace and contentment 
in his own home, and him nature favours with all her 
gifts as her loving all-generous child, and to him all 
people spontaneously bow in reverence, whom Brahma, 
Lord Supreme as well as visionary of the Vedas, prime 
Spirit and prime person, favours and blesses as the 
brilliant ruler with the divine presence. 


अप्र॑तीतो जयति सं धनानि प्रतिजन्यान्युत या सज॑न्या । 
अवस्यवे यो वरिवः कृणोति ब्रह्मणे राजा तम॑वन्ति 
देवाः ॥ ९॥ ति 

०8 Apratito jayati sam dhanani pratijanyanyuta ya 
sajanya. Avasyave yo varivah krnoti brahmane 
raja tamavanti devah. 


Unchallenged, unopposed, that ruler wins over 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 50 223 


and rules all the wealth and powers, assets and liabilities, 
whether they belong to the opposition or to his own 
supporters, who does honour and service to the holy 
man of Vedic knowledge, who feels he needs protection 
and support and offers worship and support to the lord 
omniscient and omnipotent in support of his people. 
Indeed all the nobilities of humanity and all powers of 
nature strengthen, support and protect that ruler as the 
man of God for all his people. 


इन्द्र॑श्च सोमं पिबतं बृहस्पतेऽस्मिन्यज्ञे म॑न्दसाना वुंषण्वसू | 
आ वां विशन्त्विन्द॑वः स्वाभुवोऽस्मे रयिं सर्ववीरं नि 
य॑च्छतम्‌ ९०॥ 


10. Indrasca somam pibatam brhaspate’smin yajiie 
mandsana vrsanvasu. A vam visantvindavah 
svabhuvo’sme rayim sarvaviram ni yacchatam. 


Brhaspati, master of the knowledge of 
omniscience, and Indra, lord ruler of the world, both 
rejoicing and giving showers of wealth and comfort to 
the people, drink the soma of bliss in this yajna of human 
excellence. O lords of glory in your own right, may the 
majesty and sublimity of divinity bless you both and 
may you create and give us the wealth and honour of a 
brave and perfect nation with a brave young generation. 


बृह॑स्पत इन्द्र वर्धतं न: सचा सा वां सुमतिर्भूत्वस्मे । अविष्टं 
धियो जिगृतं पुर॑न्धीर्जजस्तमर्यो वनुषामरातीः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Brhaspata indra vardhatam nah saca sa vam 
sumatirbhutvasme. Avistam dhiyo jigrtam puran 
dhirjajastamaryo vanusamaratith. 


Brhaspati and Indra, scholar teacher of science 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


224 RGVEDA 


and Divinity, ruler of the world, lead us on to 
advancement, we pray, be with us as our own, and may 
your vision and wisdom be ours for ourselves. Inspire 
and protect our mind and soul, awaken our thought and 
action. Lord and master, kind and favourable, help us 
exhaust and eliminate our weaknesses, want and 
poverty, dedicated supplicants as we are. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 51 
Usha Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


इदमु त्यत्पुरुतमं पुरस्ताज््योतिस्तम॑सो वयुनावदस्थात्‌। 
नूनं दिवो दुहितरो विभातीगातुं कुणवन्नुषसो जनाय ॥ ९ ॥ 


bs Idamu tyat purutamam purastajjyotistamaso 
vayunavadasthat. Nunam divo duhitaro vibhatir- 
gatum krnavannusaso janaya. 


Yonder in the east arises and shines that glorious 
light of the dawn revealing itself from the depths of 
night’s darkness and inspiring us to wake up and see 
the light of knowledge. Surely daughters of heaven, the 
sublime lights of the dawn illuminate the earth for us to 
see the paths of the day’s action. 


srae चित्रा उषसं: पुरस्तान्यिताइव स्वर॑वोऽध्वरेषुं। 
व्यु व्रजस्य तम॑सो दारोच्छन्तीरव्रञ्छच॑यः पावकाः ॥ २॥ 
2: Asthuru citra usasah purastan-mitd iva svaravo’- 


dhvaresu. Vyu vrajasya tamaso dvarocchantira- 
vran-chucayah pavakah. 


The lights of the dawn, various wondrous, shine 
magnificent in the east like daughters of omniscience, 
bright and bold like flag posts of yajnas of the day, pure 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 51 225 


and purifying as flames of fire, opening the doors of 
light from the deep folds of the night’s darkness. 


उच्छन्तीरद्य faaa-a भोजा््राधोदेयायोषसों मघोनीं: 1 
अचित्रे अन्तः word: ससन्त्ववुंध्यमानास्तमंसो विम॑ध्ये ॥ ३॥ 


3: Ucchantiradya citayanta bhojan radhodeya- 
yosaso maghonth. Acitre antah panayah sasantva- 
budhyamanas-tamaso vimadhye. 


Brilliant and blissful magnificent lights of the 
dawn now in the early hours of the morning wake up 
and inspire liberal yajakas for the gifts of charity and 
performance of the morning yajna, while deep down in 
the folds of impenetrable darkness the slothful misers 
sleep on, unconscious, unaware and lost in the state of 
ignorance. 


कुवित्स दैवीः सनयो नवो! वा यामो बभूयादुषसो वो अद्य | 
येना Tara अद्धिरे दश॑ग्वे सास्य रेवती रे वदूष ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Kuvitsa devih sanayo 11410 va yamo babhu- 
yadusaso vo adya. Yena navagve angire dasagve 
saptasye revati revadusa. 


O divinities of the dawn, let that ancient chariot 
of yours which is ever new every morning be ever so 
great and magnificent by which, rich and luxurious in 
wealth and grace of beauty, you come and shine for your 
darling, dear as breath of life, who has nine cows or 
ten, i.e., earthly virtues, and seven mouths for 
consumption and many more for creation. 


यूयं हि देैवीऋतयुग्भिरश्वैः परिप्रयाथ भुव॑नानि सद्यः। 
प्रबोधयन्तीरुषसः ससन्तं द्विपाच्यतुंष्पाच्यरथाय जीवम्‌ & ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


226 RGVEDA 


D: Yuyam hi devir-rtayugbhirasvaih pariprayatha 
bhuvanani sadyah. Prabodhayantirusasah 
sasantam dvipac-catuspac-carathaya jivam. 


O divine lights of dawn, you always move over 
and across regions of the world by the rays of light 
travelling by the straight paths of truth and natural law 
across the oceans of space, waking up and inspiring the 
sleeping world of life, humans and animals, to rise and 
move for the day’s activity. 


क्तं स्विदासां कतमा quot यया विधानां विदधुऋभूणाम्‌। 
शुभं यच्छृभ्रा उषसश्चर॑न्ति न वि ज्ञायन्ते सदृशीर- 
Wat: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Kva sivadasam katama purani yaya vidhana 
vidadhur-rbhunam. Subham yacchubhra usasa- 
§caranti na vi jnayante sadrsir-ajuryah. 

Where and which of these dawns is that ancient 
one by which the wonder works of the Rbhus, 
miraculous artists and experts, were accomplished? 


Which one of these glorious dawns that go about so 
blissfully, all alike and unaging? No, not known. 


ताघाता war उषसः पुरासुरथिष्िद्युप्ना ऋतजातसत्याः | 
यास्वीजानः शंशमान sad: स्तुवञ्छंसन्द्रविंणं सद्य 
sid ie i 
Ne Ta gha ta bhadra usasah purasurabhistidyumna 
rtajatasatyah. Yasvijanah sasamana ukthaih 
stuvanchamsan-dravinam sadya apa. 
For sure those were the dawns of ancient time, 


givers of abundant wealth of one’s heart’s desire, born 
of the law of Divinity, rooted in eternal truth and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 51 227 


rectitude, in which the holy yajaka, worshipping the 
Divine with songs of praise and celebration, always and 
immediately achieved the wealth of his choice and 
desire. They are the same even now, the old ever new. 


ता आ च॑रन्ति समना पुरस्तात्समानत॑ः समना पप्रथानाः | 
ऋतस्य देवीः सद॑सो बुधाना गवां न सगी उषसो जरन्ते ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ta a caranti samana purastat samanatah samana 
paprathanah. Rtasya devih sadaso budhana 
gavam na sarga usaso jarante. 


They are the celestial lights of Divinity, part of 
cosmic dynamics, waking up the homesteads to activity 
and proceeding like streams of cows going to the 
pastures. Thus do the dawns arise, radiate, wake up life 
and celebrate the Divine. They rise and act the same 
way in the east since eternity, radiate equally the same 
way, illuminating the same way, eternal, ever new, old 
yet ever young. 


ता इन््वे व dat स॑मानीरमींतवर्णा उषसंश्चरम्ति। 
गृरहन्तीरभ्वमसिंतं रुश्द्धिः शुक्रास्तनूभिः शुच॑यो 
रुचानाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


os Ta innveva samana samanir-amitavarna usasa- 
§caranti. Guhantir-abhvamasitam rusadbhih 
sukrastanubhih sucayo rucanah. 


Thus do the dawns, equal, alike, unobstructed 
and inviolable, radiate and roam around, covering the 
vast spatial darkness with light and vesting things with 
beautiful forms of their own by their catalytic rays of 
light and blaze, penetrating, pure, purifying, beautiful 
and edifying. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


228 RGVEDA 


रयिं दिवो दुहितरो विभातीः प्रजावन्तं यच्छतास्मासुं देवीः 1 
स्योनादा वं; प्रतिबुध्य॑मानाः सुवीर्यस्य पत॑यः स्याम ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Rayim divo duhitaro vibhatih prajavantam 
yacchatasmasu devih. Syonada vah pratibudhya- 
manah suviryasya patayah syama. 


O daughters of the light of heaven, angelic 
damsels of divinity, bear and bless us with the wealth 
of progeny so that, illuminative as you are, edified into 
a state of wakefulness and enlightenment through the 
peace and bliss of your love and beauty, we, awake and 
enlightened, may command a blessed force of warlike 
heroes. 


तद्रो! दिवो दुहितरो विभातीरुपं ga उषसो aaah: | वयं 
स्याम यशसो जनेषु तद्‌ द्यौश्च॑ धत्तां पुथिवी च॑ देवी ॥ ९९॥ 


11. (वर्वा८ divo duhitaro vibhatirupa bruva usaso 
yajnaketuh. Vayam syama yasaso janesu tad 
dyausca dhattam prthivi ca devi. 


O lights of dawn, daughters of the glory of 
heaven, brilliant, radiating and illuminative as you are, 
I sing of you as you are, symbol of cosmic yajna, and I 
pray we may be blest with the glory of divinity, 
splendour of humanity and the honour and wealth of 
excellence which the heaven and earth and the daughters 
of heaven and earth may bear and bring for us. 


(Swami Dayananda extends the meaning of the 
dawns from ‘daughters of heaven’ to heavenly daughters 
of humanity’, enlightened women, makers of happy 
homes. A happy home is a very heaven, he says.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 52 229 


Mandala 4/Sukta 52 
Usha Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


प्रति ष्या सूनरी जनी व्युच्छन्ती परि स्वसुः | 
दिवो अ॑दशि दुहिता ॥ ९॥ 


I Prati sya sunati jani vyucchanti pari svasuh. 
Divo adarsi duhita. 


That joyous dawn, pioneer of the sun, harbinger 
of the new day, shining at the departure of her sister, 
the night, rises to view every morning as the daughter 
of heaven, arousing the world to fresh life. 
sida चित्रारुषी माता गर्वामताव॑री। 
सखाभू दण्विनोरुषाः ॥ २॥ 

2. ASveva citrarust mata gavamrtavari. 
Sakhabhudasvinorusah. 


Like a graceful mare, crimson red, wondrous 
bright, mother pioneer of sunrays, shower of nature’s 
light and bliss, the dawn is a friend of the Ashvins, the 
sun and moon. 

उत सरास्यण्विनोरुत माता गवामसि | 
उतोषो वस्व॑ ईशिषे ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Uta sakhasyaSvinoruta mata gavamasi. 
Utoso vasva iSise. 


O Dawn, while you are a friend of the sun and 
moon and mother of sunrays, you also command the 
wealths of the world. 


यावयद्‌ gue त्वा चिकित्वित्सूनृतावरि। 
प्रति स्तोभैरभुत्स्महि ॥ ४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


230 RGVEDA 


4. Yavayaddvesasam tva cikitvitsunrtavari. 
Prati stomairabhutsmahi. 


O bright and illuminative dawn, spirit and 
beauty of truth and holiness, while you dispel hate and 
anger and inspire love and admiration, let us know and 
celebrate you with songs of praise and honour. 


प्रतिं भद्रा अदृक्षत गवां सर्गा न tyra: | 
ओषा अप्रा उरु ज्रय॑ः ॥ ५॥ 

3, Prati bhadra adrksata gavam sarga na rasmayah. 
Osa apra uru jrayah. 
The bright and blessed light rays of the dawn 
appear moving like herds of cows, like showers of solar 
energy and like clusters of galaxies: the refulgent dawns 
filling the wide spaces with light and splendour. 
आपप्रुषी विभावरि व्यावर्ज्योतिंषा at: 1 
उषो अनुं स्वधामव ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Apaprust vibhavari vyavarjyotisa tamah. 
Uso anu svadhamava. 
Bright and wide awake, inspiring the world with 
light and awareness, replete with the virtue of divinity, 
removing the veil of darkness with light, O dawn, protect 
us, protect and promote all, as you have the power and 
wakefulness. 
आ at date र श्मिभिरान्तरिक्चमुरु rer 
sa: Bshut शोचिषा ॥ ७॥ 

Ts A dyam tanosi rasmibhir-antariksamuru priyam. 
Usah sukrena Socisa. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 53 231 


O dawn, with your rays of light, you radiate and 
fill the wide heavens and the skies, and the regions of 
universal love, so do you bless your loved one with the 
purest light of love and bliss. 


(Swami Dayananda interprets the dawn literally 
as well as metaphorically: The dawn is not only the light 
of the morning, daughter of the sun, but also the light 
of the home, blessed and beautiful lady of the house 
who fills the home with light and virtue and inspires 
her beloved husband with love and bliss.) 


Mandala 4/Sukta 53 
Savita Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


तदेवस्य॑ सवितुर्वार्य' महद्‌ quite असुरस्य प्रचेतसः | 
छर्दिर्येनं दाशुषे यच्छति त्मना तन्नं wel उद॑यान्देवो 
अक्तुभिः ॥ ९॥ 


॥. Tad devasya saviturvaryam mahad vrnimahe 
asurasya pracetasah. Chardiryena dasuse yachati 
tmana tanno mahan udayandevo aktubhih. 


We love, choose and pray for that great, lovable 
and cherished energy and refulgence of Savita, self- 
refulgent, all observant, giver of light, life and breath 
of energy by which, all by himself, he gives the peace 
and shelter of a blessed home to the generous yajnic 
devotee. May the same lord of light and life arise for us 
day by day and bless us with the bliss of a sweet home. 


दिवो धर्ता भुव॑नस्य प्रजापतिः fasTs द्रापिं प्रतिं मुञ्चते 
कविः। विचकश्चणः प्रथयंन्नापृणान्नर्वजीं जनत्सविता सुम्न- 
मुक्थ्य॑म्‌ 2 ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


232 RGVEDA 


2: Devo dharta bhuvanasya prajapatih pisangam 
drapim prati muncate kavih. Vicaksanah pratha- 
yannaprnannurvajijanat savita sumnamukth-yam. 


Upholder of the heaven of light, sustainer of the 
universe, Prajapati Savita, lord of light and vision, wears 
the refulgent mantle of many forms and colours and, all 
watching, illuminative, radiating and expansive, filling 
all regions with the life breath of energy, creates and 
inspires adorable peace and joy of living. 


आप्रा रजांसि दिव्यानि पार्थिवा serch देवः ura स्वाय 
धर्मणे । प्र बाहू अंस््राक्सविता सवीमनि निवेशय॑न्प्रसुव- 
ज्रक्तथिर्जग॑त्‌॥ ३॥ ति 

a Apra rajamsi divyani parthiva slokam devah 
krnute svaya dharmane. Pra bahu asraksavita 
savimani nivesayan prasuvannaktubhirjagat. 


Savita, self-refulgent creator, giver of light and 
life, pervades the highest regions of light, the middle 
regions of the skies and the regions of the earth and 
creates the poetry of omniscience for the revelation and 
communication of his own divine law. He extends the 
arms of his omnipotential power and presence thereby 
in-vesting and advancing the world of his creation into 
the honour and excellence of life day and night. 


अदाभ्यो भुव॑नानि प्रचाकशद्‌ व्रतानि देवः सविताभि are 


प्रास््राग्बाह्‌ भुव॑नस्य प्रजाभ्यो धृतव्रतो महो अज्मस्य 
राजति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Adabhyo bhuvanani pracakasad vratani devah 
savitabhi raksate. Prasragbahu bhuvanasya 
prajabhyo dhrtavrato maho ajmasya rajati. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 54 233 


Undaunted and intrepidable, the self-refulgent 
lord of infinite generosity, Savita, illuminates the worlds 
of existence and guards and superintends the laws of 
nature and holy resolutions of humanity. He extends 
his arms of help and protection for the children of the 
earth and, wielding his omnipotence of the laws of 
existence, he shines and rules over the wide regions of 
the mighty universe. 


त्रिरन्तरिक्षं सविता afer त्री रजांसि परिभूस्त्रीणि 
रोचना | तिस्रो fea: पृथिवीस्तिस््र इन्वति च्रिभिर्व्रतैरभि 
नो! रश्चति त्मना ॥ ५॥ 


5. Trirantariksam savita mahitvana tri rajamsi 
paribhustrini rocana. Tisro devah prathivistisra 
invati tribhir-vratair-abhi no raksati tmana. 


Lord Savita with his power and presence 
pervades and inspires threefold middle regions, 
threefold regions of firmament and spatial oceans, 
threefold lights of fire, lightning and the sun, three orders 
of heaven and threefold regions of earth, and with his 
love and power he guides, protects and fulfils us by the 
threefold laws of creation, sustenance and dissolution 
of the world. 


बृहत्सुम्नः प्रसवीता निवेश॑नो जग॑तः स्थातुरुभयंस्य यो 
वशी । स नो देवः सविता शर्म यच्छत्वस्मे erate त्रिवरूथ- 
Wea: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Brhatsumnah prasavita nivesano jagatah sthatu- 
rubhayasya yo vasi. Sa no devah savita Sarma 
yacchatvasme ksayaya trivaruthaman-hasah. 


Lord giver of abundant peace and joy, creator 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


234 RGVEDA 


sustainer, mainstay of the moving and unmoving world 
and controller of both, may the self-refulgent lord Savita 
of infinite generosity grant us peace and prosperity of 
an excellent home for threefold protection of body, mind 
and soul, elimination of sin and evil and rest in 
tranquillity. 
आगंन्देव ऋतुधिर्वर्धतु क्षयं cata नः सविता सुंप्रजा- 
मिष॑म्‌। स न॑ः aod भिश्च जिन्वतु प्रजावन्तं रयिमस्मे 
स्मिन्वतु ॥ ७॥ 

४ Agandeva rtubhir-vardhatu ksayam dadhatu nah 
savita suprajamisam. Sa nah ksapabhirahabhisca 
Jinvatu prajavantam rayimasme saminvatu. 

May the self-refulgent lord Savita arise, promote 
the peace and prosperity of our home by every season 
and bring us abundant food and energy with the bliss of 
noble progeny. May he inspire us day and night to higher 


honour and achievement and advance us all round to a 
settled state of homely wealth for generations to come. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 54 
Savita Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 

अभू देवः सविता वन्द्यो नु न॑ इदानीमहं उपवाच्यो af: 1 
वि यो var भजंति मानवेभ्यः श्रेष्ठं नो अत्र द्रविणं यथा 
atau 

il, Abhuddevah savita vandyo nu na idanimahna 
upavacyo nrbhih. Vi yo ratna bhajati manave- 
bhyah srestham no atra dravinam yatha dadhat. 


Lord Savita, giver of abundant light and joy, is 
adorable for all of us, the lord who is now praised and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 54 235 


worshipped day in and day out by the best of men and 
leaders of humanity, and who gives for the people 
abundant good fortune of the jewels of wealth just as 
he creates and gives the best and highest of wealth for us. 


देवेभ्यो हि प्रथमं यज्ञियेभ्योऽ मृतत्वं सुवसि arma | 
आदिद्ामानं सवितर्व्युणषिऽनूचीना जीविता मानुषेभ्यः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Devebhyo hi prathamam yajniyebhyo’mrtatvam 
suvasi bhagamuttamam. Adiddamanam  savitar- 
vyurnuse ’nucina jivita manusebhyah. 


Savita, lord creator of life, you alone first of all 
create and inspire the immortal bliss of freedom, the 
highest gift of divinity for mankind, awarded to the 
devotees of yajna and divine worship, and then you 
alone reveal yourself and open up the treasures of divine 
gifts for the generous people followed by children who 
keep up the family tradition of piety. 


अचित्ती यच्य॑कृमा दैव्ये जने दीनैर्दश्चैः प्रभूती पूरुषत्वर्ता | 
देवेषु च सवितमरनुषिषु च त्वं नो अत्र॑ सुवतादनागसः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. 4 ८7/17 yaccakrma daivye jane dinairdaksaih 
prabhuti purusatvata. Devesu ca savitarman- 
usesu ca tvam no atra suvatadanagasah. 


Whatever our trespass whether out of ignorance, 
or helplessness, or pride, or arrogance, or sense of 
power, either among or toward the divine people, or 
the generous and brilliant, or even ordinary people, for 
that trespass, O lord Savita, giver of light and inspiration, 
give us the strength and inspiration to correct ourselves 
and be free from sin and evil here itself in this life we 
are human, after all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


236 RGVEDA 


न प्रमियें सवितुर्दैव्य॑स्य तद्यथा विश्वं भुव॑नं धारयिष्यति । 
aden वरिमन्ना स्व॑ङ्गुरिर्व्ष्मन्दिवः सुवतिं सत्यम॑स्य 
तत्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Na pramiye savitur-daivyasya tad yatha visvam 
bhuvanam dharayisyati. Yatprthivya varimanna 
svangurir-varsmandivah suvati satyamasya tat. 


Never shall the grandeur of divine Savita be 
violated and destroyed, grandeur by which he wields 
and shall ever wield the whole universe, by which he 
creates the wide expanse of the earth and the glory of 
high heaven whereon is seen the imprint of his fingers. 
That grandeur is ever true, imperishable. 


इन्द्र ज्येष्ठान्बृहद्धयः पर्व॑"तेभ्यः ett एभ्यः सुवसि 
पस्त्यावतः | यथायथा पतयन्तो वियेयिर एवैव त॑स्थुः 
सवितः Part ते ॥ ५॥ 


3, Indrajyesthan brhadbhyah parvatebhyah ksayan 
ebhyah suvasi pastyavatah. Yathayatha patayanto 
viyemira evaiva tasthuh savitah savaya te. 


Savita, O lord creator, you create the stars and 
forces great as the sun and cosmic energy, greater than 
the mighty mountains and the thunderous clouds, and 
you create the regions and orbits for these wherein they 
abide like home dwellers. And as these fly around and 
observe the cosmic law, so they abide for your honour 
and grandeur doing homage to your glory. 


ये ते त्रिरह॑न्त्सवितः सवासो दिवेदिवे सौभंगमासुवन्तिं | 
इन्द्रो द्यावापृथिवी सिन्धुर द्धिरादित्यैरनो अदितिः शर्म 
यंसत्‌ & ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 55 237 


6. Ye te trirahant-savitah savaso divedive saubha- 
gamasuvanti. Indro dyavaprthivi sinduradbhir- 
adityair-no aditih Sarma yamsat. 


Savita, lord creator, the created ones such as sun 
and moon and the human beings, who daily do homage 
to you thrice every day, may all these, earth and heaven, 
the sea with waters, mother nature with her solar lights, 
and Indra, the sun, and lord omnipotent create for us 
homely sweetness and give us a peaceful home for rest. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 55 
Vishvedeva Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


को वस्त्राता daa: को deat द्यावाभूमी अदिते त्रासीथां 
नः। सदीयसो वरुण faa मर्तात्को वोऽध्वरे वस्वो धाति 
देवाः॥ ९॥ 


1. Ko vastrata vasavah ko varuta dyavabhumi adite 
trasitham nah. Sahiyaso varuna mitra martat ko 
vo’dhvare varivo dhati devah. 


O Vasus, shelter homes of life, which one of 
you is our saviour, our protector? O heaven and earth, 
O mother nature, safeguard us. O Mitra and Varuna, 
friend and lord of justice, who is our protector and 
defender against the powerful challenging man? O noble 
people, who bears and brings us the best gifts in yajna? 


प्रये धामानि पूर्व्पाण्यर्चान्वि यदुच्छान्विंयोतारो अमूराः | 
विधातारो वि ते depsten ऋतधीतयो रुरुचन्त दस्माः ॥ २॥ 

2. Pra ye dhamani purvyanyarcan vi yaducchan- 
viyotaro amurah. Vidhataro vi te dadhurajasra 
ratadhitayo rurucanta dasmah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


238 RGVEDA 


Those who love and respect and have realised 
the primal seats and sources of divine bliss, who dispel 
the darkness and illuminate them, wise destroyers of 
suffering, creators and sustainers of boons of divine 
bliss, bear and bring immortal bliss without relent, they 
are the destroyers of want and misery, and they abide 
by and sustain the laws of truth and shine in glory. 


प्रपस्त्याडमदितिं सिन्धुंमकैः cake wear देवीम्‌। 
उभे यथा नो अहनी निपातं उषासानक्ता करतामदब्धे ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Pra pastyamaditim sindumarkaih svastimile 
sakhyaya devim. Ubhe yatha no ahani nipata 
usasanakta karatamadabdhe. 


I praise the divine Aditi, Mother Nature and 
imperishable Eternity, blessed home of existence and 
the ocean, with songs of celebration for the sake of 
friendship and the gift of welfare and happiness, and I 
pray that just as the two protect and sustain us day and 
night, so may the night and the dawns, both intrepidable, 
nourish and sustain us. 


व्यर्यमा वरुणश्चेति पन्थापिषस्पतिः सुवितं गातुमभिः। 
इन्द्राविष्णु Jag षु स्तवाना शर्म नो यन्तमम॑वद्वरूथम्‌ ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Vyaryama varunasceti panthamisaspatih suvitam 
gatumagnih. Indravisnu nrvadu su stavana Sarma 
no yantamamavadvarutham. 


May Aryama, lord of justice, and Varuna, 
supreme ruler, show us the paths of life with light and 
knowledge. May Agni, leading creator and controller 
of food and energy, open up the paths of progressive 
development on earth. May Indra, controller and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 55 239 


commander of power, and Vishnu, sustainer and 
protector of a steady state of law and order, both praised 
and celebrated as leaders of excellence, provide us a 
life of peace, freedom and security and a sweet home of 
conjugal bliss and promising progeny. 


आ पर्व॑तस्य मरुतामवांसि देवस्य ्रातुरव्रि ater 
पात्पतिर्जन्यारदंहंसो नो मित्रो मित्रियांदुत न॑ उरुष्येत्‌ & ॥ 


9, A parvatasya marutamavamsi devasya traturavri 
bhagasya. Patpatirjanyadanhaso no mitro mitri- 
yaduta na urusyet. 


I pray for protections of the cloud, the mountain 
and the winds and warriors, and for the gifts of Bhaga, 
generous giver of power and prosperity, the lord 
protector and promoter of all. May the ruler of the land 
save us from sin and crime that might arise, and Mitra, 
friends, like real friends, protect and advance us in life. 


नू रोदसी अर्हिना बुध्न्यन स्तुवीत देवी oral Re: 1 
समुद्रं न संचरणे सनिष्यवो घर्मस्व॑रसो नद्यो ३ अपं त्रन्‌ ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Nu rodasi ahina budhnyena stuvita devi apye- 
bhiristaih. Samudram na samcarane sanisyavo 
gharmasvaraso nadyo apa vran. 


As the sailors who desire to cross the sea study 
and appraise the sea and sea conditions to sail over, so, 
O dedicated performers of yajna, study the earth and 
heaven along with thunder and clouds and the desired 
water gifts of the skies so that streams of vapour and 
showers of rain be released for the rivers to flow over 
land to the sea. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


240 RGVEDA 


देवैर्नो देव्यदितिर्नि पातु देवस्त्राता त्रायतामप्र॑युच्छन्‌ | 
नहि पित्रस्य वरुणस्य धासिमर्हीमसि प्रमियं सान्वयः ॥ ७॥ 


as Devairno devyaditirni patu devastrata trayata- 
maprayucchan. Nahi mitrasya varunasya dhasi- 
marhamasi pramiyam sanvagneh. 


May divine Aditi, Mother Nature, with all her 
generous forces nourish and sustain us. May divine 
saviour save, protect and sustain us without relent and 
neglect. (So may our mother and father guide, protect 
and sustain us.) And we must not try, much less even 
feel, that we can hurt or compromise the high position 
and favour of Mitra, the friend, Varuna, senior guide 
and judge, and Agni, leader, fire and vital energy. 


अग्िरीशे वसव्य॑स्याऽग्रिर्महः सौभ॑गस्य | 
तान्यस्मभ्यं रासते॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Agnirise vasavyasya’gnirmahah saubhagasya. 
Tanyasmabyam rasate. 


Agni, ruler of action and endeavour, rules the 
wealth, power and honours of life. Agni, fire, commands 
the prosperity, good fortune and grandeur of humanity. 
Agni provides all these for us. 


sot मघोन्या व॑ह सूनुं ते वायी पुरु | 
अस्मभ्यं वाजिनीवति i ९॥ 

9. Uso maghonya vaha sunrte varya puru. 
asmabyam vajinivati. 


Usha, O lady of morning light, beauty of the 
home, blest with holy speech of inspiration, 
commanding wealth and honour, mistress of intelligence 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 56 241 


and speed of progress in action and endeavour, bring 
us manifold wealth and honour of our cherished desire. 


तत्‌ सु न॑: सविता भगो वरुणो fiat अर्यमा । 
इन्द्रो नो राधसा WAL ९०॥ 
10. Tat su nah savita bhago varuno mitro aryama. 


Indro no radhasa gamat. 


That power, prosperity, honour and excellence 
for us, may Savita, the sun, Bhaga, ruler of wealth and 
power, Varuna, the chosen leader, Mitra, the friend, 
Aryama, the chief of justice, and Indra, commander and 
controller of power and rule of law and order, may bring 
us with all wealth and success of excellence and joy. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 56 
Dyavaprthivi Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


मही द्यावापृथिवी इह ज्येष्ठं रचा Naat शुचयंद्धिर कः | 
यत्सीं ahs बहती विंमिन्वच्रुवन्दोक्षा पप्रथानेभिरेवैः ॥ ९ ॥ 


i. Mahi dyavaprthivi iha jyesthe ruca bhavatam 
sucayadbhir-arkaih. Yatsim varisthe brhati 
viminvan ruvaddhoksa paprathanebhir-evaih. 


The great heaven and earth, greatest here both, 
grow bright and beautiful with pure and purifying 
showers of light when the sun, radiating and all round 
pervading both the great and best regions of the 
universe, rises and roars like a bull in the heavens with 
wide expansive rays of its glorious radiation. 


देवी देवेभिर्यजते यजत्रैरमिनती तस्थतुरुक्षमाणे । 
ऋतावरी अद्रुहा देवपुत्रे यज्ञस्य नेत्री शुचयंद्धिर कैः ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


242 RGVEDA 


2: Devi devebhiryajate yajatrair-aminati tasthat- 
uruksamane. Rtavari adruha devaputre yajnasya 
netrt Sucayadbhir-arkaih. 


Divine dyavaprthivi, sun and earth with their 
divine forces—the sun with light and the earth with her 
motherly nurture and noble people — both worthy of 
love and study with dedication, loving and non-violent, 
abide constant in the universe. They are generous with 
showers of light and vitality, firm in the cosmic law of 
truth, replete with waters of life, loving all and hating 
none, blest with bright and creative progeny — the sun 
with planets and satellites and the earth with vegetation 
— carrying on and leading the process of cosmic yajna 
with their pure and purifying rays of light and vibrations 
of creative generosity. 


स इत्स्वपा भुव॑नेष्वासर य sh eratoferct जजानं। 
उर्वी ग॑भीरे रज॑सी सुमेक अवंशे धीर : शच्या समैरत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Sa itsvapa bhuvanesvasa ya ime dyavaprthivi 
(काव. Urvi gabhire rajasit sumeke avamse dhirah 
Sacya samairat. 


That One alone, lord of omnipotent holy action 
omnipresent in these worlds of the universe, is the lord 
who creates the heaven and earth wide and deep with 
concentrations of particles together in beautiful forms 
self-sustained without external support. He is the lord 
eternal and omniscient who moves these with his vision 
and holy power. 


नू रोदसी बृहद्धिनो वरूथैः पत्नी वद्धिरिषय॑न्ती सजोषाः | 
उरूची विश्वे यजते नि पातं धिया स्याम र॒थ्य॑ः सदासाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 56 243 


4. Nu rodast brhadbhirno varuthaih patniva-dbhir- 
isayantt sajosah. Uruci 1151८ yajate ni patam 
dhiya syama rathyah sadasah. 

May the heaven and earth, vast, together loving, 
kind, favourable and fertile, revered and admired by 
the world, bless us with vast homes managed by 
dedicated ladies and may we, with our will and 
intelligence, achieve and command many chariots and 
assistants under their protection. 

प्र वां महि दवीं अभ्युप॑स्तुतिं भरामहे । 
शुची उप प्र॑स्तये ॥ ५॥ 

a: Pra vam mahi dyavi abhyupastutim bharamahe. 

Suci upa prasastaye. 


O resplendent heaven and earth, pure and 
unsullied, we offer earnest praise in honour to you and 
approach you with prayers. 

पुनाने तन्वां मिथः स्वेन दश्चण राजथः। 
ऊह्याथे सनादूतम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Punane tanva mithah svena daksena rajathah. 
Uhyathe sanadrtam. 


Divine and pure heaven and earth, together in 
body with your innate power and potential, you shine 
in glory and observe the laws of eternal truth in 
Existence; 


मही frat साधथस्तरन्ती पिप्र॑ती ऋतम्‌ । 
परि यज्ञं नि षेदथुः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Mahi mitrasya sadhathas-taranti piprati rtam. 
Pari yajnam ni sedathuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


244 RGVEDA 


O mighty heaven and earth, helping friends and 
devotees to cross the hurdles to attainment, fulfilling 
the laws of truth to bliss, you preside over the yajnas of 
life to perfection of success. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 57 


Kshetrapati, Shuna, Shunasira, Sita Devata, 
Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


क्षेत्र॑स्य पतिना वयं हितेनेव warafa 
गामश्वं पोषयित्वा स नो मृक्ठातीदुर ie ॥ 


1. Ksetrasya patina vayam hiteneva jayamasi. 
Gamasvam posayitnva sa no mrlatidrse. 


We prosper in life by virtue of the master of the 
field as by a benefactor or a friendly army. May he, 
giver of good health and nutriments, develop fertile 
fields, cows and horses and, in this way, provide peace 
and joy for us all. 


क्षेत्र॑स्य पते Helse AAR व पयो! अस्मासु धुक्ष्व | 
मधुश्चुतं घृतमिव सुपूतमृतस्य नः पत॑यो Foard ।॥ २ ॥ 


Ksetrasya pate madhumantam-urmim dhen-uriva 
payo asmasu dhuksva. Madhuscutam ghrtamiva 
suputam-rtasya nah patayo mrlayantu. 


Master of the field, as the cow produces milk 
and you milk the nectar for us, so produce the rippling 
sweets of honey for us, and so may the masters of 
running waters, laws of nature and holy action discover 
the sacred knowledge of science like sanctified ghrta 
seasoned with honey for the peace and joy of us all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 57 245 


मधुंमतीरोष॑धीद्यवि आपो मधुमन्नो भवत्वन्तरिश्चम्‌। 
क्षेत्र॑स्य पतिर्मधुंमान्नो अस्त्वरिष्यन्तो अन्वेनं चरेम 3 ॥ 


Di Madhumatirosadhirdyava apo madhumanno 
bhavatvantariksam. Ksetrasya patir-madhum- 
anno astvarisyanto anvenam carema. 


May the herbs and trees, all vegetation indeed, 
be full of honey for us. May the heavens of light, the 
skies and the oceans of earth and space be full of honey 
for us. May the farmer, master of the field, be gracious 
with honey for us. And let us join, serve and cooperate 
with the farmer as well as with nature as we should 
without hurting, injuring and polluting. 
शुनं वाहाः शुनं नर॑: शुनं ad लाङ्ग॑लम्‌ | 
शुनं व॑र त्रा ब॑ध्यन्तां शुनमष्टूामुदिङ्कय॥ x 

4. Suna vahah sunam narah sunam krsatu langa- 
lam. Sunam varatra badhyantam sunamastra- 
mudingaya. 


Let the oxen and horses draw the plough and 
carry the burdens happily for growth and prosperity. 
Let the men work happily, let the plough furrow the 
field neatly, and let the whole process move on happily 
and effectively for growth and prosperity. 


शुनासीराविमां वाचं जुषेथां यदिवि चक्रथुः पयं: । 
तेनेमामुपं सिञ्चतम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


9 Sunasiravimam vacam jusetham yad divi cakra- 
thuh payah. Tenemamupa sincatam. 


O Vayu and Aditya, wind and sun, farmer and 
helpers, listen to this word and follow: the water which 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


246 RGVEDA 


you create in the regions of light, and which you move 
in the light of science, pray bring down to irrigate this 
holy land of the fields. 


state! सुभगे भव सीते वन्दामहे car 
यथां नः सुभगासंसि यथा नः सुफल्ासंसि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Arvact subhage bhava site vandamahe tva. 
Yatha nah subhagasasi yatha nah suphalasasi. 


O charming furrow, be straight and deeply well 
drawn. We love and celebrate you so that you bring us 
good fortune, so that you bring us the best fruit of our 
labour and endeavour. 


इन्द्रः सीतां नि गुह्णातु तां Gers यच्छतु | 
सा नः पयस्वती दुहामुत्तरामुत्तरां समाम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

0 Indrah sitam ni grhnatu tam pusanu yacchatu. 
Sa nah payasvati duham-uttaramuttaram samam. 


Let Indra, the farmer, take over and look after 
the furrow with seed, and may the sun shine warmly 
over the seed. Let Pusha, fertility of nature, feed and 
energise the grain. And let the earth mother, full of the 
milk of life, produce more and more of pure foods year 
by year for us. 


शुनं नः फात्छा वि कुषन्तु भूमिं शुनं कीनाशा अभि य॑न्तु 
वाहैः । शुनं पर्जन्यो मधुना पयोधिः शुनासीरा शुनमस्मासु 
धत्तम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sunam nah phala vi krsantu bhumim sunam 
kinasa abhi yantu vahaih. Sunam parjanyo ma- 
dhuna payobhih sunasira Sunamasmasu dhattam. 

Let the ploughmen plough the land happily for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 58 247 


our peace and nourishment. Let the farmers work with 
the oxen and horses happily for peace and joy. Let the 
clouds shower with milk and honey joyously for peace 
and prosperity. Let the share and plough, the ploughmen 
and their helpers, and the powers of fertility bear and 
bring us peace, prosperity and joy for us all. 


Mandala 4/Sukta 58 


Agni, Surya, Apah, Gavah, or Ghrtam Devata, 
Vamadeva Gautama Rshi 


सखमुद्रादूर्मिर्मधुमां उदर दुपांशुना सम॑मृतत्व्मानट्‌। 
घृतस्य नाम गुह्यं यदस्ति जिह्वा देवानाममृतस्य नाभिः ॥ ९ ॥ 


il Samudrad-urmir-madhuman udaradupamsuna 
samamrtatvamanat. Ghrtasya nama guhyam 
yadasti jihva devanamamrtasya nabhih. 


From the seas of earth and space arises the wave 
of honeyed energy, and close by the sun and soma that 
is produced in the solar yajna it joins and collects the 
nectar of immortality. That mysterious identity of cosmic 
fertility which is for us and for life as a whole flows 
from the tongue of divinities and originates from the 
centre of Eternity. 


वयं नाम प्र ब्र॑वामा घृतस्याऽस्मिन्यज्ञे धारयामा TATA: | 
उप॑ ब्रह्या शुंणवच्छस्यमानं चतु-शङ्खोऽवमीद्रौर एतत्‌॥। २ ॥ 


2. Vayam nama pra bravama ghrtasya’smin yajne 
dharayama namobhih. Upa brahma srnavaccha- 
syamanam catuhsrngo’vamid gaura etat. 


The name and identity of that spirit of energy 
and immortality we sing and celebrate in divine words 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


248 RGVEDA 


in this yajna, and, with reverence, surrender and self 
sacrifice, give it unto ourselves in the soul to hold on to 
it in life. May the Lord Omniscient so close to us hear it 
well chanted in celebration, the same Lord of Vak, the 
eternal Word, who commands the four Vedas as high 
peaks of knowledge and breathes out the same for us in 
revelation. 


चत्वारि VST त्रयो अस्य पादा द्वे शीर्षे सपर हस्तासो अस्य | 
त्रिधां बन्दो वुंषभो रोरवीति महो देवो Hef आ विवेश ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Catvari $rnga trayo asya pada dve Sirse sapta 
hastaso asya. Tridha baddho vrsabho roraviti 
maho devo martyan व viveSa. 


Of this mighty self-refulgent Lord, Word and 
Dharma, four are the high peaks of light and self 
proclamation: Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and 
Atharva-veda; three legs on which it rests: jnana or 
knowledge, karma or action, and upasana or prayer; two 
heads: abhyudaya or worldly well being, and Nihshreyas 
or moksha or ultimate freedom; seven hands or the seven 
verse forms. Three way bound in faith, action and 
meditation, it is the thundervoice of Divinity which 
proclaims itself through the beauty, wonder and terror 
of nature and the music of the Veda. And this mighty 
presence of mighty self-refulgent Lord and the self- 
awareness of omniscience is enshrined in the heart of 
mortal humans. 


fret हितं पणिभिर्गुह्यमानं गवि carat घृतमन्व॑विन्दन्‌। 
इन्द्र एकः सूर्य एकं जजान वेनादेकं स्वधया निष्ट॑तक्षुः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tridha hitam panibhirguhyamanam gavi devaso 
ghrtamanvavindan. Indra ekam surya ekam 
jJajana venadekam svadhaya nistataksuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 58 249 


Ghrta, the essence of the nature, purpose and 
science of life, three way hidden in mystic language 
and held by natural forces, the enlightened ones 
discover, create and produce: Indra, cosmic energy, 
electricity, thunder and lightning, holds and reflects one, 
the sun holds and radiates another, and the third they 
discover from their meditation on Divinity with their 
own vision and intelligence. 


एता अर्षन्ति हद्यात्समुद्राच्छतव्र॑जा रिपुणा नावचक्चं । घतस्य 
धारां अभि चाकशीमि हिरण्ययो वेतसो मध्य॑ आसाम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


Eta arsanti hrdyatsamudracchatavraja ripuna 
navacakse. Ghrtasya dhara abhi cakasimi hiran- 
yayo vetaso madhya asam. 


These streams of light and life’s energy flow in 
a hundred streams from the innermost depth of the heart- 
ocean, but not perceptible to the negative soul. Residing 
in the golden grove, myself wrapped in golden hue in 
their midst, I watch the light all round, the gold and the 
essence of life. 


सम्यक्स््र॑वन्ति सरितो न धेनां अन्तर्हृदा मन॑सा पूयमानाः | 
एते अर्षन्त्यूर्मयो घृतस्य wise क्षिपणोरीषमाणाः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Samyak sravanti sarito na dhena antarhrda 
manasa puyamanah. Ete arsantyurmayo ghrtasya 
mrga iva ksipanorisamanah. 


These streams of light and life flow like 
vibrations of the voice divine, purified and sanctified 
by the innermost soul of the heart and mind. The streams 
of ghrta, joy of life, flow like deer flying from the 
hunter’s arrows towards the shelter of the divine saviour. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


250 RGVEDA 


सिन्धोरिव प्राध्वने शुघनासो वातप्रमियः पतयन्ति यह्वाः । 
घृतस्य धारां अरुषो न वाजी काष्ठा भिन्दन्नूर्मिभिः पिन्व॑- 
मानः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Sindhoriva pradhvane sughanaso vatapramiyah 
patayanti yahvah. Ghrtasya dhara aruso na vaji 
kastha bhindannurmibhih pinvamanah. 


The streams of ghrta, life’s energy, flow on to 
join the sea like strong currents of a river rushing on in 
tumult by simple, straight and holy paths of the bed 
carved by Divinity, and I, inspired by the waves of ghrta, 
like a fiery stallion flying, breaking the bounds of world 
pressures all round by the force of inner vibrations, move 
on to my divine destination. 


अभि प्र॑वन्त॒ सम॑नेव योषाः कल्याण्यः स्मय॑मानासो 
SR घृतस्य धाराः समिधो! नसन्त ता जुषाणो हर्यति 
जातवेदाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Abhi pravanta samaneva yosah kalyanyah smaya- 
manaso agnim. Grtasya dharah samidho nasanta 
ta jusano haryati jatavedah. 

As youthful ladies of love and virtue, inspired 
with passion and smiling in bliss, proceed to meet agni, 
enlightened husband, so do streams of ghrta move and 
flow into the vedi to meet the lighted fire, and the rising 
fire, loving and gracious, cherishes to receive the flow 
of the holy yajaka’s offer. 


कन्याइव वहतुमेतवा उ अञ्ज्य॑ञ्जाना अभि चाकशीमि। 
यत्र सोम॑: सूयते यत्र यज्ञो घृतस्य धारा अभि तत्प॑वन्ते ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 58 251 


9. Kanya iva vahatumetava u anjyanjana abhi caka- 
simi. Yatra somah suyate yatra yajno ghrtasya 
dhara abhi tatpavante. 


Where the yajna of holy action and meditation 
is enacted and the bliss of divine soma is created, there 
I see all round the flow of the streams of consciousness 
into that vedi of divine fire wherein, like a maiden in 
all her beauty, finery and perfume proceeding to meet 
her bridegroom at the wedding yajna, the individual soul 
flies and is accepted and sanctified in the supreme spirit 
of Divinity. 

अभ्यर्षत सुष्टुतिं tetas भद्रा द्रविंणानि धत्त। 
इमं यज्ञं नयत देवता नो घतस्य धारा मधुंमत्पवन्ते ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Abhyarsata sustutim gavyam-djim-asmasu 


bhadra dravinani dhatta. Imam yajnam nayata 
devata no ghrtasya dhara madhumat-pavante. 


Let the voice of holy praise and divine 
celebration rise and resound, O saints and sages and 
scholars of eminence, bear and bring us the light of 
knowledge enshrined in holy speech, lead us to honour, 
excellence and victory, and help us create wealth for 
the world leading all to the bliss of peace and common 
good. Guide, lead and direct this yajna of ours, the 
streams of honeyed ghrta flow for the fire divine. 


धाम॑न्ते विश्वं arate ्चितमन्तः संमुद्रे Ber न्तरायुंषि। 
अपामनीके सपिथे य आभृतस्तम॑श्याम मधुमन्तं त 
RN eeu 


11. Dhaman te visvam bhuvanamadhi sritamantah 
samudre hrdyantarayusi. Apamanike samithe ya 
abhrtastamasyama madhumantam ta urmim. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


252 RGVEDA 


O Lord, within your presence by your power is 
sustained the entire world of existence. That same power 
and presence vibrates in the depths of the oceans, in the 
cave of the heart, in the breath of life and age, in the 
waves of water and energy, in the vibrations of thought, 
and in the heat of action in nature and humanity. That 
power and presence vibrating in existence, O Lord, we 
pray, let us realise. Let us flow with that constant flow 
of vibration of Divinity in and across the fluctuations 
of mutability. 


॥ इति चतुर्थं मण्डलम्‌ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


253 


MANDALA 5 


Mandala 5/Sukta 1 
Agni Devata, Budha-Gavishthara of Atreya Family Rshis 


sateafa: समिधा जनानां प्रति धेनुमिंवायतीमुषासंम्‌। 
Gea प्र वयामुजिहानाः प्र uma: सिस्रते नाक- 
Teas ९॥ 


il, Abodhyagnih samidha jananam prati dhenumi- 
vayatimusasam. Yahva iva pra vayamujjihanah 
pra bhanahah sisrate nakamaccha. 


Agni is seen and known while rising by the 
burning samidhas lighted by the yajakas at dawn coming 
up like a cow early in the morning, and the flames, like 
branches of a mighty tree, rise brilliantly and touch the 
sky where there is no pain, no darkness. 


अबोधि drat यजथाय carseat अभिः सुमनाः प्रातर॑स्थात्‌। 
समिद्धस्य रुश॑ददडि पाजो! महान्देवस्तमसो निर॑मोचि ॥ २॥ 


2: Abodhi hota yajathaya devanurdhvo agnih 
sumanah pratarasthat. Samiddhasya rusada- 
darsi pajo mahan devastamaso niramoci. 


The yajaka Agni, good at heart, is seen to invoke 
the divinities and noble sages to the yajna and rises high 
while the fire keeps burning and rising. The light of the 
burning fire is seen as a blissful divine power and then 
the great refulgent sun rises from the night’s darkness. 


यदीं गणस्य रशनामजीगः Bras शुचिंभिर्गोभि॑रभिः। 
आद्चिणा युज्यते वाजयन्त्युंत्तानामृर्ध्वो अंधय्नुहूभिः ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


254 RGVEDA 


Di Yadim ganasya rasanamajigah sucirankte 
sucibhirgobhiragnih. Addaksina yujyate vajaya- 
ntyuttanamurdhvo adhayajjuhubhih. 


When the pure and lustrous fire of yajna, as the 
sun, rises with its pure bright flames and takes over the 
reins of the conduct of the yajnic world around, then 
the invigorating and powerful dakshina offering is made 
with the ladles, the flames of fire rise high, and the fire 
higher and higher up voraciously consumes the offering. 


अभथिमच्छ देवयतां मनांसि चक्षुंषीव सूर्ये सं aera । यदीं 
सुवति उषसा विरूपे श्वेतो वाजी जायते अग्रे अह्वाम्‌।॥। ४ ॥ 

4. Aghimaccha devayatam manamsi caksumsiva 
surye sam caranti. Yadim suvate usasa virupe 
Sveto vaji jayate agre ahnam. 


The minds of holy celebrants of Divinity turn 
intently to Agni as their eyes wait for and turn to the 
rising sun. And when the heaven and earth, both 
different of form, one bright and the other dark and 
green, bring forth this Agni at the rise of the dawn, day 
light appears and the world grows bright. 


ws हि जेन्यो अग्रे stat हितो हितेष्व॑रुषो वनेषु । 
दमेदमे सप्त रला दधानोऽ freter नि ष॑सादा यजीयान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
a: Janista hi jenyo agre ahnam hito hitesvaruso 


vanesu. Damedame sapta ratna dadhano’ gnir- 
hota ni sasada yajtyan. 


Arises Agni, victorious yajaka, the fire and the 
sun, for sure in advance of the day every morning, 
benevolent, active in everything good and holy, bright 
in the woods and every home, bearing sevenfold jewels 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 1 255 


of light and flame, and then settles in yajnic business, 
carrying the yajna on and on. The yajna must go on. 


strata न्य॑सीदद्यजींयानुपस्थ मातुः सुरभा ङ TH | 
gat कविः पुरुनिःछ ऋतावा धर्ता कष्टीनासुत मध्यं 
इन्दः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Agnirhota nyasidadyajiyanupasthe matuh sura- 
bha u loke. Yuva kavih purunihstha rtava dharta 
krstinamuta madhya iddhah. 


Agni, host and performer of yajna, settles in the 
lap of the mother, earth and nature, in the beautiful 
fragrant world and its people, conducting the yajnic 
business of life which must go on. Young and bold, 
bright, intelligent and creative, imaginative as a poet, 
dedicated to all without exception, committed to truth 
and the law divine, sustainer and controller of the people, 
he goes on at the centre of everything, bright and 
blazing, never relenting, never slackening. The yajna 
must go on. 


प्रणुत्यं विप्र॑मध्वरेषु साधुमयिं होर्तारमीव्छते salts: 1 आ 
यस्ततान रोदंसी ऋतेन नित्यं मृजन्ति वाजिनं घृतेन॑ ॥ ७॥ 


We Pra nu tyam vipramadhvaresu sadhumagnim 
hotaramilate namobhih. A yastatana rodasi rtena 
nityam mrjanti vajinam ghrtena. 


Ever and onward, with food, surrender and 
service in faith, people light, praise and worship that 
Agni, wise and vibrating, excellent in the 
accomplishment of yajnic projects, host, priest and 
organiser of life’s business, who pervades heaven and 
earth with light and fragrance and blesses the people 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


256 RGVEDA 


with enlightenment. Daily they renew their dedication 
and commitment with vows of truth, feed the power 
with ghrta, and refine the light and power to shine it 
more and more. 


मार्जाल्यों मृज्यते स्वे eda: कविप्रश॒स्तो अतिथिः शिवो 
न॑:। सहस्त्र॑णुड्ो वृष भस्तदोजा विश्व अग्रे सह॑सा 
प्रास्यन्यान्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Marjalyo mrjyate sve damunah kavipraSsasto 
atithih sivo nah. Sahasrasrngo vrsabhastadoja 
visvan agne sahasa prasyanyan. 


Agni, pure and purifying catalytic power, is 
refined in itself. Self-controlled and a powerful 
controller, sung and celebrated by poets, it is a welcome 
guest, auspicious and beneficent for all of us as a breeze 
of peace and freshness. Agni, O light of a thousand 
flames of eminence, generous as cloud showers, blazing 
lustrous, you are the pioneer, overtaking, conquering, 
and leading all others forward with your power and 
force. 


Ween अग्रे अत्येष्यन्यानाविर्यस्यै चारुतमो बभूथ । ईव्टेन्यो 
वपुष्यो विभावा प्रियो विशामतिंधिर्मानुंषीणाम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


8 Pra sadyo agne atyesyanyanaviryasmai caru- 
tamo babhitha. Ilenyo vapusyo vibhava priyo 
visama-tithirmanusinam. 


Agni, lord of light and power, for whosoever 
you rise on the vedi, light up in the home, or shine in 
flame in the cave of the heart most lovely and gracious, 
for him you excel and surpass everything else instantly 
and forever: adorable, sublime, effulgent, dearest and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 1 257 


most welcome guest of all communities and habitations 
of men and women. 


तुभ्यं भरन्ति facet यविष्ठ बकििमं्रे अन्तित ओत eared 
आ भन्दिष्ठस्य सुमतिं चिकिद्धि ged अग्रे महि शर्म॑ 
भद्रम्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10... Tubhyam bharanti ksitayo yavistha balimagne 
antita ota durat. A bhandisthasya sumatim 
cikiddhi brhatte agne mahi Sarma bhadram. 


Agni, most youthful power and presence, 
devoted people from far and near bear and bring and 
offer homage and yajaka to you. Listen, know and accept 
the praise and prayer of the celebrant. May your shelter 
and protection for us be wide and great, full of peace 
and well being. 


आद्य रथं भानुमो भानुमन्तमग्ने तिष्ठं यजतेभिः सम॑न्तम्‌ । 
विद्धान्प॑थीनामुर्व१ न्तरिश्चमेह देवान्हविरद्याय afar ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Adya rathan bhanumo bhanumantamagne tistha 
yajatebhih samantam. Vidvan pathinam-urvanta- 
riksameha devan haviradyaya vaksi. 


Agni, refulgent lord of knowledge, ascend your 
strong and brilliant chariot of light today with your 
adorable powers and associates, and across the wide 
paths of space bring here the nobilities of eminence of 
your alliance for joining and sharing our feast of yajnic 
offerings to the divinities. 


अवोचाम कवये मेध्याय वचो वन्दारु वृषभाय वृष्णे । 
गविष्ठिरो नम॑सा स्तोम॑मगौ दिवीव रुक्ममुरुव्यञ्चं- 
मश्रेत्‌॥ VU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


258 RGVEDA 


12. Avocama kavaye medhyaya vaco vandaru vrsa- 
bhaya vrsne. Gavisthiro namasad stomamagnau 
diviva rukmamuruvyancamasret. 


We sing this song of adoration in honour of the 
lord of light and knowledge, holy, potent, and generous. 
The holy yajaka dedicated to sacred speech and light of 
heaven, thus, ought to direct his beautiful song of praise 
and prayer with oblations and salutations rising high to 
the skies as to the sun in heaven. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 2 
Agni Devata, Kumara Atreya or Vrsha Jana or both Rshis 


कुमारं माता युवतिः समुब्धं गुहां विभर्ति न द॑दाति पित्रे । 
अनीकमस्य न मिनज्ननासः पुरः प॑श्यन्ति नि्हिंत- 
मरतौ।॥ ९॥ 


i, Kumaram mata yuvatih samubdham guha 
bibharti na dadati pitre. Anitkamasya na mina- 
jjanasah purah pasyanti nihitamaratau. 


The youthful mother bears and supports the 
foetus concealed in the womb, she does not, cannot, 
give it to the father in the state of immaturity. People 
cannot hurt its strength and vitality hidden in secret. 
But when it is born, they see its beauty and vitality before 
their eyes. 


wad त्वं daa कुमारं पेषीं विभर्षि महिषी जजान । 
पूर्वीर्हि गर्भ: शरदो! ववर्धाऽप॑श्यं जातं Aaa माता ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Kametam tvam yuvate kumaram pest bibharsi 
mahisi jajana. Purvirhi garbhah sarado vavar- 
dha’ pasyam jatam yadasuta mata. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 2 259 


O youthful lady, sweet is this baby you carry 
which the consecrated mother bore. I saw the foetus 
grow and grow for many many years many times before. 
And I see it born of the mother when she delivered it. 


हिरण्यदन्तं शुचिवर्णपारात्कषेत्रादपश्यमायुंधा frat 
ददानो अस्मा अमृतं विप्रक्वत्किं मामनिन्द्राः कुणवन्न- 
नुक्थाः ॥ ३॥ 


2 Hiranyadantam sucivarnam-arat-ksetrad- 
apasya-mayudha mimanam. Dadano asma 
amrtam viprkvatkim mamanindrah krnavannan- 
ukthah. 


I see him born of the mother’s womb far and 
near with a golden spoon in his month, pure and bright 
of form, wielding his weapons of essential potential. 
And I give him the feed of immortal elixir for life. What 
can those deny Indra, the soul? What can those who 
reject knowledge and celebration of Divinity do against 
me? Nothing. 


क्षेत्रादपश्यं सनुतश्चर॑न्तं सुमद्यूथं न पुरु शो भ॑मानम्‌। 
न ता अंगृश्चन्नज॑निष्ट हिषः पल्डिवनीरिद्युंवतयो भवन्ति ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ksetradapasyam sanutasScarantam sumadyu- 
tham na puru Sobhamanam. Na ta agrbhrann- 
ajanista hi sah paliknir-id-yuvatayo bhavanti. 


I see him born of the mother, mother earth and 
Mother Nature, see him roaming around since eternity 
by himself like an army on the march, commanding great 
beauty and grace. When he is born they hold him not, 
withhold him not, they cannot, and the young mothers, 
having given him birth, grow old and grey haired, and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


260 RGVEDA 
then they grow youthful again. 


के मे मर्यकं वि dara गोभिर्न येषां गोपा अर॑णण्चिदासं। 
य ई! जगुभुरव ते स्रुंजन्त्वाजाति पश्व उप॑ नश्चि- 
कित्वान्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Ke me maryakam vi yavanta gobhirna yesam gopa 
aranascidasa. Ya im jagrbhurava te srjantvajati 
pasva upa nascikitvan. 


Who can take away my wealth alongwith my 
lands and cows, sense and mind, feeling as if they are 
the cowherd stealing away my bull alongwith the cows, 
when in fact Agni himself is their protector and 
energiser? And those who try to grab them must despair 
and give up since the lord omniscient continues to 
protect, create and recreate the human wealth. 


वसां walt वसतिं जनानामरातयो नि द॑धुर्मर्त्येषु। 
ब्रह्माण्यत्रेरव तं asd निष्दितारो निन्द्यासो भवन्तु ।॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Vasam rajanam vasatim jananamaratayo ni da- 
dhurmartyesu. Brahmanyatrerava tam srjantu 
ninditaro nindyaso bhavantu. 


The law and order of humanity and the human 
habitations, negative forces try to obstruct and sabotage 
in the communities among themselves. But the power, 
potential and intelligence of Atri, enlightened people 
free from physical, mental and spiritual fears and 
limitations disinflate that negative effort and the 
saboteurs themselves become self-condemned. 


शुन॑श्चिच्छेपं निदितं सहस््राद्यूपादमुञ्चो sists हि a: 1 
warned वि मुमुग्धि पाशान्होत॑श्चिकित्व इह तू 
निषद्य ॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / <^ - 2 261 


7. Sunascicchepam niditam sahasrad yupdada- 
munco asamista hi sah. Evasmadagne vi mumu- 
gdhi pasan hotascikitva iha tu nisadya. 


Agni, O lord of light and ruler of the world, you 
save even shunah-shepa, the connoisseur lost in senses, 
reviled and condemned; you save him from a thousand 
snares of the world so that the man settles back in peace 
of mind. Same way, O lord and light of the world, come, 
O highpriest of the yajna of life, grace our yajna here 
and snap the snares of suffering and slavery off our body, 
mind and soul. 


हणीयमानो अप हि मदैयेः प्र में देवानां व्रतपा sare 
इन्द्रो विद्धा अनु हि त्वा waa तेनाहम अनुंशिष्ट 
आगाम्‌ ८ ॥ 


8. Hrniyamano apa hi madaiyeh pra me devanam 
vratapa uvaca. Indro vidvan anu hi tva cacaksa 
tenahamagne anusista agam. 


The observer of the laws of righteousness and 
divinity says: Let the element of hate and anger be away 
from me. Indra, man of knowledge and power, who 
knows and speaks of you, O Agni, destroyer of the 
pollution and impurity of body, mind and soul, has 
spoken to me and, instructed by him, I come to you in 
search of purity and purgation. 


faster बृहता भात्यथिराविर्विंश्वानि कृणुते महित्वा । 
प्रादेवीर्मायाः संहते दुरेवाः शिशीते शुद्धे रक्ष॑से विनिश्च ui ९ ॥ 


0. Vi jyotisa brhata bhatyagniravirvisvani krnute 
mahitva. Pradevirmayah sahate durevah Sisite 
5776८ raksase vinikse. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


262 RGVEDA 


Agni shines and blazes expansively with mighty 
rising flames of light, and with its lustre and power 
illuminates and reveals all things of the world. It 
sharpens and extends its arms of light and power for 
the destruction of evil and challenges and throws out 
the strength and wiles and acts of the clever forces of 
negation and destruction. 


उत स्वानासो दिवि ष॑न्त्वगेस्तिग्मायुंधा tate हन्तवा उ। 
ue चिदस्य प्र रुजन्ति भामा न व॑रन्ते परिबाधो 
अदेवीः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Utasvanaso divi santvagnes-tigmayudha raksase 
hantava u . Made cidasya pra rujanti bhama na 
varante paribadho adevih. 


And let the blazing weapons of fire roaring in 
the heights of the skies be raised for the destruction of 
evil forces, for as they strike for the joy and victory of 
life’s positive forces as the very flames of terror, the 
obstructive forces of evil would fail to avert or oppose 
them. 


एतं ते स्तोमं तुविजात विप्रो रथं न धीर: carat अतक्षम्‌। 
यदीदग्ने प्रति त्वं देव हर्याः स्व॑र्वतीर॒प War जयेम ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Etam te stomam tuvijata vipro ratham na dhirah 
svapa ataksam. Yadidagne prati tvam deva 
haryah svarvatirapa ena jayema. 


Agni, light and power divine among the strong 
and wise, I, dedicated to knowledge and service, bold 
and patient, keen to do good in word and action, 
structure this song of celebration like a skillful engineer 
designing and making a chariot for you. O lord refulgent, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 3 263 


if you are kind and gracious to accept it, then by the 
same song we would win sweet and heavenly waters of 
life, light and energy for the joy of life. 


तुविग्रीवो! वृषभो वावृधानो!ऽशत्चपै र्यः समजाति वेद॑ः | 
इतीममयिममृतां अवोचन्वर्हिष्प॑ते मन॑वे शर्म यंसब्दविष्प॑ते 
मन॑वे शर्म" यंसत्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tuvigrivo vrsabho vavrdhano’ satrvaryah sama- 
jati vedah. Ifttmam-agnim-amrta avocan barhi- 
smate manave Sarma yamsaddhavismate manave 
Sarma yamsat. 


Agni, strong and graceful power and flame, 
roaring as a bull and generous as cloud showers, 
growing and promoting, free from enemies, master ruler 
and sustainer, creates and bestows wealth and power of 
the noblest kind: Thus do men of spiritual vision and 
divine wisdom celebrate this Agni in holy words. May 
Agni bless the man of generosity and self sacrifice, man 
of thought and discrimination, with a happy and peaceful 
life, holy family and a happy home. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 3 
Agni Devata, Vasushruta Atreya Rshi 
wad वरुणो जाय॑से यत्त्वं मित्रो भ॑वसि aca: । 
त्वे विश्वे सहसस्पुत्र देवास्त्वमिन्द्रो दाशुषे sett ९॥ 


1. Tvamagne varuno jayaso yat tvam mitro bhavasi 
yatsamiddhah. Tve visve sahasasputra deva 
stvamidro dasuse martyaya. 


Agni, flaming fire, light of knowledge and 
power of the world, when you are born, you shine like 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


264 RGVEDA 


Varuna, light of the dawn and spirit of justice and 
discrimination in mankind. When you are in full blaze 
of your glory, you are like Mitra, bright sun, friend of 
all. In you reside and abide all the powers of nature’s 
divinity, O child of omnipotence, and you are Indra, 
giver of honour and excellence for the man of charity 
and generosity. 


त्वमर्यमा भ॑वसि यत्कनीनां ara स्वधावन्गुह्धयं fasts । 
अञ्जन्ति fast सुधितं न गोधिर्यदम्प॑ती सम॑नसा 
कृणोषि ॥ २॥ 


१.७ Tvamaryama bhavasi yat kaninam nama sva- 
dhavan guhyam bibharsi. Anjanti mitram 
sudhitam na gobhiryaddampati samanasa krnosi. 


Agni, lord of energy and living vitality, when 
you bear the mysterious name of youth among men and 
women, you become Aryama and assume the role of a 
judge with discrimination. When you join man and 
woman in wedlock, with equal love of mind and heart, 
they celebrate you with holy words and hospitality with 
cow’s milk and butter. 


ad fara मरुतो मर्जयन्त रुद्र यत्ते जनिम चारु चित्रम्‌। 
पदं यद्विष्णोरुपमं निधायि तेन॑ पासि गुह्यं नाम गोनाम्‌ ३ ॥ 
3: Tava Sriye maruto marjayanta rudra yatte janima 


caru citram. Padam yadvisnorupam nidhayi tena 
pasi guhyam nama gonam. 


Agni, you are Rudra, lord of justice and 
dispensation. For your honour and excellence vibrant 
people come to you and anoint you and glorify the 
beautiful and wonderful name that is yours. The office 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 3 265 


of Vishnu, protector and sustainer, is vested in you, by 
that you protect and maintain the secret name and 
identity of the lights of stars. 


तवं ्चिया सुदृशो देव देवाः पुरू दधाना अमृतं सपन्त | 
होतारमगिं मनुषो नि षेदुर्दशस्यन्तं उशिजः शंस॑मायोः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tava Sriya sudrso deva devah puru dadhana 
amrtam sapanta. Hotaramagnim manuso ni 
sedurdasasyanta uSsijah Samsamayoh. 


O lord of light and generosity, ruler of the world, 
by virtue of your light, honour and grace, brilliant 
scholars of vision, commanding wide powers and 
immortal knowledge, and the people in general, loving 
and desiring admirable wealth and beauty of life, 
establish, serve and expand the fire of various forms of 
yajna of social and scientific projects, in your honour, 
holy yajaka and giver of life’s benefits. 


न त्वद्धोता पूर्वो अग्रे asilara काव्यैः परो ster स्वधावः। 
विशश्च यस्या अतिःथिर्भवासि स aad वनवदेव 
मतीन्‌॥ ५॥ 


a. Na tvaddhota purvo agne yajtyan na kavyaih paro 
asti svadhavah. Visasca yasya atithirbha-vasi sa 
yajnena vanavad-deva martan. 


Agni, there never is a generous giver and yajnic 
performer before you, nor is there any one higher 
celebrated by poets in hymns, lord of your own essential 
wealth and power as you are, worthy of homage. Lord 
of light and generosity, whoever the host where you are 
invoked and invited as yajnic deity, you bless the people 
by the yajna with fulfilment. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


266 RGVEDA 


aaah वनुयाम त्वोतां वसूयवो! हविषा बुध्य॑मानाः | 
वयं dud facie वयं राया स॑हसस्पुत्र मतीन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vayamagne vanuyama tvota vasuyavo havisa 
budhyamanah. Vayam samarye vidathesvahnam 
vayam raya sahasasputra martan. 


Agni, lord refulgent ruler of the world, may we 
grow and prosper, we pray, under your protection, 
searching for wealth, raising the fire with havi offerings 
and ourselves rising in wealth and knowledge with the 
yajna. Let us win in life’s contests, in yajnas, day by 
day, O child of strength and protector of power and 
valour, and let us be blest with children and grand 
children. 


यो न sim अभ्येनो भरात्यधीदधघमघशंसे दधात। जही 
चिकित्वो अभिशंस्तिमेतामगे यो al मर्चयति द्येन ॥ ७ ॥ 


Ts Yo na ago abhyeno bharatyadhidaghamagha- 
samse dadhata. Jahi cikitvo abhisastimeta- 
magne yo no marcayati dvayena. 


Whoever commits sin and crime against us, may 
Agni, lord ruler and dispenser of justice, turn that sin 
and crime upon the sinner and calumniator. May the 
lord of light and knowledge, Agni, silence that 
imprecation, whoever be the person that hurts us with 
double dealing, sin and scandal. 


त्वामस्या व्युषि देव yet दूतं कूण्वाना अयजन्त हव्यैः | 
संस्थे यदग्र ईय॑से रयीणां देवो मर्तैर्वसुभिरिध्यर्मानः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvamasya vyusi deva purve dutam krnvana 
ayajanta havyaih. Samsthe yadagna tyase rayi- 
nam devo martair-vasubhir-idhyamanah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 3 267 


Agni, refulgent power of light and generosity 
settled in the midst of this people, yajakas ever since 
time immemorial honouring you as harbinger of nature’s 
wealth join you and adore you in yajna with oblations 
of havi. And when you join them and settle in their midst 
then, raised and fed by the people on fragrant materials, 
you rise in flames as brilliant lord giver of the wealth of 
lite, 

अवं स्पृधि पितरं योधि विद्वान्पुत्रो aed सहसः सून He 
कदा चिकित्वो अभि चक्षसे tsa! Het ऋतचिद्यात- 
यासे।॥ ९॥ 


9. Ava sprdhi pitaram yodhi vidvan-putro yaste 
sahasah suna ihe. Kada ciditvo abhi caksase 
no’gne kadan rtacidyatayase. 


Agni, born of omnipotence, I think of you, 
meditate on you: You are the saviour from suffering 
and mortality as a child is for the parent. You are the 
scholar of science, visionary of existence and observer 
of the eternal laws of Dharma. Emulate, excel and save 
the parent, the protector and the yajaka who lights you 
in the vedi, fight out and eliminate suffering, sufferance, 
evil and destruction. Pray when would your eye of grace 
favour us? When would you inspire us and show the 
path of rectitude to guide us? 


भूरि नाम वन्द॑मानो दधाति पिता व॑सो यदि तज्नोष्यांसे। 
कुविदेवस्य सह॑सा चकानः सुम्नमभिर्वनते वावृधानः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Bhuri nama vandamano dadhati pita vaso yadi 
tajjosayase. Kuviddevasya sahasa cakanah 
sumnam-agnir-vanate vavrdhanah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


268 RGVEDA 


O shelter home of life, Agni, father and sustainer 
of living beings as you are, the worshipper adores you 
by many names which adoration if you accept and 
acknowledge with pleasure then the worshipper, loving, 
adoring and growing like fire by the light and power of 
the generous lord, creates joy and well being for himself, 
and Agni too, loving and favouring the adorer by his 
own divine knowledge and power, waxing with love 
and kindness, bestows the joy and well being of life 
upon the supplicant. 


wang ज॑रितारं यविष्ठ faval-an दुरिताति पर्षि । स्तेना 
अ॑दुश्रत्रिपवो जनासोऽ ज्ञातकेता वृजिना अभूवन्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Tvamanga jaritaram yavistha visvanyagne 
duritati parsi. Stena adrsranripavo janaso- 
*jnataketa vrjina abhuvan. 

Dearest ruler of the earth, most youthful power 
of the world, Agni, save the celebrant, purge the 
supplicant of all the evil and sufferings of the world: 
thieves are seen prowling around, enemies lying in wait, 
ignorant people lying in hidden corners, all following 
crooked ways, flags flying. 


इमे या्मासस्त्वद्रिग॑भूवन्वसंवे वा तदिदागों अवाचि। 
नाहायमयिर fuses नो न रीष॑ते वावृधानः परा 
दात्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ime yamasas-tvadrig-abhuvan vasave va 
tadidago avaci. Nahayam-agnir-abhisastaye no 
na risate vavrdhanah para dat. 

These celebrants and supplicants observing the 
law divine are dedicated to you, O lord Agni. Also, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 4 269 


whatever their weakness or trespass, that too has been 
confessed to the lord protector and sustainer. We pray 
may this Agni, lord omniscient and omnipotent, 
increasingly pleased and gracious, never forsake us and 
never deliver us unto the maligner or the injurer or the 
evil of failure and disaster. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 4 
Agni Devata, Vasushruta Atreya Rshi 


त्वामग्रे वसुपतिं adarater a म॑न्दे अध्वरेषु राजन्‌ । त्वया 
वाजं वाजयन्तो जयेमाऽभि ष्याम पृत्सुतीर्मत्यीनाम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


| Tvamagne vasupatim vasunamabhi pra mande 
adhvaresu rajan. Tvaya vajam vajayanto 
jayema’bhi syama prtsutir-martyanam. 


Agni, lord and brilliant ruler of the world, 
protector and sustainer of the wealths of life, I serve 
and celebrate you in the constructive business of 
cooperative living without hate and violence. With you 
and under your guidance and inspiration, collecting 
speed and strength for progress, let us, we pray, win the 
battles of mortal humanity and be happy. 


हव्यवाव्छ्िर्‌ जरः; पिता नो विभुर्विभावा सुदुशीको 
अस्मे । सुगार्हपत्याः समिषो दिदीद्यस्मव्रय१ क्सं मिमीहि 
श्रवांसि ॥ २॥ 

2. Havyavalagnir-ajarah pita no vibhurvibhava 
sudrsiko asme. Sugarhapatyah samiso कावा - 
hyasmadryak-sam mimthi Sravamsi. 

Agni, our father, sustainer and ruler, ever 
youthful and unaging, carrier of holy materials and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


270 RGVEDA 


fragrances over and across the world is all pervasive in 
power and presence, resplendent, all illuminative and 
all revealing, and blissful in form and appearance. May 
he provide for us all the healthful food, and energies 
for a happy household and may he, knowing us well 
and what is good for us, measure out, determine and 
grant all the bounds and laws of our wealth and 
properties, rights and duties, which we must not violate 
or neglect. 


विशां कविं विश्पतिं मानुषीणां शुचिं पावकं घुतपुंछठमिम्‌। 
नि होतारं विश्वविदं दधिध्वे स देवेषु वनते वायीणि ॥ ३॥ 

3: Visam kavim vispatim manusinam sucim pavakam 
ghrtaprsthamagnim. Ni hotaram visvavidam 
dadhidhve sa devesu vanate varyani. 


Install Agni in the seat of power, protection and 
creative governance, Agni the poetic sage and visionary 
of the people, chief of human settlements, pure and 
unsullied, the light and fire of the world, strongly based 
in ghrta and waters, highpriest of the yajnic human 
organisation, conversant with every detail of the social 
order, and he procures and rules the choice gifts which 
people love and desire. 


जुषरस्वाग्र sear सजोषा यत॑मानो cisafa: ger 
wud न: समिधं जातवेद आ च॑ देवान्हविरद्याय 
afar is 

4. Jusasvagna ilaya sajosa yatamano rasmibhih 
suryasya. Jusasva nah samidham jataveda 
aca devan haviradyaya vaksi. 


Agni, all knowing lord of light and destroyer of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 4 271 


enemies, pervasive across the earth and pleased with 
world voice, joining the sunrays and working with them, 
come, join our yajna lighted and rising with the fuel on 
fire, enjoy yourself and bring the noblest generous 
powers of nature and humanity along to partake of the 
fruits of our corporate endeavour of yajna. 


जुष्टो दमूना अतिथिर्दुरोण इमं al asad याहि विद्धान्‌ । 
विशव अगे अभियुजो विहत्य शत्रूयतामा भ॑रा 
भोजनानि ॥ ५॥ 


=) Justo damuna atithirdurona imam no yajnam-upa 
yahi vidvan. Visva agne abhiyujo vihatya Satru- 
yatama bhara bhojanani. 


Agni, enlightened scholar, ruler of the world, 
loved and honoured as a member of the family and 
welcome visitor to the house, having challenged and 
eliminated all the opposing forces of hate and enmity 
in the world, come to this yajna of ours and bring us 
cherished foods and delicacies. 


वधेन दस्युं प्र हि चातय॑स्व वय॑ः कृण्वानस्तन्वे ई स्वायै | 
पिपर्षि यत्स॑हसस्पुत्र देवान्त्सो sit पाहि नृतम वाजे 
अस्मान्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vadhena dasyum pra hi catayasva vayah krnva- 
nastanve svayai. Piparsi yatsahasasputra deva- 
ntso agne pahi nrtama vaje asman. 


Agni, enlightened ruler of the world, born and 
risen as the very child of strength and honour, drive 
away the wicked, thieves and robbers, augmenting the 
food and energy for your own body politic. O best of 
men and leaders, protect and promote the noble 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


272 RGVEDA 


enlightened people and replenish the powers of nature 
and thus strengthen and promote us in our joint 
endeavour of living. 


aad अग्र उक्थर्विधेम वयं हव्यैः पावक भद्रशोचे । अस्मे 
रयिं विश्ववारं समिन्वास्मे विश्वानि द्रविणानि afe ue 


Vayam te agna ukthairvidhema vayam havyaih 
pavaka bhadrasoce. Asme rayim visvavaram 
saminvasme visvani dravinani dhehi. 


Agni, noble ruler of life and humanity of the 
earth, pure and purifying power, rising in flames of piety 
and well being, with holy songs of celebrative 
knowledge and practical work and with correct inputs 
of yajnic materials, we offer you homage and service 
for human progress and all round welfare. For us, create, 
collect and receive the wealth of universal value and 
hold in trust the honour and prestige of the entire human 
nation. 


अस्माकमग्ने अध्वरं जुंषस्व सह॑सः सूनो त्रिषधस्थ हव्यम्‌ । 
वयं देवेषु सुकृतं: स्याम शर्म॑णा नस्तिवरूथेन पाहि।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asmakamagne adhvaram jusasva sahasah suno 
trisadhastha havyam. Vayam devesu sukrtah 
syama sarmana nastrivaruthena pahi. 


Agni, blazing light and fire, child of omni- 
potence, ruler of three worlds, join and bless our non- 
violent yajna of creation and production for the good 
of life. Let us be blest, we pray, to be followers of 
universal Dharma and piety of action, and protect and 
promote us with peace and comfort in a happy home of 
threefold bliss for body, mind and soul through three 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 4 273 


seasons for the human family. 


विश्वानि नो दुर्गहा जातवेदः सिन्धुं न नावा दुरिताति पर्षि | 
अगे अच्रिवन्नम॑सा गृणानो ३ऽ स्माकं बोध्यविता तनू- 
नाम्‌॥ ९॥ 


9. Visvani no durgaha jatavedah sindhum na nava 
duritati parsi. Agne atrivannamasa grnano’sm- 
akam bodhyavita tanunam. 


Agni, lord ruler commanding knowledge of the 
world of existence, constantly supported by relentless 
active assistants, as a sailor helps travellers to cross the 
sea by boat, so do you, we pray, help us cross the most 
difficult obstacles of the world. Served and celebrated 
with homage and service with surrender, you are the 
protector and sustainer of our bodies and material 
interests, this be gracious to know we know. 


यस्त्वां हृदा कीरिणा मन्य॑मानोऽ def मर्त्यो sitedifa 
जात॑वेदो ast अस्मासु धेहि प्रजाभिंरये अमृतत्वम- 
श्याम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. = Yastva hrda kirina manyamano ’martyam martyo 
jJohavimi. Jatavedo yaso asmasu dhehi praja- 
bhiragne amrtatvamasyam. 


While I, a mortal man, invoke, sing and celebrate 
your gifts and glory, immortal lord omnipresent in the 
world of existence, I pray with a sincere heart in full 
awareness of your omniscience and omnipotence as a 
supplicant, give us the gift of honour and excellence 
and bless us that with good progeny we may attain the 
state of immortality and ultimate freedom. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


274 RGVEDA 


यस्मै त्वं सुकृते जातवेद उ लोकम॑यरे कृणवः स्योनम्‌। 
अश्विनं स पुत्रिणं वीरव॑न्तं गोम॑न्तं रयिं न॑शते स्वस्ति ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Yasmai tvam sukrte jataveda u lokamagne 
krnavah syonam. ASvinam sa putrinam virava- 
ntam gomantam rayim naSate svasti. 


Whoever the person doing noble work in piety, 
for whom, O Jataveda, lord all knowing the things born, 
Agni, lord refulgent ruler of the world, you create and 
provide a lovely life of freedom and action, he attains a 
wealth of horses, dynamic self-progress, noble children, 
brave warriors, lands and cows, and above all the bliss 
of well being. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 5 
Apri Sukta, Mantrawise Devata, Vasushruta Atreya Rshi 


सुस॑मिन्दधाय शोचिषे घृतं तीव्रं Aare । 
अग्रये जातवेदसे ॥ ९॥ 


i; Susamiddhaya socise ghrtam tivram juhotana. 
Agnaye jatavedase. 


For success and self-fulfilment, ardenly offer 
hot and sharply catalytic ghrta into the intense fire, 
lighted, rising and radiant in the vedi, Jataveda, fire of 
life vibrating in everything in existence including 
yourself. 

For self-realisation in meditation, collect and 
concentrate your mind and consciousness into focus and 


direct it into the light of Divinity all pervasive, and 
shining in the cave of your heart also. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 5 275 


नराशंसः सुषूदतीमं यज्ञमर्दाभ्यः। 
कविर्हिं मधुहस्त्यः ॥ २॥ 


2. Narasamsah susudatimam yajnamadabhyah. 
Kavirhi madhuhastyah. 


Only the best of men admired by humanity 
effects such a yajna, the man intrepidable, whatever the 
circumstances, the man of poetic vision, so generous 
that sweetness and charity flows from his hand like 
honey dripping from the honey suckle. 


stadt अग्र आ वहेन्द्रं चित्रमिह fra 
सुखै रथेंभिरूतयें ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Ilito agna दं vahendram citramiha priyam. 
Sukhai rathebhirutaye. 


Served and celebrated in yajna, O light of life, 
Agni, hastening hither-ward by holy chariots for our 
protection and advancement, bring into the world the 
dearest wonderful wealth of honour and excellence with 
peace, comfort and freedom from fear. 


ऊर्णम्रदा वि प्र॑थस्वाऽभ्यगै र्का अनूषत । 
भवा नः शुभ्र सातये ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Urnamrada vi prathasva’bhyarka 41715414. 
Bhava nah subhra sataye. 


O ruling light of the world, soft, softening and 
protective, the mantric songs resound, arise and expand, 
bright and pure. Be gracious for our good and give us 
our share of wealth, honour and enlightenment in the 
social system. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


276 RGVEDA 


eaigit वि श्रयध्वं सुप्रायणा न॑ ऊतयें। 
प्रप्र॑ यज्ञं पूंणीतन ॥ ५॥ 
त Devirdvaro vi Srayadhvam suprayana na utaye. 
Prapra yajnam prnitana. 
O celestial doors of light divine, open welcome 
wide for us to walk through to the heavenly shades of 


peace and protection, expand, beautify and beatify the 
yajna of life for us. 


सुप्रतीके वयोवृर्धा यह्वी wate ATA | 
दोषामुषासंमीमहे ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Supratike vayovrdha yahvi rtasya matara. 
Dosamusasamimahe. 
We arise, welcome and honour the night and 
the dawn of day, both gracious and blissful of form, 


energisers of life, mighty strong, observers of nature’s 
law and makers of yajna. 


वात॑स्य पत्म॑न्नीट्ठिता दैव्या होतारा vas: | 
इमं नो! यज्ञमा ग॑तम्‌ ७॥ 

ce Vatasya patmannilita daivya hotara manusah. 
Imam no yajnama gatam. 

Divine performers of yajna, night and the dawn 
of day, blessed benefactors of humanity, celebrated in 
songs of praise and prayer, come by flight of the winds 
to grace this yajna of ours. 

Sal सर॑स्वती मही तिस्त्रो देवीर्मयोभुवः 1 
बर्हिः सीदन्त्वस्रिधः ॥ ८ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 5 277 


8. Ila sarasvati mahi tisro devirmayobhuvah. 
Barhith sidantvasridhah. 


Ila, divine knowledge of infinite omniscience, 
Sarasvati, divine language of existencial knowledge, 
and the divine spirit of mother earth, three divine givers 
of material, mental and spiritual bliss, may, we pray, 
come and sanctify our holy grass on the vedi and bless 
our yajna without delay and without fail. 


शिवस्त्व्॑टरिहा ग॑हि विभुः पोष॑ उत at । 
यज्नेय॑ज्ने न उद॑व ॥ ९॥ 


0. Sivastvastariha gahi vibhuh posa uta tmana. 
Yajneyajne na udava. 


Shiva, lord of peace and bliss, Tvashta, destroyer 
of suffering, spirit of the universe all pervasive, come 
to us in our business of health and growth by your own 
love and grace and protect and advance us all round in 
every performance of ours, yajna by yajna. 


यत्र वेत्थ॑ वनस्पते देवानां गुह्या ना्मानि। 
तत्र हव्यानि गामय ।॥ ९०॥ 

10. Yatra vettha vanaspate devanam guhya namani. 
Tatra havyani gamaya. 


Lord of sun rays and master of vegetation and 
forests, wherever you know are the secret abodes of the 
divine powers of nature and their names and definitions, 
there guide our yajna to reach for knowledge and further 
development. 


स्वाहाग्रये वरुणाय स्वाहेन्द्राय मरुदयं: | 
स्वाहां देवेभ्यो! हविः ॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


278 RGVEDA 


11. Svahagnaye varunaya svahendraya marud- 
bhyah. Svaha devebhyo havih. 


Let there be right words of description and exact 
definition for Agni, light and fire energy. Let there be 
right words of knowledge and choice for Varuna, right 
values and judgement. Let there be right actions for 
Indra, power, energy, honour and excellence for the 
Maruts, the people. Let there be honour and holy care 
for the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity. 
Let there be right materials as inputs for the holy 
scientific yajna of development and growth in gratitude 
to nature and the Lord Divine. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 6 
Agni Devata, Vasushruta Atreya Rshi 


at तं म॑न्ये यो वसुरस्तं यं यन्ति ara: | अस्तमर्वन्त 
sistas स्तं निर्त्यासो वाजिन इषं स्तोतृभ्य आ ATU ९॥ 


1. Agnim tam manye yo vasurastam yam yanti 
dhenavah. Astamarvanta asavo’stam nityaso 
vajina isam stotrbhya a bhara. 


Agni is that power and presence of energy, I 
believe, which pervades everything and in which and 
by which all things abide and function. The cows abide 
in it, move by it and end up into it. Horses abide in it, 
move by it and end into it. So do all fast moving streams 
and objects, permanent forms, and all forms of energy 
move by it and retire into it. O scholar of Agni, universal 
energy, produce and bring up food and energy for the 
celebrants and supplicants for Agni. This energy is 
originally set in motion by Agni, the Cosmic omnipotent 
Spirit. (In the mantra agni is described as astam, 1.6. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 6 279 
set into motion.) 


सो strat वसुं्गुणे सं यमायन्ति aa: । समर्व॑न्तो Taga: 
सं सुंजातासंः सूरय इषं स्तोतृभ्य आ ATU २॥ 


2. So agniryo vasurgrne sam yamayanti dhenavah. 
Samarvanto raghudruvah sam sujatasah suraya 
isam stotrbhya a bhara. 


That is Agni which is the abiding power, 
pervasive and moving force, and that is what I study 
and celebrate. The cows and horses, stars and planets 
and the rays of light, and sound and word come from, 
move by and go unto it, from which and into which and 
by which the slow moving ones move and function; 
and by which and toward which brave and eminent 
scholars rise to fame and create and produce the wealth 
of food and energy for the celebrants and supplicants. 


अभिर्हिं वाजिनं fast ददाति विश्वचर्षणिः | अम्र राये 
स्वाभुवं स प्रीतो याति वार्यपिषं स्तोतृभ्य आ ATU 3 


ey Agnirhi vajinam vise dadati visvacarsanih. Agni 
raye svabhuvam sa prito yati varyamisam stotr- 
bhya a bhara. 


Agni, light and energy of existence, alone 
provides fast modes of transport for the people. Studied 
and developed for wealth, Agni provides automatic and 
self-sustaining energy for the people. O scholar scientist, 
create and bring choice foods and energies for the 
celebrants and supplicants. 


आ ते अग्र इधीमहि द्युमन्तं देवाजर॑म्‌। यद्ध स्या ते पनीयसी 
समिदीदय॑ति द्वीषं स्तोतृभ्य आ ATU YU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


280 RGVEDA 


4. A te agna idhimahi dyumantam devajaram. 
Yaddha sya te paniyast samiddidayati dyavisam 
stotrbhya a bhara. 


Let us kindle you, light and fire of life, generous 
divinity, refulgent and unaging so that the wonderfully 
admirable light of your blaze shines in heaven and you 
bring food and energy for the celebrants. 


आ त अग्र ऋचा हविः शुक्रस्य शोचिषस्पते। सुश्चन्द्र 
दस्म fasda हव्य॑वाट्‌ तुभ्यं हूयत इषं स्तोतृभ्य आ 
TUM 


5: A te agna rca havih sukrasya socisaspate. 
Suscandra dasma vispate havyavat tubhyam 
hutaya isam stotrbhya a bhara. 


Agni, light of life, lord of power, purity and 
splendour, golden beautiful, generous, sustainer of the 
people and carrier of fragrant oblations across the 
spaces, fragrant offers are made to you with the chant 
of holy verses in praise of your identity, attributes and 
functions. Generous creative power, create and bring 
food and energy for the celebrants. 


प्रो त्ये अग्रयोऽ fry विश्वं पुष्यन्ति aria ते हिन्विरे त 
इन्विरे त इषण्यन्त्यानुषगिषं स्तोतृभ्य आ भ॑र ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pro tye agnayo’gnisu viSvam pusyanti varyam. 
Te hinvire ta invire ta isanyantyanusag-isam- 
stotrbhya a bhara. 


Those radiations of your energy into other forms 
of energies feed, invigorate and develop the wealth and 
growth of life in existence. They inspire, impel and 
collect, they expel, expand and organise, and thus they 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 6 281 


animate the circuitous dynamics of centripetal and 
centrifugal forces in systemic unison of the universe. O 
living power, create and bring food and energy for the 
celebrants. 


तव त्ये अगे अर्चयो महिं व्राधन्त वाजिन॑ः। ये पत्व॑भिः 
शफानां व्रजा भुरन्त गोनामिषं स्तोतृभ्य आ भ॑र ॥ ७॥ 


१ Tava tye agne arcayo mahi vradhanta vajinah. 
Ye patvabhih saphanam vraja bhuranta gonam- 
isam stotrbhya a bhara. 


Agni, O mighty power of the universe, those 
mighty radiations of your flames of energy feed and 
animate all objects into motion in space and they, with 
the radiating waves of your power, energise, expand 
and hold in poise the orbits of motions for the stars, 
planets and the galaxies. O mighty power, create and 
hold the food and energy of life and bless the celebrants. 


wat नो अग्र आ भ॑र स्तोत॒भ्य॑ः सुक्षितीरिष॑ः। तेस्यामय 
आनूचुस्त्वादूतासो दमेदम इषं स्तोतृभ्य आ भ॑र॥ ८ ॥ 


ne Nava no agna ठ bhara stotrbhyah suksitirisah. 
Te syama ya anrcus-tvadutaso damedama isam 
stotrbhya a bhara. 


Agni, mighty power and light of knowledge, 
bring us new forms of food and energy and give us new 
revelations of blissful earths and stars in existence. And 
we pray, may we, who worship and celebrate you, be 
your messengers in every home. O lord, bring us the 
food and energy of life and light of knowledge ever 
new for us, your celebrants and supplicants. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


282 RGVEDA 


उभे सुश्चन्द्र सर्पिषो दर्वी श्रीणीष strat । उतो न उत्पुपूर्या 
उक्थेषु शवसस्पत इषं स्तोत॒भ्य आ भ॑र ॥ ९॥ 


9. Ubhe suscandra sarpriso darvi Srinisa asani. Uto 
na ut papurya ukthesu Savasaspata isam stotrbhya 
a bhara. 


Agni, mighty lord of golden glory in form, 
creator and wielder of universal energy, you catalyse 
two ladlefuls of liquid fuel in your crucible for impulsion 
and expulsion in cosmic metabolism. Thus, O lord, fulfil 
us too in holy tasks of yajna and create and bring food 
and energy for the celebrants. 


Tat अथिम॑जुर्यमुर्गीरभियज्ञिभिरानुषक्‌ । दध॑दस्मे सुवीर्यमुत 
त्यदाश्वश्व्यमिषं स्तोतृभ्य आ ATU ९०॥ 

10. Evan agnim-ajur-yamur-girbhir-yajnebhir- 
anusak. Dadhadasme suviryamuta tyadasvas- 
vyamisam stotrbhya a bhara. 

Thus do the celebrants and supplicants 
positively dedicated to Agni study and apply natural 
energy for practical purposes by holy speech and yajnic 
structures of research and experimentation, so that agni 
may hold and bring us lustrous strength and dynamic 
energy of electric speed and success. 


O lord of power and energy, create and bring 
food and energy for the celebrants. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 7 
Agni Devata, Isha Atreya Rshi 


सखायः सं व॑: सम्यञ्चमिषं स्तोमं चाग्रये। वर्षिष्ठाय 
श्चितीनामूजो नप्त्रे सह॑स्वते ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 7 283 


im Sakhayah sam vah samyancamisam stomam 
cagnaye. Varsisthaya ksitinamurjo naptre saha- 
svate. 


O friends, all your food and energy well 
collected and all your song of description and 
celebration is for Agni and is dedicated to Agni, lord 
giver of light and energy, highest of the powers and 
abodes in the universe, power manifest in divine 
manifestations of energy and the power omnipotent 
over all. 


कुत्रा चिद्यस्य समूंतौ र॒ण्वा नरो नृषदने | 
अर्हन्तश्चिद्यमिनधते संजनय॑न्ति जन्तवः ॥ २॥ 


2; Kutra cidyasya samrtau ranva naro nrsadane. 
Arhantascidyamindhate samjanayanti jantavah. 


Where is that Agni on whose revelation and 
arrival in the home-steads of humanity, people, the best 
and highest of them, rejoice? which scholars and sages 
light and raise? and which even the least of living beings 
generate? 


सं यदिषो वर्नामहे सं ger मानुषाणाम्‌ । 
उत द्युम्नस्य शव॑स ऋतस्य र॒श्मिमा द॑दे ॥ ३॥ 


3 Sam yadiso vanamahe sam havya manusanam. 
Uta dyumnasya savasa ratasya rasmima dade. 


When we join together and pray for foods and 
energy forms, and the oblations of holy materials into 
the fire for the good of humanity rise in fragrance, then 
Agni with its power takes over the reins of rain showers 
and abundance of wealth and well being. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


284 RGVEDA 


स स्मा कृणोति केतुमा नक्तं चिद्‌ दूर आ सते। 
पावको यद्नस्पतीन्प्र स्मा पिनात्यजरः: ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sa sma krnoti ketuma naktam ciddura @ sate. 
Pavako yad-vanaspatin pra sma minatyajarah. 
He, the power unaging, pure and purifying, gives 
signals of his light and guidance even for those who are 


far away when he leaves behind the night and rides the 
waves of light over the tops of trees. 


अवं स्म यस्य वेष॑णे स्वेदं पथिषु weia 
siding स्वजेन्यं भूर्म पृष्ठेव रुरुहुः ॥५॥ 


9 Ava sma yasya vesane svedam pathisu juhvati. 
Abhimaha svajenyam bhuma prstheva ruruhuh. 


On whose rise, as the sun’s, and in whose service 
people shed the sweat of their brow in pursuit of the 
paths of life, to that Agni and the sun, the entire people 
of the earth look up and rise as children rise on the back 
of the parent. 


यं मर्त्यः पुरुस्पृहं विदद्धिश्व॑स्य aaa 
प्र स्वाद॑नं पितुनामस्तंतातिं चिदायवे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yam martyah purusprham vidadvisvasya dha- 
yase. Pra svadanam pitunam-astatatim cidayave. 


For the service of Agni, unaging sustainer of 
the world, let mortal man know and attain to Agni, 
favourite love of all, because Agni is supreme among 
the pleasures of life and Agni is the ultimate home of 
living beings, in fact, of everything in existence. 


a fe war धन्वाक्षितं दाता न दात्या पशुः। 
हिरिश्मश्रुः शुचिंदन्नु भुरनिंभृष्टतविषिः॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 7 285 


7. Sa hi sma dhanvaksitam data na datya pasuh. 
Hirismasruh sucidannrbhuranibhrstatavisih. 


Like a generous man with a golden beard and 
pure white teeth, Agni, wise and expert with his forces 
intact, his effulgence undiminished, watches all and, 
like a liberal giver, gives to the dedicated supplicant a 
dwelling in the skies. 


शुचिः ष्म went siren vateldita Fae । 
Saas माता क्राणा aatast भग॑म्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sucih sma yasma atrivat pra svadhitiva riyate. 
Susurasuta mata krana yadanase bhagam. 


For him, 1.e., the supplicant yajaka, the man free 
from threefold suffering of body, mind and soul, Agni, 
bright and pure, releases the honour and splendour of 
life like currents of thunder power, which mother nature 
spontaneously generates for him and which flows to 
him incessantly. 


आ aed सर्पिरासुतेऽ ग्रे शमस्ति aaa 
Uy द्युम्नमुत श्रव आ चित्तं मर्त्येषु धाः ॥ ९॥ 


2 A yaste sarpirasute’gne Samasti dhayase. 
Aisu dyumnam-uta Srava a cittam martyesu dhah. 


Agni, lord of light, giver of peace and power, 
when the ghrta has been offered into the fire and the 
flames arise, then let there be a shower of peace for the 
bearer of oblations, your gift for the yajaka. O lord, bear 
and bring wealth of honour and excellence, food and 
energy, and a noble mind with wisdom and vision and 
vest the same in these dedicated people. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


286 RGVEDA 


इतिं चिन्मन्युमधिजस्त्वादांतमा पशं द॑ दे । आदये अपुंण- 
aS: सासह्यादस्युनिषः GEIL ९०॥ 


10. Iti cinmanyum-adhrijas-tvadatama pasum dade. 
Adagne aprnato’trih sasahyad-dasyun-isah 
sasahyan-nrn. 


This is the song of praise and prayer, O lord, 
Agni, giver of light, peace and power. Born among the 
dedicated aspirants, I accept the gift of peace and 
passion, power and property and cattle wealth. Let man 
be Atri, free from threefold suffering of body, mind and 
soul. Let man challenge the ungenerous and fight out 
the impending dangers, human as well as natural, and 
hold on to noble men and aspirations. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 8 
Agni Devata, Isha Atreya Rshi 


त्वामंग्र ऋतायवः समीधिरे प्रलं प्रलास॑ ऊतये सहस्कृत । 
पुरुश्चन्द्रं य॑जतं विश्वधायसं ade गृहप॑तिं वरेण्यम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


I; Tvamagne rtayavah samidhire pratnam pratnasa 
utaye sahaskrta. PuruScandram yajatam visva- 
dhayasam damuanasam grhapatim varenyam. 


You, light of the world, life of life, Agni, the 
lovers of Truth and universal law dedicated to yajna 
since time immemorial kindle and install in the home 
for protection and progress: Agni, ancient and eternal 
born of omnipotence, golden glorious, worthy of 
reverence, sustainer of the universe, self-controlled and 
abiding in divine law, head of human family, chosen 
and worthy of choice. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 8 287 


(Swami Dayananda applies this hymn by 
implication and extension to home life and the homely 
fire yajna, of which the head and yajamana is the married 
couple. Agni, further, may be interpreted as the head of 
a State and of the world government elected and anointed 
by common consent.) 


त्वामग्रे अतिंधिं get विश॑ः शोचिष्केशं गृहप॑तिं नि षेदिरे । 
बृहत्केतुं पुरुरूपं धनस्पृतं सुशमी णं स्वव॑सं जर द्विष॑म्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Tvamagne atithim purvyam visah Ssociskesam 
grhapatim ni sedire. Brhatketum pururupam 
dhanasprtam susarmanam svavasam jaradvisam. 


Agni, light of life, people have enshrined and 
consecrated you in their heart and home: Agni, a 
welcome guest on the rounds, ancient presence with 
flames of fire for locks of hair, master of the home, high 
beacon of light, pervasive in all forms of the world, 
creator, lover and giver of wealth, neatly settled in 
homes, commanding noble and sure modes of protection 
and progress, pure, cleansed and free from hate and 
poisonous enmity. 


त्वामग्रे मानुंषीरीव्छते विशो होत्राविदं विविचिं रल्नधात॑ंमम्‌। 
गुहा सन्तं सुभग विषूवदंर्णतं तुविष्वणसं सुयजं घुत- 
fara ३॥ ति 

Si Tvamagne manusirilate viso hotravidam vivicim 
ratnadhatamam. Guha santam subhaga visva- 
darsatam tuvisvanasam suyajam ghrtasriyam. 


Agni, human communities all adore you 
enshrined in the heart, knower of the yajakas and the 
delicacies of yajna, discriminator between right and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


288 RGVEDA 


wrong, positive and negative, good and evil, highest 
treasurehold of the jewels of wealth, gracious and 
glorious with honour and excellence, light of the 
universe, loud and bold in universal service, directly 
accessible in yajna and rising in flames by ghrta. 


waren धर्णसिं विश्वधा वयं गीर्भिर्गृणन्तो नम॒सोप॑ सेदिम । 
स नो जुषस्व समिधानो अद्धिरो देवो मर्त॑स्य यशसा 
सुदीतिभिः nw 


4. Tvamagne dharnasim visvadha vayam girbhir- 
grnanto namasopa sedima. Sa no jusasva sami- 
dhano angiro devo martasya yasasa suditibhih. 


Agni, lord of light and sustainer of the world, 
celebrating you in many ways with holy songs of praise 
and prayer, we sit by you with reverence, with offers of 
oblations in the holy fire. O lord Angira, pervasive in 
every particle of the universe, bright and generous, 
kindled and rising in flames by the mortals’ offers of 
havi, be gracious, accept our homage and bless us with 
honour and excellence in life. 


त्वमग्रे पुरुरूपो विशोविशो वयो दधासि प्रलथां पुरुष्टुत । 
पुरूण्यन्ना सह॑सा वि राजसि त्विषिः सा ते तित्विषाणस्य 
नाधृषे ॥। ५॥ 
>: Tvamagne pururupo visevise vayo dadhasi pra- 
tnatha purustuta. Purunyanna sahasa vi rajasi 
tvisih sa te titvisanasya nadhrse. 
Agni, pervading in all the many forms of 
existence, praised and celebrated by all since time 


immemorial, you bear and bring abundant food and 
health and life for every individual and every 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 8 289 


community. You shine with might and splendour, and 
that splendour of yours, glorious one, no one dare 
challenge. 


wards समिधानं य॑विष्ठ्य देवा दूतं च॑क्रिरे हव्यवाहनम्‌ | 
उरुज्रय॑सं geal raed त्वेषं चक्ुर्दधिरे चोदयन्मति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tvamagne samidhanam yavisthya deva dutam 
cakrire havyavahanam. Urujrayasam ghrtayo- 
nimahutam tvesam caksurdadhire codayanmati. 


Agni, ever youngest, unaging power of 
existence, kindled and shining in flames, bright and 
generous sages and scholars among humanity and 
divinities of nature make you the carrier and 
disseminator of fragrant energies of life and health, and 
install and enshrine you in the vedi, ghrta fed, wide 
expansive, brilliant, watchful and inspirer of 
intelligence, ever invoked and invited. 


Taran प्रदिव sted घृतैः सुंम्नायव॑ः सुषमिधा समीधिरे | 
सर्वावृधान ओष॑धीभिरुक्चितो ३ऽ भि जरयांसि पार्थिवा वि 
तिष्ठसे ॥ ७॥ 


a Tvamagne pradiva ahutam ghrtaih sumnayavah 
susamidha samidhire. Sa vavrdhana osadhi- 
bhiruksito’bhi jrayamsi parthiva vi tisthase. 


Agni, light of life invoked and received from 
the revelations of heaven, enlightened people in pursuit 
of self-realisation enkindle and raise you in the vedi 
with fuel and ghrta of the holiest kind. They light you 
in the heart with the fuel of their sense and mind and 
self-awareness. And you, rising with the fuel and 
sprinkled with ghrta, ever abide expansive in all their 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


290 RGVEDA 


business of earthly existence. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 9 
Agni Devata, Gaya Atreya Rshi 


त्वाम॑ग हविष्पन्तो देवं मतीस gad 
मन्ये त्वा जातवेदसं स हव्या वंक्ष्यानुषक््‌ ॥ ९॥ 
ss Tvamagne havismanto devam martasa ilate. 


Manye tva jatavedasam sa havya vaksyanusak. 


You, O fire divine, mortals bearing havis with 
reverence in homage, honour, celebrate and worship, 
and I meditate on your presence in omniscience to pray: 
Radiate the holy light and fragrance all round and let it 
come to me also, generous one. 


sifretat दास्व॑तः क्षय॑स्य वृक्तबर्हिषः | 
सं यज्ञासश्चर॑स्ति यं सं amie: श्रवस्यवः ॥ २॥ 

De Agnirhota dasvatah ksayasya vrktabarhisah. Sam 
yajnasascaranti yam sam vajasah $ravasyavah. 


Agni is the high-priest of Nature’s abundance 
for humanity, blessing the house of the liberal devotee 
ready to kindle the holy fire, since all nutriments, 
energies and all yajnic gifts of Divinity coexist and work 
with Agni. 
उत स्प यं शिशुं यथा नवं जनिंष्टारणीं। 
धतं मानुषीणां विशापयिं स्व॑ध्व॒रम्‌ ॥ 3 uu 

तः Uta sma yam sisum yatha navam janistarani. 
Dhartaram manusinam visamagnim svadhvaram. 

And just as two arani woods produce the fire, 
and just as mother and father beget and nurse a new 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 9 291 


born baby, so do we kindle, raise and serve the holy fire 
of yajna and worship the lord of life, sustainer of human 
communities and high-priest of cosmic yajna. 


उत स्म॑ दुर्गुभीयसे पुत्रो न erator 
पुरू यो दग्धासि ast पशुर्न यव॑से ॥ i 


4. Uta sma durgrbhiyase putro na hvaryanam. 
Puru yo dagdhasi vana’gne pasurna yavase. 


You who burn up vast forests and devour grasses 
like a hungry animal are a product of tortuous waves of 
energy, too tempestuous and too difficult to grab. 


अधं स्म सस्यार्चयंः सम्यक्संयन्ति eft: । यदीमह त्रितो 
दिव्युप ध्मातेव ध्म॑ति शिशीते ध्मातरी यथा ॥ ५ ॥ 


a Adha sma yasyarcayah samyaksamyanti dhumi- 
nah. Yadimaha trito divyupa dhmateva dhamati 
sisite dhmatari yatha. 


Fire whose flames mixed together with smoke 
rise up and shine when the yajaka or the yogi, thrice 
excelling others in body, mind and soul, lights up the 
fire, refines, intensifies and raises the flames close to 
and into the heights of heaven just like a smelter blowing 
and intensifying the fire with the blower. 


तवाहमंग्र ऊतिभिर्मित्रस्य॑ च प्रशस्तिभिः। 
दवेषोयुतो न दुरिता तुर्याम मत्यौनाम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tavahamagna utibhirmitrasya ca praSsastibhih. 
Dvesoyuto na durita turyama martyanam. 


O light and fire of life, Agni, may we, with your 
protections and friendly exhortations, cross over the sins 
and weaknesses of mortal humanity as we overcome 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


292 RGVEDA 
the hate and enmity of the wicked. 


a नो अगे अभी नरों रयिं संहस्व आ भ॑र। स क्षेपयत्स 
पोषयद्धुवद्वाज॑स्य सातय॑ उतैधि पृत्सु नो वृधे ॥ ७॥ 


7. Tam no agne abhi naro rayim sahasva a bhara. 
Sa ksepayat sa posayad bhuvadvajasya sataya 
utaidhi prtsu no vrdhe. 


O lord of patience and power, Agni, create the 
right leaders among us. Bless us with the wealth of life. 
Inspire and move us to act. Come, be with us for the 
achievement of food, energy and prosperity. Help us 
win and make progress in our battles of life. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 10 
Agni Devata, Gaya Atreya Rshi 


अग्र ओजिष्ठमा भ॑र द्युम्नमस्मभ्य॑मच्िगो | 

wal wen परीणसा रत्सि वाजाय पन्थाम्‌ ९॥ 
ls Agna ojisthama bhara dyumnamasmabhya- 

madhrigo. Pra no raya parinasa ratsi vajaya pan- 

tham 

Agni, irresistible power of motion and 

advancement for the aspirants, bring us the most brilliant 
honour and excellence of life. Bless us with abundant 
wealth, open the path of progress and guide us on the 
way. 

त्वं नो अग्ने orga क्रत्वा cater deat 

त्वे अंसुर्यमारुहत््राणा मित्रो न यज्ञियं: ॥ २॥ 


2 Tvam no agne adbhuta kratva daksasya manhana. 
Tve asuryamaruhat krana mitro na yajniyah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 10 293 


Agni, unique unrivalled power of the world, help 
us advance by yajnic action and the greatness of our 
experts. The man rising in divine strength and 
intelligence and acting in your service is adorable for us. 


त्वं नो अग्र एषां गयं पुष्टं च॑ वर्धय । 
ये स्तोमेभिः प्र सूरयो नरो मघान्यानशुः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Tvam no agna esam gayam pustim ca vardhaya. 
Ye stomebhih pra surayo naro maghanyanasuh. 


For us, Agni, lord of light and knowledge, 
increase and exalt the health and home of these, men of 
vision and splendour, sages, scholars, teachers, leaders 
and all, bright and brave who, with songs of praise and 
prayer, have come to attain the honour and excellence 
of existence. 


ये अग्ने चन्द्र ते गिर॑ः शुम्भन्त्यश्व॑राधसः । शुष्मेभिः शुष्मिणो 
नरो दिवश्चिद्येषां बृहत्सुकीतिंर्बोधंति त्मना ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ye agne candra te girah sumbhantyasvaradhasah. 
Susmebhih susmino naro divascidyesam brhatsu- 
kirtirbodhati tmana. 


Agni, lord of beauty, majesty and ecstasy, the 
words of your voice, potent and pregnant with sense 
and power, shine and reverberate all round in space with 
the message of action and achievement at the fastest, 
the wise expansive vibrancy of which, a shower from 
heaven, by itself, awakens and inspires the leading 
people of imagination with flames of fire. 


तव त्ये AY अर्चयो भ्राज॑न्तो यन्ति धृष्णुया | 
परिंज्मानो न feed: स्वानो रथो न वाजयुः ॥ ५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


294 RGVEDA 


3: Tava tye agne arcayo bhrajanto yanti dhrsnuya. 
Parijmano na vidyutah svano ratho na vajayuh. 


Agni, those flames of your light and fire, bright 
and blazing, go round with might and majesty like 
cosmic waves of lightning energy commanding the 
kingdom of the world, as if by a roaring chariot leading 
to victory. 


नूनों अग्र aad स॒बाध॑सश्च Uda | अस्माकासश्च सूरयो 
विश्वा आ्ास्तरीषणिं ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Niu no agna utaye sabadhasasca rataye. 
Asmakasasca surayo visva asastarisani. 


And now Agni, for our protection and progress 
and for the relief and advancement bound in limitations, 
come so that all our leaders, bright and bold, may cross 
over all the bounds in all the directions of space. 


त्वं नं अग्ने अद्धिरः स्तुतः स्तवान आ भ॑र । होतर्विभ्वासहं 
रयिं स्तोतृभ्यः स्तव॑से च न उतैधि पृत्सु नो वृधे ॥ ७॥ 


7. Tvam no agne angirah stutah stavana a bhara. 
Hotarvibhvasaham rayim stotrbhyah stavase ca 
na utaidhi prtsu no vrdhe. 


Agni, light of the world, dear as breath of life, 
generous sage and scholarly yajaka, liberal giver, praised 
by devotees and approving and praising the celebrants, 
bring us wealth for the devotees and the worshipper 
good enough to challenge the mighty, and come for us 
so that we may win the battles of life and grow higher 
and higher. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 11 295 


Mandala 5/Sukta 11 
Agni Devata, Sutambhara Atreya Rshi 


जनस्य गोपा अजनिष्ट जागविर भिः सुदश्च॑ः सुविताय नव्य॑से | 
घृतप्रतीको बृहता दिविस्पृशा द्युमद्वि भाति भरतेभ्यः 
शुचिः wen 


i. Janasya gopa ajanista jagrviragnih sudaksah 
suvitaya navyase. Ghrtapratiko brhata divisprsa 
dyumadvi bhati bharatebhyah Ssucih. 


Agni, fire energy, friend and protector of man, 
ever awake, versatile power, it arises for the latest good 
of humanity. Feeding and rising on the fuel of ghrta, 
shining pure and magnificent with heat and light 
touching the skies, it shines and gives light for those 
who feed and keep the fire burning. 


यज्ञस्य॑ केतुं Wert पुरो्हिंतमगिं नर॑स्तरिषधस्थे समीधिरे । 
इन्द्रेण देवैः सरथं स बर्हिषि सीदन्नि होता यजथाय 
सुक्रतुः ॥ २॥ 

2. Yajnasya ketum prathamam purohitamagnim 
narastrisadhasthe samidhire. Indrena devaih 
saratham sa barhisi sidanni hota yajathaya 
sukrutah. 


Agni 15 the leader, mark of the science of yajna, 
first highpriest in the process, which the leading lights 
among people kindle and establish in three stages of 
life in three departments of the acquisition of 
knowledge, observance of Dharma and performance of 
karma, in three regions of earth, sky and the solar sphere. 
And Agni takes the prime seat on the grass on the vedi 
with Indra, power, devas, divine givers of nature, as it 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


296 RGVEDA 


comes with its chariot which carries it with fragrance 
to all regions. It is the sanctifier for yajnic initiation, 
conduct and congregation, and it is the very light, beauty 
and grace of the holy project. 


असंमृष्टो जायसे मात्रोः शुचिंर्मन्द्रः कविरुदतिष्ठो विवस्व॑तः। 
घृतेन॑ त्वावर्धयन्नग्न आहुत धूमस्ते केतुरंभवदिवि शितः ॥ ३ ॥ 


sf Asammrsto jayase matroh sucirmandrah kaviru- 
datistho vivasvatah. Ghrtena tvavardhayannagna 
ahuta dhumaste keturabhavad-divi Sritah. 


Agni, born of parents natural, unadorned and 
free, pure and radiant, charming, with the gift of being 
the leading light rising from the sun, when you are 
invoked and invited, people raise and advance you with 
oblations of ghrta and then your light and fragrance as 
the flag of your majesty rises to the regions of the sun. 


अभिर्नो aga aq साधुयाऽभिं नरो वि भरन्ते eye 
अगिर्दूतो अभवन्दव्यवाहनोऽ भिं वृणाना dura कवि- 
क्रतुम्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. Agnirno yajnamupa vetu sadhuya ’gnim naro vi 
bharante grhegrhe. Agnirduto abhavaddha- 
vyavahano’gnim vrnana vrnate kavikratum. 


May Agni come straight to our yajnic actions of 
social value. Leading and enlightened people light and 
raise Agni in every home. Agni is the disseminator of 
the fragrance of yajna over lands and spaces. Intelligent 
people of holy action take to Agni, the power that effects 
creative actions of the enlightened for social good. 


(Swami Dayananda interprets agni in the sense 
of the enlightened leading heights of society who help 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 11 297 


people to do good to the community. Agni is thus not 
only the divine fire but also the leader, teacher and the 
preacher.) 


तुभ्येदमंगरे wera वचस्तुभ्यं मनीषा saded शं हृदे । 
त्वां गिरः सिन्धुमिवावनीर्महीरा dura शव॑सा वर्धय॑न्ति 
च।॥५॥ 


Tubhyedamagne madhumattamam vacastu- 
bhyam manisa iyamastu sam hrde. Tvam girah 
sindu-mivavanirmahira prnanti Savasa vardha- 
yanti ca. 


Agni, this sweetest song of honour and adoration 
is presented to you. The holy sentiment and prayer is 
addressed to you in praise of your holiness and peace at 
heart. The great holy voices protect, promote and fulfil 
you and make you stronger with power just as great 
rivers flow and add to the depth and power of the sea. 


त्वामग्रे अङ्धिरसो गुहां हितमन्व॑विन्दज्छिश्चियाणं वनेवने | 
स जायसे मथ्यमानः सहो महत्त्वामा।हुः weaeqa- 


मद्धरिः ॥ £ ॥ 


6. Tvamagne angiraso guha hitam-anvavindan- 
chisriyanam vanevane. Sa jayase mathyamanah 
saho mahat tvamahuh sahasasputram-angirah. 


Angira, life breath of the universe, light and fire 
of the world, Agni, pervading every forest, every ray of 
light and every living being, holy yajakas dedicated to 
you as to the breath of life awaken and realise you 
through meditation in the cave of the heart when you 
are hidden as a mysterious flame, and you, stirred 
through contemplation, concentrated and enkindled, rise 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


298 RGVEDA 


as a great power of light and victory. Rightly they call 
you manifestation of the omnipotent. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 12 
Agni Devata, Sutambhara Atreya Rshi 


wa बहते यज्ञियाय ऋतस्य वृष्णे असुराय =a | 
घृतं न यज्ञ आस्ये ३ सुपूतं गिरं भरे वृषभाय प्रतीचीम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


i; Pragnaye brhate yajniydaya rtasya vrsne asuraya 
manma. Ghrtam na yajna asye suputam giram 
bhare vrsabhaya praticim. 


As in yajna, we bear and bring and offer 
oblations of ghrta into the vedi, so do I compose and 
bring the language of inner consciousness purified in 
meditation and offer it in honour of Agni, great, adorable 
in yajna, giver of the showers of water and the light of 
truth, life breath of the world, inspirer of thought, and 
generous giver of strength and power. 


ऋतं चिकित्व ऋतमिच्चिकिब्दयृतस्य धारा अनु, तृन्धि 
पूर्वीः। नाहं यातुं सह॑सा न द्वयेन ऋतं स॑पाम्यरुषस्य 
वृष्णः ॥ २॥ 


2. Rtam cikitva rtamiccikiddhyrtasya dhara anu 
trndhi purvih. Naham yatum sahasa na dvayena 
rtam sapamyarusasya vrsnah. 


Agni, light of the world, you know the law and 
dynamics of world order. Know the truth and sincerity 
of our yajna and worship, and release the showers of 
eternal light of truth and open the doors of nature’s 
generosity. I follow the generous and brilliant lord’s path 
of truth and rectitude but not by violence nor with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 12 299 
duplicity. I follow the path of honesty and sincerity. 


कयां नो अग्र ऋतय॑न्ृतेन धुवो नवेदा उचथंस्य नव्यं: | 
वेदा मे देव ऋतुपा ऋतूनां नाहं पतिं सनितुर्‌ स्य रायः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Kaya no agna rtayannrtena bhuvo naveda ucatha- 
sya navyah. Veda me deva rtupa rtunam-naham 
patim saniturasya rayah. 


For what reason, Agni, you being the latest 
scholar and observer of the laws of truth by the laws of 
truth, would you not know of the earth and of our songs 
of adoration? Lord protector and observer of the laws 
and cycle of the seasons, generous and brilliant, give 
me the knowledge. I do not well know the lord giver 
and protector of the wealth of life. 


के ते अग्ने रिपवे बन्धनासः के urea: सनिषन्त ead: | 
के धासिमंगरे अनुंतस्य पान्ति क आसतो वच॑सः सन्ति 
गोपाः॥ ४॥ 


4. Ke te agne ripave bandhanasah ke payavah 
sanisanta dyumantah. Ke dhasimagne anrtasya 
panti ka asato vacasah santi gopah. 


Agni, ruler of humanity, what are your 
injunctions and prohibitions of law and order to deal 
with the opposite forces? Who are the guards and what 
are the safeguards? Who are your allies? Who the 
leading lights? Who preserve and maintain food supplies 
and food resources? Who are the people and what the 
elements that shelter falsehood? What are the safeguards 
against false and malicious words and reports? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


300 RGVEDA 


सरवायस्ते विषणा अग्र एते शिवासः सन्तो अशिवा 
अभूवन्‌। अधृंर्षत स्वयमेते वचोंभिऋजूयते वृजिनानि 
ब्रुवन्तः ॥ ५ ॥ 


2; Sakhayaste visuna agna ete Sivasah santo asiva 
abhuvan. Adhursata svayamete vacobhir-rjuyate 
vrjinani bruvantah. 


Agni, bright ruler, those friends and allies of 
yours, wide spread and intelligent, who were favourable 
earlier but have become unfavourable and negative later 
would of themselves be destroyed, all these, by their 
own words, speaking crooked things to simple people 
of rectitude. See they are eliminated. 


यस्तं अग्ने नम॑सा यज्ञमीट ऋतं स पात्यरुषस्य aeot: | 
तस्य क्षयं: पृथुरा साधुरेतु प्रसस्त्रीणस्य नहुषस्य शोषं: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yaste agne namasa yajnamitta rtam sa patyarusa- 
sya vrsnah. Tasya ksayah prthura sadhuretu 
prasarsranasya nahusasya Sesah. 


O brilliant ruler, Agni, whoever the man with 
reverence and holy oblations in yajna serves your yajna 
of the social order, he protects and promotes the rule of 
truth and rectitude, the rule of the generous, brilliant 
and non-violent ruler. May his house as the house of 
the ruler go on rising high and higher, from good to 
better, the house of the progressive man on sound 
foundations of economic surplus and all round security. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 13 301 


Mandala 5/Sukta 13 
Agni Devata, Sutambhara Atreya Rshi 


अर्च॑न्तस्त्वा हवामहेऽ चन्तः ससिंधीमदहि। 
अग्ने अर्चन्त ऊतयें।॥ ९॥ 


I. Arcantastva havamahe’rcantah samidhimahi. 
Agne arcanta utaye. 


Agni, light of life, brilliant ruler, reverend 
teacher and scholar, singing hymns of adoration we 
invoke you. Singing songs of joy we enkindle and 
celebrate you. With homage and reverence, we come 
and pray for protection, light and advancement. 


अगः स्तोमं मनामहे सिध्रमद्य दिविस्पृशः 1 
देवस्यं द्रविणस्यवः ॥ २॥ 


2. Agneh stomam manamahe sidhramadya divispr- 
Sah. devasya dravinasyavh. 


With desire for the creation and achievement of 
the wealth and power of brilliant Agni, we study and 
concentrate on fire energy in focus and structure a joyous 
song of success in praise of the rich and generous power 
touching the lights of heaven and for sure that would 
make the achievement possible. 


अभिर्जुषत नो गिरो होता यो ar ae । 
स dered जन॑म्‌ ॥ ३॥ 


3. Agnirjusata no giro hota yo manusesva. 
Sa yaksad-daivyam janam. 


May Agni, life and light and fire of the world, 
yajaka, creator and giver of wealth among the people, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


302 RGVEDA 


hear and accept our prayer, come and join the brilliant 
creative geniuses and bless us with wealth. 


wana सप्रथा असि जुष्टो होता वरण्यः। 
त्वया यज्ञं वि त॑न्वते ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvamagne sapratha asi justo hota varenyah. 
Tvaya yajnam vi tanvate. 


Agni, you are all pervasive, loving and 
integrative, creator and giver, cherished and venerable 
leader for choice. By you is the yajna of life and the 
yajna of the social order enacted and extended. 


त्वामग्रे वाजसातमं विप्रा वर्धन्ति सुष्ट॑तम्‌। 
सनो रास्व सुवीर्यम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

= Tvamagne vajasatamam vipra vardhanti sustu- 
tam. Sa no rasva suviryam. 
Agni, praised and celebrated power, creator 
giver of food and energy and winner of victories, 
intelligent people serve, develop and raise you to the 
heights. May Agni give us valour, virility and honour. 
अगन नेमिर रोडंव cated परिभूरसि । 
आ राध॑श्चित्रमुंञ्जसे॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Agne nemiraran iva devanstvam paribhurasi. 
A radhas-citram-rnjase. 


Agni, just as the felly of a wheel holds and 
surrounds the spokes of the wheel, you hold and reign 
over the brilliancies and divinities of nature and 
humanity, and you create and refine all the wonderful 
varieties of the world’s wealth for us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 14 303 


Mandala 5/Sukta 14 
Agni Devata, Sutambhara Atreya Rshi 


sit स्तोमेन बोधय समिधानो अमर्त्यम्‌ । 
हव्या देवेषु नो दधत्‌॥ ९॥ 


i. Agnim stomena bodhaya samidhano amatryam. 
Havya devesu no dadhat. 


Light the immortal holy fire, physical, mental 
and spiritual, with a celebrative song of its attributes 
and qualities. Refulgent, it bears the wealth of life in 
nature’s variations, carries the fragrance of oblations to 
these divinities and brings us the gifts of divinity to 
bless the nobilities of humanity. 


तम॑ध्वरेष्वींव्छते देवं मर्ता sei यजिष्ठं arte sa 2 


2. Tamadhvaresvilate devam marta amartyam. 
Yajistham manuse jane. 


That refulgent immortal divine fire bearing rich 
gifts, loved and most loving among the human 
community, the mortals light, serve and worship in 
creative, productive and holiest projects of yajna, love 
and non-violence in the service of the Lord and 
humanity. 


तं हि शश्व॑न्त॒ ईव॑ते स्तुचा देवं घुं तश्चुतां | अभिं हव्याय 
वोठ्न्टवे।॥ ३॥ 


Si Tam hi Sasvanta ilate sruca devam ghrtascuta. 
Agnim havyaya volhave. 
Agni, that divine refulgent generous power, the 


humans, immortal souls, with ladles dripping with ghrta, 
sprinkle, serve and worship so that it may carry their 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


304 RGVEDA 


offerings across the spaces and bring them the sweets 

of yajna. 
अभिर्जातो strad घ्नन्दस्यूञ्ज्योतिंषा तम॑: 
अविन्दद्‌ गा अपः स्व॑ः ॥ ४॥ 

4. Agnirjato arocata ghnan dasyunjyotisa tamah. 
Avindadga apah svah. 

Agni, lighted, raised and manifesting, rises 
radiant and, destroying the negativities, dispelling the 
darkness and driving away the wicked with its blazing 
light, reaches over the earth and rays of the sun, waters 


in the middle regions of the skies and touches the lights 
of heaven. 


अभरिमीव्छेन्यं कविं gags सपर्यत | 
वेतु मे शुणवन्दव॑म्‌॥ ५॥ 

= Agnimilenyam kavim ghrtaprstham saparyata. 
Vetu me srnavaddhavam. 
Serve, develop, honour and worship Agni, 
adorable, poetic visionary of omniscience, shining 
bright on ghrta and rooted in fertility. May Agni hear 
and accept my invocation and prayer and come to bless 
my yajnic business of life. 
at ger वावृधुः स्तोमेंभिर्विंश्वचंर्षणिम्‌। 
स्वाधीभिर्वचस्युभिंः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Agnim ghrtena vavrdhuh stomebhir-visvacar- 
sanim. Svadhibhir-vacasyubhih. 


The devotees light, raise and exalt Agni, light 
of life, ever wakeful watcher of the world, with songs 
of adoration, deeply meditative and highly eloquent, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 15 305 


created by realised souls with words of Divinity in the 
state of samadhi. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 15 
Agni Devata, Dharuna Angirasa Rshi 


प्र वेधसे कवये वेद्याय गिरं भरे aera geata । घृतप्र॑सत्तो 
असुरः सुशोवो रायो धर्ता धरुणो वस्वो अभिः ॥ ९॥ 


i. Pra vedhase kavaye vedyaya giram bhare yasase 
purvyaya. Ghrtaprasatto asurah susevo rayo 
dharta dharuno vasvo agnih. 


I bear and offer words of adoration in honour 
of Agni, omniscient presence, visionary creator, glorious 
and eternal lord worth knowing. Pleased with the offer 
of ghrta and sincere devotion in yajna, Agni is the breath 
of life, gracious, giver and commander of the wealth of 
existence, sustainer of the universe and ultimate haven 
of the world. 


ऋतेन॑ ऋतं धरुणं धारयन्त Gare शाके प॑र॒मे व्योमन्‌। 
दिवो धर्मन्धरुणे Aga नृञ्जातैरजातां अभि ये AAT: ॥ २॥ 


2: Rtena rtam dharunam dharayanta yajnasya sake 
parame vyoman. Devo dharman dharune saduso 
nrnjatairajatan abhi ye nanaksuh. 


Those who know and realise the unborn eternals 
of existence by the forms and functioning of the 
manifested mutables, and sit by the leading lights 
abiding by the sustainer of the laws of heavenly stars, 
would know the mysteries and power of yajna in the 
highest heaven, abide by the sustainer of the laws of 
Rtam, and realise the Truth, observing the laws by 
themselves. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


306 RGVEDA 


अंहोयुव॑स्तन्व॑स्तन्वते वि वयो! मह दुष्टरं पूर्व्याय । स संवतो 
नव॑जातस्तुतुय्स्सिंहं न क्रुन्दमभितः aR ष्टुः 3 


Sy Anhoyuvas-tanvas-tanvate vi vayo mahad- 
dustaram purvyaya. Sa samvato navajatas- 
tuturyat sinham na kruddham-abhitah pari sthuh. 


Those who eliminate sin and perplexity grow 
inwardly in the self and offer incomparable gifts of 
austerities and meditation for the eternal power, Agni 
within. And he, the lordly power newly arisen in the 
soul, would, like a passionate lion, destroy the hostile 
powers prowling around. 


मातेव यद्धर॑से पप्रथानो जनंजनं धाय॑से चक्ष॑से च। 
वयोवयो जरसे यदर्धानः परि त्मना विषुंरूपो जिगासि ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Mateva yadbharase paprathano janamjanam 
dhayase caksase ca. Vayovayo jarase yaddadha- 
nah pari tmana visurupo Jigasi. 


Agni, rising and expansive, you bear and sustain 
every person like a mother, taking and giving food for 
nourishment and enlightenment. You go to everyone, 
shine as fire within for a new lease of life even for the 
weak, and in this way you glorify life, and by yourself 
go on self-revealing, taking on new and universal forms 
of life. 


वाजो नु ते शव॑सस्पात्वन्त॑मुरुं दोघं धरुणं देव Ua: | 
पदं न तायुर्गहा दधानो महो राये चितयन्नत्निंमस्पः ॥ ५ ॥ 


om Vajo nu te Savasas-patvantam-urum dogham 
dharunam deva rayah. Padam na tayurguha 
dadhano maho raye citayann-atrim-aspah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 16 307 


Agni, light of life, generous giver, may your 
omnipotence protect the strength and courage of 
humanity to the highest degree, our plenty and prosperity 
to the utmost bounds, and may you, we pray, protect 
the wealth of humanity like a guard holding his foot 
firmly down. And revealing the light of divinity in the 
cave of the heart, enlightening the devotee for great 
spiritual wealth, you bless all with the vision of Divinity. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 16 
Agni Devata, Puru Atreya Rshi 


बृहद्वयो हि भानवेऽ चौ caramel | 
यं मित्रं न प्रशस्तिभिर्मतौसो दधिरे पुरः ॥ ९॥ 


I; Brhadvayo hi bhanave’rca devayagnaye.Yam 
mitram na praSsastibhirmartaso dadhire purah. 


For heat and light, energy and power, and for 
vision and excellence in life, study, develop and revere 
that mighty inexhaustible Agni with vast and rich inputs, 
which like a friend, people have lighted and instituted 
as a prime and divine power with high praise and 
celebrations since the earliest times. 


a हि द्युथिर्जनानां होता दक्षस्य are: | 
वि हव्यमथिरानुषग्भगो न वास्मुण्वति॥ २॥ 

2. Sa hi dyubhir jananam hota daksasya bahvoh. 
Vi havyam-agniranusag-bhago na varamrnvati. 


With light and power, and with holy acts, Agni, 
highpriest of humanity, giver of the strength of arms, 
bears our inputs to the divinities of nature and, like a 
friend, brings us cherished gifts of nature and Divinity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


308 RGVEDA 


Agni makes the development and achievement possible 
like Bhaga, excellence incarnate. 


अस्य eae Te: सख्ये वृन्दशो चिषः। 
विश्वा यस्मिन्तुविष्वणि समर्ये शुष्प॑मादधुः ॥ ३ ॥ 


छ Asya stome maghonah sakhye vrddhaSsocisah. 
Visva yasmin tuvisvani samarye Ssusmamadadhuh. 


In the song and celebration of this mighty power 
of excellence, in the friendship of this lord of high light 
and majesty, in this roaring power and energy, in this 
noble master of wealth and all round prosperity, Agni, 
in which all mankind place their faith and trust, let us 
all abide, invest, preserve and develop our power and 
potential, and from this let us receive our strength and 
fragrance of life. 


अधा ay एषां सुवीर्यस्य मंहना । 
तपिद्याहवं न रोद॑सी परि श्रवो बभूवतुः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Adha hyagna esam suviryasya manhanda. 
Tamidyahvam na rodast pari sravo babhuvatuh. 


Agni, lord refulgent of power and glory, bless 
these heroes with the gifts of strength and noble valour. 
As the heaven and earth go round that mighty sun in 
orbit and homage, so do the honour and valour of life’s 
dynamics move round you. 


नून एहि ara गृणान आ भ॑र। ये वयं ये च॑ सूरय॑ः 
स्वस्ति धाम॑हे सचोतैधिं पृत्सु नो वृधे ॥ & 
2; Nina ehi varyamagne grnana a bhara. Ye vayam 


ye cha suryah svasti dhamahe sacotaidhi prtsu 
no vrdhe. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 17 309 


Agni, come and bless us now as ever, come 
roaring, rejoicing and joining our celebration, bring us 
the gifts we cherish. All of us here and all the brilliant 
brave wholly dedicated to you pray for peace and joy. 
Come as a friend, our own, promote and advance us in 
the battles of life’s dynamics. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 17 
Agni Devata, Puru Atreya Rshi 


आ aaa मर्त्य॑ इत्था तव्यांसमूतयें । 
ai कृते स्वध्वरे पूरूरीव्ठीताव॑से ॥९॥ 


il, A yajiairdeva martya ittha tavyamsamitaye. 
Agnim krte svadhvare pururilitavase. 


Come Agni, generous self-refulgent life of the 
world, the entire humanity thus, having organised holy 
projects of peace and non-violence, invokes and invites 
you, potent power, with yajnas for the sake of protection 
and advancement in knowledge, power and 
achievement. 


अस्य हि स्वय॑शस्तर आसा विंधर्मन्मन्य॑से। 
तं नाकं चित्रशणोचिषं मन्द्रं परो म॑नीषया।॥ २॥ 


2 Asya hi svayasastara asa vidharman manyase. 
Tam nakam citrasocisam mandram paro mani- 
saya. 


O man, honourable in your own right by your 
own virtue, dedicated to your particular duties of 
Dharma, with best of thought and mind, with your words 
of mouth, for sure, praise that Agni, bliss beyond 
suffering, wonderfully brilliant, charming and gracious, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


310 RGVEDA 
and supreme over all. 


अस्य वासा S अर्चिषा य आयुक्त तुजा ATT | 
दिवो न यस्य रेत॑सा बृहच्छोचंनत्यर्चय॑ः 13 


18 Asya vasa u arcisa ya ayukta tuja gira. 
Devo na yasya retasa brhacchocantyarcayah. 


O man, blest with the holy speech of communion 
and the divine light of this Agni, by whose energy- 
showers streams of adoration shine all round widely 
like rays of the sun, by that same holy light and divine 
speech destroy the want and suffering of existence. 


अस्य क्रत्वा विचेतसो दस्मस्य वसु रथ आ। 
अधा विश्वासु हव्योऽ भिर्विश्षु प्र श॑स्यते ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Asya kratva vicetaso dasmasya vasu ratha a. 
Adha visvasu havyo’ gnirviksu pra Sasyate. 


By the yajna and holy action of this brilliant 
generous power, creators of positives and destroyers of 
negatives, men of wisdom and discernment, achieve 
wealth and circulation of wealth by modes of transport 
and communication. And then Agni, venerable power 
for development, is valued and honoured among all 
human habitations. 


नू न she वार्य॑मासा स॑चन्त सूरयः | ऊर्जो नपादभिष्टये 
पाहि शग्धि स्वस्तयं उतैधि पृत्सु नो वृधे ॥ ५॥ 
> Nu na iddhi varyamasa sacanta sarayah. Urjo 


napadabhistaye pahi sagdhi svastaya utaidhi 
prtsu no vrdhe. 


Brave men of knowledge, wisdom and brilliance 
study, produce and bring us cherished gifts of Agni, fire 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 18 311 


and electricity, gifts of divinity, by word of mouth and 
steady application. Agni, O power of permanence, for 
all our good, protect and promote energy, be strong and 
strengthen us for all our good and well-being, and stand 
by us for our success and advancement in our battles of 
the business of life. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 18 
Agni Devata, Dvita Mrktavaha Atreya Rshi 


wreath: पुरुप्रियो fast: स्त॑वेतातिंधिः। 
विश्वानि यो srtcat हव्या मर्तेषु रण्य॑ति ॥ ९॥ 


| Prataragnih purupriyo visah stavetatithih. 
Visvani yo amartyo havya martesu ranyati. 


Let Agni, beloved of all people, freely roaming 
around as a visitor, be welcomed and honoured early 
morning, the immortal spirit and power which pervades, 
energises and beatifies all acts and things worth doing, 
giving and receiving among the mortals. 


fgara सूक्तवाहसे स्वस्य cater मंहना । 
इन्दुं स ध॑त्त आनुषक्स्तोता चित्ते अमर्त्यं ॥ २॥ 


2. Dvitaya mrktavahase svasya daksasya mam- 
hana. Indum sa dhatta anusak stotd citte amartya. 


Agni, immortal spirit and power, by virtue of 
the grandeur of your own potential bring light and 
sweetness, power and prosperity for dvita, dedicated 
celebrant twice born, educated and cultured, who loves 
free knowledge and bears the knowledge and power 
for your service only. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


312 RGVEDA 


dal दीघयुंशोचिषं गिरा ga मघोनाम्‌। 
अरिष्टो येषां रथो व्यश्वदावन्नीयते ui ३ ॥ 


Tam vo dirghayuSocisam gira huve maghonam. 
Aristo yesam ratho vyasvadavanniyate. 


O dedicated celebrants, for you with holy words 
of prayer I invoke Agni, harbinger of light and power, 
good health and long age, that presiding power of yajna, 
that welcome visitor. O lord giver of speed, power and 
progress, Agni, I pray for them whose chariot, blest with 
light, power and prosperity as they are, rolls on 
unchallenged. 


चित्रा वा येषु दीधिंतिरासन्चुक्था पान्ति ये। 
स्तीर्ण बर्हिः स्व॑णरि श्रवांसि दधिरे परिं॥ ४॥ 


4. Citra va yesu didhitirasannuktha panti ye. 
Stirnam barhih svarnare $ravamsi dadhire pari. 


Who are the holy visitors like Agni? Who are 
the dedicated celebrants and yajnic devotees of Agni? 
Those in whom the light of Divinity shines bright and 
various, who preserve and promote holy songs of 
dedication and pursue yajnic actions, and who spread 
holy grass on the vedi, propagate knowledge, and bear 
and offer holy materials in yajnic projects of love and 
non-violence among people for the sake of peace and 
ultimate freedom of salvation. 


ये मे पञ्चाशतं ददुरश्वानां सधस्तुति । द्युमदं गरे महि stat 
sepia मघोनां नृवदमृत नृणाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
Ye me pancasatam dadurasanam sadhastuti. 


Dyumadagne mahi Sravo brhatkrdhi magho-nam 
nrvadamrta nrnam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 19 313 


Those who give me fifty modes of speed and 
progress in life alongwith their description and words 
of thanks to Divinity, for those men of power and 
excellence among the leaders of humanity, O lord of 
light and heavenly knowledge, Agni, spirit of 
immortality, just like a human friend and leader, create 
and bring honour and glory of vast and universal order. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 19 
Agni Devata, Vavri Atreya Rshi 
अभ्य॑वस्थाः प्रजायन्ते प्र aad त्रिण्चिंकेत। 
उपस्थे मातुर्विं च॑ष्टे ॥ ९॥ 


॥ Abhyavasthah pra jayante pra vavrervavrisciketa. 
Upasthe maturvi caste. 


For the man of attainment, adverse circum- 
stances do arise. Let the man in the real situation accept 
this eventuality. And then, let him be close to mother 
Divinity for light and rise to face it successfully. 


जुहुरे वि चितयन्तोऽ fae नुम्णं पान्ति। 
आ goat पुरं विविशुः ॥ २॥ 


2 Juhure vi citayanto’nimisam nrmnam panti. 
A drlham puram vivisuh. 


Those who challenge adverse circumstances and 
sit by Agni, light of Divinity, day and night without a 
wink of sleep, they enter the adamantine city celestial. 


आ शवैत्रेयस्य॑ जन्तवो द्युमहधर्धन्त Hea: | 
निष्कग्रीवो बृहदुक्थ एना मध्वा न वाजयुः ॥ ३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


314 RGVEDA 


Di A Svaitreyasya jantavo dyumadvardhanta 
krstayah. Niskgarivo brhaduktha ena madhva na 
vajayuh. 


Living beings of spatial waters, common men 
on earth, the man wearing a golden necklace, and the 
priest chanting loud hymns, loving and wanting food 
and energy sweet as honey, all grow by the energy of 
vital fire and, with holy chant and yajnic action, develop 
the light and power of brilliant Agni. 


प्रियं दुग्धे न काम्यमजांमि जाम्योः सचा | 
घर्मो न वाज॑जठ्रोऽ द॑ब्धः शश्व॑तो दभः uu 


4. Priyam dugdham na kamyam-ajami jamyoh saca. 
Gharmo na vajajatharo’dabdhah 5451410 dabhah. 


Friend and associate of heaven and earth, 
intrepidable, eternal, dynamic, like the vital fire of the 
body which assimilates all it receives for energy, I, living 
fire of existence, receive and assimilate all I love as 
delicious milk and remain unconquered. 


क्रीठ्छ॑न्नो रश्म आ भुवः सं भस्म॑ना वायुना वेविदानः 1 ता 
अस्य सन्धृषजो न तिग्माः सुसंशिता वक्ष्यो वक्षणेस्थाः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


5. Krilanno rasma व bhuvah sam bhasmana vayuna 
vevidanah. Ta asya sandhrsajo na tigmah 
susamsita vaksyo vaksanesthah. 


Agni, radiant as rays of the sun, sporting with 
the wind and self-declaring with heat and ash, come 
and be good to us, and so too may be those potent flames 
of yours, fierce, fiery, sharp and penetrating, fully 
collected and intensified in form in vehicles and batteries 
for transport and communication. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 20 315 


Mandala 5/Sukta 20 
Agni Devata, Prayaswantah Atreyah Rshis 


aa वाजसातम त्वं चिन्मन्यसे रयिम्‌। 
तं नो गीर्भिः श्रवाय्यं देवत्रा पनया युज॑म्‌ 8 


iF Yamagne vajasatama tvam cinmanyase rayim. 
Tam no girbhih Ssravayyam devatra panaya yujam. 


Agni, scholar of eminence, expert in matters of 
food, energy, success and victory in the affairs of life, 
whatever you think is the real wealth worthy to be heard 
of, acknowledged, and, accepted for application as 
friendly and companionable power, speak to us among 
the generous and illuminative divines in words of truth 
in faith with admiration. 


ये अग्ने नेरय॑न्ति ते वृन्दा उग्रस्य शव॑सः। 
अप द्वेषो अप हरो ऽ न्यत्र॑तस्य सश्चिरे ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ye agne nerayanti te vrddha ugrasya Savasah. 
Apa dveso apa hvaro’nyavratasya sascire. 


Agni, these senior dedicated devotees of yours, 
who take to the strength of your power and passion for 
truth, do not waver in their faith, they keep away from 
malice, crookedness, double dealing and tortuous 
behaviour. 


होतारं त्वा quitaes ग्रे दक्ष॑स्य साध॑नम्‌। 
यज्ञेषु पूर्व्यं गिरा प्रय॑स्वन्तो हवामहे ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Hotaram tva vrnimahe’ gne daksasya sadha-nam. 
Yajnesu purvyam gird praysvanto hava-mahe. 


Agni, we opt for dedication to you, original 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


316 RGVEDA 


yajaka, generous giver, agent and instrument of strength 
and success, and, creatively endeavouring in our yajnic 
programmes, we invoke and invite you with the holy 
voice of faith. 


इत्था यथा त ऊतये सह॑सावन्दिवेदिवे। राय ऋतायं सुक्रतो 
गोभिः ष्याम सधमादो! वीरैः स्याम सधमादः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ittha yatha ta utaye sahasavan divedive. Raya 
rtaya sukrato gobhih syama sadhamado viraih 
syama sadhamadah. 


O lord giver of strength and light of life, 
enlighten us so that we may, under your protection, 
advance on way to wealth and rectitude day by day, and 
by our words and voice be your companions and co- 
dwellers in the home, blest with brave children. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 21 
Agni Devata, Sasa Atreya Rshi 


मनुष्वत्त्वा नि धीमहि मनुष्वत्समिधीमहि | 
अग्रे मनुष्वदङ्धिरो देवान्देवयते aan ९॥ 


1 Manusvattva ni dhimahi manusvat-samidhi-mahi. 
Agne manusvadangiro devan-devayate yaja. 

Agni, light of life, like a living human presence 
we meditate on you. Like a living human power, we 
enkindle, serve and develop you. O breath of life, 
Angira, like a human power and sagely presence, inspire 
the brilliant and generous sages with the light of life for 
the sake of those who love the divinities. 


त्वं हि ae जनेऽ गे सुप्रीत sere 
स्तुच॑स्त्वा यन्त्यानुषक्सुजात सर्पिरासुते ॥ २ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 21 317 


2. Tvam hi manuse jane’gne suprita idhyase. 
Srucastva yantyanusak sujata sarpirasute. 


Agni, fire of life, loved and kindled, you shine 
and blaze in the human community. Excellent in form 
and beauty by birth and nature you are, and ladles full 
of ghrta move to you in love and faith and, on the 
oblations of ghrta, you rise and shine among humanity. 


त्वां विश्वे स॒जोष॑सो देवासो दूतमक्रत । 
स पर्यन्त॑स्त्वा कवे यज्ञेषुं दवमी! क्ते ॥ ३ ॥ 


Tvam 177517८ sajosaso devaso dutamakrata. 
Saparyantastva kave yajnesu devamilate. 


All the divine powers of nature and all brilliant 
sages of humanity in one accord, with love and 
reverence for you, install you as the conductor and 
carrier of their yajna forward. Serving you, O visionary 
of poetic excellence, they honour and worship you as a 
divine power in their yajnas of creative and corporate 
projects. 


देवं वों देवयज्यया ऽयिमींव्ठीत wed’: 1 afte: शुक्र 
degre योनिमासंदः ससस्य योनिमासदः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Devam vo devayajyaya’gnimilita martyah. 
Samiddhah sukra didihyrtasya yonimasadah 
sasasya yonimasadah. 


O sages and scholars, with your service in yajnas 
of love and non-violence in honour of the divinities of 
nature and noble humanity, man serves and worships 
the generous and radiant Agni. O radiant power and 
presence, Agni, pure and potent, lighted and raised to 
the full, shine on, illuminate the truth of existence and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


318 RGVEDA 


the flow of life from the particle onward and reveal the 
chain of cause and effect in the process of evolution. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 22 
Agni Devata, Vishvasama Atreya Rshi 


प्र विंङुवसामन्नत्निवदची पावकशोंचिषे। 
यो अध्वरेष्वीड्यो dat मन्द्रत॑मो विशि॥ ९॥ 


22. Pravisvasamannatrivadarca pavakasocise. 
Yo adhvaresvidyo hota mandratamo Visi. 


O vishvasaman, master of all world power and 
property, songs of praise and prayer, peace and 
tranquillity, shine, illuminate, develop, honour and sing 
in celebration of Agni, blazing as fire, pure and potent 
power and presence of nature and humanity, yajaka, 
creator and giver, most enlightened and blissful among 
people, worthy of song and celebration in yajnic 
projects. Celebrate Agni like Atri, man of vast 
knowledge and freedom from suffering. 


Sit जातवेदसं दधाता देवमूत्विज॑म्‌। 
प्र यज्ञ एत्वानुषगद्या दे वव्य॑चस्तमः॥ २॥ 


2. Nyagnim jatavedasam dadhata devamrtvijam. 
Pra yajna etvanusagadya devavyacastamah. 


Hold on to Agni, meditate, worship the power 
omnipresent in things born, generous Divinity, cosmic 
yajaka in seasons of time, holiest friend and companion, 
haven and home of divinities such as earth and heaven, 
and ultimately the power that winds up the cosmic game. 
May that Power and Presence, most intimate, reveal 
Itself in the heart, the friend, the Self. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 23 319 


चिकित्विन्म॑नसं त्वा देवं adda ऊतये । 
वरेण्यस्य asada इयानासो। अमन्महि ३ ॥ 


Di Cikitvinmanasam tva devam martasa utaye. 
Varenyasya te’vasa ityanaso amanmahi. 


Agni, refulgent lord of life and giver of light, 
we mortals, approaching the generous lord of supreme 
intelligence worthy of choice for protection and 
enlightenment, meditate on your presence and pray for 
the favour of your grace. 


अग चिकिन्छ्य१¶ स्य न॑ इदं वच॑ः Geet तं त्वां सुशिप्र 
दम्पते स्तोगेर्वर्धन्त्यत्र॑यो गीर्भिः शुम्भन्त्यत्र॑यः॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Agne cikiddhyasya na idam vacah sahasya. Tam 
tva susipra dampate stomairvardhan-tyatrayo 
girbhih sumbhantyatrayah. 


Agni, giver of strength and courage, listen to 
this word of our prayer for light, protection and 
advancement. O lord of gracious visor and presiding 
power of the home and family, celebrants free from three 
kinds of suffering, of body, mind and soul, exalt you 
with songs of celebration, supplicants free from three 
kinds of passion, hate, anger and greed, adore you with 
words of worship. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 23 
Agni Devata, Dyumna Vishvacharshani Atreya Rshi 
अग्ने सर्ह॑न्तमा भ॑र gered प्रासहा र यिम्‌। 
विश्वा यश्चंर्षणीरभ्याडेसा वाजेषु ara ९॥ 


1. Agne sahantama bhara dyumnasya prasaha 
rayim. Visva yascarsanirabhya sa vajesu sasahat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


320 RGVEDA 


Agni, commander of honour, power and majesty, 
bring us that wealth of strength and courage of the 
conviction, honour and dignity most forbearing, 
challenging and victorious which may instantly face, 
fight and overthrow all the opposing forces against 
humanity in the battles of life. 


aan geared रयिं daca आ भ॑र । 
त्वं हि सत्यो oral दाता वाज॑स्य गोम॑तः ॥ २॥ 


2. Tamagne prtanadsaham rayim sahasva a bhara. 
Tvam hi satyo adbhuto data vajasya gomatah. 


Agni, commander of valour and power, 
forbearing, challenging and victorious, bring us that 
overwhelming wealth of fighting force and stability 
which may face and overthrow the opposing forces of 
the enemy. You are the pillar of truth indispensable, 
wonderful, generous giver of food, energy and 
endurance, wonderful and in possession of cows, lands 
and the right language of communication. 


विश्वे हि त्वां स॒जोष॑सो जनासो वृक्तबर्हिषः | 
होतारं सद्म॑सु प्रियं व्यन्ति वार्या पुरु ॥३॥ 

2: Visve hi tva sajosaso janaso vrktabarhisah. 
Hotaram sadmasu priyam vyanti varya puru. 


Agni, all people, all friendly and allied forces 
ready in arms for the call, come and make choice offers 
of things required, without reservation, to you, host and 
yajaka, dear most welcome in homes and seats of 
government. 


afew विश्वचर्षणिरभिमति सदो दधे । अग्र॑ एषु क्षयेष्वा 
रेवन्नः शुक्र दीदिहि द्युमत्पावक दीदिहि ॥ ४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 24 321 


4. Sa hi sma visvacarsanirabhimati 5८/10 dadhe. 
Agna esu ksayesva revannah sukra didihi dyumat 
pavaka didihi. 


Agni, that all watchful commander of the world 
brings us challenging strength and victorious force. 
Agni, light of life and ruler of the world, in these homes 
and places, shine, lord of wealth, shine for us, fire pure 
and light illuminating, shine in command of the wealth 
and honour of humanity. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 24 
Agni Devata, Bandhu, Subandhu, Shrutabandhu, 
Viprabandhu Gopayana or Laupayana Rshis 
अरे त्वं नो अन्त॑म उत त्राता शिवो भ॑वा वरूथ्यंः॥ ९॥ 
tl. Agne tvam no antama uta trata Sivo bhava 
varuthyah. 


Agni, lord of light, fire of life, you are our closest 
friend and saviour. Be good and gracious, the very spirit 
and security of the home for the inmates. 


वसुर भिर्वसुश्रवा अच्छा afer द्युमत्तमं रयिं दाः॥२॥ 
2. Vasuragnir-vasusrava accha naksi dyumatta- 
mam rayim dah. 


Agni, you are the home and shelter of the world. 
Pure and purifier, you create and give the food for life 
and energy, wealth and honour. Give us the food, energy 
and light of life. Come and pervade this home as the 
very spirit and security. 


स नो बोधि श्रुधी eager णो अघायतः संमस्मात्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


322 RGVEDA 


Di Sa no bodhi srudhi havamurusya no aghayatah 
samasmat. 


Such is Agni. May the lord awaken us, listen, 
enlighten us. Hear our prayer, save us from all sin. We 
want no sin. We love no sin and evil. 


तं त्वां शोचिष्ठ दीदिवः सुम्नायं नूनमीमहे सखिभ्यः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Tam tva Socistha didivah sumnaya nunamimahe 
sakhibhyah. 


Lord most pure and purifying, light of 
illumination, with all our friends, for sure, we pray to 
you for peace and life’s well being. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 25 
Agni Devata, Vasuyavah Atreya Rshis 


अच्छा वो अगरिमवंसे देवं गासि स नो aa: | 
Teas ऋषूणामुताव। पर्षति द्विषः॥ ९॥ 

il; Accha vo agnimavase devam gasi sa no vasuh. 
Rasat putra rsunamrtava parsati dvisah. 

Sing well of Agni, light of Divinity, with 
enthusiasm, for your protection and progress. He, spirit 
of truth and rectitude, who inspires the sages with the 
light of truth and life’s stability may, we pray, give us 
wealth and stability. Agni is a saviour as a son is, 


overcomes hate and enmity and takes us across the seas 
of life. 


स हि सत्यो oof चिदेवासंश्चिद्यमीधिरे । 
होतारं मन्द्रलिंहमित्सुंदीतिभिंरविंभाव॑सुम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 25 323 


2. Sa hi satyo yam purve cid devasascid yamidhire. 
Hotaram mandrajihvamit suditibhirvibhavasum. 


That alone is true, unquestionable and inviolable 
whom the seniors and brilliant sages kindle and install 
on the vedi, the leader and ruler, liberal giver and host 
of yajna, sweet and serious of tongue and commander 
of wealth and splendour by virtue of his innate light 
and flames of holy fire. 


(Swami Dayananda applies this mantra to the 
choice and investiture of a ruler.) 


सनो धीती aRear sear च सुमत्या। 
amt रायो दिदीहि नः सुवृक्तिभिंर्वरेण्य ॥ ३॥ 


2 Sano dhiti varisthaya sresthaya ca sumatya.A gne 
rayo didthi nah suvrktibhir-varenya. 


Agni, O lord of our love and choice, life of life, 
light of the world, give us the stability of mind and 
intelligence and, alongwith the highest, choicest and 
best thought and understanding, kindle and bring us 
splendid wealth with do’s and don’ts of holy teaching. 


stdagd राजत्यगिर्म्तिष्वाविरान्‌ । 
sth? हव्यवार्हनोऽ यिं धीभिः स॑पर्यत ।॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Agnirdevesu rajatyagnir-martesvavisan. 
Agnirno havyavahano’ gnim dhibhih saparyata. 
Agni, life of life, light of existence, revealing 
intelligence, natural energy, leading light, pervades, 
energises, inspires, shines, illuminates and enlightens 


as it is present in divinities such as earth, and nobilities 
such as scholars and sages, and vibrates in all mortals. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


324 RGVEDA 


O scholars and sages, serve, pursue, and develop Agni 
with the best of your intelligence and understanding. 


sirdfastaet तुविब्रंहयाणमसुत्तमम्‌। 
अतूर्त" ्रावयत्प॑तिं पुत्रं द॑दाति दाशुषे ॥ ५॥ 


5. Agnis-tuvisravastamam tuvibrahmanamuttamam. 
Aturtam sravayatpatim putram dadati dasuse. 


Agni, generous light of yajna, gives to a liberal 
yajaka and man of charity progeny fond of study and 
listening, abundant in food and wealth, widely read in 
sacred lore, most virtuous and invincible, who brings 
honour and glory to the parents. 


sifadarta सत्प॑तिं सासाह यो युधा नृभिः । 

shine रघुष्यदं जेतार मपराजितम्‌ ॥ ६॥ 
6. Agnirdadati satpatim sasaha yo yudha nrbhih. 

Agniratyam raghusyadam jetaramaparajitam. 

Agni, lord of light and ruler, gives us a leader, 

ruler, and progeny who protects and supports the good, 
who fights and wins over evil with arms and forces, 
and to this invincible victor he gives transport and 
communications of fastest efficiency. 

यद्वाहिष्ठं तदग्नये gede विभावसो | 

महिषीव त्वद्रयिस्त्वद्राजा उदीरते ॥ ७॥ 


i: Yad vahistham tadagnaye brhadarca vibhavaso. 
Mahisiva tvad rayistvad vaja udirate. 


The fastest transport, fastest communication, 
lightning adoration is for Agni, lord of light and power. 
Shine high and wide and intense, blazing power, and as 
all greatness and grandeur flows from you, so do all 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 26 325 
wealth, all energy and all victories flow from you. 


तवं द्युमन्तो' अर्चयो ग्रावेवोच्यते ged! 
उतो ते तन्यतुर्य'था स्वानो अर्तं त्मना दिवः ve ॥ 
8. Tava dyumanto arcayo gravevocyate brhat. 


Uto te tanyaturyatha svano arta tmana divah. 


Blazing are your flames of fire, radiant your rays 
of light. Your identity is proclaimed like rumble of the 
cloud, and your voice like thunder and lightning radiates 
from heavens by itself. 


एवां aft व॑सूयवंः सहसानं व॑वन्दिम । 
सनो विश्वा अति द्विषः पर्षन्नावेवं सुक्रतुः ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Evan agnim vasuyavah sahasanam vavandima. 


Sano visva ati dvisah parsannaveva sukratuh. 


Thus do we, aspiring for wealth and power, 
adore and celebrate you, lord of forbearance, challenge 
and victory. May Agni, omnipotent lord of holy action, 
save us and, like a boat over seas, help us cross over all 
hate and enmity of the world. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 26 
Agni Devata, Vasuyavah Atreya Rshis 
अग्ने पावक रोचिषा मन्द्रया देव reat 
am देवान्व॑क्चि afat ane ui 


॥. Agne pavaka rocisa mandraya deva jihvaya. 
A devan vaksi yaksi ca. 
Agni, light of Divinity, fire of life, generous and 
brilliant giver of knowledge and enlightenment, with a 
sweet and lustrous tongue, bright and blissful, you bear 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


326 RGVEDA 


and bring the divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity to the vedi and serve them from here with 
light and energy. 


तं त्वां घतस्नरवीमहे चित्र॑भानो cago 
देवों आ वीतये वह।। २॥ 

De Tam tva ghrtasnavimahe citrabhano svardrsam. 
Devan a vitaye vaha. 
Agni, pure and purifier, light of fire feeding on 
ghrta, showerer of life’s beauty and grace, shining with 
manifold lustre, indeed the very light and bliss of 
heaven, we pray: With a sweet and lustrous tongue of 
flame full of bliss, bring for us the nobilities and 
divinities of nature and humanity for a feast of pleasure 
and enlightenment and serve them with love and 
reverence. 
वीतिहोत्रं त्वा कवे द्युमन्तं समिंधीमहि। 
अग्रे बृहन्तमध्वरे ॥ ३॥ 

3; Vitihotram tva kave dyumantam samidhimahi. 
Agne brhantam-adhvare. 


Agni, creative visionary of the light of heaven, 
in our yajnic project of love and non-violence, we invoke 
and enkindle you, universally great, self-refulgent and 
giver of the gifts of peace and enlightenment. 


अग्ने विश्वेभिरा ग॑हि दवेभिंर्हव्यदांतये | 
होतारं त्वा वृणीमहे ।। ४ ॥ 


4. Agne visvebhira gahi devebhir-havyadataye. 
Hotaram tva vrnimahe. 


Agni, light and fire of yajna, spirit of creation 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 26 327 


and cooperation, come with all the divinities and 
nobilities of nature and humanity for the presentation 
of the fruits of yajnic creation. We elect and invite you 
as the presiding priest and the chief yajaka. 


यज॑मानाय सुन्वत आ सुवीर्य' वह। 
देवैरा स॑त्सि aera i ५॥ 


१ Yajamanaya sunvata agne suviryam vaha. 
Devaira satsi barhisi. 


Agni, giver of the prizes of yajna, come with 
the divinities, sit with the nobilities on the holy grass in 
the holy assembly, bearing noble vigour and splendour 
for the host of yajna who prepares and offers the pleasure 
and power of peace and excellence in the yajna and 
bless him and all. 


समिधानः संहस्त्रजिदग्रे ध्मीणि पुष्यसि । 
देवानां दूत उक्थ्यः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Samidhanah sahasrajidagne dharmani pusyasi. 


Devanam duta ukthyah. 


Agni, burning and blazing, winning a thousand 
forces over, you protect and promote the universal 
values of knowledge and practical conduct in 
cooperation. Surely you are the adorable harbinger of 
the bounties of God and nature for humanity. 


afi जातवेदसं होत्रवाहं यविंछ्यम्‌ । 
दर्धाता देवमृत्विजम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


ह Nyagnim jatavedasam hotravaham yavisthyam. 
Dadhata devam-rtvijam. 


Hold on to Agni, light and fire of life, pervasive 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


328 RGVEDA 


in all things in existence, bearer of yajna fragrance, most 
youthful energy, and divine yajaka of nature and 
humanity. 


प्र यज्ञ एत्वानुषगद्या देवव्य॑चस्तमः। 
स्तणीत बर्हिरासदे ॥। ८ ॥ 

8. Pra yajna etvanusagadya devavyacastamah. 
Strnita barhirasade. 

May the yajna, creative and fragrant activity of 
mankind and nature, spread around in due order and 
reach the bounds of divinities pervasive unto the ends 
of the expansive universe. Come ye devout performers, 


spread the holy grass for the yajnas and expansion of 
the fire and fragrance. 


एदं मरुतो अण्विना मित्रः सीदन्तु वरुणः। 
देवासः सर्व॑या fast eu 

9. Edam maruto asvina mitrah sidantu varunah. 
Devasah sarvaya viSa. 


May the Maruts, dynamic leaders, Ashvins, 
complementary powers like teachers and preachers, 
friends, Varuna, judges, and brilliant nobilities with all 
the people come, and sit on this vedi for yajna. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 27 


Agni and Indra-Agni Devata, Tryaruna Traivrshna, 
Trasadasyu, Paurukutsa, Ashva-medha Bharata, or Atri 
Bhauma Rshis 


अन॑स्वन्ता सत्प॑तिपमिहे मे गावा चेतिष्ठो असुरो मघोन॑ः। 
Fait अग्ने दशभिः सहस्तररवैश्वानर्‌ ज्य॑रुणणश्चिकेत ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 27 329 


I Anasvanta satpatirmamahe me gava cetistho 
asuro maghonah. Traivrsno agne dasabhih 
sahasrair-vaisvanara tryarunasciketa. 


Agni, life and leader of humanity, the Lord, 
protector and sustainer of the true and _ the good, giver 
of higher knowledge, mighty powerful and dear as 
breath of life, shower of bliss for and from the earth 
and heaven and the sky, commanding existence, 
omniscience and beatitude, has blest me with tens, 
hundreds and thousands of cows and transports. I honour 
and exalt the lord of all wealth and power and pray the 
lord may know my people and my gifted power and 
potential and protect the same. 


ara gran विंशतिं च गोनां हरी च युक्ता सुधुरा ददाति | 
वैश्वानर eal वावृधानोऽ ग्रे यच्छ त्य॑रुणाय शर्म ॥ २॥ 


2. Yo me Sata ca vimSatim ca gonam hari ca yukta 
sudhura dadati. Vaisvanara sustuto vavr- 
dhano’gne yaccha tryarundya Sarma. 


Agni, life and light pervasive in the world, leader 
of entire humanity, honoured, exalted and exalting in 
the universe, you give me teams of twenty and hundred 
cows and horses yoked to well structured and firmly 
balanced chariots, pray give a happy and comfortable 
home for the man aspiring for the truth, beauty and 
goodness of life. 


एवा ते अग्रे सुमतिं dart afasra नवमं त्रसद॑स्युः। यो 
मे गिर॑स्तुविजातस्यं पूवीर्युक्तेनाभि ज्य॑रूुणो गृणाति ut ३ ॥ 

3. Eva te agne sumatim cakano navisthaya navamam 
trasadasyuh. Yo me girastuvijatasya purviryukKte- 
nabhi tryaruno grnati. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


330 RGVEDA 


O lord of light and life, Agni, thus does 
Trasadasyu, the man terror for the wicked, aspiring for 
favour of your attention and kindness, Tryaruna, blest 
with physical health, mental insight and spiritual vision, 
with concentrative mind sings anew in praise of you, 
lord ever fresh and most youthful, who ‘for me 
(i.e. Trasadasyu, Tryaruna) reveal the ancient and eternal 
Word of omniscient awareness’. 


यो म इतिं प्रवोचत्यश्व॑मेधाय सूरये । 
दद॑दूचा सनिं यते दद॑न्मेधामुंतायते ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Yo ma iti pravocatyasvamedhaya suraye. 
Dadadrca sanim yate dadanmedhamrtayate. 


“Who for me reveals the ancient and eternal 
Word...”, whoever speaks thus in homage to Agni in 
the interest of the social order of the world and for 
advancement of the brave, enlightened people, to him, 
endeavouring with holy chant, may Agni give wealth, 
to him, aspiring for truth and rectitude, may the lord 
grant the light of divine intelligence. 


यस्य॑ मा परुषाः शातमुं्धर्षयंन्त्युक्चषण॑: । 
अश्वमेधस्य दानाः सो्माइव Sar: ॥ ५॥ 
5. Yasya ma parusah satamuddharsayantyu-ksanah. 
Asvamedhasya danah soma iva tryasirah. 
The loud and bold voices, creative acts and 
generous gifts of ‘ashvamedha’, national yajna in 
relation to threefold programmes for life, environment 


and energy, like a drink of soma, give me pleasure in a 
hundred ways. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 28 331 


इन्द्रासरी शतदान्नूयश्व॑मेधे सुवीर्यम्‌ | 
ast धारयतं बृहद्दिवि सूर्यमिवाजरंम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indragni Satadavnyasvamedhe suviryam. 
Ksatram dharayatam brhad divi suryamivajaram. 


May Indra and Agni, knowledge and power, 
force of law and enlightenment, generous and giving in 
a hundred ways, in this ashvamedha yajna, i.e., non- 
violent holy plan and programme of national 
development and governance, enact, uphold and sustain 
the social order as they hold the sun in the vast heaven. 
Unaging, ever young harbingers of honour and valour 
to the system, ever fresh they are. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 28 
Agni Devata, Vishvavara Atreyi Rshi 


समिंब्दो अग्रिर्दिवि शोचिर॑श्रत््रत्यङ्ङ्षसंमुर्विया वि atte | 
एति प्राची! विश्ववारा नमो'भिर्दवां gata हविषा 
घृताचीं ॥ ९॥ 


। Samiddho agnirdivi Socirasret pratyannusasa- 
murviya vi bhati. Eti practi visvavara namobhir- 
devan ilana havisa ghrtact. 


The fire of yajna, kindled and rising, reaches 
the light and energy in the solar sphere and, with its 
various and expansive lustre, extends to the dawn, and 
then the East. Vishvavara, laden with versatile food and 
energy for the world, activating nature’s bounties like a 
yajnic ladle full of ghrta, it illuminates and showers the 
world with gifts of Divinity at the end of the dewy night. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


332 RGVEDA 


समिध्यमानो अमृतस्य राजसि हविष्कृ ण्वन्तं सचसे 
स्वस्तये । विश्वं स ध॑त्ते द्रविणं यमिन्व॑स्यातिथ्यमगने नि चं 
धत्त SUT: ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Samidhyamano amrtasya rajasi haviskrnvantam 
sacase svastaye. Visvam sa dhatte dravinam 
yaminvasyatithyamagne ni ca dhatta it purah. 


Agni, O light and fire of life, kindled and raised 
in the vedi and in the mind, you rise and shine in the 
midst of immortality and abide with the supplicant 
yajaka as a friend for his life’s well being. Whoever 
you inspire, invigorate and, as a friend, take up under 
your care and protection, the person wins, holds and 
commands the world’s wealth in existence and, since 
then for all time, O light divine, he offers service with 
complete surrender in obedience to your will like 
hospitality in obligation to an honoured guest. 


अग्ने शर्धं महते सौभ॑गाय तव॑ द्युम्नान्युंत्तमानिं aed सं 
जास्पत्यं सुयममा कृणुष्व शत्रूयतामभि तिष्ठा महांसि ॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Agne sardha mahate saubhagaya tava dyumna- 
nyuttamani santu. Sam jaspatyam suyamama 
krnusva Satruyatamabhi tistha mahamsi. 


Agni, mighty power, may your highest gifts of 
wealth, honour and splendour be for great good fortune 
and well being in life. Make our homes full of conjugal 
bliss, well maintained with discipline and control. Help 
us face and fight out the greatest enemies in the conflicts 
of life. 


समिद्धस्य प्रम॑ंहसोऽग्रे बन्दे तव frat 
वृषभो द्युम्नवौ असि सम॑ध्वरेष्विंध्यसे ॥ ४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 28 333 


4. Samiddhasya pramahaso’ gne vande tava Sriyam. 
Vrsabho dyumnavan asi samadhvares-vidhyase. 


Agni, mighty ruling power of the world, burning 
bright and great, I honour and adore your wealth and 
splendour. Valorous and generous, prosperous and 
majestic, you shine glorious in the yajnic projects of 
the world. 


समिद्धो अग्र आहुत देवान्यक्षि स्वध्वर । 
त्वं हि ह॑व्यवाव्छसिं॥ ५॥ 


Samiddho agna ahuta devan yaksi svadhvara. 
Tvam hi havyavalasi. 


Agni, invoked, kindled and raised to the full in 
light and splendour, you honour and inspire the 
nobilities of humanity and feed and replenish the 
bounties of nature. O noble power of the yajnas of love 
and non-violence, you are the receiver and disseminator 
of our oblations and you are the harbinger of the gifts 
of nature’s bounties. 


आ जुहोता दुवस्यताऽयिं प्र॑यत्य॑ध्वरे । 
वृणीध्वं ह॑व्य॒वाह॑नम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A juhota duvasyata’ gnim prayatyadhvare. 
Vrnidhvam havyavahanam. 


O man, honour and serve Agni with offers of 
fragrant havi in creative and developmental programmes 
of love and non-violence in humanity. Select, elect and 
serve the light and fire of life, receiver of our oblations 
and giver of the gifts of life and nature. 


(Swami Dayananda interprets Agni as the fire 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


334 RGVEDA 


of yajna, as the scholar and teacher who gives 
knowledge, and as the ruler who receives, creates and 
distributes the wealth in the social order of humanity 
with love and without violence.) 


Mandala 5/Sukta 29 
Indra, Indra Ushana Devata, Gauriviti Shaktya Rshi 


त्य॑र्यमा मनुषो देवर्ताता त्री रोचना दिव्या धारयन्त । अर्चन्ति 
त्वा मरुत॑ः पूतद॑श्चास्त्वमेषामूषिरिन्द्रासि धीरः ॥ ९॥ 


is Tryaryama manuso devatdata tri rocana divya 
dharayanta. Arcanti tva marutah putadaksas- 
tvamesam-rsir-indrasi dhirah. 


Indra, lord of power and ruling power of the 
world, in the holy yajna of the social order, its 
governance and administration, those heroes of the 
speed of winds honour and serve you whose strength 
and expertise is pure and sanctified : men of judgement 
and discretion who are thrice blest with full knowledge, 
noble action and devotion to Divinity; men of brilliance 
who are self-established with health of body, mind and 
soul, familial joy and social commitment; and men who 
enjoy the favour and grace of Divinity. Indra, you are 
their seer, philosopher and guide, imperturbable, 
inviolable and unchallengeable. 


नु यदी" मरुतो मन्दसानमार्चच्निन्द्रं पपिवांसं qa | 
sida व्र॑पभि यदहिं हन्नपो यह्ीर॑सृजत्सर्तवा Ju २॥ 


2 Anu yadim maruto mandasanamarcannindram 
papivamsam sutasya. Adatta vajramabhi yadahim 
hannapo yahvirasrjat sarvata u. 

With dedication and loyalty, when the Maruts, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 29 335 


supportive heroes of the social order, serve and honour 
Indra, the ruler, happy and honourable, ruling and 
enjoying the state entrusted to him, then, just as the sun 
with thunder and lightning breaks up the clouds and 
releases the showers and mighty streams aflow, he too 
takes over the thunderbolt of law and power and, striking 
the serpentine demons of darkness and evil, sets the 
mighty streams of national energy to flow in showers 
and creative streams. 


उत Garon मरुतो मे अस्येन्द्रः सोम॑स्य सुषुतस्य पेयाः 1 
तद्धि हव्यं मनुषे गा अविन्ददहन्नहिं पपिवां इन्द्रो अस्य ॥ ३ ॥ 


Uta brahmano maruto me asyendrah somasya 
susutasya peyah. Taddhi havyam manuse ga 
avindad-ahann-ahim papivan indro asya. 


And may the Maruts, heroes of the winds, 
dedicated to Brahma and the Vedas and the ruling lord 
Indra, now drink of this soma of national honour and 
glory so well distilled by me. That honour and glory 
alone, dedicated to Divinity in yajna, for man can win 
cows and lands and holy wisdom, of which Indra alone 
is the guardian, having destroyed the forces of evil. 


आद्रोद॑सी वितरं वि ष्क भायत्संविव्यानज्चिंद्धियसे मृगं 
कः । जिगर्तिमिन्द्रो अपजर्गुराणः प्रति श्वसन्तमव दानवं 
हन्‌ ॥ ४॥ 

4. Ad rodasi vitaram vi skabhayat samvivyanascid 
bhiyase mrgam kah. Jigartim-indro apajargura- 
nah prati §vasantamava danavam han. 


And then Indra holds and firms up the earth and 
heaven separate and yet together pervading both with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


336 RGVEDA 


his presence and power just like separating a fear- 
stricken deer and a devouring tiger by the power of his 
presence and holding off the demon tiger snorting 
fiercely. 


(Compare the laws of gravitation separating and 
holding together in firm relationship two heavenly 
bodies according to their mass and distance under the 
presiding presence of the force of natural omnipotence.) 


अध क्रत्वा मघवन्तुभ्यं देवा अनु विश्वे अददुः सोमपेय॑म्‌। 
यत्सूर्य॑स्य हरितः पत॑न्तीः पुरः सतीरुप॑रा एत॑शो कः ॥ ५॥ 


> Adha kratva maghavan tubhyam deva anu visve 
adaduh somapeyam. Yat suryasya haritah 
patantth purah satirupara etase kah. 


And further, O lord of honour and power of 
omnipotence, all the divinities of nature and humanity 
offer you the drink of soma in response to your yajnic 
action of systemic integration and sustenance when the 
various rays of the sun radiating forward all round and 
nourishing life stop on the planet on your behest (to 
feed life and drink up the sweet juices of soma). 


नव सद॑स्य नवतिं च॑ भोगान्त्साकं वजरैण मघर्वां विवृश्चत्‌। 
अर्चन्तीन्द्रं मरुत॑ः सधस्थे Seo वच॑सा बाधत द्याम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nava yadasya navatim ca bhogantsakam vajrena 
maghava vivrscat. Arcantindram marutah 
sadhasthe traistubhena vacasa badhata dyam. 


When Indra with thunder and lightning destroys 
ninetynine serpentine strongholds of evil and darkness 
obstructing the light of Divinity in this world, then the 
Maruts, guardian forces of humanity on earth, honour 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 29 337 


and adore the omnipotent lord with trishtubha hymns 
of celebration. 


सरवा सख्ये अपचत्तूय॑मथिर स्य cheat महिषा त्री शतानि । 
त्री साकमिन्द्रो मनुषः सरांसि सुतं flag वृत्रहत्याय 
सोम॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


ye Sakha sakhye apacat tuyamagnirasya kratva 
mahisa tri Satani. Tri sakamindro manusah 
saramsi sutam pibad brtrahatyaya somam. 


Agni, a friend, for a friend, Indra, alongwith 
Indra and the holy action of Indra, the sun, in this world 
soon ripens the sap in three hundred fields and forests 
of man, and then Indra, great and generous, drinks up 
the soma in order to break the clouds of rain and let the 
rivers flow to fill three great lakes in three worlds of 
heaven, earth and sky. 


at यच्छता म॑हिषाणामघो मास्त्री सरांसि मघवां सोम्यार्पाः। 
कारं न विश्वे अहन्त देवा भरमिन्द्रय sels Hal ८ ॥ 

8. Tri yacchata mahisanamagho mastri saramsi 
maghava somyapah. Karam na visve ahvanta 
deva bharamindraya yadahim jaghana. 


Indra, inviolable lord, commanding honour, 
power and excellence, when you ripen and mature three 
hundred great fields and forests and create and protect 
three great lakes of soma, all the divinities of the world 
invoke Indra like a great hero and offer homage since 
he breaks the cloud of serpentine hoards of showers. 


उशना यत्सं हस्यै stad गृहमिन््र जूजुवानेभिरश्वैः | 
वन्वानो अत्र॑ सरथं ययाथ कुत्सेन sarang शुष्णम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


338 RGVEDA 


9. Usanad yat sahasyairayatam grhamindra 
jujuvanebhirasvaih. Vanvano atra saratham 
yayatha kutsena devairavanorha susnam. 


Indra, glorious ruler, when the man of light and 
passion and you both come home by chariot driven by 
swift and robust horses, then, again with love and desire 
for victory, pray go with the thunderbolt and the best of 
the brilliancies and defend the strength and honour of 
the nation. 


प्रान्यच्यक्रम॑वृहः सूर्यस्य कुत्सायान्यद्वरि वो यात॑वेऽकः । 
अनासो दस्यँरमृणो वधेन नि दुर्योण sttqureqa- 
aba: Neon 


10. Pranyaccakramavrhah  suryasya kustayanyad 
varivo yatave’kah. Anaso dasyunramrno vadhena 
ni duryona avrnan mrdhravacah. 


Extend the orbit of enlightenment for the 
thunderbolt. Clear the paths and areas for development, 
peace and freedom of movement. Eliminate the 
shameless, the wicked and the thieves with punishment, 
and stop the entry of the malicious, throw them in jail. 


स्तोमासस्त्वा गौरिंवीतेरवर्धन्नर॑न्धयो वैदथिनाय fag a | आ 
त्वामुजिश्वा सख्यायं चक्रे पच॑न्पक्तीरपिबः सोम॑- 
मस्य ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Stomasastva gauriviteravardhannarandhayo 
vaidathinaya piprum. A tvamrjisva sakhyaya 
cakre pacan paktirapibah somamasya. 


May the eulogies of the poetic lovers of song 
and their singers exalt you. Punish the man who exalts 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 29 339 


and raises the warring forces against you. Let the men 
of simple honest mind be keen to make friends with 
you. Maturing and completing the plans and 
programmes of the state, celebrate and enjoy the honour 
and splendour of the order. 


नवग्वासः सुतसोमास इन्द्रं दशग्वासो अभ्यंर्चन्त्यकैः । गव्यं 
चिदूर्वम॑पिधानंवन्तं तं feat: शशमाना अपं त्रन्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Navagvasah sutasomasa indram dasagvaso 
abhyarcantyarkaih. Gvyam cidurvamapidhana- 
vantam te cinnarah SaSamana apa vran. 


Men of new ideas treading new paths of 
knowledge and polity, men of controlled mind and 
senses, celebrants ready with distilled exhilarating soma, 
adore Indra with songs and presentations of homage 
and, celebrating him, the dedicated admirers, best of 
men and leaders, extol him revealing his vast but hidden 
virtues of divine knowledge. 


कथो नुते परि चराणि विद्वान्वीयी मघवन्या चकर्थ।या 
चो नु नव्यां कृणवः शविष्ठ Ue ता ते विदथेषु ब्रवाम ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Katho nu te pari carani vidvan virya maghavan 
ya cakartha. Ya co nu navya krnavah Ssavistha 
predu ta te vidathesu bravama. 


Indra, ruler of the world, mightiest hero 
commanding wealth, power, honour and excellence, 
sage and scholar, how shall we, in yajnic assemblies of 
the nation, fully describe, sing and celebrate your 
achievements and your potential, the exploits that you 
have done and those new ones you are sure to achieve 
henceforth ? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


340 RGVEDA 


एता विश्वां चकृवां इन्द्र भूर्यप॑रीतो जनुषा वीर्येण। या 
चिन्नु व॑चिन्कृणवों दधूृष्वान्न d वतां तविष्या अस्ति 
तस्याः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Eta visva cakrvan indra bhuryaparito janusa 
viryena. Ya cinnu vajrin krnavo dadhrsvan 
na te varta tavisya asti tasyah. 


All these many exploits of the world [from 
creation and sustenance to organisation, organisational 
elimination included], Indra, ruler and lord of power 
and excellence, which you have done and which you 
would do, unresisted and irresistible, by nature and 
nurture, by vigour and valour, O wielder of the 
thunderbolt, bold and terrific, no one can comprehend. 
There is none who can obstruct, hold or surpass those 
overwhelming powers and forces of yours. 


इन्द्र ब्रह्य feanton जुषस्व या ते शविष्ट नव्या अकर्म । 
aaa भद्रा सुकुता वसूयू रथं न धीर्‌: स्वपा अत- 
क्षम्‌॥ ९५॥ 


15. Indra brahma kriyamana jusasva ya te Savistha 
navya akarma. Vastreva bhadra sukrta vasuyu 
ratham na dhirah svapa ataksam. 


Indra, the holy chant and homage of gifts, 
newest and latest, being offered, graciously accept and 
cherish, which, for you, O lord most powerful, we have 
created. Like a beautiful dress of thought and devotion, 
I, a sincere artist in pursuit of life’s wealth and peace 
and a steadfast and skilful maker, have designed and 
created the song like a chariot. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 30 341 


Mandala 5/Sukta 30 
Indra, Indra and Rnanchaya Devata, Babhru Atreya Rshi 


क्वस्य वीरः को अंपश्यदिन्दरं सुखरं थमीय॑मानं हरिभ्याम्‌ | 
यो राया व्री सुतसोममिच्छन्तदोको गर्ता पुरुहूत 
ऊती।॥ ९॥ 


iP Kva sya virah ko apasyadindram sukharatha- 
miyamanam haribhyam. Yo raya vajri sutaso- 
mamicchan tadoko ganta puruhita uti. 


Where is that thunderous catalytic power? Who 
saw that Indra, harbinger of peace and comfort travelling 
like a pleasing chariot along the waves of attraction and 
repulsion which, laden with wealth and wielding the 
force of thunder moves on and, invoked and invited by 
many for protection and promotion, goes to the house 
of the host with desire for the taste of life’s pleasure? 


अवाचचक्षं पदमस्य सस्वरुग्रं निधातुरन्वायमिच्छन्‌। 
अपृंच्छमन्यां उत ते म॑ Sng RS नरो बुबुधाना SAHA ॥ २॥ 
2. Avacacaksam padamasya sasvarugram nidha- 


turanvayamicchan. Aprcchamanyan uta te ma 
ahurindram naro bubudhana asema. 


With the desire to pursue and achieve success, I 
have discovered and described the science of this mighty 
source of immanent energy. Let me consult and ask 
others too who would speak of Indra, the energy, to me. 
And the best of men and leading scholars among men, 
enlightened all, we would realise and achieve it in full. 


प्रनु वयं सुते या ते parts ब्र॑वाम यानि नो जुजोषः | 
वेददर्विंद्ाञ्छरणव॑च्च विद्वान्वहं तेऽ यं मघवा सर्व सेनः ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


342 RGVEDA 


3 Pra nu vayam sute ya te krtanidra bravama yani 
no jujosah. Vedadavidvanchrnavacca vidvan 
vahate’yam maghava sarvasenah. 


The knowledge acquired and energy created in 
practice, O scholar, Indra, let us speak of and proclaim 
your achievements which you share with us. Let those 
who don’t know hear and know of it too. This scholar 
who bears the knowledge and power is the mighty 
possessor of honour and excellence, and he commands 
all the power and the forces. 


स्थिरं मन॑श्चकृषे जात ईन्द्र वेषीदेको युधये भूय॑सश्चित्‌। 
अश्मानं चिच्छवंसा दिद्युतो वि विदो गर्वामूर्वमुस्तरिया- 
णाम्‌॥ ४॥ 


4. Sthiram manascakrse jata indra vesideko yudhaye 
bhuyasascit. Asmanam cicchavasa didyuto vi vido 
gavamurvamusriyanam. 


Indra, commander of light, knowledge and 
power, rising, you firm and resolve the mind to stability 
and constancy. In battle, you alone, by yourself, 
overcome many. You illuminate the cloud and the 
firmament and break the mountain with your power and 
force, and you recover and reveal the vastness of earth, 
the sun rays, the wisdom of knowledge and the ocean 
fire enshrined in words. 


परो यत्त्वं dra आजनिष्ठाः परावति श्रुत्यं नाम fava 
अतंख्चिदिन्द्रदभयन्त देवा विश्वां अपो अंजयदास- 
प॑लीः॥ ५५ ॥ 

2: Paro yat tvam parama ajanisthah paravati 
srutyam nama bibhrat. Atascidindradabha-yanta 
deva visva apo ajayad dasapatnih. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 30 343 


When you, highest and best power, arise and 
manifest, bearing great name and high renown in far 
off regions, and win over and release the waters 
concealed in the cloud, since then all the forces of nature 
accept the power of Indra and obey the divine law. 


तुभ्येदेते मरुत॑ः Esra अर्चन्त्यर्कं सुन्वन्त्यन्ध॑ः। atfe- 
मोहानमप आशयानं प्र मायाभिर्मायिनं सश्चदिन्द्रः॥ ६॥ 


6. Tubhyedete marutah suseva arcantyarkam 
sunvantyandhah. Ahimohanamapa asayanam 
pra mayabhirmayinam saksadindrah. 


Vibrant heroes and these yajakas in obedient 
service offer you songs of adoration, prepare the food 
and distil the soma for you, Indra. And with his 
wondrous forces, Indra engages the crafty cloud holding 
the waters by his deceptive wiles and sleeping like a 
giant in apparent security. 


fa षू मृधों जनुषा दानमिन्वन्नहन्गवां मघवन्त्संचकानः। 
अत्रा दासस्य Aa: शिरो यदवंर्तयो मन॑वे गातु- 
मिच्छन्‌॥ ७॥ 


ds Vi su mrdho janusa danaminvannahan gava 
maghavantsamcakanah. Atra dasasya namuceh 
Siro yadavartayo manave gatumicchan. 


Indra, commander of honour and valour, ruling 
lord of excellence, from your very emergence thirsting 
for battle, breaking the cloud with the roar of thunder 
and lightning, energising and winning prizes for 
humanity with the desire to make way for progress, you 
arise here and now and break the stronghold of the dark 
cloud locking up the waters of rain showers. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


344 RGVEDA 


युजं हि amar आदिदिन्द्र शिरो दासस्य नमुंचेर्म- 
थायन्‌। अश्मानं चित्स्वर्य वर्त॑मानं प्र चक्रियेव रोद॑सी 
Weed: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yujam hi mamakrtha adidindra Siro dasasya 
namucermathayan. ASmanam cit svaryam 
vartamanam pra cakriyeva rodast marudbhyah. 


Make me your friend and instrument since you 
break the top of the cloud, replete with vapours but 
resistant to release the rain, hold the firmament 
wheeling, circling and resounding, and divide space into 
earth and heaven and make them turn round and round 
like wheels for the winds to blow in the firmament and 
the humans to live on the earth. 


fern हि दास आयुधानि चक्रे किं मां axaaer ster 
सेनाः | अन्तर््यख्य॑दुभे अस्य धने अथोप Weert दस्यु- 
सिन्द्र॑ः॥ ९॥ 


a. Striyo hi dasa ayudhani cakre kim ma karanna- 
bala asya senah. Antarhyakhyadubhe asya dhene 
athopa praid yudhaye sasyumindrah. 


Dasa, enemy of an inferior order, uses women 
as secret weapons and warriors. But what can these poor 
forces do against me (in violation of my discretion]. 
Let the ruler, Indra, see deep into both the language and 
warriors [of this enemy, the open policy and the secret 
tactics), and then advance upon the slavish enemy to 
engage him in battle. 


समत्र गावोऽ भितोऽनवन्तेहेहं वत्सैर्वियुंता ware St ता 
इन्द्रो असजदस्य शाकैर्यदीं सोमासः सुषुता अम॑न्दन्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 30 345 


10. Samatra gavo’bhito’navanteheha vatsairviyuta 
yadasan. Sam ta indro asrjadasya sakairyadim 
somasah susuta amandan. 


If the cows exult in unison with calves 
everywhere, if the sunrays play together on the herbs, 
if the lands smile with greenery and the earth rejoices 
with her children, and then, suppose the cows were 
separated from the calves, the rays of the sun were 
intercepted from the herbs, the lands were locked off 
from greenery, the earth were bereft of her children, 
then must Indra, brilliant ruler of the earth and the skies, 
should join the mothers and children with his might so 
that the soma drinks distilled may gladden him and his 
ruling order. 


यदीं सोमा बश्वुधुता अमन्दन्नरोरवीद्‌ वृषभः साद॑नेषु । 
पुरन्दरः uftat इन्द्रो अस्य पुनगंवामददादुस्तरिया- 
णाम्‌॥ ९९१॥ 


11. Yadim soma babhrudhuta amandannaroravid 
vrsabhah sadanesu. Purandarah papivan indro 
asya punargavamadadadusriyanam. 


When the somas, honours and pleasures of the 
earth, created, distilled and energised by the sagely 
scholars and people of yajnic creativity, exhilarate Indra, 
the ruler and his order, then the generous and valorous 
lord roars in the assemblies and in the homesteads and 
he, breaker of the enemy strongholds, having drunk of 
the honour and glory of the nation, again gives to the 
nation fertile lands, cows, open sunlight and words of 
holy speech. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


346 RGVEDA 


भद्रमिदं रुशर्मां अगे अक्रन्गवां चत्वारि दद॑तः सहस्रा । 
ऋणंचयस्य प्रय॑ता मघानि प्रत्यग्रभीष्प नृत॑मस्य 
नृणाम्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Bhadramidam rusama agne akran-gavam catvari 
dadatah sahasra. Rnamcayasya prayata magha- 
nipratyagrabhisma nrtamasya nrnam. 


Agni, refulgent ruler, it is a great blessing of 
Indra, the sun, giver of four thousand rays of light, 
wealth of existence, and destroyers of negativities, 
which he collects from nature, and gives us. He is the 
best leader and guide of humanity, and with gratitude 
and best efforts we should acknowledge and benefit 
from these gifts of energy and power. 


guste माव॑ सृजन्त्यस्तं गवां USA रुशमासो अग्ने । तीव्रा 
इन्द्र॑मममन्दुः TATA SHIPS परितक्म्यायाः ॥ ९३॥ 


[6 Supesasam mava srjantyastam gavam sahasrai 
rusamaso agne. Tivra indram-amanduh sutaso 
*ktorvyustau paritakmyayah. 


Agni, refulgent ruler, brilliant forces, destroyers 
of evil and darkness, create and give me a beautiful home 
with a thousand bright rays of light, and at the end of 
the departing night in the light of the dawn, blazing 
fires bear distilled soma oblations and rise to Indra, the 
sun, and give him delight. 


ओच्छत्सा रात्री परितक्म्या याँ ऋणंचये राज॑नि रुश्मानाम्‌। 
अत्यो न वाजी रघुरज्यमानो बश्रुश्चत्वार्यसनत्सहस्त्रा ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Aucchat sa ratri paritakmya yan rnanicaye rajani 
rusamanam. Atyo na vaji raghurajyamano 
babhruscatvaryasanat sahasra. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 31 347 


When the fugitive night of rest and peace in the 
home departs, having made up the want of light at the 
rise of dawn, blest and beautiful, collecting and bearing 
nature’s gifts, then babhru, the crimson sun, sustainer 
of life, moving like a flying horse at instant speed, 
showers four thousand gifts of energy and intelligence 
and the creative yajaka receives and shares the gifts on 
and from the vedi. 


चतुःसहस्रं गव्य॑स्य पश्वः प्रत्य॑ग्रभीष्म Soran । घर्मण्चिं- 
Wa: Was य आसींदयस्मयस्तम्वादाम विप्राः wee i 


15. Catuh sahasram gavyasya pasvah pratyagra- 
bhisma rusamesvagne. Gharmascit taptah pravrje 
ya asidayasmayastamvadama viprah. 


Agni, O self-refulgent light of life, glorious ruler 
of the world, let us receive and share four thousand gifts 
of the wealth of light, energy and intelligence present 
in the lights of the dawn, and let us, O friends of 
knowledge, vibrant scholars, receive and share that 
golden wealth and heat of life which is tempered and 
refined in the pravargya yajna of self sacrifice and 
surrender. 

Mandala 5/Sukta 31 


Indra, Indra or Kutsa, Indra or Ushana, Indra and 
Kutsa Devatah, Avasyu Atreya Rshi 
इन्द्रो tale प्रवतं कृणोति यमध्यस्थान्मघवा वाजयन्तंम्‌। 
यूथेव पश्वो व्युनोति गोपा अरिष्टो याति प्रथमः सिषा- 
सन्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
I, Indro rathaya pravatam krnoti yamadhyastha- 


nmaghava vajayantam. Yutheva pasvo vyunoti 
gopa aristo yati prathamah sisasan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


348 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, 
commander of power and forces, accelerates whichever 
supersonic chariot he rides and inspires whichever 
region he rules for a great leap forward to the heights. 
All round protector and pioneer, like a shepherd who 
leads and drives his flock and followers forward, he 
gives the clarion call, gathers his forces with the desire 
to advance and win, and goes fast forward, unhurt and 
unobstructed, first and foremost leader and pioneer 
thirsting to realise his ambition. 


आ प्र द्र॑व हरिवो मावि वेनः fasterra अभि a: सचस्व। 
नहि त्वदिन्द्र वस्यो! अन्यदस्त्य॑मेनांख्चिज्ननिंवतश्च- 
HA? 


2, A pra drva harivo ma vi venah pisangarate abhi 
nah sacasva. Nahi tvadindra vasyo anyadastya- 
menanscijjanivatascakartha. 


Indra, commander of horse and speed of 
progress, giver of golden wealth, advance all round, be 
not lustful, be with us and share the honours. There is 
none better settled, successful and prosperous than you. 
Look after the unmarried, widows and widowers, help 
them to have a meaningful life. 


SIS: सह॑स आज॑निष्ट देदिं ष्ट इन्द्रं द्द्ियाणि विश्वा । 
प्राचो'दयत्सुदुघ। aa अन्तर्वि ज्योतिषा संववृत्वत्त- 
मोऽ वः॥ ३॥ 


६ Udyat sahah sahasa ajanista dedista indra 
indriyani visva. Pracodayat sudugha vavre anta- 
rvi jyotisa samvavrtvat tamo’vah. 


When strength and virility is born and matures 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 31 349 


with the growth of health and vitality, then let Indra, 
the disciplined soul, control and command all the senses, 
mind and intellect, awaken and exercise the creative 
potentials innate but yet dormant within, and with inner 
light of the soul keep off the resurgent darkness. 


अन॑वस्ते रथमश्वाय तक्चन्त्वष्टा AF पुरुहूत द्युमन्तम्‌ | 
ब्रह्माण इन्द्रं महयन्तो अर्कैर वंर्धयन्रह॑ये हन्तवा उ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Anavaste rathamasvaya taksan tvasta vajram 
puruhuta dyumantam. Brahmana indram 
mahayanto arkairavardhayannahaye hantava u. 


Indra, mighty ruler, expert craftsmen design and 
make the chariot for your fast movement and 
communication, the defence scientist and engineer, 
Tvashta, makes the blazing thunderbolt for you, and 
the scholars of the Veda celebrate your power and glory 
with hymns of adoration and exalt you to break the 
demonic cloud of darkness and want for showers of rain 
and prosperity. 

वृष्णो यत्ते वृष॑णो अक्मर्चानिन्द्र ग्रावाणो अदितिः 
सजोषाः | अनश्वासो ये पवयोंऽर था इन्द्रेषिता अभ्यवर्तन्त 
दस्यन्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

Vrsne yat te vrsano arkamarcanindra gravano 
aditih sajosah. Anasvaso ye pavayo’ratha indre- 
sita abhyavartanta dasyun. 

Indra, ruler of honour and excellence, when the 
brave warriors and noble citizens offer songs of 
adoration to you, then, O generous lord, the clouds and 


the sky in unison with them and with you and those 
dynamic powers even without horse and chariot, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


350 RGVEDA 


inspired by your power and grace, surround the wicked 
and destroy them. 


प्र ते पूवीणि कर॑णानि वोचं प्र नूत॑ना मघवन्या acne | 
शक्तीवो यद्धिभरा रोद॑सी उभे जय॑न्नपो मन॑वे दानु- 
चित्राः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra te purvani karanani vocam pra nutana 
maghavan ya cakartha. Sathivo yad vibhara 
rodasi ubhe jayannapo manave danucitrah. 


Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence, 
commanding force and power, let me speak to you of 
the acts and instruments old and new which you have 
achieved and which you would achieve, which scholars 
and scientists, having immense knowledge and bearing 
immense possibilities of gifts for mankind, exploring 
both earth and the skies, would make it possible for 
you to win waters from the clouds and pranic energies 
from air. 


deg ते करणं दस्म विप्राऽदहिं यद्‌ wart अत्रामिंमीथाः। 
शुष्ण॑स्य चित्परि' माया अगृभ्णाः प्रपित्वं यन्नप॒ 
दस्यँःरसेधः ॥ ७॥ 


de Tadinnu te karanam dasma vipra’him yad ghna- 
nnojo atramimithah. Susnasya cit pari maya 
agrbhnah prapitvam yannapa dasyunrasedhah. 


That is your act, achievement and further 
possibility, generous ruler of the world, giver of gifts, 
and eminent scholar, since you break the clouds, destroy 
the serpentine demons of darkness, create prosperity 
and excellence for mankind here on earth, and, 
mastering the wondrous knowledge of the secrets of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 31 351 


energy and techniques of power, you stall the 
negativities, make the waters flow and achieve further 
progress. 


त्वमपो यद॑वे तुर्वशायाऽरंमयः सुदुघाः पार इनदर | 
उग्रम॑यातमवंहो ह कुत्सं सं ह यद्वामुशनारर॑न्त देवाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


ध, Tvamapo yadave turvasaya’ramayah sudughah 
para indra. Ugramaydatamavaho ha kutsam 
sam ha yad vamuSsanaranta devah. 


Indra, ruler of the world, giver of honour and 
glory, pioneer and helmsman of the people, you make 
the abundant waters flow for Yadu and Turvasha, men 
of management, production and control, you achieve 
the rare and difficult energy of electricity powerful as 
thunderbolt, and then the brilliant people, lovers of life 
and humanity all, enthusiastically admire and celebrate 
both you and your thunderous achievement. 


इन्द्राकुत्सा वह॑माना रथेनाऽ5ऽ वामत्या अपि कर्णे वहन्तु । 
निः षीमद्ध्यो धम॑थो निः षधस्थान्मघोनों हृदो व॑रथस्त- 
मांसि॥ ९॥ 


o. Indrakutsad vahamana rathena’’vamatya api 
karne vahantu. Nih stmadbhyo dhamatho nih 
sadhasthanmaghono hrdo varathastamamsi. 


Indra, ruler of the world, and Kutsa, creator and 
controller of energy and the force of power, both 
travelling by chariot, let the running horse powers of 
energy at instant speed transport you both to the centre 
of life’s business. Both energy and power arise from 
the currents of waters and waves (as of sunrays), and 
both of you control and complete the projects from your 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


352 RGVEDA 


seat of office and residence, wherefrom you dispel the 
darkness and want from the centre of their power and 
prosperity. 


वात॑स्य युक्तान्त्सुयुजंख्चिदश्वान्क विच्च eat अंज- 
Taare: | विश्वे ते अत्र॑ मरुतः सखाय इन्द्र ब्रह्माणि 
तविंषीमवर्धन्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vatasya yuktant-suyujascid-asvan kaviscid-eso 
ajagann-avasyuh. Visve te atra marutah sakhaya 
indra brahmani tavisim-avardhan. 


Let this scholar of creative vision working for 
defence and protection, take to, explore and advance 
the forceful currents of winds employed as effective 
agents of travel and transport. All your scholars, friends 
and forces here, O powerful ruler, at the speed of winds 
increase and advance the power, prosperity and defence 
potential of the land. 


सूर॑श्चिद्रथं परितक्म्यायां oe कर दुप॑रं जूजुवांसंम्‌। 
भरच्यक्रमेत॑शः सं रिणाति पुरो दधंत्सनिष्यति क्रतुं 
TU ९९॥ त 

11. Surascid ratham paritakmyayam purvam kara- 
duparam jujuvamsam. Bharaccakrametasah sam 
rinati puro dadhat sanisyati kratum nah. 


Let the brave and brilliant pilot of the chariot 
first steady the chariot in the initial motion in the night 
and then take off rising to the clouds. The craft bearing 
its gears and stages of motion presses forward, 
conducting our project onward perfectly as intended. 


आयं ज॑ना अभिचक्षे जगामेन्द्रः सखायं सुतसोममिच्छन्‌ | 
वदन्ग्रावाव वेदिं fara यस्य॑ जीरम॑ध्वर्यवश्चररन्ति ॥ १२ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 32 353 


12. Ayam jana abhicakse jagamendrah sakhayam 
sutasomamicchan. Vadan gravava vedim bhriyate 
yasya jiram-adhvaryavas-caranti. 


O citizens of the land, this Indra, the ruling lord, 
has come to the yajna vedi to see his friends and all 
with the desire to observe and enjoy the finest 
achievements of the nation. The scholars too 
proclaiming their achievements are brought to the vedi 
where learned priests dedicated to the yajna of love and 
non-violence conduct and manage the programme and 
its progress. 


ये चाकनन्त चाकनन्त न्‌ ते मती अमृत मो ते अंह SIN 
वावन्धि ated ag धेह्योजो जनेषु aq ते स्याम ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ye cakananta cakananta nu te marta amrta mo te 
amha aran. Vavandhi yajyunruta tesu dhehyo- 
Jo janesu yesu te syama. 


O lord of immortality, Indra, those who love 
truth, knowledge and peaceful progress for themselves 
and others may abide loving and self sacrificing. May 
the mortals never come to suffer evil, never commit sin 
and crime. Bond with the yajakas who are committed 
to truth and holy action, vest them with honour and 
splendour, and bless us that we too, your own, be among 
them. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Gatu Atreya Rshi 
अदं दरुत्समसरंजो वि खानि त्वमंर्णवान्ब॑द्रधार्नों team: | 
महान्त॑मिन्द्र पर्व॑तं वि ag: सृजो वि धारा अव॑ दानवं 


न्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


354 RGVEDA 


I; Adardarutsam-asrjo vi khani tvamarnavan bad- 
badhanan aramnah. Mahantamindra parvatam vi 
yad vah srjo vi dhara ava danavam han. 


Indra, maker and breaker of things, you break 
open the springs, open the doors, let the streams aflow, 
and free the bonded to live free and enjoy, you who 
break the cloud and the mountain, let out the streams to 
flow into rivers and the sea, having destroyed the 
demons and broken the cloud. 


त्वमुत्सोँ' ऋतुभिवर्बद्रधानों अरंह ऊधः Ud rea वजिन्‌। अहि 
चिदुग्र प्रयुतं शयानं जघन्वाँ इन्द्र तविंषीमधत्थाः ॥ २॥ 


2 Tvamutsan rtubhirbadbadhanan aramha udhah 
parvatasya vajrin. Ahim cidugra prayutam 
Sayanam jaghanvan indra tavisim-adhatthah. 


Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you let the locked 
up springs of water flow like milky streams of the cloud 
down the mountain slopes according to the seasons. O 
ruling lord of light and lustre, breaker of the serpentine 
cloud of darkness, take up and command the blazing 
forces for action. 


त्यस्य॑ fast निर्मृगस्य aeistars तविरंषीभिरिन्द्रः | 
य एक इर्प्रतिर्मन्य॑मान आद॑स्मादन्यो अआंजनिष्ट तर्व्यान्‌ ॥ 3 ॥ 


3: Tyasya cinmahato nirmrgasya vadharjaghana 
tavistbhir-indrah. Ya eka idapratirmanyamana 
adasmadanyo ajanista tavyan. 


Indra, the ruling lord, alone by himself, 
unequalled and universally acknowledged and adored, 
destroys the might of that great informidable demon of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 32 355 


darkness and negativities with his blazing powers and 
actions like the sun breaking the cloud, and then he 
creates other powers greater than demonic negativities. 


त्यं चिंदेषां स्वधया मदन्तं मिहो नपातं सुवृधं तमोगाम्‌। 
वृष॑प्रभर्मा दानवस्य भामं वरण ast नि ज॑घान 
शुष्णम्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Tyam cidesam svadhaya madantam miho 
napatam suvrdham tamogam. Vrsaprabharma 
danavasya bhamam vajrena vajri ni jaghana 
Susnam. 


That demon of darkness and negativity whose 
might is only the drought, locking up the rains and 
consuming and thriving on the food and morale of these 
people of the earth, growing and growing and roaming 
around in the prevailing darkness and want is strong: 
yet the might and rage of that demon, shushna, drought 
and famine, Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, destroys 
with his lightning strike and rises as lord victor of the 
clouds and rain showers. 


त्यं चिदस्य क्रतुभिर्निष॑त्तममर्मणो विददिद॑स्य ae । 
यदीं' सुक्षत्र प्रभुता मद॑स्य युयुंत्सन्तं तम॑सि हर्म्ये धाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Di Tyam cidasya kratubhir-nisattam-amarmano 
vidadidasya marma. Yadim suksatra prabhrta 
madasya yuyutsantam tamasi harmye dhah. 


O noble lord of the mighty social order, Indra, 
with your actions and intelligence you know and expose 
the hidden weakness of this otherwise incomprehensible 
demon thirsting for fight, and, happy and elated in the 
hope and thrill of victory, you shut him up in the depths 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


356 RGVEDA 
of darkness. 


त्यं चिदित्था कत्पयं शयानमसूर्ये तम॑सि वावृधानम्‌ | 
तं चिन्मन्दानो dav: सुतस्योच्यैरिन्द्रो अपगूयी जघान & ॥ 


6. Tyam cidittha katpayam Sayanam-asurye tamasi 
vavrdhanam. Tam cinmandano vrsabhah sutasyo- 
ccair-indro apagurya jaghana. 


That demon of drought and negativity thus lying 
and sleeping in sunless darkness with some vapours of 
water but still growing, Indra, ruler of the social order, 
great and generous, exhilarated by the hope and joy of 
victory and raising his thunderbolt breaks, and destroys 
that demon. 


उद्यदिन्द्रो महते दानवाय aes सहो अप्र॑तीतम्‌। 
यदीं वज्र॑स्य wel ददाभ विश्व॑स्य जन्तोरधमं च॑कार ॥ ७ ॥ 


des Ud yadindro mahate danavaya vadharyamista 
saho aprititam. Yadim vajrasya prabhrtau 
dadabha visvasya jantoradhamam cakara. 


And when Indra raises the thunderbolt of justice 
and punishment against the great demon of wickedness, 
in favour of the great and generous man of charity, and 
thus displays his mysterious force and power, and at 
the raising of the bolt he punishes the wicked, he reduces 
them to the lowest state of living beings. 


त्यं चिदर्ण' मधुपं शयानमसिन्वं acd मह्याद॑दुग्रः। 
अपादमत्रं dear वधेन नि दुर्योण ओआवृणङ्मृश्र्वाचम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Tyam cidarnam madhupam sayanam-asinvam 
vavram mahyddadugrah. Apadamatram mahata 
vadhena ni duryona avrnan mrdhra-vacam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 32 357 


For sure that flood of water, honey sweet, 
dormant, unbounded, cavernous, floating, expansive 
and roaring, the blazing sun, Indra, seizes with a great 
blow of electric charge of thunderbolt and breaks it in 
its own place. 


(So should the ruler break open the hidden 
treasures of the land.) 


को shea शुष्पं तविषीं वरात एको धना भरते stadia: 1 
इमे चिदस्य जय॑सो नु देवी इन्द्रस्योज॑सो भियसा जिहाते ॥ ९ ॥ 


6 Ko asya Susmam tavisim varata eko dhana 
bharate apratitah. Ime cidasya jrayaso nu devi 
indrasyaujaso bhiyasa jihate. 


Who can comprehend and hold his force and 
blaze? The One alone by himself bears all the wealths 
though unseen. And these two divine creations, heaven 
and earth, move by the awful force and blazing 
splendour of this mighty Indra. 


न्य॑स्मै देवी स्वधिंतिर्जिंहीत्‌ इन्द्राय गातुरुशातीवं SA 
सं यदोजो युवते विश्व॑माभिरनु taera farrell नमन्त ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Nyasmai devi svadhitirjihita indraya gatur- 
usativa yeme. Sam yadojo yuvate visvamabhir- 
anu svadhavne ksitayo namanta. 


To this Indra, cosmic energy and the earth, both 
divine, submit in love and obedience like a maiden in 
love submitting herself to her lover. When Indra radiates 
the cosmic splendour and power with these natural 
phenomena, then the entire humanity and all stars and 
planets do homage to the divine and self-refulgent 
omnipotence of Indra with these acts of obedience to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


358 RGVEDA 
the law. 


एक नु त्वा सत्प॑तिं पाञ्च॑जन्यं जातं शुणोमि यशसं जनेषु । 
तं मे जगृश्च आसो afas दोषा वस्तोर्हव॑मानास 
इन्द्र॑म्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ekamnutva saptatim pancajanyam jatam srnomi 
yasasam janesu. Tam me jagrbhra 65450 navi- 
stham dosa vastorhavamanasa indram. 


I hear you, feel your vibrations manifested 
among the people: One and only one self-existent and 
self-refulgent lord and protector in truth, guardian of 
all the five people, commanding divine excellence and 
majesty. I hope and pray that my people, hoping and 
loving, self sacrificing day and night, may attain to the 
latest manifestations of Indra and his newest gifts of 
excellence. 


एवा हि त्वामरंतुथा area=d मघा विप्रभ्यो दद॑तं शणोपिं। 
किं ते ब्रह्माणो गृहते सखायो ये त्वाया निदधुः काम॑- 
मिन्द्र ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Eva hi tvamrtutha yatayantam magha viprebhyo 
dadatam srnomi. kim te brahamano Grhate 
sakhayo ye tvaya nidadhuh kamamindra. 


Indra, ruling lord of the world, thus do I hear of 
you, I feel the vibrations, inspiring life according to the 
seasons, bestowing wealth and honour on noble 
scholars, what the sages dedicated to divine knowledge 
receive and what desires and ambitions with prayers 
they place in you. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 33 359 


Mandala 5/Sukta 33 
Indra Devata, Samvarana Prajapatya Rshi 


महिं महे तवसे दीध्ये Asean तवसे अत॑व्यान्‌। 
यो अस्मै सुमतिं वाज॑सातौ स्तुतो जने समर्यश्चिकेतं ॥ ९ ॥ 


ll, Mahi mahe tavase didhye nrnindrayettha tavase 
atavyan. Yo asmai sumatim vajasatau stuto jane 
samaryasciketa. 


For the sake of great strength and power, let me 
thus focus on the people who are not too strong and 
draw the attention of this mighty ruler, Indra, who, 
honoured and admired among people, is keen to fight 
for progress and, in the struggle onward, enlightens our 
mind and directs our efforts on the right path. 


सत्वं न॑ इन्द्र धियसानो अर्कैर्हरीणां वृषन्योक्त्र॑मश्रेः | 
या इत्था म॑घवन्ननु जोषं वक्षो अभि प्रार्यः GT जनान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Sa tvam na indra dhiyasano arkairharinam vrsan 
yoktramasreh. Ya ittha maghavannanu josam 
vakso abhi praryah saksi janan. 


And you Indra, master and ruler of the nation, 
commanding power and prosperity, generous as showers 
of rain, thus addressed with reverence and listening to 
our prayer, take up the reins of the people, be with them 
and harness their energy, and with love and faith pursue 
the noble policies for advancement to completion. 


नते त॑ इन्द्राभ्य१ ATM SATA अब्रह्मता यदस॑न्‌ | 
तिष्ठा रथमधि तं व॑ज्रहस्ताऽऽरस्िं दैव यमसे स्वश्व॑ः ॥ २३ ॥ 
Si Na te ta indrabhyasmadrsva’yuktaso abrahmata 


yadasan. Tistha rathamadhi tam vajrahasta’’ 
rasmim deva yamase svasvah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


360 RGVEDA 


Indra, mighty lord, refulgent and generous, those 
who are not with us and are not for you are disjoined 
from reality. It is their ignorance and impiety toward 
the motherland. O lord of the force of thunder in hand, 
ride the chariot, take up the reins, equipped as you are 
with excellent forces for advancement. Guide and lead. 


पुरू यत्त॑ इन्द्र सन्त्युक्था गवे चकर्थोर्वरासु युध्य॑न्‌ aaa 
सूयय चिदोकसि स्वे वृषां समत्सु दासस्य नाम॑ चित्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Puru yat ta indra santyuktha gave cakarthorva- 
rasu yudhyan. Tatakse suryaya cidokasi sve vrsa 
samatsu dasasya nama cit. 


Many are your acts of generosity, Indra, which 
you have done for the land and cattle wealth and for 
fertility of the fields, O generous lord, and while fighting 
in the battles of life in your own seat, you create the 
light of life like the sun and earn for yourself the name 
and fame of the abundant cloud of showers. 


वयं ते त॑ इन्द्र ये च नरः शर्धो जज्ञाना याताश्च Tart: | 
आस्माञ्ज॑गम्याददहिशुष्प सत्वा भगो न हव्य॑ः प्रभृथेषु 
चारुः ॥ ५॥ 


5. Vayam te ta indra ye ca narah Sardho jajnana 
yatasca rathah. Asman-jagamydad-ahisusma satva 
bhago na havyah prabhrthesu caruh. 


Indra, lord illustrious breaker of the dark cloud 
of might, we are yours, and these leaders creating and 
forming power and force, the chariots that go round for 
transport, all these are yours. Come, O lord, and bless 
us with all your imperishable power, come like power 
and splendour incarnate, most welcome among the 
cherished ones. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 33 361 


पपृक्चेण्यमिन्द्र त्वे ह्योजो Tan च नृतमानो stad: । स 
न एनी वसवानो रयिं दाः प्रार्यः स्तुषे तुविमघस्य 
दान॑म्‌ ६॥ 


6. Paprksenyamindra 111८ hyojo nrmnani ca nrta- 
mano amartah. Sa na enim vasavano rayim dah 
praryah stuse tuvimaghasya danam. 


Incomprehensible is the splendour in you, Indra, 
lord of glory, all the wealths of humanity abide in you, 
yours is the ongoing dance of creation, yours is 
immortality. Universal abode of existence, give us the 
pure wealth of life, wealth that is possible. You are the 
lord and master commanding immense wealth, honour 
and power. I praise, admire and pray for your grace and 
generosity. 


एवा न॑ इन्द्रोतिभिंरव पाहि गणतः शुर क्ारून्‌। उत त्वचं 
दद॑तो वाज॑सातौ पिप्रीहि मध्वः सुषुतस्य चारोः ॥ ७ ॥ 


{+ Eva na indrotibhirava pahi grnatah Sura karun. 
Uta tvacam dadato vajasatau piprihi madhvah 
susutasya caroh. 


Thus O lord brave and fearless, Indra, protect 
us, the celebrants, poets, makers and artists, teachers 
and preachers with all modes of safety and security. And 
giving us the glowing corselet of self defence in the 
battle business of life, enjoy the beauty and sweetness 
of life created, distilled and offered by the admirers and 
worshippers. 


उत त्ये मां पौरुकुत्स्यस्य सूरेस्त्रसदस्योर्हिर णिनो रराणाः | 
added मा दश श्येतांसो अस्य गैरिष्चितस्य wad 
स॑श्चे ॥ ८ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


362 RGVEDA 


8. Uta tye ma paurukutsyasya surestrasadasyor- 
hiranino raranah. Vahantu ma dasa Syetaso asya 
gairiksitasya kratubhirnu sasce. 


And may those ten horses (ten senses of 
perception and volition or five senses of perception and 
five pranic energies) of the child of the wielder of the 
thunderbolt, wise and bold, terror of the wicked, lord 
of golden wealth, abiding on the heights carry me on in 
life. Playful yet stable are they, gifts of the bountiful, 
and with holiness of words and actions I abide with 
them, (and enjoy the beauty and sweetness of life). 


उत त्ये Ut मारूताश्व॑स्य शोणाः ऋत्वामघासो विदथस्य 
रातौ। deat मे च्यव॑तानो ददान आनूकमर्यो वपुषे 
नार्चत्‌॥ ९॥ 7 

9. Uta tye ma marutasvasya sonah kratvamaghaso 
vidathasya ratau. Sahasra me cyavatano dadana 
anukamaryo vapuse narcat. 


And may those vibrating gifts of the lord, who 
commands the winds as a charioteer drives and controls 
the horses, red hot in action, vested with holy perception 
and action, help me in the abundant creative yajna of 
the social order, so that the Lord and Master, inspiring 
me and giving me grace a thousand ways, may love and 
accept me like an ornament for the body. 


उत त्ये ot ध्वन्य॑स्य जुष्टा लक्ष्पण्य॑स्य सुरुचो यतानाः | 
Hal रायः संवर॑णस्य ऋषे्व्रंजं न गावः प्रय॑ता अपिं 
ग्मन्‌॥ oll 

10. Uta tye ma dhvanyasya justa laksmanyasya 
suruco yatanah. Mahna rayah samvaranasya rse- 
rvrajam na gavah prayata api gman. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 34 363 


May the living voices of Vedic mantras and 
wealths of existence with all their grandeur of meaning 
and value, coexistent with the lord of original Word, 
loved by the scholar of holy intention and purpose, 
divined and envisioned in right selection of words by 
the Rshis, all dynamic and relevant by moving forward 
to modern contexts come to me like cows going to their 
stalls. 

Mandala 5/Sukta 34 


Indra Devata, Samvarana Prajapatya Rshi 


अजातशत्रुमजरा wder स्वधामिंता दस्ममीयते । 
सुनोत॑न wea ब्रह्मवाहसे पुरुष्टुतायं प्रतरं द॑धातन ॥ ९ ॥ 


tl. Ajatasatrumajara svarvatyanu svadhamita 
dasmamiyate. Sunotana pacata brahmavahase 
purustutaya prataram dadhatana. 


The lady of light and joy, grace unbound, 
unaging power, divine Shakti, as the human offering 
too, in yajna, follows the lord omnificent, Indra, 
omnipotent, free from enemies ever born. Sow the seed 
of piety, distil the soma, mature it for the lord creator, 
giver and receiver of food, energy and eternal wisdom, 
universally adored and worshipped, and bear and offer 
the fragrance that will take you across the seas of 
existence. 


आ यः सोमेन जठर मपिप्रताऽमंन्दत मघवा मध्वो अन्ध॑ंसः। 
यदी मृगाय हन्त॑वे महाव॑धः सहस््र॑भृष्टिमुशना वधं 
यम॑त्‌ २॥ 


2. A yah somena jatharamapiprata’mandata magha- 
va madhvo andhasah. Yadim mrgaya hantave 
mahavadhah sahasrabhrstimusana vadham yamat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


364 RGVEDA 


He, lord of wealth, honour and power, who 
satisfies his hunger with soma and exults in honey 
sweets of food offered, and who, wielding the mighty 
thunderbolt of justice and punishment, out of love for 
life and the people raises his bolt of a thousand potentials 
to punish and destroy the wild beast of violence and 
ferocity: that is Indra, that is the ruler. 


यो अस्मै ta sa वाय ऊध॑नि सोमं सुनोति भवंति द्युमाँ 
अहं । अपाप शक्रस्त॑तनु्टिं मूहति asi मघवा य 
कवासरः।॥। ३॥ 


3 Yo asmai ghramsa uta va ya udhani somam sunoti 
bhavati dyuman aha. Apapa Sakras-tatanustim- 
uhati tanusubhram maghava yah kavasakhah. 


He who creates soma day and night and offers 
it to this lord Indra surely rises to heights of brilliance 
in knowledge, power and honour. But Indra, the lord 
commanding wealth, power, honour and excellence, 
disowns and throws off that man far and farther from 
himself who lives and works only for self-decoration 
and self-exhibition and associates with the selfish, 
miserly and wholly acquisitive. 


यस्याव॑धीत्ितरं यस्य॑ मातरं यस्य॑ श॒क्रो भ्रात॑रं नातं Fae | 
adgea प्रय॑ता यतंकरो न किल्वरंषादीषते aa 
आकरः ॥ ठ Ul 

4. Yasyavadhit pitaram yasya mataram yasya S$akro 
bhrataram ndata tsate. Vetidvasya prayata yatam- 
karo na kilvisddisate vasva akarah. 


If the powerful ruler punishes somebody’s father 
or mother or brother, he does not for that reason forsake 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 34 365 


that person, nor does he go back on his decision. Indeed 
he expects and accepts the homage of the man since he 
loves effort and endeavour, and he is the shelter of all 
and a treasure of wealth. He does not fly away from sin 
and guilt, he faces it and fixes it. 


न usafudsrfidsanre नासुन्वता सचते पुष्य॑ता चन । 
जिनाति वेद॑मुया हन्तिं वा धुनिरा देवयुं भ॑जति गोम॑ति 
ATU 


>. Na pancabhir-dasabhir-vastyarabham nasun- 
vata sacate pusyata cana. Jinati vedamuya hanti 
va dhunira devayum bhajati gomati vraje. 


He does not wish to begin anything with the 
five senses and ten pranic energies in association with 
a selfish, slothful, unyajnic person even though he were 
otherwise thriving. In this manner he defeats and 
punishes the lazy and the selfish. But a terror as he is to 
the wicked, he loves and serves the pious and learned 
person in the place where cows roam around and the 
place resounds with chant of the sacred Word. 


वित्वक्च॑णः समतौ चक्रमासजोऽ सुन्वतो विषुणः सुन्वतो 
वृधः । इन्द्रौ विश्व॑स्य दमिता विभीष॑णो यथावशं न॑यति 
दासमार्यः ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Vitvaksnah samrtau cakramasajo’sunvato 
visunah sunvato vrdhah. Indro visvasya damita 
vibhisano yathavasam nayati dasamaryah. 

Brave in the battle of life, Indra destroys 
suffering and rides the wheel of time and cycle of the 


seasons. Averse to the selfish and uncreative, he helps 
and raises the creative men of yajna so that life may 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


366 RGVEDA 


grow higher and better. Self-controlled and awe- 
inspiring, Indra is the ruler and ordainer of the world, a 
power, dynamic, ever modern and progressive, who 
controls the services of the nation according to the force 
and pressure needed on time. 


स्मी' पणोर॑जति भोज॑नं मुषे वि दाशुषे भजति सूनरं वसु । 
दुर्गे चन धिंयते विश्व आ पुरु जनो यो अस्य तविंषीम- 
AHI ७ ॥ 

ए Samim paner-ajati bhojanam muse vi dasuse 
bhajati sunaram vasu. Durge cana dhriyate visva 
a puru jano yo asya tavistmacukrudhat. 


For sure he augments the food and comfort of 
the celebrant but takes away the grains of the thief, and 
for the charitable he gives wealth good for people. And 
into dungeon darkness are thrown all those people who 
challenge his blazing power and provoke his 
indignation. 


सं यज्जनौ geri विशूवशंर्धसाववेदिन्द्रौ मघवा गोषुं शुभिषु। 
युजं ह्य¶न्यमकुत प्रवेषन्युदीं गव्यं सृजते सत्व॑थिर्धुनिंः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sam yajjanau sudhanau visvasardhasavavedindro 
maghava gosu subhrisu. Yujam hyanyamakrta 
pravepanyudim gavyam srjate satvabhir-dhunih. 


If Indra, lord of honour and excellence, terror 
of the enemies and inspirer of the people by virtues of 
his nature and character, were to come across and select 
two men possessed of honest wealth and all round 
strength and courage from among the brilliant people 
over the reputed and spotless regions of the land, he 
would appoint one as his assistant, and the other for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 35 367 


economic management providing for abundant water 
and wealth of cows and food products. 


सहस््रसामािवेशि गृणीषे sitar उपमां केतुमर्यः । तस्मा 
आपः dad: पीपयन्त तस्मि॑नक्षत्रमम॑वत््वेषमंस्तु tl ९॥ 


9. Sahasrasamagnivesim grnise Ssatrimagna 
upamam ketumaryah. Tasma apah samyatah 
pipayanta tasmin ksatram-amavat tvesamastu. 


Agni, refulgent ruler, you adore Indra, giver of 
a thousand gifts of fire and electric energy, powerful, 
self-evident mark of honour and grandeur. Such as you 
are, I pray, like rivers flowing in bounds to the sea, may 
the disciplined people be dedicated to you and may the 
social order, brilliance and majesty vest in you as their 
very home and glory incarnate. 


Mandala 5/Sukta-35 
Indra Devata, Prabhuvasu Angirasa Rshi 


यस्ते साधिष्ठोऽ Aa इन्द्र॒ ्रतुष्टमा ATI 
अस्मभ्यं चर्षणीसहं सस्निं वाजेषु दुष्टर॑म्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Yaste sadhistho’vasa indra kratustama bhara. 
Asmabhyam carsanisaham sasnim vajesu 
dustarn. 


Indra, lord refulgent, ruler of the world, for our 
protection and promotion, bear and bring for us that 
straight and most effective vision and action of yours 
which is pure and most bountiful, tolerant and yet 
challenging for people and informidable in our battles 
of life, the discipline inviolable. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


368 RGVEDA 


यदिन्द्र ते aden यच्छूर सन्तिं fore: | 
यदा पञ्च॑ क्षितीनामवस्तत्‌ सु न आ VT २॥ 


pA Yadindra te catasro yacchura santi tisrah. 
Yad va panca ksitinamavastat su na a bhara. 


Indra, refulgent ruler, bear and bring us for the 
protection, progress and sustenance of the people those 
three, four or five principles of policy and values of 
society which, according to you, are the best ways of 
the peace and advancement of the people, and let us 
settle and establish ourselves therein with your law and 
inviolable power, brave one. 


Note: This mantra is the basic formula of any 
socio-political structure and its governance and 
administration for the preservation, advancement and 
balanced sustenance of society. Details have to be 
worked out in the light of permanent values, history 
and tradition, and present and future implications. We 
may consider the following: 


(A) Three: Physical, mental and spiritual well- 
being of the individual, society and the total human 
community, the departments of governance and 
administration, legislation and education; care, 
preservation and replenishment of the earth, 
environment and higher sphere; the government, the 
people, and the defence forces. 


(B) Four: The four classes of the people, 1.e., 
teachers and researchers, defence forces and 
administrators, producers and businessmen, and the 
ancillary workers; The four stages of individual and 
collective life, i.e., Brahmacharya (education, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 35 369 


preparation and consolidation), Grhastha (family, 
professional life and social responsibilities and 
management), Vanaprastha (retirement and voluntgary 
community service), and Sanyas (total freedom, 
renunciation and social service). This is Varnashrama 
Dharma. 


(C) Five: Four classes of people and the other 
miscellaneous groups whosoever they be. 


Five levels of organisation: individual, family, 
professional community, nation, and the global and 
environmental level. 


Vedic suggestions are symbolic and general, 
particular details are to be worked out in the light of the 
Vedic purpose of life and living for the realisation of 
Dharma, righteousness in practical life, Artha, material 
well being, Kama, fulfilment of the Self, and Moksha, 
ultimate freedom. 


आ तेऽ वो वरेण्यं वृष॑न्तमस्य eae 
वृष॑जूतिर्हिं जज्ञिष आभूभिरिन्द्र तुर्वणिः ॥ ३॥ 


3. = 4 te’vo varenyam vrsantamasya humahe. 
Vrsajutirhi jajnisa abhubhirindra turvanih. 


Indra, refulgent lord of power and protection, 
we invoke and pray for your protection, most cherished, 
since you are the most generous and gracious. 
Uninterrupted is the shower of your grace like the 
showers of a cloud, as you arise, instantly victorious, 
commanding and bearing the protective blessings of 
existence such as knowledge, power and humility. 


तृषा ह्यसि राध॑से जज्ञिषे वृष्णिं ते era: 
स्वक्षत्रं ते धृषन्मनः cares पौस्य॑म्‌॥ ४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


370 RGVEDA 


4. Vrsa hyasi radhase jajnise vrsni te Savah. Svaks- 
tram te dhrsanmanah satrahamindra paum-syam. 


Indra, ruling lord of the world, you rise as the 
shower of bliss for munificence and achievement of 
success. Your power is the shower of joy. Your self- 
government and free social order is powerful, your mind 
is irresistible, your strength is for the good of the people. 


त्वं तमिन्द्र मर्त्य'मसित्रयन्तंमद्रिवः। 
सर्वरथा श॑तक्रतो नि याहि शवसस्पते ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Tvam tamindra martyam-amitrayantam-adrivah. 
Sarvaratha Satakrato ni yahi Savasaspate. 


Indra, lord of lustre and majesty, wielder of the 
thunderbolt and generous as a cloud, master of 
knowledge doing a hundred noble creative actions, 
commander of forces and power, take to your chariot, 
deploy all the chariots of battle forces and advance upon 
that mortal enemy who challenges the love and 
friendship of the people. 


त्वामिद्‌ वृत्रहन्तम जनासो वृक्तबर्हिषः | 
उग्रं पूर्वीषुं पूर्व्यं हव॑न्ते वाज॑सातये ॥ ६॥ 
6. Tvamid vrtrahantama janaso vrktabarhisah. 


Ugram purvisu purvyam havante vajasdataye. 


O lord, all the people ready for yajnic action of 
defence and advancement, having touched the skies by 
their chant and fragrance, all ready in full gear, invoke 
and call upon you, breaker of the cloud and destroyer 
of darkness and suffering, blazing with force of 
grandeur, first among the best leaders old and new. This 
is the clarion call for victory in life’s battle for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 36 371 
sustenance and success. 


अस्माकमिन्द्र दुष्टरं पुरोयार्वानमाजिषुं। 
सयार्वानं eer वाजयन्त॑मवा रथ॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


a Asmakamindra dustaram puroyavanamadjisu. 
Sayavanam dhanedhane vajayantamava ratham. 


Indra, ruler and commander of the people, take 
over, command, lead and protect our chariot of the 
nation, formidable, advancing in the contests of life, 
going ahead with all forces of the nation in one field 
after another and winning victory after victory. 


अस्माकमिन्द्रे्िं नो रथ॑मवा पुरन्ध्या | वयं श॑विष्ठ॒ वार्य 
दिवि श्रवो दधीमहि दिवि स्तोमं मनामहे।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Asmakamindrehi no rathamava purandhya. 
Vayam savistha varyam divi 57410 dadhimahi 
divi stomam manamahe. 


Indra, lord of might and blazing power of light, 
come, we pray, and protect our chariot by your 
intelligence, wisdom and tactics. O lord most potent, 
let us have our cherished sustenance and word of 
wisdom in this kingdom of love and beauty. Let us know 
and meditate on the holy song of success and adoration 
in this kingdom of light and peace. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 36 
Indra Devata, Prabhuvasu Angirasa Rshi 


स आ ग॑मदिन्द्रौ यो agat Fachaerd दाम॑नो रयीणाम्‌ | 
धन्वचरो न वंसंगस्तृषाणश्च॑कमानः पिबतु दुग्धमंशुम्‌॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


372 RGVEDA 


1. Sa a gamadindro yo vasunam ciketad datum 
damano rayinam. Dhanvacaro na vamsagastr- 
sanas-cakamanah pibatu dugdham-amsum. 


Come, Indra, lord of honour and excellence, you 
know the wealth, beauty and excellence, of the world 
of existence, you know how to give, you are the giver 
and treasure hold of the wealth of life, golden orb of 
the full moon. Like a sojourner of the skies, like a bird 
or bull, thirsting, loving, discriminating between truth 
and falsehood, come, drink the nectar of refreshing, 
rejuvenating, regenerating milk of life, your rightful 
share. 


आते हनुं हरिवः ae शिप्रे रुहत्सोमो न पर्वतस्य GSI 
अनुं त्वा राजन्नर्वतो न हिन्वन्गीर्भिर्मिदेम पुरुहूत fava ॥ २॥ 


00 A te hanu harivah Sura 5707८ ruhat somo na 
parvatasya prsthe. Anu tva rajannarvato na 
hinvan girbhir-madema puruhita viSsve. 


Indra, great and brave lord of heroic people, may 
love and sweetness play on your lips, let fragrance 
breathe from your nose, let success and glory play on 
your helmet like a soma creeper on mountain top. O 
ruler of the world all honoured and adored, like a 
victorious army rejoicing on victory, we all with all our 
voices in unison invoke and entertain you so that we all 
enjoy together. 


चक्रं न वृत्तं पुरुहूत वेपते मनो भिया मे अमंतेरिदद्रिवः। 
रथादधिं त्वा जरिता स॑दावृध play स्तोषन्मघवन्पुरू- 
वसुं: ॥ ३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 36 373 


a Cakram na vrttam puruhuta vepate mano bhiya 
me amateridadrivah. Rathadadhi tva jarita 
sadavrdha kuvinnu stosanmaghavan puru-vasuh. 


Indra, invoked and adored, blazing as sun and 
generous as cloud, ever greater and greater, commanding 
knowledge, honour, power, and treasure hold of all 
wealth, like a wheel in motion my mind is trembling 
for fear of want of intelligence and understanding and, 
in praise and adoration of you as commander of the 
chariot, it raises the voice of prayer and supplication. 
Listen lord, shelter, haven and home of all. 


एष ग्रावेव जरिता त॑ इन्द्रेयर्ति वाचं बृहदाशुषाणः। प्र wea 
मघवन्यंसिं रायः प्र द॑क्चिणिन्दरिवोमावि वेनः॥॥ 


4. Esa graveva jarita ta indreyarti vacam brhad- 
asusanah. Pra savyena maghavan yamsi rayah 
pra daksinidd-harivo ma vi venah. 


Indra, lord of wealth, power and honour, you 
have attained the heights of wide spaces. This celebrant 
like a soma press which extracts streams of soma or 
like a cloud of showers sends up words of praise in 
your honour for your beneficence. You control and give 
gifts of wealth by both right and left hands. O warrior 
of the chariot and leader of men, we pray, do not 
ignore us. 


aut त्वा वृष॑णं वर्धतु द्यौर्तृषा वृष॑भ्यां वहसे हरिभ्याम्‌। 
सनो वृषा वृष॑रथः सुशिप्र वृष॑क्रतो वृषा afew 
धाः UG Ul 

a, Vrsa tva vrsanam vardhatu dyaurvrsa vrsabhyam 
vahase haribhyam. Sano vrsa vrsarathah susipra 
vrsakrato vrsa vajrin bhare dhah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


374 RGVEDA 


Indra, you are brave and generous, may the 
gracious heaven elevate and exalt you. Generous and 
great, you move and rise by ground and powerful modes 
of transport and yajnic action. May the great lord of 
mighty chariot, clad in strong helmet, generous of action, 
wielder of the thunderbolt engage and protect us in the 
battle of life. 


यो रोहितो वाजिनौ वाजिनीवाच्त्रिभिः शतैः सच॑मानावर्दिं्ट। 
यूने सम॑स्मै क्ितयो नमन्तां श्रुतरथाय मरुतो दुवोया ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Yo rohitau vajinau vajinivan tribhih sataih 
sacamanavadista. Yune samasmai ksitayo 
namantam srutarathaya maruto duvoya. 


Let the people of the world bow in honour and 
reverence to the scholar, expert of the knowledge of 
motion and speed who teaches this young student the 
two allied subjects of the science of heat and electric 
energy with three hundred applications of it and designs 
a world famous vehicle for transport. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 37 
Indra Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 
सं भानुना यतते GMs STA FATS: स्वञ्चाः | 
तस्मा SIGS उषसो व्युंच्छान्य इन्द्राय सुनवामेत्याह ॥ ९ ॥ 
॥ Sam bhanuna yatate suryasya’’juhvano ghrtapr- 
sthah svancah. Tasma amridhra usaso vyucchan 
ya indraya sunavametyaha. 


The flame of Agni, heat and light, invoked and 
kindled on the base of ghrta, water, rising fast and 
beautifully vies with the light of the sun. “This we create 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 37 379 


in honour of Indra, the ruler’: for the scholar scientist 
who says this, let untiring dawns of light and excellence 
shine blissfully. 


समिंब्धायिर्वनवत्स्तीर्णब्ह्ुक्तग्रावा सुतसोमो जराते | 
ग्रावाणो यस्येषिरं वदन्त्यय॑दध्वर्युर्हविषाव सिन्धुम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Samiddhagnir-vanavat stirnabarhir-yuktagrava 
sutasomo jarate. Gravano yasyesiram vadantya- 
yad-adhvaryur-havisava sindhum. 


Agni, light and fire, raised and rising, touching 
the skies, suffusing the clouds, creating the soma for 
life and energy, crackles, and adores Divinity. The 
roaring clouds proclaim its force and refreshing power. 
The yajaka scientist with his yajnic inputs into the fire 
rises and moves to the sea (with fragrant vibrations rising 
to space, with waters flowing to the seas). 


वधूरियं पतिंमिच्छन्त्येति य ई वाति महिंषीमिषिराम्‌। आस्य॑ 
श्रवस्याद्रथ आ च॑ घोषात्पुरू सहस्रा परिं वर्तयाते ॥ ३॥ 


3; Vadhur-iyam patim-icchantyeti ya im vahate 
mahisim-isiram. Asya Sravasyad ratha a ca 
ghosat puru sahasra pari vartayate. 


Just as a loving bride goes to her groom and the 
bridegroom receives the consecrated bride, and both 
together run the home and take the family forward, so do 
fire and water mixed and working together drive the 
chariot and from the power and its revolution and 
thunderous roar many thousands of projects are moved 
forward. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


376 RGVEDA 


न स राजां व्यथते यस्थि्निन्द्रस्तीव्रं सोयं पिबति गोसं॑- 
Tare! आ संत्वनैरज॑ति हन्तिं gat क्षेति fart: सुभगो 
नाय पुष्य॑न्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Na sa raja vyathate yasminn-indras-tivram 
somam pibati gosakhayam. A satvanair-ajati 
hanti vrtram kseti ksitih subhago nama pusyan. 


That ruler does not face want and trouble in 
whose realm Indra, fire or electric energy, consumes 
intense liquid, friendly with earth connection, and goes 
forward with various forms of power. The ruler moves 
forward, breaks the clouds for rain, destroys the demon 
of darkness with light and knowledge, and settles his 
people in homes, thus progressing all forward in health 
and sustenance and earning a name for wealth and 
power. 


पुष्यात्कषेम अभि art भवात्युभे वृतौ संयती सं ज॑याति। 
प्रियः सूर्ये" प्रियो अग्रा भ॑वाति य इन्द्राय सुतसोमो 
दर्दाशत्‌॥ ५॥ 


2; Pusyat kseme abhi yoge bhavatyubhe vrtau 
samyati sam jayati. Priyah surye priyo agna bha- 
vati ya indraya sutasomo dadasSat. 


That nation moves forward in yoga, creation of 
new assets, and in kshema, preservation of the progress 
and achievement earlier attained, rises higher in social 
dynamics both ways, and wins further ground in both 
together: the nation which reverentially loves solar 
energy, which reverentially takes interest in fire energy, 
and which spares its best and sweetest surplus in the 
service of Indra, development of electric energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 38 377 


Mandala 5/Sukta 38 
Indra Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


sire इन्द्र राध॑सो विभ्वी रातिः श॑तक्रतो । 
stat नो विश्वचर्षणे द्युम्ना सुक्षत्र मंहय ॥ ९ ॥ 


il. Urosta indra radhaso vibhvi ratih Satakrato. Adha 
no visvacarsane dyumna suksatra manhaya. 


Indra, hero of a hundred holy actions with 
insight and counsel, wide and high are your powers and 
wealth, abundant your gifts. Ultimate watcher and 
observer of all that is in the world, ruler of the mighty 
social order, lead us on to wealth, power, honour and 
excellence and help us rise to the heights. 


यदीमिन्द्र srarafad शविष्ठ दधिषे। 
पप्रथे दीर्घश्रुत्तमं हिर॑ण्यवर्णां दुष्टरम्‌ ॥ २॥ 
2. Yadimindra sravayyam-isam Savistha dadhise. 


Paprathe dirghasruttamam hiranyavarna dusta- 
ram. 


Indra, ruler of golden majesty, lord most potent, 
destroyer of suffering, whatever food, energy and light 
of knowledge, great and renowned, you bear and bestow 
upon us you increase and extend, and it resounds far 
and wide as the highest of fame most unchallengeable 
by mortal man. 


शर्ष्मासो ये a अद्रिवो Beat केतसापः 1 
उभा देवावभिष्टये दिवश्च ग्मश्च॑ राजथः ॥ ३॥ 


Di Susmaso ye te adrivo mehana ketasapah. 
Ubha devavabhistaye divasca gmasca rajathah. 


O ruler of the clouds and mountains, dispenser 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


378 RGVEDA 


of generous and adamantine justice, these powers and 
potent people of yours, these lights and the enlightened, 
all these brilliancies that obey your law and do your 
will both shine and exalt earth and heaven with their 
power and generosity for the achievement of cherished 
goals. 


उतो at अस्य कस्य॑ चिदक्ष॑स्य तवं वृत्रहन्‌ । 
अस्मभ्यं नूम्णमा भ॑राऽस्मभ्यं नृमणस्यसे ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Uto no asya kasya cid daksasya tava vrtrahan. 
Asmabhyam nrmnama bhara’smabhyam nrmana- 
syase. 


Indra, O lord destroyer of darkness, want and 
suffering, bring that human wealth of values, honour 
and excellence which is worthy of anyone here, there 
and everywhere in terms of efficiency of your divine 
order. Give us the power and freedom from fear, since 
you love us and wish us to rise and prosper. 


ad आभिरभिष्टिंथिस्तव शर्म॑ञ्छतक्रतो | 
इन्द्र स्याम॑ सुगोपाः शूर स्याम॑ eT: ॥ & 


शः Nu ta abhir-abhistibhis-tava sarmanchatakrato. 
Indra syama sugopah Sura syama sugopah. 


Indra, lord of unbounded action and generosity, 
potent ruler of the world, may we with these cherished 
blessings under your benign protection be possessors, 
protectors and promoters of lands and cows and 
revelations of light. Let us be preservers and promoters 
without fear. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 39 379 


Mandala 5/Sukta 39 
Indra Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


यदिन्द्र चित्र मेहनाऽस्ति त्वादातमद्रिवः 1 
राधस्तन्नो विदद्वस उभयाहस्त्या ATU ९॥ 


i, Yadindra citra mehana’sti tvadatamadrivah. 
Radhastanno vidadvasa ubhayahastya bhara. 


Indra, O lord of light and power, mysterious and 
sublime, refulgent ruler of the clouds and mountains, 
omniscient dispenser of munificence, whatever the rain 
of blessings showered by you, whatever the wealth and 
honour of success, not yet ours, pray give us with both 
hands. 


यन्मन्यसे वरेण्यमिन्द्र द्युक्षं तदाभ॑र। 
विद्याम तस्य॑ ते वयमकूपारस्य दावने i २॥ 
2. Yanmanyase varenyam-indra dyuksam tad- 


abhara. Vidyama tasya te vayam-akuparasya 
davane. 


Indra, whatever you think is worthy of choice, 
bear and bring that brilliant gift of heavenly quality. 
Let us receive that and let us know that as a blessing of 
your unbounded generosity worthy to be received and 
justified with gratitude. 
यत्ते दित्सु प्रराध्यं मनो अस्ति श्रुतं बृहत्‌ । 
तेनं gee चिंदद्रिव आ वाजं aff सातये! 3 

Yat te ditsu praradhyam mano asti $rutam brhat. 
Tena drlha cidadriva ठ vajam darsi sataye. 


Adriva, wielder of thunder arms and ruler of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


380 RGVEDA 


clouds and mountains, with that mind and courage of 
yours which is great, renowned and magnanimous 
leading to sure success, break down the strongholds of 
darkness and scatter the forces of negativity to reveal 
the light of rectitude for success and victory. 


des बो मघोनां राजानं चर्षणीनाम्‌। 
इन्द्रमुप प्रश॑स्तये gat stare गिर॑ः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Manhistham vo maghonam rajanam carsani-nam. 
Indramupa praSastaye purvibhir-jujuse girah. 


For the praise and celebration of Indra, greatest 
of the powerful among you and ruler of the people, offer 
songs of adoration with the eternal verses of the Vedas 
as did the ancients for the benediction of the lord and 
master. 


अस्मा इत्काव्यं वच॑ उक्थमिन्द्राय शंस्य॑म्‌। तस्मा उ 
ब्रह्मवाहसे गिरो वर्धन्त्यत्र॑यो गिर॑: शुम्भन्त्यत्र॑यः॥ ५॥ 


> Asma it kavyam vaca uktham-indraya Samsyam. 
Tasma u brahmavahase giro vardhantyatrayo 
girah sumbhantyatrayah. 


For this Indra, lord and master, indeed, is the 
holy poetic voice of praise. For that lord giver of 
universal wealth and light of knowledge and wisdom 
do poets free from threefold bondage of body, mind and 
soul raise and offer their songs of adoration. Him, the 
voices beautified with threefold graces of sound, 
meaning and structure, free from threefold defects of 
sound, meaning and structure exalt and glorify. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 40 381 


Mandala 5/Sukta 40 
Indra, Surya, Atri Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


आ याहयद्विभिः सुतं सोमं सोमपते पिब । 
वृष॑न्निन्द्र वृष॑धिररतृत्रहन्तम ।॥ ९॥ 


i, A yahyadribhih sutan somam somapate piba. 
Vrsannindra vrsabhir-vrtrahantama. 


Indra, creator and protector of honour, 
excellence and prosperity, come with the clouds of rain 
showers, and taste and promote the distilled soma of 
the herbs of the earth. Come, generous lord, greatest 
dispeller of darkness and suffering, with the strongest 
and most enlightened, commanding the creation of 
glory. 
तृषा ग्रावा वृषा मदो वृषा सोमो अयं सुतः | 
वृष॑न्निन्द्र वृष॑भिररतृत्रहन्तम ॥ २॥ 

2. Vrsa grava vrsa mado vrsa somo ayam sutah. 
Vrsannindra vrsabhir-vrtrahantama. 


Deep is the cloud, the hope and ecstasy is high, 

and this soma distilled is potent and delicious. O 
generous lord, Indra, creator of valour and destroyer of 
darkness and suffering, come and realise the highest 
prosperity with the showers of rain clouds. 

aut त्वा वृष॑णं हुवे वचिंज्चित्राभिरूतिभिः। 

वृष॑न्निन्द्र वृष॑भिररतृत्रहन्तम ॥ ३ ॥ 
3: Vrsa tva vrsanam huve vajrin-citrabhir-utibhih. 

Vrsannindra vrsabhir-vrtrahantama. 


Indra, potent lord of generosity, magnanimous 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


382 RGVEDA 


giver of the showers of joy, wielder of the arms of 
thunder, greatest breaker of the clouds of rain and 
destroyer of evil, I invoke you with the strongest and 
most liberal powers and gifts of prosperity to come with 
various and wondrous securities, protections and 
promotions. 


ऋजीषी व्री वृषभस्तुराषाट्‌ छुष्मी राजां वृत्रहा सोमपावा । 
युक्त्वा हरिभ्यामुप यासदर्वाङ्माध्यन्दिने सव॑ने मत्स- 
fara: 2॥ 


4. Ryist vajri vrsabhas-turasat-chusmi raja vrtraha 
somapava. Yuktva haribhyamupa yasadarvan 
madhyamdine savane matsadindrah. 


Dynamic guardian of the path of rectitude to 
the last, wielder of thunder, generously brave, breaker 
of tempestuous missiles instantly, terribly forceful, 
refulgent ruler and sovereign commander, destroyer of 
the darkest enemies and protector of peaceful prosperity 
and joy of the people, Indra comes post haste by fastest 
horses, and at the noon day session of yajna joins the 
celebrations of the nation’s honour and excellence. 


यत्त्वा सूर्यं स्व॑भानुस्तमसाविंध्यदासुरः | 
अक्षेत्रविद्यर्था मुग्धो भुव॑नान्यदीधयुः ॥ ५ ॥ 
a Yat tva surya svarbhanus-tamasavidhyad-asurah. 


Aksetravid yatha mugdho bhuvanan-yadidhayuh. 


When the moon lighted by the sun affects the 
sun with the darkness of its shadow, when it is in line 
with the sun and earth, then the person who does not 
know his area feels confused during the eclipse and the 
regions too appear confusing. Similarly O sun, light of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 40 383 


the spirit, when the veil of darkness covers knowledge 
and awareness of the spirit, then the ignorant man feels 
confused and the world too appears different, that is, 
the material appears as ultimate reality and the spirit is 
eclipsed. He makes no distinction between body and 
soul. 


स्व॑भनोरध यदिन्द्र माया अवो दिवो वर्त॑माना अवान्‌ । 
Toe सूर्यं तमसापव्रतेन तुरीयेण ब्रह्मणाविन्दद्रिः ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Svarbhanoradha yadindra maya avo divo varta- 
mana avahan. Gilham suryam tamasapavra-tena 
turtyena brahmanavindadatrih. 


And then Indra, when the cosmic energy which 
moves the stars and planets removes the shadow of the 
moon from the sun, then Atri, man of knowledge, with 
his fourth state of the soul, that is, turiya, direct vision 
of Reality, regains the sight of the sun earlier covered 
by the shadow of the moon. 


Similarly, when Indra, lord of light, removes the 
illusion of darkness which intercepts the light of the 
spirit below it, then Atri, the sage of knowledge and 
discrimination, with this fourth stage of spiritual 
development, regains the light earlier covered by the 
darkness of ignorance. 


मा मामिमं तव सन्त॑मत्र इर स्या द्रुग्धो भियसा नि a 
त्वं पित्रो असि सत्यरराधास्तौ मेहावतं वरुणश्च राजां ॥ ७ ॥ 


7. Ma mamimam tava santamatra irasya drugdho 
bhiyasa ni garit. Tvam mitro asi satyaradhastau 
mehavatam varunasca raja. 


O sage, Atri, free from the bondage of confusion 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


384 RGVEDA 


between body, mind and soul, I am your friend. Let not 
this malevolent ogre out of anger, dread or hunger 
devour me. You are a friend. So is this Varuna, ruler of 
light and man of judgement and discrimination. May 
you two, I pray, protect me from darkness, ignorance 
and confusion. 


ग्राव्णो sen dar: स॑पर्यन्कीरिणां देवान्नम॑सोपशिश्च॑न्‌। 
अत्रिः सूर्यस्य दिवि चक्षुराधात्स्व॑भनोरपं माया अं॑घु- 
क्षत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Gravno brahma yuyujanah saparyan kirina devan 
namasopasiksan. Atrih suryasya divi caksura- 
dhat svarbhanorapa maya aghuksat. 


Then Atri, sagely scholar of four Vedas, free 
from threefold confusion, illusion and sufferance, 
collecting hymns of adoration, joining wise sages, 
singing songs of adoration in honour of Divinity, teaches 
and illuminates the supplicant disciple, removes the 
clouds, dispels the veil of darkness and illusion, and 
restores the light of the heavenly sun into the spirit. 


यं वै सूर्य स्व॑भनुस्तमसाविध्यदासुरः। 
अत्र॑यस्तमन्व॑विन्दन्नह्य१न्ये अशक्नुवन्‌ ॥। ९ ॥ 


9. Yam vai suryam svarbhanus-tamasavidhyada- 
surah. Atrayas-tamanvavindan nahyanye asa- 
knuvan. 


That sun and light of heaven, covered by the 
shadow of the moon and hidden by the veil of darkness, 
the Atris, sages of knowledge in the fourth state of 
spiritual development, turiya, direct vision of Reality, 
free from threefold confusion, illusion and sufferance, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 385 


restore and regain for themselves and their disciples. 
Others cannot see that light because they do not have 
the spiritual vision and freedom from illusion. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 41 
Vishvedeva Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


कोनु at मित्रावरुणावृतायन्दिवो at महः पार्थिवस्य ar 
दे। ऋतस्य वा सद॑सि त्रासीथां नो यज्ञायते वां पशुषो न 
वा्जान्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Ko nu vam mitravarunavratayan divo va mahah 
parthivasya va de. Rtasya va sadasi trasitham no 
yajnayate va pasuso na vajan. 


O Mitra and Varuna, light and bliss of heaven, 
complementary energies of prana and udana, friend and 
man of justice, teacher and preacher, who, for sure, 
dedicated to truth, can know you? Who can thank you 
in words? Protect and promote us wherever you be in 
your regions of truth and natural law in the light of 
heaven, the firmament or the earth, and bless us with 
food and energy, speed and progress, vision and wisdom, 
and material and spiritual wealth for the generous man 
of yajna. 

a al fat वरुणो अर्यमायुरिन्द्र ऋभुक्षा Weal जुषन्त । 
नमोभिवां ये दध॑ते सुवृक्तिं स्तोमं रुद्रायं toga 
सजोषाः ॥ २॥ 


2 Te no mitro varuno aryamayurindra rbhuksa 
maruto jusanta. Namobhirva ye dadhate suvrktim 
stomam rudraya milhuse sajosah. 


May the light of the day and the peace of night, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


386 RGVEDA 


the ocean, the cosmic order, health and time of age, 
spiritual vision, spirit of nature, cosmic flow of energies, 
be friendly with us. May all these who, together in love 
and loyalty with Rudra, lord of generous abundance and 
universal justice of correctitude, bear and carry our 
prayers and adorations and yajnic offerings with all our 
obedience and salutations to the Lord. 


आ वां येष्ठाश्विना हुवध्यै वात॑स्य पत्मत्रथ्य॑स्य पुष्टौ । उत 
at दिवो असुराय मन्म प्रान्धांसीव यज्य॑वे भरध्वम्‌ 3 ॥ 


a: A vam yesthasvina huvadhyai vatasya patman 
rathyasya pustau. Uta va divo asuraya manma 
prandhamsiva yajyave bharadhvam. 


Ashvins, complementary harbingers of light and 
life energy, observers and keepers of the laws of nature 
and guiding principles of humanity, teachers and 
preachers, I invoke you for extension of the paths of 
winds and clearance of the channels of progress, and I 
call upon you for strengthening and sophistication of 
the chariot powers of humanity. Come ye all fellow men, 
travellers and friends, concentrate your thoughts and 
intentions on the life breath of existence flowing from 
the regions of light as you bear and bring the food and 
fragrance for the yajna fire. 


प्र aaron दिव्यः कण्व॑होता त्रितो fea: सजोषा वातों 
अभिः । पूषा भग॑ः प्रभृथे विरुवभोजा आजिं न ज॑ग्मुरार्वं- 
वतमाः। Iwi त 

4. Pra saksano divyah kanvahota trito divah sajosa 
vato agnih. Pusa bhagah prabhrthe visvabhoja 
vajim na jagmurasvasvatamah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 387 


The refulgent yajaka, forbearing, challenging 
and victorious, intelligent and self-conscious (Kanva), 
Trita, active and expansive in the three regions of the 
universe, i.e., the sun, wind and electric energy, heat 
and light, nourishment and growth, power, prosperity, 
honour and excellence, all operative together in love 
like friends, with brilliant holy ambitions for the 
advancement of the world, may, we plan and pray, come 
like warriors flying to the battle business of life on the 
wings of fastest coursers. 


Wal Tet युक्ताश्वं भरध्वं राय एषेऽ व॑से दधीत et: | 
सुशेव एवैरौशिजस्य होता ये व एवां मरुतस्तुराणाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Pra vo rayim yuktasvam bharadhvam raya 
ese’ vase dadhita dhih. Suseva evairausijasya hota 
ye va eva marutasturanam. 


O Maruts, dynamics of nature and progressive 
forces of humanity, create, bear and bring the wealth 
and power born of action and advancement. Develop, 
hold and use knowledge and intelligence for the 
achievement of all forms of power, honour and 
prosperity. All the actions and movements of yours are 
for your good, and by all these progressive steps of 
yours, the yajaka, creator and giver of fragrance, 
humanity, the child of brilliant ambition, grows happy 
and enjoys peace and comfort. 


प्रवो वायुं रथयुजं कृणुध्वं प्र देवं विप्रं पनितारमकैः। 
इषुध्यवं ऋतसापः पुर॑न्धीर्वस्वीर्नो अत्र पलीरा धिये धुः ॥ ६ ॥ 
6. Pra 10 vayum rathayujam krnudhvam pra devam 


vipram panitaramarkaih. Isudhyava rtasapah 
purandhirvasvirno atra patnira dhiye dhuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


388 RGVEDA 


With your holy chants of mantras and offers of 
fragrant inputs into the yajnic fire of corporate action, 
create the wind and electric energy usable in your 
transports for progress. Create the brilliant, vibrant, 
admirable scholar and scientist of energy. And may these 
watriors of energy and scientific intelligence dedicated 
to progress and the truth and goodness of the laws of 
natural and human dynamics, serving heaven and earth, 
motherly divinities, bear and bring universal light and 
nourishment for our intellectual and cultural 
advancement. 


उप॑ व एषे adr: a: प्र यही दिवश्चितयंद्धिर कः | 
उषासानक्ता विदुषीव विश्वमा at वहतो मत्यीय यज्ञम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


7. Upa va ese vandyebhih susaih pra yahvi 
divascitayadbhir-arkaih. Usasanakta vidusiva 
visvama ha vahato martyaya yajnam. 


In consequence, for your success and 
achievement, by virtue of your holy and powerful efforts 
and your intelligent and enlightened chants and 
oblations, may the night and day, both great and potent, 
like intelligent and educated women, carry your yajna 
across the world and bring you from heaven the wealth 
of the world for humanity. 


अभि वों अर्चे पोष्याव॑तो नृन्वास्तोष्पतिं caste TTT: | 
धन्यां स॒जोषा धिषणा नमोधिर्वनस्पर्तीरिष॑धी राय एषे ॥। ८ ॥ 


8. Abhi vo ८1८८ posyavato nin vastospatim tvasta- 
ram raranah, Dhanya sajosa dhisana namo- 
bhirvanaspatinrosadhi raya ese. 


Happy with myself, celebrant for you all, and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 389 


for the achievement of wealth, power and all round 
prosperity, I honour, adore and serve the leaders who 
work for food and nourishment for growth. I honour 
the artist, architect and maker of forms, and love creative 
and friendly intelligence, trees and herbs, with 
reverence, gratitude, replenishment and renewal. 


तुजे नस्तने पर्व॑ताः सन्तु स्वैत॑वो ये वस॑वो न वीराः । पनित 
आप्त्यो Asta: सदां नो aefta: शंसं नर्यो अभिष्टौ ।॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Tuje nastane parvatah santu svaitavo ye vasavo 
na virah. Panita aptyo yajatah sada no vardha- 
nnah samsam naryo abhistau. 


May the clouds and mountains be for the 
expansion of our charities. So may be the Vasus, abodes 
of life such as earth and oceans, suns and planets, as 
well as the brave and generous people of strength and 
intelligence, self-motivated, self-moved, celebrated, 
self-realised, creative and corporate powers, and may 
they all augment our honour and reputation in all fields 
of human welfare. 


वृष्णो! अस्तोषि भूम्यस्य गर्भ त्रितो नपातमपां date | 
गृणीते stat न शूषैः शोचिष्केशो नि रिणाति 
वर्ना ॥ gon 
10. Vrsno astosi bhumyasya garbham trito napa- 
tamapam suvyrkti. Grnite agniretart na Susaih 
sociskeso ni rinati vana. 
I admire and adore the lightning fire, child of 
waters, which pervades the three worlds of the universe 


and gives showers of life for the fertility of the earth. 
Like a moving power with locks of light with its force 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


390 RGVEDA 


and motion, Agni energises the rays of the sun, moves 
the clouds and enlivens the forests with greenery. 


कथा महे सुद्धिर्याय ब्रवाम कद्राये चिकितुषे भगाय | आप 
ओषधीरुत नोऽ वन्तु द्यौर्वनां गिरयो वृक्षकैशाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Katha mahe rudriyaya bravama kad raye cikituse 
bhagaya. Apa osadhiruta no’vantu dyaurvana 
girayo vrksakesah. 


How shall we speak to the seeker of nature’s 
catalytic powers breaking and making the changing 
forms of matter and energy, how speak to the earnest 
seeker of knowledge, of wealth, production and 
prosperity? May the flowing waters and clouds, herbs, 
heavens, rays of sunlight and high mountains with locks 
of forests help and protect us. 


श्रृणोतु न ऊर्जा afahic: स नभस्तरीयां इषिरः परिज्मा । 
श्रण्वन्त्वापः पुरो न शुभ्राः परि Sal wagers: ।॥ १२॥ 


12. Srnotu na urjam patirgirah sa nabhastariyan 
isirah parijma. Srnvantvapah puro na subhrah 
pari sruco babrhanasyadreh. 


May the lord creator, controller and sustainer 
of energies listen to our voice of prayer, listen and reveal 
the mystery. May the master of the science of energy 
listen and enlighten us. May the lord omniscient, 
pervasive in waters and the skies, ever moving, 
omnipresent, listen and reveal the knowledge. May the 
crystal waters and the perennial streams and showers 
issuing forth from the mighty clouds and mountains 
speak to us like the clairvoyant ancient seers and seekers. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 391 


विदा चिन्नु महान्तो ये व एवा ब्रवाम दस्मा वार्य दर्धानाः। 
वय॑श्चन सुभ्व१ आव॑ यन्ति क्षुभा मर्तमनुंयतं वधस्नैः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. वत cinnu mahanto ye va eva bravama dasma 
varyam dadhanah. Vayascana subhva ava yanti 
ksubha martamanuyatam vadhasnaih. 


Listen ye, great ones, and let us know for certain 
those acts and motions of yours which we speak of and 
pray for, which, all great and generous ones, bearing 
cherished gifts of food, energy, health and age, ever 
growing stronger and expansive, mighty powerful with 
their catalytic forces, come to the mortal seeker who 
tries to know and search them out. 


आ cal पार्थिवानि जन्ाऽपश्चाच्छ सुम॑खाय वोचम्‌ | 
वर्धन्तां द्यावो गिरश्चन्द्राग्रा उदा व॑र्धन्तामभिषाता 
अर्णः ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. 4 daivyani parthivani janma’pascaccha suma- 
khaya vocam. Vardhantam dyavo girascandr- 
agra uda vardhantam-abhisata arnah. 

I speak of the celestial and terrestrial evolution 
of things and forces and their actions and attributes for 
the holy pursuer of creative yajnic action. May the 
heavenly light and words of knowledge grow with 
peace, beauty and bliss in action. May the waters of life 
and energy grow and flow like the spatial oceans 
enveloping our existence. 


पदेपदे मे जरिमा नि धायि वरूत्री वा श॒क्रा ar पायुभिश्च। 
सिष॑क्तु माता मही रसा नः स्मत्सूरिभिऋजुरस्तं ऋलु- 
वनिः ॥ ९५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


392 RGVEDA 


15. Padepade me jarima ni dhayi variutri va Sakra ya 
payubhisca. Sisaktu mata mahi rasa nah smat 
suribhir-rjuhasta rjuvanih. 


At every stage of evolution, my growth with 
divine praise and prayer is evident, replete with power 
and grace bearing all natural and divine modes and 
materials of protection and progress. May mother earth 
and her nectar sweets of energy with sages and scholars 
bless us with the rich gifts of her simple, natural and 
liberal hands. 


कथा दाशेम नम॑सा Gar नेवया मरुतो अच्छोक्तौ प्रश्र॑वसो 
मरुतो अच्छोक्तौ। मा नोऽ federal रिषे धादस्माकं 
भूदुपमातिवनिः ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Katha dasema namasa sudaninevaya maruto 
acchoktau prasravaso maruto acchoktau. Ma 
no’hirbudhnyo rise dhadasmakam bhudupama- 
tivanih. 


How shall we honour and serve the generous 
and renowned Maruts, dynamics of nature and the 
dynamic leaders and scholars of humanity, with offers 
of gifts and acts of homage in order to thank and 
supplicate them in words of reverence? Too generous 
and too highly renowned are they even for the best and 
choicest words of ours. May the generous cloud in the 
sky never forsake us to suffer want and injury. May there 
always be ample blessings of nature and Divinity for us 
close at hand. 


इति fag प्रजायै पशुमत्यै cata वन॑ते मर्त्यो व आ देवासो 
वनते मर्त्यो वः । अत्रा शिवां तन्वो धासिमस्या जरां चिन्मे 
निऋतिर्जग्रसीत ॥ ९७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 393 


17. Iti cinnu prajayai pasumatyai devaso vanate 
martyo va ठ devaso vanate martyo vah. Atra Sivam 
tanvo dhasimasya jaram cinme nirrtir-jagrasita. 


Thus does mortal man honour and celebrate you, 
O divinities of nature and humanity, for progeny and 
for abundance of wealth and cattle. Thus does mortal 
man win your favour. Give me here in the world well 
being of the body and sustenance for health, and may 
mother earth with her generosity keep off debility and 
decay of my health and the onset of old age. 


तां al देवाः सुमतिमूर्जय॑न्तीमिष॑मश्याम वसवः शसा गोः। 
सा न॑ः सुदानुमुंव्य॑न्ती देवी प्रति द्रव॑न्ती सुविताय 
गम्याः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Tam vo devah sumatim-urjayantim-isamasyama 
vasavah Sasa goh. Sa nah sudanur-mrlayanti devi 
prati dravanti suvitaya gamyah. 


O Vasus, divinities of nature and humanity, may 
we receive that holy intelligence of yours, that 
energising food, by our praise and prayer in honour of 
mother earth, nature and the cow, and may that mother 
power, generous, loving and merciful, O divinities, sages 
and scholars, the lady overflowing with kindness, move 
for us in response to us for our good, for our honour 
and prosperity. 


अभि न इव्छ gered माता स्मन्नदीभिरुर्वशी! वा गृणातु | 
उर्वशी वा बृहद्दिवा गुंणानाऽभयुंण्वाना प्र॑भृथस्यायोः ॥ ९९ ॥ 


19. Abhi na ila yuthasya mata smannadibhir-urvasi 
va grnatu. Urvasi va brhaddiva grnana’bhyur- 
nvana prabhrthasyayoh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


394 RGVEDA 


May the divine Ida, voice of omniscience, 
generous nature and the wide earth, mother of 
multitudes, sublime and overwhelming, enlighten and 
inspire us. And may the majesty of divinities, 
commanding universal light, comprehending the 
meaning, purpose and energy of life itself, revealing 
knowledge and wisdom come to us. 


सिष॑क्तु न ऊर्जव्यस्य TB: ॥ २०॥ 
20.  Sisaktu na urjavyasya pusteh. 


And let the scientist help us and the lord 
omniscient bless us, with strength and energy from all 
sources of nature. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 42 
Vishvedeva Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


प्र शन्त॑मा वरुणं दीधिती गीर्मित्रं भगमदितिं नूनमंश्याः। 
quent: पञ्च॑होता शणोत्वतुर्तपन्था असुरो मयोभुः ॥ ९॥ 


ls Pra santama varunam didhiti girmitram bhaga- 
maditim nunamasyah. Prsadyonih pancahota 
Srnotvaturtapantha asuro mayobhuh. 


Let my holy voice, the chant of OM, full of peace 
and bliss, light of my higher energy of udana, rise up 
and reach Varuna, cherished lord of love and justice, 
Mitra, lord of light and friendship, Bhaga, lord of honour 
and excellence, and Aditi, mother Infinity of heaven 
and earth. May the lord Supreme listen and receive, the 
lord of Eternal Word and speech coexistent with space 
and Divinity, ministrant of five pranic energies, 
indefatigable and irresistible in the ways of his power 
and action, giver of life and energy, lord of bliss, Bliss 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 395 
itself. 


प्रतिं मे स्तोममदिंतिर्जगृभ्यात्सूनुं न माता ह्यं सुशोव॑म्‌। 
ब्रह्मं प्रियं देवहितं यदस्त्य॒हं fas वरुणो यन्म॑योभु ॥ २॥ 


2. Prati me stomam-aditir-jagrbhyat sunum na mata 
hrdyam susevam. Brahma priyam devahi-tam 
yadastyaham mitre varune yanmayobhu. 


May Aditi, mother of eternal speech, receive and 
love my song of praise and prayer as a mother holds her 
child to the heart, dear, cherished and soothing. Brahma, 
lord Infinite that is dear, kind and benevolent to the noble 
people, supreme giver, who inspires prana and udana 
energies, is our lord adorable. 


उदीरय कवित॑मं कवीनामुनत्तैनमभि मध्वा gest | स नो 
वसूनि प्रय॑ता हितानि चन्द्राणि देवः सविता सुवाति ॥ ३॥ 


3; Udiraya kavitamam kavinam-unattainam-abhi 
madhva ghrtena. Sa no vasuni prayata hitani 
candrani devah savita suvati. 


Sing, celebrate him that is the most imaginative 
of poets, exalt him with honey sweets of song and 
homage, and may he, the inspirer creator, Savita, 
refulgent and generous lord, in response to our homage 
and effort, give us cherished wealth and honour of our 
choice for the good of our body, mind and soul. 


समिन्द्र un मन॑सा नेषि गोभिः सं सूरिभिं्हरिवः सं स्वस्ति | 
सं ब्रह्मणा देवहितं यदस्ति सं देवानां सुमत्या यि- 
यानाम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Samindra no manasa nesi gobhih sam suribhir- 
harivah sam svasti. Sam brahmana devahitam 
yadasti sam devanam sumatya yajniyanam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


396 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence, you 
lead us on with a holy mind, with efficient senses, 
intelligence and songs of homage, with bright and brave 
people. Lord of humanity, commanding the motive 
forces of the dynamics of existence, let there be all good 
and well being for us. Lead us on with knowledge and 
wealth of divinity, with whatever is good and beneficial 
for noble people, and with the wisdom of the brilliant 
people devoted to yajnic creation and divine service. 


देवो भगं सविता रायो अंश इन्द्रो area संजितो SAAT | 
ऋभुक्षा वाज॑ उत वा पुरन्धिरवंन्तु नो अमृतां सस्तुरासंः ॥ ५ ॥ 


a: Devo bhagah savita rayo amsa Indro vrtrasya 
samyjito dhananam. Rbhuksa vaja uta va puran- 
dhiravantu no amrtasas-turasah. 


May the brilliant and generous, the prosperous 
and honourable, the creator inspirer, rich and generous, 
participant sharer, commander of honour and excellence, 
winner of loud showers, producer of wealth, the 
powerful intellectual, commander of power and 
progress, the man of wisdom and distant vision, the 
immortals and powers of tempestuous advancement, 
may all these protect and promote us on the path of 
goodness. 


मरुत्वतो अप्र॑तीतस्य जिष्णोरजूर्यतः प्र ब्र॑वामा spar | 
न ते Ue मघवन्नाप॑रासो न वीर्य नूत॑नः कण्चनापं 1 ६ ॥ 


6. Marutvato aprtitasya jisnorajuryatah pra brava- 
ma krtani. Na te purve maghavan naparaso na 
viryam nutanah kascanapa. 


We sing and celebrate the acts and achievements 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 397 


of the lord of men and winds, incomprehensible, 
victorious, unaging and undecaying. O lord of honour 
and power, Indra, neither the ancients, nor the moderns, 
nor the succeeding ones nor anyone else would 
comprehend your power and potential. 


उप स्तुहि प्रथमं रत्नधेयं बृहस्पतिं सनितारं धनानाम्‌। 
यः शंस॑ते स्तुवते शंभ॑विष्ठः पुरूवसुंरागमजनोहुवानम्‌।। ७ ॥ 


8 Upa stuhi prathamam ratnadheyam brhaspatim 
sanitaram dhananam. Yah samsate stuvate 
sambhavisthah puruvasur-agamaj-johuvanam. 


First sing in honour of him close at hand who 
wields and governs the jewel wealth of existence, 
Brhaspati, Lord Almighty of the boundless universe, 
giver of wealth and honour, lord most blissful, 
omnificent, universally adored, who blesses the 
celebrant and supplicant, and brings him the wealth and 
honour prayed for. 


तवोतिभिः सचमाना अरिं्टा बृह॑स्पते मघवानः सुवीराः | 
ये अश्वदा उत वा सन्तिं गोदा ये वस्त्रदाः सुभगास्तेषु 
राय॑ः ue 


om Tavotibhih sacamana arista brhaspate maghav- 
anah suvirah. Ye asvada uta va santi goda ye 
vastradah subhagastesu rayah. 


Brhaspati, O lord of unbounded wealth of the 
universe, the people who are free from injury, enjoying 
wealth and power, brave and fearless, sharing the 
blessings of your protections, who are generous and 
honourable and give horses, cows and clothes in charity, 
all enjoy the good fortune of wealth and power and the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


398 RGVEDA 
grace of divinities. 


विसर्माणं कृणुहि वित्तमेषां ये भुञ्जते अपुंणन्तो न उक्थेः। 
अपंत्रतान्प्रसवे वावृधानान्‌ dates: सूयींद्यावयस्व ॥ ९ ॥ 
9. Visarmanam krnuhi vittamesam ye bhunjate 
aprnanto na ukthaih. Apavratan prasave vavr- 
dhanan brahmadvisah suryad yavayasva. 


Render the wealth of those people fruitless and 
unproductive who eat by themselves inspite of our songs 
of divine praise in honour of charity. Deprive them of 
the light of the sun who observe no rules of good 
conduct, and who, while growing materially in the lord’s 
creation, revile the lord giver and desecrate the food. 


य sted taal देववीं तावचक्रथिस्तं म॑रुतो नि ate i at 
वः wet शशमानस्य निन्दात्तुच्छ्यान्कामान्करते सिष्वि- 
दानः॥ ९०॥ 

10. = Yaohate raksaso devavitavacakrebhistam maruto 
ni yata. Yo vah Samim SaSamanasya nindat 
tucchyan kaman karate sisvidanah. 

O Maruts, dynamic leaders of the people, take 
him down straight, not in round about words, who 
invokes and entertains the wicked in the holy 
programmes of society, who reviles the noble work of 
the divine celebrant and who, even though trying hard 
apparently, demeans his values and desires. 


तमुं ष्टुहि यः स्विषुः सुधन्वा यो विश्व॑स्य क्षय॑ति भेषजस्य | 
यक्ष्वा महे सौमनसाय रुद्रं नमोभिर्देवमसुरं दुवस्य ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Tamu stuhi yah svisuh sudhanva yo visvasya 
ksayati bhesajasya. Yaksva mahe saumanasaya 
rudram namobhir-devam-asuram duvasya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 399 


Praise and exalt him who wields the strong bow 
and sharp arrow in support of life and shelters the 
creative, corrective and protective forces of the world. 
Do good work in cooperation with the great and 
magnanimous people, and honour and serve with 
homage and holy offerings Rudra, lord of power, justice 
and punishment, brilliant and generous giver of life and 
energy. 


दमूनसो अपसो ये सुहस्ता वृष्णः पल्नीर्नद्यो विभ्वतष्टाः | 
सरस्वती बृहददिवोत राका द॑श॒स्यन्तीर्वरिवस्यन्तु 
शुभाः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. = Damunaso apaso ye suhasta vrsnah patnir-nadyo 
vibhvatastah. Sarasvati brhaddivota raka 
dasasyantirvarivasyantu subhrah. 


May those who are generous at heart, noble at 
work, liberal of hand, bold and bountiful, motherly 
women, streams of water flowing within bounds of 
divinity, vastly illuminative, perennially flowing with 
sweetness, blissful like a moonlit night, ever giving 
without reserve, pure and immaculate, we pray, bless us. 


प्र सू महे सुशरणाय मेधां गिरं भरे नव्य॑सीं जाय॑मानाम्‌। 
य आहना दुहितुर्वक्षणासु रूपा मिनानो अकुणोदिदं 
न॑ः।॥ ९३॥ 

13. Pra su mahe susaranaya medham giram bhare 


navyasim jayamanam. Ya ahana duhitur-vaksa- 
nasu rupa minano akrnod-idam nah. 


I offer my latest song of praise arising 
spontaneously and dedicate my intellect and imagination 
in honour of Indra, blissful shelter of the world, who, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


400 RGVEDA 


sculptor of the forms of his creation, has provided and 
made to flow this water for us in the streams of his 
daughter, the earth. 


प्र सुष्टुतिः स्तनयंन्तं रु वन्त॑मिव्छस्पतिं जरितर्नूनमंश्याः | 
यो अंब्दिमों उदनिमों इय॑ततिं प्र विद्युता रोद॑सी उश्च- 
माणः 1 ९४॥ 


14. Pra sustutih stanayantam ruvantam-ilaspatim 
Jaritar-nunamasyah. Yo abdiman udaniman iyarti 
pra vidyuta rodasit uksamanah. 


Let this celebrative song, O celebrant, rise and 
reach the roaring, thundering lord of earth and eternal 
speech who, replete with blissful waters, rolling like 
spatial oceans, goes forward sprinkling the earth and 
illuminating heaven and earth with the showers of light 
and life. 


एष स्तोमो मारुतं शर्धो अच्छ॑ रुद्रस्य Gia eda: | 
कामों राये ह॑वते मा स्वस्त्युपं स्तुहि पृष॑दश्वाँ अयासं: ।॥ ९५॥ 


15. Esah stomo marutam sardho accha rudrasya 
sununr-yuvanyunr-udasyah. Kamo raye havate 
ma svastyupa stuhi prsadasvan ayasah. 


Let this song of praise reach and excite the 
power and force of the Maruts, fellow humans, youthful 
children of Rudra, Lord of law, justice and 
discriminative wisdom, and let my love and desire 
inspire them for wealth and honour of the world. O 
celebrant, celebrate the dynamic forces of humanity, 
generous and showerful as the clouds. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 401 


प्रैषः स्तोम॑ः पृथिवीमन्तरिक्षं वनस्प्तीरिष॑धी राये अश्याः | 
देवोदेवः सुहवो! भूतु मह्यं मा नो! माता पुंथिवी दुर्मतौ 
धात्‌॥ ९६॥ 


16.  Praisah stomah prthivimantatiksam vanaspati- 
nrosadhi raye asyah. Devodevah suhavo bhutu 
mahyam ma no mata prthivi durmatau dhdat. 


May this song of celebration ring over the earth, 
resound across the sky, and vibrate among the trees and 
herbs for the production of wealth. May the lord 
supreme, God of the divinities of nature and humanity, 
be kind to me and listen to my invocation and prayer. 
May the mother earth be kind and never ill-disposed to 
us. 


उरौ देवा अनिबाधे स्याम ॥ ९७॥ 
17. Urau deva anibadhe syama. 


O divinities, saints and sages, may we ever 
prosper in the unbounded generosity of nature and of 
mother earth. 


समश्विनोरवसा नूत॑ नेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम । आ 
नो रयिं वहतमोत वीराना विश्वान्यमृता सौभ॑गानि ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Samasvinor-avasa nutanena mayobhuva supra- 
nitt gamema. A no rayim vahatamota virana 
visvanya-mrta saubhagani. 


O lord, we pray, may we ever follow and benefit 
from the latest and blissful guidance and noble policy 
of the Ashvins, teachers and scholars. Bring us, O divine 
-twin powers of nature’s complementarities, wealth, 
brave progeny and all the imperishable good fortunes 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


402 RGVEDA 


of honour and excellence. Let us prosper with your 
protection and vision of progress. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 43 
Vishvedeva Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


आ धेनवः पय॑सा queer अमंर्धन्तीरुपं नो यन्तु मध्वा | 
महो राये ded: aa विप्रो मयोभुवो जरिता जोहवीति ॥ ९॥ 


॥ A dhenavah payasa tunryartha amardhantirupa 
no yantu madhva. Maho raye brhatth sapta vipro 
mayobhuvo jarita johaviti. 


Let the Voice of Divinity like mother cows, 
flowing with milky streams of meaning and metaphor, 
instantly vibrating unto the mind and soul, incessantly 
rippling and soothing without violence or difficulty, 
come and bless us with honey sweets of divine peace 
and spiritual awareness. Sevenfold are they in sound, 
music and meaning, expressive, grand and infinite. The 
celebrant yajaka, joyous and ecstatic, invokes, augments 
and proclaims the voices for the highest wealth and well 
being of life. 
आ सुष्टुती नम॑सा वर्तयध्यै द्यावा वाजाय पृथिवी अमू | 
पिता माता मधुवचाः सुहस्ता भरेभरे नो यसाव- 
विष्टाम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

2: A sustuti namasa vartayadhyai dyava vajaya 
prthivi amrdhre. Pita mata madhuvacah suhasta 
bharebhare no yasasavavistam. 


We offer songs of adoration with homage and 
offers of yajnic food and fragrance to win incessant 
blessings of loving and non-violent heaven and earth 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 43 403 


for the sake of food and sustenance, knowledge and 
progressive advancement in life. May the father, mother, 
heaven and earth, sweet and loving of voice and word, 
liberal and unstinted of hand, bless us with honour and 
excellence at every stage of our battle business of life. 


अध्वर्यवश्चकृ वांसो मधूनि प्र ara भरत चारु शुक्रम्‌ । 
होतेव नः प्रथमः पाह्यस्य देव मध्वो ररिमा ते मदाय ॥ ३॥ 


a Adhvaryavas-cakrvamso madhuni-pra vayave 
bharata caru Sukram. Hoteva nah prathamah 
pahyasya deva madhvo rarima te madaya. 


O priests of the scientific yajna for peace and 
unity with love and non-violence, working on the holy 
powers and mysteries of wind and electric energy, take 
up pure energised waters, and create and bear the energy 
for Vayu, spirit and ruler of humanity. O Vayu, brilliant 
ruler, first of all preserve, protect and promote this honey 
sweet energy so that we may be happy and enjoy life 
together for your honour and pleasure. 


दश क्षिपो युञ्जते arg अद्रिं सोम॑स्य या शमितारां सुहस्त | 
मध्वो रसं सुगभ॑स्तिर्गिरिष्ठां चनिंश्चददुदुहे शुक्रमंशुः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Dasa ksipo yunjate bahu adrim somasya ya 
Samitara suhasta. Madhvo rasam sugabhastir- 
giristham caniscadad duduhe sukramamsuh. 


Just as ten fingers join the two hands, and the 
dexterous priests use the stone press to extract the soma 
juice, and just as the sun with its bright rays, happy and 
rejoicing, distils the potent pure honey sweet vitalities 
of energy existing in the clouds and mountains, so do 
the happy performers of scientific yajna for peace, expert 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


404 RGVEDA 


specialists of energy, using their hands and mind and 
senses, working on the clouds distil the purest rays of 
energy, the honey sweet essence of nature’s sources of 
wind and waters. 


असावि ते जुजुषाणाय सोमः क्रत्वे दक्षाय बृहते मदाय । 
हरी रथे सुधुरा योगे अर्वागिन्द्र प्रिया pure हूयमानः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Asavi te jujusanaya somah kratve daksaya brhate 
madaya. Hari rathe sudhura yoge arvagindra 
priya krnuhi huyamanah. 


Indra, brilliant ruler, commander of winds and 
waters, distilled is the soma of energy for your 
knowledge and enlightenment, for your power and 
potential, and for delight and grand celebration, love as 
you do the honour and excellence of prosperity. Invoked 
and invited to the celebration, harness the fast controlled 
powers to the chariot, come straight, and accomplish 
the programmes you wish to complete. 


आ नो महीमरमतिं सजोषा ग्रां देवीं नम॑सा wearers | 
मधोर्मदाय ब॒हतीमरं तन्नामा वह पथिभिर्देवयानैः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A no mahim-aramatim sajosa gnam devim 
namasa ratahavyam. Madhormadaya brhatim- 
rtajnamagne vaha pathibhirdevayanaih. 


Agni, O light of knowledge, scholar scientist, 
loving and cooperative, lead us on to that great, 
continuous but unaddicted knowledge of divine value 
with your humility and yajnic inputs, knowledge which 
is highly creative and productive for honey sweet 
delights and celebration of mankind, which is vastly 
revealing of mother nature’s truths and worthy of further 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 43 405 


pursuit by the progressive paths of divinities and 
nobilities among humanity. 


अञ्जन्ति यं प्रथयन्तो न faut व॒पाव॑न्तं नाथिना तप॑न्तः। 
पितुर्न पुत्र उपसि प्रेष्ठ आ घर्मो अथिमृतयंन्नसादि ॥ ७॥ 


re Anjanti yam prathayanto na vipra vapavantam 
nagnina tapantah. Piturna putra upasi prestha 
a gharmo agnim-rtayann-asadi. 


Like a darling child in the lap of father, like the 
fire of yajna in the vedi, the disciple in pursuit of the 
light of knowledge and fire of life is seated in school 
close to the teachers like a seedling growing to fullness, 
whom sagely scholars, purifying, seasoning and 
tempering like steel and gold by the heat of fire, 
strengthen and prepare for a full yajnic life. 


अच्छ मही बुं हती orden गीर्दूतो न ग॑न्त्वण्विन। हुवध्यै | 
मयोभुवा सरथा यातमर्वाग्गन्तं निधिं धुर॑माणिर्न नाभिम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Accha mahi brhati Santama girduto na gantva- 
§vina huvadhyai. Mayobhuva saratha yatamar- 
vaggantam nidhim dhuramanirna nabhim. 


Let the good and great, wide and high, 
refreshing and beneficent voice of ours like a messenger 
go to invoke and invite the Ashvins, teachers and 
preachers, complementary powers of nature, positive 
and negative currents of energy circuit, and may the 
Ashvins, kind, peaceable and peace giving come to us 
straight like the centre pin of the axle and nave of a 
chariot wheel, and share our treasure wealth of 
knowledge, power and material well-being. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


406 RGVEDA 


Waele नम॑ञक्तिं तुरस्याऽहं पूष्ण उत वायोरंदिक्षि। या 
राध॑सा चोदितारा मतीनां या वाज॑स्य द्रविणोदा उत 
त्मन्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


2. Pra tavyaso namauktim turasya’ham pusna uta 
vayoradiksi. Ya radhasa coditara matinam 
ya vajasya dravinoda uta tman. 


I offer the song of homage and reverence in 
honour of Pusha, power of nourishment, and Vayu, 
energy of wind and electricity, both power givers for 
success and achievement, inspirers of mankind, and both 
spontaneous and instant givers of wealth and progress. 


आ नाम॑भिर्मरुतों afar विश्वाना रूपेभिंजातवेदो gars: | 
यज्ञं fri जरितुः सुष्टुतिं च fava गन्त मरुतो विश्वं 
ऊती Aol 


10. A namabhir-maruto vaksi visvana rupebhirja- 
tavedo huvanah. Yajnam giro jarituh sustutim ca 
visve ganta maruto visva 1/7. 


O Jataveda, light of life, sagely scholar of the 
knowledge of things in existence, invoked and invited, 
kindled and raised, you bring and speak of all the 
energies of winds and electricity of all names and all 
descriptions for men. O Maruts, winds and energies, in 
response to the mantric formulae and the celebrant’s 
songs of adoration, come all and bring all modes of 
protection and advancement along to the sagely 
scholars’ yajnic pursuit of research and development. 


आ नो दिवो dea: पर्वतादा सर॑स्वती यजता ग॑न्तु 
यज्ञम्‌ । हवं देवी जुजुषाणा घृताचीं शग्मां नो वाच॑पुष्टाती 
शुणोतु ॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 43 407 


11. 4 no divo brhatah parvatada sarasvati yajata 
gantu yajnam. Havam devi jujusana ghrtaci 
Sagmam no vacamuSati $rnotu. 


May Sarasvati, divine mother of knowledge and 
language in the cosmic flow, loving and responsive to 
her children, come to bless our yajna, bearing ghrta and 
waters of life’s energy and inspiration from heaven, the 
vast skies, clouds and mountains. May she join us like 
a mother overflowing with love, listen to our words of 
prayer for peace and pious advancement and give us 
the vision. 


आ वेधसं नीत्कपृष्ठं बृहन्तं ब॒ हस्पतिं सद॑ ने सादयध्वम्‌ । 
सादद्योनिं दम्‌ आ दीदिवांसं हिर॑ण्यवर्णमरुषं स॑पेम ॥ ९२॥ 


12. A vedhasam nilaprstham brhantam brhaspatim 
sadane sadayadhvam. Sadad-yonim dama a 
didivamsam hiranyavarnam-arusam sapema. 


Enshrine the eminent sage and scholar 
specialised in the round blue skies, great and rising 
pursuant of space, in your seat of yajnic learning, in the 
home and in the assembly : the scholar concentrating 
on the ultimate natural causes, bright and illuminative, 
golden in performance, the very dawn of light and 
knowledge, we honour and serve. 


आ auifadeat रराणो विश्वेभिर्गन्त्वोम॑भिर्हुवानः। 
ग्रावसान ओष॑धीरमरध्रस्िधातुश्चङ्घो वृषभो व॑योधाः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. A dharnasir-brhaddivo rarano visvebhir-gantv- 
omabhirhuvanah. Gna vasana osadhir-amr- 
dhras-tridhatusrngo vrsabho vayodhah. 


May the wielder and sustainer of existence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


408 RGVEDA 


mighty refulgent and blissful, invoked, enkindled and 
raised in the vedi come and bless our yajna with all 
means of protection and progress, the lord illuminating 
our voices of praise and prayer, vitalising herbs and 
vegetation, kind and loving, lord of nature’s three modes 
of thought (sattva), energy (rajas) and matter (tamas) 
which are transparent, red and dark green, the lord 
generous as showers and giver of health and age. 


मातुष्यदे UA शुक्र आयोर्विपन्यवों रास्थिरासों अग्मन्‌ । 
सुशेव्यं नम॑सा रातहव्या: शिशुं मृजन्त्यायवो न वासे ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Matuspade parame sukra ayor-vipanyavo raspi- 
raso agman. Susevyam namasa ratahavyah sisum 
mrjantyayavo na vase. 


On the sacred and excellent vedi on the floor of 
mother earth, lovers and admirers of life come in pursuit 
of the joy of living, bearing holy offers for the sacred 
fire. And just as they cleanse the new born baby and 
welcome it in new life, so they feed, serve and develop 
the holy fire with love and offers of food and fragrance 
like a living divinity on earth. 


seca ब॒ हते तुभ्य॑मग्ने धियाजुरो मिथुनासं: सचन्त । 
देवोदेवः सुहवो! भूतु मह्यं मा al माता पुंथिवी दुर्मतौ 
धात्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Brhad vayo brhate tubhyamagne dhiydjuro 


mithunasah sacanta. Devodevah suhavo bhutu 
mahyam ma no mata prthivi durmatau dhdat. 


People senior in age and wide in experience, 
eminent in knowledge and intelligence, men and women 
together, offer homage to you, Agni, lord of light and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 409 


great. May the lord Divine, light of all divinities, be 
kind and gracious to me, and may mother earth look at 
us with favour and never forsake us. 


उरौ देवा अनिबाधे Saar i 2 
16. Urau deva anibadhe syama. 


O Divinities, may we ever be in the light of your 
unbounded grace, free and uninterrupted. 


समश्विनोरवसा नूत॑ नेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम । आ 
नो रयिं व॑हतमोत वीराना विश्वान्यामृता सौभ॑गानि ॥ ९७॥ 


17. SamaSsvinor-avasa nutanena mayobhuva 
supranitt gamema. A no rayim vahatamota viran- 
a visvanyamrta saubhagani. 

Ashvins, complementary powers of nature, 
teachers and preachers, men and women together, all 
kind and blissful, may we go on in life by your latest 
protections and noble paths of progress and morality. O 
immortal divines, bear and bring us wealth, and brave 
progeny and all the good fortunes of the world. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 44 
Vishvedeva Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa and others Rshis 
तं प्रलथां पूर्वां विश्वथेमथां ज्येष्ठतातिं बर्हिषदं स्वर्विदम्‌ | 
प्रतीचीनं वृजनं दोहसे गिराऽऽशुं जय॑न्तमनु यासु वर्ध॑से ॥ ९॥ 


iP Tam pratnatha purvatha visvathematha jyestha- 
tatim barhisadam svarvidam. Praticinam vrjanam 
dohase gira’’sum jayantamanu yasu vardhase. 


Indra, Ruler as of ancient times, as before, as 
always, as of now, with your holy voice you draw upon 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


410 RGVEDA 


the highest, heavenly, blissful force and power present 
upfront and instantly victorious in the battles of life, 
and you grow and progress in consequence of that same 
power and force. O Ruler, let us all honour and augment 
and serve that power. 


Br सुदृशीरूप॑रस्य याः स्वर्विरोच॑मानः ककुभामचोदते | 
सुगोपा अंसि न दभाय सुक्रतो परो मायाभिहित आस 
नाम॑ ते॥ २॥ 


2. Sriye sudrsir-uparasya yah svarvirocamanah 
kakubham-acodate. Sugopa asi na dabhaya 
sukrato paro mayabhir-rta asa nama te. 


Ruler of the world, you are the self-refulgent 
light of heaven, illuminator of spaces and mover of the 
still clouds of vapours in the skies, the lord whose lights 
and graces are for the beauty and majesty of life. You 
are the protector, defender, preserver and promoter. You 
are not for deceit or violence. You are the cause and 
agent of holy action, sovereign with your powers and 
potential, and your name is identical with truth and law. 


अत्यं हविः स॑चते Get धातु aisRemd: स होता 
सहोभरिः | प्रसस्त्रीणो अनुं afedar शिशुर्मध्ये युवाजरो 
विस्तरा हितः ॥ ३ ॥ 


ध Atyam havih sacate sacca dhatu ca’ristagatuh sa 
hota sahobharih. Prasarsrano anu barhirvrsa 
sisurmadhye yuvajaro visruha hitah. 


(He abides in, with, and above the dynamics of 
the yajnic evolution of existence: consumer, consumed, 
consumption, evolution and devolution, the beginning 
and the end, all): He abides with the food of life. He is 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 411 


truth, reality, eternity. He is the wielder, sustainer and 
commander of the world in existence. Inviolable is his 
word, uncharted his way. He is the yajaka, creator and 
giver. He is the lord and controller of power and 
potential, challenge and forbearance. He is ever on the 
move across the skies and spaces. He is the generous 
cloud, the seedling in the womb of existence, ever 
young, unaging, antidote of negative destruction, and 
loving support of all. 


vd ud सुयुजो यामं्िष्टये नीचीर मुष्प यम्यं ऋतावृधः | 
सुयन्तुभिः सर्वशासैर भीशुभिः क्रिविर्नामानि प्रवणे 
मुषायति ॥ ४॥ 


4. Pra va ete suyujo yamannistaye niciramusmai 
yamya rtavrdhah. Suyantubhih sarvasasai-rabhi- 
Subhih krivirnamani pravane musayati. 


O children of the earth, for your good and 
comfort, immediate as well as distant, are these united, 
cooperative, well controlled radiations of the sun all 
round, fostering the truth of nature’s law in their own 
way: For that Master Spirit, the sun sucks up the vapours 
of water from the ocean and other lower places by well 
directed, all dominating waves of light, and then makes 
the cloud release the waters in rain showers to flow down 
in streams and rivers into the ocean. 


(In the same way the administrative forces of 
the ruler, working together in cooperation within the 
law, collect the taxes from the various communities of 
the people and the ruler uses the collection for rain 
showers of the people’s protection, promotion and 
prosperity without hoarding anything for himself.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


412 RGVEDA 


संजर्भराणस्तरुभिः सुतेगृभं वयाकिनं चित्तग॑भसिु 
सुस्वरुः । धार वाकेष्वुंजुगाथ शोभसे वर्धस्व पलीरभि जीवो 
अध्वरे ॥ ५ ॥ 


2; Sanjarbhuranas-tarubhih sutegrbham vayakin- 
am cittagarbhasu susvaruh. Dharavakesv- 
rjugatha sobhase vardhasva_patnirabhi jivo 
adhvare. 


Shining and vibrating by flutter of the leaves of 
trees, proclaiming the presence of the spirit manifested 
in life forms living and aging in the world of creation, 
in the caves of the heart, you shine and radiate in the 
consciousness, O lord of rectitude and paths of 
naturalness. Grow on, live on, O lord, in the yajna of 
creation and let the life forms grow on and advance. 


यादगेव ciel arated सं wrerat दधिरे सिध्रयाप्स्वा । 
महीमस्मभ्य॑मुरुषामुरु जयो बृहत्सुवीर मन॑पच्यु तं सह॑ः ॥। & ॥ 


6. Yadrgeva dadrse tadrg-ucyate sam chayaya 
dadhire sidhrayapsva. Mahim-asmabhyam- 
urusamuru jrayo brhat suviram-anapacyutam 
sahah. 


Who are the sagely divines of humanity? As they 
see the truth of reality, so do they speak of it. They 
behold it and stand thereby by the holy reflection of it 
in divine works of creation or in the visions of their 
own imagination. And they, men of courage, wide and 
bold in speech and imagination, bear and bring for us 
great illuminative speech of knowledge and high and 
mighty undecaying valour, forbearance and spirit of 
challenge which creates great heroes in the service of 
truth and rectitude. They are human divines. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 413 


वेत्यग्रुर्जनिवान्वा अति we: समर्यता मन॑सा सूर्य कविः | 
घ्रंसं रश्च॑न्तं परि विश्वतो गयमस्माकं शर्म वनवत्स्वा- 
aa: ॥ ७॥ 


१९ Vetyagrur-janivan va ati sprdhah samaryata 
manasa suryah kavih. Ghramsam raksantam pari 
visvato gayamasmakam Sarma vanavat svavasuh. 


The leader, reborn in knowledge and courage 
of action, goes forward challenging, thirsting for battle, 
radiant by mind, visionary of present and future, 
protecting the light of day, preserving our future wealth 
of generations, and protecting our hearth and home, self- 
possessed and self-established as he is. 


ज्यायांसमस्य यतुनस्य edt ऋषिस्वरं च॑रति यासु नामं 
ते। यादूख्पिन्धायि तम॑पस्ययां विदद्य स्वयं ada सो 
अरं करत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Jyayamsamasya yatunasya ketuna rsisvaram 
carati yasu. nama te. Yadrsmin dhayi tamapa- 
syaya vidad ya u svayam vahate so aram karat. 


The ruler and scholar who receives and serves 
the superior, the holy and advancing voice of the seers 
and sages by virtue of the knowledge and efforts of this 
industrious scholar, and you whose name and fame 
resounds among the people, whichever way the name 
and fame and knowledge is received, and the man who 
attains the knowledge of that all by his own effort and 
karmic discipline and carries the tradition on by himself, 
self-possessed and self-established, may all these do us 
good on our way of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


414 RGVEDA 


समुद्रमांसामवं तस्थे अग्रिमा न रिष्यति स्वनं यस्सिन्नाय॑ता | 
अत्रा न हार्दि क्रवणस्य रेजते यत्रा मतिर्विंद्यते पूत- 
बन्ध॑नी ॥ ९॥ 


2. Samudram-asam-ava tasthe agrima na risyati 
savanam yasminn-ayata. Atra na hardi kravana- 
sya rejate yatra matirvidyate putabandhani. 


The fame and advancement of these people 
resounds over seas and abides over spaces, nor does 
their yajnic progress suffer where hymns are chanted 
and wealth grows in holiness. Here the heart’s desire of 
the worshipper is not obstructed where holy intelligence 
and intentions abide for guidance in action. 


स हि श्चत्रस्य॑ मनसस्य चित्तिंभिरेवावदस्य॑ यजतस्य सधे: । 
अवत्सारस्य स्पृणवाम waft: शविष्ठं वाजं विदुर्षा 
चिदर्ध्यम्‌ gon 


10. Sa hi ksatrasya manasasya cittibhir-evavadasya 
yajatasya sadhreh. Avatsarasya sprnavama 
ranvabhih Savistham vajam vidusa cidardhyam. 


With our collective thoughts and intentions and 
with all our love and delight, we desire to have that 
ruler for the social order whose high strength and 
dynamism is respected by the wise and enlightened 
scholars, who is a strong disciplinarian and organiser, 
who commands intelligence and eloquence, who is a 
holy and cooperative man of yajna, sociable as a friend 
and who can preserve, protect, defend, promote and 
enlighten the people and the system. Only such a person 
deserves to be the ruler. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 415 


श्येन आसामदिं तिः कक्ष्यो ३ मदो विष्व्वारस्य यजतस्य 
मायिनः । समन्यम॑न्यमर्थयन्त्येत॑वे विदुर्विषाणं परिपानमन्ति 
ते॥ ९९॥ 


11.  Syena asamaditih kaksyo mado viSvavarasya 
yajatasya mayinah. Sam-anyamanyam-artha- 
yantyetave vidurvisanam paripanamaniti te. 


Of these people, he, the ruler, is the Shyena, 
eagle, harbinger of nectar, the watchful eye, and the 
marksman for the target, the destination. He is Aditi, 
the inviolable identity, symbol of nature, character, 
tradition and the nation. He is Kakshya, orbit of 
movement as well as the rampart, ever in harness, and 
he is the joy of life. Of this universal leader, all 
embracing and giving, all powerful, they jointly and 
separately desire and ask for advancement, know his 
generosity, and find their own fulfilment in his presence. 


सदाप्रणो यजतो fa द्विषो! वधीद्राहु वृक्तः श्रं त वित्तर्यो a: 
सचा । उभा स वरा प्रत्येति भाति च ad? गणं भजंते 
सुप्रयाव॑भिः॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sadaprno yajato vi dviso vadhid bahuvrktah 
Srutavit taryo vah saca. Ubha sa vara pratyeti 
bhati ca yadim ganam bhajate_ suprayavabhih. 


He is an unfailing giver of fulfilment, holy and 
cooperative in joint action for development, destroyer 
of hate and enmity, strong of arms, scholar of the Vedas, 
accessible saviour and helper and friendly for all of you. 
He receives both friend and foe appropriately and 
realises both material and spiritual good, shines and 
illuminates, the leader who serves this social order and 
this people with effective and acceptable means and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


416 RGVEDA 
policies. 


सु तंभरो यज॑मानस्य सत्प॑तिर्विंश्वासामू धः स धिया- 
West: | भरन्न्‌ रस॑वच्छिश्रिये पयोऽ नुल्रुवाणो अध्यति 
न स्वपन्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Sutambharo yajamanasya satpatir-visvasam- 
udhah sa dhiyam-udancanah. Bharad dhenu 
rasavac-chisriye payo’nubruvano adhyeti na 
svapan. 


The baby’s parent, the yajaka’s protector and 
promoter, the teacher, ruler, guardian of humanity who 
preserves, sustains and advances whatever wealth and 
joy is achieved, the treasure hold of all history and 
tradition and intellectual and scientific progress on the 
march, bearing the milky food for body, mind and soul 
like the mother cow and forbearing earth, he goes 
onwards high proclaiming his knowledge and vision, 
the divine gift, without a wink of sleep: He is worthy of 
reverence. 


SST तमृच॑ः कामयन्ते यो SIT तमु सामानि यन्ति । 
यो जागार तमयं सोमं आह तवाहमस्मि सख्ये न्योकाः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Yo jagara tamrcah kamayante yo jagarah tamu 
samani yanti. Yo jagara tamayam soma aha 
tavahamasmi sakhye nyokah. 


Whoever is awake, the Rks love and bless. 
Whoever is alert, the Samans move and elevate. 
Whoever is active without a wink of sleep, this soma of 
life’s joy and ecstasy addresses and says: O seeker and 
yajaka, I am for you, a friend and shelter home. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 45 417 


अजीगर्‌ तमृच॑ः कामयन्तेऽ िजीगार्‌ तमु सामानि 
यन्ति। अथिजीगार तमयं सोम॑ आह तवाहमस्मि सख्ये 
न्योकाः ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Agnirjagara tamrcah kamayante’gnirjagara tamu 
samani yanti. Agnirjagara tamayam soma aha 
tavahamasmi sakhye nyokah. 


To Agni, soul of life awake, the light of Rks 
radiates with love. To Agni, light of life awake, the songs 
of Samans vibrate with love. To Agni, the fire of life 
aflame, the streams of nectar flow with love, and to the 
soul of life, the light of awareness and the fire of action, 
the ecstasy of life says: I am yours with love, a friend, 
your very haven and home. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 45 
Vishvedeva Devata, Sadaprna Atreya Rshi 
विदा दिवो विष्यन्नद्विमुक्थेरायत्या उषसो अर्चिनो गुः | 
अर्पावृत ब्रजिनीरुत्स्व॑गद्धि दुरो मानुंषीर्दव आवः neu 
1. Vida divo visyann-adrim-ukthair-dyatya usaso 
arcino guh. Apavrta vrajinirut svargad vi duro 
manusirdeva avah. 


Brilliant sages with holy songs of adoration 
worship the self-refulgent Lord and break the cloud of 
ignorance. In consequence, the dawn of light follows, 
dispels the nights of darkness, and then the refulgent 
sun of divine knowledge opens the doors of human 
reason and intelligence with knowledge. 


fa सूर्यो अमतिं न श्रियं सादोर्वाद्‌ गवां माता जानती 
Tite धन्व॑र्णसो नद्य 4: खादोर्णा equiva सुमिता deat 
द्यौः ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


418 RGVEDA 


2 Vi suryo amatim na Sriyam sadorvad gavam mata 
janati gat. Dhanvarnaso nadyah khado arnah 
sthuneva sumita drmhata dyauh. 


The sun takes on the refulgent form of beauty 
like the grace of divinity, and from the vast heavens, 
the dawn, mother of light rays, goes forward revealing 
the beauty of the world. Streams and rivers, charming 
bright and refreshing, flow rushing on to the sea. The 
regions of light rise on, expansive like a measured 
column of the day’s sustenance. 


(The mantra is a metaphor, in continuation of 
the previous mantra, of the expansion of the light of 
knowledge and onward flow of life.) 


अस्मा उक्थाय पर्व॑तस्य Tt महीनां जनुषं पूर्व्याय । वि 
पर्वतो जिहीत साध॑त द्यौराविर्वासन्तो दसयन्त भूमं ॥ ३॥ 


Asma ukthaya parvatasya garbho mahinam 
jJanuse purvyaya. Vi parvato jihita sadhata dyaur- 
avivasanto dasayanta bhuma. 


In honour of this adorable ancient sun, cause of 
the birth of planets and the cloud, and for the fertility of 
the earths, the vapours leave the cloud to rain in showers. 
Let us too, high shining like the sun, realising the light 
of knowledge, illuminating all around, giving in charity, 
eliminating evil, realise ourselves. 


goal aalfudastii-at न्व ग्री अव॑से हुवध्यै । 
उक्थेधिर्हिं wat wad: सुयज्ञा आविवासन्तो मरुतो 
यज॑न्ति ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Suktebhirvo vacobhir-devajustair-indra nvagni 
avase huvadhyai. Ukthebhirhi sma kavayah 
suyajna avivasanto maruto yajanti. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 45 419 


With unambiguous holy words approved by 
scholars and loved and used by divine brilliancies, we 
study and experiment with Indra and Agni for the 
invocation and achievement of electric energy and fire 
power for protection and progress, just as, with the same 
holy words, for all time, poetic men of vision and 
imagination and dynamic scientists engaged in creative 
and productive joint works, shining and illuminating in 
the pursuit of truth, work and conduct holy programmes 
of research for you all. 


एतो aa सुध्यो ३ भवाम प्र दुच्छुन। मिनवामा ala: | 
आरे द्वेषांसि सनुतर्दधामाऽयाम प्राञ्चो यज॑मानमच्छ॑॥ ५ ॥ 


a Eto nvadya sudhyo bhavama pra ducchuna mina- 
vama vartyah. Are dvesamsi sanutardadhama’ - 
yama pranco yajamanamaccha. 

Come ye all today, let us engage in works of 
vision and wisdom as intelligent holy people. Let us 
throw off all evil and eliminate it. Let us always keep 
hate and enmity far away. Let us move forward and 
enthusiastically join the yajamana engaged in creative 
and productive work for advancement. 


एता धियं कृणवामा सखायोऽ प या मार्तो ऋणुत ast 
गोः। यया मनुर्विशिशिप्रं जिगाय यया वणिग्वङ्कुरापा 
पुरीषम्‌ su 


6. Eta dhiyam krnavama sakhayo’pa ya matan rnuta 


vanigvankurapa purisam. 


Come friends, let us take up works of science 
and reason by which mother knowledge reveals and, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


420 RGVEDA 


like the dawn, opens the doors of light and power, by 
which the man of war and tactics wins the helmet and 
armour, and by which the industrious producer achieves 
fertile land and ample water. 
shies हस्त॑यतो अद्विरार्चन्येन दशं मासो नव॑ग्वाः । ऋतं 
यती सरमा गा अंविन्दद्विश्वानि सत्याद्धिंराश्चकार ॥ ७॥ 
Anunodatra hastayato adrirarcan yena dasa maso 
navagvah. Rtam yati sarama ga avindad visvani 
satyangirascakara. 

7. Let the priest of dexterous hand, generous 
like the cloud, celebrant of divinity and nature’s powers, 
set the yajna in motion, inspiring the new generation 
on the move to keep the fire burning for ten months at 
least, and the dynamics of revelation would flow to the 
yajna, open the secrets of the Word and knowledge and 
control of mind and senses, and vibrant men of initiative 
would enact projects of truth and universal good. 

विश्वे अस्या व्युषि मार्हिनायाः सं यद्‌ गोधिरङ्धिरसो नव॑न्त | 
उत्स॑ आसां परमे स॒धस्थ॑ ऋतस्य पथा सरमा विदद्‌ 
TW: We ॥ 

Visve asya vyusi mahinayah sam yad gobhiran- 
giraso navanta. Utsa asam parame sadhastha 
rtasya patha sarama vidad gah. 


8. When on the rise of this glorious dawn the 
Angiras, vibrant scholars and sages dedicated to yajnic 
divinity, meet and rejoice with the rays of light, then, 
the oceanic source of these rays of light being in the 
highest heaven, it is the radiations of Divinity on the 
waves of nature’s vitality that transmit the revelations 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 45 421 
of light and knowledge and bless the yajnic seekers. 


आ सूर्यो यातु सप्ताश्वः क्षेत्रं adenfefar दीर्घयाथे 1 cy: 
श्येनः पतयदन्धो अच्छा युवां कविर्दी दयद्‌ गोषु गच्छ॑न्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


D. A suryo yatu saptasvah ksetram yadasyorviya 
dirghayathe. Raghuh syenah patayad-andho 
accha yuva kavirdidayad gosu gacchan. 


Let the sun, commanding seven horses of its 
spectrum lights, come to the earthly part of its domain 
like a flying courser, a hawk-like harbinger of nectar, 
dispelling darkness, and ripening food with its light and 
heat, and let it shine, an unaging youth, a visionary 
creator and inspirer, going over lands and planets on 
the long course of its orbit in space. 


So may the light of the Spirit descend into the 
earthly form of the body of five elements and five senses, 
mind and intelligence, and illuminate the individual 
personality of the soul to keep it a youthful visionary 
and self-inspiring poet, creatively playing around with 
the mind and senses, dispelling the darkness of 
ignorance and ripening the existential potential of its 
nature, across the world of five elements, and ahankara 
and mahan modes of nature, for its advancement over 
its eternal course. 


आ सूर्यो sesag maui saw यद्छरितो वीतपृष्ठाः । उद्वा 
न नाव॑मनयन्त धीरां आश्ण्वतीरापो stairs ui ९०॥ 


10. A 570 aruhac-chukram-arno’yukta yaddharito 
vitaprsthah. Udga na navam-anayanta dhira 
asrnvatir-apo arvag-atisthan. 

When the sun yokes its far ranging rays of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


422 RGVEDA 


spectrum light to its chariot, it rises over the bright and 
lustrous ocean of spatial waters, and its intelligent and 
well directed horses carry it over the orbit like the 
constant waves of the sea carrying a boat, with the result 
that the overflowing waters stand around listening and 
raining down in showers. Similarly when the self- 
luminous soul yokes the five senses, the five pranas 
and the mind and intelligence to its purpose of action in 
yoga yajna, it rises over the bright and blazing world of 
existence, the seven lights of natural powers, perceptive 
and well directed by the soul in the state of constancy, 
carry it over the waters around waiting for its orders, and 
the soul reaches its destination where it joins the Divine. 


धियं at अप्सु द॑धिषे स्वर्षा ययात॑र॒न्दश॑ मासो नव॑ग्वाः। 
अया धिया स्याम देवगोपा अया धिया तुंतुयामिात्यंहंः ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Dhiyam 10 apsu dadhise svarsam yayataran dasa 
maso navagvah. Aya dhiya syama devagopa aya 
dhiya tuturyamatyamhah. 

O divinities of nature and humanity, I pray, I 
may absorb into my pranic energies and actions that 
blissful intelligence of your gift by which the rising souls 
on the move cross the seas over ten months. May we, 
by this, be protectors and promoters of our sages and 
our divine nature. May we, by this, cross the seas over 
sin and evil. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 46 
Vishvedeva, Devapatni Devatah, Pratikshatra Atreya Rshi 
हयो न विद्धां अ॑युजि स्वयं धुरि तां व॑हामि प्रतर॑णीमवस्युवम्‌। 
नास्यां वस्मि विमुचं नावृतं पुनर्विद्वान्पथः पुरएत ऋजु 
ata ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 46 423 


im Hayo na vidvan ayuji svayam dhuri tam vahami 
prataranim-avasyuvam. Nasya vasmi_ vimucam 
navrtam punarvidvan pathah pura eta rjunesati. 


Like a trained horse on the new path, the man 
of knowledge takes on a new programme, voluntarily. I 
too carry on the new programme which is protective, 
defensive and progressive. I do not want it abandoned, 
nor do I have anything reserved or secret about it, and 
further, only a scholar pioneer and leader advancing on 
the path of rectitude would take men and leaders 
forward. 


अग्र इन्द्र वरुण faa देवाः शर्धः प्र य॑न्त मारुतोत विष्णो । 
उभा नास॑त्या रुद्रो अध याः पूषा भगः सरस्वती 
जुषन्त ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Agna indra varuna mitra devah sardhah pra yanta 
marutota visno. Ubha nasatya rudro adha gnah 
pusa bhagah sarasvati jusanta. 


Agni, O brilliant power of light, fire and 
knowledge, may Indra, powers of honour and 
excellence, Varuna, chosen powers of justice and 
goodness, Mitra, friends, devas, noble powers of nature 
and humanity, Vishnu, universal lover of life all over, 
Maruts, leaders of the force and speed of the winds, 
create strength and courage and bestow it on us. O 
Ashvins, cooperative powers of truth and rectitude of 
behaviour, Rudra, powers of justice and punishment, 
and voices of scholars and sages, Pusha, power of 
nourishment and vitality, Bhaga, creator of honour and 
prosperity and Sarasvati, spirit of knowledge, listen to 
our voice. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


424 RGVEDA 


इन्द्रागरी पित्रावरुणादिंतिं स्व॑: पृथिवीं at मरूतः पर्व॑ताँ 
अपः। हुवे विष्णुं पूषणं ब्रह्मणस्पतिं भगं नु शंसं 
सवितारमूतये ॥ ३ ॥ 


Indragni mitravarunaditim svah prthivim dyam 
marutah parvatan apah. Huve visnum pusanam 
brahmanaspatim bhagam nu Samsam savitara- 
mutaye. 


I invoke and study, for the benefit of protection 
and progress, heat, light and electricity, prana and udana 
energies of vitality, the atmosphere and the sky, the sun 
and higher regions of light, air and winds, clouds and 
mountains, waters and other liquids, all pervasive space, 
vitality of vyana energy, spirit of the universe, universal 
power and prosperity, creative energy of the universe, 
and all their positive and beneficial attributes and 
practical applications. 


उत नो विष्णुरुत areal fen! द्रविणोदा उत सोमो 
मय॑स्करत्‌। उत ऋभव उत राये al अश्विनोत त्वष्टोत 
विभ्वानुं मंसते ॥ ४॥ 


4. Uta no visnuruta vato asridho dravinoda uta somo 
mayaskarat. Uta rbhava uta radye no asvinota 
tvastota vibhvanu mamsate. 


And may the omnipresent lord Vishnu, sustainer 
of life, Vata, waves of wind and electric energy, the 
creator and giver of wealth, and Soma, spirit of peace 
and joy do us good without delay or violence. And may 
the experts and specialists, and the Ashvins, 
complementarities of natural evolution, and the maker 
of forms and sophisticated designs, all with their skill 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 46 425 


and power and knowledge enlighten and train us in arts 
and crafts for the achievement of life’s wealth and 
honour. 


उत त्यन्नो मारुतं शर्धं आ ग॑ंमदिविक्षयं य॑जतं बर्हिरासदे | 
बृहस्पतिः शर्म पूषोत नो! anges) वरुणो मित्रो 
अर्यमा UG UI 


D. Uta tvanno marutam sardha ठ gamad diviksayam 
yajatam barhirasade. Brhaspatih Sarma pusota 
no yamad varithyam varuno mitro aryama. 


And may that celestial and adorable power and 
force of the tempestuous nature of winds in consonance 
with joint human interest and advancement come and 
be installed in our homes, assemblies and centres of 
production. And may Brhaspati, father and ruler of the 
wide world, Pusha, giver of nourishment and 
sustenance, Varuna, highest leader of our choice, Mitra, 
friendly and loving as breath of life, and Aryama, lord 
of justice and correctitude grant us peace, joy and 
progress worthy of a happy home. 


उत त्ये नः पर्व॑तासः Gerad: सुदीतयो नद्यश्स्त्राम॑णे 
भुवन्‌। भगो विभक्ता शवसावसा ग॑ंमदुरुव्यचा अदितिः 
श्रोतु मे हव॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uta tye nah parvatasah susastayah suditayo 
nadyastramane bhuvan. Bhago vibhaktda savas- 
avasa gamad-uruvyaca aditih srotu me havam. 


And may those clouds and mountains, and 
streams and rivers, admirable and majestic, shine and 
flow for our sustenance and progress. May Bhaga, lord 
of honour, excellence and prosperity, generous friend 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


426 RGVEDA 


of all, come to us with universal strength and protection, 
and may Aditi, inviolable Mother Nature of unbounded 
generosity respond to our invocation and prayer and 
bless us all. 


देवानां पलींरुशतीरंवन्तु नः प्रावन्तु नस्तुजये वाज॑सातये । 
याः पार्थिवासो या अपामपि व्रते ता नो देवीः सुहवाः 
छर्म यच्छत NO UN 


7. Devanam patnir-uSatir-avantu nah pravantu 
nastujaye vajasataye. Yah parthivaso ya apamapi 
vrate ta no devih suhavah sarma yacchata. 


May the motherly divinities of nature and the 
motherly women in happy and blessed homes of pious 
people, loving, sustaining and spontaneous, protect us, 
constantly advance us to rise in strength for the 
achievement of success in battles of life. May all these 
divinities and nobilities of the earth and of the oceans 
and celestial waters of space, constant in their holy tasks, 
ever responsive to our prayer give us peace and felicity 
of home and family. 


उत ग्रा व्य॑न्तु देवप॑त्रीरिन्द्राण्यश्य्राय्यण्विनी राट्‌। आ रोद॑सी 
वरुणानी शुंणोतु व्यन्तु देवीर्य ऋतुर्जनीनाम्‌ ¢ ॥ 


8. Uta gna vyantu devapatnir-indranyagnayyasvini 
rat. A rodast varunani Srnotu vyantu devirya 
rturjaninam. 


May the brilliant divinities of nature and women 
of noble and divine disposition, protective and 
progressive, be good and responsive to our voices of 
prayer. May motherly lightning energy, heat and healing 
energies, earth and heaven, spirit of justice and soothing 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 47 427 


cool of waters, and the cycle of seasons respond. May 
mother ruler, mother leader, health care matrons, fertility 
of women, scholars of earth, heavens and oceans, be 
kind and responsive to our progress. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 47 
Vishvedeva Devata, Pratiratha Atreya Rshi 


प्रयुञ्जती दिव एति ब्रुवाणा मही माता दुहितुर्बोधयंन्ती । 
आविर्वासन्ती युवतिर्म'नीषा पितृभ्य आ सद॑ने जोह 
वाना।॥ ९॥ 


1. Prayunjati diva eti bruvana mahi mata duhitur- 
bodhayanti. Avivasanti yuvatirmanisa pitrbhya a 
sadane johuvana. 


Great and glorious mother arises in all her 
youthful splendour from the lights of heaven and, 
invoked, invited and adored on the vedi, she comes with 
radiations of light and intelligence collected from the 
nourishing and sustaining divinities of nature and 
humanity, awakening, enlightening, speaking loud and 
bold, and preparing the daughter for life in the home 
with knowledge and wisdom. (The Dawn is mother, the 
earth is daughter.) 


(The mother of the home, and the mother teacher 
in the school, is great and adorable as a human deity 
because, having collected her knowledge and wisdom 
from her parents and teachers, she arises like the dawn 
of light and prepares the daughter for intelligent living 
in an enlightened home.) 


अनिरासस्तद॑प ईय॑माना आतस्थिवांसो अमृतस्य aT 
अनन्तासं उरवो favad: सीं परि द्यावापृथिवी य॑न्ति 
पन्थाः ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


428 RGVEDA 


2 Ajirasastadapa tyamana atasthivamso amrtasya 
nabhim. Anantasa uravo visvatah sim pari dya- 
vaprthivi yanti panthah. 


The radiations of the light of the dawn, as the 
actions of wise and brilliant parents and teachers, 
abiding in the centre of immortal eternity and flowing 
therefrom, move all round fast and ceaseless, vast and 
endless, on their paths across and over heaven and earth. 


उक्षा स॑मुद्रो stea: सुं पर्णः पूर्वस्य योनिं पितुरा विवेश । 
मध्ये दिवो निहितः पृषश्निरश्मा वि च॑क्रमे रज॑सस्पा- 
त्यन्तौ ।॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Uksa samudro arusah suparnah purvasya yonim 
pitura vivesa. Madhye divo nihitah prsnirasma 
vi cakrame rajasaspatyantau. 


The mighty deep and generous ocean of waters, 
the blazing sustainer bird of space, the sun, enters in 
the spatial womb of its mother, divine Nature, fertilized 
by the original and eternal father creator. Placed in the 
midst of the heavens of light like a multicolour diamond, 
it traverses on and on, lights up, sustains and marks the 
expansive ends of the upper and lower strata of the 
sphere of heaven. 


aan ई बिभ्रति क्षेमयन्तो दशा गर्भ' ard धापयन्ते। 
त्रिधात॑वः परमा अस्य गावों दिवश्चरन्ति परि सद्यो 
अन्तान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Catvara im bibhrati ksemayanto dasa garbham 


carase dhapayante. Tridhatavah parama asya 
gavo divascaranti pari sadyo antan. 


The directions of space, receiving the sustaining 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 47 429 


light and warmth of life, bear it up. Ten directions of 
space feed the world they hold as a baby to keep it going. 
The rays of the sun radiate from the highest region of 
light and fill the threefold world of sattva, rajas and 
tamas, heaven, firmament and the earth, reaching all 
round to the borders of it almost instantly. 


इदं वपुर्निवच॑नं जनासश्चरन्ति यच्नद्य॑स्तस्थुराप॑ः | 
दवे यदीं विभृतो मातुर न्ये See जाते यम्या ३ सब॑न्धू ॥ & ॥ 


च Idam vapur-nivacanam jandasaSscaranti yanna- 
dyastasthurapah. Dve yadim bibhrto maturanye 
iheha jate yamya sabandhiu. 


Just as rivers hold and celebrate the flowing 
waters, so do people revere and adore this refulgent sun 
of wondrous form which two twin sisters, day and night, 
born of the same mother, hold and nurse the same one 
brother though born of another mother. 


वि त॑न्वते feral अस्मा अपांसि वस्त्रा gare मातरो वयन्ति | 
उपप्रक्षे वृष॑णो मोद॑माना दिवस्पथा वध्वो य॒न्त्यच्छ॑ ।। ६ ॥ 

6. Vi tanvate dhiyo asma apamsi vastra putrdaya 
mataro vayanti. Upaprakse vrsano modamana 
divaspatha vadhvo yantyaccha. 


Celebrants compose songs of adoration from 
their heart and intellect and extend yajnic homage up to 
this sun by the paths of light and fire just as mothers 
weave and sew clothes for the child and joyous wives 
eagerly move to join their generous husbands. 


तद॑स्तु मित्रावरुणा aed शं योरस्मभ्य॑पिदमंस्तु शस्तम्‌ | 
अशीमहि गाधमुत प्र॑तिष्ठां नमो दिवे बुं हते साद॑नाय ॥ ७ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


430 RGVEDA 


a Tadastu mitravaruna tadagne sam yorasma- 
bhyamidamastu sastam. Asimahi gadhamuta 
pratistham namo dive brhate sadanaya. 


O Mitra and Varuna, lord of love and judgement, 
sun and the sea, day and night, mother and father, prana 
and udana energies, O Agni, yajna fire purifier, revered 
teacher, teacher pioneer and giver of enlightenment, may 
this cherished song of ours be for our peace and 
blessedness which is all time free from suffering and 
pain. May we attain a home and haven of high excellence 
and unshakable honour and prestige. Salutations to the 
great and glorious heaven of light, eternal and 
imperishable! 


Mandala 5/Sukta 48 
Vishvedeva Devata, Pratibhanu Atreya Rshi 


कदु प्रियाय धाम्न मनामहे स्वक्षत्राय स्वय॑शसे महे वयम्‌। 
आमेन्यस्य रज॑सो wey ओं अपो dune वितनोति 
मायिनीं॥ ९॥ 


i, Kadu priyaya dhamne manamahe svaksatraya 
svayasase mahe vayam. Amenyasya rajaso 
yadabhra an apo vrnana vitanoti mayini. 


When shall we all sing and celebrate in honour 
of our own domain, our cherished independent identity 
and social order, our own honour and glory, which, 
commanding its own power and splendour, pursuing 
its own policy, extends its resounding actions and waters 
of peace and freedom among the people, across the lands 
and over the clouds of immeasurable skies and spaces? 
When shall we think and reflect upon this? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 48 431 


ता aad वयुनं वीरवंक्षणं समान्या वृतया विश्वमा रज॑ः | 
अपो अपाचीरप॑रा अपेजते प्र पूर्वीभिस्तिरते देव - 
युर्जन॑ः ॥ २ ॥ 


2, Ta atnata vayunam viravaksanam samanya 
vrtaya visvama rajah. Apo apdacirapara apejate 
pra purvabhistirate devayurjanah. 


Those acts and policies of peace and freedom 
provide incentives to the brave and extend knowledge 
and positive action programmes over the entire world 
of humanity, through uniform treatment and equality of 
law for all. A brilliant nation of vision and noble action 
doesn’t procrastinate over the present, agitating over 
the past or worrying and waiting for the future, it crosses 
the bridges in front right away. 


आ ग्राव॑भिरहन्येभिर py RS aan जिघर्ति मायिनिं। 
शतं वा यस्य॑ प्रचर न्त्स्वे दमे संवर्तय॑न्तो वि a वर्त- 
यत्नहां ॥ ३ ॥ 


a: A gravabhir-ahanyebhir-aktubhir-varistham 
vajra-ma jighrti mayini. Satam va yasya praca- 
rantsve dame samvartayanto vi ca vartayannaha. 


Ever and instantly, this nation shines and 
sharpens its best arms and armaments day and night 
with the stones (which sharpen the arms and press the 
soma too) or with the clouds of showers against the 
evil of want and suffering of ignorance, and otherwise 
too hundreds of its forces actively working together in 
their own fields spend their time moving forward in a 
state of readiness with a challenging spirit. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


432 RGVEDA 


ताम॑स्य रीतिं प॑र शोरिंव प्रत्यनींकमणख्यं भुजे अ॑स्य वर्प॑सः | 
सचा यदि पितुमन्त॑मिव क्षयं tea दधाति भर॑हूतये 
विषो ॥ ४॥ 


4. Tamasya ritim parasoriva pratyanikamakhyam 
bhuje asya varpasah. Saca yadi pitumantamiva 
ksayam ratnam dadhati bharahutaye vise. 


That character and disposition, that form and 
policy of its dynamic flow, that admirable force of its 
arms like the razor’s edge, I know, is in keeping with its 
identity for the purpose of peace, protection and 
progress, and, like a comfortable home full of plenty, it 
holds the jewels of wealth and felicity for the people at 
the beck and call of the inmates. 


स fea चतु.रनीक ऋञ्जते चारु वसानो वरुणो 
यतंन्नरिम्‌। न तस्य॑ विद्या पुरुषत्वत। वयं यतो भग॑ः सविता 
दाति वार्यम्‌॥ UI 


= Sa jihvaya caturanika rnjate caru vasano varuno 
yatannarim. Na tasya vidma purusatvata vayam 
yato bhagah savita dati varyam. 


The nation, the ruler, the fire, the sun, wearing 
a charming form, shining with forces all round in all 
four directions, encounters the opposing darkness with 
the tongue of light and flame. We know not how, with 
what strength and power, from where this Varuna, best 
and highest power of justice and wisdom, Bhaga, 
commanding wealth and felicity, Savita, inspiring all 
with exhilaration, brings and bestows on us all the 
cherished gifts of life, how he makes everything 
possible. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 49 433 


Mandala 5/Sukta 49 
Vishvedeva Devata, Pratiprabha Atreya Rshi 


ed al अद्य संवितारमेषे भगं च tat विभजंन्तमायोः। 
आ वां नरा पुरुभुजा ववृत्यां दिवेदिवे चिदश्विना 
सखीयन्‌॥ ९॥ 


iP Devam vo adya savitaramese bhagam ca ratnam 
vibhajantamayoh. A vam nara puru-bhuja 
vavrtyam divedive cidasvina sakhiyan. 


For you all today I love, gratefully desire and 
pray for favour of the brilliant and generous Savita, 
inspirer of light and life, Bhaga, treasure source of 
honour and prosperity and the loving spirit of life and 
living beings that showers the jewel wealth and felicity 
on all. O Ashvins, leading complementarities of nature 
powers and humanity, ruler and people, leaders and 
followers, men and women, parents and children, 
teachers and disciples, blessed participants and 
celebrants of life for all, I love to be friends with you 
and pray that I may love, cooperate and be with you 
day in and day out. 


प्रतिं प्रयाणमसुरस्य विदवान्त्सूक्तर्दैवं सवितारं दुवस्य । उप॑ 
ब्रुवीत नम॑सा विजानञ्ज्येष्ठं च tet विभजंन्तमायोः ॥ २॥ 


2: Prati prayanam-asurasya vidvant-shuktairde- 
vam savitaram duvasya. Upa bruvita namasa 
vijananjyestham ca ratnam vibhajantamayoh. 


Sagely scholar, watch the evolution of life and 
energy, meditate on the self-refulgent Savita, inspirer 
of life, with Vedic songs of praise and prayer, and with 
homage and gratitude speak precisely of the supreme, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


434 RGVEDA 


the most precious felicity pervading and participating 
in the evolution of life, knowing well the gifts of the 
lord. 


sane द॑यते वायीणि yor भगो अदितिर्वस्त॑ ser: | 
इन्द्रो विष्णुर्वरुणो मित्रो अथिरहानि भद्रा ज॑नयन्त 
दस्माः UB A 


ai Adatraya dayate varyani pusa bhago aditirvasta 
usrah. Indro visnurvaruno mitro agnirahani bha- 
dra janayanta dasmah. 


Aditi, eternal and infinite creative power of lord 
Savita’s Nature, Prakrti, wears the mantle of the 
morning. Pusha, nature’s nourishing power, and Bhaga, 
inexhaustible generosity, produce, promote and give the 
choicest gifts of food for consumption and creation of 
energy. Indra, catalytic radiation, Vishnu, all pervasive 
energy, Varuna, udana energy for evolution, Mitra, 
pranic energy of life, Agni, heat and light for life, all 
these creative and generative powers give rise to the 
days of light and bliss for us. 


dal अनर्वा fae वरूथं तत्सिन्ध॑व इषयन्तो अनुं ग्मन्‌ । 
उप यद्वोचें अध्वरस्य होता रायः स्याम पत॑यो वाज॑- 
Yat: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. 1471710 anarva savita varutham tat sindhava 
isayanto anu gman. Upa yad voce adhvarasya 
hota rayah syama patayo vajaratnah. 


May lord Savita, creator, with his radiating 
energy, grant us that treasure of cherished values of 
hearth and home which I celebrate as organiser and 
achiever of yajnic production, and which the flowing 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 50 435 


rivers and swelling seas promote with love and desire 
in obedience to the lord. O lord, we pray, may we, blest 
with energy and felicity of existence, be protectors and 
promoters of the wealth of the world. 


प्रये वसुभ्य ईवदा नमो दुर्ये मित्रे वरणे Gata: | 
अवैत्वभ्वं कृणुता वरीयो दिवस्पूंथिव्योरव॑सा मदेम ॥ ५॥ 


5, Pra ye vasubhya iwada namo durye mitre varune 
suktavacah. Avaitvabhvam krnuta variyo 
divasprthivyor-avasa madema. 


Let untold wealth and knowledge flow to those 
who offer homage and yajnic service to the Vasus, 
creative abodes of life and sustenance in the world of 
nature, and to those who raise their voice of adoration 
in honour of Mitra and Varuna, friendly sun and seas 
and all embracing space. O Vishvedevas, creative 
divinities, create for us wealth of exceptional order so 
that we may abide and enjoy under the protection of 
heaven and earth. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 50 
Vishvedeva Devata, Svasti Atreya Rshi 
विश्वो! tard नेतुर्मर्तो वुरीत सख्यम्‌। 
विश्वो राय इषुध्यति द्युम्नं dutta पुष्यसे ।॥ ९ ॥ 
| Visvo devasya neturmarto vutita sakhyam. 
Visvo raya isudhyati dyumnam vrnita pusyase. 


Let all the mortals, people of the world, choose 
and win the favour and friendship of the brilliant leader 
and pioneer who targets and commands the wealth of 
the world. O people of the world choose the wealth, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


436 RGVEDA 


power and splendour of the world for the sake of growth 
and advancement. 


ad देव Aa चेमां अंनुशसें। 
ते राया ते द्याडेपृचे सचेमहि wast: ॥ २॥ 


2 Te te deva netarye ceman anuSase. 
Te raya te hyaprce sacemahi sacathyaih. 


O brilliant leader and ruler, those who have 
chosen you are wholly for you, and so are these whom 
you approve and admire. All the assets and powers of 
the nation are yours to rule and protect, and to share, 
defend and augment the same we are keen to join you 
and win your favour. 


अतो न आ नृनतिंथीनतः पल्नींर्दशस्यत | 
आरे विश्वं पथेष्ठां द्विषो data यूयुंविः॥ ३ ॥ 


3: Ato na त nrn-atithin-atah patnir-dasasyata. 
Are visvam pathestham dviso yuyotu yuyuvih. 


From here, from this elective and promotive 
yajna of total cooperation, serve and strengthen and 
thereby promote us all, leaders, chance visitors, 
immigrants and others, raise and promote the women, 
mothers of the nation, and, maker and breaker as you 
are, throw off all the hate, enmity and negativities 
obstructing the paths of progress. 


यत्र वद्धि र्‌ भिर्हितो दु द्रवद्‌ द्रोण्य॑ः पशुः | 
नृमणा वीरपस्त्योऽ णा धीरेव सनिता ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yatra vahnir-abhihito dudravad dronyah pasuh. 
Nrmana virapastyo’rna dhireva sanita. 


Where the fire, placed, invoked and kindled in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 51 437 


the vedi rises in flames, where a fiery leader, elected, 
supported and enthused goes around watching and 
watched all round among a dynamic people, loving all 
and loved at heart by all, and where the homes abound 
with brave and brilliant youth, there the streams of 
prosperity flow deep and calm like inalienable partners 
of the nation. 


एष ते देव नेता रथस्पतिः शं Tf: i शं राये शं स्वस्तयं 
इषःस्तुतों मनामहे देवस्तुतो मनामहे ॥ ५ ॥ 

Esa te deva neta rathaspatih Sam rayih. Sam raye 
Sam svastaya isah stuto manamahe devastuto 
manamahe. 


O brilliant leader, pilot of the nation to peace 
and prosperity, this warrior of the chariot is yours, this 
peace, this wealth, power and prosperity is for you. This 
peace is for wealth and this peace and prosperity is for 
holiness of well-being. This warrior of the chariot, peace 
and prosperity honours and adores food, energy and 
knowledge. We love and adore this peace and prosperity. 
We love and adore you and the nation honoured by the 
divines. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 51 
Vishvedeva Devata, Svasti Atreya Rshi 
अग्रै सुतस्य॑ पीतये विश्वैरूमेभिरा गं॑हि। 
देवेभिर्हव्यदांतये ॥ ९॥ 


I, Agne sutasya pitaye visvair-umebhira gahi. 
Devebhir-havyadataye. 


Agni, light of knowledge and fire of life, come 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


438 RGVEDA 


with all the means and methods of protection and 
progress, come with all the divines of the world and 
divine generosities of nature to enjoy what knowledge 
and nourishment we have distilled for your treat and 
bring the wealth and knowledge you have gained for us. 


ऋत॑धीतय आ ग॑त॒ सत्य॑धर्माणो अध्वरम्‌ । 
अभः पित reat ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Rtadhitaya a gata satyadharmano adhvaram. 
Agneh pibata jihvaya. 


O divine scholars, radiations of nature’s 
vitalities, observers of the laws of universal truth, 
followers of the truth of Dharma and the Dharma of 
Truth, come to our yajna of love and non-violence and 
scientific creation in honour of the Lord. Agni, leading 
light of the world, drink the joy of life by the tongues of 
fire. 
विप्रेभिर्विप्र सन्त्य प्रातयविंभिरा ग॑हि। 
देवेभिः सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३॥ 

छ Viprebhirvipra santya prataryavabhira gahi. 
Devebhih somapitaye. 

O vipra, vibrant scholar, eminent sage of the 
present age, come with other scholars, with the 
knowledge and freshness of the morning light and 
breeze which stir and radiate with the dawn. Come with 
the divines for a drink of the soma we have distilled. 


अयं सोम॑श्चमू सुतोऽमंत्रे UR षिच्यते | 
प्रिय इन्द्राय वायवे i x ॥ 


4. Ayam somascamiu suto’matre pari sicyate. 
Priya indraya vayave. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 51 439 


This soma, inspiring power and honour of the 
nation, reflected in the defence forces as soma is held 
in the charu vessel, and held in the body politic as soma 
is poured in the goblet, is the love and pride of Indra, 
ruling lord, and Vayu, tempestuous defence forces. 


वायवा alfe वीतये जुषाणो हव्यदातये | 
पिबा सुतस्यान्धसो अभि प्रय॑ः॥ ५॥ 


Vayava yahi vitaye jusano havyadataye. 
Piba sutasyandhaso abhi prayah. 


O Vayu, force and power of the nation, come 
for the delight of a drink of the soma of knowledge and 
enlightenment with love and joy for the self sacrificing 
people. Enjoy the flavour of the food and stimulating 
taste of the drink on the tongue. 


Sava वायवेषां सुतानां पीतिमर्हथः | 
ताञ्जुषेथामरेपसावभि प्रय॑: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Indrasca vayavesam sutanam pitimarhathah. 
Tanjusetham-arepasavabhi prayah. 


Indra and Vayu, ruler of the land and commander 
of the defence forces, you deserve a drink of the soma 
of the nation’s power and culture. Come, watch the 
effects and delicacies of their taste and decency, and, 
inspired with love and holiness, enjoy the beauties of 
life. 


सुता इन्द्राय वायवे सोमासो दध्यांशिरः। 
निम्नं न य॑न्ति सिन्ध॑वोऽभि प्रय॑ः nie 


Te Suta indraya vayave somaso dadhyasirah. 
Nimnam na yanti sindhvo’bhi prayah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


440 RGVEDA 


Just as rivers flow downwards to the seas, so 
the sweetness and decency of the soma of human values 
and culture distilled with effort and cooperative action 
flow to Indra and Vayu, the strong and the progressive. 


सजुर्विश्वेभिर्देवेभिर्‌ श्विभ्यामुषसा सजुः | 
आ याह्यग्ने अत्रिवत्सुते र॑ण ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sajurvisvebhirdevebhirasvibhyamusasa sajuh. 
A yahyagne atrivat sute rana. 


Agni, giver of enlightenment and the fire of life, 
friend and associate of all the generous divinities, 
companion of the dawn and the Ashvins, circuitous 
complementaries of natural energies, come into this 
world of creative humanity like an omnipresent power 
free from threefold bondage of body, mind and soul, 
rejoice and proclaim your message of light and love 
loud and bold. 


सजूर्मित्रावरुणाभ्यां सजुः area विष्णुना । 
आ याह्यग्ने अत्रिवत्सुते र॑ण ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sajurmitravarunabhyam sajuh somena visnuna. 
A yahyagne atrivat sute rana. 


Agni, giver of knowledge and power, come 
together with prana and udana energies of nature, come 
together with the peace and beauty of the moon and the 
vastness of omnipresent space, come like a sage free 
from the threefold worries of past, present and future, 
come to the world of creative and endeavouring 
humanity, rejoice and proclaim your message of 
knowledge and action loud and bold. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 51 441 


सजूरादित्येर्वसुंभिः सजूरिन्द्रेण वायुना । 
आ याह्यग्ने अत्रिवत्सुते र॑ण ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sajuradityairvasubhih sajurindrena vayuna. A 
yahyagne atrivat sute rana. 


Agni, giver of health and knowledge, come 
together with the light of the sun as in the changing 
months and seasons, come with the generosity of the 
abodes of life such as earth, come with the breath of 
life and glow of health, come with the force and 
freshness of the winds, come to the world of joint human 
yajna like one free from threefold ailments of body, mind 
and spirit, rejoice and proclaim your message of health 
and energy loud and bold. 


स्वस्ति नो मिमीतामज्विना भग॑ः स्वस्ति देव्यदिंतिरनर्वर्णः। 
स्वस्ति पूषा असुरो दधातु नः स्वस्ति द्यावापृथिवी 
सुचेतुना eeu 


11.  Svasti no mimitam-asvina bhagah svasti devya- 
ditir-anarvanah. Svasti pusa asuro dadhatu nah 
svasti dyavaprthivi sucetund. 


May the Ashvins, complementarities of nature 
and humanity such as teachers and preachers, day and 
night, sun and moon, prana and apana energies, bring 
us peace and well-being. May Bhaga, lord of glory, bless 
us with peace and honour. May the eternal imperishable 
Mother Nature and indivisible Vedic revelation of 
omniscience bless the independent scholars with peace 
and spiritual joy and vision. May the nourishment and 
showers of the life-giving cloud bring us peace and joy. 
And may the heaven and earth bless us with peace of 
mind, joy of knowledge and spiritual illumination. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


442 RGVEDA 


स्वस्तये वायुमुपं ब्रवामहे सोमं स्वस्ति थुव॑नस्य यस्पतिः 1 
ब्रहस्पति सर्वगणं स्वस्तये स्वस्तय॑ आदित्यासो भवन्तु 
नः॥ ९२॥ 


12. Svastaye vayumupa bravamahai somam svasti 
bhuvanasya yaspatih. Brhaspatim sarvaganam 
svastaye svastaya adityaso bhavantu nah. 


Let us study and describe Vayu, wind, energy, 
and pursue programmes of peace and joy for our social 
good and well-being. May the lord ruler who controls 
and sustains the world be good and kind to us. Let us 
pray to the Lord of the expansive universe and honour 
the head of all the world communities for our peace 
and progress. May the scholars of the highest order and 
the cycle of the solar phases of time and seasons be 
good and kind to us for our well-being. 


विश्वे देवा al अद्या स्वस्तये! वैश्वानरो aa fa: स्वस्तये । 
देवा अंवन्त्वृभरवंः स्वस्तये स्वस्ति नो GA: पात्वंहसः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Visve deva no adya svastaye vaisvanaro vasu- 
ragnih svastaye. Deva avntvrbhavah svastaye 
svasti no rudrah patvamhasah. 


May all the generous divinities of nature and 
brilliant sages of the world be good and kind to us for 
our well-being today. May the all pervasive vitality of 
life’s energy be kind and favourable for our peace and 
well-being. May all the generous scholars and brilliant 
experts be for our good and advancement in peace with 
joy. May Rudra, lord of law and justice, be good and 
kind and save us from sin for our well-being. May all 
the divinities protect us. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 443 


स्वस्ति मित्रावरुणा स्वस्ति प॑थ्ये रेवति । स्वस्ति न इन्द्रश्चा- 
faga स्वस्ति नो अदिते कृधि।॥ ९४॥ 


14. = Svasti mitravaruna svasti pathye revati. 
Svasti na indrascagnisca svasti no adite krdhi. 


May Mitra and Varuna, sun and moon, prana 
and udana energies of nature, rich in life’s wealth of 
vitality, be for our good and well-being and guard us to 
move on the right path of action. May the universal 
electric energy and the vital heat of life’s vitality be 
kind and good for our well-being. O Mother Nature, 
eternal and imperishable one, do us good, be kind and 
gracious. 


स्वस्ति पन्थामनु चरेम सूर्याचन्द्रमसाविव | 
पुनर्ददताघ्च॑ता जानता सं ग॑मेमहि ॥ ९५५ ॥ 
15. वरा panthamanu carema suryacandrama- 


saviva. Punardadataghnata janata sam game- 
mahi. 


Let us follow the path of peace, progress and 
well-being like the sun and moon, moving forward with 
men of knowledge and self-awareness, giving, receiving 
and giving again, in our orbit without hurting and 
encroachment on the rights of others, at the same time 
maintaining our own identity. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 52 
Marutah Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


प्र श्यावाश्व धृष्णुयाऽची मरुद्धिऋक्रभिः। 
ये अंद्रोघमनुष्वधं श्रवो मद॑न्ति यज्जियाः ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


444 RGVEDA 


1; Pra syavasva dhrsnuya’rca marudbhir-rkvabhih. 
Ye adrogham-anusvadham sravo madanti 
yajniyah. 

O bold yajaka, riding the spectrum flames of 
holy fire, honour and celebrate those divinities worthy 
of reverence and homage who exult with electric 
vitalities of the winds and vibrancy of dynamic people 
without hate and jealousy within the laws of nature and 
their own potential, and who accept the homage and 
spontaneously respond according to nature. 


ते हि स्थिरस्य शव॑सः सखायः सन्ति धृष्णुया | 
ते यामन्ना धुषद्धिनस्त्मना urea शश्व॑तः ॥ २॥ 


ps Te hi sthirasya savasah sakhayah santi dhrsnuya. 
Te yamanna dhrsadvinas-tmana panti Sasvatah. 


Bold and brilliant, they are friends and constant 
companions of the strong among the stable minded 
people, and on the highways of life they, sincerely and 
spontaneously, protect and promote the brave and 
resolute always without fail. 


ते स्पन्द्रासो नोक्षणोऽतिं ष्कन्दन्ति ora a: | 
मरुतामधा महो दिवि erat चं मन्महे।॥ ३॥ 


3: Te spandraso noksano’ti skandanti Sarvarih. 
Marutamadha maho divi ksama ca manmahe. 


Streaming and overflowing with generosity like 
the cloud and the sun, they shower the nights and dawns 
of twilight with showers of rain and dew. We admire 
and celebrate the grandeur, potential and forbearance 
of the winds on the heights of heaven and the strength 
and stability of vibrant people in the brilliance of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 445 
humanity. 


मरुत्सु at दधीमहि स्तोमं यज्ञं च॑ धृष्णुया | 
विश्वे ये मानुषा युगा पान्ति मर्त्य॑" रिषः ॥ ४॥ 


4. Marutsu vo dadhimahi stomam yajnam ca 
dhrsnuya. Visve ye manusa yuga panti martyam 
risah. 


For you all, let us admire and honour all those 
of you and hold them among the Maruts as children of 
stormy winds and rays of light who protect our songs 
of praise and prayer and promote the flames and 
fragrance of yajna throughout human history and save 
humanity from violence with strength and determina- 
tion. 


अर्हन्तो ये सुदानवो नरो असमिशवसः। 
प्र यज्ञं य्ियेभ्यो दिवो stat मरु द्यं: ॥ ५ ॥ 
a. Arhanto ye sudanavo naro asamisavasah. 
Pra yajnam yajniyebhyo divo arca marudbhyah. 


Honour and admire those leading lights who are 
deservingly meritorious and commanding, generously 
charitable, strong and determined, loving and brilliant, 
and who dedicate their songs and yajna to the dynamic 
Maruts among humanity worthy of reverence. 


आ BRT युधा नर॑ ऋष्वा ऋष्टीरंसूक्षत। Saat अहं 
विद्युतो मरुतो जच््तीरिव भानुरर्त त्मना दिवः॥ ६॥ 


6. A rukmaira yudha nara rsva rstirasrksata. 
Anvenan aha vidyuto maruto jajjhatiriva bhanu- 
rarta tmana divah. 


While the leading lights and mighty warriors 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


446 RGVEDA 


with blazing arms launch the attack upon the enemy, 
then, for sure, upon the heels of these tempestuous forces 
and shining leaders the light and splendour of the world 
follows spontaneously like roaring streams of water. 


ये वावृधन्त पार्थिवा य उरावन्तरिंश्च आ। 
वृजन वा नदीनां सधस्थे वा महो दिवः neu 


५५ Ye vavrdhanta parthiva ya uravantriksa a. 
Vrjane va nadinam sadhasthe va maho divah. 


The heroes of the earth who rise in honour and 
glory, the winds and currents of lightning energy in the 
wide wide skies, or the roaring waters flowing in the 
river beds and around, or the splendour of the regions 
of light, these are the Maruts worthy of honour and 
celebration with homage. 


vet मारुतमुच्छस सत्यशणवसमृभ्व॑सम्‌। 
उत स्मते शुभे नरः प्र स्पन्द्रा युजत त्मना ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sardho marutamucchamsa satyasavasam- 
rbhvasam. Uta sma te subhe narah pra spandra 
yujata tmana. 


Honour and celebrate the strength and courage 
of humanity, admire and value the honest wisdom and 
rectitude of the scientist and the expert. O leading lights 
and brave pioneers of the human nation, moving forward 
with steadiness and dignity, join the onward march of 
humanity for a noble divine purpose. Join it 
conscientiously, honestly, without reservation. 


sa A a परष्ण्यामूर्णी वसत शुन्ध्यव॑ः। 
उत पव्या रथानामद्वि' चिन्दन्त्योज॑सा॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 447 


9. Uta sma te parusnyamurna vasata Sundhyavah. 
Uta pavya rathanam-adrim bhindantyojasa. 

And they, the Maruts, leading lights and 

warriors, self-secure on the tortuous paths of existence, 


shining bright and pure, with their valour and wheels 
of the chariot ride the clouds and shatter the mountains. 


siden विप॑थयोऽ न्त॑स्पथा अनुंपथाः। 
एतेभिर्मह्यं नाम॑भिर्यज्ञं विं्टार ओहते ॥ ९० ॥ 

10. Apathayo vipathayo’ntaspatha anupathah. 
Etebhir-mahyam namabhir-yajnam vistara ohate. 


Travellers hitherwards, or travellers by various 
ways, or travellers over the interior ways, or travellers 
of open and successive ways, thus and by these names 
and descriptions they bring expansion to my yajna. 


अधा नरो न्योंहतेऽधां नियुतं ओहते । 
अधा पारावता इतिं चित्रा रूपाणि द्यी ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Adha naro nyohate’dha niyuta ohate. 
Adha paravata iti citra rupani darsya. 

Leaders of knowledge and advancement, 
sometimes they carry the burdens by themselves, 
sometimes appointed as a team in cooperation with 
others, and sometimes stationed far away: thus their 
forms and functions are various, wondrous, beautiful 
and beatific. 


छन्दःस्तुभ॑ः कुभन्यव उत्समा कीरिणो। नृतुः 1 
तेमेके चिन्न तायव ऊमा आसन्दशि त्विषे ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Chandah stubhah kubhanyava utsama kirino 
nrtuh. Te me ke cinna tayava uma asan drsi tvise. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


448 RGVEDA 


Poetic celebrities, some of them, thirsting for 
self-expression, burst out in lyrics and sing and dance 
in divine ecstasy from the depth of the heart. Some of 
them like streams profusely flowing for us are protectors 
and saviours, and some of them shine in the sight of the 
beholder because shine they must by nature. 


य ऋष्वा ऋष्टिविंद्युतः कवयः सन्तिं aera: । 
age मारुतं गणं Amen रमया गिरा॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ya rsva rstividyutah kavayah santi vedhasah. 
Tamrse marutam ganam namasya ramaya gira. 


Those who are great and strong, formidable 
scholars of science, of heat, light and electric energy, 
poetic visionaries, writers and singers, and sages of the 
sacred love: for that class of dynamic leaders and path 
finders, O Rshi, seer, sage and scholar, offer reverence 
and homage and, with the celebrant’s words of praise 
and appreciation, give them the feel of the joy and 
holiness of their vocation. 


अच्छ ऋषे मारुतं गणं दाना fast न योषणां । 
दिवो at धृष्णव ओजसा स्तुता धीभिरिंषण्यत ॥ ९४ i 


14. Accha rse marutam ganam dana mitram na 
yosana. Divo va dhrsnava ojasa stuta dhibhir- 
isanyata. 


Just as a maiden goes to her chosen friend and 
love, so, O Rshi, sagely seer and scholar, with gifts of 
homage, go reverentially to the congregation of the 
Maruts, dynamic scholars, leaders and divinities of the 
world. O Maruts, brilliant as light, loving, bold and 
determined, blazing with splendour, celebrated by the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 449 


wise and visionaries, come, hasten to our yajna and 
receive our homage. 


नू मन्वान एषां देवों अच्छा न वक्षणा। 
दाना स॑चेत सुरिभिर्यामिश्रुतेभिर Say: ॥ ९५॥ 


15. ४ manvana esam devan accha na vaksana. 
Dana saceta suribhir-yamasrutebhir-anyjibhih. 


As the stream flows and meets the sea, so should 
the man of thought and reverence eagerly meet the 
Maruts, brilliant and divine natures in humanity, with 
gifts of homage and associate with the wise and brave, 
celebrated and gracious scholars, leaders and path 
makers who are well versed in law and the ethics of 
conduct. 


wa मे बन्ध्वेषे गां वोच॑न्त सूरयः पृश्चिं वोचन्त मातर॑म्‌। 
अधां पितर॑पिष्पिणं रुद्रं वोचन्त शिक्रसः॥ १६॥ 


16. Pra ye me bandhvese gam = vocanta surayah 
prsnim vocanta mataram. Adha pitaramism-inam 
rudram vocanta Sikvasah. 


I meet, associate, and write with the Maruts, 
those leading lights wise and brave who speak to me as 
to a friend and brother in search of human and divine 
bonding. Mighty powerful are they who speak to me of 
the Holy Word, of heat and light of the sun, the earth 
and the cow. They speak of the rainbow skies and spaces, 
and of Mother Nature, and then they reveal to me the 
omnipresent omnipotent Father and Rudra, lord of 
justice and mercy. 


सप्त मे सप्त शाकिन एकमेका शता de: | यमुनायामधिं 
श्रुतमुद्राधो गव्यं मृजे नि राधो अश्व्यं मृजे ॥ ९७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


450 RGVEDA 


17.  Sapta me sapta Sakina ekameka sata daduh. 
Yamunayamadhi srutamud radho gavyam mrje 
ni radho asvyam mrje. 


Seven and seven are the Maruts, wise and brave, 
and each one of them gives me a hundred gifts of 
knowledge, will and strength for action, and love of 
life and divine worship. What I have heard 
comprehensively on yama and niyama, ethics of conduct 
in social and personal life, and on the subject of success 
regarding earthly life (abhyudaya), and the philosophy 
of attainment and ultimate destination and arrival 
(nihshreyas), I specify and refine for practical 
application and success in the earthly situation and in 
relation to the ultimate freedom of Moksha in the 
personal psychic and spiritual situation. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 53 
Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


को वेद्‌ जानमेषां को at पुरा सुम्नेर्ष्वास मरुूताम्‌। 
यद्युयुजे ferent: ॥ ९॥ 


1 Ko veda janamesam ko va pura sumnesvasa 
marutam. Yad yuyujre kilasyah. 

Who knows the origin of these Maruts? Who 
was present in the peace and pleasure of the Maruts? 
Whoever concentrates the mind, meditates on their 
presence, and joins them, and then has the clear and 
specific language to describe them, knows these stormy 
powers. 


एेतान्रथेषु तस्थुषः कः शुश्राव कथा aa: | 
कस्मै सस्तु: सुदासे अन्वापय इव्छ॑भिर्वष्ट य॑: सह॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 53 451 


2. Aitan rathesu tasthusah kah susrava katha yayuh. 
Kasmai sasruh sudase anvapaya ilabhirvrstayah 
saha. 


Who perceives them riding their chariot on earth 
and in the skies and who knows whither they move? 
For which generous man or power do they rise and flow 
and turn like friends with the showers of their mysterious 
message and food for life? 


ते म॑ srgd आययुरुप द्युभिर्विभिर्मदे। 
नरो मयी sod इमान्पश्यत्नितिं ष्टुहि॥ ३॥ 


SF Te ma ahurya ayayurupa dyubhir-vibhir-made. 
Naro marya arepasa iman pasyanniti stuhi. 


They speak to me who come to me with lights 
of revelation, flying like birds in ecstasy: “Noble men 
among mortals free from sin and folds of ignorance have 
seen these Maruts.” Say this, appreciate and praise the 
Maruts. 


ये sary ये वाशींषु स्वभानवः स्रक्षु रुक्मेषुं खादिषु | 
श्राया TAG धन्व॑सु ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Ye anjisu ye vasisu svabhanavah sraksu rukmesu 
khadisu. Sraya rathesu dhanvasu. 


The people who are innately brilliant, who shine 
in their open works and achievements, in their speech 
and expression, in garlands of applause in series of 
action programmes, in their golds and jewels of honour, 
and who ride pioneering chariots of nations and resound 
in the twang of their bow: they are the Maruts. 


युष्माकं स्मा रथाँ अनुं मुदे द॑धे मरुतो जीरदानवः | 
वृष्टी द्यावो यतीरिंव ॥ ५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


452 RGVEDA 


६ Yusmakam sma rathan anu mude dadhe maruto 
Jiradanavah. Vrsti dyavo yatiriva. 


O Maruts, leading lights and unaging pioneers, 
I take to your chariots for your pleasure and exhilaration 
and rise to the clouds of shower and lights of heaven. 


आ यं नर॑: सुदानवो ददाशुषे दिवः कोशमचुच्यवुः | 
वि पर्जन्यं सृजन्ति रोद॑सी अनु धन्व॑ना यन्ति gee: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A yam narah sudanavo dadasuse divah kosam- 
acucyavuh. Vi parjanyam srjanti rodast anu dhan- 
vana yanti vrstayah. 


The treasure wealth of holy vapours, which the 
generous leading lights of the science of yajna cause to 
move from the regions of sunlight for the generous 
creators and givers of food and energy, shower down to 
the earth and skies: The skies then form the clouds and 
let them rain down on the earth and the floods move as 
directed over the thirsty lands. 


(This mantra is on the science of rain and 
irrigation which can further be explained with reference 
to Chhandogya Upanishad 5, 4, 1 to 5, 8, 2, and Gita 3, 
14-16.) 


ततृदानाः सिन्ध॑वः क्षोद॑सा रजः प्र संस्तुर्धेनवों यथा | 
erat अर्बाइवाध्व॑नो विमोचने वि aged a एन्यः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Tatrdanah sindhavah ksodasa rajah pra sasrur- 
dhenavo yatha. Syanna asva ivadhvano vimocane 
vi yad vartanta enyah. 


Released and freely flowing, soaking and 
breaking the lands with the flood, the rivers flow over 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 53 453 


and on, irrigating the lands like mother cows feeding 
the people. Like horses they go on covering and leaving 
their track behind, the streams revolve as they go on in 
their circular course of yajna. 


आ ata मरुतो दिव आन्तरिंक्षादमादुत। 
माव॑ स्थात परावतः ॥ ८ ॥ 


ध, A yata maruto diva antariksadamaduta. 
Mava sthata paravatah. 


O Maruts, leading lights and stormy forces of 
nature and humanity, creators and givers, come, come 
from the lights of heaven, come from the skies, come 
from near and afar, be on the move, never stay still, do 
not stagnate. 


मावोरसानिंतभा कुभा क्रुमुर्मा a: सिन्धुर्न Gad 
मा वः UR छात्सरयुंः पुरीषिण्यस्मे इत्सुम्नमंस्तु a: ॥ ९॥ 


न Ma vo rasanitabha kubha krumurma vah 
sindhurni riramat. Ma vah pari sthat sarayuh 
purisinyasme it sumnamastu vah. 


May the earth and her environment never move 
without light and water for you. May the flowing river 
and the rolling sea never stop for you. May the wind 
and vapour, blowing, flowing and refreshing for human 
habitations never be still. May everything, every force 
of the Maruts, on the earth and in the environment be 
for your comfort and well being. Let nothing hold you 
back. 


तं वः शर्धं रथानां त्वेषं गणं मारुतं नव्य॑सीनाम्‌। 
अनु प्र य॑न्ति वृष्टयः ॥ ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


454 RGVEDA 


10. Tam vah sardham rathanam tvesam ganam 
marutam navyasinam. Anu pra yanti vrstayah. 


O people of the earth, the showers of peace, 
comfort and well being rain down on you in response 
to your strength, the speed and shine of your war-like 
chariots, the joint power and performance of your 
leaders, and the latest powers and policies you work 
out and follow for your peace and progress. 


vref'oref व एषां व्रातंव्रातं गणंग॑णं सुशस्तिभिः | 
अनुं क्रामेम धीतिभिंः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Sardham-sardham va esam vratam-vratam 
ganam-ganam suSsastibhih. Anu kramema 
dhitibhih. 


Let us move together step by step in disciplined 
order in accord with the united interests and aspirations 
of each unit of the defence forces, each unit of the 
economic order and each unit of the social order of these 
people for you all as a nation with the appraisal and 
appreciation of these with the best of our understanding 
and action. 


कस्मा अद्य सुजाताय रातहव्याय प्र य॑युः 1 
एना यामेन मरुतं: ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Kasma adya sujataya ratahavyaya pra yayuh. 
Ena yamena marutah. 


For which cultured, creative and generous 
personality, for which producing and providing 
community of yajnic gifts, do the Maruts, dynamic 
forces of life, move forward today by this chariot with 
controlled motion and direction? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 53 455 


येन॑ तोकाय तन॑याय धान्यं बीजं added अध्चितम्‌। 
अस्मभ्यं तन्॑त्तन यद्व ईम हे राधो विश्वायु सोभंगम्‌॥ ९२ ॥ 


13. Yena tokaya tanayaya dhanyam bijam vahadhve 
aksitam. Asmabhyam tad dhattana yad va imahe 
radho visvayu saubhagam. 


O Maruts, dynamic and progressive leaders and 
powers of life, that action and message of advancement 
by which you create and bear the food and imperishable 
seed of life and progress for the baby and the child and 
the rising generation, bear and bring the same gifts and 
action for us too, the honour and good fortune, universal 
health and wealth, and the secret and source of that 
accomplishment we ask of you. 


अतीयाम निदस्तिरः स्वस्तिभिर्हित्वावद्यमरातीः। 
वृष्टी शं योराप॑ ste dust स्याम मरुतः सह ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Atiyama nidastirah svastibhir-hitvavadyam- 
aratth. Vrstvi Sam yorapa usri bhesajam syama 
marutah saha. 


O citizens and leaders of the world, let us get 
over the malignant scandalisers and crooked evil 
mongers, having given up inner evils and despicable 
failures and adversities with noble thoughts and positive 
actions. Let us have the showers of peace and united 
action, waters of holiness, light of truth and wisdom, 
and food and tonics for good health, all with the Maruts 
together. 


सुदेवः स॑महासति सुवीरो नरो मरुतः स मर्त्य: । 
यं त्राय॑ध्व स्याम A ९५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


456 RGVEDA 


15.  Sudevah samahasati suviro naro marutah sa 
martyah. Yam trayadhve syama te. 


O Maruts, leading lights of life, great and 
glorious, brilliant is that man, brave and fearless, whom 
you protect and promote across the seas. Let us too be 
the same, your own, all for you. 


स्तुहि भोजान्त्स्तुवतो ster याम॑नि रणन्गावो न aaa । 
यतः पूर्वोडव सखीरनुं हय गिरा गणीहि care: ॥ ९६॥ 

16. „917 bhojant-stuvato asya yamani ranan gavo 
na yavase. Yatah purvan iva sakhinranu hvaya 
gira grnthi kaminah. 

Adore the Maruts, natural saviours and leading 
lights of humanity, givers of life and food for energy 
while moving on the holy path of this yajnic celebrant 
of theirs, rejoicing at the same time like cows running 
for their favourite grass. Invoke them like ancient eternal 
friends, and, loving as they are, celebrate them with holy 
songs of adoration. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 54 
Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 
प्र श़धीय मारुताय स्वभानव इमां वाच॑मनजा पर्वतच्युते | 
घर्मस्तुभे दिव आ पुंष्टयज्व॑ने द्युम्नश्र॑वसे महिं नृम्ण- 
मर्चत॥ ९॥ 

i, Pra sardhaya marutaya svabhanava imam 
vacamanaja parvatacyute. Gharmastubhe diva a 
prsthayajvane dyumnaSravase mahi nrmna-mar- 
cata. 

For the self-refulgent force and power of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 54 457 


Maruts, leading lights of humanity, offer this song of 
adoration. And for the renowned yajaka who lights and 
feeds the fire to adore the divinities of nature through 
yajna on the heights, moves the clouds and brings the 
showers, offer gifts of human wealth of high value with 
songs of praise and appreciation. Loving scholars value 
the gifts of divinity from the lights of heaven. 


"Wal मरुतस्तविषा उदन्यवो वयोवृधो अश्वयुजः 
परिज्रयः । सं विद्युता दध॑ति वाति त्रितः स्वरन्त्या- 
पोऽ वना परिंज्ञयः।॥ २॥ 


2: Pra vo marutas-tavisa udanyavo vayovrdho asva- 
yujah parijrayah. Sam vidyuta dadhati vaSati 
tritah svarantyapo’vana parijrayah. 


O Maruts of sky and space, your powerful 
currents of wind laden with vapours, bearers of food, 
energy and healthful age for living beings, going all 
round on the wings of electric energy, take on the 
thunder of lightning roaring as trinity of wind, water 
and lightning, and the waters shower over the earth 
everywhere as harbingers of food and health for all. 


विद्युन्महसो नरो अश्म॑दिद्यवो वात॑त्विषो मरुतः cele: । 
अब्दया चिन्मुहुरा ह।दुनीवृत॑ः स्तनय॑दमा रभसा उदो - 
जसः ॥ ३ ॥ 

a Vidyunmahaso naro asmadidyavo vatatviso 


marutah parvatacyutah. Abdaya cinmuhura 
hradunivrtah stanayadama rabhasa udojasah. 


O leading lights of humanity, know that the 
Maruts command the mighty electric energy in the skies, 
light up the thunder, energise the winds and break the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


458 RGVEDA 


clouds. Blazing with splendour, ferocious with force, 
roaring with thunder, they wear the rumble of spatial 
boom shaking the mountains and burst in floods of 
incessant rain. 


व्यपे क्तु द्रा ae शिक्वसो व्यरन्तरिंश्चं fa रजांसि 
धूतयः । वि gest अज॑थ नावं ई यथा वि दुर्गाणि मरुतो 
नाहं रिष्यथ । ४ ॥ 


4. Vyaktun rudra vyahani sikvaso vyantariksam vi 
rajamsi dhutayah. Vi yadajran ajatha nava im 
yatha vi durgani maruto naha risyatha. 


O potent Maruts, mighty blazing and roaring 
powers of cosmic winds, Rudras, breakers and makers 
of things, you shake the nights and days in and out, you 
shake the skies and atmosphere, you move the particles 
of matter and pass over regions as the ship sails over 
the sea. You break open the strongholds of nature and 
yet you never hurt nor destroy. 


age? वो मरुतो महित्वनं दीर्घ त॑तान सूर्यो न योज॑नम्‌। 
एता न यामे अगृुंभीतशोचिषोऽ न॑र्वदां यल्ययातना 
गिरिम्‌॥ ५॥ 


= Tad viryam vo maruto mahitvanam dirgham 
tatana suryo na yojanam. Eta na yame agrbhi- 
tasociso’nasvadam yannyayatana girim. 


That lustre and splendour of yours, that 
extensive grandeur of yours radiates like the light and 
gravitation of the sun. Incomprehensible is the course 
of your radiations of energy which penetrates even the 
dark and densest clouds and mountains which are 
otherwise impenetrable. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 54 459 


अभ्राजि शर्धो मरुतो यदर्णसं मोष॑था वृक्षं कपनेव वेधसः | 
अधं स्मा नो अरम॑तिं सजोषसश्चक्षुरिव यन्तमनु नेषथा 
सुगम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Abhraji 5474070 maruto yadarnasam mosatha 
vrksam kapaneva vedhasah. Adha sma no 
aramatim sajosasaS-caksuriva yantamanu 
nesatha sugam. 


O Maruts, leading lights of nature and humanity, 
commanders of strength, creativity and intelligence, 
your power and splendour is apparent as it shines since, 
like a storm, it shakes the flood and the forest. O friends 
and comrades, guide our activity relentlessly in motion 
onward on the straight and right path just as the eye 
shows the path to the traveller and helps him to move 
on and makes it easy for him to follow. 


नस जीयते मरुतो न ह॑न्यते न Sata न व्य॑थते न रिंष्यति। 
नास्य राय उप॑ दस्यन्ति नोतय ऋषि" वा यं राजानं वा 
सुषुंदथ ॥ ७॥ 


५ Na sa jiyate maruto na hanyate na sredhati na 
vyathate na risyati. Nasya raya upa dasyanti 
notaya rsim va yam rajanam va susidatha. 


O Maruts, divine powers of nature and brilliant 
leading lights of humanity, the person you protect and 
guide, mature, refine and temper is never overcome, 
nor killed, nor decays, fears or falls, nor hurts anyone. 
Nor do his powers, honours and excellence, defences 
and protections ever deplete and exhaust. Indeed, the 
person grows in knowledge as a sage and shines bright 
in splendour as a leader and ruler. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


460 RGVEDA 


नियुत्वन्तो ग्रामजितो यथा नरो'ऽर्यमणो न मरुतः 
cater: । पिन्वन्त्युत्सं यदिनासो अस्व॑रन्व्युन्दन्ति पृथिवीं 
मध्वो अन्ध॑सा॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Niyutvanto gramajito yatha naro ’ryamano na 
marutah kavandhinah. Pinvantyutsam yadinaso 
asvaran vyundanti prthivim madhvo andhasa. 


Great organisers, winners of multitudes and 
human habitations like leading lights, makers of men 
and dispensers of justice on the paths of life, the Maruts 
are reservoirs of vitality and exhilaration like the clouds 
of living waters and freshness of breeze. And when the 
mighty forces set out in motion, whistling, roaring, 
thundering, they fill the rivers, lakes and oceans over 
and surfeit the earth with honey sweets of food and 
energy for the joy of life. 


प्रवत्व॑तीयं परथिवी wea: प्रवत्व॑ती द्यौर्भ॑वति wags: 1 
प्रवत्व॑तीः पर्थ्या अन्तरिश््याः प्रवत्व॑न्तः पर्व॑ता जीरदा- 
नवः॥ ९॥ 


9. Pravatvatiyam prthivi marudbhyah pravatvati 
dyaurbhavati prayadbhyah. Pravatvatih pathya 
antariksyah pravatvantah parvata jiradanavah. 


The wide world of abundant ways opens and 
clears its highways for the Maruts, adventurers who 
move like winds. The heaven of light extends all her 
expansive spaces for those who fly. The regions of the 
skies open up their paths for the winds, and the life 
giving clouds and mountains open up their depths and 
caverns for the heroes of initiative and adventure. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 54 461 


यन्म॑रुतः सभरसः स्वरः सूर्य sida मद॑था दिवो नरः। 
न वोऽ val: श्रथयन्ताह सिस्र॑तः खद्यो अस्याध्व॑नः 
पारमंङ्नुथ ॥ Qo UI 


10. = Yanmarutah sabharasah svarnarah surya udite 
madatha divo narah. Na vo’sva srathayantaha 
sisratah sadyo asyadhvanah paramasnutha. 


O Maruts, leading lights of the love of life and 
joy of heaven, you bear the burdens of life together for 
all and lead them all to celestial joy and the truth of 
Dharma. You feel delighted and celebrate the sunrise, 
and never do your horses in harness relent, but galloping 
on at high speed reach the destined end of this existential 
highway. 


अंसेषु व ऋष्टयः पत्सु खादयो वक्ष॑ःसु रुक्मा म॑रुतो रथे 
शुभ॑ः । अभिभ्राजसो विद्युतो गभ॑स्त्योः शिप्राः शीर्षसु वित॑ता 
हिरण्ययीं: ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Amsesu va rstayah patsu khadayo vaksahsu 
rukma maruto rathe subhah. Agnibhrajaso 
vidyuto gabhastyoh Siprah Sirsasu vitata hiran- 
yayth. 

O Maruts, warriors of the winds for humanity, 
on your shoulders are blazing lances, at your feet your 
assistants, on your chests are shining corselets, on your 
chariot are flames of the purity of fire, in your hands 
are flashes of lightning, and on your heads are protective 
golden helmets. Victory is assured. 


तं नाकमर्यो अगरंभीतशोचिषं रुशत्पिप्प॑लं मरुतो वि धूनुथ । 
सम॑च्यन्त चृजनातिंत्विषन्त यत्स्वरन्ति घोषं वित॑तमूता- 
aa: ॥ ९२॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


462 RGVEDA 


12. Tamnakam-aryo agrbhitasocisam rusat pippalam 
maruto vi dhunutha. Samacyanta vrjanatitvisanta 
yat svaranti ghosam vitatam-rtayavah. 


O Maruts, leading celebrants of action and 
Divinity, like a master of his own freedom in the laws 
of Truth and Divinity, shake the tree of existence by 
your noble action, bring down the balance sheet of your 
fruits of karma to Zero and win that rewarding state of 
ultimate freedom and bliss, void of suffering, beyond 
comprehension, which is pure ineffable refulgence of 
Divinity. Winding up their tally of karma, dismantling 
their fortifications, shining in the light divine, waxing 
in their search for Truth, when the celebrants raise the 
chant of Aum, they declare the victory and rest at the 
end of the road. 


युष्माद॑त्तस्य मरूतो विचेतसो रायः स्यांम रथ्यो ३ वय॑स्वतः | 
न यो युच्छति तिष्यो ३ यथा दिवो ३ स्पे रारन्त मरुतः 
सहस्रिणम्‌ ॥ ९२३ ॥ 


13. Yusmadattasya maruto vicetaso rayah syama 
rathyo vayasvatah. Na yo yucchati tisyo yatha 
divo’sme raranta marutah sahasrinam. 


O Maruts, leading lights of wisdom and vision 
for humanity, masters of discriminative knowledge, 
travelling by radiations of Divinity in the mind, let us, 
we pray, be masters of the life-giving wealth of light 
divine given by you. O Maruts, bless us with that wealth 
of thousandfold value which decays not but shines like 
a star of heaven for ever. 


यूयं रयिं म॑रुतः स्यार्हवीरं यूयमृषिंमवथ साम॑विप्रम्‌ । 
यूयमर्वन्तं भरताय वाजं यूयं धत्थ राजानं श्रुष्टिमन्तम्‌ Ov it 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 55 463 


14. = Yuyam rayim marutah sparhaviram yuyam-rsim- 
avatha samavipram. Yuyam-arvantam bhara-taya 
vajam yuyam dhattha rajanam srusti-mantam. 


O Maruts, leading lights of humanity, you 
protect and promote the heroic wealth, honour and 
excellence of the nation with her heroes. You revere, 
protect and promote the sage who chants the hymns of 
Samaveda in celebration of humanity and Divinity. You 
bear and bring the food, energy and the speed of progress 
for the maintenance of life on the globe, and you hold 
and maintain the harmonious, dynamic and glorious 
social order on earth. 


dal यामि द्रविणं सद्यऊतयो येना ea UF ततनाम TTA 
इदं सु मे मरुतो हर्यता वचो यस्य तरेम तर॑सा शतं feat: ॥ ९५॥ 

15. (दव vo yami dravinam sadya-utayo yena svarna 
tatanama nrnrabhi. Idam su me maruto haryata 
vaco yasya tarema tarasa Satam himah. 


O Maruts, leading lights of humanity and 
generous divinities of nature, instant givers of protection 
and all round support, listen and accept this holy voice 
of mine: I feel blest with that wealth of yours by which 
we can promote the life of humanity as in a heaven of 
bliss on earth, and by which we would live a happy life 
over a hundred years with strength and success. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 55 
Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 
प्रय॑ज्यवो मरुतो भ्राजंदू टयो बृहद्वयो दधिरे रुक्मवक्षसः | 
ईयन्ते अश्वैः सुयमेभिराशुधिः शुभं यातामनु रथ 
अवृत्सत ।॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


464 RGVEDA 


ly Prayajyavo maruto bhrajad-rstayo brhad-vayo 
dadhire rukma-vaksasah. Iyante asvaih suyame- 
bhir-asubhih subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


Adorable Maruts, devout pioneers and leading 
lights of yajnic progress in unison with humanity, 
commanding vast knowledge and power to bear the 
mighty burdens of life, wielding brilliant weapon in 
hand with golden corselet on the chest, press forward 
by coursers of instant speed controlled by sense and 
judgement. So do their noble chariots on and on. 


Let the chariots roll on with the leading lights 
on way to the land of honour and excellence. 


स्वयं द॑धिध्वे तविषीं य्था विद बृहन्मंहान्त उर्विया वि 
राजथ | उतान्तरिंश्चं ममिरे व्योज॑सा शुभं यातामनु रथा 
अवृत्सत ॥ २॥ 


2. Svayam dadhidhve tavisim yatha vida brhan- 
mahanta urviya vi rajatha. Utantariksam mamire 
vyojasa Subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


Great and glorious as you are, you know, you 
hold and command the blazing forces by yourself, and 
while you go over, explore and know the vast earth and 
the environment, rule accordingly and shine. And let 
the chariots roll on with the blazing pioneers and with 
their might and splendour traverse the skies and spaces. 


साकं जाताः asa: arenafarar: fra चिदा wat 
वावृधुर्नरः | विरोकिणः सूर्य॑स्येव रश्मयः शुभं यातामनु 
रथां अवृत्सत ॥ ३ ॥ ति 
a. Sakam jatah subhvah sakamuksitah sriye cida 
prataram vavrdhurnarah. Virokinah suryasyeva 
rasmayah subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 55 465 


Maruts, leading lights and rulers of the earth 
and her children, risen together, excellent, anointed, 
sanctified and covenanted together for the honour, 
excellence and grace of life, rise and advance the 
freedom and happiness of life for the people, and thus, 
with their interests and holy ambitions, shine in truth 
and rectitude like rays of the sun. Let the chariots roll 
on with the leading lights to the holy lands of bliss and 
freedom. 


आभूषेण्यं वो मरुतो महित्वनं fag ave सूर्यस्येव चश्च॑णम्‌। 
उतो अस्मां अमृतत्वे द॑धातन शुभं यातामनु र्था 
अवृत्सत ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Abhusenyam vo maruto mahitvanam didrksen- 
yam suryasyeva caksanam. Uto asman amrtatve 
dadha-tana subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


O Maruts, leading lights of life, graceful is your 
greatness and grandeur, radiant your form and conduct 
as light of the sun. With your light and grace, lead us to 
establish ourselves in the regions of immortality. Let 
the chariots roll on with the leading lights to the heights 
of goodness and grace. 


उदीरयथा मरूतः समुद्रतो यूयं वृष्टिं व॑र्षयथा पुरीषिणः । न 
वो cer उप॑ दस्यन्ति धेनवः शुभं यातामनु रथा 
अवृत्सत ॥ UI 

=f Udirayatha marutah samudrato yuyam vrstim 
varsayatha purisinah. Na vo dasra upa dasyanti 
dhenavah subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


O Maruts, ruling lights of the earth, just as the 
winds raise vapours from the seas and shower them 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


466 RGVEDA 


down from the sky, so you inspire the people, energise 
the earth, shake up the clouds and bring the showers of 
prosperity from the seas and spaces. O wondrous 
workers and generous leaders, the fertilities of nature, 
sunlight, earths and cows never desert you, nor ever 
exhaust for you. Let the chariots of life roll on with the 
leading lights of generosity to happiness and prosperity. 


यदश्वान्धूषु पृष॑तीरयुःग्ध्वं far ण्ययान्प्रत्यत्कों अमुंगध्वम्‌ | 
विश्वा इत्स्पृधो मरुतो व्य॑स्यथ शुभं यातामनु रथा 
अवृत्सत NG ॥ 


6. Yadasvan dhursu prsatir-ayugdhvam hiranya-yan 
pratyatkan amugdhvam. Visva it sprdho maruto 
vyasyatha subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


O Maruts, windy travellers of the skies, when 
you use liquid fuel and air for motive power in the front 
part of your chariot, put on your protective golden suit 
and release the energy drop by drop and spark by spark, 
you leave behind all the contestants on the journey. Let 
the chariots roll on with the travellers of space for a 
noble cause for a noble destination. 


न पर्वता न नद्यो वरन्त वो यत्राचिंध्वं मरुतो गच्छथेदु 
तत्‌। उत दद्यार्वापृथिवी याथना परि शुभं यातामनु रथां 
अवृत्सत ।॥ ७ ॥ 

ee Na parvata na nadyo varanta vo yatracidhvam 


maruto gacchathedu tat. Uta dyavaprthivi yatha- 
na pari Subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


O Maruts, heroes of the earth and skies, no 
mountains, nor clouds, nor rivers in flood any way 
obstruct your course wherever you travel, nor do they 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 55 467 


disturb the place you reach. Indeed, your course is all 
over the earth and skies and unto the regions of light 
across the spaces. Let the chariots roll on with leading 
lights of the earth and space for the well being of life 
on earth. 


यत्पूर्व्यं म॑रुतो teat नूतनं aged वसवो यच्च॑ शस्यते | 
विश्व॑स्य तस्यं भवथा नवेदस्रः शुभं यातामनु रथा 
अवृत्सत ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yat purvyam maruto yacca nutanam yadudyate 
vasavo yacca Sasyate. Visvasya tasya bhavatha 
navedasah subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


O Maruts, leading lights of the world and havens 
of life and comfort, whatever is old, and whatever is 
new, and whatever is spoken, admired and adored : of 
all that be cognizant and aware in the full. Let the 
chariots roll on with leading lights of knowledge and 
life’s joy for the good of humanity. 


मृव्छत॑ नो मरुतो मा व॑धिष्टनाऽस्मभ्यं शर्म age वि य॑न्तन । 
अधिं स्तोत्रस्य सख्यस्य गातन शुभं यातामनु रथा 
अवृत्सत ॥ ९ ॥ 


र Mrlata no maruto ma vadhistana’smabhyam 
sarma bahulam vi yantana. Adhi stotrasya sakhya- 
sya gatana Subham yatamanu ratha avrtsata. 


O Maruts, leading lights of life, rulers of the 
earth and travellers of the sky and spaces, give us peace 
and comfort. Hurt us not. Bring us abundant joy in a 
happy home. Come, listen and accept our song of 
friendship and adoration, and show us the right path. 
Let the chariots roll on with the leading light of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


468 RGVEDA 


knowledge, love and adventure for the good of all life 
on earth. 


यूयमस्मान्न॑यत वस्यो अच्छा निरंहतिभ्यो मरुतो गृणानाः | 
जुषध्वं नो हव्यदातिं ase वयं स्याम पत॑यो 
रयीणाम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Yiuyamasman nayata vasyo accha niranhatibhyo 
maruto grnanah. Jusadhvam havyadatim yajatra 
vayam syama patayo rayinam. 


O Maruts, leading lights of yajna, lords in 
command of the world’s wealth, adorable performers 
of yajna, come you all, happy, singing and rejoicing, 
join our yajna and enjoy the sweets of our yajnic 
homage. Lead us from all adversities to excellence and 
prosperity. We pray: may we be masters, protectors and 
promoters of the world’s wealth, honour and excellence 
for all. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 56 
Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


अग्ने शर्धन्तमा गणं पिष्टं रुक्येभिरज्िभिंः। 
विशो अद्य मरुतामव हये दिवण्चिं्रोचनादधि॥ ९॥ 


if Agne sardhantama ganam pistam rukmebhir- 
anjibhih. Viso adya marutamava hvaye divascid 
rocanadadhi. 


Agni, ruler of the land, today I call upon the 
most daring troop of the Maruts, commandos of the 
nation decorated with golden honours of rainbow 
briliancy from amongst the most shining and intelligent 
defence forces of the country. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 56 469 


यथा चिन्मन्यसे हृदा तदिन्मे जग्मुराशसंः | 
ये ते नेदिष्ठं हव॑नान्यागमन्तान्वं्ध भीमसंदुशाः ॥ २॥ 


2. Yatha cinmanyase hrda tadinme jagmurasasah. 
Ye te nedistham havananyagaman tan vardha 
bhimasamdrsah. 


As you believe at heart that they are such and 
honour them sincerely, so they would instantly come 
closest to you and to your expectations in response to 
your call. Then encourage and promote them, they are 
just pictures of terror for the enemies. 


toesita पृथिवी पराहता मद॑न्त्येत्यस्मदा। 
ऋश्यो न वो मरुतः शिमीवाँ अमो दुध्रो गौरिव भीमयुः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Milhusmativa prthivi parahata madantyetya- 
smada. Rkso na vo marutah simivan amo dudhro 
gauriva bhimayuh. 


Like a youthful woman wedded to a virile 
husband, the earth, unhurt and rejoicing, comes to us 
for protection, defence and promotion. O Maruts, 
youthful warrior defenders of the land, like a shooting 
star is your force, strong, unchallengeable, and terrible 
as a mighty bull. 


नि ये रिणन्त्योजसा वृथा गावो न geht: । 
अश्मानं Farah पर्वतं गिरिं प्र च्यावयन्ति याम॑भिः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ni ye rinantyojasa vrtha gavo na durdhurah. 
Asmanam cit svaryam parvatam girim pra cyava- 
yanti yamabhih. 

The Maruts are those heroes who rush forth with 
their valour and splendour, throw off the yoke like 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


470 RGVEDA 


untamable bulls and scatter the enemy forces, and with 
their advances shake up resounding mountains and 
break up thundering clouds. 


उत्तिष्ठ नूनमेषां स्तोमः समुस्चितानाम्‌। 
मरुतां पुरूतममपूर्व्य गवां सर्ग॑मिव हये ॥ ५ ॥ 


> Ut tistha nunamesam stomaih samuksitanam. 
Marutam purutamamapurvyam gavam sargamiva 
hvaye. 


O ruler, O citizen, rise up with joy and 
confidence, for, as we call in or call out of the stalls a 
herd of cows, so I call upon and arouse the ancient and 
abundant host of these mighty Maruts exalted by songs 
of praise. 


युङ्ग्ध्वं हयरुषी tal युङ्ग्ध्वं रथेषु रोहितः | 
Gerd हरी अजिरा a coed विछ aR वोक्ठह॑वे ॥। & ॥ 


6. Yungdhvam hyarusi rathe yungdhvam rathesu 
rohitah. Yungdhvam hari ajira dhuri volhave 
vahistha dhuri volhave. 


O warriors and engineers, use the red flames of 
fire for moving the chariot like red horses, use the 
collected and stored solar energy, use the fast moving 
impulsion and expulsion, and use the strongest 
accelerative force to carry the load and move the chariot 
to the destination. 


उत स्य वाज्यरुषस्तुविष्वणिरिह स्म॑ धायि agta: 1 
मावो aay मरुतश्चिरं करत्प्र तं रथेषु चोदत ।॥ ७॥ 


di Uta sya vajyarusas-tuvisvanir-iha sma dhayi 
darsatah. Ma vo yamesu marutasciram karat pra 
tam rathesu codata. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 57 471 


And now, O Maruts, adventurers and explorers 
of the earth, that volatile, wondrous and vociferous 
energy of red flames is here used in the chariot. It would 
not delay you any more in your advancement. Ignite 
and accelerate it in the chariots. 


रथं नु मारुतं वयं श्र॑वस्युमा हंवामहे। आ यस्मिन्तस्थौ 
सुरणानि बिभ्र॑ती सचा मरुत्सु रोदसी ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ratham nu marutam vayam sravasyuma huva- 
mahe. A yasmin tasthau suranani bibhrati saca 
marutsu rodasi. 


We call up and ready in harness the stormy and 
resounding chariot of the Maruts in which both earth 
and the heavens treasuring many adorable energy prizes 
join with the Maruts in a bond of friendship. 


तं वः शर्ध रथेशुभं त्वेषं प॑नस्युमा ga यस्थिन्त्सु्जाता 
सुभगा महीयते सचां मरुत्सु मीव्नहुषी ॥ ९ ॥ 
Tam vah sardham rathesubham tvesam pana- 


syuma huve. Yasmintsujata subhaga mahtiyate 
saca marutsu milhusi. 


I admire that force and power of your chariot, 
shining, adorable and good for the chariot, in which are 
exalted the generous earth-and-heaven energies, nobly 
manifested and beneficent in abundance as friends of 
the Maruts. 

Mandala 5/Sukta 57 


Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 
आ रुद्रास इन्द्र॑वन्तः स॒जोष॑सो हिरण्यरथाः सुविताय 
गन्तन । इयं वों अस्मत्प्रतिं हर्यते मतिस्तुष्णजे न दिव उत्सा 
उदन्यवे ।॥। ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


472 RGVEDA 


1. A rudrasa indravantah sajosaso hiranyarathah 
suvitaya gantana. Iyam vo asmat prati haryate 
matis-trsnaje na diva utsa udanyave. 


O Rudras, powers of justice, rectitude and 
dispensation, commanding honour, power and 
excellence of the world, loving kind and friendly, going 
by golden chariots of glory with gifts of good fortune, 
prosperity and well being for all, this love, desire, 
understanding and prayer of us all is addressed to you: 
Come like a wave of divine nectar for the thirsty waiting 
for a drink on the shore. 


वाशीमन्त ऋष्टि मन्तो मनीषिणः सुधन्वान इषुमन्तो 
निषद्भिर्णः। स्वश्वाः स्थ सुरर्थाः पृश्निमातरः स्वायुधा 
म॑रुतो याथना शुभ॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


(५१ Vasimanta rstimanto manisinah sudhanvana 
isumanto nisanginah. Svasvah stha suratha 
prsnimatarah svayudha maruto yathana subham. 


O Maruts, tempestuous heroes of the world, 
children of the essence of nature in love with the earth, 
you are blest with the voice of thunder, light of 
knowledge, wisdom and understanding of the speed of 
mind, mighty bows, unfailing arrows and inexhaustible 
quivers, noble steeds and excellent chariots and the best 
arms and armaments. Go forward, noble heroes, and do 
good to all. 


धूनुथ द्यां पर्वतान्दाशुषे वसु नि वो वनां जिहते याम॑नो 
भिया। कोपय॑थ पृथिवीं पृश्चिमातरः शुभे agar: 
प॒ष॑तीरयुग्ध्वम्‌॥। २ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 57 473 


a Dhunutha dyam parvatan dasuse vasu ni vo vana 
Jihate yamano bhiya. Kopayatha prthivim 
prsnimatarah subhe yadugrah prsatir-ayug- 
dhvam. 


O Maruts, children of the firmament, winds and 
tempests of nature’s energy, you agitate the regions of 
light, break the clouds and shake the mountains to create 
wealth for the generous giver. At your approach forests 
shake with fear and the earth vibrates when in a state of 
passion for water showers you join and charge the clouds 
of vapour. 


वात॑त्विषो मरुतो ae ets यमाइव सुसंदृशः TUT: | 
fastgivat अरुणाश्वा अरेपसः प्रत्व॑क्षसो महिना 
द्यौरिंवोरवंः xu 


4. Vatatviso maruto varsanirnijo yama iva susa- 
drsah supesasah. Pisangasva arundasva arepasah 
pratvaksaso mahina dyaurivoravah. 


The Maruts command the fury and splendour 
of the winds. Cleansed and anointed by holy water, they 
replete the showers of love and justice all the year round. 
They are highly impressive and handsome in body and 
mind as self-controlled people are. They command the 
moderate yellow as well as the intense red flames of 
the yajnic fires of life’s dynamics. Untouched by sinful 
involvements, refined and discriminative in thought and 
judgement, they are refulgent like the sun and large- 
hearted like space by virtue of their innate greatness. 


पुस द्रप्सा अज्जिमन्तः सुदान॑वस्त्वेषसंदुरो SAAT: | 
सुजातासो जनुषां रुक्मवक्षसो दिवो अर्का अमृतं नामं 
भेजिरे ॥ ५५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


414 RGVEDA 


Ds Purudrapsa anjimantah sudanavas-tvesasam- 
drso anavabhraradhasah. Sujataso janusa rukma- 
vaksaso divo arka amrtam nama bhejire. 


Universally generous like the perennial stream 
of soma and showers of nature’s joy, versatile of form 
and action as light in spectrum colours, holy and vastly 
charitable, they see the reality in all its variety of true 
colours as light reveals the real forms without screen 
effects. Commanding imperishable wealth, power and 
competence in their own right by birth and genetic merit 
of previous karma, they wear their beauty and regality 
of life and conduct in their heart and hands. Loving, 
brilliant and adorable, the Maruts define, deserve, serve 
and thus justify the name and description: Immortal. 


eal वो मरुतो अंस॑योरधि सह ओजो areraf बलं 
हितम्‌ । नृम्णा शीर्षस्वायुधा र्थेषु वो विश्वां a: श्रीरधिं 
तनूषु पिपिशो ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Rstayo vo maruto amsayoradhi saha ojo bahvorvo 
balam hitam. Nrmna Sirsasvayudha rathesu vo 
visva vah $sriradhi tanusu pipise. 


O Maruts, leading lights of humanity, on your 
shoulders you bear the blazing lances and the burdens 
of forbearance with courage and splendour of life, while 
the force of action is concentrated in your hands. On 
your heads you carry the care and comfort of humanity 
with the arms and ammunitions of protection and 
progress in your chariots. Indeed, the entire wealth and 
honour, beauty and grace of life reflects in your body 
and personality. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 57 475 


गोमदश्वांवद्रथ॑वत्सुवीरं चन्द्रवद्राधों मरुतो ददा A: | 
प्रशस्तिं नः कृणुत रुद्रियासो भक्षीय वोऽव॑सो दैव्य॑स्य ॥ ७॥ 


१ Gomad-asvavad rathavat suviram candravad 
radho maruto dada nah. Prasastim nah krnuta 
rudriyaso bhakstya vo’vaso daivyasya. 


O Maruts, leading lights of humanity, generous 
divinities of nature, indomitable powers of love and 
justice, give us the wealth of lands, cows and the 
revealing language of knowledge bright as sun rays. 
Give us the force of noble heroes equipped with fast 
transport and uninterrupted communications. Give us 
wealth and competence for success with the beauty and 
graces of culture. Promote our power and prestige so 
that we may share and participate in your human 
protection and divine evolution to the grace of freedom 
and immortality. 


हये नरो मरुतो मृव्छतां नस्तुवीमघासो अमूंता ऋत॑ज्ञाः | 
सत्य॑श्रुतः Haat युवानो बृह द्विरयो बृहदुक्षमाणाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Haye naro maruto mrlata nastuvimaghaso amrta 
rtajnah. Satyasrutah kavayo yuvano brhadgirayo 
brhaduksamanah. 


O Maruts, leading lights of humanity and 
divinities of nature, commanders of unbounded wealth, 
honour and excellence, immortal souls, learned sages 
of the laws of nature and time, world renowned voices 
of truth, poetic visionaries young beyond aging and 
debility, diviners into the infinite Word and world 
languages, heroes of universal generosity and generative 
vitality, bless us with wealth of the world, peace of mind 
and everlasting grace. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


476 RGVEDA 


Mandala 5/Sukta 58 
Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


aa नूनं तविंषीमन्तमेषां स्तुषे गणं मारुतं नव्य॑सीनाम्‌ | 
य आश्वश्वा अम॑वदरह॑न्त उतेर्शिरे अपरत॑स्य स्वराजं: ॥ ९॥ 


ll Tamu nunam tavisimantamesam stuse ganam 
marutam navyasinam. Ya aSvasva amavad 
vahanta utesire amrtasya svarajah. 


I admire the blazing, tempestuous group of these 
Maruts, modern self governing people who, possessed 
of the fastest transports and communications, move like 
storms, a very picture of velocity, and, shining and self- 
controlled, dominate over the regions of the immortals. 


त्वेषं गणं तवसं खादिंहस्तं धुनित्रतं मायिनं दातिंवारम्‌। 
मयोभुवो ये अपिता महित्वा वन्द॑स्व विप्र तुविराधसो 
नृन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Tvesam ganam tavasam khadihastam dhunivra- 
tam mayinam dativaram. Mayobhuvo ye amita 
mahitva vandasva vipra tuviradhaso nrn. 


O sagely scholar, admire and exalt that group 
of leading lights, brave, generous and dexterous of hand, 
enthusiastically committed to noble causes, wondrous 
workers abundantly charitable, who are versatile 
achievers without reserve or bounds by virtue of their 
own innate strength and expertise and who are a 
tremendous source of peace and prosperity. 


आ वो यन्तूदवाहासो अद्य वृष्टं ये विश्वे मरुतो जुनन्ति । 
अयं यो अथिर्मरुतः सपिंन्द एतं जुषध्वं कवयो 
युवानः ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 58 477 


a A vo yantudavahaso adya vrstim ye visve maruto 
junanti. Ayam yo agnirmarutah samiddha etam 
jJusadhvam kavayo yuvanah. 


O Maruts, eminent leaders and pioneers, may 
all those winds of the firmament come to you to-day in 
this yajna which bear the clouds and impel the rain 
showers. O leading scholars and scientists, poetic 
visionaries and youthful researchers, lighted is this fire, 
come and take it over for the rain yajna. 


यूयं राजानमिर्य sate विभ्वतष्टं जनयथा यजत्राः | 
युष्मदेति मुष्टिहा बाहुजूतो युष्मत्सद॑श्वो मरुतः सुवीरं: ॥ 2 ॥। 


4. Yuyam rajanamiryam janaya vibhvatastam jana- 
yatha yajatrah. Yusmadeti mustiha bahujuto 
yusmat sadasvo marutah suvirah. 


O Maruts, leading lights of the nation, holy 
performers meeting and working together for yajnic 
development, you create the inspiring ruler who is an 
architect of the nation. From you arises the administrator 
of strong hand and will. From you arise the warriors of 
strong arms, and from you arises the brave man, the 
hero who commands the army, the cavalry and the flying 
force for the people. 


अराइवेदचरमा अहेव ue जायन्ते अकवा महोभिः । पृश्नेः 
पुत्रा ॐपमासो रभिष्ठाः स्वया मत्या मरुतः सं मिमिक्षुः ॥ ५॥ 
9 Ara ivedacarama aheva prapra jayante akava 


mahobhih. Prsneh putra upamaso rabhisthah 
svaya matya marutah sam mimiksu. 


Like the spokes of a wheel in motion, together, 
undivided, equal and integrated, whole, generative, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


478 RGVEDA 


Maruts rise anew like days on and on with their power 
and forces. Children of mother earth, firmament and 
radiations of sunlight, strongest and most eminent, with 
their own perception, understanding, dedication and 
determination, they analyse, catalyse, integrate and 
generate new ideas, forces, institutions and traditions, 
all renewed and revitalised. 


यत्प्रायासिष्ट wdifirvaddtaafatureat रथेभिः। 
क्षोद॑न्त॒ आपो रिणते वनान्यवोस्ियो' वृषभः ऋरन्दतु 
द्यौः WG UI 


6. Yat prayasista prsatibhir-asvair-vilupavibhir- 
maruto rathebhih. Ksodanta apo rinate vanan- 
yavosriyo vrsabhah krandatu dyauh. 


By their motive forces and chariots equipped 
with strong wheels of initiative and advancement, the 
Maruts proceed with showers of new life as leaders and 
pioneers of a new age, and as they proceed, the dormant 
vapours of life agitate with new ferment and join the 
rays of the sun, the cloud roars with thunder and 
lightning and the earth receives the showers of new life. 


प्रथिष्ट ara-oferet चिंदेषां भर्तेव गर्भ caftresal धुः । 
वातान्हयश्वान्धुयी युयुज्रे ad स्वेदं चक्रिरे रुद्रियासः ॥ ७॥ 


ie Prathista yaman prthivi cidesam bharteva gar- 
bham svamicchavo dhuh. Vatan hyasvan dhurya- 
yuyujre varsam svedam cakrire rudriyasah. 


As the Maruts proceed, the earth waxes with 
desire and fertility. Like the husband man, the Maruts 
shower their own vitality on earth as the seed of new 
life. Thus do the Maruts, forces of new life, generative 
and enlightened, commanding power and judgement, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 59 479 


yoke new winds and motive forces to the chariot of life 
and move the wheels of history forward with the shower 
of their own sweat of the brow. 


हये नरो मरुतो Fort नस्तुवीमघासो अमृता ऋतज्ञाः | 
सत्य॑श्रुतः कवयो युर्वानो बृहद्विरयो बृहदुक्षमाणाः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Haye naro maruto mrlata nastuvimaghaso amrta 
rtajnah. Satyasrutah kavayo yuvano brhadgirayo 
brhaduksamanah. 


O Maruts, leading lights of history, be kind and 
gracious and rejoice with us. You command the grandeur 
of life’s wealth, honour and excellence. You are the 
immortal spirit of humanity, observers of Law and Truth, 
renowned and blest with the Revelation of Truth, poetic 
visionaries, ever young and modern, masters of 
universal voice and blest with the spirit of renewal and 
regeneration. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 59 
Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


Wa: स्पव्छक्रन्त्सुविताय॑ दावनेऽ ची दिवे प्र पुथिव्या ऋतं 
oft 1 उक्षन्ते अश्वान्तरुषन्त आ रजोऽ नु स्वं भानुं श्र॑थयन्ते 
sata: 12 ति 

i Pra vah spalakrant-suvitaya davane’rca dive pra 
prthivya rtam bhare. Uksante asvan tarusanta a 
rajo’nu svam bhanum srathayante arnavaih. 


Adore and exalt those who are close to you, who 
do good and observe truth and law in their character, 
conduct and action for you, for your welfare, for the 
generous, and for the earth, the firmament and the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


480 RGVEDA 


regions of light. They energise the motive forces, radiate 
their light and lustre upto the regions of space and attain 
their ends by the seas. 


stent भियसा भूमिंरेजति नौर्न पूर्णां क्ष॑रति व्यधिर्यती । 
दूरेदृशो ये चितय॑न्त WAR न्तर्महे विदथे येतिरे नर॑: ॥ २॥ 


2. Amddesam bhiyasa bhumirejati naurna purna 
ksarati vyathiryati. Duredrso ye citayanta 
emabhir-antarmahe vidathe yetire narah. 


By the power and force of these Maruts, the 
earth trembles with fear and, like an overloaded boat 
going over the sea, shakes in agitation under pressure. 
Seen from far, they are known by their movements and, 
leading lights as they are, they go forward in the great 
battle business of life and its organisation. 


गवामिव Brea शृङ्क॑मुत्तमं सूर्यो न चक्षु रज॑सो विसजने । 
अत्यां इव सुभ्व TANG: स्थन म्यौ इव ferred चेतथा 
नरः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Gavamiva Sriyase Srngamuttamam suryo na 
caksu rajaso visarjane. Atya iva subhvascaravah 
sthana marya iva Sriyase cetatha narah. 


For the beauty of the regions of the earth, you 
are like the highest peak of mountain ranges. In the 
shower of vapour and in the clearance of mists, you are 
like the sun, eye of the world. You are handsome and 
excellent like race horses, and, O leaders and pioneers, 
you shine like rays of the sun for the glory of humanity. 


को al weed महतापुद॑श्नवत्कस्काव्यां मरुतः को ह 
deat । यूयं ह भूमिं किरणं न रेजथ प्र यद्दररंध्वे सुविताय 
दावनें।। ४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 59 481 


4. Ko vo mahanti mahatamudasnavat kaskavya 
marutah ko ha paumsya. Yuyam ha bhumim 
kiranam na rejatha pra yad bharadhve suvitaya 
davane. 


O Maruts, leading lights of the world, you are 
great. Who can reach your grandeur and achievements? 
Who can realise your divine vision and imaginative 
creations? O virile heroes, who can approach your power 
and potential? You illuminate the earth as sun beams 
and even shake it like particles of dust, while you rain 
down showers of generosity as gifts for the charity and 
welfare of the people. 


stat इवेद॑रुषासः सब॑न्धवः शूरा इव प्रयुधः प्रोत युयुधुः । 
मयौ इव सुवृधो! वावृधुर्नरः सूर्य॑स्य चक्षुः प्र मिनन्ति 
वृष्टिभिः ॥५॥ 


a ASva ivedarusasah sabandhavah sura iva 
prayudhah prota yuyudhuh. Marya iva suvrdho 
vavrdhurnarah suryasya caksuh pra minanti 
vrstibhih. 


O Maruts, leading lights of the world, sanguine 
and bold, you are ever going forward like horses on the 
course, uninterrupted. Brotherly and friendly toward all 
equally, fighting like warriors for all, you are always 
struggling for a better world. Rising and growing like 
mortal life forms, you are evolving continuously. And 
with the torrents of rain you dim the blazing light of the 
sun 111 mist. 


ते अज्येष्ठा अकनिष्ठास उद्धिदोऽम॑ध्यमासो मह॑सा fa 
वावृधुः। सुजातासो जनुषा पृश्निमातरो दिवो wat si At 
अच्छा जिगातन ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


482 RGVEDA 


6. Te ajyestha akanisthasa udbhido’madhyamaso 
mahasa vi vavrdhuh. Sujataso janusa prsnimataro 
divo marya ठ no accha jigatana. 


None highest, none lowest, none middling, 
among them, they are equals all, burst forth into life 
through layers of impediments. Nobly born by nature, 
children of heaven, earth and the firmament, they are 
mortals, humans all, who, as we wish, come to us and 
appreciate us all. They grow and rise by their own 
strength and grandeur. 


वयो न ये श्रेणीं: पप्तुरोजसाऽन्ताद्दिवो बुं हतः सानुं नस्परि। 
अश्वास एषामुभये यथा विदुः प्र पर्वतस्य नभर 
चुच्यवुः ॥ ७॥ 

7. Vayo na ye Srenth papturojasa’ntan divo brhatah 
sanunaspari. ASvasa esamubhaye yatha viduh pra 
parvatasya nabhanunracucyavuh. 


They soar together like flights of birds with the 
innate force of their light and lustre over mighty 
mountain peaks across the middle regions to the bounds 
of expansive heaven. Commanding the two-way motion 
of their circuitous energy, they shake the clouds of the 
sky and break them into showers. 


मि्मातु द्यौरदितिर्वीतिये नः सं दानुचित्रा seal यतन्ताम्‌ । 
आचुंच्यवुर्दिव्यं कोशमेत ऋषे सुद्रस्य॑ मरुतो गृणानाः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Mimatu dyaur-aditir-vitaye nah sam danucitra 
usaso yatantam. Acucyavur-divyam kosameta rse 
rudrasya maruto grnanah. 


May the heaven of light and mother earth bless 
us and help us rise in light and generosity, peace and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 60 483 


joy. May the dawns, wonderful givers, join us and help 
us to rise in beauty and grace of life. O Rshi, lord of 
universal vision, may these Maruts, children of the lord 
of justice and rectitude, sung and adored, singing and 
rejoicing, shower the treasure of heavenly light and joy 
on earth. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 60 
Maruts and / or Agni Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


$e tht स्वव॑सं नमोभिरिह प्र॑सत्तो वि च॑यत्कृतं न॑: । रथैरिव 
प्र भ॑रे anata: प्रदक्चिणिन्मरूतां स्तोम॑मृध्याम्‌ ९॥ 


ll. Ile agnim svavasam namobhiriha prasatto vi 
cayat krtam nah. Rathairiva pra bhare vajayad- 
bhih pradaksinin-marutam stomam-rdhyam. 


Collecting the work already done for us in the 
field, happy and enthusiastic, in perfect faith with 
relentless dedication and investments, I study and adore 
Agni, heat, light and electric energy, rich source of 
protection and progress, in order to extend the 
knowledge, hoping that, going round the world as if by 
tempestuous chariots of the winds in right order, I would 
raise the song of celebration in honour of the scholars 
and humanity. May the lord of knowledge accept and 
consecrate our work! 


आ ये तस्थुः पृष॑तीषु stare सुखेषु रुद्रा मरुतो रथेषु । 
वना चिदुग्रा जिहते नि वों शिया पुथिवी चिंद्रेजते 
पर्व तज्चित्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2. A ye tasthuh prsatisu Srutasu sukhesu rudra 


maruto rathesu. Vana cidugra jihate ni vo bhiya 
prthivi cid rejate parvatascit. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


484 RGVEDA 


Rudras, pranic energies of life and natural 
catalysis, Maruts, heat, light, electric and wind energies, 
which abide and energise streams and showers, which 
work in means of transport and comfort, and which are 
described in works of revelation and research, are 
mighty, tempestuous and blazing. O Rudras and Maruts, 
catalytic, integrative and regenerative energies, under 
your power and fear of natural law the sun-rays radiate, 
the forests tremble, the earth moves and shines, the 
clouds break and the mountains shake. 


पर्व॑ तज्चिन्महिं वृद्धो fara दिवश्चित्सानुं रेजत स्वने 
व॑:। यत्क्रीव्टथ मरुत ऋष्टिमन्त आप॑ इव सश्यञ्चो 
धवध्वे ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Parvatascinmahi vrddho bibhaya divascit sanu 
rejata svane vah. Yat krilatha maruta rstimanta 
apa iva sadhryanco dhavadhve. 


O Maruts, tempestuous energies of divine 
omnipotence, when you agitate, blow and flow together 
like streams of water—which 15 just your play in life— 
the densest cloud and the great ancient mountain cower 
in fear and the top bounds of the regions of light vibrate 
with the waves of your boundless roar. 


aigasaarn हिर॑ण्यैरभि स्वधाभिंस्तन्व॑ः fats | 
fara श्रेयांसस्तवसो रथेषु सत्रा महांसि चक्रिरे तनूषु ॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Vara ived raivataso hiranyair-abhi svadha-bhis- 
tanvah pipisre. Sriye Sreyamsas-tavaso rathesu 
satra mahamsi cakrire tanusu. 


Like eminent people nobly born in life’s 
affluence who adorn themselves with their innate graces 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 60 485 


and golden attainments of culture and education, the 
Maruts, leading lights of humanity, commanding honour 
and excellence, riding their chariots, do great actions 
of truth and rectitude in their life and conduct for the 
beauty of human culture and grace of living as 
reflections of their inner self. 


अज्येष्ठासो अकनिष्ठास एते सं भ्रात॑रो वावृधुः Ga । 
gat पिता स्वप सुद्र एषां सुदुघा पृश्निः सुदिना 
मरुद्भ्यः We ॥ 


>. Ajyesthaso akanisthasa ete sam bhrataro vavr- 
dhuh saubhagaya. Yuva pita svapa rudra esam 
sudugha prsnih sudina marudbhyah. 


None highest, none lowest, all equal as brothers 
together, the Maruts, leading lights of life and humanity, 
work and grow and advance for the honour and 
prosperity of life and living. Their father and creator, 
Rudra, lord omnipotent of justice and dispensation, ever 
young, giver of sustenance, and mother earth and the 
firmament, ever abundant and generous for the Maruts 
through the bright days, look after them and inspire 
them. 


यदुत्तमे म॑रुतो मध्यमे वा यद्वावमे सुभगासो दिवि छ । अतों 
नो रुद्रा उत वा ra esa वित्ताद्धविषो यद्यजांम ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yaduttame maruto madhyame va yad vavame 
subhagaso divi stha. Ato no rudra uta va nvasya’- 
gne vittaddhaviso yad yajama. 


O Maruts, creators of prosperity, honour and 
excellence, and Rudras, leading lights of justice and 
rectitude, and Agni, leading light of knowledge, whether 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


486 RGVEDA 


you abide in the highest, or middle or the lowest regions 
of life and action, or in the light of heaven, establish us 
in right knowledge and action of the transparent order, 
and know of our action and homage which we offer to 
Divinity in our life. 


stiva यन्म॑रुतो विश्ववेदसो दिवो वह॑ध्व उत्तरादधि 
ष्णुभिः । ते म॑न्दसाना धुन॑यो रिशादसो वामं ध॑त्त यज॑मानाय 
सुन्वते ॥ ७ ॥ 


ए Agnisca yanmaruto visvavedaso divo vahadhva 
uttaradadhi snubhih. Te mandasana dhunayo 
risadaso vamam dhatta yajamanaya sunvate. 


O Agni, leading light, and Maruts, dynamic 
leaders and pioneers, blest with knowledge and wealth 
of the world, you abide on top of the regions of light 
and love by your own will and desire and bring down 
showers of light and wisdom. O leaders and pioneers, 
such as you are, movers and shakers of the negatives, 
and as you rejoice on the vedi with the yajakas, bring 
down the gift of life’s wealth and beauty from over the 
levels of ordinary mortals for the yajamana and the 
creative soma yajaka. 


अगं मरुद्धिः शुभयंद्धिऋक्रभिः सोमं fra मन्दसानो 
ग॑ंणश्िभिः । पावकभिर्विश्वमिन्वेभिंरायुधिर्वैशर्वानर प्रदिवां 
केतुनां सजुः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Agne marudbhih subhayadbhirrkvabhih somam 
piba mandasano ganasribhih. Pavakebhir- 
visvaminvebhir-ayubhir-vaisvanara pradiva 
ketuna sajuh. 


O leading light of the world, Agni, Vaishvanara, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 487 


power and passion of life, friend and associate of higher 
light and wisdom by virtue of your character and 
conduct, come rejoicing to the vedi, share and enjoy 
the sweets of soma, life’s joy, wealth, honour and 
excellence in the company of the Maruts, dynamic 
people on the march who are pure and gracious, praise- 
worthy, pride of the republic, purifying, inspiring, 
strengthening and beautifying the world, people who 
love life and add to the grace of life by living well and 
gracefully. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 61 
Maruts, Shashiyasi Tarantamahishi, Purumidha 
Vaidadashvi, Taranta Vaidadashvi, Rathaviti Darbhya 
Devatah. Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 
के Stat: श्रेष्ठतमा य एकएक आयय। 
परमस्याः परावतं: ॥ ९॥ 


il, Ke stha narah sresthatama ya ekaeka dayaya. 
Paramasyah paravatah. 


Who are you, leaders and pioneers, best and 
most excellent, that come one by one and reach all 
together from farthest of far distances? 


aay वोऽ var: क्वा ३ भीरवः कथं शोक कथा य॑य। 
पृष्ठे सदो नसोर्यमः ॥ २ ॥ 


Kva vo’svah kva bhisavah katham seka katha 
yaya. Prsthe sado nasoryamah. 


Where are your horses? Where the reins? What 
is your power and potential? How do you move? Where 
is the saddle on the horse back? Where is the bridle that 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


488 RGVEDA 
controls the direction by the nose? 


जघने चोद॑ एषां वि सक्थानि ay यमुः 1 
पुत्रकृथे न जन॑यः ॥ ३ ॥ 

छ Jaghane coda esam vi sakthani naro yamuh. 
Putrakrthe na janayah. 


They goad and spur on the horses’ flanks, the 
riders make them move fast in order, their muscles 
strained and waxed, as parents raise their children to 
the optimum with freedom and control. 


परां वीरास एतन म्यीसो wast: | 
अगितपो यथास॑थ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Para virasa etana maryaso bhadrajanayah. 
Agnitapo yathasatha. 


Go far, brave leaders of the people, nobly born 
and nobly educated, men of vibrant discipline trained 
in the crucibles of fire as you are, and happily married. 


सनत्साश्व्यं पशुमुत गव्यं शताव॑यम्‌। 
श्यावाश्व॑स्तुताय या दोर्वीरायों पब्ब हत्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

Sanat sasvyam pasumuta gavyam Satavayam. 
Syavasvastutaya ya dorvirayopabarbrhat. 

The woman who opens her arms with love and 
joins her brave and dynamic husband shoulder to 
shoulder in work and household jointly achieves a 
hundredfold wealth of land and cattle, plenty of food 
and energy, and movable and immovable acquisitions. 

उत त्वा स्त्री शशीयसी पुंसो भ॑वति वस्य॑सी । 
अदे वत्रादराधसंः ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 489 


6. Uta tva 517 Sastyast pumso bhavati vasyasi. 
Adevatrad-aradhasah. 


O man, the woman deserves your respect and 
reverence and love because she remains a generous and 
graceful accomplisher in the home in spite of the man’s 
want of piety and success. 


fa a जानाति sath fa geld fa कामिन॑म्‌। 
देवत्रा कुणुते मन॑: ॥ ७॥ 
7. Vi ya janati jasurim vi trsyantam vi kaminam. 
Devatra krnute manah. 
She who knows well the man struggling with 
want and deprivation, thirsting for love and recognition, 
ambitious for dedication and success, steadies her mind 


in concentration and the divine will in action for success 
in married life in piety. 


उत घा नेमो अस्तुतः Gar इतिं ga पणिः। 
स वैर॑देय इत्समः॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Uta gha nemo astutah puman iti 6141८ 41171. 
Sa vairadeya it samah. 


And I say: Whether the man is worthy of praise 
or unworthy of praise, but being the husband he is half 
of the woman’s life (as the woman is his better half), 
and has equal rights and responsibilities in the family 
affairs and equal conjugal rights. 


उत मेऽ रपद्युवतिर्म पन्दुषी प्रतिं yarard वर्तनिम्‌। 

वि teat पुरुमीक््ायं येमतुर्विप्राय दीर्घ॑य॑शसे ॥ ९ ॥ 
ध Uta me’rapad yuvatir-mamandusi prati Syavaya 

vartanim. Vi rohita purumilhaya yematur-vipraya 

dirghayaSase. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


490 RGVEDA 


And she, my wife, young, happy, learned, going 
fast forward, clearly shows the way of life to me, virile, 
learned, seeker of high renown, going forward by 
chariot, which we two draw like two equal ruddy horses. 


ata धेनूनां शतं वैद॑दश्विर्यथा दद॑त्‌। 
तरन्तडव मंहना ॥ ९०॥ 
10. Yome dhenunam satam vaidadasviryatha dadat. 


Taranta iva manhana. 


Hail to him, disciple of a specialist of transport, 
who gives me a hundred gifts of lands and cows and 
forms of knowledge and takes me across the seas as by 
a mighty boat. 


य ई वह॑न्त आशुभिः पिब॑न्तो मदिरं मधु। 
अत्र श्रवांसि दधिरे॥ ९९॥ 
11. = Yatmvahanta asubhih pibanto madiram madhu. 


Atra Sravamsi dadhire. 


Those who bring hither instant showers of rain, 
tasting sweets of honey drinks here, bear and hold the 
food, energy and wealth of the world. 


येषां ्चियाधि treat विभ्राजन्ते रथेष्वा । 
दिवि रुक्मडंवोपरिं ।॥ ९२॥ 
12. Yesam sriyadhi rodasi vibhrajanate rathesva. 
Divi rukma ivopari. 
Those, who by their beauty and grace of culture 
shine over earth and skies in chariots like the sun in 


heaven above, (bear and hold the food, energy and 
wealth of the world). 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 491 


युवा स मारुतो गणस्त्वेषर॑थो srt: | 
शुभंयावाप्र॑तिष्कुतः ।॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Yuva sa maruto ganas-tvesaratho anedyah. 
Subhamyavapratiskutah. 


Young, bright and bold, that group of Maruts, 
pioneers of humanity, riding their bright and blazing 
chariots, admirable beyond reproach, rises over the 
spatial oceans, unobstructed and unchallenged. 


को वेद नूनमेषां यत्रा मद॑न्ति धूत॑यः | 
ऋतजाता अरेपसः ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Ko veda nunamesam yatra madanti dhitayah. 
Rtajata arepasah. 


Who would know of them for sure where these 
tempestuous heroes born of truth, immaculate and free 
challengers of sin, work and rejoice and celebrate their 
victory? 
यूयं ud’ विपन्यवः प्रणोतारं इत्था धिया | 
श्रोतारो याम॑हूतिषु ।॥ ९५५ ॥ 

15. = Yuyam martam vipanyavah pranetara ittha-dhiya. 
Srotaro yamahitisu. 

O leading lights, admirable heroes, with 
intelligence and understanding, thus, you are inspirers, 
guides and saviours of mortals. And you listen when 
they call on you in peace or distress for help and 
assistance. 

ते नो वसूनि काम्यां पुरुश्चन्द्रा Renee: | 
आ य॑ज्ञियासो ववृत्तन ॥ १६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


492 RGVEDA 


16. Te no vasuni kamya puruscandra risadasah. 
A yajniyaso vavrttana. 

Thus they, adorable benefactors, creators of 

good and destroyers of evil by yajna, abundant in golden 


gifts, may, we pray, continue to bring us the wealth and 
honours of excellence we desire. 


एतं मे स्तोम॑मूर्म्ये areata परां ag 
गिरो देवि रथीरिव ui gion 


17. Etam me stomamurmye darbhyaya para vaha. 
Giro devi rathiriva. 


O divine spirit of night and vibrations of peace, 
listen and, like a charioteer, for me, carry this song and 
words of prayer far to the regenerative lord of life. 


उत में बोचतादितिं सुतसोमे रथ॑वीतौ । 
न कामो अपं वेति Au ९८ ॥ 


18. Uta me vocataditi sutasome rathavitau. 
Na kamo apa veti me. 


And then say this for me: The yajna is complete, 
soma is distilled, the chariot arrived in peace, and my 
prayer and desire never goes astray. 


एष क्षेति रथ॑वीतिर्पघवा tities | पर्वतेष्वप॑श्रितः 1122 ॥ 


19. Esa kseti rathavitir-maghava gomatiranu. 
Parvatesvapasritah. 


This man of yajnic action, honour and 
excellence travelling by chariot straight like rays of the 
sun across the clouds lives in the world and reaches his 
destination without difficulty. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 62 493 


Mandala 5/Sukta 62 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Shrutavid Atreya Rshi 


तेन॑ ऋतमपिंहितं yet वां सूर्य॑स्य यत्र॑ विमुचन्त्यर्वान्‌ । 
दशं श॒ता सह त॑स्थुस्तदेकं देवानां श्रेष्ठं वपुंषामपश्यम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


if Rtena rtamapihitam dhruvam vam suryasya yatra 
vimucantyasvan. Dasa Sata saha tasthus-tadekam 
devanam Ssrestham vapusamapasyam. 


O Mitra and Varuna, light and life of the 
universe, I know the thousand radiations, and I have 
seen that one fixed centre of your reality, Rtam, Eternal 
Truth, covered by Rtam, cosmic manifestations of its 
mutability and the laws of mutability, where the 
radiations converge and wherefrom they are released 
around. And that eternal centre is the essential, ultimate 
and highest form of all existential forms of divinity, the 
One and yet many at the same time. 


तत्सु वां मित्रावरुणा महित्वमीर्मां तस्थुषीरहंभिरर्ददुहे। 
विश्वाः पिन्वथः स्वस॑रस्य धेना अनुं ame: पविरा 
वंवर्त।॥ २॥ 


2. Tat su vam mitravaruna mahitvamirma tasthu- 
strahabhir-duduhre. Visvah pinvathah svasaras- 
ya dhena anu vamekah pavira vavarta. 


O Mitra and Varuna, sun and the surrounding 
waters of life, that living grandeur of yours, the One 
constant impeller of life, the unmoved mover, Spirit of 
existence at the centre, vests in the immovable forms of 
life, herbs and trees, by days and nights. Thus you 
nourish all the streams of life while one of you, the sun, 
goes round and round in orbit by the law of the One at 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


494 RGVEDA 
the centre. 


steed पृथिवीमुत द्यां मित्र॑राजाना tear Hatha: | 
वर्धय॑तमोष॑धीः पिन्व॑तं गा अवं वृष्टं aad जीरदानू ॥ ३ ॥ 


छ Adharayatam prthivimuta dyam mitrarajana 
varuna mahobhih. Vardhayatamosadhih pinva- 
tam ga ava vrstim srjatam jiradanu. 


Mitra and Varuna, sun and space, light and law, 
heat and water, refulgent rulers of the world, generous 
creators and givers, together with your powers and 
actions, you hold the earth and heaven, feed and promote 
the greenery of nature, sustain the planets, and create 
and shower the rains. 


आ वामश्वासः सुयुजो! वहन्तु यतर॑श्मय sd यन्त्वर्वाक्‌ । 
घृतस्य॑ attr वर्तते वामुप सिन्ध॑वः प्रदिवि arta ux 


4. A vamasvasah suyujo vahantu yatarasmaya upa 
yantvarvak. Ghrtasya nirniganu vartate vamupa 
sindhavah pradivi ksaranti. 


Mitra and Varuna, rulers and scientists of the 
world, may your motive forces of transport well used 
and well steered like horses by reins and light by rays 
bear you and bring you hither. Purified and reinforced 
waters and liquid fuels are under your command, and 
let streams of water flow when the fire is ignited. 


अनु श्चुताममतिं वर्धं दुर्वी बर्हिरिव aster रक्ष॑माणा । 
नम॑स्वन्ता धृतदश्षाधि गर्ते मित्रासाथे वरुणो्व्छास्वन्तः ॥ ५ ॥ 


5: Anu Srutamamatim vardhadurvim barhiriva 
yajusa raksamana. Namasvanta dhrtadaksadhi 
garte mitrasathe varunelasvantah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 62 495 


Mitra and Varuna, leading lights and dynamic 
forces of the world, in keeping with Vedic tradition and 
your own honour and fame, enhancing your personality 
and character, preserving and promoting the wide earth 
and environment, like protecting and augmenting the 
light and fire of yajna with mantric chants of application 
and acts of self-sacrifice, with wealth of food and energy 
for input, and commanding strength and expertise, you 
sit at the high steer of the nation and join centres of 
production and progress across the earth. 


अक्रविहस्ता सुकृते पर स्पा यं त्रासे वरूणेव्ास्वन्तः। 
राजाना क्षत्रमहणीयमाना सहस्त्र॑स्थूणं बविभरथः सह द्रौ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Akravihasta sukrte paraspa yam trasathe varu- 
nelasvantah. Rajana ksatram-ahrniyamana 
sahasrasthunam bibhrthah saha dvau. 


Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of vision and 
judgement, ruling and refulgent powers of humanity, 
kind and loving nobilities of non-violent hands, holy 
of action, helpful for others, seated at the centres of 
yajnic activity over the earth’s regions, ruling and 
protecting the social order without hurting and 
damaging it, both of you bear and hold up the order of 
a thousand pillars together and protect it against fear 
and violence of terror. 


दिर॑ण्यनिरणिगयो अस्य स्थूणा वि भ्राजते दिव्यै र्वाजंनीव । 
भद्रे क्षेत्रे निमिता तिल्विले वा सनेम मध्वो अधि- 
गर्त्यस्य ॥ ७ ॥ 

cP Hirnyanirnigayo asya sthuna vi bhrajate divya- 
svajaniva. Bhadre ksetre nimita tilvile va sanema 
madhvo adhigartyasya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


496 RGVEDA 


This social order is distinctive, discriminative 
between gold and merely glittering. It rests on pillars 
of gold, and it shines like lightning in the skies. Its policy 
is framed and defined in the house of holiness or, let us 
say, on the fields of fertility. Let us hope and pray we 
join and share the honey sweets created by the leading 
lights and rulers of judgement at the helm of the nation 
and by the people in the home by the fire-side. 


दिरंण्यरूपमुषसो व्युंटावय॑ःस्थूणमुदिंता सूर्यस्य । आ रोहथो 
वरुण मित्र गर्तमत॑श्चक्षाथे अदितिं दितिं च॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Hiranyarupamusaso vyustavayah sthunamudita 
suryasya. A rohatho varuna mitra gartamatas- 
caksathe aditim ditim ca. 

O Mitra and Varuna, rulers and leaders of the 
earth, commanding vision and judgement, at the break 
of dawn and rise of the sun you ride your chariot of 
golden pillars and take your seat on the helm and thence 
watch the realm for what is permanent of value and 
preservable and what is merely transient and 
destructible. 


ages नातिविधे सुदानू अच्छिद्रं शर्म भुवनस्य गोपा । 
तेन॑ नो मित्रावरुणावविष्टं सिषासन्तो जिगीवांसः 
स्याम॥९॥ 

9. Yad banhistham natividhe sudanu acchidram 


sarma bhuvanasya gopa. Tena no mitravarun- 
avavistam sisasanto jigivamsah syama. 


O Mitra and Varuna, ruler and leading lights of 
strength and judgement, generous as breath of life, 
unchallengeable protectors of the world, come and bless 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 63 497 


us with that greatest, highest and imperishable home of 
protection in which, sharing the honey sweets of life 
with all, we may live to achieve our ambition for victory 
in the struggle of existence. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 63 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Archanana Atreya Rshi 


ऋत॑स्य गोपावधिं तिष्ठथो रथं सत्य॑धर्माणा परमे व्योमनि। 
यमत्र मित्रावरुूणाव॑थो युवं तस्मै वृष्टि मधुमत्पिन्वते 
fea: ९॥ 


iP Rtasya gopavadhi tisthatho ratham satyadharm- 
ana parame vyomani. Yamatra mitravarun- 
avatho yuvam tasmai vrstir-madhumat pinvate 
divah. 


Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and lord of justice 
and rectitude, ruler and judge, guardians of truth and 
law, observers of truth and law and eternal Dharma, you 
abide in the highest regions of existence in the presence 
of Divinity and ride over the chariot of life and the state 
while you occupy the highest seats of the social order. 
In this state, whoever you protect is blest, rains of honey 
sweets shower on him from heaven above. 


waster भुव॑नस्य राजथो मित्रावरुणा face cago | 
वृष्टं at राधों अमृतत्वमीमहे द्यावापृथिवी वि च॑रन्ति 
तन्यवः ॥ २॥ 


2. Samrajavasya bhuvanasya rajatho mitravaruna 
vidathe svardrsa. Vrstim vam radho amrtatvami- 
mahe dyavaprthivi vi caranti tanyavah. 


Mitra, lord of love and friendship, Varuna, lord 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


498 RGVEDA 


of judgement and discrimination, rulers and leading 
lights of this world, you shine in splendour and reveal 
the light of Divinity in the yajnic business of life on the 
earth. Just as thunder and lightning light and shake the 
earth and sky, so do you rule the earth. We pray to you 
for the shower of joy, success and the nectar sweets of 
immortal values in this mortal state of life. 


wart उग्रा वुंषभा दिवस्पतीं पृथिव्या यित्रावरुणा 
faction । चित्रेभिरभ्रैरुपं fasen रवं द्यां वर्षयथो असुरस्य 
मायया ।॥ ३॥ 


3 Samraja ugra vrsabha divaspati prthivya mitra- 
varuna vicarsani. Citrebhirabhrairupa tisthatho 
ravam dyam varsayatho asurasya mayaya. 


Mitra and Varuna, ruler and leading lights like 
sun and shower, shining in majesty, blazing with 
splendour, brave and generous, guardians of heaven and 
light of the earth, watchful observers of the world, 
wielding wondrous clouds of rain and power, you stay 
close by us and send down showers of rain and roar of 
thunder by the awful force of light and winds of nature’s 
breath of life. 


माया वां मित्रावरुणा दिवि चिता सूर्यो ज्योतिंश्चरति 
चित्रमायुंधम्‌। तमभ्रेणं asa गू ह॑थो दिवि पर्जन्य द्रप्सा 
मधुमन्त ईरते॥४॥ ` 

4. Maya vam mitravaruna divi Srita suryo jyotisca- 
rati cittamayudham. Tamabhrena vrstya guhatho 
divi parjanya drapsa madhumanta trate. 


Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and lord of bliss, 
ruler and leading lights of the social order, your power 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 63 499 


and generosity is based in the light of Divinity and issues 
from there. The sun, an agent and manifestation of the 
same, shines with its light as weapon of enlightenment 
and purification. You cover the sun with an ocean of 
vapour and energy of cosmic electricity in the regions 
of light, then the cloud is formed and showers of honey 
drops fall as rain. 


रथं युञ्जते मरुत॑ः शुभे सुखं शूरो न मित्रावरुणा गविष्टिषु | 
रजांसि चित्रा वि च॑रन्ति तन्यवों fea: सम्राजा पय॑सा न 
उक्षतम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5. Ratham yunjate marutah subhe sukham 5711-0 na 
mitravaruna gavistisu. Rajamsi citra vi caranti 
tanyavo divah samraja payasa na uksatam. 


O Mitra and Varuna, generous ruler and 
enlightened leaders, the Maruts, dynamic scientists and 
engineers, brave as warriors and tempestuous as winds, 
design and structure a faultless chariot and use it for 
the comfort and welfare of mankind. They rise in the 
company of sunrays to the wonderful regions of the 
skies, light and lightning in yajnic programmes for the 
good of all. O brilliant leaders, give us showers of water, 
milk, generative energy and creative vision. 


वाचं सु मिंत्रावरुणाविरावतीं पर्जन्य॑श्चित्रां व॑दति 
त्विषींमतीम्‌। अश्रा व॑सत मरुतः सु मायया द्यां वंर्षयतम- 
रुणाम॑रेपसंम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vacam su mitravarunay-iravatim parjanyas- 
citram vadati tvisimatim. Abhra vasata marutah 
su mayaya dyam varsayatam-arunamarepasam. 


Just as the cloud deeply filled with vapour and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


500 RGVEDA 


highly generous rumbles with its voice of thunder and 
showers rains of water, fertilising, exciting and pure, 
similarly, O scholars, teachers and preachers, loving as 
Mitra, friend, and discriminative as Varuna, the judge, 
speak to us that language of knowledge and wisdom 
which is comforting, refreshing, regenerative and life 
giving, wonderfully engaging and illuminating, full of 
wonder and variety and light of life. Let the dynamic 
people, vibrant as winds live in plenty like the cloud, 
and rise to the light of heaven with knowledge and 
power. Powerful as Indra, brilliant as Sun, and generous 
as Prajapati, give us the showers of knowledge and 
speech, holy, bright and blazing, free of sin and evil. 


धर्म॑णा मित्रावरुणा विपश्चिता व्रता रक्षेथे असुरस्य 
मायया । ऋतेन विश्वं भुव॑नं वि राजथः सूर्यमा ध॑त्थो दिवि 
चित्यं रथ॑म्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


i, Dharmana mitravaruna vipascita vrata raksethe 
asurasya mayaya. Rtena visvam bhuvanam vi 
rajathah suryama dhattho divi citryam ratham. 


Mitra, O lord of light and love, and Varuna, lord 
of law and justice, knowing and discriminative, 
dedicated to the observance of the Law, you uphold, 
protect and promote the entire world of existence in 
order by Dharma, Rtam, cosmic dynamics and the innate 
strength and will of life. You shine in manifestation by 
Law and you maintain the sun in the regions of light 
like a marvellous chariot on the highway by the Law. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 64 501 


Mandala 5/Sukta 64 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Archanana Atreya Rshi 


वरुणं at Rerdager मित्रं ह॑वामहे । 
परि avd बाह्योर्ज'गन्वांसा स्व॑णरिम्‌॥ ९॥ 


| ॥ Varunam vo risadasam-rca mitram havamahe. 
Pari vrajeva bahvor-jaganvamsa svarnaram. 


O Mitra, loving friend, and Varuna, learned 
scholar and lover of justice, with words of prayer and 
adoration we invoke and invite you, destroyers of 
negativity and enmity, moving forward by the strength 
of your arms and leading to the golden goal of joy and 
bliss by paths of knowledge, love and rectitude, moving 
as you do like shepherds leading cows to the stall. 


ता बाहर्वां सुचेतुना प्र aaa अर्चते। 
शेवं हि जार्य' वां विश्वासु arg जोगुवे ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Ta bahava sucetuna pra yantamasma arcate. 
Sevam hi jaryam vam visvasu ksasu joguve. 
O Mitra and Varuna, sages of love and justice, 
extend your hands of generosity alongwith your 
knowledge and wisdom to this aspiring supplicant. I 


adore and proclaim your admirable treasure of light, 
love and justice over the entire regions of the world. 


यन्नूनमश्यां गतिं fret यायां पथा । 
अस्य॑ प्रियस्य शर्मण्यहि'सानस्य सख्चिरे ॥ ३ ॥ 


2: Yannunam-asyam gatim mitrasya yayam patha. 
Asya priyasya Sarmany-ahimsanasya sascire. 


I wish and pray I go by the same path and reach 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


502 RGVEDA 


the same goal, the home of divine bliss of this dear lord 
of love and non-violence, Mitra which the sages follow 
and reach. 


युवाभ्यां मित्रावरुणोपमं धयामूचा । 

यद्ध क्षये मघोनां स्तोतुणां चं स्पूर्धसें ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Yuvabhyam mitravarunopamam dheyamrca. 

Yaddha ksaye maghonam stotrnam ca spurdhase. 

May I, with prayer and adoration, receive from 

you, Mitra and Varuna, that excellent treasure of wealth 
and wisdom which abides in the home of the prosperous 
celebrants when they have reached their golden goal of 
joy and which I aspire to emulate. 

आ नो faa सुदीतिथिर्वरुणश्च सधस्थ आ। 

स्वे क्षये मघोनां सखीनां च वृधसे ॥ ५ ॥ 
= A no mitra suditibhir-varunasca sadhastha 4. 

Sve ksaye maghonam sakhinam ca vrdhase. 


O Mitra and Varuna, loving friend and friend of 
justice and rectitude, come to us with your brilliance of 
knowledge and grace our home, your own place, for 
the advancement of friends and devotees on way to 
further progress. 


युवं नो येषुं वरूण क्षत्रं geet विभूथः। 
उरु णो वाज॑सातये कृतं राये स्वस्तये ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yuvam no yesu varuna ksatram brhacca bibhr- 
thah. Uru no vajasataye krtam raye svastaye. 


O lord of love and friendship, Mitra, O Varuna, 
lord of justice and rectitude, those whom you vest with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 65 503 


the great social order and high excellence and guide 
and conduct for our sake, advance and raise higher in 
honour and excellence for victory, wealth and well being 
for us. 


उच्छन्त्यां मे यजता saa रुशंद्रवि । सुतं सोमं न हस्तिभिरा 
पडभि्धीवतं नरा बिभ्र॑तावर्चनान॑सम्‌ ii ७॥ 


We Ucchantyam me yajata devaksatre rusadgavi. 
Sutam somam na hastibhira padbhirdhavatam 
nara bibhratav-arcananasam. 


Mitra and Varuna, ruler and pioneers of the 
nation, adorable guides and unifiers of humanity, come 
running fast on feet firm as the elephant’s and join my 
yajna at the rise of dawn in the light of the sun in this 
holy social order. Accept the song of adoration and 
prayer of the celebrant and enjoy it like distilled soma 
of yajna and excellence of the social order. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 65 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Ratahavya Atreya Rshi 


यश्चिकेत स सुक्रतुर्देवत्रा स ब्र॑वीतु नः। 
वरुणो यस्य॑ estat मित्रो वा वन॑ते गिर॑ः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Yasciketa sa sukraturdevatra sa bravitu nah. 
Varuno yasya darsato mitro va vanate girah. 


He who knows is a holy performer of good 
action, Sukratu. Let the sukratu speak to us of the Lord 
and of truth, universal love, justice and rectitude, whose 
vision and language of vision, Mitra, friend and lover, 
and Varuna, who can discriminate between truth and 
falsehood, eminent among the eminent worth meeting, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


504 RGVEDA 


love and admire. Let mitra and varuna among us speak 
to us of Mitra and Varuna, Lord of love and justice. 


ता fe श्रेष्ठवर्चसा राजाना दीर्घश्ुत्तमा। 
ता सत्प॑ती ऋतावृधं ऋतावाना जनेजने ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Ta hi sresthavarcasa rajana dirghasruttama. 
Ta satpati rtavrdha rtavand janejane. 


They command the highest knowledge and 
illumination, they are eminent among the brilliant, 
learned scholars of Revelation. They command and 
preserve the truth, they preserve and protect the divine 
law of nature, they observe and uphold the universal 
law and Dharma among every community of humanity. 


ता वामियानोऽ da gat उप॑ qa सचा । 
स्वर्वासः सु चेतुना वाज अभि vera ॥। ३ ॥ 


a: Ta vamiyano’vase purva upa bruve saca. 
Svasvasah su cetuna vajan abhi pra davane. 


O Mitra and Varuna, twin powers of love and 
friendship, justice and rectitude, ancient and eternal, I 
approach you for protection and promotion, and speak 
to you and speak of you: you command knowledge, you 
command revelation and communication, you give 
knowledge, you give means of communication and 
transport, food and energy, struggle, speed and success 
to the people of charity and generosity. 


मित्रो अंहोषश्चिदादुरु क्षयाय गातुं aac 
यित्रस्य हि प्रतूर्व॑तः सुमतिरस्तिं विधतः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Mitro anhoSscidaduru ksayaya gatum vanate. 
Mitrasya hi praturvatah sumatirasti vidhatah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 65 505 


Mitra, friend and lover, for sure, provides a wide 
path away from sin for us to have a safe and spacious 
haven of peace on earth. The love and friendship of the 
Lord of instant action who protects and upholds us 
against sin and evil is for humanity, abundant for anyone 
who cares to benefit from it by prayer and effort. 


वयं यित्रस्याव॑सि era सप्रथस्तमे । 
अनेहसस्त्वोतंयः सत्रा वरुणशेषसः ॥ ५॥ 


Vayam mitrasyadvasi syama saprathastame. 
Anehasastvotayah satra varunaSsesasah. 


Let us pray and make effort that we may abide 
in the widest protection of Mitra, lord of mercy, friend 
and lover of the universe. Let us be free from sin, evil 
and violence, safe under your protection, O Lord, ever 
dedicated to truth and law, and let us live as loved 
children of Varuna, lord of justice and rectitude. 


युवं fad जनं ada: सं चं नयथः। मा मघोनः oR 
ख्यतं मो अस्माकमृषीणां गोपीथे न॑ उरुष्यतम्‌ ६ ॥ 


6. Yuvam mitremam janam yatathah sam ca 
nayathah. Ma maghonah pari khyatam mo 
asmakam-rsinam gopithe na urusyatam. 


O Mitra and Varuna, friend and lover of 
humanity, upholder of justice and rectitude, you inspire 
and exhilarate this human nation to action, unite them 
and lead them to the common goal. O lord of love, mercy 
and justice, pray do not ignore the supplicants on way 
to prosperity and excellence, do not forsake our people 
and future generations on the path of piety and progress, 
promote and exalt us and our leading lights to reach the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


506 RGVEDA 


haven of peace and bliss. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 66 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Ratahavya Atreya Rshi 


आ चिंकितान सुक्रतुं देवौ ad रिशाद॑सा। 
वरुणाय ऋतपेशसे दधीत प्रय॑से महे॥ ९॥ 


i; A cikitana sukratu devau marta risdadasa. 
Varunaya rtapesase dadhita prayase mahe. 


O learned and intelligent people, for a perfect 
dynamic order of truth and righteousness, abundant, 
great and joyful, hold on to brilliant, generous and divine 
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and justice who 
discriminate between right and wrong, truth and 
falsehood. they are destroyers of hate and enmity, 
negativity and contradiction, and inspirers of holy, 
creative and integrative action, dedicated to creative 
yajna of the human nation. 


ता fe क्षत्रमविंहुतं सम्यग॑सुर्य arent | 
अधं व्रतेव मानुषं Cai ut धायि दर्शतम्‌ २॥ 

2: Ta hi ksatram-avihrutam samyagasuryamasa€te. 
Adha vrateva manusam svarna dhayi darsatam. 


They alone successfully lead to a steady, vibrant 
and inviolable social order and, like committed and 
covenanted powers, establish a bright and blessed 
heaven of humanity on earth. 


ता वामेषे रथानामुर्वी गव्यूतिमेषाम्‌। 
रातह॑व्यस्य सुष्टुतिं दधृक्स्तोभैर्मनामहे ॥ ३॥ 


a: Ta vamese rathanam-urvim gavyutimesam. Rata- 
havyasya sustutim dadhrk_ stomair-manamahe. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 66 507 


O Mitra and Varuna, for the onward movement 
of these chariots of yours we freely offer the wide earth 
and her highways and honour you and the creative song 
of the sacrificing celebrant with our chants of praise. 


अधा fe काव्यां युवं दक्ष॑स्य GRR gar 
नि केतुना जनानां चिकेथे पूतदक्षसा ॥ ४॥ 


4. Adha hi kavya yuvam daksasya purbhiradbhuta. 
Ni ketuna jananam cikethe putadaksasa. 


O Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and 
friendship, justice and rectitude, poetic visionaries 
commanding unprecedented and unsullied power, 
inspiring wonder and awe, you are widely known of 
the people by the brilliance of your knowledge, abundant 
praises of the versatile poet and the strongholds of 
strength and power over the earth. 


aad पृथिवि बृहच्छव एष ऋषीं णाम्‌ । 
जरयसानावरं पृथ्वतिं क्षरन्ति याम॑भिः॥५॥ 


Tadrtam prthivi brhacchrava esa rsinam. 
Jrayasanavaram prthvati ksaranti yamabhih. 


That truth of Law and rectitude, water and 
abundant food, profuse renown, and wisdom of the sages 
for attainment of the people, O mother earth, Mitra and 
Varuna, widely ranging over time and space, day by 
day, action by action, pray shower on life and humanity 
abundantly and incessantly without bounds. 


आ यद्वामीयचश्चसा मित्र॑ वयं च॑ axel: । 
व्यचि बहुपाय्ये यतेमहि स्वराज्ये ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


508 RGVEDA 


6. A yad vamiyacaksasa mitra vayam ca surayah. 
Vyacisthe bahupayye yatemahi svardajye. 


Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of the world, 
we invoke you and pray that the power, prosperity and 
excellence of life which you shower upon the earth for 
humanity, we too, wise and brave, may try to augment 
and maintain in the wide order of universal freedom 
and law which is the common responsibility of the united 
people. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 67 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Yajata Atreya Rshi 


alan da निष्कृतमादित्या यजतं eM | 
वरुण मित्रार्यमन्वर्षिष्ठं क्त्रमाशाथे॥ ९॥ 


ie Balittha deva niskrtam-aditya yajatam brhat. 
Varuna mitraryaman varsistham ksatramasathe. 


It is true, thus, that three brilliant and generous 
powers of divinity vested in humanity organise, sustain 
and promote the grand, united and adorable world order 
achieved and established: Mitra, spirit of love, 
friendship and constant vigilance; Varuna, spirit of 
justice, rectitude and discriminative sense of values and 
wisdom; and Aryaman, innate energy, comprehensive 
vision and all embracing spirit of progressive planning 
and guidance. 


आ यद्योनिं हिरण्ययं वरूण faa ada: | 
धर्तारां चर्षणीनां यन्तं सुम्नं रिशादसा॥ २॥ 

2, A yad yonim hiranyayam varuna mitra sadathah. 
Dhartara carsaninam yantam sumnam risadasa. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 67 509 


O Mitra and Varuna, leading lights and rulers 
with the spirit of love and justice, organisers and 
sustainers of the people, destroyers of hate, enmity and 
contradictions, since you occupy the golden seat of 
power, pray rule, guide and promote the peace and 
welfare of the social order of the people. 


विश्वे हि विश्ववेदसो वरुणो पित्रो अर्यमा । 
aa ued सश्चिरे पान्ति मर्त्यः रिषः॥३॥ 


=, Visve hi visvavedaso varuno mitro aryama. 
Vrata padeva sascire panti martyam risah. 


All the ruling, sustaining and promotive powers, 
Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, knowing everything of the 
systemic order, are committed to the laws, discipline 
and values of the order, keeping their feet on the ground 
realities as their sacred duty, and they protect the people 
against evil and violence and promote them towards a 
better life. 


ते हि सत्या ऋतस्पश ऋतार्वानो जनेजने । 

सुनी थासंः सुदानवो ऽ होश्चिंदुरु चक्रयः॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Te hi satya rtasprsa rtavano janejane. 

Sunithasah sudanavom hoscidurucakrayah. 

Surely they are the best and highest in truth, 

keepers of the rule of law and rectitude, dedicated to 
universal truth and law, generous among and for every 
community, holy guided guides of the people, and they 
keep the wheel of Dharma moving against the evil of 
ignorance, injustice, poverty and sloth of every kind. 

कोनु at मित्रास्तुतो वरुणो वा तनूनाम्‌। 

तत्सु वामेष॑ते मतिरत्निभ्य एष॑ ते मतिः ॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


510 RGVEDA 


Ds Ko nu vam mitrastuto varuno va tanunam. 
Tat su vamesate matiratribhya esate mathih. 


O Mitra, friend, O Varuna, friend of justice, 
which one of you is not praised and appreciated? Which 
one of you is not best of form and function in 
manifestation? Indeed, all our thoughts and reflections 
turn to you in homage. All our adorations are addressed 
to the powers free from evil and injustice, to those who 
command knowledge and good action beyond threefold 
miseries of body, mind and soul of the individual, society 
and humanity. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 68 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Yajata Atreya Rshi 
val fara गायत॒ वरुणाय विपा गिरा। 
मरिंक्षत्रावृतं बृहत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 
1. Pra vo mitraya gayata varunaya vipa gira. 
Mahiksatravrtam brhat. 


Sing in holy words in honour and praise of Mitra 
and Varuna, ruling lord of light and dispenser of justice, 
who hold and sustain the great world order and maintain 
the universal values of eternal Truth and Law for you. 


सम्राजा या gaat मित्रश्चोभा वरुणश्च | 
देवा देवेषु प्रस्ता ॥ २॥ 

2s Samraja ya ghrtayoni mitrascobha varunasca. 
Deva devesu prasasta. 


Mitra and Varuna, both brilliant rulers of nature 
and humanity, sources of the showers of fertility, 
prosperity and felicity, are eminent and adorable, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 68 511 
honoured among the brilliancies of nature and humanity. 


ता a: शक्तं पार्थिवस्य महो रायो feces | 
महिं वां क्षत्रं देवेषु ।॥ ३॥ 


3 Tanah saktam parthivasya maho rayo divyasya. 
Mahi vam ksatram devesu. 


Great is your power and potential for us over 
the wealth and excellence of heavenly and earthly 
values, culture and conduct and behaviour. Great is your 
rule and order over the divinities of nature and humanity. 


ऋतमृतेन सपन्तेषिरं दक्च॑माशाते | अद्धा देवौ वर्धेते ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Rtamrtena sapantesiram daksamasa€te. 
Adruha devau vardhete. 


They live, serve, strive and search for the 
realisation of Rtam, eternal and universal values of Truth 
and Dharma, by their earnest pursuit of truth and 
Dharma in life and conduct, Rtam, and thus, free from 
hate, jealousy and violence, achieve the strength and 
excellence they long for and rise, shining in merit as 
leading lights of humanity. 


वृष्टिद्यावा रीत्यापिषस्पती दानुंमत्याः। 
वहन्तं गर्त॑माशाते ॥ ५ ॥ 
5, Vrstidyava rityapesaspati danumatyah. 
Brhantam gartamasate. 
Harbingers of showers from heaven, making the 
waters flow on earth, creating, preserving and promoting 
the energy, fertility and production of the generous earth 


and environment, ruling and realising the desires and 
aspirations of humanity, Mitra and Varuna bring about 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


512 RGVEDA 


a great and expansive haven of peace, prosperity and 
felicity on earth. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 69 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Uruchakri Atreya Rshi 


त्री रोचना व॑रुण त्रीरुत द्यून्त्रीणि मित्र धारयथो रजांसि। 
वावृधानावमरिंश्चत्रियस्याऽनु व्रतं रक्च॑माणावजुर्यम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


॥ Tri rocana varuna trinruta dyun trini mitra dha- 
rayatho rajamsi. Vavrdhanavamatim ksatriya- 
sya’nu vratam raksamanavajuryam. 


Mitra and Varuna, prana and udana energies of 
the life of existence, you wield and sustain the three 
regions of light, three regions of the ethereal sphere, 
and the three layers of the earthly sphere, sustaining, 
protecting and promoting the expansive form and 
structure of the world in dedication to the unaging laws 
of Rtam, universal Law. 


इररावतीर्वरूण धेनवो वां मधुमद्वां सिन्ध॑वो faa दुहे 
त्रय॑स्तस्थुर्वुंष भासंस्तिसूणां धिषणानां रेतोधा वि 
द्युमन्तं: ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Travatir-varuna dhenavo vam madhumad vam 
sindhavo mitra duhre. Trayas-tasthur-vrsabha- 
sas-tisrnam dhisananam retodha vi dyumantah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, nourishing, energising and 
radiating are your rays of light, fluent and overflowing 
your showers and streams of milk, honey and life giving 
waters. Three are abiding clouds of virility and fertility 
inspired with love and vested with vibrant life seeds of 
the three mighty regions, radiating with knowledge, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 70 513 
karma and worship, O brilliant ones. 


प्रातर्देवीमदिंतिं जोहवीमि मध्यन्दिन उदिता gat es । 
राये मित्रावरुणा सर्वतातेट्ट तोकाय तन॑याय शं योः ॥ ३॥ 


a Pratar-devim-aditim johavimi madhyandina udita 
suryasya. Raye mitravaruna sarvatatele tokaya 
tanayaya Sam yoh. 


O Mitra and Varuna, life-givers of love and 
justice, early morning I invoke and pray to eternal 
mother nature for divine intelligence, at mid-day when 
the sun is high, I pray for light and splendour, and in 
the all blissful yajna, I pray for health, wealth and all 
round peace and well being for the children and all future 
generations. 


या धतरा रज॑सो रोचनस्योतादित्या दिव्या पार्थिवस्य। 
न वां देवा अमृता आ मिनन्ति व्रतानि मित्रावरुणा 
धुवाणि ux 

4. Ya dhartara rajaso rocanasyotaditya divya 
parthivasya. Na vam deva amrta a minanti vratani 
mitravaruna dhruvani. 


O Mitra and Varuna, light and life of existence, 
who are wielders and sustainers of the regions of the 
earth, the middle regions of the skies and the highest 
regions of light and all the heavenly stars, no brilliant 
humans, no divinities of nature, no immortals ever 
violate your laws of eternal constancy. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 70 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Uruchakri Atreya Rshi 


पुरूरुणां चिन्दयस्त्यवो नूनं वां वरूण । 
मित्र वंसिं वां सुमतिम्‌॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


514 RGVEDA 


1. Pururuna ciddhyastyavo nunam vam varuna. 
Mitra vamsi vam sumatim. 


O Mitra, O Varuna, great and abundant is your 
protection and wisdom which, O friend, in all sincerity 
you love to share and extend to us. 


ता वां सम्यगंद्ुह्ाणेष॑मश्याम धाय॑से । 
वयं ते रुद्रा स्याम।॥२॥ 


2: Ta vam samyag-adruhvanesam-asyama dhayase. 
Vayam te rudra syama. 


O Mitra and Varuna, Loving friends of justice 
and rectitude, free from hate and jealousy and destroyers 
of violence and injustice, may we receive, we pray, that 
energy and sustenance, that protection, guidance and 
wisdom of yours so that we may internalise it and pursue 
it in our life and conduct. 


urd AY रुद्रा पायुभिरुत त्रायेथां सुत्रात्रा | 
तुर्याम दस्युन्तनूभिरः ॥ ३॥ 

छ Patam no rudra payubhiruta trayetham sutratra. 
Turyama dasyun tanubhih. 


O destroyers of hate and violence, lovers and 
dispensers of justice and rectitude, with all your care 
and guidance, protect and promote us. Save us, O 
89101118, against evil in our person and social 
institutions so that we may get over all forces of 
negativity, crime and destruction. 


मा कस्याद्धुतक्रतू यक्षं भुजमा तनूभिः। 
मा रोष॑सा मा तन॑सा॥ ४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 515 


4. Ma kasyadbhutakratu yaksam bhujema tanubhih. 
Ma Sesasa ma tanasa. 


O Mitra and Varuna, friend and justicier, 
accomplishers of wonderful acts of yajna, creation and 
production, let us never grab, consume, live on or live 
by any body else’s share of yajnic sustenance, nor 
withhold our share of yajnic contribution for our selfish 
purposes, either for our own person or for our children 
and friends, either for the present or for future. (Help 
us to live by our own effort.) 


Mandala 5/Sukta 71 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Bahuvrkta Atreya Rshi 


आ नो गन्तं रिशादसा वरुण fast बर्हणा । 
उपेमं चारुमध्वरम्‌॥ ९॥ 

॥. A no gantam risadasa varuna mitra barhana. 
Upemam carum-adhvaram. 


O Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and 
friendship, justice and rectitude, destroyers of 
negativities, hate and enmity, promoters of love and 
unity, knowledge and positive action, come to us and 
join this pleasing and elevating programme of love and 
non-violence, this yajna for common good. 


विश्व॑स्य fe प्र॑चेतसा वरुण fas weiter: | 
ईशाना पिप्यतं fara: 12 1 

Zi Visvasya hi pracetasa varuna mitra rajathah. 
Isana pipyatam dhiyah. 


Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and 
unity, justice and discriminative awareness, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


516 RGVEDA 


commanding universal knowledge and ruling power, 
you shine and reign over all. We pray, inspire and elevate 
our mind and intelligence to fullness. 


saa: सुतमा ग॑तं वरुणा मित्र॑ दाशुषंः। 
अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये ३॥ 


Upa nah sutama gatam varuna mitra dasusah. 
Asya somasya pitaye. 


Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love, 
friendship and felicity, justice and rectitude, our yajna 
is accomplished, the soma is distilled. Come, drink of 
the soma of this worshipful celebrant yajaka, share and 
bless our yajnic achievement of success and progress. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 72 
Mitra - Varuna Devata, Bahuvrkta Atreya Rshi 


आ faa वरुणे वयं गीर्भिर्जुहुमो अत्रिवत्‌। 
नि बर्हिषि सदतं सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९॥ 


॥ A mitre varune vayam girbhir-juhumo atrivat. 
Ni barhisi sadatam somapitaye. 


Like the sage free from threefold suffering of 
body, mind and soul, with songs of adoration, we invoke 
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and justice, 
offer yajnic homage in their honour and service, and 
pray that they may come and grace our seats of yajna 
for a drink of soma and bless our accomplishment of 
the creative and productive programme. 


ae स्थो श्ुवक्चेमा धर्मणा यातयज्ज॑ना | 
नि बर्हिषि सदतं सोम॑पीतये ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 73 517 


2. Vratena stho dhruvaksema dharmana yata- 
yajjana. Ni barhisi sadatam somapitaye. 


O constant protectors of achievement and 
progress, unshakable leaders dynamic at the centre of 
movement, dedicated to the vows of piety, guides of 
the people on the march forward and onward by the 
laws of Dharma, come, grace the seats of yajna in the 
world order and drink the soma of success and 
advancement. 


मित्रश्च नो वरुणश्च जुषेतां यज्ञमिष्टये | 
नि बर्हिषि सदतां सोम॑पीतये ॥ ३॥ 

2. Mitrasca no varunasca jusetam yajnamistaye. 
Ni barhisi sadatam somapitaye. 

Let Mitra and Varuna, loving friend and 
discriminative judge of circumstance with 
comprehensive vision making the right choice, cherish, 
join and guide our yajna, corporate programme of 


progress, sit on the holy seats of yajna and celebrate the 
finale with a drink of soma in honour of success. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 73 
Ashvins Devata, Paura Atreya Rshi 
ae स्थः परावति यदर्वावत्य॑श्विना। 
यद्वा पुरू पुरुभुजा यदन्तरिश्च आ ग॑तम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


| Yadadya sthah paravati yadarvavatyasvina. 
Yad va puru purubhuja yadantariksa a gatam. 


Ashvins, twin divines, complementary currents 
of the circuit of nature’s divine energy, wind and 
electricity, you are present far and near in the middle 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


518 RGVEDA 


sphere of the sky and operative far and near here and 
now, abundant, sustaining all and sustainable by all. O 
men and women, let us try these currents of energy come 
to us for the benefit of all. 


इह त्या deude पुरू दंसांसि बिभ्र॑ता । 
वरस्या arate हुवे तुविष्ट॑मा भुजे ॥ २ ॥ 


me Tha tya purubhitama puru damsamsi bhibhrata. 
Varasya yamyadhrigu huve tuvistama bhuje. 


Here I invoke and practically realise the 
abundant and extensive currents of natural energy 
bearing many and mighty potentials, highly useful, most 
powerful and non-stop in operation for our purpose of 
power and comfort. 


ई्मान्यद्वपुंषे वपुंश्चक्रं रथ॑स्य येमथुः | 
पर्यन्या ASOT युगा महवा रजांसि दीयथः ॥ ३॥ 


9; Irmanyad vapuse vapuscakram rathasya 
yemathuh. Paryanya nahusa yuga mahna rajamsi 
diyathah. 


Ashvins, instantly moving harbingers of light 
and energy, one brilliant wheel of your chariot, one part 
of your circuit, you have set in motion for the expression 
of your brilliance by the sun. By the other, like night 
after the day and by the circle of night and day, you 
complete the circle of the day and year and thereby with 
your might and splendour you illuminate the terrestrial 
and ethereal regions and count up the ages of humanity 
on earth. 


तदू षु वांमेना कृतं विश्वा यद्वामनु ्टवे । 
नाना जाताव॑रे पसा समस्मे बन्धुमेय॑थुः ॥ ४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 73 519 


4. Tadu su vamena krtam visva yad vamanu stave. 
Nana jatavarepasa samasme bandhumeyathuh. 


Ashvins, complementary, powers of nature, and 
humanity like teachers and preachers, leaders and 
followers, for all these that you have done for us, for all 
that, I honour and adore you in consequence. Born and 
arisen without sin and free of negativity, come and guide 
our friends and brothers for our sake. 


आ यद्वां सूयां रथं तिष्ठ द्रघुष्यदं wat 
परिं वामरूषा वयो घृणा व॑रन्त आतपं: ॥ ५॥ 

A yad vam surya ratham tisthad raghusyadam 
sada. Pari vamarusa vayo ghrna varanta atapah. 


When the dawn, daughter of the sun, like a bride, 
comes and rides your fast moving chariot, ruddy, shining 
and blazing, birds, beasts and humans always look up 
to you and adore you all round. 


युवोरन्रिश्चिकेतति at सुम्नेन चेत॑सा । 
घर्मं यद्वामरेपसं नासत्यास्ना भुरण्यति ६ ॥ 
6. Yuvoratrisciketati nara sumnena cetasa. Ghar- 


mam yad vamarepasam nasatyasna bhuranyati. 


Ashvins, leading lights and pioneers of life on 
the path of truth and rectitude, Atri, the sage who has 
conquered threefold suffering of existence knows you 
fully with an undisturbed mind and adores you with 
hymns of praise when he experiences and receives from 
you the fire of life free from sin and untruth. 


उग्रो at ककुहो ययिः शृण्वे यामेषु सन्तनिः | 
यद्वां दंसोभिरण्विनाऽत्रिर्नराववर्तति ॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


520 RGVEDA 


ce Ugro vam kakuho yayih 511117८ yamesu samtanih. 
Yad vam damsobhir-asvina trir-naravavartati. 


Ashvins, leading lights and path finders of 
humanity, the mighty rumble of your advance expanding 
in all directions is heard at every stage of your 
movements when Atri, the celebrant sage of threefold 
freedom turns his attention to you by virtue of your noble 
actions. 


मध्व॑ SY म॑धूयुवा रुद्रा सिष॑क्ति पिष्युषीं । 
यत्संमुद्राति पर्षथः पक्वाः पुश्च भरन्त वाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Madhva u su madhuyuva rudra sisakti pipyust. 
Yat samudrati parsathah pakvah prkso bharanta 
vam. 


Ashvins, roaring powers of nature like sun and 
wind, mixers and makers of the sweets of earth, when 
you fill the oceans of ethereal and terrestrial regions 
and abundant showers slake the thirst of honey sweets 
of green, they ripen and bear and bring offers of ripe 
fruit and nourishing food for you. 


सत्यमिद्वा ॐ अश्विना युवामाहर्मयो भुवा | 
ता याम॑न्यामहूत॑मा यामन्ना Boarder ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Satyamid va u asvina yuvam-ahur-mayobhuva. 
Ta yaman yamahutama yamanna mrlayattama. 


Ashvins, leading lights of nature and humanity, 
earth and heaven, sages and scholars, true it is as they 
say you are the harbingers and givers of peace and well- 
being. Most kind and responsive to the call of devotees, 
we pray, come and bring us the highest bliss on the wings 
of wind and light. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 74 521 


इमा ब्रह्माणि वर्धनाऽश्विभ्यां सन्तु SAT | 
या तक्षाम रथौ इवाऽवोचाम बृहन्नमः ॥ ९०॥ 
10.. Ima brahmani vardhana’svibhyam santu 


Santama. Ya taksama rathan iva’vocama 
brhannamah. 


May these songs of praise and celebration be 
pleasing and exalting for the Ashvins and bring peace 
and prosperity for us, the songs which we conceive, 
design and structure like chariots of power and felicity 
while we compose words of yajnic homage in ecstasy. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 74 
Ashvins Devata, Paura Atreya Rshi 


pal देवावश्विनाऽद्या दिवो म॑नावसू । 
तच्छरवथो वृषण्वसु अनत्रिर्वामा विवासति ॥ ९॥ 


i. Kustho devavasvina’dya divo manavasu. 
Tacchravatho vrsanvasu_ atrirvama vivasati. 


Divinities of the earth, Ashvins, rich at heart, 
abiding in the mind, harbingers of showers of wealth 
from the heights of heaven, Atri, the sagely celebrant 
who enjoys three-fold freedom of body, mind and soul 
today prays in service to you. Pray listen to him. 


कुह त्या कुह नु. श्रुता दिवि देवा नास॑त्या । 
fara य॑तथो जने को वां नदीनां सचा ॥ २॥ 


2. Kuha tya kuha nu sruta divi deva nasatya. 
Kasminna yatatho jane ko vam nadinam saca. 


Where are they? Where are they heard and 
renowned, the brilliant ones in heaven, ever dedicated 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


522 RGVEDA 


to truth in heavenly conduct and behaviour? O brilliant 
divines, Ashvins, in which community do you operate? 
Who shares and benefits from your flowing rivers and 
rolling oceans? 


कं याथः कं हं गच्छथः कमच्छ युञ्जाथे रथ॑म्‌ । 
कस्य ब्रह्माणि रण्यथो वयं वामुरश्मसीष्टये।।॥। ३॥ 


ot Kam yathah kam ha gacchathah kamaccha 
yunjathe ratham. Kasya brahmani ranyatho 
vayam vam-usmasistaye. 


Who do you go to? To what course or goal? For 
what purpose do you harness your chariot? Whose songs 
do you love to hear and enjoy? We love and felicitate 
you for our cherished desire. 


पौरं चिन्द्युं प्तं पौरं पौराय जिन्व॑थः। 
यदी" गृभी तर्तातये सिंहमिव gerd ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pauram ciddhyudaprutam paura pauraya 
Jinvathah. Yadim grbhitatataye simhamiva 
druhaspade. 


O citizen, you proceed to the citizen in deep 
waters and resume and raise him to new life for the 
citizen and the coming generation for the extension of 
their action and achievement already made and like a 
lion even jump into the den of hate and enmity to protect 
and promote them. 


प्र च्यवानाल्नुजुरुषों वव्रिमत्कं न सुंञ्चथः। 
युवा यदीं कृथः पुनरा काम॑मृण्वे aed: ॥ ५॥ 


2: Pra cyavanaj-jujuruso vavrimatkam na munca- 
thah. Yuva yadi krthah punara kamamrnve 
vadhvah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 74 523 


Like a physician and surgeon you discard the 
debility of age like an old and worn out garment when 
you renew it back to youth which could be fascinating 
even for the love of a damsel. 


(So does a dynamic society change over Le., 
retire, and aging person from an exacting public position 
to replace him with a young, energetic, intelligent man 
capable of take him over the onerous duty and 
responsibilities of a youthful nation.) 


अस्ति fe alfae स्तोता cafe वां a-efst ्चिये। 
नू श्रुतं म आ ग॑तमवोभिर्वाजिनीवसू 1 ६ ॥ 


6. Asti hi vamiha stota smasi vam samdrSsi Sriye. 
Nu Srutam ma ठ gatam-avobhir-vajinivasu. 


Here for sure is your dedicated devotee and 
celebrant. We abide within your eye sight for the sake 
of the beauty and grace of life. Listen to us and come 
with your modes of protection, Ashvins, who command 
treasures of food, energy and the forces of renewal, 
rejuvenation and advancement. 


को वामद्य पुंरूणामा da मरत्यीनाम्‌ । 
को विप्रो विप्रवाहसा को यज्ञैवीजिनीवसू।॥। ७ ॥ 


7. Ko vamadya purunama vavne martyanam. 
Ko vipro vipravahasa ko yajnairvajinivasu. 


Who of the many many mortals today could win 
your love and favour, O favourite celebrities of the saints 
and scholars? Which one of the wisest? Which one at 
last could win your recognition and favour, O 
commanders of the treasures of food, energy, wealth, 
power and the forces of life? By all yajnas at his 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


524 RGVEDA 
command, could he? Probably, for sure may be. 


आ वां रथो रर्थानां ast यात्वश्विना । 
पुरू चिंदस्मयुस्तिर आङ्गूषो मर्त्येष्वा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A vam ratho rathanam yestho 41145171. 
Puru cid-asmayus-tira anguso martyesva. 


Ashvins, leading lights for humanity, may your 
chariot, fastest of all, adorable among mortals, victorious 
over many negativities, hate and enmities, be directed 
hitherward, reach us and take us across the oceans. (Let 
us create the chariots as divine gifts and sail over the 
oceans across the skies.) 


शमू षु वां मधूयुवाऽस्माकमस्तु चर्कुतिः। 
अवचिीना विचेतसा विभिः श्येनेव दीयतम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Samu su vam madhiuyuva’smakamastu carkrtih. 
Arvacina vicetasa vibhih Syeneva diyatam. 


Ashvins, leading lights, masters of speed and 
direction, creators of the honey sweets of life, may that 
creation, invention and achievement of yours be ours, 
adorable for our good. Most modern intellectuals, 
eminent scientists of imagination, give us the chariot 
with wings to fly with the birds, by winds like the eagle, 
and shine. 


अश्विना ae कर्हि चिच्छुश्रूयात॑मिमं हवम्‌ | 
वस्वीरू षु वां भुज॑ः पृञ्चन्ति सु वां पृच॑ः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Asvina yaddha karhicic-chusruyatam-imam 
havam. Vasviru su vam bhujah pricanti su vam 
preah. 


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, wherever 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 75 525 


you be and whatever you do, please listen to this 
invocation, adoration and invitation of ours to live and 
justify existence, and please know: All your plans and 
actions for peace, prosperity and progress in life fructify 
in full, all your ambitions are fulfilled. We love and 
admire you and all those who work together to realise 
our dreams. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 75 
Ashvins Devata, Avasyu Atreya Rshi 


प्रतिं प्रियत॑मं रथं वृष॑णं agqaret | स्तोता वामश्विनावृषिः 
स्तोमेन प्रति भूषति माध्वी मम॑ श्रुतं हव॑म्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i, Prati priyatamam ratham vrsanam vasuvaha- 
nam. Stota vamasvinavrasih stomena prati 
bhusati madhvi mama srutam havam. 


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, the 
celebrant visionary of life’s reality and mantric meaning, 
adores your achievement in befitting words of song in 
response to the beauty of your dearest chariot which is 
the carrier and harbinger of showers of wealth and well 
being. O creators and makers of the sweets of existence, 
the celebrant prays: Listen to my song of adoration and 
accept the invitation to live and create the joy of life. 


अत्यायातमणश्विना तिरो विश्वा अहं aati cer 
हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी सुषुम्ना सिन्धुवाहसा माध्वी ममं श्रुतं 
हव॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 

Atyaydtamasvina tiro visva aham sana. Dasra 
hirnyavartani susumna sindhuvahasa madhvi 
mama srutam havam. 


Ashvins, leading lights of life in existence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


526 RGVEDA 


destroyers of suffering, harbingers of peace and 
prosperity, creators of honey sweets, listen to my prayer: 
Come over regions of earth across the spaces, travelling 
by golden chariots over golden highways, navigating 
by rivers and oceans, so that I may cross all hurdles of 
existence and live as the immortal that I am. 


आ नो tat बिभ्रतावश्विना गच्छ॑तं युवम्‌। रुद्रा 
हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी जुषाणा वाजिनीवसू माध्वी मम॑ श्रुतं 
हव॑म्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. A no ratnani bibhratavasvina gacchatam yuvam. 
Rudra hirnyavartani jusana vajinivasu madhvi 
mama srutam havam. 


Ashvins, come you both to us, bearing jewel 
wealths of life; come, O Rudras, dispensers of justice 
and punishment, travelling by golden chariot over 
golden highways, loving and listening partners, givers 
of food, energy and speedy progress, creators of the 
sweets of life, come in response to our invocation and 
listen to our prayer. 


gel वां वृषण्वसू रथे वाणीच्याहिता । उत वां ककुहो 
मृगः get: कृणोति वापुषो माध्वी ममं श्रुतं हव॑म्‌ ॥ ४॥ 


4. Sustubho vam vrsanvasu rathe vanicyahita. Uta 
vam kakuho mrgah prksah krnoti vapuso madhvi 
mama srutam havam. 


Ashvins, harbingers of the showers of wealth 
and joy, haven of the abundant and generous, the 
celebrant is delighted in your chariot and feels elevated. 
His song is dedicated to you, and he, mighty strong, 
handsome of body, seeker of your favour and purity, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 75 527 


prepares the offering of homage for you. O creators and 
givers of the sweets of life, listen to my prayer and praise. 


बोधिन्मनसा रथ्येषिरा हवनश्रुता | विधिश्च्यवानमणश्विना 
नि याथो अद्वयाविनं माध्वी मम॑ श्रुतं हव॑म्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


Bodhinmanasa rathyesira havanasruta. Vibhis- 
cyavanam-asvind ni yatho advayavinam madhvi 
mama srutam havam. 


Ashvins, leaders and guides of enlightened 
mind, travelling far and fast by chariot, responsive to 
praise and prayer, you reach the sincere searching man 
of holy mind free from duplicity as by flight of birds. O 
creators and givers of honey sweets, listen to my 
invocation. 


आ वां नरा मनोयुजोऽ vata: प्रुषितप्स॑वः। वयो वहन्तु 
पीतये खह सुम्नेभिरश्विना माध्वी ममं श्रुतं हव॑म्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A vam nara manoyujo’svasah prusitapsavah. 
Vayo vahantu pitaye saha sumnebhirasvina 
madhvi mama srutam havam. 


Ashvins, leaders and pioneers of adventurous 
men, may your horses, flying birds, controlled by 
thought, consuming burnt fuel, bring you hither with 
gifts of peace and well being for a drink of the soma of 
success and splendour. O creators and harbingers of 
honey sweets, listen to my prayer. 


अश्विनावेह ग॑च्छतं arden मा वि वेनतम्‌। तिरणश्चिंदर्यया 
UR वर्तियीतमदाभ्या माध्वी ममं श्रुतं हव॑म्‌ ॥ ७ ॥ 


ae Asvinaveha gacchatam nasatyad ma vi venatam. 
Tirascidaryaya pari vartiryatam-adabhya madhvi 
mama srutam havam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


528 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, come hither, noble masters, 
indomitable leaders ever dedicated to truth. Even if you 
are far away, pray do not be indifferent, slacken not the 
reins, cross over the winding paths and come. O creators 
and givers of honey sweets, listen to my prayer. 


अस्मिन्यज्ञे अदाभ्या जरितारं शुभस्पती | अवस्युम॑ण्विना 
युवं गणन्तमुप॑ भूषथो माध्वी ममं श्चुतं हव॑म्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. 4 5711771 yajne adabhya jaritaram subhaspati. 
Avasyum-asvina yuvam grnantamupa bhusatho 
madhvi mama srutam havam. 


In this yajna of creation, invention and 
production for social good, O masters, indomitable 
Ashvins, twin protectors and promoters of creative 
people and noble works, come and grace the celebrant, 
supplicant with songs of homage for protection and 
patronage. O creators and givers of showers of honey 
sweets, listen to my prayer. 


अभूदुषा रुशंत्पशुरागिरंधाय्युत्वियंः | अयोजि वां वृषण्वसू 
रथो दस्रावमर्त्यो माध्वी मम॑ श्रुतं हव॑म्‌ ९॥ 


9. Abhudusa rusat-pasuragnir-adhayyrtviyah. Ayoji 
vam vrsanvasu ratho dasravamartyo madhvi 
mama srutam havam. 


The dawn is risen. The holy fire, giver of shining 
wealth, is placed in the vedi according to the season. 
Your chariot, Ashvins, is in harness, invincible and 
immortal. O destroyers of hate and suffering and givers 
of showers of wealth and honey sweets, come, listen to 
my prayer. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 76 529 


Mandala 5/Sukta 76 
Ashvins Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


आ भात्ययिरुषसामनींकमुद्विप्राणां देवया वाचो! अस्थुः | 
अर्वाञ्चा नूनं tae ald पीपिवांसं मश्विना घर्ममच्छ Ue 


if A bhatyagnir-usasamanikam-ud vipranam devaya 
vaco asthuh. Arvanca nunam rathyeha yatam 
pipivamsam-asvina gharmam-accha. 


The holy fire of the sun shines here while the 
splendour of the dawn radiates as advance forces of the 
solar fire, and the holy voices of the sages arise in 
adoration. O Ashvins, vitalities of divinity, reach here 
by chariot of the dawn and join the rising fire of the 
house-hold yajna of noble men and women. 


न संस्कृतं प्र मिमीतो गमिष्ठान्ति नूनमश्विनो प॑स्तु तेह | 
दिवांभिपित्वेऽ वसाग॑पिष्ठा प्रत्यवर्तिं दाशुषे शंभ॑विष्ठा ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Na samskrtam pra mimito gamistha’nti: nunam- 
asvinopas-tuteha. Divabhipitve’vasa-gamistha 
pratyavartim dasuse Sambhavistha. 


Ashvins, divinities of nature and humanity, most 
auspicious harbingers of peace and joy, invoked and 
invited to the yajna here, celebrated and adored, coming 
at the fastest, almost instantly reaching with protection 
and promotion at the rise of the day, you do not destroy, 
nor restrict, nor confine what has been refined, seasoned 
and sanctified by yajna. In fact, you bring safety and 
security against adversity and self-betrayal for the 
generous yajamana at his closest. 


उता यातं संगवे crave} मध्यन्दिन उदिता weet । 
दिवा नक्तमवसा शन्तमेन नेदानीं पीतिरण्विना त॑तान 3 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


530 RGVEDA 


Di Uta yatam samgave pratar-ahno madhyamdina 
udita suryasya. Diva naktam-avasa Samtamena 
nedanim pitirasvina tatana. 

And this exuberance of yajnic celebration and 
joy is not confined to the present moment only, it extends 
over days and nights. Come Ashvins, divinities of nature 
and nobilities of men and women, come at the rise of 
dawn, at mid day when the sun is risen up on high, in 
the evening when the cows come home. Come all day 
and night with your gifts of safety and security, peace 
and joy. 


इदं हि वां प्रदिवि स्थानमोकं इमे गृहा अश्विनेदं दुरोणम्‌ | 
आ नो दिवो dea: पर्वतादाऽद्धयो ्यातमिषमूर्ज वहन्ता ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Idam hi vam pradivi sthanamoka ime grha 
asvinedam duronam. A no divo brhatah parva- 
tada’dbhyo yatam-isamurjam vahanta. 


Ashvins, harbingers of light, enlightened men 
and women, this house, these inmates, this open door 
home, all this is your ancient abode in the very light of 
heaven. Come here, bearing and bringing for us 
nutriments and energy from the vast regions of light 
and space, cloud and mountains, and from the waters 
of earth and space. 


समश्विनोरवसा नूत॑ नेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम | 
आ नो! रयिं वहतमोत वीराना विश्वान्यमृता सौभ॑गानि ॥ ५ ॥ 


3: SamasSvinor-avasa nutanena mayobhuva supra- 
nitt gamema. A no rayim vahatamota viran-a 
visvanya-mrta saubhagani. 

May we join, unite and move on with the latest 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 77 531 


and blissful protection and ethics, morals and policy of 
the Ashvins, leading lights of the world. O leaders and 
pioneers of life in nature and history, bring us, lead us 
to, wealth, honour and excellence, valiant children and 
all the gifts of good fortune and immortality in the world. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 77 
Ashvins Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


प्रातर्यावाणा प्रथमा य॑जध्वं पुरा गृध्रादररुषः fara: | 
प्रातर्हिं यज्ञमश्विना दधाते प्र शंसन्ति waa: पूर्व 
भाजंः॥ ९॥ 


॥. Prataryavana prathama yajadhvam pura 
grdhrad-ararusah pibdatah. Pratarhi yajnam- 
asvina dadhate pra Samsanti kavayah purv- 
abhajah. 

Arise, meet and adore the Ashvins, first early 
morning visitors and harbingers of holy light and life’s 
vitalities. They join and bless the yajna and shower and 
share the soma before the covetous grabbers and 
hoarders are up. They join and guide the yajnic business 
of life while the saints and sages, men of poetic vision 
and intelligence, earliest sharers of the bliss, sing in 
praise of the leading lights of divinity. 


weed जध्वमणश्विना हिनोत न सायमस्ति देवया अजुंष्टम्‌। 
उतान्यो अस्मद्यजते वि चावः पूर्वपूर्वो यज॑मानो 
वनीयान्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Prataryajadhvam-asvina hinota na sayamasti 
devaya ajustam. Utanyo asmad yajate vi cavah 
purvah purvo yajamano vaniyan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


532 RGVEDA 


Invoke the Ashvins early morning, join the 
leading lights and adore them at yajna, evening is not 
the favourite time of the lovers of divinity as the 
morning. And who else other than us, is the yajaka who 
loves and adores the Ashvins in yajna, and worthy of 
love and reverence, the earlier, the worthier, anywhere, 
anyone? None. 


दिर॑ण्यत्वङ्मधुं वर्णो org: Yat agar tal वर्तते ar | 
मनोजवा अश्विना वातरंहा येनातियाथो दुरितानि 
विष्व ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Hiranyatvanmadhuvarno ghrtasnuh prkso 
vahanna ratho vartate vam. Manojava asvina 
vataranha yenatiyatho duritani visva. 


Ashvins, leading lights of divinity, scholars, 
scientists and engineers, your chariot comes hither laden 
with gold, honey sweet and charming, bringing showers 
of water and ghrta, carrying wealth of food and energy. 
It is fast as mind and powerful as wind and storm by 
which you cross over all hurdles and evils of the world. 


यो भूयिष्ठं नासत्याभ्यां विवेष चनिष्ठं पित्वो रर॑ते fast | 
स तोकम॑स्य पीपरच्छमीभिरनुर्ध्वभासः सदपित्तुतुर्यात्‌॥। ४ ॥ 


4. Yo bhuyistham nasatyabhyam vivesa canistham 
pitvo rarate vibhage. Sa tokamasya piparac- 
chamibhir-anurdhvabhasah sadamit tuturydt. 


One who serves and works with the Ashvins, 
leading lights of divinity and humanity, all free from 
untruth and falsehood, achieves by his creative works 
abundant cherished food. He shares the food and success 
with others in yajnic living, advances his rising 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 78 533 


generation by the same works, surpasses those who do 
not raise the sacred-fire, and always destroys the evils. 


समश्विनोरवसा नूतनेन मयोभुवा सुप्रणीती गमेम | आ नों 
रयिं वहतमोत वीराना विश्वान्यमृता सौभ॑गानि ॥ ५॥ 


9 Samasvinor-avasa nutanena mayobhuva supra- 
nitt gamema. A no rayim vahatamota viran-a 
visvanyamrta saubhagani. 


Let us abide by the noble guidance of the 
Ashvins and go forward by their latest blissful protection 
and progress. O leading lights of life, we pray, lead us 
to the wealth of life and bless us with brave heroes and 
all the good fortunes of the world and values of 
immortality. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 78 
Ashvins Devata, Saptavadhri Atreya Rshi 


अश्विनावेह ग॑च्छतं नास॑त्या मा fa वेनतम्‌। 
हंसाविव पततमा Gat उप॑ 2 

ll. Asvinaveha gacchatam nasatya ma vi venatam. 
Hamsaviva patatama sutan upa. 


Ashvins, complementary sustainers of life as air 
and water, men and women, teachers and disciples, ever 
true to reality, come together into the world, be not ill- 
disposed or hostile, fly like a pair of swans hither to the 
distilled sweets of life. 


svat हरिणाविंव गौराविवानु यव॑सम्‌ | 
हंसाविव पततमा at उप॑ ॥ २॥ 


2. Asvina harinaviva gauravivanu yavasam. 
Hamsaviva patatama sutan upa. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


534 RGVEDA 


Ashvins, twin harbingers and sharers of divine 
love and joy, come like a couple of golden deer, like a 
pair of white fawns to the cherished green, fly like a 
couple of swans hither to share the distilled soma of 
joys with us. 


sat वाजिनीवसू जुषेथां यज्ञमिष्टये | 
हंसाविव पततमा Gat उप॑ ॥ ३॥ 


3: Asvina vajinivasu jusetham yajnamistaye. 
Hamsaviva patatama sutan upa. 


Ashvins, twin divines like teachers and 
researchers, creators and developers of food and energy 
for speed and progress, come and join our programme 
of development for the realisation of our cherished 
goals. Fly like a couple of swans to the pleasures of 
life’s achievement. 


अत्रिर्यद्ामवरोह॑न्बीसमजो'हवी न्नाध॑मानेव aren 
श्येनस्य चिजजव॑सा नूत नेना ग॑च्छतमण्विना शन्तं मेन ।॥। ४ ॥ 
4. Atriryad vam-avarohann-rbisam-ajohavin- 


nadhamaneva yosa. Syenasya cijjavasa nutan- 
enagacchatam-aSsvina Santamena. 


Ashvins, harbingers of new life like sun and 
moon, when Atri, man of threefold freedom, in 
depression, struggling to emerge, calls upon you for help 
like a woman in distress, pray fly to his rescue and 
rejuvenation like an eagle with protection and fresh lease 
of life giving him peace, stability and reassurance. 


fa जिहीष्व वनस्पते योनिः सृष्य॑न्त्याइव । 
श्रुतं मे अश्विना हवं ससव॑धिं च मुञ्चतम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 78 535 


a. Vi jihisva vanaspate yonih susyantya iva. Srutam 
me asvina havam saptavadhrim ca muncatam. 


O man, spirit of desire, as the baby on maturity 
leaves the folds of the mother’s womb, so give up the 
bonds of mortality to freedom. O Ashvins, harbingers 
of knowledge and freedom, listen to my call of prayer, 
release saptavadhri, the spirit that has lived out the 
fivefold sense experience and the two-fold adventure 
of thought and desire. 


भीताय नाध॑मानाय ऋष॑ये Waders | 
मायाभिर॑रश्विना युवं gai सं च वि चाचथः॥ ६॥ 


6. Bhitaya nadhamanaya rsaye saptavadhraye. 
Mayabhirasvina yuvam vrksam sam ca vi caca- 
thah. 


Ashvins, complementary powers of evolution, 
discrimination and vision, for the man in fear of 
existence, for the supplicant in sufferance, for the sage 
of vision, and for the man of sevenfold bondage of sense 
and mind, for all these, with your divine powers, let the 
tree of life seed and grow well for experience and then 
let it fall off for the soul’s freedom. 


यथा ard: पुष्करिणीं aftrgalfea cea: । 
एवा ते गर्भ एजतु निरैतु दश॑मास्यः ॥ ७॥ 
a Yatha vatah puskarinim samingayati sarvatah. 
Eva te garbha ejatu niraitu daSamasyah. 
Expectant mother, just as the breeze of life feeds 
and vibrates the pool of lotus life all round, so may your 


foetus in the womb vibrate with life and growth and be 
born when it matures in ten months. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


536 RGVEDA 


यथा वातो यथा वनं यर्था समुद्र एज॑ति। 
एवा त्वं द॑शमास्य were जरायुणा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yatha vato yatha vanam yatha samudra ejati. 
Eva tvam dasamasya sahavehi jarayuna. 

O baby in the womb, just as the breeze, as the 

forest, as the sea ripples with vitality, so may you vibrate 


and move in the womb and, maturing in ten months, be 
born alongwith the sheath of life. 


दश मासाज्छशयानः कुमारो अधिं मातरि । 
निरैतु जीवो अक्ष॑तो जीवो जीवन्त्या अधिं।॥ ९॥ 

9. Dasa masanchasayanah kumaro adhi matari. 
Niraitu jivo aksato jivo jivantya adhi. 


Let the individual soul reposing in the mother’s 
womb for ten months be born as the baby, healthy and 
unhurt, in the mother’s state of good health and perfect 
life and live on as extension of the mother beyond her 
life. 

Mandala 5/Sukta 79 
Usha Devata, Satyashrava Atreya Rshi 
महेनों अद्य बोधयोषो राये दिवित्म॑ती । यथां चिन्नो अबोधयः 
स॒त्यश्र॑वसि वाय्ये सुजाते अश्व॑सून॒ते ॥ ९॥ 


1. Mahe no adya bodhayoso raye divitmati. Yatha 
cinno abodhayah satyasravasi vayye sujate 
asvasunrte. 


O dawn, lady of morning light brilliant with 
splendour, arouse us and enlighten us today for the 
achievement of grandeur, wealth and excellence of life 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 79 537 


as you have been the giver of enlightenment and 
generosity ever before, O majesty of renown, symbol 
of life’s extension, nobly born, commander of the 
nation’s power, achievement and love of noble truth. 


(Swami Dayananda interprets this mantra as an 
address to the lady of the house.) 


या aie शौचद्रथे Seal दुहितर्दिवः ror ates सहीयसि 
सत्यश्रवसि वाय्ये सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ २॥ 


2. Ya sunithe saucadrathe vyauccho duhitardivah. 
Sa vyuccha sahiyasi satyasravasi vayye sujate 
asvasunrte. 


Daughter of the light of heaven, lady of justice 
and moral guidance who ride a chariot of pure brilliance, 
as you have shone before, so may you ever shine now 
and after in future, O lady, forbearing and challenging, 
renowned for truth and righteousness, extensive, nobly 
born and blest with prosperity, achievement and 
discrimination between truth and untruth of thought and 
speech. 


सा नो अद्याभरद्वसु्व्युच्छा दुहितर्दिवः । यो aires: सहीयसि 
सत्यश्र॑वसि वाय्ये सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ २॥ 


Sa no adyabharadvasur-vyuccha duhitardivah. 
Yo vyaucchah sahiyasi satyasravasi vayye sujate 
asvasunrte. 


May she, daughter of the light of heaven, 
harbinger of all wealth, establish us today in the light 
of life. She is most forbearing, dedicated to truth and 
prosperity, lovable, nobly born, the enlightened lady of 
knowledge and eternal truth who herself shines in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


538 RGVEDA 
splendour. 


अभि ये त्वां विभावरि स्तोमैर्गणन्ति वह्वयः । सधैर्म॑घोनि 
सुश्रियो दाम॑न्वन्तः सुरातयः सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Abhi ye tva vibhavari stomairgrnanti vahnayah. 
Maghair-maghoni susriyo damanvantah  sura- 
tayah sujate asvasunrte. 


O lady of light, glorious dawn, nobly born, 
enlightened and dedicated to eternal truth and noble 
achievement, those celebrants who are rich and generous 
and command the beauty of grace and heat of fire in 
dedication and adore you with holy songs of praise and 
liberal gifts of yajna deserve and enjoy your favour for 
advancement. 


यच्िद्धि त गणा इमे छृदय॑न्ति मघत्तये । परिं चिद्यो 
दथुर्ददतो राधो sea सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ।॥ ५॥ 


a: Yacciddhi te gana ime chadayanti maghattaye. 
Pari cid vastayo dadhur-dadato radho ahrayam 
sujate asSvasunrte. 


O lady of light, nobly born and enlightened, 
truthful and progressive, these celebrants of yours who 
adore you for gifts of wealth and splendour receive, 
hold and command creditable means, materials and 
wealth for success while, loving and shining, they give 
lots in charity. 


ve धा वीरवद्यश उषो! मघोनि aa 1 ये नो राधां स्यहया 


मघवानो अरासत सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Aisu dha viravad yasa uso maghoni surisu. Ye no 
radhamsyahraya maghavano arasata sujate 
asvasunrte. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 79 539 


O dawn, lady of light, nobly born, enlightened, 
progressive and truthful, commanding wealth and 
power, vest these brave and generous celebrants with 
honour and excellence worthy of heroes, who, blest with 
wealth and honour, give us means and materials for 
success in life which are free from discredit and shame. 


तेभ्यो द्युम्नं बृहद्यश उषो मघोन्या व॑ह । ये नो राधांस्यश्व्या 
गव्या भजंन्त सूरयः सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ ७॥ 


a Tebhyo dyumnam brhad_ yasa uso maghonya 
vaha. Ye no radhamsyasvya gavya bhajanta 
surayah sujate asvasunrte. 


O dawn, lady of light, mistress of honour and 
excellence, nobly born and enlightened, truthful, 
dynamic and progressive, bear and bring vast wealth 
and honour of high order for those brave celebrants who 
produce wealth, means and materials for success in 
terms of food and speed, cattle wealth and transport, 
progress and prosperity and in their generosity share it 
with us. 


उत नो गोम॑तीरिष आ व॑हा eeafta: 1 साकं सूर्य॑स्य 
रश्मिभिः शुक्रः शोच॑द्धिरर्चिभिः सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Uta no gomatirisa a vaha duhitardivah. Sakam 
suryasya rasmibhih sukraih socadbhir-arcibhih 
sujate aSvasunrte. 


And O daughter of heaven, nobly born and 
enlightened, spirit of truth and progress, come with the 
rays of the sun, pure and purifying, sacred and 
sanctifying, and bring for us food and energy, lands and 
COWS. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


540 RGVEDA 


व्युच्छा दुहितर्दिवो मा चिरं त॑नुथा अप॑ः । नेत्वा स्तेनं यथां 
रिपुं तपाति सूरो अर्चिषा सुजाते अश्व॑सूनुते॥ ९॥ 


9. Vyuccha duhitardivo ma ciram tanutha apah. 
Nettva stenam yatha ripum tapati suro arcisa 
sujate asSvasunrte. 


Daughter of the light of heaven, nobly born and 
enlightened, truthful and progressive, rise and shine, 
and let us shine too. Do not procrastinate, do not protract 
your sacred act, accomplish the act and rise. Just as the 
ruler punishes the thief and the enemy, just as the sun 
burns dry grass with its heat of light, that way let no 
one torment you. 


एतावद्वेद्‌षस्त्वं wat वा दातुंमर्हसि। या स्तोतुभ्यों 
विभावर्युच्छन्ती न प्रमीय॑से सुजाते अश्व॑सूनृते ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. Etavad vedusastvam bhuyo va datumarhasi. Ya 
stotrbhyo vibhavaryucchanti na pramiyase sujate 
asvasunrte. 


O dawn, lady of light, nobly born and 
enlightened, ever true and progressive, brilliant and 
enlightening, such you are and more competent and 
pleased to give to your dedicated celebrants, whom you 
never neglect, never frustrate, but ever bless and 
promote higher and higher. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 80 
Usha Devata, Satyashrava Atreya Rshi 


grat ब॒ हतीमूतेनं ऋतावंरीमरूणप्सुं विभातीम्‌ | 
देवीमुषसं स्व॑रा वहन्तीं प्रति विप्रासो मतिभिर्॑जरन्ते ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 80 541 


im Dyutad-yamanam brhatim-rtena rtavarim-aru- 
napsum vibhatim. Devim-usasam_ svar-avahan- 
fim prati vipraso matibhir-jarante. 


Saints and sages with holy mind and hymns of 
adoration honour and celebrate the divine dawn, crimson 
hued, shining brilliant, grand and sublime, illuminating 
hours of time and regions of space, observing universal 
law of eternity by simple natural conduct, and bringing 
the morning light and bliss of the sun. 


एषा जनं दर्शता बोधयन्ती सुगान्पथः कृण्वती यात्यग्रे | 
बृह द्रथा लुं हती विंश्वमिन्वोषा ज्योतिंर्यच्छत्यग्रे अद्ध॑म्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Esa janam darsata bodhayanti sugan pathah 
krnvati yatyagre. Brhadratha brhati visvaminvo- 
sa jyotir-yacchatyagre ahnam. 


This glorious dawn, vast and great, goes forward 
riding her mighty chariot, arousing humanity from sleep, 
lighting up easy paths for movement, all illuminative, 
giving light in advance of the day. 


एषा गोभिररुणेभिर्युजानाऽस्त्रधन्ती रयिमप्रायु चक्रे । पथो 
रद॑न्ती सुविताय देवी पुरुष्टुता विश्ववारा वि भाति ॥ ३ ॥ 


3 Esa gobhir-arunebhir-yujana-sredhanti rayima- 
prayu cakre. Patho radanti suvitaya devi puru- 
stuta visvavara vi bhati. 

Harnessing the crimson rays of the sun to her 
chariot, she goes unerringly, assiduously, creating 
unfailing wealth of light and rejuvenation. Marking 
paths of movement for the good of the people, the divine 
dawn shines, loved and adored by the people as the 
source of universal good. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


542 RGVEDA 


एषा व्येनी भवति द्विबही आविष्कृण्वाना तन्वं पुरस्तात्‌ । 
ऋतस्य पन्थामन्वेति साधु प्र॑जानतीव न दिशो मिनाति ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Esa vyent bhavati dvibarha aviskrnvana tanvam 
purastat. Rtasya pantham-anveti sadhu praja- 
nativa na diso mindati. 


Revealing her body of light from the east, this 
lady of light radiates fast on both sides right and left 
over day and night. It follows the path of eternal law 
and, knowing well everything in nature, it neither 
violates nor goes astray over the quarters of space. 


एषा शुभ्रा न तन्वो विदानोर्ध्वेव स्नाती दूये नो अस्थात्‌ | 
अप द्वेषो बाध॑माना तमांस्युषा दिवो दुहिता ज्योतिषा- 
गात्‌॥ ५॥ 

Esa subhra na tanvo vidanordhveva snati drsaye 
no asthat. Apa dveso badhamana tamamsyusa 
divo duhita jyotisagat. 

The sacred dawn, revealing her radiant majesty 
like the lady of light for us to see and admire, this 
daughter of the sun stands above pure and sanctified as 
if doing her morning ablutions and, dispelling hate and 
darkness, warding off negativities, she walks with her 
train of splendour. 


एषा प्रतीची दुहिता दिवो नृन्योषेव भद्रा नि रिणीते stead: | 
व्यूर्ण्वती दाशुषे वायीणि पु नर्ज्योतिर्युवतिः पूर्वथाकः ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Esa pratict duhita divo nrn yoseva bhadra ni rinite 
apsah. Vyurnvati dasuse varyani punar-jyotir- 
yuvatih purvathakah. 


Yonder stands this daughter of heaven like a 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 81 543 


maiden, holy and inspiring to the best of men, and then 
moves to the west, revealing the day’s phases of her 
splendour and opening up new possibilities of cherished 
achievements for the generous man of yajnic action. 
Ever bright and youthful, she thus moves the daily 
rounds of light anew as ever before since times 
immemorial. 


Note: Swami Dayananda gives an extended 
interpretation of the Dawn by implication: He interprets 
Usha as the newly married woman rising like the dawn 
over the world of her new home, bringing new light 
and new possibilities of life’s achievements. The 
wedding of the couple is a new morning for the family, 
life moves on, new phases of the day move on westward, 
new generations follow, life goes on and on like the 
daily round of night and day. The sun remains the same, 
days and nights are new. Life remains the same, the 
phases are new. The bride is holy, sacred, inspiring, 
worthy of love, respect and reverence. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 81 
Savita Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 
युञ्जते मनं उत Goad धियो विप्रा विप्र॑स्य बहतो विंप- 
सचितः । वि होत्रां दधे वयुनाविदेक इन्मही देवस्य॑ सवितुः 
परिष्टुतिः ॥ ९॥ 
1. Yunjate mana uta yunjate dhiyo vipra viprasya 


brhato vipascitah. Vi hotra dadhe vayunavideka 
inmahi devasya savituh paristutih. 


Enlightened sages concentrate their mind and 
senses and meditate on the infinite, omniscient and 
vibrant omnipresence of Divinity who alone as sole 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


544 RGVEDA 


power and ruler knows and governs all the laws and 
ways and facts of existence and watches, rules and 
dispenses the karma of yajakas and others. Great indeed 
is the glory, and high the praise of Savita, lord of life 
and self-refulgent giver of light. 


विर्वा रूपाणि प्रति मुञ्चते कविः प्रासावीद्धद्रं द्विपदे 
चतुष्पदे | वि नाकमख्यत्सविता वरेण्योऽ नुं प्रयाण॑मुषसो 
वि राजति॥ २॥ 


2. Visva rupani prati muncate kavih prasavid 
bhadram dvipade catuspade. Vi nakamakhyat 
Savita varenyo’nu prayanamusaso vi rajati. 


The omniscient creator, eternal poet and maker, 
creates and pervades all forms of existence and produces 
all good things for the well being of humans and animals. 
He, Savita, creator and energiser, lord of love worthy 
of our choice, manifests and illuminates the heaven of 
light and joy, inspires the rise of the dawn with light 
and rules and shines the sun and after. 


यस्य॑ प्रयाणमन्वन्य serdar cael महिमानमोजंसा। 
यः पार्थिवानि विममे स एत॑शो रजांसि ea: स॑विता 
महित्वना ।॥ ३ ॥ 


ai Yasya prayanam-anvanya id yayurdeva devasya 
mahimanam-ojasa. Yah parthivani vimame sa 
etaso rajamsi devah savita mahitvana. 


Savita is the lord of life, creator, self-refulgent, 
all pervasive, whose majesty, Law and ways, all other 
powers of nature and humanity with all their potential 
follow, the lord omnipresent who, with his grandeur and 
omnipotence, creates, pervades and transcends all 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5/SUKTA - 81 545 
regions of the universe. 


उत यासि सवितस्त्रीणिं रोचनोत सूर्य॑स्य रस्मिभिः 
स्मुंच्यसि। उत रात्रींमुभयतः परीयस उत मित्रो भ॑वसि 
देव ef far: ॐ॥ 


4. Uta yasi savitas-trini rocanota suryasya rasmi- 
bhih samucyasi. Uta ratrim-ubhayatah pariyasa 
uta mitro bhavasi deva dharmabhih. 


Savita, lord of light and life, you pervade and 
illuminate three orders of light, sun, moon and electric 
energy and love to play with the sun’s rays. You envelop 
the night at both ends and, with your laws and function, 
O lord self-refulgent, you become the friend and 
measure of everything. 


उतेर्शिंषे प्रसवस्य त्वमेक इदुत पूषा भ॑वसि देव aah: | 
उतेदं विश्वं भुव॑नं वि राजसि श्यावाश्व॑स्ते सवितः 
स्तोम॑मानो ॥ ५५ ॥ 


a: Utesise prasavasya tvameka iduta pusa bhavasi 
deva yamabhih. Utedam visvam bhuvanam vi 
rajasi Syavasvaste savitah stomamanase. 


Savita, spirit of life and inspiration, self- 
refulgent giver of light, you alone by yourself rule over 
the world of existence. O generous and self-refulgent 
lord, by every stage of evolution in order of time you 
remain the giver of light and nourishment for growth. 
And you pervade, illuminate and rule over this entire 
world of existence so that the sun itself receives light 
and adoration by virtue of your light of illumination. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


546 RGVEDA 


Mandala 5/Sukta 82 
Savita Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi 


तत्सं वितुर्व"णीमहे वयं देवस्य भोज॑नम्‌। 
श्रेष्ठं सर्वधात॑मं तुरं भग॑स्य धीमहि॥ ९॥ 
il Tat saviturvrnimahe vayam devasya bhojanam. 


Srestham sarvadhatamam turam bhagasya 
dhimahi. 


We choose to pray to the lord creator Savita for 
his love and favour so that we may receive the highest, 
all sustaining and all victorious glory of the lord self- 
refulgent and omnipotent. 


अस्य हि स्वय॑शस्तरं सवितुः कच्यन प्रियम्‌। 
न पिनन्ति स्वराज्यम्‌ 2.1 
2: Asya hi svayasastaram savituh kaccana priyam. 


Na minanti svarajyam. 


Whoever it be, whoever might try, no one can 
violate or impair the self-glorious dear absolute 
dominion of lord Savita’s divine freedom. 


स हि रलानि दाशुषे सुवाति सविता भग॑ः | 
तं भागं चित्रमींमहे।॥। २३॥ 

Sa hi ratnani dasuse suvati savita bhagah. 
Tam bhagam citramimahe. 

Only Savita, lord of power, honour and 
excellence, creates and augments the jewel wealths of 
life for the man of yajnic generosity. We pray we may 
know and receive his favour and grace for a share of 
that wonderful glory. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 82 547 


अद्या नो देव सवितः प्रजाव॑त्सावीः सौभ॑गम्‌ । 
परां दुःष्वप्न्यं सुव ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Adya no deva savitah prajavat savih saubhagam. 
Para duhsvapnyam suva. 


O generous lord Savita, create for us here and 
now honour and good fortune full of noble people and 
progeny. Drive away bad dreams and ward off dreamy 
ambitions. 


विश्वानि देव सवितर्दुरितानि परां सुव । 
यद्भद्रं तन्न आ सुव ॥ ५॥ 
Visvani deva savitarduritani para suva. 


Yad bhadram tanna a suva. 


O lord Savita, ward off and sterilise all the evils 
of the world. Grant us that which is good. Vitalise, 
energise and promote all that is good. 

अनागसो अदितये देवस्य॑ सवितुः सवे। 
विश्वां वामानि धीमहि॥ ६॥ 


6. Anagaso aditaye devasya savituh save. 
Visva vamani dhimahi. 

Free from sin and evil in the yajnic world of 
lord Savita’s creation, we pray, we may receive the 
cherished gifts of life in service of the mother, mother 
earth and nature. 


आ विश्वदेवं सत्प॑तिं सूक्तैर द्या वूंणीमहे। 
स॒त्यस॑वं सवितारम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


i A visvadevam saptatim suktairadya vrnimahe. 
Satyasavam savitaram. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


548 RGVEDA 


With songs of adoration we worship and 
celebrate lord Savita, cosmic yajaka of eternity, self- 
refulgent generous father inviolable protector and 
sustainer of the world of existence. 


य इमे उभे अहनी पुर एत्यप्र॑युच्छन्‌ । 
स्वाधीर्देवः स॑विता॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Ya ime ubhe ahani pura etyaprayucchan. 
Svadhirdevah savita. 


We adore and worship self-refulgent, self- 
existent lord of creation, Savita, who transcends both 
the day and night of existence and self-abides without 
relent. 

य इमा विश्वां जातान्याश्रावय॑ति शत्ोकेन | 
प्र च॑ सुवाति सविता ॥ ९॥ 
9. Ya ima visva jatanyasravayati Slokena. 
Pra ca suvati savita. 
We invoke and adore lord Savita who informs 


all these born ones by his Word, who creates and inspires 
them all, without exception. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 83 
Parjanya Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 
अच्छ वद तवसं गीर्भिराभिः स्तुहि पर्जन्यं नमसा विवास | 
कनिक्रदद्‌ वृषभो जीरदानू रेतो दधात्योषधीषु गर्भम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


Le Accha vada tavasam girbhirabhih stuhi parja- 
nyam namasa vivasa. Kanikradad vrsabho jira- 
danu reto dadhatyosadhisu garbham. 

Hail the mighty cloud well with these holy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 83 549 


words of song, serve, celebrate and energise it with 
homage in yajna for peace and a happy home. Roaring 
and thundering with passion, the virile cloud, giver of 
life and freshness, impregnates the herbs with the seed 
of generation. 


fa वृक्षान्‌ ह॑न्त्युत हन्ति रक्षसो विश्वं बिभाय भुव॑नं 
महाव॑धात्‌। उतानागा ईषते वृष्ण्यावतो यत्पर्जन्यः स्तनयन्‌ 
हन्तिं दुष्कृतं ॥ २॥ 


2. Vi vrksan hantyuta hanti raksaso visvam bibhaya 
bhuvanam mahavadhat. Utanaga tsate vrsnya- 
vato yat parjanyah stanayan hanti duskrtah. 


The cloud shakes the trees, destroys the demons 
whom the whole world fears, and when it roars and 
releases the water of rain pregnant with life, it kills the 
evil doers with the terrible bolt and saves the sinless 
and the generous forces of life. 


रथीव कशयाश्वां अभिश्चिपन्नाविर्दूतान्करणुते वर्यौ ३ अदं | 
दूरास्सिंहस्यं स्तनथा उदीरते aust: कृणुते वर्ष्य 
नभ॑ः UB HU 


a. Rathiva kasayasvan abhiksipannavirdutan krnute 
varsyan aha. Durat simhasya stanatha udirate yat 
parjanyah krnute varsyam nabhah. 


Indeed like a charioteer urging on the horses by 
the whip, the cloud condenses and intensifies the rain 
carrier showers down to the earth, and, for that, when it 
strikes the ocean of vapours in the sky with thunder to 
turn it into rain, the space resounds from far like the 
roar of a lion. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


550 RGVEDA 


प्र वाता वान्ति पतयन्ति विद्युत उदोष॑धीर्जिंहं ते पिन्व॑ते 
स्व॑ः । इरा विश्व॑स्मै भुव॑नाय जायते यत्पर्जन्यः पृथिवीं 
रेतसावति ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra vata vanti patayanti vidyuta udosadhirjihate 
pinvate svah. Ira visvasmai bhuvanaya jayate yat 
parjanyah prthivim retasavati. 


Fast and fresh blow the winds, lightnings flash, 
herbs spring up, the sky swells and overflows, food 
grows, spirits arise and songs resound over the world 
when the cloud fertilises the earth with the showers of 
life. 

यस्य॑ ad पुंथिवी नन्नमीति यस्य॑ व्रते शफवज्नर्भरीति। 
यस्य॑ ad ओष॑धीर्विश्वरूपाः स 4: पर्जन्य महि शर्म 
यच्छ ॥ ५ ॥ 


3: Yasya vrate prthivi namnamiti yasya vrate Sapha- 
vajjarbhuriti. Yasya vrata osadhirvisva-rupah sa 
nah parjanya mahi Sarma yaccha. 


O cloud, rain shower of life and fertility, in 
consequence of your commitment to the laws of sun 
and shower, the earth submits and surrenders, the animal 
stirs with passion and fire, the herbs burst forth in all 
forms of life. O cloud, such as you are, give us a great 
home of peace, joy and excellence. 


दिवो नो वृष्टं म॑रुतो ररीध्वं प्र पिन्वत वृष्णो अश्व॑स्य 
धाराः | stafead स्तनयिलुनेह्यपो निंषिञ्चन्नसुरः पिता 
AU 

6. Divo no vrstim maruto raridhvam pra pinvata 


vrsno asvasya dharah. Arvanetena stanayitnu- 
nehyapo nisincannasurah pita nah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 83 551 


May the Maruts, windy currents of energy, bring 
us rain from the regions of the sun. May the mighty 
cloud showers of fertility bring us growth. O cloud, 
harbinger of vitality come down here with showers of 
rain flooding the earth and giving us breath of life and 
sustenance like a father. 


अभि क्रन्द स्तनय गर्भमा at उदन्वता परि दीया र्थन I 
दृतिं सु कष विषितं न्य॑ञ्चं समा भ॑वन्तूदतो निपादाः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Abhi kranda stanaya garbhama dha udanvata 
pari diya rathena. Drtim su karsa visitam nyan- 
cam sama bhavantudvato nipadah. 


Thunder and roar, O cloud, bring the vitalities 
of life and fertilise the earth for generation. Go far and 
wide by chariot run on water, draw the reservoir of 
waters released unto yourself, and conduct them 
downward so that the upward vapours may be brought 
down in showers. 


महान्तं कोशमुद॑चा नि षिंञ्च स्यन्द॑न्तां कुल्या विषिताः 
पुरस्तात्‌। घृतेन ददयार्वापृथिवी व्युन्धि सुप्रपाणं भ॑वत्व- 
Saad: we ॥ 


8. Mahantam kosSamudaca ni sinca syandantam 
kulya visitah purastat. Ghrtena dyavaprthivi 
vyundhi suprapanam bhavatv-aghnyabhyah. 


The sun holds the mighty reservoir of vapours 
up on high, the cloud pours it down in showers. Let the 
lakes and rivers flow with waters released to freedom. 
O cloud, fill the earth and sky with water so that there 
may be ample food and water for the cows. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


552 RGVEDA 


यत्पं जन्य कनिंक्रदत्स्तनयन्‌ हंसि दुष्कृत॑ः। 
प्रतीदं विश्वं मोदते यत्किं च॑ पृथिव्यामधि ।॥ ९॥ 


9. Yat parjanya kanikradat stanayan hamsi duskr- 
tah. Pratidam visvam modate yat kim ca prthi- 
vyamadhi. 

When the cloud roars and thunders and destroys 
all the negativities which do evil, then in response to 
the cleansing and vitalising rain this entire humanity 
and all else that is on earth rejoices in celebration. 


अवंषीर्वर्षमुदु षू गंभायाऽकर्धन्वान्यत्यतवा उ । अजीजन 
ओषंधीर्भोजंनाय कमुत प्रजाभ्यो ऽ विदो मनीषाम्‌ ॥ ९० ॥ 
10. Avarsir-varsam-udu su grbhaya’kardhanvanya- 


tyetava u. Ajijana osadhir-bhojanaya kamuta 
prajabhyo’vido manisam. 


Pour down the showers, O cloud, take over the 
earth for generation, fertilise the thirsting lands for 
growth, produce herbs and plants and trees for food of 
the people, and win the thanks of a grateful humanity. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 84 
Prthivi Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 
बच्छित्था पर्वतानां खिद्रं बिंभरषिं पृथिवि।. 
प्र या भूमिं प्रवत्वति wa जिनोषिं महिनि।॥ ९॥ 


ke Balittha parvatanam khidram bibharsi prthivi. 
Pra ya bhumim pravatvati mahna jinosi mahini. 


Truly, O terrestrial mother, revered earth, you 
bear the thunder breaker of the clouds, bear the burden 
of mountain ranges, hold on the flood of rivers and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 85 553 


contain the rolling oceans. O mighty one on the onward 
move, you are the one who thus with your great power 
and force rule and sustain the land and her people. 


स्तोमासस्त्वा विचारिणि प्रतिं टो भन्त्यक्तुभिः। 
प्रया वाजं न हेष॑न्तं पेरुमस्य॑स्यर्जुनि ॥ २॥ 
2 Stomasastva vicarini prati stobhantyaktubhih. 


Pra ya vajam na hresantam perumasyasyarjuni. 


O moving one, the celebrants adore you day and 
night with songs, you, O bright one, who shake and 
impel the roaring cloud like a war horse onward to 
victory. 
goa चिद्या वनस्पतीनक्ष्मया दर्धं््योजसा | 
ad अभ्रस्यं विद्युतो दिवो वर्ष॑न्ति वृष्टयः ॥ ३॥ 

3. = Drlha cid ya vanaspatin ksmaya dardharsyo-jasa. 
Yat te abhrasya vidyuto divo varsanti vrstayah. 

Surely you are strong and firm who, with your 
strength and splendour, sustain the herbs and trees, since 
the rains of wealth and sustenance shower for you down 
from the thunder and lightning of the regions of light. 

Mandala 5/Sukta 85 
Varuna Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


प्र सम्राजे ब हरद्॑चां गभीरं wal प्रियं वरुणाय stares | 
वि यो जघानं शपितेव चरमो पस्तिरे पथिवीं सूयीय ॥ ९॥ 


| Pra samraje brhadarca gabhiram brahma priyam 

varunaya Srutaya. Vi yo jaghana sami-teva 
carmo-pastire prthivim suryaya. 

Offer homage and reverence of the highest and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


554 RGVEDA 


deepest order full of love to Varuna, the one sovereign 
ruler and lord of love and judgement over all, who 
hammered and shaped the earth into form and, like the 
host of a yajna of peace and non-violence, overspread 
the earth with the atmosphere as a protective and 
promotive cover as a shield for the sun, as protection 
against heat for the sake of generative power and 
fertility. His divine voice resounds across the universe. 


वनेषु cay न्तरिक्षं ततान वाजमर्वत्सु पयं उस्तियासु | हत्सु 
क्रतुं वरुणो अप्स्वष शिं दिवि सूर्यमदधात्सोममद्रौं ।॥ २ ॥ 


2. Vanesu vyantariksam tatana vajamarvatsu paya 
usriyasu. Hrtsu krtum varuno apsvagnim divi 
suryamadadhat somamadrau. 


Varuna, lord of love and judgement for life, 
extensively vested sap in vegetation, energy in horses 
and others that move, milk in cows, faith, love and will 
to act in the hearts, vitality in waters, sun in heaven and 
soothing joy in the cloud and soma plant on the 
mountain. 


नीचीन॑बारं वरुणः कव॑न्धं प्र das रोद॑सी अन्तरिश्चम्‌। 
तेन विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य राजा यवं न वृष्टि्व्युनत्ति भूमं ॥ ३ ॥ 


Nicinavaram varunah kabandham pra sasarja 
rodast antariksam. Tena visvasya bhuvanasya 
raja yavam na vrstirvyunatti bhuma. 


Varuna brings into existence heaven, earth and 
the middle region of the sky, and he forms the cloud for 
shower on the earth down below. By that the sovereign 
ruler of the whole universe, the supreme, brings about 
the rain which fertilises the earth as it nourishes the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 85 555 


grain. 
उनत्ति भूमिं पृथिवीमुत द्यां यदा दुग्धं वरूणो वष्टयादित्‌। 
wav वसत्‌ पर्व तासस्तविषीयन्तंः श्रथयन्त वीराः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Unatti bhumim prthivimuta dyam yada dugdham 
varuno vastyadit. Samabhrena vasata parvatasa- 
stavistyantah Srathayanta virah. 


Varuna fills the earth and sky and the regions of 
the sun with vapour when he desires to create the milk 
of life, thereafter the clouds are laden with vapour, and 
then forceful currents of wind energy strike the clouds 
from within and release the showers of rain. 


इमामू ष्वासुरस्यं श्रुतस्य॑ महीं मायां वरुणस्य प्र वोचम्‌ | 
मानें नेव तस्थिवाँ अन्तरिक्षे वि यो ममे पुथिवीं सूर्येण ॥ ५ ॥ 


5, Imamu svasurasya $rutasya mahim mayam 
varunasya pra vocam. Maneneva tasthivan antri- 
kse vi yo mame prthivim suryena. 

This marvellous omnipotence of the renowned 
life giver Varuna, I celebrate in words, who pervades 
the space and, abiding in the middle regions of the 
universe, marks out the earth as if by measure, purpose 
and design, and creates it from the sun. 


इमामू नु कवित॑मस्य मायां महीं देवस्य नकिरा द॑धर्ष | 
एकं यदुद्धा न पृणन्त्येनीरासिञ्चन्तींर वन॑यः समुद्रम्‌ ॥ & ॥ 


6. Imamiu nu kavitamasya mayam mahim devasya 
nakira dadharsa. Ekam yadudna na_prnantye- 
nirasincantir-avanayah samudram. 


This great power of the most creative lord, who 
can challenge and violate? None, just as all the streams 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


556 RGVEDA 


and rivers flooding the lands and rushing on do not fill 
the ocean with water. 


अर्यम्यं वरुण fast वा सखायं वा सदमिद्‌ भ्रात॑रं ar 
वेशं वा नित्यं वरूणार॑णं वा यत्सीमागंश्चकृमा शिश्र- 
थस्तत्‌॥ ७॥ ति 

i Aryamyam varuna mitryam va sakhayam va 
sadamid bhrataram va . Vesam va nityam varun- 
aranam va yat simagas-cakrma Sisrathastat. 


If we happen to commit a sin of omission or 
commission or transgression toward a man of judgement 
or friend or companion or a close ally or inmate of the 
house or brother, or constant or near or distant relation, 
then, O Varuna, loosen the snare of sin and help us be 
Tree, 

कितवासो यद्विरिपुर्न दीवि यद्वा घा सत्यमुत aa विदा । 
सर्वां ता fa ष्य॑ शिथिरेव देवाऽ्धा ते स्याम वरूण 
प्रियास: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Kitavaso yad riripurna divi yad va gha satyamuta 
yanna vidma. Sarva ta vi sya sithireva deva’dha 
te syama varuna priyasah. 

Like gamblers in the game, if someone attribute 
sin or deception to us, which may be true or may not be 
true, or which we might not even know, all that, O lord 
of light and judgement, loosen so that we may be free 
and be dear to you. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 86 
Indra - Agni Devata, Atri Bhauma Rshi 


Sat यमव॑थ उभा arty मर्त्य॑म्‌ | 
gael चित्स प्र भैदति द्युम्ना वाणीरिव faa: ue 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 86 557 


im Indragni yamavatha ubha vajesu martyam. 
Drlha cit sa pra bhedati dyumna vaniriva tritah. 


Indra and Agni, divine power and knowledge, 
celestial and terrestrial energy of electricity and fire, 
both ruler and enlightened leaders, whosoever the mortal 
you protect, guide and promote, he breaks through 
massive obstructions in the battle business of life, and 
wins his way to wealth, honour and splendour, just like 
the sagely scholar of threefold freedom of body, mind 
and soul who penetrates through three layers of 
language, vaikhari, madhyama and pashyanti, 1.6., word, 
thought and deep memory, and reaches the vision of 
the para, the supreme Word and silence of Divinity. 


या पृत॑नासु दुष्टरा या वाजेषु sara | 

या पञ्च॑ चर्षणीर भीन्द्रामी ता ह॑वामहे ॥। २॥ 
Zs Ya prtanasu dustara ya vajesu $ravayya. 

Ya panca carsanirabhindragni ta havamahe. 

We adore and solicit Indra and Agni which, 

among the forces of life, are indomitable, in the battles 
for power and prosperity, admirable, and among the five 
orders of society and among the five pranic energies 
are of prime importance. 

तयोरिदम॑वच्छव॑स्तिग्मा दिद्युन्पघोनोः | 

प्रति द्रुणा गभस्त्योर्गवां वृत्रश्च एष॑ते ॥ ३॥ 
2. Tayorid-amavac-chavas-tigma didyun-maghon- 

oh. Prati druna gabhastyor-gavam vrtraghna 

esate. 


The sharp, impetuous and blazing force in the 
hands of these two mighty powers moves by the speed 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


558 RGVEDA 


of sunbeams in destroying the cloud of darkness and 
strikes where it must. 


ता वामेषे रथानामिन्द्राग्री ह॑वामहे। 
पतीं तुरस्य राध॑सो विद्वांसा गिर्वणस्तमा ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ta vamese rathanam-indragni havamahe. 
Pati turasya radhaso vidvansa girvanastama. 


Indra and Agni, most adorable scholars of the 
science of terrestrial and celestial energy, heat, light and 
electricity, and masters of fast automotion and material 
prosperity, we invoke you both for the speed and 
movement of chariots for success. 


ता वृधन्तावनु द्यून्मर्तौय carat 
अर्हन्ता Fart दर्थेऽ शेव देवावर्व॑ते ॥ ५ ॥ 


१ Ta vrdhantavanu dyun-martaya devavadabha. 
Arhanta citpuro dadhen’seva devavarvate. 


Exalted, thriving day by day for the sake of 
mortal humanity, brilliant, indomitable, adorable and 
generous Indra and Agni, ruling powers and enlightened 
scholars, we honour you at the head of our creative and 
developmental yajna like the soma of success and 
celebration in matters of science and progress. 


एवेन्द्रागिभ्यामर्हावि हव्यं शूष्यं घृतं न पूतमद्िभिः। 
ता सूरिषु श्रवो! बृहद्रयिं गृणत्सु दिधृतमिषं गृणत्सु 
दिधृतम्‌॥६॥ ` ति ति 

6. Evendragnibhyam-ahavi havyam susyam ghrtam 
na putam-adribhih. Ta surisu $ravo brhadrayim 
grnatsu didhrtamisam grnatsu didhrtam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 87 559 


Thus homage of adoration is offered to Indra 
and Agni, scholars of earthly and spatial energy. From 
energies, by scholars is received strength, energy and 
power, materials for yajnic investment and development, 
ghrta, delicacies, like water showers sanctified by the 
clouds. May they, we pray, bring and bestow upon the 
scholars and celebrants high renown and abundant 
wealth, may they bring and bestow upon the admirers 
food and energy for a happy life. 


Mandala 5/Sukta 87 
Maruts Devata, Evayamarut Atreya Rshi 


प्रवो महे मतयो! यन्तु विष्ण॑वे म॒रुत्व॑ते गिरिजा एवयामरुत्‌ | 
प्र शधीय प्रय॑ज्यवे सुखादये तवसे भन्ददिं्टये धुनिव्रताय 
शव॑से ।॥। ९॥ 


1, Pra vo mahe matayo yantu visnave marutvate 
girija evayamarut. Pra sardhaya prayajyave 
sukhadaye tavase bhandadistaye dhunivrataya 
Savase. 


O vibrant man of vision, all ye men and women, 
let all your songs and flights of thought and vision born 
of the voice of the heart reach Vishnu, all pervasive 
lord, commander of the winds and warriors, indomitable, 
highly majestic, adorable and cooperative, blissfully 
appreciative, relentlessly active and absolute in justice 
and power. 


प्रयेजाता महिना ये च नु स्वयं प्र विद्यानां gad एवयाम॑रुत्‌। 
क्रत्वा तद्रो मरुतो नाधुषे शवो दाना मह्या तदेषामधुं्टासो 
ASA: UU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


560 RGVEDA 


2 Pra ye jata mahina ye ca nu svayam pra vidmana 
bruvata evayamarut. Kratva tad vo maruto 
nadhrse savo dana mahna tadesamadhrstaso 
nadrayah. 


Evayamarut, O vibrant visionary and celebrant 
of the Maruts, these warriors and pioneers of humanity 
are self-made, risen by themselves who proclaim 
themselves through their knowledge and self-awareness. 
O Maruts, stormy leaders, that power and force of yours 
is unchallengeable by virtue of your noble acts, grandeur 
and generosity. O men, their force is indomitable, they 
are inviolable, unshakable like mountains. 


प्रये दिवो dea: wat गिरा सुशुक्वानः सुभ्वं 
waded न येषापिरीं सधस्थ ईष्ट ओं अग्रयो न 
स्वविंद्युतः प्र स्पन्द्रासो धुनी नाम्‌॥ ३ ॥ 


2 Pra ye divo brhatah Ssrnvire gira susukvanah 
subhva evayamarut. Na yesamiri sadhastha ista 
an agnayo na svavidyutah pra spandraso 
dhuninam. 


Evayamarut, O celebrant of the Maruts, they 
hear the voice of Divinity from the light of heaven, they 
are heard by their voice from the heights of heaven. Pure 
and brilliant, they live in holiness and felicity. No tyrant, 
impeller or compeller, can bend them in their right and 
abode. Self-refulgent like the flames of fire, they radiate, 
they make the winds blow and set the rivers aflow. 


स च॑क्रमे महतो निरुरुक्रमः संमानस्मात्सद॑स WaT SLI 
यदायुक्त त्मना स्वादधि ष्णुधिर्विष्पर्धसो विम॑हसो जिगति 
शोवधो नृभिः uw 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 87 561 


4. Sa cakrame mahato nirurukramah samanasmat 
sadasa evayamarut. Yadayukta tmana svadadhi 
snubhir-vispardhaso vimahaso jigati Sevrdho 
nrabhih. 


He, Evayamarut, Vishnu, lord of infinite action 
and commander of the Maruts, universal energies, 
transcends by infinite possibility the great constant, 
central and universal seat of his presence, that is, this 
universe. When evayamarut, the man of vision, master 
of his senses and faculties, connects with the lord by 
heart and soul by the guidance of dynamic teachers and 
preachers, unenvious and brilliant, he rises from his own 
state of existence and joins the lord omnipotent of 
infinite felicity. 

स्वनो न वोऽम॑वात्रेजयद्‌ gat त्वेषो areas एव- 
याम॑रुत्‌। येना सह॑न्त ऋञ्जत स्वरोचिष स्थारश्मानो 
हिरण्ययाः स्वायुधासं इष्मिणः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


a Svano na vo’mavan rejayad vrsa tveso yayistavisa 
evayamarut. Yena sahanta rnjata svarocisah 
stharasmano hirnyayah svayudhasa isminah. 


Like the rumble of the Big Bang of creation, 
may the lord of the Maruts, Vishnu, shake you, O men 
and women of the world, shine you and inspire you, the 
lord omnipresent, generous, self-refulgent, omnipotent, 
everfelt in the heart, by virtue of whom the Maruts, 
natural energies and pioneers of humanity shining by 
themselves, unshaken yet dynamic like rays of the sun, 
golden gloried, self-armed and nobly ambitious, stand 
the challenges of existence and achieve their end and 
aim. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


562 RGVEDA 


अपारो at महिमा बुब्धशवसस्त्वेषं शवो!ऽ वत्वेवयाम॑रुत्‌। 
स्थातारो हि प्रसितौ संदूशि स्थन ते न॑ उरुष्यता निदः 
शुंशुक्वांसो ara: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Aparo vo mahima vrddhaSsavasas-tvesam 5410 '- 
vatvevayamarut. Sthataro hi prasitau samdrsi 
sthana te na urusyata nidah s$asu-kvamso nagna- 
yah. 


Unbounded is your greatness, O heroes of 
ancient might. May your brilliant power protect and 
promote evayamarut, vibrant sage of vision and 
knowledge. In the heat of battle when missiles are shot, 
stay firm in the open view unshaken. Such as you are, 
O Maruts, blazing as flames of fire, protect us against 
the maligners and the revilers. 


ते रुद्रासः सुम॑खा अग्रयो' यथा तुविद्युम्ना अंवन्त्वेव- 
याम॑रुत्‌ । दीर्घं पृथु पप्रथे सद्धा पार्थिवं येषामज्मेष्वा महः 
शधस्यद्धतैनसाम्‌॥ ७॥ 


ip Te rudrasah sumakha agnayo yatha tuvidyumna 
avantvevayamarut. Dirgham prthu paprathe 
sadma parthivam yesam-ajmesva mahah 
sardham-syadbhutainasam 


Heroes of the winds, scholars of the middle 
order, dispensers of justice and punishment, performers 
of holy creative actions, commanding power and glory 
like flames of fire may protect and promote us and the 
sagely scholar of vision and dynamic performance. Wide 
and lofty grows the earthly abode of humanity by virtue 
of those whose grandeur grows high and onslaughts 
grow terrible in the battles against the evil and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 87 563 
wickedness of unimaginable order. 


अद्वेषो नो मरुतो गातुमेत॑न श्रोता हवं जरितुर वयामं॑रुत्‌। 
विष्णो्महः स॑मन्यवो युयोतन स्मद्रथ्यो३े न दंसनाऽप द्वेषांसि 
सनुतः ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Adveso no maruto gdatumetana srota havam 
jariturevayamarut. Visnormahah samanyavo 
yuyotana smad rathyo na damsana’pa dvesamsi 
sanutah. 


Maruts, heroes of the speed of winds, free from 
hate and jealousy, with zeal and ardour for righteous 
action, come to our earthly abode and lead us on the 
path of goodness and progress. O lord of the winds, 
Vishnu, listen to the song and prayer of the celebrant. 
O leaders and pioneers, come like warriors of the chariot 
and join the power and grandeur of Vishnu, lord of the 
wide world and space, accomplish acts of universal 
generosity and throw off hate, jealousy and animosity 
from the earth. 


गन्तां नो यज्ञं य॑ज्ञियाः सुशमि श्रोता हव॑मर॒क्ष एवयामंरुत्‌। 
ज्येष्ठासो न पर्वतासो व्योमनि यूयं तस्यं प्रचेतसः स्यातं 
दुर्धर्त॑वो निदः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Ganta no yajnam yajniyah susami srota hava- 
maraksa evayamarut. Jyesthaso na parvataso 
vyomani yuyum tasya pracetasah syata durdhar- 
tavo nidah. 

O Maruts, adorable heroes of the world, come 
and join our yajna of holy living with grace and 
earnestness. Listen to the prayer of the celebrant of the 
winds in need of protection and advancement. Most 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


564 RGVEDA 


eminent and most enlightened among us, be generous 
givers of knowledge, wisdom and enlightenment of 
Divine order like showers of the cloud from the sky so 
that no maligner or reviler can resist and challenge you 
or anyone else. 

॥ इति पञ्चमं AVS ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


565 


MANDALA 6 


Mandala 6/Sukta 1 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


त्वं Ga प्रथमो मनोताऽस्या धियो अभ॑वो दस्म होतां। 
त्वं सीं वृषन्नरकृणोर्ष्टरींतु सहो विश्वस्मै सह॑से सह॑ध्यै ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Tvam hyagne prathamo manota’sya dhiyo abhavo 
dasma hota. Tvam sim vrsannakrnor-dustaritu 
saho visvasmai sahase sahadhyai. 


Agni, light of life faster than mind, you are the 
prime mover of this cosmic intelligence and evolution, 
marvellous creator and foremost performer of universal 
yajna. O generous father of life, you alone generate the 
inviolable life force and strength of will vested in 
existence for us to resist and overcome all negative 
forces of the world for survival and onward progress. 


अधा होता न्यसीदो यजीयानिक्छस्पद इषयन्नीड्यः सन्‌। 
तं त्वा नरः प्रथमं देवयन्तो महो राये चितय॑न्तो अनु 
ग्मन्‌ ॥ २॥ 

2. Adha hota nyasido yajtyanilaspada isayannidyah 
san. Tam tva narah prathamam devayanto maho 
raye citayanto anu gman. 


Then let the prime yajaka, being adorable, 
inspired to create and give in unison, be seated at the 
head of yajna on the earthly vedi of life foremost in the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


566 RGVEDA 


midst of holy chant, and you, leading light of humanity, 
yourself knowledgeable and illuminating, seekers of 
great wealth, honour and light of Divinity, follow him 
as the leader. 


वृतेव यन्तं ब हुभिरर्वसव्यै sea र यिं जागृवांसो अनुं ग्मन्‌ । 
रुशन्तमभिं deft बृहन्तं वपाव॑न्तं विश्वहा दीदिवां- 
स॑म्‌॥ ३॥ 


ai Vrteva yantam bahubhirvasavyaistve rayim jagr- 
vamso anu gman. RuSantamagnim darsatam 
brhantam vapavantam visvaha didivamsam. 


Enlightened persons with many productive 
offerings of yajnic value follow Agni, prime yajnic 
leader, leading to wealth by normal paths of creative 
production, Agni that is shining as well as catalysing, 
splendid and blissful, great and rising high, generative 
and all time illuminative. 


पदं देवस्य नम॑सा व्यन्त॑ः श्रवस्यवः श्रव॑ stro I 
नार्मानि चिद्धिरे यज्ञियानि भद्रायां ते रणयन्त ASST ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Padam devasya namasa vyantah Sravasyavah 
§$rava apannamrktam. Namani cid dadhire 
yajniyani bhadrayam te ranayanta sandrstau. 

Yajna performers aspiring for honour, 
excellence and spiritual vision of Divinity by surrender 
and yajnic homage obtain untainted wealth and honour. 

O lord Agni, they receive name and reputation worthy 

of yajakas and abide and rejoice in your blissful 

presence. 


त्वां वर्धन्ति fara: पृथिव्यां त्वां राय॑ उभर्यासो Saar 
त्वं त्राता त॑रणे चेत्यो भूः पिता माता सदमिन्मानुंषाणाम्‌॥ ५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 1 567 


=) Tvam vardhanti ksitayah prthivyam tvam raya 
ubhayaso jananam. Tvam trata tarane cetyo bhiuh 
pita mata sadaminmanusanam. 


O lord, people both simple and learned, glorify 
you on earth, people’s wealth both material and spiritual 
exalts you. Pray, O lord, you be the people’s protector 
and saviour toward their success and freedom, giver of 
light in their heart and soul, father, mother and the 
ultimate home of humanity. 


सपर्येण्यः स प्रियो विक्ष्व गिर्होत। मन्द्रो नि ष॑सादा 
यजीयान्‌ । तं त्वा वयं दम आ दीदिवांसमुपं ज्ुबाधो नम॑सा 
PANS ॥ 


6. Saparyenyah sa priyo viksvagnirhota mandro ni 


sasada yajiyan. Tam tva vayam dama a 
didivamsam-upajnubadho namasa sadema. 


That Agni worthy of yajnic service and, 
affectionate, yajaka and giver of yajnic gifts, rejoicing 
provider of happiness abides among people as adorable 
presence. O lord, in a posture of reverence and faith, 
with homage and surrender, we pray, let us be seated in 
the home where you ever shine in your refulgence. 


तं त्वा वयं सुध्यो ३ नव्य॑मग्ने सुम्नायव ईमहे cased: | 
त्वं विशो अनयो दीद्यानो दिवो अंगने बृह॒ता रोचनेन ॥। ७ ॥ 
7. Tam tva vayam sudhyo navyamagne sumndayava 


tmahe devayantah. Tvam 1750 anayo didyano 
divo agne brhata rocanena. 


Agni, adorable giver of light, we, blest with holy 
intelligence and aspiring for well being and light of 
divinity, pray that you, shining with universal light and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


568 RGVEDA 


knowledge, lead the people to the state of enlightenment 
and freedom. 


विशां कविं विश्पतिं शश्व॑तीनां नितोशनं वृषभं चंर्षणीनाम्‌। 
प्रेतीषणिपिषय॑न्तं पावकं राजंन्तमयिं यजतं र॑यीणाम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Visam kavim visapatim Sasvatinam nitosanam 
vrsabham carsaninam. Pretisanimisayantam 
pavakam rajantamagnim yajatam rayinam. 


We celebrate and exalt Agni, giver of light and 
wisdom, visionary creator, ruler and protector of the 
people who never go out of existence, destroyer of 
suffering, generous benefactor of the people, inspiring 
leader for progress and development, holy purifier, 
refulgent power and adorable guide for the sake of 
wealth, honour and excellence. 


सो st ईजे visa च मर्तो यस्त आन॑ट्‌ समिधां हव्यदातिम्‌। 
य आहुतिं परि वेदा नमोधिर्विश्वेत्स वामा द॑धते त्वोत॑: ॥ ९॥ 


8 So agna {€ 5454171८ ca marto yasta anat samidha 
havyadatim. Ya ahutim pari veda namobhir- 
visvet sa vama dadhate tvotah. 


Agni, giver of light and life, that man does 
honour and worship to you who brings and offers you 
yajna with sacred fuel and holy materials, who knows 
what to offer and offers the oblations with faith and 
surrender. Such a man protected and promoted by you 
is blest with honour and admirable capacity for action. 


अस्मा 3 ते महिं महे विधेम॒ नमोभिरये समिधोत wel: । 
वेदी सूनो सहसो गीर्भिरुक्थेरा ते भद्रायां सुमतौ य॑ तेम i ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 1 569 


10. Asma u te mahi mahe vidhema namobhiragne 
samidhota havyaih. Vedi suno sahaso girbhiru- 
kthaira te bhadrayam sumatau yatema. 


Agni, giver of light and knowledge, child of 
omnipotence and source of strength, we offer high 
reverence and worship to you in honour of your 
greatness and glory, with homage, sacred fuel and 
fragrant yajnic materials into the vedi, with chant of 
holy words and songs of praise, and we pray that we 
may always abide and strive for noble actions in your 
benign presence and favour. 


आ यस्ततन्थ रोद॑सी fa भासा श्रवोभिश्च श्रवस्य - 
Tea: । बृहद्धिवजिः स्थविरेभिरस्मे Tare वितरं वि 
भाटहि॥ ९९॥ 


11. A yastatantha rodasi vi bhasa Sravobhisca 
sravasyastarutrah. Brhadbhirvajaih | sthavire- 
bhirasme revadbhiragne vitaram vi bhahi. 


Agni, refulgent giver of light and power and 
knowledge, which overspreads heaven and earth with 
light, also renowned for gifts of sustenance and energy, 
is the saving power for life. O refulgent power, shine for 
us more and ever more with abundant and expansive 
gifts of food and energy and stable forms of wealth and 
power. 


नृवद्वसो सदमिद्धेह्यस्मे भूरिं तोकाय तन॑याय पश्वः | 
पूर्वीरिषो बृहतीरारेअघा अस्मे भद्रा सौश्रवसानि 
सन्तु ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Nrvad vaso sadamiddhehyasme bhuri tokaya 
tanayaya pasvah. Purviriso brhatirareagha 
asme bhadra sauSsravasani santu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


570 RGVEDA 


O father and guardian of humanity, Agni, giver 
of life and beneficence, give us a blessed home for our 
children and grand children, full of material and cattle 
wealth, abundant and expansive food and energy, 
freedom from sin and evil, where there may be ample 
means of well being, honour and excellence. 


पुरूण्यग्ने पुरुधा त्वाया adh राजन्वसुता ते sar) 
पुरूणि हि त्वे dean सन्त्यग्ने वसुं विधते राजनि त्वे ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Purunyagne purudha tvaya vasuni rajan vasuta 
te asyam. Puruni hi tve puruvara santygne vasu 
vidhate rajani tve. 


Agni, O leading light of life and humanity, 
brilliant by virtue of knowledge, power and generosity, 
may we by your kindness and grace obtain wealth and 
prosperity of various kinds and orders. O giver of 
knowledge, power and excellence, Agni, universally 
loved and adored, infinite are your gifts of wealth 
abiding in your dominion which you hold in treasure 
for the dedicated supplicant. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 2 

Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 

त्वं हि क्षैत॑वद्यशोऽ ग पित्रो न पत्य॑से। 

त्वं विचर्षणे श्रवो वसो पुष्टिं न पुष्यसि ॥ ९॥ 
iL Tvam hi ksaitavad yaso’gne mitro na patyase. 

Tvam vicarsane Sravo vaso pustim na pusyasi. 

Agni, leading light of life, like an inmate of our 

earthly home, like a friend for sure you protect, promote 
and sustain our honour and excellence. O watchful 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 2 571 


observer of all, our haven and home, you preserve and 
advance our food and energy, honour and fame, like 
our body’s vitality. 


त्वां हि wat चर्षणयो यज्ञेभिंर्गी भिरीव्छते। 
त्वां वाजी यात्यवृको रंजस्तूर्विंश्वचंर्षणिः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Tvam hi sma carsanyo yajnebhirgirbhirilate. 
Tvam vajt yatyavrko rajasturvisvacarsanih. 


You alone people adore with yajnic acts and 
songs of praise. The warlike, the non-violent, the mover 
of the skies, the all watchful, everyone comes to you. 


सजोषस्त्वा feat नरों यज्ञस्य के तुमिंन्धते। 
ae स्य मानुषो जनः सुम्नायुर्जुह्वे अध्वरे ॥ 3 


cP Sajosastva divo naro yajnasya ketumindhate. 
Yaddha sya manuso janah sumnayurjuhve 
adhvare. 


Loving and friendly people, leading lights of 
humanity, all of one accord, kindle and light you, the 
light and symbol of yajna, for which reason the rational 
communities aspiring for peace and well being invoke 
and invite you to their noble programmes of love and 
non-violence. 


mae Gara धिया ad: शशमंते। 
ऊती ष azar दिवो द्विषो अंहो न def ४॥ 


4. Rdhad yaste sudanave dhiya martah sasamate. 
Uti sa brhato divo dviso anho na tarati. 


The man who with his intelligence and holy 
action serves, worships and offers homage to you and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


572 RGVEDA 


thus promotes you, generous giver, he enjoys peace and 
prosperity under protection of the vast heaven and 
crosses over all hate and jealousy as well as sin and 
evil. 


समिधा यस्त॒ आहुतिं निशितिं मर्त्यो नश॑त्‌। 
वयावन्तं स पुष्यति क्षय॑मग्ने शतायुषम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 
5. Samidha yasta ahutim nisitim martyo nasat. 
Vayavantam sa pusyati ksayamagne Satayusam. 
The mortal who responds to your urgent call 
and with holy fuel offers you intense and abundant 


oblations of yajna obtains and prospers in a happy home 
for a hundred years. 


त्वेषस्ते धूम ऋण्वति दिवि षञ्छुक्र sida: | 
सूरो नद्िद्युता त्वं कृपा पावकः रोच॑से ।॥ ६॥ 

6. Tvesaste dhuma rnvati divi sanchukra atatah. 
Suro na hi dyuta tvam krpa pavaka rocase. 


Shining bright and rising high, your flames and 
fragrance reach unto the height of heaven. O pure and 
purifying fire, with light and splendour you shine like 
the sun. 

अधा हि विक्ष्वीड्योऽ सिं प्रियो नो अतिंधिः। 
रण्वः पुरीव जूर्यः सूनुर्न ययास्य ॥ ७॥ 
(0 Adha hi viksvidyo’si priyo no atithih. 
Ranvah puriva juryah sunurna trayayayyah. 
O light and fire of life, you are adorable among 


the people, welcome to us like a cherished guest, 
delightful like a venerable senior in the sacred city, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 2 =) 


darling as a child running to the parent for protection 
and security. 


क्रत्वा हि द्रोणे अज्यसेऽ गे वाजी न cet: | 
परिज्पेव स्वधा Wats cat न aa: शिशुः neu 
8. Kratva hi drone ajyase’gne vaji na krtvyah. 


Parijmeva svadha gayo’tyo na hvaryah Ssisuh. 


Agni, holy light and fire, you manifest by 
attrition in the wood, by yajna in the home, active, 
sportive and restive like a courser, moving everywhere 
like wind, soothing and satisfying as food, intimate as 
self will, comfortable as home, vibrant as a wave of 
energy and pure and innocent as a baby. 


त्वं त्या चिदच्युतागऽ पशुन ada । 

धामा ह यत्त अजर वनां वृश्चन्ति Perera: ॥ ९॥ 
6 Tvam tya cidacyuta’ gne pasurna yavase. 

Dhama ha yat te ajara vana vrscanti Sikvasah. 

Agni, eternal light and fire of existence, for all 

those solid objects of existence, apparently imperishable 
regions of the universe, you are as the bull is for the 
grass since, O lord of eternity, your mighty flames of 


annihilation consume them as the bull consumes the 
grass. 


वेषि द्य॑ध्वरीयतामग्रे होता दमे विशाम्‌ । 
समूधो! विश्पते कृणु जुषस्व हव्यमंङ्धिरः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Vesi hyadhvariyatam-agne hota dame visam. 
Samrdho vispate krnu jusasva havyam-angirah. 


Angira, vital fire of life pervading every limb 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


574 RGVEDA 


of the body, breath of life vibrating in every part of the 
universe, eternal highpriest of cosmic yajna, enter, 
pervade and bless the home of the devotees conducting 
the yajna of love and non-violence. O lord protector 
and ruler of the people, make them prosperous, accept 
and enjoy their holy offering. 


अच्छ नो मित्रमहो देव देवानग्ने are: सुमतिं रोद॑स्योः। 
वीहि स्वस्तिं सुक्षितिं दिवो ager अंहांसि दुरिता त॑रेम 
ता तरेम तवाव॑सा तरेम ।॥ ९९॥ 


11. Accha no mitramaho deva devanagne vocah 
sumatim rodasyoh. Vihi svastim suksitim divo 
nrndviso anhamsi durita tarema ta tarema 
tavavasa tarema. 


O most adorable friend, venerable and refulgent 
light of the world, speak well to the noble and brilliant 
holy men of the eternal Word of universal knowledge 
and wisdom of heaven and earth. Bear and bring 
prosperity and well being on the blessed earth in happy 
homes to the loving and dedicated people. We pray help 
us cross over all sins and evil, hate and jealousy. Let us 
cross over all negativities and undesirables, cross over 
all of them, cross over to the life divine by your 
protection and grace. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 3 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
अग्ने a क्षेषदूतपा ऋतेजा उरु ज्योतिर्नशते देवयुष 1 यं त्वं 
मित्रेण वरुणः सजोषा देव पासि त्यज॑सा मर्तमंहः ॥ ९॥ 
| Agne sa ksesadrtapa rteja uru jyotirnasate 
devayuste. Yam tvam mitrena varunah sajosah 
deva pasi tyajasa martamanhah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 3 575 


Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, 
guardian of Truth and Law, manifesting in truth and 
law and the fire and fragrance of yajna, that mortal man 
lives in peace who protects the truth and abides in truth, 
and he receives the gift of your infinite light and grace 
who loves Divinity and noble humanity, and whom you, 
O lord of love and justice, loving, kind and generous 
father, with loving care and merciful justice, you protect 
and save by abandonment of sin and evil. 


ईजे यज्ञेभिः sem शमीभितऋधरद्वारायाग्रये ददाश । 
एवा चन तं aera eater मर्त" नशते न प्रदिः ॥ २॥ 


2 7८ yajnebhih 5454111८ Samibhir-rdhadvarayag- 
naye dadasa. Eva cana tam yaSasamajustir- 
nanho martam nasate na pradrptih. 


If the mortal does good to others with humility 
and yajna, lives in peace with auspicious acts of holiness, 
and does service to Agni, giver of success and prosperity, 
with acts of charity and self surrender, then, for sure, 
neither want of honour and glory, nor sin and evil, nor 
pride and arrogance can ever touch him. 


सूरो न यस्य॑ eorfat tor भीमा यदेति शुचतस्त आ eft: 1 
हेष॑स्वतः शुरुधो नायमक्तोः कुत्रा चिद्रण्वो dufad- 
AST: ॥ ३ ॥ 

Si Suro na yasya drsatir-arepa bhima yadeti Suca- 
tasta a dhih. Hesasvatah surudho nayamaktoh 
kutra cid ranvo vasatir-vanejah. 

The holy sight of Agni, leading light of 
humanity, like the sun, and the message of thought and 
wisdom of the brilliant light that radiates, is pure and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


576 RGVEDA 


immaculate, and yet it is awesome and comes as terrible 
to the vitiated. Indeed wherever the source and abode 
of this blazing destroyer of the night of darkness and of 
his prophetic voice be, as that of light in sunrays and of 
fire in the wood, it is delightful and elevating. 


तिग्मं चिदेम महि auf अस्य भसदश्वो न यमसान आसा। 
विजेहमानः पर शर्नं जिह्वा द्रविर्न द्रावयति are धक्ष॑त्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tigmam cidema mahi varpo asya bhasadasvo na 
yamasana asa. Vijehamanah parasurna jihvam 
dravirna dravayati daru dhaksat. 


Sharp is his path like the razor’s edge we may 
like to follow, great his form and appearance shining 
brilliant, open his mouth self-controlled as the horse’s, 
sharp his tongue as an axe, and he melts rigidities like a 
smelter and burns wooden prejudices like fire. 


स इदस्तेव प्रतिं धादयिष्यच्छिशींत्‌ तेजोऽ य॑सो न ahr 
चित्रध्र॑जतिरर तर्यो अक्तोर्वेर्न द्रुषद्वा रघुपत्मजंहाः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Sa idasteva prati dhadasisyanchisSita tejo’yaso na 
dharam. Citradhrajatiraratiryo aktorverna dru- 
sadva raghupatmajamhah. 

Free from dead wood, he shoots his target like 
an archer freely. He sharpens his blaze like the edge of 
an axe. Swift and wonderful in speed, relentless in work, 
he discards rest and slow speed of movement like a bird 
of flight flying off from the branch of the tree of his 
night’s rest. 


ae tata प्रतिं वस्त उस्त्राः शोचिषा रारपीति faa: 1 
नक्तं य ईमरुषो यो दिवा Fae अरुषो यो दिवा 
नृन्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 3 577 


6. Saim rebho na prati vasta usrah Socisa rarapiti 
mitramahah. Naktam ya tmaruso yo diva nrn- 
amartyo aruso yo diva nrn. 


He, leading light of the world, wears the light 
of the morning sun and, in return, like crackling fire, 
proclaims himself with the light and blaze of the new 
day, being the greatest friend of humanity. Red as flames, 
bright as sunlight, he lights up the night of darkness 
and arouses humanity into the day of light, awareness 
and activity, being the harbinger of the immortal light 
of Divinity. Yes, bright and blazing, he rouses people 
into the light of day. 


दिवो न यस्य॑ विधतो नवीनोद्‌ aot Sar ओष॑धीषु नूनोत्‌। 
घृणा न यो ध्रज॑सा पत्म॑ना यन्ना रोद॑सी वसुना दं 
सुपत्नी ॥। ७ ॥ 


de Divo na yasya vidhato navinod vrsa ruksa 
osadhisu nunot. Ghrna na yo dhrajasa patmana 
yanna rodasi vasuna dam supatni. 


Whose presence as of the light and grace of 
heaven, and order, the generous cloud worships and 
proclaims, whose light and vitality is manifested in herbs 
and trees, and who, by his flight and velocity and 
omnipresence, vests the spaces of motherly heaven, 
earth and sky with the wealth of living sustenance as 
with his light and grace. 


धायोभिर्वा यो युज्येभिर कैर्विंद्युन्न द॑विद्योत्स्वेथिः शष्पैः । 
शर्धो वा यो मरुतां ततश्च ऋभुर्न त्वेषो र॑भसानो अंद्योत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Dhayobhirva yo yujyebhir-arkair-vidyunna 
davidyot svebhih susmaih. Sardho va yo marutam 
tataksa rbhurna tveso rabhasano adyaut. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


578 RGVEDA 


Who flashes like lightning, shines with his self- 
refulgence and potent presence, and constantly 
illuminates by his manifestation by the beneficiary stars, 
planets and plants, by his associates and assistants, and 
by his celebrants and worshippers of his virtues, and 
who, blazing and impetuous, like the divine intelligence 
and maker, fashions the forms and force of the winds 
and the stormy powers of humanity : that is Agni, life 
of existence and leading light of the world. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 4 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


यर्थां होतर्मनुषो देवताता यज्ञेभिः सूनो सहसो यजासि। 
एवा नो अद्य संमना संमानानुशन्न॑ग्र उशतो Aha देवान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


Ls Yatha hotarmanuso devatata yajnebhih suno 
sahaso yajasi. Eva no adya samana samanan- 
usannagna usato yaksi devan. 


Agni, leading light of life, ruler of the world, 
child of strength, source of strength and courage, yajaka 
and generous giver, as you do selfless yajnic service to 
life and Divinity like any human, so you today in our 
battle of life, out of love for loving and dedicated people, 
pray invoke the divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity to join us. 


atl विभावा चक्षणिर्न ait गिर्वन्दारु वेद्यार्चनों धात्‌। 
विश्वायुर्यो अमृतो मर्त्यषू षर्भुद्धूदतिंधिर्जातवेदाः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Sa no vibhava caksanirna vastoragnirvandaru 
vedyascano dhat. Visvayuryo amrto martyesu- 
sarbhud bhidatithirjatavedah. 


May that lord, Agni, refulgent as the sun, light 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 4 579 


of the day, adorable, worth knowing and realising, bear 
and bring us food for life and energy for action, that 
lord who is life of life, immortal among mortals, 
manifests like a cherished guest at dawn and knows all 
that is born in existence by omnipresence. 


द्यावो न यस्य॑ पनयन्त्यभ्वं भासांसि वस्ते सूर्यो न शुक्रः | 
वि य इनोत्यजरः पावकोऽ श्न॑स्य चिच्छिश्नथत्पूर्व्याणिं ॥ २ ॥ 


a Dyavo na yasya panayantyabhvam bhasamsi 
vaste suryo na Sukrah. Vi ya inotyajarah pava- 
ko’snasya cicchisnathat purvyani. 


Like the lights of heaven, sages celebrate the 
lord’s glory. Pure and immaculate, like the sun, he wears 
the lights and colours of existence. Purifying like fire, 
he pervades the forms of the world of existence, and at 
the ultimate end withdraws all that existed before, and 
remains, ageless and eternal, the sole and absolute 
presence. 


वदा हि dat stetaragt चक्रे अगिर्जनुषाज्मान्नम्‌। 
स त्वं न॑ ऊर्जसन ऊर्ज" धा राजेव जेरवृके AeA ॥ ठ i 


4. Vadma hi suno asyadmasadva cakre agnirjanu- 
sajmannam. Sa tvam na urjasana urjam dha 
rajeva jeravrake ksesyantah. 


O inspirer of life, Agni, self-manifestive loud 
and bold, you are all pervasive in everything that is food 
for life since by nature and operation you generate both 
food and energy. O creator and giver of energy, bear 
and bring us food and energy, be victorious like a ruler 
and abide in peace and non-violence as an inspiration. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


580 RGVEDA 


नितिक्ति यो वारणमन्नमत्ति वायुर्न राष्टयत्येत्यक्तून्‌ । car 
यस्त॑ आदिशामरातीरत्यो न हुतः पत॑तः URSA ५॥ 


Ds Nitikti yo varanamannamatti vayurna rastrya- 
tyetyaktun. Turyama yasta adisam-aratir-atyo na 
hrutah patatah parihrut. 


Agni sharpens his instant weapon of radiance 
against darkness, consumes the consumables for energy, 
rules over existence like breath of life, surpasses even 
the rays of light. O lord of radiation pervading all round 
by waves of omnipotence, destroyer like a superlative 
missile of those crooked ones who fall in its way, may 
we too likewise overcome those who negate your gifts 
of life. 


आ सूर्यो न भानुमद्धिर करयं ततन्थ treat fa भासा। 
चित्रो न॑यत्परि तमांस्यक्तः शोचिषा पत्मन्नौशिजो न 
दीय॑न्‌ ॥ ६॥ 

6. A suryo na bhanum-adbhir-arkair-agne tatantha 
rodasi vi bhasa. Citro nayat pari tamamsyaktah 
Socisa patmann-ausSijo na diyan. 

Agni, light of life, as the sun with thunderous 
rays of light, so you pervade heaven and earth with 
splendour and majesty. Marvellous and sublime, with 
light radiating all round, brilliant as sublimity incarnate, 
you rule dispelling all kinds of darkness. 


त्वां fe मन्द्रत॑ममकशोकैर्ववृमहे महिं नः sired 
इन्द्रं न त्वा शव॑सा देवतां वायुं dora राध॑सा न॒त॑माः ॥ ७॥ 


Me Tvam hi mandratamam-arkasokair-vavrmahe 
mahi nah Srosyagne. Indram na tva Savasa devata 
vayum prnanti radhasa nrtamah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 5 581 


Agni, lord most charming and blissful, with 
brilliant songs of adoration we celebrate you. Listen to 
our song of sublimity. Like Indra, lord of omnipotence, 
like Vayu, breath of life, the best of leading lights of 
humanity adore you with all their might and sense of 
fulfilment. 


नू नों sits वृकेभिः स्वस्ति वेषि रायः पथिभिः पर्य | 
ता सूरिभ्यो गृणते रासि सुम्नं मदेम शातदहिमाः सुवीराः ॥ ८ ॥ 


Gi Nino agne’vrkebhih svasti vesi rayah pathibhih 
parsyanhah. Ta suribhyo grnate rasi sumnam 
madema Satahimah suvirah. 


Agni, lord of light, wealth and bliss, with honest 
and loving people lead us to wealth and honour, peace 
and well being by paths of holiness, cleanse us of sin, 
blow off evil from us. That peace and joy you bestow 
upon brilliant and brave celebrants and upon the 
supplicant, bestow upon us too, we pray, so that we, 
blest with brave children, may rejoice for a full life of 
hundred years. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 5 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
हुवे a: सूनुं सह॑सो युवानमद्रोघवाचं मतिभिर्यविंछम्‌। य 
इन्व॑ति द्रविणानि प्रचेता विश्ुववाौराणि पुरुवारो 
STITH ॥ ९॥ 


te Huve vah sunum sahaso yuvanam-adroghava- 
cam matibhir-yavistham. Ya invati dravinani 
praceta visvavarani puruvaro adhruk. 


For you all, I invoke and invite Agni, giver of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


582 RGVEDA 


strength and forbearance, young, sweet and loving of 
speech free from malice, most youthful, wise and all 
aware, cherished friend of all without jealousy, who 
creates, inspires, invigorates and brings us gifts of 
universal value and drives away the evils. 


त्वे वसूनि पुर्वणीक होतर्दोषा वस्तोरेरिरे यज्ञियासः | क्षामेव 
विश्वा भुव॑नानि यस्िन्त्सं सौभ॑गानि दधिरे पावके ॥ २॥ 


(५१ Tve vasuni purvanika hotardosa vastorerire 
yajniyasah. Ksameva visva bhuvanani yasmin 
tsam saubhagani dadhire pavake. 


In you, lord of eternal flames of power and 
generation, cosmic yajaka and generous giver, holy 
performers of yajnic acts repose their confidence, and 
to you, day and night, they attribute all the gifts of life. 
By virtue of you, cleanser and purifier, all regions of 
the universe like earth bear cherished gifts of nature for 
humanity. 


त्वं विक्षु प्रदिवः सीद आसु क्रत्वा teat वा्यीणाम्‌। 
अतं इनोषि विधते चिकित्वो व्यानुषग्जातवेदो वसुनि ॥ ३ ॥ 


Di Tvam viksu pradivah sida asu kratva rathira- 
bhavo varyanam. Ata inosi vidhate cikitvo 
vyanusag-jatavedo vasuni. 


Come you, leading light wrapped in the light of 
divinity, sit and abide among these people with your 
knowledge and yajnic action. Be like a chariot harbinger 
of choice gifts of life. You are wise and you command 
universal awareness. You know all that is born in 
existence and, integrated with life and society, you 
inspire and promote the wealths of the world for the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 5 583 
dedicated celebrant. 


यो नः सनुत्यो अभिदासदग्ने at अन्त॑रो मित्रमहो वनुष्यात्‌ | 
तमजरेथिर्वृष॑भिस्तव स्वैस्तपा तपिष्ठ तप॑सा तप॑स्वान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Yo nah sanutyo abhidasadagne yo antaro 
mitramaho vanusyat. Tam-ajarebhir-vrsabhis- 
tava svaistapa tapistha tapasa tapasvan. 


Agni, O dearest and greatest friend, tempered 
in the crucibles of austere discipline to the highest 
degree of intensity, whatever the force or power internal 
or external, close around or far off which might weaken, 
attack, injure or destroy us, pray burn up and eliminate 
by your own essential, unaging, generous and most 
youthful power of discipline and fire. 


aed यज्ञेन समिधा य उक्थेर hh: सूनो सहसो ददाशत्‌ 
स मर्त्येष्वमृत प्रचेता राया द्युम्नेन श्रव॑सा वि भाति॥ ५॥ 


2: Yaste yajnena samidha ya ukthair-arkebhih suno 
sahaso dadasat. Sa martyesvamrta praceta 
raya dyumnena sravasa vi bhati. 


Agni, O source giver of strength and inspiration, 
whoever serves you with yajnic acts of self-sacrifice 
and offers you homage, worship and songs of 
celebration with sacred fuel to keep the fire burning, 
rises in knowledge and life’s awareness, advances in 
wealth, honour and fame, and shines out with immortal 
excellence among mortals. 


स तत्कुधीषितस्तूय॑मग्ने well बाधस्व सह॑सा सह॑स्वान्‌ । 
यच्छस्यसे द्युभिर्‌ क्तो वचोंधिस्तज्नुषस्व जरितुर्घयोषि 
wae HU 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


584 RGVEDA 


6. Sa tat krdhisitastuyamagne sprdho badhasva 
sahasa sahasvan. Yacchasyase dyubhirakto 
vacobhis-tajjusasva jariturghosi manma. 


Agni, lord of forbearance and challenging 
might, loved, inspired and impelled, do that fast with 
your power and force, resist and repell the envious 
contenders, for which you are admired by the celebrants. 
Do that, O lord wearing the aura of light and fire, and 
accept the devoted supplicant’s thanks and homage 
expressed from the depth of mind and soul. 


अश्याम तं काम॑मग्रे तवोती अश्याम र चिं र॑यिवः GaNA । 
अश्याम वाजमभि वाजयन्तो ऽ श्यामं द्युम्नमजराजरं 
ANON 


7. Asyama tam kamamagne tavoti aSyama rayim 
rayivah suviram. ASyama vajamabhi vajayanto 
*Syama dyumnam-ajarajaram te. 

Agni, leading light of the world, ruler and 
pioneer of humanity, by virtue of your protection and 
spirit of advancement, let us realise that will and desire 
we pray for. O lord creator and giver of wealth, let us 
achieve that wealth and honour blest with the brave we 
cherish. O lord imperishable, let us win, while we press 
forward, that energy, sustenance and progress, let us be 
blest with that honour and excellence which is immortal. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 6 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


प्र नव्य॑सा सह॑सः Great यज्ञेन गातुमव इच्छमानः। 
वृषचद्व॑नं कृष्णयामं रुशन्तं वीती होतारं दिव्यं जिंगाति ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 6 585 


im Pra navyasa sahasah sunumaccha yajnena 
gatumava icchamanah. Vrscadvanam krsnaya- 
mam rusantam vitt hotaram divyam jigdti. 

Whoever desires and plans for advancement into 
new ways of progress, defence and protection, tries and 
experiments with newest forms of yajna, socio-scientific 
developments in pursuit of Agni, heat, light and electric 
energy, source and generator of power, breaker of the 
clouds, illuminator of pathways into darkness and the 
unknown, bright catalytic agent, giver of peace and 
prosperity for well being and divine agent of cosmic 
evolution. 


स श्विंतानस्त॑न्यत्‌ रोचनस्था अजरेथिननिदद्धिर्यविं्टः। 
यः पावकः पुरूतमं: पुरूणि पृथून्यभिरंनुयाति भर्वन्‌ ॥ २॥ 
2. Sa Svitanastanyatu rocanastha ajarebhir- 


nanadadbhir-yavisthah. Yah pavakah puruta-mah 
puruni prthunyagnir-anuyati bharvan. 

That energy, Agni, which is brilliant, expansive 
and roaring, constant in light without a flicker, abiding 
in imperishable thunder and lightning, is the fire purifier 
which lies dormant in many forms in solids, and it is 
versatile and explosive. 


वि ते विष्वग्वात॑जूतासो अग्ने भामासः शुचे शुच॑यश्चरम्ति । 
तुविम्रक्षासो दिव्या नवग्वा वनां वनन्ति धृषता रुजन्तः ॥ ३ ॥ 

>: Vi te visvag-vatajutaso agne bhamasah ८८८ 
Sucayascaranti. Tuvimraksaso divyad navagva 
vana vananti dhrsata rujantah. 


Agni, cosmic energy, those universal waves of 
your power impelled by nature’s currents radiate all 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


586 RGVEDA 


round, pure and purifying, embracing everything, 
celestial, ever moving anew, beautiful, forceful, making, 
breaking and remaking everything that comes their way. 


ये ते शुक्रासः शुच॑यः शुचिष्मः at वप॑न्ति विषितासो 
अश्वाः | अध॑ ware उर्विया वि भाति यातयमानो अधि 
सानु EA: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ye te Sukrasah Sucayah Sucismah ksam vapanti 
visitaso asvah. Adha bhramasta urviya vi bhati 
yatayamano adhi sanu prsneh. 


Life and light of the world, those vitalising pure 
and radiant waves of your energy flowing down like 
horses freed from their bound, fertilise and impregnate 
the earth, and then their circulation across the sky, taking 
over the mountain tops shines all over the earth. 


अधं fret पापतीति प्र वृष्णो गोषुयुधो नाशनिः GST | 
शूर॑स्येव प्रसितिः श्चातिर गदरव भीमो daa वनानि ॥ ५॥ 


9, Adha jihva papatiti pra vrnno gosuyudho nasanih 
srjana. Surasyeva prasitih ksatir-agner-durva- 
rturbhimo dayate vanani. 


Further, the tongue of flame, the flash of 
lightning, like the thunderbolt of mighty Indra, warrior 
of the flash and thunder’s roar, shakes and shines with 
the blaze, striking and shattering things like a warrior’s 
blow, and thus the terrible onslaught of irresistible Agni 
destroys the forests. 


आ भानुना पार्थिवानि जरयांसि महस्तोदस्य॑ धृषता त॑तन्थ । 
स बाधस्वाप भया सहोभिः een वनुष्यन्वनुषो नि 
जुर्व।॥६॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 7 587 


6. A bhanuna parthivani jrayamsi mahastodasya 
dhrsata tatantha. Sa badhasvapa bhaya sahobhih 
sprdho vanusyan vanuso ni jurva. 


Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, with 
your light spread over all places and activities of the 
earth, and shine by the great and glorious radiation of 
your power. With your force and power, resist and repel 
all fears and envious contenders and, saving and 
protecting those who ought to be served and protected, 
break down the enmities and negativities. 


स faa चित्रं चितयन्तमस्मे चित्रक्षत्र चित्रत॑मं वयोधाम्‌। 
चन्द्रं रयिं पुरुवीरं बृहन्तं चन्द्र चन्द्राभिरर्गृणाते युवस्व ॥ ७॥ 


४८ Sa citra citram citayantamasme citraksatra 
citratamam vayodham. Candram rayim puru- 
viram brhantam candra candrabhir-grnate 
yuvasva. 


Agni, marvellous leading light of the world, 
ruler of the wonderful human order of brilliance, inspirer 
of love, benevolence and bliss, join and mix various 
wonderful elements with beautiful and soothing 
elements and then create for us enlightening, most 
surprising, invigorating, blissful, life giving, self- 
expansive wealth inspiring for all the youth and for the 
dedicated celebrant. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 7 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
मूर्धानं दिवो अ॑र तिं पुंथिव्या वैश्वानरमृत आ जातमभिम्‌। 
कविं सम्राजमतिथिं जनानामासन्ना पात्रं जनयन्त 
देवाः॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


588 RGVEDA 


1. Murdhanam divo aratim prthivya vaisvanara- 
mrata a jatamagnim. Kavim samrajam-atithim 
jJananam-asanna patram janayanta devah. 


The divinities of nature and humanity light the 
sacred fire: supreme light of heaven, vital fire of life of 
the earth, Vaishvanara, leader and energiser of the world, 
born of cosmic law and the fire of cosmic yajna. It is 
the visionary, even the revolutionary, poet, ruler of the 
world, sacred as a chance visitor, voice of the people, 
sustainer of life and its order. 


नाभिं यज्ञानां सदनं रयीणां महामाहावमभि सं न॑वन्त | 
वैश्वानरं रथ्यमध्वराणां यज्ञस्य॑ केतुं ज॑नयन्त देवाः ॥ २॥ 
ps Nabhim yajnanam sadanam rayinam mahama- 
havamabhi sam navanta. Vaisvanaram rathyama- 
dhvaranam yajnasya ketum janayanta devah. 


Divines and brilliant people light and sing in 
praise of Vaishvanara, sacred fire of the world, centre- 
hold of yajna and creative programmes of development, 
treasure source of wealths, divine challenge and 
cherished deity of their service, motive power of non- 
violent projects, the real symbol and the very life of 
yajna. 


त्वद्विप्रों जायते area त्वद्वीरासो! अभिमातिषाहः । 
वैश्वानर त्वमस्मासु धेहि वसूनि राजन्त्स्पहया्य्याणि ॥ ३ ॥ 


Tvad vepro jayate vajyagne tvad viraso abhima- 
tisahah. Vaisanara tvamasmasu dhehi vasuni 
rajantsprhayayyani. 

O leading light of the world, Agni, by you arises 
the dedicated scholar, energy, sustenance and progress, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 7 589 


and the warriors who brave the challenges and win. O 
Vaishvanara, fire of earthly existence, brilliant leader 
and ruler, lead us to wealths of the world worthy of 
being fought for and won. 


त्वां विश्वे अमृत जाय॑मानं शिशुं न देवा अभि सं न॑वन्ते। 
तव क्रतुं भिरमूृतत्वर्मायन्वैरु्वानर यत्पित्रोरदीं दे: ॥ ४॥ 

4. Tvam 177517८ amrta jayamanam sisum na deva abhi 
sam navante. Tava kratubhir-amrata-tvamayan 
vaisvanara yat pitroradideh. 


O Vaishvanara Agni, light and vitality of the 
world, all brilliant scholars and divines of humanity love 
you as a baby and celebrate you all round like the rising 
sun at dawn, or like a young scholar emerging from the 
home of his parents and teachers like the sun from 
heaven over the earth. By virtue of your holy acts, the 
mortals achieve the immortality of holiness and 
excellence. 


वैश्वानर तव तानिं व्रतानि महान्य॑ग्रे नकिरा dere 
यजनाय॑मानः पित्रोरूपस्थेऽ विन्दः केतुं वयुनेष्वह्छम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Vaisvanara tava tani vratani mahanyagne nakira 
dadharsa. Yajjayamanah pitrorupasthe ’vindah 
ketum vayunesvahnam. 


Vaishvanara, leading light and fire of life, Agni, 
the great ordinances of yours none can challenge, those 
which you, arising in the lap of your parents from heaven 
over the earth take on as your essential character and 
identity in the light of days in relation to the laws of 
existence from the earth to the Supreme Spirit and Lord 
of the universe. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


590 RGVEDA 


वैरुवा नरस्य विमितानि चक्ष॑सा सानूनि feat अमृतस्य 
केतुना । तस्येदु विश्वा भुवनाधि मूर्धनि वयाइव weg: 
सप्त विस्रुहः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vaisvanarasya vimitani caksasa sanuni divo 
amrtasya ketuna. Tasyedu visva bhuvanadhi 
murdhani vaya iva ruruhuh sapta visruhah. 


By the vision and radiance of immortal 
Vaishvanara, the tops of heaven are pervaded, measured 
and transcended. On him, as base which is also the 
summit of existence, rest all the worlds of the universe 
which manifest like hair on the head, grow like seven 
branches from the one root, or flow like seven streams 
from the centre source. 


वि यो रजांस्यमिमीत सुक्रतुर्वैश्वानरो वि दिवो रोचना 
कविः। परि यो विश्वा भुवनानि पप्रथेऽदब्धो गोपा अमृतस्य 
रक्षिता ॥ ७॥ 


4. Vi yo rajamsyamimita sukratur-vaisvanaro vi 
divo rocana kavih. Pari yo visva bhuvanani 
paprathe’dabdho gopa amrtasya raksita. 


Vaishvanara, merciful lord of the world and 
humanity, cosmic yajaka and visionary creator, who 
conceives, creates and ordains all regions of the 
universe, who illuminates the radiance of heaven, who 
pervades, expands and transcends all the worlds of 
existence, is the sole lord supreme, unchallenged ruler, 
sustainer and protector of the mortal world and the state 
of immortality. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 8 591 


Mandala 6/Sukta 8 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


पृक्षस्य quit अरुषस्य नू सहः प्र नु वोचं facat 
जातवेदसः । वैश्वानराय मतिर्नव्यसी शुचिः aga पवते 
चारुर ग्रये ।॥ ९॥ 


I. Prksasya vrsno arusasya nu sahah pra nu vocam 
vidatha jatavedasah. Vaisvanaraya matirnavyast 
Sucih soma iva pavate caruragnaye. 


Spontaneously I sing and celebrate the 
knowledge and omnipotence of Jataveda, omniscient 
lord creator, omnipresent, generous, refulgent and 
merciful. The holy thoughts and words of the song flow 
ever fresh, pure, soothing and sanctifying like the 
streams of soma in honour of the universal lord and 
leading light of the world. 


स जाय॑मानः परमे व्योमनि aarafirdaar अ॑रक्चत। 
व्यत न्तरिंश्चषममिमीत सुक्रतुर्वैश्वानरो महिना नाकम- 
PITT २॥ 


Sa jayamanah parame vyomani vratanyagnir- 
vratapa araksata. Vyantariksamamimita sukra- 
turvaisvanaro mahina nakamasprsat. 


He, Agni, ordainer of the laws of existence, 
manifesting in the highest heavens like the sun, protects 
and sustains the laws of life, being ordainer and observer 
of the laws of existence. Vaishvanara, immanent in the 
heart of humanity, holy protector of yajnic actions, 
pervades the firmament and, with his grand potential, 
gives the magic touch of refulgence to the heaven of 
joy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


592 RGVEDA 


व्य॑स्तभ्नाद्रोद॑सी मित्रो अद्तोऽ न्तर्वाव॑ंदकृणोज्न्योतिंषा 
तमं: । वि चर्म॑णीव धिषणे अवर्तयदैश्वानरो विश्व॑मधत्त 
वृष्ण्य॑म्‌ ।॥। २ ॥ 


2; Vyastabhnad rodasi mitro adbhuto’ntarvavada- 
krnojjyotisa tamah. Vi carmaniva dhisane 
avartayad vaisvanaro visvamadhatta vrsnyam. 


Vaishvanara, leading light and life of existence, 
universal friend and light giver, marvellous and all 
immanent unmoved mover, holds the heaven and earth 
in balance, covers, i.e., dispels darkness with light, 
revolves heaven and earth, day and night, wearing both 
like changing and alternate forms and thus sustains the 
entire living, organismic generous universe. 


sored महिषा अगृभ्णत विशो राजानमुप तस्थुर 
ग्मिय॑म्‌। आ दूतो अभ्िम॑भरद्विवस्व॑तो वैश्वानरं मातरिश्वा 
परावतं: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Apamupasthe mahisa agrbhnata 1750 rajana- 
mupa tasthur-rgmiyam. A duto agnimabharad 
vivasvato vaisvanaram matarisva paravatah. 


In the midst of spatial oceans of particles in the 
firmament, great scholars and scientists perceive, 
receive and develop Agni celebrated in the Rks and 
closely abide by it in study like people abiding by the 
ruler for their benefit. Vayu, currents of cosmic energy 
abiding in space, acts as carrier and bears Vaishvanara, 
universal energy of heat and light from the far off sun 
for the benefit of the world. 


युगेयुगे विदथ्यं गृणद्धयोऽ गरे रयिं यशसं धेहि नव्य॑सीम्‌ । 
पव्येव राजन्नघशंसमजर नीचा नि ava वनिनं न 
तेज॑सा ॥ ५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 8 593 


> Yugeyuge vidathyam grnadbhyo’gne rayim 
yasasam dhehi navyasim. Pavyeva rajanna- 
ghasamsamayjara nica ni vrsca vaninam na tejasa. 


Agni, leading light of the world, from year to 
year, age by age, bear and bring for the dedicated 
celebrants latest and newest wealth and honour for 
advancement in knowledge and action. O brilliant ruler, 
unaging and imperishable, strike down the agent of sin 
and crime as you strike down a tree or a cloud by thunder 
and lightning. 


अस्माकमग्ने wade धार याऽनांमि श्चत्रमजरं सुवीर्यम्‌ । 
वयं ज॑येम शातिनं सहस्रिणं वैरुवानरः ama 
तवोतिभिः ।॥ ६॥ 


6. Asmakamagne maghavatsu dharaya’nami 
ksatramajaram suviryam. Vayam jayema Satinam 
sahasrinam vaisvanara vajamagne tavotibhih. 


Agni, leading light of the world, Vaishvanara, 
kindly ruler of the hearts of humanity, among our people 
who are blest with wealth, honour and power by virtue 
of your gifts of protection and advancement, establish 
anoble, courteous, inalienable and unaging social order 
of freedom worthy of the brave. We pray we may win a 
hundredfold and a thousandfold victories of food and 
sustenance, energy and progress under your protection 
and promotion. 


अदब्धेभिस्तव गोपाभिररिष्टे ऽ स्माकं पाहि त्रिषधस्थ सूरीन्‌ | 
रक्षा च नो ददुषां शर्धो अग्रे वैरुवानर प्र च॑ तारीः 
स्तवानः ॥ ७॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


594 RGVEDA 


oe Adabdhebhistava gopabhiriste’smakam pahi 
trisadhastha surin. Raksa ca no dadusam sardho 
agne vaisvanara pra ca tarth stavanah. 


Agni, refulgent leader, Vaishvanara, gracious 
ruling presence of the world, loving and adorable 
guardian present in the three worlds of earth, heaven 
and the firmament, presiding power of the three councils 
of governance, legislation and education, with your 
loving, non-violent and irresistible forces of defence 
and protection for advancement, pray protect and 
promote our saints and sages, scholars and the brave 
heroes and leaders. And protect us all, sustain and 
advance the courage and morale of all the celebrants 
and generous givers and yajakas. Save us all, O lord 
adorable, lead us all across the seas of darkness to the 
cherished goal. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 9 
Vaishvanara Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


अह॑श्च कृष्णमहरर्जुनं च वि dda रज॑सी वेद्याभिः | 
वैश्वानरो जाय॑मानो न राजाऽवातिर ज्योतिंषाग्िस्त- 
मांसि॥ ९॥ 

ll; Ahasca krsnamahararjunam ca vi vartete rajast 
vidyabhih. Vaisvanaro jayamano na raja’ vatira- 
Jjyotisagnistamamsi. 

The dark half of the earth’s daily round, the 
night, and the bright half, the day, revolve alternately 
in the terrestrial atmosphere alongwith their cognizable 


characteristics. Vaishvanara Agni, the sun, darling of 
the world, as it rises, overcomes and dispels the darkness 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 9 595 


with light like a ruler eliminating the dark and evil forces 
of society. 


नाहं तन्तुं न वि जानाम्योतुं न यं वय॑न्ति समरेऽ AAMT: | 
कस्य॑ स्वित्पुत्र इह वक्त्वानि परो व॑दात्यव॑रेण पित्रा ॥ २॥ 


2. Naham tantum na vi janamyotum na yam vayanti 
samare’tamanah. Kasya svit putra iha vaktvani 
paro vadatyavarena pitra. 


I know not the warp nor the woof of the web of 
life. Nor do I know the design of the web which the 
weavers weave together in their constant concourse of 
nights and days. Whose son here or far off, pure and 
purifying, could say what ought to be said by virtue of 
the father, or teacher or the supreme teacher at the 
closest? Who knows? 


स इत्तन्तुं स वि जानात्योतुं स वक्त्वान्यृतुथा व॑दाति । य ई 
चिकेतदमृतस्य गोपा अवश्चरन्परो अन्येन पश्य॑न्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Sa it tantun sa vi janatyotum sa vaktvanyrtutha 
vadati. Ya im ciketadamrtasya gopda avascaran 
paro anyena pasyan. 


He surely knows the warp, he knows the woof, 
he speaks of what ought to be spoken according to the 
season and the circumstances, he who knows the flow 
of the stream of life and time, who is the master and 
keeper of the eternals, and eternal knowledge, who 
knows and moves up and down, far and near, seeing 
the reality by the eye of the other, the supreme lord of 
eternal light. 


अयं होता प्रथमः पश्य॑तेमयिदं ज्योतिरमृतं मर्त्येषु । 
अयं स aa ya आ निषत्तोऽ मंत्यस्तन्वा ई वर्ध॑मानः ॥ ४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


596 RGVEDA 


4. Ayam hota prathamah pasyatemamidam 
Jyotiramrtam martyesu. Ayam sa jajne dhruva a 
nisatto’martyastanva vardhamanah. 


This supreme lord is the prime yajaka, giver and 
receiver. See and know this immortal light among the 
mortals. And this is that other, the individual soul, 
unshaken, immovable, firmly seated in the personality, 
immortal, growing in knowledge and vision and the 
body in which it is born. 


ga ज्योतिर्निहितं दृशये कं मनो wats पतयत्स्वन्तः । fave 
देवाः सम॑नसः सकता एकं क्रतुमभि वि य॑न्ति साधु ॥ ५॥ 


5. Dhruvam jyotirnihitam drsaye kam mano 
javistham patayatsvantah. Visve devah sama- 
nasah saketa ekam kratumabhi vi yanti sadhu. 


In order that the individual soul may see the one 
immovable blissful divine light enshrined in the cave 
of the heart, there is the mind, fastest of psychic faculties 
in the personality of all those who direct themselves to 
the one centre. All the organs of perception, in fact all 
the illuminative elements of nature, all of equal 
competence, united together and in unison with the mind 
efficiently move toward the individual soul. 


faa कर्णीं पतयतो वि चक्षुर्वीडे दं =ifadda आहितं 
यत्‌। वि मे मन॑श्चरति दूरआधीः किं Regent किमु नू 
मनिष्ये ॥ ६ ॥ ति ति 

6. Vi me karna patayato vi caksurvidam jyotirhrdaya 
ahitam yat. Vi me manascarati dura adhih kim 
svid vaksyami kimu nu manisye. 


My ears, as I feel impelled to have a vision of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 10 597 


the inner light of divinity, my eyes, the light of the spirit 
enshrined in the heart, my mind which connects with 
far off things, all move to help me see the light of divinity 
within me. What at all shall I say more? What shall I 
think more? 


विश्वे car अंनमस्यन्थियानास्त्वामंग्ने तम॑सि तस्थिवांसंम्‌। 
वैश्वा नरोऽ वतूतये नोऽ म॑र्त्योऽ वतूतयें नः ॥ ७॥ 


a, Visve deva anamasyan bhiyanastvamagne tamasi 
tasthivamsam. Vaisvanaro’vatitaye no’martyo’- 
vatutaye nah. 

Agni, light of life, life of the universe abiding 
at the centre of darkness and mystery of existence, all 
divinities of nature and humanity with all their sense 
and power bow to you in awe. We pray may Vaishvanara, 
immortal light of the soul and the universe, protect us 
for safety, security and well being, protect us for peace 
and progress. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 10 

Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
पुरो at मन्द्रं दिव्यं dats data यज्ञे अग्निमध्वरे दधिध्वम्‌। 
पुर उक्थेभिः स हि नो विभावा स्वध्वरा करति जात- 
वेदाः ॥ ९॥ 

i Puro vo mandram divyam suvrktim prayati yajne 
agnim-adhvare dadhidhvam. Pura ukthebhih sa 
hi no vibhava svadhvara karati jatavedah. 


In your well-planned and projected programmes 
of yajnic development free from violence, first and 
foremost, with right formulae and right process, place 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


598 RGVEDA 


in the fore front Agni, holy fire and leading light, 
charming presence, brilliant and pure power leading to 
the right goal by the right path. That power and presence 
alone, kind and loving, immanent in all that exists, leads 
holy acts of love and kindness to sure success. 


ad द्युमः पुर्वणीक dea अगिधिर्मनुंष इधानः। 
स्तोमं यम॑स्मै ममतेव शुषं घृतं न शुचिं मतय: पवन्ते ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Tamu dyumah purvanika hotaragne agnibhir- 
manusa idhanah. Stomam yamasmai mamateva 
Susam ghrtam na suci matayah pavante. 


Agni, sagely yajaka brilliant in knowledge and 
fiery in will and action who inspire people with passion 
and enthusiasm, pray listen to the song of celebration, 
powerful as love and pure as ghrta, which wise and 
thoughtful people sing and sanctify in honour of this 
holy fire. 


पीपाय स श्रव॑सा मर्त्येषु यो अग्रयें ददाश विप्रं उक्थः। 
चित्राभिस्तमूतिभिश्चित्रशोचिव्रजस्यं साता गोम॑तो 
sata ३॥ 


8 Pipaya sa Sravasa martyesu yo agnaye dadasa 
vipra ukthath. Citrabhis-tamutibhiscitrasocir- 
vrajasya sata gomato dadhdati. 


That sagely scholar thrives among mortals with 
honour and excellence who serves and advances the 
holy fire with songs of praise and holy materials. And 
Agni too, commanding marvellous light and flames, 
blesses him with wonderful forms of protection and 
advances him on the paths of progress with plenty of 
wealth, land, cows and gifts of knowledge and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 10 599 
enlightenment. 


आ यः पप्रौ जाय॑मान उर्वीं दूरेदृशा भासा कृष्णाध्वा | 
अध॑ बहु चित्तम ऊम्ययास्तिरः शोचिषौ ददृशो 
Ulach: US Il 

4. A yah paprau jayamana urvi duredrsa bhasa 
krsnadhva. Adha bahu cit tama urmyayas- 
tirah Socisa dadrse pavakah. 


As Agni rises and manifests itself like the sun, 
itis seen from afar and, going over areas of darkness by 
the paths it makes for itself, it fills the wide spaces of 
heaven and earth with its light. The light and fire, pure 
and purifying, thus overcomes the deep darkness of the 
night with splendour and reveals its glory and the reality 
of things. 

Wiad पुरुवाजाभिरूती अगं रयिं मघवद्धय्च धेहि। 
ये राध॑सा श्रव॑सा चात्यन्यान्त्सुवीर्येभिश्चाभि सन्ति 
जनान्‌ ॥ ५॥ 

Nu nascitram puruvajabhiruti agne rayim magha- 
vadbhyasca dhehi. Ye radhasd $ravasa catyanyan 
tsuviryebhiscabhi santi janan. 

Agni, leading light of life, for all time with 
wonderful vigour, power and forces of action in perfect 
safety and protection, bear and bring abundant wealth 
and excellence for us and for those leaders of 
magnificence who stand out before other people by 


means and materials, honour and fame, courage and 
fortitude. 


इमं यज्ञं oil धा अग्र उशन्यं त आसानो जुं हुते हविष्मान्‌ | 
भरद्वाजेषु दधिषे सुवृक्तिमवीर्वाजंस्य गध्य॑स्य सातौ ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


600 RGVEDA 


6. Imam yajnam cano dha agna usan yam ta asano 
juhute havisman. Bharadvajesu dadhise suvrktim- 
avirvajasya gadhyasya satau. 


Agni, leading light of life, loving and anxious 
for the success of this yajnic programme of development 
and service, bring holy food, energy and sustenance. 
You always bless the men of munificence, power and 
success with glory and excellence. Protect us in the 
battles for science and energy and the wealth and values 
of our choice. 


वि देषां सीनुहि वर्धयेव्ठां मदेम grafear: सुवीराः ॥ ७॥ 
des Vi dvesamsinuhi vardhayelam madema satahimah 
suvirah. 
Agni, leading light of life, drive away hate, 
jealousy and the enemies. Promote food and energy, 
protect and replenish the earth and her resources, 


advance knowledge and holy speech. Bless us that we 
may be happy and live a hundred years with heroic 


progeny. 
Mandala 6/Sukta 11 


Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


यज॑स्व होतरिषितो यजीयानग्ने are मरुतां न war 
आ नो पित्रावरुणा arden द्यावा होत्राय पृथिवी 
व॑वृत्याः ॥ ९॥ 
| Yajasva hotarisito yajityanagne badho marutam 
na prayukti. A no mitravaruna nasatya dyava 
hotraya prthivi vavrtyah. 
Keep the fire of yajna burning, O yajaka, loved, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 11 601 


inspired and invoked, leading light of life most 
reverential, bulwark of defence and protection like the 
force and freshness of winds for the unity and 
engagement of the people in common causes of creation 
and development. Bring up for us Mitra and Varuna, 
powers of love and friendship, judgement and 
protection, the Ashvins ever true, heaven and earth, keep 
them on ever active together for the advancement of 
our yajnic endeavours. 


त्वं Sat मन्द्रतमो नो अध्रुगन्तर्देवो विदथा मर्त्येषु । 
पावकयां Gets वहधिरासाऽगरे यज॑स्व तन्वं + तव स्वाम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 
2 Tvam hota mandratamo no adhrugantardevo 


vidatha martyesu. Pavakaya juhva vahnirasa 
*gne yajasva tanvam tava svam. 


Agni, you are our leading light of yajna, 
charming and blissful, free from jealousy among 
mortals, radiant and generous creator giver in our yajnic 
endeavours, harbinger of wealth by the purifying flames 
of fire with havis offered with the holy ladle of ghrta 
and catalysed to fragrance. O lord of us all, develop 
your own self of radiant fire and develop the social 
structure of order. 


धन्यां fate त्वे धिषणा वष्टि प्र देवाञ्जन्म गृणते यजध्यै | 
वेपिष्ठो अङधिरसां यन् विप्रो मधुं च्छन्दो भनति रेभ 
इष्टौ ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Dhanya ciddhi tve dhisana vasti pra devanjanma 
grnate yajadhyai. Vepistho angirasam yaddha 
vipro madhucchando bhanati rebha istau. 


Blessed is the mind and intelligence in pursuit 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


602 RGVEDA 


of life’s wealth and grace which concentrates on you, 
Agni, for the celebrant soul to realise the manifestations 
of Divinity when the devotee, most vibrant sage among 
the Angirasas, wise saints and scholars, sings as a poet 
in ecstasy for the cherished attainment. 


अदिद्युतत्स्वपांको विभावाग्ने यज॑स्व रोद॑सी उरूची | आयुं 
न यं नम॑सा रातहव्या अञ्जन्ति सुप्रयसं पञ्च जना: ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Adidyutat svapako vibhava’gne yajasva rodasi 
urucit. Ayum na yam namasa ratahavya anjanti 
suprayasam panca janah. 


O Brilliant, self-refulgent, glorious power of 
noble action, Agni, leading light of the world, rise over 
the wide earth and heaven. All the five classes of people 
bearing sacred offerings honour and celebrate you with 
submission and homage as abundant giver of life’s 
blessings, indeed as the very spirit of life. O man, rise 
and join the Spirit omnipresent. 


वृञ्जे ह यन्नम॑सा बर्हिर ग्रावयापि स्तुग्धुतव॑ती सुवृक्तिः। 
अम्यक्षि war सदने पृथिव्या अश्रायि यज्ञः सूर्ये न 
चक्षुः ॥ ५॥ 


Vrnje ha yannamasa barhiragnavayami srugghr- 
tavati suvrktih. Amyaksi sadma sadane prthivya 
asrayi yajnah surye na caksuh. 


Surely when the grass is gathered with 
reverence, the ladle overflowing with ghrta is raised 
over the fire with sacred hymns, the vedi is firmly settled 
on the ground, then the yajna is accomplished on the 
earth as the eye is established in the sun (from birth to 
death with the last rites). 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 12 603 


दश्टास्या न॑ः पुर्वणीक होतर्देवेभिरये अयिभिरिधानः। 
रायः संनो सहसो वावसाना अतिं स्रसेम वृजनं AHS: ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Dasasya nah purvanika hotardevebhiragne 
agnibhiridhanah. Rayah suno sahaso vavasana 
ati srasema vrjanam nanhah. 


Agni, leading light of life, shining in infinite 
manifestations, cosmic yajaka and giver of fragrance, 
blazing with divine flames of fire, omnipotent generator 
of strength, bestow on us wealths of existence so that, 
blest with the light of Divinity, we may complete our 
life’s journey and avoid the paths of sin. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 12 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


मध्ये होतां दुरोणे बर्हिषो राव्यिस्तोदस्य रोद॑सी atest । 
अयं स सूनुः सह॑स ऋतावा दूरात्सूर्यो न शोचिषा 
ततान ॥ ९॥ 


I, Madhye hota durone barhiso ralagnistodasya 
rodasi yajadhyai. Ayam sa sunuh sahasa rtava 
durat suryo na Socisa tatana. 


Agni, ruling light of the world, cosmic yajaka 
in the midst of the yajnic house of space, radiates as 
light of the sun to join the heaven and earth together. 
So does this yajaka, child of courage and forbearance, 
observing the laws of truth and yajna in the midst of the 
house of yajna, shine from afar like the sun and extends 
over earth and heaven (with the fragrance of fire). 


आ afar स्वपाके यजत्र यक्च॑द्राजन्त्सर्वतातेव नु ail: । 
त्रिषधस्थ॑स्ततरुषो न जंहो! हव्या मघानि मानुषा यजध्यै ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


604 RGVEDA 


2. A yasmin tve svapake yajatra yaksad rajant- 
sarvatateva nu dyauh. Trisadhasthastataruso na 
janho havya maghani manusa yajadhyai. 


Agni, adorable self-refulgent ruling power of 
life and yajna, let the light of the sun join your radiance 
as in yajna for universal good so that the light pervasive 
in heaven, firmament and earth like a dynamic saving 
power of vitality may create and develop means and 
materials for wealth and prosperity, honour and 
excellence for humanity. 


तेजिष्ठा यस्यार fae नेराट्‌ तोदो अध्वन्न वुंधसानो अद्यौत्‌ । 
अद्रोघो न द्रविता चेतति त्मन्नमंर्त्योऽ वर्त्र ओष॑धीषु ।॥। ३॥ 


रः Tejistha yasyaratirvanerat todo adhvan na 
vrdhasano adyaut. Adrogho na dravitd cetati tma- 
nnamartyo’vartra osadhisu. 


Agni, whose brilliant pervasiveness blazing in 
the rays of the sun and shining over the forests radiates 
advancing on its path like the sun in orbit, manifests by 
its self-refulgence in herbs and trees as a power free 
from hate and jealousy, a presence indispensable and 
inevitable, dynamic and imperishable. 


सास्माकेभिरे तरी न शुषेरभिः Fa दम आ जातवेदाः | 
द्रव॑न्नो वन्वन्‌ रत्वा नावसरः पितेव॑ जारयायि यज्ञैः ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sasmakebhiretari na susairagnih stave dama a 
jatavedah. Drvanno vanvan kratva narvosrah 
piteva jarayayi yajnaih. 
That refulgent ruling power of the world, Agni, 


knows and resides with all that exists and it is honoured 
and celebrated in our welcome homes by us with all 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 12 605 


our strength and enthusiasm. Manifest even in the 
simplest forms and in wood and forests, loving, noble 
by intelligence and holy action, Agni is honoured with 
homage and yajnas as father, celebrated like a 
tempestuous power and loved like the light of dawn. 


अधं स्मास्य पनयन्ति भासो वृथा यत्तक्चषदनुयाति Geary | 
सद्यो यः स्यन्द्रो विषितो धवीयानृणो न तायुरति eat 
राट्‌॥ ५॥ 


>. Adha smasya panayanti bhaso vrtha yat 
taksadanuyati prthvim. Sadyo yah spandro visito 
dhaviyanrno na tayurati dhanva rat. 


And then people admire and celebrate its light 
and splendour which it releases, refines and intensifies 
into forms as it goes along on way by the earth, which 
power whoever knows, always and instantly radiating, 
flowing, pervading, flying, moving and shaking like 
flood and storm, the man becomes brilliant with 
knowledge and shines with the power of superior arms 
and armaments. 


सत्वं नो अर्वन्निदाया विश्वेभिरग्ने अथिभिंरिधानः। 
वेषिं रायो वि यांसि दुच्छुना मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीराः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Sa tvam no arvan nidaya visvebhiragne agnibhiri- 
dhanah. Vesi rayo vi yasi ducchuna madema 
Satahimah suvirah. 


Agni, ruling light of the world, instant dynamic 
and omnipresent power burning with all kinds of light 
and fire, protect us from reproach, create and bring us 
wealth, honour and excellence, ward off and destroy 
hate, enmity and evil, and let us all enjoy and celebrate 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


606 RGVEDA 


a full hundred years of life in the company of brave 
children and heroic warriors of the earth. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 13 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


त्वद्विश्वा सुभग aetna fa य॑न्ति वनिनो न aa: | 
श्रुष्टी र चिर्वाजो वृ त्रतूर्ये दिवो वृष्टिरीड्यो रीतिर पाम्‌॥ ९॥ 


if Tvad visva subhaga saubhagdnyagne vi yanti 
vanino na vayah. Srusti rayirvajo vrtraturye 
divo vrstiridyo ritirapam. 


Agni, ruling light of life, lord of good fortune, 
honour and excellence of the world, from you arise and 
grow all riches, honours and graces of life like branches 
of the tree growing and extending from the same one 
root. Sure and beneficent wealth, strength and spirit to 
break the demon of darkness, thunder for the cloud and 
rain from the skies, glorious showers of the waters of 
life and the adorable flow of holy action, all these too 
arise and expand from you alone. 


त्वं भगो न आ हि waa परिज्मेव क्षयसि दस्मवर्चाः । 
अगे fast न aaa ऋतस्याऽसि erat वामस्य॑ देव 
भूरे: ।॥। २॥ 

2. Tvam bhago na @ hi ratnamise parijmeva ksayasi 


dasmavarcah. Agne mitro na brahata rtasya- 
*si ksatta vamasya deva bhureh. 


Agni, leading light of the world, like a 
magnanimous master, you bestow upon us cherished 
jewel wealths of the world. Power of extra ordinary 
deeds of glory, you move and abide everywhere like 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 13 607 


the circumambient wind, omnipresent. O refulgent and 
generous friend of the world like the sun, you are the 
light and path-maker for our pursuit of the highest and 
widest paths of universal truth and life’s onward flow, 
and you are the gracious dispenser of the fruits of human 
action. 


स सत्प॑तिः शव॑सा हन्ति वृत्रमग्ने विप्रो वि पणेर्भतिं वाज॑म्‌ | 
यं त्वं प्र॑चेत ऋतजात राया सजोषा नप््रापां हिनोषि ॥ ३॥ 


९ Sa saptatih savasa hanti vrtramagne vipro vi 
panerbharti vajam. Yam tvam praceta rtajata 
raya sajosa naptrapam hinosi. 


Agni, leading light of life, only that wise and 
vibrant sage, observer, protector and promoter of truth 
and the paths of truth, destroys the evil and darkness of 
the world with strength and courage, and only he 
commands the knowledge and power of a worthy leader 
whom you, O lord omniscient and omnipresent in the 
world of truth, call, inspire and bless with wealth and 
fire for action and success, and whom you accept as 
your own. 


aed सूनो सहसो गीर्भिरुक्थेयन्निर्मर्तो निशितिं वेद्यान॑ट्‌। 
विश्वं स दैव प्रति anan धत्ते धान्यं पत्य॑ ते वसव्यैः ।॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yaste suno sahaso girbhirukthairyajnairmarto 
nisitim vedyanat. Visvam sa deva prati varamagne 
dhatte dhanyam patyate vasavyaih. 


Agni, O child of omnipotence and maker of the 
brave, generous and brilliant ruler of the world, whoever 
is the mortal who with songs of praise and prayer and 
noble yajnic deeds receives by the vedi, seat of yajna, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


608 RGVEDA 


his focus and favour for action, he abounds in cherished 
gifts of life and commands the wealth and power of the 
world with all treasure sources of prosperity. 


ता नृभ्य आ सौश्रवसा सुवीराऽगं सूनो सहसः पुष्यसे धाः। 
कृणोषि यच्छवसा भूरिं पश्वो वयो वृकायारये 
जसुरये ॥ ५॥ 


5. Ta nrbhya व sauSravasa suvira’gne suno sahasah 
pusyase dhah. Krnosi yacchavasa bhuri pasvo 
vayo vrkayaraye jasuraye. 


Agni, leader and ruler of the world, creator of 
strength, courage and forbearance, bear and bring those 
renowned acts of enlightenment and brave heroes and 
that abundant food and nourishment, cattle wealth, 
health and age which you create with your strength and 
power for sustenance and support of the people and 
weaker sections of the community and in defence against 
the wolfish thieves and violent enemies. 


वदा dat सहसो नो विहाया अग तोकं तन॑यं वाजि नो 
दाः। विशूवाभिर्गी भिरि भि पूर्तिम॑श्यां मदेम शतर्हिंमाः 
सुवीराः ।॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vadma suno sahaso no vihaya agne tokam 
tanayam vaji no dah. Visvabhir-girbhir-abhi 
purtima-syam madema Satahimah suvirah. 


Agni, leading light of the world, creator and 
giver of strength and forbearance, great and eminently 
enlightened leader, speak to us of truth and knowledge. 
Lead us to have brave progressive children, grand 
children and heroic warriors. Let us have complete 
happiness and fulfilment with all our songs of praise 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 14 609 


and prayer and let us enjoy life for a full hundred years 
in the company of our brave children. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 14 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


अग्रा यो मर्त्यो दुवो धियं' जुजोषं धीतिभिः | 
wag ष प्र पूव्यं इषं वुरीतावसे neu 


iF Agna yo martyo duvo dhiyam jujosa dhitibhih. 
Bhasannu sa pra purvya isam vuritavase. 


The mortal who dedicates his faith and worship, 
reason and intelligence with all his thoughts and 
intentions, devotion and prayers to Agni, light and fire 
of life, surely shines as first and foremost in excellence, 
blest with food and energy, knowledge and 
enlightenment for all round protection and progress. 


अगथिरिद्ि प्रचेता अथिर्वेधस्त॑म ऋषिः 1 

अगिं grated यज्ञेषु मनुषो fast: ॥ २॥ 
2 Agniriddhi praceta agnirvedhastama rsih. 

Agnim hotaramilate yajnesu manuso visah. 


Agni is enlightened and giver of enlightenment, 
wisest and most worshipful, a seer of ultimate reality 
and revelation. Thoughtful people honour and adore 
Agni, high priest of cosmic yajna and giver of all 
blessings, in their yajnic acts of creation and 
development. 


नाना ह्य4 येऽ da स्पर्धन्ते wal अर्यः। 
तूर्वन्तो दस्युमायवो व्रतैः सीक्ष॑न्तो STAAL ३॥ 
a. Nana hyagne’vase spardhante rayo aryah. 


Turvanto dasyumayavo vrataih siksanto avratam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


610 RGVEDA 


Successful people in the socio-economic field 
vie with each other in various ways for protection and 
progress, overcoming anti-social elements for the 
purpose of challenging and defeating the unprincipled 
by their ways of discipline. 


अभिरप्सापरंतीषहं वीरं द॑दाति aaa 

यस्य aaa शव॑सः संचि शत्र॑वो भिया uw 
4. Agnirapsamrtisaham viram dadati satpatim. 

Yasya trasanti Savasah samcaksi Satravo bhiya. 

Agni blesses and makes way for the rise and 

advancement of the brave man of action who challenges 
and conquers the attacks of evil and protects and 
promotes the good life of truth, because in the face of 
his courage and valour the enemies shake with fear and 
flee. 

अगिर्हिं faamt निदो देवो ad मुरुष्यति। 

सहावा यस्यावृतो र यिवांजेष्ववुंतः ॥ ५ ॥ 
5. Agnirhi vidmana nido devo martamurusyati. 

Sahava yasyavrto rayirvajesvavrtah. 


Agni, generous and brilliant leader, for sure, 
with his knowledge and power protects mortals from 
hate, jealousy and enmity. He is an open and 
spontaneous protector, and whoever the man he protects, 
his wealth and honour is safe, open and unchallengeable 
in the battles of life. 


अच्छ नो मित्रमहो देव देवानग्ने वोच॑ः सुपति eet: | 
वषि स्वस्तिं सश्चति दिवो नृन्द्िषो अंहांसि 
दुरिता त॑रेम ता त॑रेम॒ तवाव॑सा तरेम neu 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 611 


6. Accha no mitramaho deva devanagne vocah 
sumatim rodasyoh. Vihi svastim suksitim divo nrn 
dviso anhamsi durita tarema ta tarema tavavasa 
tarema. 


Agni, leading light of life, generous and 
refulgent lord, greatest friend adorable, speak to us well, 
specially to men of brilliance and the people who love 
to know of the knowledge of heaven and earth, and of 
the three fires of earth, firmament and the solar sphere: 
fire, wind, and electricity and light. Bring us the good 
life of truth and all round well-being and a happy home 
for peaceful living. Help us get over jealousy, sin and 
crime and evil conduct, help us get over malignity, 
reproach and enmity, protect us, save us and let us cross 
over the seas of life by your grace. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 15 


Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya or Vitahavya 
Angirasa Rshi 


इममू षू वो अतिथिमुषर्बुधं विश्वासां विषां पतिंपृञ्जसे 
गिरा। वेतीदिवो जनुषा कच्चिदा शुचिर्ज्योक्छ्चिंदत्ति गर्भ 
यदच्युंतम्‌।॥ ९॥ 

i. Imami su vo atithim-usarbudham visvasam visam 
patim-rnjase gira. Vetid divo janusa kaccida 
Sucirjyok cidatti garbho yadacyutam. 


O sage and scholar, this holy guest of yours 
visiting and waking you up at dawn, guardian and 
sustainer of all people of the world, you honour and 
adore with sacred words of song. He comes from the 
heaven of light, is wholly pure and immaculate by nature 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


612 RGVEDA 


and, subsisting in the earth and everywhere, constantly 
consumes what never perishes, never decreases. 


मित्रंन यं ald भृग॑वो दधुर्वनस्पतावीङ्य॑मृर्ध्वशोचिषम्‌। 
सत्वं सुप्रीतो वीतहव्ये अद्भुत प्रशस्तिभिर्महयसे 
दिवेदिवे ॥ २॥ 


pa Mitram na yam sudhitam bhrgavo dadhur-vana- 
spatavidyamurdhvasocisam. Sa tvam suprito 
vitahavye adbhuta praSsastibhirmahayase 
divedive. 


Agni whom the wise ones discover in sun rays 
and generate in arani wood is firm, well placed, sweet 
as nectar and adorable. As such, O leading light of 
marvellous knowledge, kind as a friend and rising high 
in flames of fire and light of life, ever pleased with the 
supplicant, you are honoured and exalted with holy 
songs of celebration day by day by the devotees. 


स त्वं दक्च॑स्यावृको वृधो avd: परस्यान्तरस्य तरुषः। 
रायः Gat सहसो मर्त्येष्वा छर्दिर्यच्छ वीतहव्याय सप्रथो 
भरद्वाजाय स॒प्रथ॑ः ॥ ३॥ 


3: Sa tvam daksasyavrko vrdho bhuraryah para- 
syantarasya tarusah. Rayah suno sahaso 
martyesva chardiryaccha vitahavyaya sapratho 
bharadvajaya saprathah. 


Agni, child of omnipotence, leading light and 
giver of strength and courage, loving ruler free from 
jealousy and grabbing cruelty, be promoter of the 
efficient and the expert, be the master of external, 
internal and victorious power and honour, bring 
settlement, peace and comfort for the people, rise in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 613 


expansion for the giver and receiver of yajnic creations, 
and honour the man of science and technology with 
recognition and advancement. 


द्युतानं वो अतिथिं स्व॑र्णरमभिं होतारं ade: स्वध्वरम्‌ । 
विप्रं न दयुक्षव॑चसं सुवृक्तिभिरर्हव्यवाहंमर तिं देवमंञ्जसे ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Dyutanam vo atithim svarnaram-agnim hotaram 
manusah svadhvaram. Vipram na dyuksavacasam 
suvrktibhir-havyavaham-aratim devam-rnjase. 


Honour and felicitate with songs of praise and 
place of eminence the radiant Agni, leading light and 
pioneer, dear as an honoured guest, harbinger of peace 
and joy, holy organiser and creative high priest of the 
joint programmes of humanity, like a vibrant sage and 
scholar, speaker of heavenly words, giver and carrier 
of yajnic materials of fragrance and wealth of honour 
and above all a beacon of light for advancement. 


पावकया यश्चितय॑न्त्या कृपा AAAS aA उषसो न ATTA | 
तूर्वन्न यामन्रेत॑शस्य नू रण आयो घृणे न त॑त॒षाणो 
अजरं; ॥ ५॥ 


5. Pavakaya yascitayantya krpa ksaman ruruca 
usaso na bhanuna. Turvan na yamannetasasya 
nu rana a yo ghrne na tatrsano ajarah. 


Free from age and decay, Agni, with purifying 
splendour of enlightenment, shines over the earth like 
the dawns with light at break of day, rushing and 
overpowering darkness like a war hero on course in 
battle, thirsting for victory in its blaze. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


614 RGVEDA 


अगिमयिं वः समिधा दुवस्यत प्रियंपरिंयं at srfafer 
गृणीषणि । उप॑ वो गीर्भिर्‌ मृतं विवासत देवो देवेषु वन॑ते 
हि वार्य'देवो देवेषु वन॑ते हि नो ga: ue ॥ 


6. Agnimagnim vah samidha duvasyata priyam- 
priyam vo atithim grnisani. Upa vo girbhiramr- 
tam vivasata devo devesu vanate hi varyam devo 
devesu vanate hi no duvah. 


In the daily business and holy observances of 
life, honour and serve Agni regularly day by day with 
offers of fuel and fragrant food. Agni is dear and dearer, 
welcome as a learned visitor worthy of honour and 
felicitation. Serve and exalt imperishable Agni with 
words of faith and reverence. Refulgent Agni vests 
brilliant divinities of nature and eminent scholars with 
valuable wealth and knowledge and blesses us with 
cherished gifts of life. 


समिब्दमभिं समिर्धां गिरा wot शुचिं पावकं पुरो अध्वरे 
धुवम्‌ । विप्रं होतारं पुरु वार॑मद्ुहं कविं सुम्नरीं महे जात- 
वेदसम्‌॥ ७॥ 


ds Samiddhamagnim samidha gird grne Sucim 
pavakam puro adhvare dhruvam. Vipram 
hotaram puruvaramadruham kavim sumnairim- 
ahe jatavedasam. 


I glorify the lighted fire, pure and purifying 
power, firm and foremost in holy works of love and 
non-violent development. In our state of peace and 
comfort, we celebrate and pray to the vibrant light giver 
of gifts, universally admired, free from jealousy, poetic 
creator, all knowing and present in all that exists. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 615 


त्वां दूतमंग्रे अमृतं युगेयुगे हव्यवाहं दधिरे urepiisay| 
देवासंश्च मतौसश्च जागृविं विभुं विश्पतिं नम॑सा नि 
षेदिरे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Tvam dutamagne amrtam yugeyuge havyavaham 
dadhire payumidyam. Devdasasca martasasca 
jJagrvim vibhum vispatim namasa ni sedire. 

Agni, life of life, light of existence, brilliant 
saints and sages and ordinary mortals too for ages and 
ages have meditated on you, light divine, with homage 
and self-surrender and found their haven and home in 
your presence, O lord disseminator of fragrance, 
receiver of homage and giver of grace, immortal, 
protector, adorable, ever awake, infinite, ruler and 
sustainer of humanity. 


विभूष॑न्नग्र उभ्या अनु व्रता दूतो देवानां रज॑सी समीयसे | 
यत्ते धीतिं सुमतिमावृणीमहेऽध स्मा नस्तिवरूथः शिवो 
भ॑व ।॥ ९॥ 


च Vibhusannagna ubhayann anu vrata duto deva- 
nam rajasi samiyase. Yat te dhitim sumati- 
mavrnimahe dha sma nastrivaruthah Sivo bhava. 


Agni, lord beatific, purifying fire, gracious to 
both wise and innocent according to your eternal law, 
self-refulgent light giver for the brilliant and generous, 
you pervade heaven and earth with your saving 
presence. As we meditate on your holy light and vision 
of knowledge, in consequence by your grace be kind 
and good to us, O lord of three worlds, omnipresent, 
omniscient and omnificent. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


616 RGVEDA 


तं सुप्रतीकं सुदृशं स्वञ्चमविंदांसो विदुष्टरं सपेम । 
स defeat वयुनानि विद्वान्प्र हव्यपयिर मृतेषु 
वोचत्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Tam supratikam sudrsam svancamavidvamso 
vidustaram sapema. Sa yaksad visva vayunani 
vidvan pra havyam-agnir-amrtesu vocat. 


We, people of limited knowledge, honour, adore 
and worship Agni, lord of glorious flames of action, of 
beatific vision, gracious wielder of the universe, lord 
almighty over all. May he, Agni, omniscient presence 
in all knowable objects and laws of existence, bless us 
and reveal to us, immortal souls, all that ought to be 
known. 


तमग्ने पास्युत तं पिपर्षि यस्त आन॑ट्‌ कवये! vy धीतिम्‌ । 
areal वा निशितिं वोदितिं वा तमित्पंणद्चि शवसोत 
राया॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tamagne pasyuta tam piparsi yasta anat kavaye 
sura dhitim. yajnasya va nisitim voditim va 
tamit prnaksi Savasota raya. 

Agni, lord of light and grace, him you protect 
and promote with fulfilment who dedicates his thought 
and action to you and meditates on you, lord omnipotent 
of universal vision and poetic creation. And whoever 
offers you rising flames of yajna and progressive action, 
you shower him with wealth, power, honour and 
courage. 


wanda वनुष्यतो नि पाहि त्वमु नः सहसावन्नवद्यात्‌ । सं त्वां 
ध्वस्मन्वदभ्येतु पाथः सं रयिः स्परं हयास्यः स स्त्री ॥ ९२॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 617 


12. Tvamagne vanusyato ni pahi tvamu nah sahasa- 
vannavadyat. Sam tva dhvasmanvadabhyetu 
pathah sam rayih sprhayayyah sahasri. 


Agni, lord of force and forbearance, we pray, 
you protect us, the devotees, against the violent and the 
malignant. 


May food and water free from negativity, mighty 
powerful against the violent come to you. May cherished 
wealth and power of a hundred and thousandfold 
efficacy come to you. 


sifrefat qeafa: स राजा विश्वां वेद्‌ जनिंमा जातवेदाः | 
देवानामुत यो मत्यीनां यजिष्ठः स प्र य॑जतामूतावां ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Agnirhota grhapatih sa raja visva veda janima 
jJatavedah. Devanamuta yo martyanam yajisthah 
Sa pra yajatamrtava. 


Agni is the cosmic highpriest of the dynamics 
of existence, lord protector of the house of life, ruler 
omniscient and omnipresent of all that is, and he knows 
the origin of all that comes into existence. He is the 
most adorable lord of the bounties of nature and of 
mortal humanity. May he, lord of truth and law, accept 
us as participants of cosmic yajna and carry on the yajna 
of creativity for us. 


अग्ने यदद्य विशो stares होतः पाव॑कशोचे as हि यज्चां । 
ऋता य॑जासि महिना वि यद्भूर्हव्या व॑ह यविष्ठ या तें 
अद्य।॥। ९४॥ 

14. 4.77 yadadya 1756 adhvarasya hotah pavakasoce 
vestvam hi yajva. Rta yajasi mahina vi yad 
bhurhavya vaha yavistha ya te adya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


618 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord of light and fire of purity, high priest 
of cosmic yajna, receiver and giver of fragrance of the 
people’s non-violent programmes of life, harbinger and 
overwatcher like a bird of flight, breaker and integrator 
of natural evolution, you pervade the laws and processes 
of nature. Let the universe grow ever expansive by your 
omnipotence and, O youthful spirit of life, bring us today 
what the noblest gifts of life are for us from you for our 
progress. 


अभि प्रयांसि af fe wit fF cat दधीत रोद॑सी 
यज॑ध्यै । stat नो मघवन्वाज॑सातावग्ने विश्वानि दुरिता 
त॑रेम ता त॑रेम॒ तवाव॑सा तरेम ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Abhi prayamsi sudhitani hi khyo ni tva dadhita 
rodast yajadhyai. Ava no maghavan vajasata- 
vagne visvani durita tarema ta tarema tavavasa 
tarema. 


Agni, light of life, Maghavan, lord of cosmic 
glory, you reveal to us, bring us, the daintiest delicacies 
and strongest powers of life and wield the heaven and 
earth together to sustain the expansive universe. Protect 
us in the struggles of life so that we may cross over all 
evils of the world, cross through all of them, win over 
all of them by your grace and protection. 


अग्ने विश्वेभिः स्वनीक देवैरूर्णविन्तं प्रथमः सीद योनिम्‌। 
कुल्कायिनं घृतव॑न्तं सवित्रे यज्ञं न॑य यज॑मानाय साधु ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. 4.7८ visvebhih svanika devairurnavantam pra- 
thamah sida yonim. Kulayinam ghrtavantam 
savitre yajnam naya yajamanaya sadhu. 


Agni, lord commander of glorious flame and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 619 


power, highpriest and foremost yajaka, with brilliant 
nobilities of nature and humanity, take over this home 
and sit on this vedi covered with holy grass, the home 
full of people and prosperity and overflowing with 
fragrant ghrta, and lead the yajna to a noble end for the 
yajamana in honour of Savita, lord creator, the cosmic 
organiser of Nature’s yajna. 


इममु त्यम॑थर्ववदिं म॑न्थन्ति cere: | 
यम॑ङ्कूयन्तमान॑यन्न-मूंरं श्याव्याभ्यः ॥ ९७॥ 


17. Imamu tyam-atharvavad-agnim manthanti 
vedhasah. Yamankuyantam-dnayann-amuram 
syavyabhyah. 


This actual as well as potential vibrant energy 
of fire and electricity, scholars of nature produce by 
rotative friction as described in the Atharva science of 
Veda, the energy which travels in waves and is far 
reaching and deep penetrative for darkness and things 
hidden in darkness. 


whic देववीतये सर्वताता स्वस्तये । आ देवान्व॑क्ष्यमूतंं 
ऋतावृधो! यज्ञं देवेषु पिस्पृशः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Janisva devavitaye sarvatata svastaye. A devan 
vaksyamrtan rtavrdho yajnam devesu pisprsah. 


Produce the fire and generate the energy for 
noble humanity, for universal good and total well being. 
Bring up the brilliant scholars together, collect generous 
and imperishable energies of nature which advance the 
truth of science and glorify the laws of nature, and let 
the yajna reach the heights of heaven. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


620 RGVEDA 


aad त्वा गृहपते जनानामग्ने अक॑र्म समिधां बृहन्तम्‌ । 
अस्थूरि नो गार्हपत्यानि सन्तु तिग्मेन नस्तेजसा सं 
शिंशाधि।॥ ९९॥ 


19. Vayamu tva grhapate jananamagne akarma 
samaidha brhantam. Asthuri no garhapatyani 


awa 


santu tigmena nastejasa sam sisadhi. 


Agni, leading light and power, sustainer of 
people’s homes, we exalt you and develop power and 
energy higher and higher with knowledge and inputs of 
fuel so that our multipower transports and domestic 
needs be fulfilled. O brilliant lord, enlighten us, teach 
us by your penetrative and far reaching lustre of 
knowledge and vision. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 16 
Agni Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


wat यज्ञानां होता विश्वेषां हितः । देवेधिमानुंषे जने i 2 


i Tvamagne yajnanam hota visvesam hitah. 
Devebhir-manuse jane. 


Agni, self-refulgent leading light of the 
universe, you are the chief highpriest of all yajnic 
developments of nature and of all creative and 
developmental programmes of humanity for common 
universal good along with the brilliancies of nature and 
nobilities of humanity among the human community. 


स at मन्द्राभिरध्वरे जिह्वाभिर्यजा महः। 
आ देवान्व॑क्चि afat an 2 u 


2. Sa no mandrabhir-adhvare jihvabhiryaja mahah. 
A devan vaksi yaksi ca. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 621 


O lord almighty, with inspiring words of 
enlightenment and bliss, consecrate our yajna, join us, 
bring up noble and brilliant divinities and with them 
make our yajnic programmes fruitful. 


वेत्था हि वेधो अध्व॑नः पथश्च देवाञ्ज॑सा। 
अगन यज्ञेषुं सुक्रतो ॥ २ ॥ 


3. Vettha hi vedho adhvanah pathasca devanjasa. 
Agne yajnesu sukrato. 


O refulgent lord of knowledge and wisdom, 
Agni, you are the prime agent of holy action in corporate 
programmes, you know the highways and byways of 
existence, and you command the brilliant powers of 
nature and humanity by your instant moving presence 
across time and space. 


warns अधं द्विता भ॑र तो वाजिभिः शुनम्‌। 
ईजे यज्ञेषुं यज्िय॑म्‌॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvamile adha dvita bharato vajibhih sunam. 
(€ yajnesu yajniyam. 
I worship you, lord both immanent and 
transcendent, with all my knowledge, power and 
potential. You are the ordainer and sustainer of life. I 
pray for your gift of peace and well-being and yearn for 
your company, adorable lord, in the yajna of corporate 
action. 
त्वमिमा वायौ पुरु दिवोदासाय सुन्वते। 
भरद्वाजाय दाशुषे ॥ ५ ॥ 

a Tvamima varya puru divodasaya sunvate. 
Bharadvajaya dasuse. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


622 RGVEDA 


You are the source giver of all these many 
cherished gifts of life for the enlightened, generous, 
creative yajaka, master of knowledge, wealth and 
honour dedicated to social service and charity. 


त्वं दूतो sed आ व॑हा दैव्यं जन॑म्‌। 
श्रुण्वन्विप्र॑स्य सुष्टुतिम्‌ it ६ ॥ 
6. Tvam duto amartya a vaha daivyam janam. 
Srnvan viprasya sustutim. 
Imperishable harbinger of light and wisdom, like 
a divine messenger, listen to the praise and prayer of 
the vibrant sage and scholar and bring up the man of 


exceptional brilliance who commands the knowledge 
of nature and Divinity. 


त्वामग्रे स्वाध्यो ३ मतसो देववीतये । यज्ञेषुं देवमींव्छते 19 11 


ds Tvamagne svadhyo martaso devavitaye. 
Yajnesu devamilate. 


Agni, leading light of the world, learned mortals 
worship and adore you, refulgent giver of abundance, 
in corporate acts of creativity and development for the 
achievement of divine gifts of success and 
enlightenment. 


तव प्र afer सन्दृरशमुत क्रतुं सुदान॑वः। 
विश्वे जुषन्त कामिनः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Tava pra yaksi samdrsamuta kratum sudanavah. 
Visve jusanta kaminah. 


All generous and charitable people inspired with 
love and desire yearn for a vision of your presence and 
holy action. O lord, let us have the vision and let us join 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 623 


all such charitable acts. 


त्वं होता मनुर्हितो वदह्धिरासा विदुष्टरः | 
अग्ने ufat दिवो fast: ९॥ 


9. Tvam hota manurhito vahnirasa vidustarah. 
Agne haksi divo visah. 


Agni, leading light of life, ruler of the world, 
you are the generous performer of the yajna of existence, 
deeply benevolent to humanity by holy words of 
wisdom. O lord, bless the loving people with the light 
and wisdom of heaven, most enlightened as you are. 


अग्र आ याहि वीतये गृणानो हव्यदातये | 
नि होतां सत्सि बर्हिषि 1 2011 
Agna a yahi vitaye grnano havyadataye. 
Ni hota satsi_barhisi. 
Come Agni, sung and celebrated, to join our 
feast of enlightenment, accept our homage to create the 


gifts of life and yajnic development, and take the 
honoured seat in the assembly. 


तं त्वां समिद्धिरद्धिरो घृतेन॑ वर्धयामसि । 
बृहच्छोचा AAT ९९ ॥ 


Tam tva samidbhirangiro ghrtena vardhayam-asi. 
Brhacchoca yavisthya. 

Angira, breath of life, light of the world, 
expansive, lustrous pure and most youthful, we honour 
and exalt you with offers of fuel and ghrta to raise the 
flames of fire to the heights. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


624 RGVEDA 


aa: पृथु श्रवाय्यमच्छा देव विवाससि | 
बृहद गरे सुवीर्यम्‌ ez 


12. Sanah prthu Sravayyamaccha deva vivasasi. 
Brhadagne suviryam. 


Agni, lord of light and lustre, mighty expansive 
power, you bless us graciously with admirable strength 
and courage worthy of universal honour and fame. 


त्वामग्रे पुष्करादध्यथर्वा निर॑मन्थत | 
मूर्ध्नो विश्व॑स्य are: ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Tvamagne puskaradadhyatharva niramanthata. 
Murdhno visvasya vaghatah. 


Agni, light of life, the wise scholar and devotee, 
Atharva, dedicated to love and non-violence, discovers 
and churns you out without violence from the highest 
sphere above the skies which supports and sustains the 
entire universe. 


तमु त्वा दध्यङ्ङ्षिः पुत्र ईशे अथंर्वणः। 
वु त्रहणं पुरन्दरम्‌ ॥ ९४ ॥ 

14. Tamu tva dadhyannrsih putra 140८ atharvanah. 
Vrtrahanam puramdaram. 


The seer divining into the meaning of Veda- 
mantra, who is the child of love and non-violence 
dedicated to scholarly teachers, lights and develops you, 
breaker of the clouds and shatterer of the strongholds 
of darkness. 


तमु त्वा पाथ्यो वृषा समीधे दस्युहन्त॑मम्‌। 
धनञ्जयं रणेरणे ॥ ९५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 625 
15. Tamu tva pathyo vrsa samidhe dasyuhantamam. 
Dhanamjayam ranerane. 


The bold and generous scholar, leading light of 
the paths of life, lights and develops you, Agni, destroyer 
of the darkness of life and winning source of life’s 
wealth in battle after battle for progress and prosperity. 
ए्यू षु ब्र्वाणि तेऽ ग्रं इत्थेतरा गिरः | 
एभिर्व॑ धसि इन्दधिः॥ १६॥ 

16.  Ehyu su bravani te’gna itthetara girah. 
Ebhirvardhasa indubhih. 


Agni, leading light and pioneer, come, listen, 
thus do I speak in honour of you, and listen further to 
higher words, and rise higher with these words sweet 
and soothing like rays of the moon and exciting as 
draughts of soma. 
यत्र क्वं च ते मनो दक्षं दधस SAL 
तत्रा सद॑: कृणवसे ॥ Vo ul 

17. Yatra kva ca te mano daksam dadhasa uttaram. 
Tatra sadah krnavase. 


O leading light, where, wherever in fact, is your 
mind, there you hold your efficiency and identity, and 
there indeed you create your haven and home. 


नहि ते पूर्तम॑श्चिपद्धुवंन्नेमानां वसो | 
अथा Tal वनवसे ॥ १८ ॥ 


18. Nahi te purtamaksipad bhuvannemanam vaso. 
Atha duvo vanavase. 


Never is the perfection, abundance and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


626 RGVEDA 


fruitfulness of your food and sustenance ever wasted 
away, instead it increases, O haven and home of life 
and creator of its sustenance. Hence accept our homage 
and reverence. 


shim भारतो वृत्रहा पुरुचेत॑नः। 
दिवोदासस्य सत्प॑तिः ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Agniragami bharato vrtraha purucetanah. 
Divodasasya satpatih. 


Agni, light of life, sustainer of existence, breaker 
of the clouds of darkness and giver of the bliss of rain, 
all enlightened and protector of generous enlightened 
souls, is attained by relentless service, yajna and practice 
of meditation by the man of universal charity. 


स हि विश्वाति पार्थिवा र॒यिं दाश॑न्महित्वना। 
वन्वन्नवातो stead: २०॥ 

20. Sa hi visvati parthiva rayim dasan-mhitvana. 
Vanvannavato astrtah. 


That Agni, light of the world, all loving, 
destroying all evil, unassailable, unshaken, bestows 
upon us all the wealth, honour and excellence of the 
world solely by his greatness and power. 
स प्र॑लरवन्नरवीयसाऽग्ने द्युम्नेन संयता | 
बृहत्ततन्थ भानुना ॥ २९॥ 

21. Sa pratnavannaviyasa’gne dyumnena samyata. 
Brhat tatantha bhanuna. 


Agni, light of life, pioneer of the world, just as 
the sun with its splendour of light reveals and illuminates 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 627 


the world more and more as ever before, so you too, as 
ever before, with latest, well controlled and onward 
moving light and wealth, honour and excellence of 
knowledge, pervade, illuminate and expand the world 
of humanity. 


प्र व॑ः सखायो अग्रये स्तोमं यज्ञं च॑ धृप्णुया | 
अर्च गाय॑ च वेधसे ।॥ २२॥ 


22. Pra vah sakhayo agnaye stomam yajnam ca 
dhrsnuya. Arca gaya ca vedhase. 


O friends, offer your songs of adoration and 
yajnic programmes of corporate action and advancement 
in dedication to Agni, leading light of humanity, with 
full strength and unshakable courage. Thus you worship 
the lord and sing songs of exaltation in honour of the 
all knowing illuminant power of divinity. 


a fe at are युगा सीदन्द्ोतां कविक्रतुः | 
दूतश्च हव्यवाहनः ॥ २३॥ 


23. Sahi yo manusa huga sidaddhota kavikratuh. 
Diutasca havyavahanah. 


May that Agni, cosmic highpriest of nature’s 
yajna, receiver of oblations and giver of the fruits of 
corporate action, visionary power of creative holiness, 
harbinger and disseminator of fragrance like a 
messenger, creator and distributor of the finest things 
of life, join us and be seated with us on the vedi for all 
ages of human history. 


ता राजाना शुचिंत्रताऽऽदित्यान्मारुतं गणम्‌। 
वसो यश्चीह रोद॑सी ।॥ २४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


628 RGVEDA 


24. Ta rajana sucivrata’’dityan marutam ganam. 
Vaso yakstha rodasi. 


Agni, leading light of the world, giver of 
peaceful and progressive settlement, bring up and 
honour in unison those refulgent powers of purity and 
self discipline of universal law, Mitra and Varuna, sun 
and moon with coolness of the oceans, love and 
friendship, brilliant divinities of nature and humanity, 
human and natural forces vibrant as winds, and the 
wealth of heaven and earth on the vedi of our corporate 
programmes of yajna. 


वस्वीं ते अग्ने सन्दृष्टिरिषयते मत्यौय। 
ऊर्जो नपादमृतस्य ॥ २५॥ 


25. Vasvi te agne samdrstir-isayate martyaya. 
Urjo napadamrtasya. 


Agni, leading light of the world, immortal source 
of universal strength, your equal vision and provision 
of earthly settlement and peace for all the mortals 
yearning for love and sustenance in life is all time sure 
and true. 


क्रत्वा दा अस्तु श्रे्ठोऽ द्य त्वां वन्वन्त्सुरेक्णा।ः | 
मर्तं आनाश सुवृक्तिम्‌ ॥ २६॥ 


26. Kratvadaastu Srestho ’dya tva vanvantsu-reknah. 
Marta anasa suvrktim. 


O lord, may the holy man of yajnic action and 
charity, generously giving, loving and offering homage 
in adoration to you, rise to eminence here and now, be 
master of noble wealth and follow the path of rectitude 
to ultimate freedom. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 629 


ते त अग्ने त्वोतां इषयन्तो विश्वमायुः | 
तर॑न्तो अर्यो अररातीर्वन्वन्तों अर्यो अरातीः 1 २७॥ 


27. Te te agne tvota isayanto visvamayuh. 
Taranto aryo aratir-vanvanto aryo aratth. 


Agni, all those devotees of yours, who enjoy 
your protection and pray for food, energy and sustenance 
for a full happy life, cross over indigence and hostility, 
wiping off the envious and the stingy hoarders away 
from their path. 


अथिस्तिग्मेनं शोचिषा arafesd न्यपै तरिर्णम्‌। 
stra? वनते रयिम्‌॥ २८ ॥ 

28.  Agnistigmena Socisa yasad visvam nyatrinam. 
Agnirno vanate rayim. 


Agni, with the flaming light of pure refulgence, 
dries up and burns off all hostility of the world and 
brings the wealth of life for us, dedicated supplicants 
and celebrants. 


सुवीरं रयिमा भ॑र जात॑वेदो विच॑र्षणे । 
जहि रक्षांसि सुक्रतो ॥ २९॥ 


29. Suviram rayima bhara jatavedo vocarsane. 
Jahi raksamsi sukrato. 


Lord omniscient, all immanent of universal 
vision, bring us the wealth of life coupled with noble 
strength and brave progeny. O lord of creative action, 
eliminate the cruel and wicked forces of negativity in 
the interest of progress. 


त्वं न॑ः Ureidat जात॑वेदो अघायतः। 
रक्षा णो ब्रह्मणस्कवे I Bo ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


630 RGVEDA 


30. Tvam nah pahyamhaso jatavado aghayatah. 
Raksa no brahmanaskave. 


Save us, O lord omnipresent 11 existence, from 
sin and evil. O lord of omniscient vision, O voice of 
divinity, give us the ultimate protection and security in 
our creative endeavours. 


at at अगे दुरेव आ मर्तो वधाय aretfer | 
तस्मान्नः पाद्यंह॑सः ॥ ३९॥ 

31. Yono agne dureva व marto vadhaya dasati. 
Tasmannah pahyanhasah. 
Agni, leading light of purity and justice, 
whatever the malignant force of negation, whatever the 
mortal power that strikes to eliminate us, give us the 
strength and protect us against that evil, to survive and 
move on. 
त्वं तं दैव जिह्वया परि बाधस्व दुप्कृतंम्‌। 
मर्तो यो नो जिघांसति 32 u 

32. Tvam tam deva jihvaya pari badhasva duskrtam. 
Marto yo no jighamsati. 


Brilliant lord of love and justice, with your 
flames of fire, the power of your word of judgement, 
prevention and punishment, stop that person alongwith 
the evil deed that intends or is intended to hurt us and 
to destroy us. 


भरद्वाजाय सप्रथः शर्म यच्छ सहन्त्य | 
अग्ने वरेण्यं वसुं ॥ ३२३ ॥ 


33. Bharadvajaya saprathah Sarma yaccha sahantya. 
Agne varenyam vasu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 631 


Agni, lord of power and forbearance, give a 
spacious and comfortable home and security to the 
person who commands knowledge and means of service 
and sustenance for the society. 


अभ्िर्ृत्राणिं जङ्घनद्‌ द्रविणस्युर्वि'पन्यर्या | 
समिंब्दः शुक्र आह॑तः ॥ ३२ ॥ 


34.  Agnirvrtrani janghanad dravinasyurvipanyaya. 
Samiddhah sukra ahutah. 


Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, bright, 
pure and purifying, invoked, invited and lighted in the 
seat of yajna, keen on wealth, honour and excellence 
with self-approbation and public exaltation, should 
destroy the evils and endeavour to raise the power and 
prosperity of the human nation. 


गर्भे मातुः पितुष्पिता विदिद्युतानो ster | 
सीदन्नृतस्य योनिमा ॥ ३५॥ 


35. Garbhe matuh pituspita vididyutano aksare. 
Sidannrtasya yonima. 


Agni, life of life and light of the universe, 
present in the interior of mother earth, sustainer of the 
sun, father of earth and her children, shining in his own 
eternal self, in the individual soul and in the world of 
imperishable Prakrti, the spirit of the universe, pervades 
and inspires the ruling laws of eternal truth and the world 
of existence. 


ब्रह्य प्रजावदा भ॑र॒ जात॑वेदो विचर्षणे | 
अग्ने यदीदयंदिवि।॥ ३६ ॥ 


36. Brahma prajavada bhara jatavedo vicarsane. 
Agne yad didayad divi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


632 RGVEDA 


Agni, lord all knowing, all watching, who shine 
in the light of the sun, bless us with the food of life that 
sustains the children of the earth. 


उप त्वा रण्वसंन्दृशं प्रय॑स्वन्तः सहस्कृत | 
अग्न ससूज्महे गिर: ॥ ३७ ॥ 


37. Upatvaranvasamdrsam prayasvantah sahaskrta. 
Agne sasrjmahe girah. 


Agni, blazing light of life, lord of bliss and 
beatific vision, source giver of the power of action and 
forbearance, blest with the food of life and light of the 
spirit, we sing songs of adoration and send up our words 
of gratitude to you. 


उप॑ च्छायामिव घृणोरग॑न्म शर्म' ते वयम्‌। 
अग्ने हिर॑ण्यसंदृशः ॥ २८ ॥ 

38. Upacchayamiva ghrneraganma sarma te vayam. 
Agne hirnyasamdrsah. 


Agni, lord of bliss and eternal protection, just 
as a person runs to the shade for relief from the blazing 
sun, SO may we, shining as pure gold, rise and come to 
your presence, the blissful shade of divinity, our ultimate 
haven and home. 


य saga शर्यहा farast st न वंसंगः। 
अग्ने पुरों रुरोजिथ i ३९॥ 


39. Ya ugra iva saryaha tigmasrngo na vamsagah. 
Agne puro rurocitha. 


Agni, lord protector of life, destroyer of killer 
arrows like a fierce warrior, burning off negativities like 
the fierce rays of the sun, you destroy the strongholds 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 633 
of the enemies of life. 
आ यं हस्ते न खादिनं शिशुं जातं न fafa 
fasta स्वध्वरम्‌ ॥ wo ॥ 
40. Ayam haste na khadinam sisum jatam na bibhrati. 
Visamagnim svadhvaram. 


Like the darling new born baby held in the hand, 
like a beautiful bracelet worn on the wrist, the yajakas 
place the fire in the vedi, light and raise it, since it is the 
blessed source giver of wealth and joy for the people. 


प्र देवं देववीतये भर॑ता वसुवित्तमम्‌ । 
आ स्वे योनौ नि षीदतु॥ we 


41. Pra devam devavitaye bharata vasuvittamam. 
A sve yonau ni sidatu. 


Place, light and raise the brilliant and generous 
fire in your home for favour of the bounties of nature 
and humanity since it is the immense source giver of 
wealth, honour and excellence. Let the holy fire be 
instituted and maintained so that you abide in peace 
and joy. 
आ जातं जातवेदसि प्रियं शिंशीतातिंधिम्‌। 
स्योन आ गृहपतिम्‌ we 

42. A jatar jatavedasi priyam SaSitatithim. 
Syona व grhapatim. 

Sharpen and constantly intensify the light of 
universal Agni, spirit of life, manifested in the all 
immanent fire of yajna, like a dear guest worthy of 


reverence in the delightful home, the spirit which is 
protector, promoter and really the head of family. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


634 RGVEDA 


a युक्ष्वा हि ये तवाऽश्वांसो देव साधवः | 
अरं वहन्ति मन्यवे ॥ ४३ ॥ 


43. Agne yuksva hi ye tava’svaso deva sadhavah. 
Aram vahanti manyave. 


Agni, leading light of knowledge and power, 
generous creator and giver, yoke those motive powers 
of yours to the chariot which are best and fastest and 
which transport you to the destination of your love and 
passion gracefully without fail. 


अच्छा नो aren व॑हाऽभि प्रयांसि वीतयें। 
आ देवान्त्सोम॑पीतये ॥ ४४ ॥ 


44. = 4८/1८ no yahya vaha’bhi prayamsi vitaye. 
A devantsomapitaye. 


Agni, leading light of knowledge, generous 
pioneer, come fast in all your glory, bring us the dearest 
powers for sustenance and advancement for the sake of 
peace and well-being, and bring the noble brilliancies 
along to celebrate success with the delight of soma. 


Sah भारत द्युमदज॑सत्रेण दविद्युतत्‌। 
शोचा वि भाह्यजर ।। ४५५ ॥ 


45. Udagne bharata dyumad-ajasrena davidyutat. 
Soca vi bhahyajara. 

Agni, unaging sustainer of life, shining with the 
light of excellence and blazing with glory, rise up with 
flames of fire and shine on with inexhaustible splendour, 
and help the shining people too to rise in the light of 
knowledge and excellence of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 635 


वीती यो देवं मर्तो दुवस्येदथििमीव्टीताध्वरे हविष्ान्‌। 
होतारं सत्ययजं रोद॑स्योरुत्तानह॑स्तो नमसा विंवासेत्‌॥। ४६ ॥ 


46. 77 yo devam marto duvasyedagnimilitadhvare 
havisman. Hotaram satyayajam rodasyoru- 
ttanahasto vivaset. 


The mortal, who, bearing holy materials of yajna 
with love and reverence, serves and worships Agni, 
generous and brilliant yajaka of the universe abiding 
and operative in the unity of cosmic law and universal 
truth, and who prays to the lord with folded hands raised 
in surrender and supplication, would shine over earth 
and heaven with divine favour and joy. 


आ त अग्र ऋचा हविर्हदा तष्टं भ॑रामसि। 
ते ते भवन्तूक्षण ऋषभासो! वशा उत ॥ vol 


47. A te agna rca havir-hrda tastam bharamasi. 
Te te bhavantuksana rsabhaso vasa uta. 


Agni, O lord of light, omniscience and 
omnipotence, thus do we bear and offer the homage of 
surrender and self-sacrifice to you, prepared with love 
of the heart and sanctified with holy chant of Rgveda, 
and we pray may all our people be for you, virile and 
generous, inspired with love and brilliance of 
excellence. 


अगिं देवासो अग्रिययिन्धते वृत्रहन्त॑मम्‌। 
येना वसून्याभ्रुता qaet रक्षांसि वालिना ॥ ४८ ॥ 


48. Agnim devaso agriyam-indhate vrtrahantamam. 
Yena vasunyabhrta trlha raksamsi vajina. 


Thus do brilliant sages light the holy fire and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


636 RGVEDA 


worship Agni, leading light and pioneer, lord of action, 
foremost leader, highest breaker of the densest clouds 
and harbinger of the showers of generosity, who bears 
and brings for us the wealth and honours of the world 
and who, with his omnipotence, destroys the wicked 
hostilities of humanity. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 17 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


पिबा सोम॑मभि ada ad ऊर्व गव्यं महिं गणान इन्द्र वि 
यो धृष्णो वधिषो व्रहस्त विश्वा वृत्रम॑सित्रिया 
शवोभिः।॥ ९॥ 


1. Piba somamabhi yamugra tarda urvam gavyam 
mahi grnana indra. Vi yo dhrsno vadhiso 
vajrahasta visva vrtram-amitriya Savobhih. 


Indra, mighty invincible lord of the force of 
cosmic energy, wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, drink 
and celebrate with soma while you are sung and 
celebrated since you break the cloud of showers as the 
sun, release the vast and great wealth of cows, milk and 
ghrta, and with your powers and action destroy all 
unfriendly and antilife forces of the world. 


स ई' पाहि य ऋजीषी तरुत्रो यः शिप्र॑वान्वृषभो यो 
म॑तीनाम्‌। यो गोत्रभिद्व॑ज्रभृद्यो हरिष्ठाः स इन्द्र feat अभि 
dat वाजान्‌ २॥ 


2. Saim pahi ya rjisi tarutro yah sipravan vrsabho 
yo matinam. Yo gotrabhid vajrabhrd yo haristhah 
sa indra citran abhi trndhi vajan. 


The one that is simple and natural in conduct, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 17 637 


saviour across the seas, splendid and self-protected, 
mightiest among people, breaker of clouds and hostile 
strongholds, wielder of the thunderbolt and strongest 
winner, such is Indra, and such, O lord, defend, protect 
and promote what is won, release the wonderful energies 
and overcome the on-slaughts of hostile forces. 


एवा पाहि प्रलथा मन्द॑तु त्वा श्रुधि reat वावृधस्वोत गीर्भिः | 
आविः सूर्यं कृणुहि पीपिहीषो जहि wretch गा इन्द्र 
तुन्धि॥ ३॥ 


Eva pahi pratnatha mandatu tva srudhi brahma 
vavrdhasvota girbhih. Avih suryam krnuhi 
pipihiso jahi satrunrabhi ga indra trndhi. 


Thus protect and promote life and humanity as 
ever before, and let the adventure give you the pride of 
pleasure. Listen to the Veda, protect the Word of 
knowledge, and be exalted by our songs of celebration. 
Uncover the light of the sun, enjoy food and drink, 
destroy the hostilities, release the speech of humanity 
to freedom, and unshackle the lands from bondage into 
liberty. 


ते त्वा मदां बृहदिन्द्र स्वधाव इमे पीता उक्षयन्त aKa | 
महामनूनं तवसं fast मत्सरासो जर्हषन्त Warde ४ ॥ 
4. Te tva mada brhadindra_ svadhava ime pita 


uksayanta dyumantam. Mahamanunam tavasam 
vibhutim-matsuraso jarhrsanta prasaham. 


Indra, self-refulgent lord of your own essential 
power and grandeur, exalted ruler, may these drinks of 
soma thus enjoyed shower you with the joy and ecstasy 
of victory. So do the people moved with the excitement 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


638 RGVEDA 


of self-confidence and divine exaltation celebrate you, 
great, perfect, potent, magnificent, and victorious yet 
forbearing lord of power as you are. 


af: सूर्यमुषसं a-caritsateatsd gaat द्र त्‌। 
Heras परि गा इन्द्र सन्तं नुत्था अच्युतं सद॑सस्परि 
स्वात्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5. Yebhih suryam-usasam mandasano’vasayo’ pa 
drlhani dardrat. Mahamadrim pari ga indra 
santam nuttha acyutam sadasaspari svat. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, by the powers and 
forces with which you place the sun in orbit and rouse 
the dawn on course, and vest them both in light and 
splendour, and with which you break the strongest 
mountain asunder, by the same power and force, O lord 
of love and bliss, from your own assembly seat, inspire 
and strengthen the great inexhaustible human energy, 
generous as cloud of showers, across the earth to rise 
and shine. 


तव क्रत्वा तव तद॑सनाभिरामासु पक्वं शच्या नि der: 1 
ओणोर्दुरं उस्रियाभ्यो वि दृक्होदूर्वाद्रा stasit अद्धिर- 
स्वान्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tava kratva tava tad damsanabhir-amasu pakvam 
sacya ni didhah. Aurnordura usriyabyo vi drlho- 
durvad ga asrjo angirasvan. 


With your wisdom, holy deeds and divine power, 
you develop ripeness in the unripe and maturity in the 
immature minds and open the strong doors and fill them 
with light for the bright people. Thus does the lord of 
life and breath energy of freedom liberate the lands and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 17 639 
their speech from the violence of tyrants. 


पप्राथ क्षां महि दंसो व्यु Lah द्यामृष्वो बृहदिन्द्र TANT: | 
अर्धारयो रोद॑सी देवपुत्रे wet मातरा यह्वी ऋतस्य ।। ७ ॥ 


a. Papratha ksam mahi damso vyurvimupa 
dyamrsvo brhadindra stabhayah. Adharayo 
rodasi devaputre pratne matara yahvi rtasya. 


Indra, almighty lord of glorious action and 
potential, you create, pervade and sustain the wide earth 
and heaven and you sustain, support and order the 
compact earth, heaven and the expansive universe, and 
you sustain the compact earth, firmament and the solar 
sphere, ancient, great and generous mothers of the 
children of divinity and themselves the children of 
mother Prakrti and the divine law of nature. 


अधं त्वा विश्वे पुर इन्द्र देवा Uh तवसं दधिरे भराय । 
अदेवो यदभ्यौहिष्ट देवान्त्स्व॑षतिा वृणत इन्द्रमत्र ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Adha tva visve pura indra deva ekam tavasam 
dadhire bharaya. Adevo yadabhyauhista deva- 
ntsvarsata vrnata indramatra. 


Indra, lord almighty of bliss and enlightenment, 
all the noble powers of nature and humanity hold on to 
you, lord absolute and omnipotent, for success in their 
life’s endeavours. And when anyone bereft of light 
engages in contest against the enlightened, then the 
enlightened people maintain their faith in the heavenly 
power and win the battle for light and bliss here itself. 


अध द्यौश्चित्ते अप सा नु aute द्वितान॑मद्धियसा स्वस्यं 
मन्योः । अहिं यदिन्द्रो अभ्योह॑सानं नि चिद्धिश्वायुः great 
Wat ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


640 RGVEDA 


9. Adha dyauscit te apa sa nu vajrad dvitanamad 
bhiyasa svasya manyoh. Ahim yadindro 
abhyohasanam ni cid visvayuh Sayathe jaghana. 


And then even the light of heaven doubly bows 
to you, first in awe of the thunderbolt and then also in 
awe of your majesty of divine passion, when Indra, 
cosmic energy, strikes the approaching dark cloud and 
lays it down in showers and sends it to sleep. 


अध ast ते मह उग्र वज्रं Gees ववृतच्छताभ्चिम्‌। 
निकाममरमणसं येन नवन्तमहिं सं पिणगृजीषिन्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Adha tvasta te maha ugra vajram sahasra-bhrstim 
vavrtacchatasrim. Nikamamarama-nasam yena 
navantam-ahim sam pinagrjisin. 


O lord of blazing glory, simple, natural and 
forceful, Tvashta, the cosmic maker of forms, shaped 
in nature the mighty hundred-angled thousand pointed 
thunderbolt of your cherished design for relentless 
strikes by which you break the roaring cloud of darkness 
for showers of rain in the cycle of seasons. 


वर्धान्यं विश्वे मरुत॑ः सजोषाः पच॑च्छतं म॑हिषाों इन्द्र तुभ्य॑म्‌ । 
पूषा विष्णुस्त्रीणि सरांसि धावन्वृत्रहणं मदिरमंशु- 
म॑स्मै॥९९॥ 


11. Ardhan yam 177517८ marutah sajosah paca- 
cchatam mahisam indra tubhyam. Pusa 
visnustrini saramsi dhavan vrtrahanam madiram- 
amsum-asmai. 

Indra, O potent spirit of the cosmos, let all 
vibrant creative and constructive forces of nature and 
humanity join in unison and exalt you, ruler of the world, 
ripening and maturing a hundred mighty gifts of vitality 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 17 641 


in your service. May Vishnu, omnipresent sustaining 
power of universal nourishment, ever active on the 
move, fill the three oceans of earth, heaven and the 
middle regions with life giving nectar of bliss and 
excitement for this Indra to break down the cloud of 
darkness, evil and want. 


आ क्षोदो महिं वृतं नदीनां परिष्ठितमसृज ऊर्मिमपाम्‌। 
तासामनु प्रवतं इन्द्र पन्थां Ure यो नीचीर पस॑ः समुद्रम्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. A ksodo mahi vrtam nadinam paristhitamasrja 
urmimapam. Tasamanu pravata indra pantham 
prardayo nictrapasah samudram. 


Indra, ruling power of the world, creates the 
great flood of the rivers collected and controlled all 
round and releases the waves of the waters to flow. 
Accordingly he prepares the paths of water movement 
downward and lets the waters join the sea (thereby 
completing the natural cycle of water energy across the 
three oceans). 


एवा ता विषूवां चकृवांसमिन्द्रं महामुग्रम॑जुर्य संहोदाम्‌। 
सुवीरं त्वा स्वायुधं सुवज्जमा ब्रह्म नव्यमवसे ववृत्यात्‌ BB ॥ 


3. Eva ta visva cakrvamsam-indram mahamugram- 
ajuryam sahodam. Suviram tva svayudham 
suvajrama brahma navyam-avase vavrtydt. 


Thus may our new homage of praise, prayer and 
yajnic service reach Indra, omnipotent lord of the 
universe, absolute doer of all actions, mighty, refulgent, 
unaging and imperishable, giver of strength and 
forbearance, commander of heroes, all armed and 
wielder of the thunderbolt of nature’s cyclic energy, and 
may our prayer move the lord for our protection and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


642 RGVEDA 
progress. 


सनो वाजाय श्रव॑स इषे च॑ राये धेहि द्युमतं इन्द्र विप्रान्‌ । 
भरद्वाजे Jad इन्द्र सूरीन्दिवि च॑ स्मैधि पार्ये न इन्द्र ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Sano vajaya sravasa ise ca raye dhehi dyumata 
indra vipran. Bharadvaje nrvata indra surin 
divi ca smaidhi parye na indra. 


May Indra, lord ruler of the universe, accept us, 
vibrant seekers of light, for the gift of speed and progress 
toward victory, honour and excellence, food and energy, 
and all round wealth of life. May Indra bless the brave 
leaders of humanity, and may the lord establish us all in 
the light of divinity and guide us on the path of total 
worldly fulfilment and freedom of ultimate salvation. 


अया वाजं देवहितं सनेम मदेम शातहिंमाः सुवीराः ॥ 2G 
15. Aya vajam devahitam sanema madema satahimah 
suvirah. 


Thus do we offer ardent praise and seek to share 
divine favour and inspiration fit for dedicated humanity 
and pray we may live happy a full hundred years blest 
with noble and heroic generations of progeny. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 18 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
तमु, ष्टुहि यो अभिभूत्योजा वन्वन्नर्वातः पुरुहूत इन्द्रः | 
अषाठ्हमुग्रं सह॑मानमाभिरगी भिर्वर्धं वृषभं चर्षणीनाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ly Tamu stuhi yo abhibhityoja vanvannavatah 
puruhuta indrah. Asalhamugram sahamanam- 
abhirgirbhir-vardha vrsabham carsaninam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 18 643 


Adore him who tames and controls brute force, 
loves and shares life with all, unshaken and all admired, 
that is Indra, potent ruler of the world, intrepidable, 
blazing refulgent, challenging yet forbearing, most 
generous and creative of people. With these words of 
celebration, exalt him, and you too would rise. 


स युध्मः सत्वा खजकृत्समद्वा dawant नदनुमाँ ऋजीषी । 
बृहद्रैणुश्च्यवनो मानुषीणामेकः कृष्टीनाम॑भवत्स॒हावां ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Sa yudhmah satva khajakrt samadva tuvimrakso 
nadanuman 1747. Brhadrenus-cyavano manusi- 
namekah krstinam-abhavat sahava. 


Indra is a hero, strong and realistic, a warrior, 
socially committed, all loving and friendly, eloquent, 
simple, natural and honest, dynamic, stormy in 
movement, and a unique embodiment of courage and 
tolerance among the best of thinking humanity. 


त्वं ह नु त्यद॑दमायो दस्यूँरिकः कृष्टीर॑वनोरायौय । अस्ति 
स्विन्न वीर्य तत्त इन्द्र न स्विदस्ति तदुंतुथा वि वोचः ॥ ३॥ 


a Tvam ha nu tyadadamayo dasyunrekah krstfira- 
vanoraryaya. Asti svinnu viryam tat ta indra na 
svidasti tadrtutha vi vocah. 


Indra, you for sure are the one who fight out 
and control the wicked and violent elements and bring 
the world communities together for a united world of 
progressive and cultured humanity. That indeed is your 
strength, real heroism, is it not? Pray speak of that 
courage, competence and vision according to the needs 
of time and season. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


644 RGVEDA 


सदिद्धि ते तुविजातस्य मन्ये Te: Ges तुर तस्तुरस्यं | 
उग्रमुग्रस्य॑ तवसस्तवीयोऽ रध्रस्य Taq बभूव ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sadiddhi te tuvijatasya manye sahah sahistha 
turatasturasya. Ugramugrasya tavasastavi- 
yo’radhrasya radhraturo babhuva. 


Real and true indeed is the courage and tolerance 
of the world hero, yours all, I believe, O boldest and 
most forbearing warrior, which defines the light, power 
and victory of the ruler who is the instant victor over 
the victorious, blazing over the violent, stronger than 
the strongest and most powerful non-violent destroyer 
of the destructive. 


wa: Wet सख्यमस्तु युष्मे इत्था वद द्धिर्वलमद्धिरोभिः। 
हन्न॑च्युतच्युदस्मेषयंन्तमृणोः पुरो वि दुरो अस्य विश्वाः ॥ ५॥ 


a: Tannah pratnam sakhyamastu yusme ittha 
vadadbhir-valamangirobhih. Hannacyutacyud 
dasmesayantamrnoh puro vi duro asya visvah. 


That age-old friendship of ours with you may, 
we pray, be firmly established in you and remain thus 
with the vibrant celebrants too who speak this same way 
in praise of you, and just as the sun breaks the cloud 
and opens the flood gates of rain showers, so may you, 
O lord imperishable and generous, shaker of the 
otherwise unshaken, destroy the darkness of evil, inspire 
and advance the dynamic leaders, and open all the gates 
of the human cities on the world highways. 


स हि धीभिर्हव्यो अस्त्युग्र ईशशानकृन्म॑हति वृं त्तर्ये a 
तोकसाता तन॑ये स वज्री वितन्तसाय्यो अभवत्समत्सु ।। ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 18 645 


6. Sa hi dhibhir-havyo astyugra isanakrn-mahati 
vrtraturye. Sa tokasata tanaye sa vajri vitanta- 
sayyo abhavat samatsu. 


That is the lord worthy of homage with all our 
intelligence and holy actions, refulgent maker of leaders 
and achievers in the great human struggle against evil 
and deprivation. That wielder of adamantine power is 
to be exalted and glorified in the battles of humanity 
for the advancement and progress of our children and 
grand children for future generations. 


स मज्पना ae मानुंषाणामम्त्येन नाप्नाति wae 
स द्युम्नेन स शवसोत राया स वीर्येण नृत॑मः समोकाः ॥ ७॥ 


7. Sa majmana janima manusanam-amatryena 
namnati pra sarsre.Sa dyumnena sa Savasota raya 
sa viryena nrtamah samokah. 


With immortal power he continues and extends 
the name and identity of humanity and, as highest leader 
of supreme human virtues and all pervasive with human 
presence, he advances the human generations with 
honour and excellence, courage and valour, wealth and 
fame, and manly vigour and splendour. 


सयो न aes मिथू जनो भूत्सुमन्तुनामा चुमुरिं aia 
quifaad शम्ब॑रं शुष्णमिन्द्रः पुरां च्यौलायं शयथाय नू 
चिंत्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Sa yo na muhe na mithu jano bhut suman-tunama 
cumurim dhunim ca. Vrnak piprum sambaram 
Susnamindrah puram cyautnaya Sayathaya nu cit. 

The man who never suffers from error, never 
feels bewildered, stupefied, infatuated or perverted but 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


646 RGVEDA 


remains self-possessed, conscious of his essential 
identity and constancy of character, who shakes the ogre, 
the hoarder, the vociferous bully and the exploiter, and 
favours the generous, peace loving and enlightened 
persons, is Indra, worthy to be the ruler for the peace 
and progress of the common-wealth of nations for sure. 


उदावता त्वक्ष॑सा पन्य॑सा च वृत्रहत्याय रथ॑मिन्द्र fas 
धिष्व वचं हस्त आ दक्षिणत्राऽभि प्र म॑न्द पुरुदत्र 
मायाः॥ ९॥ 


9. Udavata tvaksasa panyasa ca vrtrahatyaya 
ratham-indra tistha. Dhisva vajram hasta a 
daksinatra’bhi pra manda purudatra mayah. 


And by raising and refining the admirable power 
of action, O lord ruler and sovereign, ascend your chariot 
for the battle of life against darkness and deprivation. 
Take up the thunderous weapon of power and force in 
the right hand, generous lord, shine in all your majesty 
and glory of action and destroy the force and wiles of 
the enemy. 


sthrt शुष्कं वन॑मिन्द्र हेती tart नि धक्ष्यशनिर्न भीमा । 
गम्भीरय ऋष्वया यो रुरोजा्वानयदुरिता दम्भय॑च्य ॥ Qo ॥ 


10. Agnirna Suskam vanamindra heti rakso ni 
dhaksyasanirna bhima. gambhiraya rsvaya yo 
rujojadhvanayad durita dambhayacca. 


Just as fire burns down dry forest woods to ash, 
so Indra, O lord ruler awful as thunder, shatter the forces 
of terror and destruction, you who, with a mighty blow 
of the weapon of justice and punishment, crush the evils 
of fear, deceit and terror. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 18 647 


आ सहस्रं पथिभिरिन्द्र राया तुविद्युम्न तुविवाजेंभिर र्वाक्‌ | 
याहि सनो सहसो यस्य नू चिददेव ईशे पुरुहूत योतोः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. 4 sahasram pathibhirindra raya tuvidyumna 
tuvivajebhirarvak. Yahi suno sahaso yasya nu 
cidadeva tse puruhuta yotoh. 


Indra, ruler of the world, lord of abundant 
wealth, power, honour and excellence, child of 
omnipotence, universally invoked and adored, who join 
and reshape the uniform and various powers of nature 
and humanity, come here to a thousand devotees by a 
thousand ways with wealth of a thousand forms of food, 
energy and advancement, lord whose favour and 
friendship even the semipious desire to have. 


प्र तुविद्युम्नस्य स्थविरस्य घृष्वेर्दिवो eet महिमा 
पृंथिव्याः। नास्य erat प्र॑तिमानंमस्ति न प्रतिष्ठिः 
पुरुमायस्य सद्यो: ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Pra tuvidyumnasya sthavirasya ghrsverdivo 
rarapse mahima prthivyah. Nasya satrurna 
pratimanamasti na pratisthih purumayasya 
sahyoh. 

The greatness and glory of this lord of 
abundance, most ancient and venerable, self-refulgent 
tamer of evil, transcends the bounds of the earth. There 
is no enemy, no equal measure or rival, nor any defined 
seat of stability of this self-sufficient, omnipotent and 
forbearing lord. 


प्र तत्त अद्या कर॑णं कृतं भूत्कुत्सं यदायुम॑तिथिग्वमंस्मै | 
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिशा अभि श्षामुत्तू्व'याणं धृषता 
निनेथ ।॥ ९३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


648 RGVEDA 


13. Pra tat te adya karanam krtam bhit kutsam 


abhi ksamut turvayanam dhrsata ninetha. 


Surely great are your acts, activities and ways 
of earthly accomplishment today, as you bring a 
thousand gifts of wealth, knowledge and competence 
to this mighty, vibrating and hospitable humanity and 
raise the earth to the heights of speed and progress. 


अनु aes अधं देव देवा मदन्विश्वे, कवितमं कवीनाम्‌ | 
करो यत्र वरिवो बाधिताय दिवे जनाय तन्वे गृणानः ॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Anu tvahighne adha deva deva madan 1751८ 
kavitamam kavinam. Karo yatra varivo badhitaya 
dive janaya tanve grnanah. 


Refulgent lord, brilliant sages of the world 
rejoice in unison with you in honour as the dispeller of 
demonic darkness and adore you as wisest of divine 
visionaries since, adored and exalted by them, you bring 
gifts of freedom and deliverance for the distressed as 
well as for the brilliant and give them health and material 
well being. 


अनु द्यावापृथिवी तत्त ओजोऽ deat जिहत इन्द्र देवाः। 
कृष्वा Hat अकतं यत्ते अस्त्युक्थं नवीयो जनयस्व 
यज्ञैः ॥ १५ ॥ 

15. Anu dyavaprthivi tat ta ojo’martya jihata indra 
devah. Krsva krtno akrtam yat te astyuktham 
naviyo janayasva yajnaih. 

Indra, lord omnipotent, heaven and earth and 


the immortals and brilliants of nature and humanity 
move in observance of that support and splendour of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 19 649 


yours. O lord of action, inspire us to accomplish what 
is yet to be accomplished and to create the latest songs 
of adoration by yajnas and yajnic acts of social 
development for all. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 19 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


माँ इन्द्रो नृवदा च॑र्षणिप्रा उत द्विबही अमिनः सहोभिः। 
अस्मद्रय॑ग्वावृधे वीयीयोरूः पृथुः Gard: कर्तृभिर्भूत्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


0 Mahan indro vrvada carsnipra uta dvibarha 
aminah sahobhih. Asmadyrag-vavrdhe viryayo- 
ruh prthuh sukrtah kartrbhir-bhut. 


May the great Indra, the sun, overseeing and 
commanding cosmic energy inspiring humanity, 
pervasive and expansive over heaven and earth, 
impetuous but unafflictive, come to us with auxiliary 
forces and grow vast and high, helping noble work by 
the assistance of active and expert workers. 


इन्द्रमेव धिषणा सातये धाद्‌ बृहन्तमृष्वमजरं युवानम्‌ । 
अषाक्छहेन शव॑सा शूशुवांसं सद्यश्चिद्यो वावृधे असामि ॥ २॥ 


2. Indrameva dhisana sataye dhad brhantam- 
rsvamajaram yuvanam. Asalhena Savasa 
susuvamsam sadyascid yo vavrdhe asami. 


Whoever with relentless action and intelligence 
and unchallengeable power and courage, for the sake 
of development and progress, dedicates himself to Indra, 
sun and cosmic energy, vast and high, pervasive, 
impetuous, indestructible, ever fresh and youthful, and 
forceful, soon for sure grows to power and prosperity 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


650 RGVEDA 


to the full. 


पृथू करस्त्रा agen गभ॑स्ती अस्मनऋ्य १ क्सं मिमीहि श्रवांसि। 
यूथेव पश्वः पशुपा दमूना अस्माँ इन्द्राभ्या AKASH ॥ ३ ॥ 


Prthu karasna bahula gabhasti asmadyrak sam 
mimihi Srvamsi. Yutheva pasvah pasupa damuna 
asman indrabhya vavrtsvajau. 


Indra,, lord of power and peaceful controller, 
extend your open, generous and sanctifying hand of 
plentiful abundance to us for the gift of food and energy, 
power and fame, and guide us constantly in our battle 
of life for victory like a shepherd watching, controlling 
and guiding his flock. 


तं व इन्द्रं चतिन॑मस्य शाकैरिह नूनं वाजयन्तो हुवेम | 
यर्थां चित्पूर्वे' जरितारं आसुरनेद्या अनवद्या अरिं्टाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tam va indram catinamasya sakairiha nunam 
vajayanto huvema. Yatha cit purve jaritara asu- 
ranedya anavadya aristah. 


O children of the earth, for the sake of you all 
here in the world, we invoke, invite and adore that lord 
Indra, fearless giver of joy, with all his power and forces, 
in pursuit of knowledge, peace and progress, just as the 
sagely celebrants of all time do and live blameless, 
irreproachable, and safe and secure against fear and 
injury. 


धृतव्र॑तो धनदाः सोमंवृद्दधः स हि वामस्य वसुनः पुरुक्षुः | 
सं ज॑म्मिरे पथ्या रायो! अस्मिन्त्समुद्रे न सिन्धवो 
याद॑मानाः ।॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 19 651 


a. Dhrtavrato dhanadah somavrddhah sa hi 
vamasya vasunah puruksuh. Sam jagmire pathya 
rayo asmint-samudre na sindhavo yadamanah. 


Indra is the lord ordainer and observer of 
unshakable discipline of law and order, giver of wealth, 
exalted in honour and excellence, and abundant treasure- 
hold of cherished riches of the world. Indeed all wealth, 
powers and honours of the world move, each in its own 
right course, and concentrate in him just as the rivers 
flow and all together join and concentrate in the sea. 


शविष्ठं न आ भ॑र शूर शव ओजिष्ठमोजो अभिभूत उग्रम्‌। 
विश्वां द्युम्ना वृष्ण्या मानुंषाणामस्मभ्यं दा हरिवो माद- 
seat ६॥ 


6. Savistham na @ bhara sira ईवत ojisthamojo 
abhibhuta ugram. Visva dyumna-vrsnya manu- 
sanam-asmabhyam da harivo madayadhyai. 


Heroic Indra, destroyer of the evil, leader of the 
brave and tempestuous forces of humanity, bring us the 
strongest power and valour, most burning and blazing 
lustre and dignity, and give us showers of all the wealth 
and honours of the world good for the people for their 
joy and celebration. 


यस्ते मद॑ः पृतनाषाव्छमृश्च इन्द्र तं न आ भ॑र शूशुवांसम्‌ । 
येन॑ तोकस्य तन॑यस्य सातौ मंसीमहि जिगीवां सस्त्वोताः ॥ ७ ॥ 


a Yaste madah prtanasdlamrdhra indra tam na a 
bhara susuvamsam. Yena tokasya tanayasya satau 
mamsimahi jigivamsas-tvotah. 

Indra, invincible hero, ruler of life, bless us with 
that righteous passion of yours, challenging and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


652 RGVEDA 


victorious yet forbearing and unhurtful, which inspires 
all good virtues and by which, under your protection, 
we may triumph in life and live happy in the company 
of our children and grand children. 


आ नो भर वृष॑णं शुष्म॑मिन्द्र धनस्पृतं शूशुवांसं सुदश्च॑म्‌। 
येन वंसाम पृत॑नासु शत्रून्तवोतिभिरुत जा्मीरजामीन्‌ ॥। ८ ॥ 


8. A no bhara vrsanam susmamindra dhanasprtam 
susuvamsam sudaksam. Yena vamsama prtanasu 
Satrun tavotibhiruta jaminrajamin. 


Indra, lord of life and ruler of the world, bless 
us with that overwhelming vigour and power victorious 
in our struggles for wealth and prosperity ever rising in 
excellence, expertise and generosity by which, under 
your guidance and protection, we may be successful in 
our battles of life against negative forces and win over 
our own people and others unrelated, strangers and 
aliens. 


आ ते शुष्मो! वृषभ Ud पश्चादोत्तराद॑धरादा TEA | 
आ विश्वतो अभि समेत्वर्वांडिन््र दयुम्नं tad oar ॥ ९ ॥ 


रः A te Susmo vrsabha etu pascadottaradharada 
purastat. A visvato abhi sametvarvanindra dyu- 
mnam svarvaddhehyasme. 


Indra, ruler of the world, may overwhelming and 
generous vigour, force and power come and flow for 
you all round from above and below, front and behind, 
all ways and every way constantly without break, and 
may it come to us from all sides. O lord of peace, 
prosperity and happiness, hold, protect and promote the 
wealth, honour and excellence of life for us and bless 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 19 653 
us with the grace of holy living on earth. 


नृवत्त इन्द्र नृत॑माभिरूती वं्ीमहिं वामं श्रोम॑तेभिः | gat 
हि वस्व॑ डभय॑स्य राजन्धा ta महिं स्थूरं बृहन्त॑म्‌॥ Yo tl 


10. Nrvat ta indra nrtamabhiruti vamsimahi vamam 
sromatebhih. $€ hi vasva ubhayasya rajan 
dha ratnam mahi sthuram brhantam. 


Lord of humanity, leader of world pioneers, 
illustrious ruling power, refulgent Indra, we pray may 
we share and enjoy your most human favour and 
protection and have the cherished graces of life with 
revelations of the Word and actions of holiness. O 
refulgent lord, I see your divine glory of both heaven 
and earth prevailing among rulers and the people, and 
pray sustain this glory of life, great, constant, expansive 
and infinite. 

मरुत्व॑न्तं वृषभं वावृधानमकवारिं दिव्यं शासमिन्द्रम्‌ । 
विश्वासाहमवसे नूत॑नायोग्रं संहोदापिह तं हुवेम ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Marutvantam vrsabham vavrdhanamakavarim 
divyam sasamindram. Visvasahamavase nutana- 
yogram sahodamiha tam huvema. 


Here on the vedi of this dear green earth, for the 
protection of life and the environment and for progress 
of the latest order, we invoke, invite and celebrate Indra, 
lord of glory, commanding humanity and the winds, 
generously valorous, ever rising, free from detractors, 
divinely refulgent, all ruling, all forbearing and 
victorious, illustrious giver of both tolerance and 
fighting power over evil for victory of the good for 
constant growth. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


654 RGVEDA 


जनं वचिन्मदहिं चिन्मन्य॑मानमेभ्यो नृभ्यो रन्धया येष्वस्मि|। 
अधा हित्वा पृथिव्यां शूरसातौ हवामहे तन॑ये गोष्वप्सु ।॥ १२॥ 


12. Janam vajrin mahi cinmanyamanam-ebhyo 
nrbhyo randhaya yesvasmi. Adha hi tva prthiv- 
yam surasatau havamahe tanaye gosvapsu. 


O lord of the thunderbolt of power, justice and 
punishment, humble that man who proudly holds 
himself as the greatest and mightiest against these people 
among whom I live and justify my existence. And now, 
O lord, for the sake of these very people on earth and in 
the battles of the brave for victory, we invoke, invite 
and celebrate you among our children, our cows, our 
lands and waters, and in the onward flow of our life 
and progress. 


वयं त॑ एभिः dead Ge: शत्रो-शत्रोरुत्तर इत्स्याम । 
घ्न्तो वृत्राण्युभयानि शूर राया म॑ देम लृ हता त्वोताः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Vayam ta ebhih puruhita sakhyaih satroh 
Satroruttara it syama. Ghnanto vrtranyubhayani 
Sura raya madema brhata tvotah. 


We are yours, O lord universally invoked and 
adored, and we pray that by these friendly words and 
acts of service we may be constantly superior to one 
enemy after another enemy of life and progress, fighting 
out and destroying the evils of darkness and want in 
both spiritual and material fields of life on earth, so 
that, under the umbrella of your protection and guidance, 
we may enjoy life with wealth, honour and excellence, 
rising higher and higher. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 20 655 


Mandala 6/Sukta 20 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


art य इन्द्राभि भूमार्यस्तस्थौ रयिः शव॑सा पृत्सु जनान्‌ । 
तं न॑: सहस्त्र॑भरमुर्वरासां दद्धि Gat सहसो वृत्रतुरम्‌ 2 


i Dyaurna ya indrabhi bhumaryastasthau rayih 
Savasa prtsu janan. Tam nah sahasrabharam- 
urvarasam daddhi suno sahaso vrtraturam. 


Indra, lord of life, creator giver of strength, 
commander of power and forbearance, give us that 
wealth and life’s value and that master ruling power 
vast as skies and bright as sun which, by its intrinsic 
strength of character can stand by people in the face of 
hostile forces in our struggle for progress, fight a 
thousand battles with success, give us lands of fertility 
and smiling greenery, and overcome the darkness of 
ignorance, poverty and injustice. 


दिवो न तुभ्यमन्विन्द्र सत्राऽसर्य' देवेभिवर्धायि fardy 
अर्हं यद्‌ वृत्रमपो वव्रिवांसं हन्ंजीषिन्विष्णुंना सचानः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Divo na tubhyamanvindra satra’suryam deve- 
bhirdhayi visvam. Ahim yad vrtramapo vavriv- 
amsam hannrjisin visnuna sacanah. 


Indra, ruler of the world, observer of the original 
law and keeper of the honest simplicity of natural 
conduct, when in union with omnipresent Vishnu, 
omnipotent cosmic energy, you break the cloud of 
serpentine motion holding showers of the waters of life 
in hiding, then, together with the showers, universal life 
breath of vital energies is received, like light of the sun 
from heaven, by the brilliancies of humanity and of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


656 RGVEDA 
nature such as earth to bless you and your people. 


तूर्वन्नोजीयान्तवसस्तवींयान्कृतब्रह्ये्द्रो' वृन्दमंहाः | 
राजाभवन्मधुनः सोम्यस्य विश्वासां यत्पुरां दर्ल्ुमावंत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


De Turvannojiyan tavasastaviyan krtabrahmendro 
vrddhamahah. Rajabhavanmadhunah somyasya 
visvasam yat puram dartnumavat. 


Indra, refulgent and illustrious leader, is 
mightiest of the mighty. Breaking the clouds for shower, 
having created abundance of food, energy and literature 
of vision and wisdom, and having raised a team of 
veteran assistants, he becomes the real ruler of humanity, 
commander of honey sweets of peace and joy and 
saviour of all cities of the common wealth against the 
assailant and destroyer. 


शतैरपद्रन्पणय इन्द्रात्र दशोणये कवयेऽ कसातौ । वधेः 
शुष्णस्याणुष॑स्य मायाः पित्वो नारिरेचीत्किं चन प्र ॥ ४॥ 


4. Satairapadran panaya indratra dasonaye 
kavaye’rkasatau. Vadhaih susnasyasusasya 
mayah pitvo narirecit kim cana pra. 


Here in the world of business and administration 
in the advancement of life and light for the men of vision 
and wisdom protected from all ten directions, misers, 
thieves and robbers all run off by a hundred onslaughts 
of the ruler’s admirers. Indra, O lord ruler of light and 
life, can any one exhaust, surpass or defeat the power, 
knowledge and abundance of the mighty and generous 
ruling order? None. 


महो get अपं विश्वायुं धायि adea यत्पत॑ ने पादि शुष्ण॑ः | 
उरु ष सरथं सार॑थये करिन्द्रः कुत्साय सूर्यस्य सातौ ॥ ५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 20 657 


a. Maho druho apa visvayu dhayi vajrasya yat 
patane padi susnah. Uru sa saratham sarathaye 
karindrah kutsaya suryasya satau. 


When on the fall of the mighty thunderbolt of 
justice and punishment the demon of darkness and 
denial is fallen and the sustaining force of all hate, 
jealousy and enmity is withdrawn, then the mighty Indra, 
further, opens and extends the field for the positive 
leaders and pioneers of vision, creativity and power for 
the nation on the march in the higher battle of light and 
culture. 


प्र श्येनो न मदिरमंशुमस्मै शिरो दासस्य नसुंचेर्मथायन्‌। 
प्रावन्नर्मी' साप्यं ससन्तं पृणग्राया समिषा सं स्वस्ति ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Pra Syeno na madiramamsumasmai Siro dasasya 
namucermathayan. Pravannamim sapyam sasan- 
tam prnagraya samisa sam svasti. 


Crushing the head of the violent destroyer, 
churning the mind of the persistent sabotager to 
correction, saving the humbled opponent at the end of 
his tether now lying at peace for mercy, and providing 
all such with adequate means and materials with food 
and sustenance for a life of comfort and well being, the 
leader, commander, ruler, Indra, like a victorious eagle, 
should bring the exhilarating drink of new life and joy 
of celebration for this social order. 


वि पिप्रोरहिंमायस्य goed: पुरो वचिञ्छवंसा न ad: | 
सुदामन्तद्रेक्णो! अप्रमृष्यमृजिश्व॑ने दात्रं दाशुषे दाः ॥ ७॥ 


a Vi piprorahimayasya drlhah puro vajrinchavasa 
na dardah. Sudaman tad rekno apramrsyam- 
rjisvane datram dasuse dah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


658 RGVEDA 


O lord of the power of thunderbolt, with your 
power and force, pray never destroy the strongholds 
and cities of the protective and promotive leader of 
versatile genius and competence. Instead, O lord of 
generosity, for such a philanthropic leader of simple 
and honest law and conduct of pious virtue, provide 
generous gifts and grants of irresistible and permanent 
value. 


स dad दशमायं दशोणि adi: स्वथिष्टिसुंम्नः। 
आ तुग्रं शश्वदिभं द्योत॑नाय मातुर्न सीमुप सृजा इयध्यै ।॥। ८ ॥ 


8. Sa vetasum daSamayam dasonim tutujimindrah 
svabhistisumnah. A tugram sasvadibham dyota- 
naya maturna simupa srja iyadhyai. 


Indra, refulgent ruler commanding noble peace 
and cherished well being, in order to continuously 
advance the dominion and raise it to splendour, adopt, 
nurse and promote the world famous, ten ways versatile, 
ten ways expansive, powerful and ambitiously receptive 
and progressive social order as your own family, just as 
the mother elephant nurses, guides and promotes her 
calf to maturity without let up. 


ad wel वनते अप्र॑तीतो faugst वृत्रहणं गभ॑स्तौ । 
तिष्ठन्दरी अध्यस्तेव गर्ते' वचोयुजा वहत SRT ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Sa im sprdho vanate apratito bibhrad vajram 
vrtrahanam gabhastau. Tisthaddhari adhyasteva 
garte vacoyuja vahata indramrsvam. 


Indra, glorious ruler, enemies unknown, takes 
on and wins over the rivals and contenders and, wielding 
the cloud-breaking thunderbolt in hand and settled in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 20 659 


his dominion seat of power, he aims like an archer and 
rides his chariot driven by word-controlled horse powers 
which drive the mighty ruler over the expanse of his 
dominion. 


सनेम तेऽ व॑सा नव्य॑ इन्द्र प्र Wa: स्तवन्त एना यज्ञैः । सस 
यत्पुरः शर्म शार॑दीर्व्ग्दन्दासींः पुरुकुत्साय शिक्षन्‌ ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Sanema te’vasa navya indra pra puravah stavanta 
ena yajnaih. Sapta yat purah Sarma Ssdaradirda- 
rdhan dasth purukutsaya Siksan. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, by virtue 
of your protection and promotion, we enjoy the latest 
gifts of life, and the citizens adore you by these 
programmes of yajna since you establish seven cities 
for comfortable living, open out seven abundant 
autumnal streams against drought and deprivation, and 
destroy all forms of slavery and impiety for the 
education and advancement of the heroic wielder of 
power and weapons of defence. 


त्वं वृध इन्दर पूर्व्यो भूर्वरिवस्यन्नुरान' arent 
परा नव॑वास्त्वमनुदेयं महे पित्रे ददाथ स्वं नपातम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11.3 Tvamvrdha indra purvyo bhurvarivas-yannusane 
kavyaya. Para navavastvaman-udeyam mahe 
pitre dadatha svam napatam. 


Indra, lord ruler of honour and excellence, 
knowledge, wisdom and generosity, be the first and 
foremost leader in the service of the great advancing 
human nation, specially for the inspired and ambitious 
pioneer of art, science and culture. Give the best and 
latest home and infrastructure worthy of being granted 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


660 RGVEDA 


to the great father figure of future development which 
must not be self-destructive or self-defeating in any way. 


त्वं धुनिरिन्द्र धुनिमतीरृणोरपः सीरा न स्रव॑न्तीः 1 
प्र यत्समुद्रमति शूर पर्षि पार्या तुर्वशं यदुं स्वस्ति ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Tvam dhunirindra dhunimatirrnorapah sira na 
sravantih. Pra yat samudramati Sura parsi 
paraya turvasam yadum svasti. 


Indra, you are the shaker and arouser of life and 
passion. Arouse, accelerate and control the roaring 
streams of the nation’s life and wealth like the pulsating 
veins and arteries of the human system. O brave hero, 
you cross the seas and traverse the skies, let there be 
peace and well being with the industrious, self- 
controlled and dynamic humanity. 


तव॑ ह त्यदिन्द्र विश्व॑माजौ सस्तो धुनीचुमुरी याह 
सिष्व॑प्‌ । दीदयदित्तुभ्यं सोमेभिः सुन्वन्दभीतिरिध्मभूंतिः 
पक्थ्य4 कः UVM 


13. Tava ha tyadindra visvamajau sasto dhunicu-murt 
ya ha sisvap. Didayadit tubhyam somebhih 
sunvan dabhitiridhmabhrtih pakthyarkaih. 


Indra, lord sustainer and giver of peace and joy, 
in the business of life, all that roaring action or 
sufferance or consumption, all is your world, for you : 
the idle, the restful, the sleeping, the shining, the violent, 
the faithful bearing holy fuel, the cook, whether 
preparing soma with sacred work or doing homage with 
songs and prayers of adoration, everything is yours, all 
is for you. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 21 661 


Mandala 6/Sukta 21 


Indra, Veshvedeva Devata, Bharadvaja 
Barhaspatya Rshi 


इमा उ त्वा पुरुतमस्य कारोर्हव्यं dit हव्या हवन्ते । 
धियो रथेष्ठामजरं नवीयो रयिर्विभूतिरीयते वचस्या ॥ ९॥ 


ll, Ima u tva purutamasya karorhavyam vira havya 
havante. Dhiyo rathesthamajaram naviyo 
rayirvibhutirtyate vacasya. 


Heroic Indra, leader of the world, you are 
ageless, ever new, ever fresh. These creations of the 
most versatile artist worthy of presentation glorify you, 
adorable lord, and they are offered to you in homage 
since all creations of intelligence, all wealth and 
celebrated glory reach you, lord of the nation’s chariot, 
and everything flows from you. 


ad स्तुष इन्द्रं यो विदानो गिवीहसं गीर्भिर्यज्ञवुंब्दम्‌। यस्य 
दिवमति मह्या dire: पुंरुमायस्य॑ रिरिचे म॑हित्वम्‌।॥ २॥ 


2. Tamu stusa indram yo vidano girvahasam 
girbhiryajnavrddham. Yasya divamati mahna 
prthivyah purumayasya ririce mahitvam. 


Indra is the lord omniscient who alone knows 
the ultimate mystery of existence. I adore and glorify 
him who is the ultimate content of all speech, who is 
exalted by songs of adoration in yajnas, and whose glory 
by its sublimity and omnipotence transcends the light 
of heaven and the magnitude of the world of nature. 


स इत्तमोऽ वयुनं ततन्वत्सूर्येण वयुन॑वच्यकार | कदा ते 
मतौ अमृतस्य धामेयक्षन्तो न मिनन्ति स्वधावः ॥ ३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


662 RGVEDA 


a. Sa it tamo’vayunam tatanvat suryena vayuna- 
vaccakara. Kada te marta amrtasya dhameya- 
ksanto na minanti svadhavah. 


The lord of his own absolute omniscience and 
omnipotence illuminates the world of darkness and 
ignorance by the light of expansive knowledge like the 
sun which dispels the darkness of night. The mortals, O 
lord immortal, who seek to join your domain never 
violate your laws. 


यस्ता चकार स कुहं स्विदिन्द्रः कमा जनं चरति are 
विक्षु । कस्ते यज्ञो मन॑से शं वराय को अर्कं इन्द्र कतमः स 
होता ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Yasta cakara sa kuha svidindrah kama janam 
carati kasu viksu. Kaste yajno manase Sam varaya 
ko arka indra katamah sa hota. 


Who is that Indra and where, that lord 
omnipotent who does all those things? Which people 
does he favour and visit? Among which community or 
nation? O lord omnipotent, which sacred act of yajna is 
that which pleases you at heart and gives you the 
satisfaction of your choice? What sort of praise and 
adoration? Who is the yajaka you listen to and respond? 


इदा हि ते वेविषतः पुराजाः Were आसुः Wepre: | 
ये म॑ध्यमास॑ उत नूत॑नास उतावमस्य॑ पुरुहूत बोधि ॥ ५॥ 


Ida hi te vevisatah purajah pratnasa asuh purukrt 
sakhayah. Ye madhyamasa uta nutanasa 
utavamasya puruhiuta bodhi. 


O lord of universal acts, universally invoked and 
adored, all are your friends, pray know and enlighten 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 21 663 


them all here and now, all those who are ancient, old 
and eminent, middling ones, moderns, most recent ones, 
existing and active all over the world. 


तं पृच्छन्तोऽ aera: पराणि प्रत्ना तं इनदर श्रुत्यानु येमुः | 
अर्चीमसि वीर ब्रह्मवाहो यादेव विदा तात्त्वा महान्तम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tam prcchanto’varasah parani pratna ta indra 
Srutyanu yemuh. Arcamasi vira brahmavaho 
yadeva vidma tat tva mahantam. 


Indra, lord of knowledge and power, brave 
leader and ruler of the world, the seekers of truth young 
and old, ancient and modern all, trying to know you by 
question and answer in faith, go by the Word which is 
eternal and highest. O lord giver of divine vision, 
sustainer of the life and wealth of existence, the more 
we know, the greater we find you and worship you as 
lord supreme. 


अभि त्वा पाजो रक्षसो वि त॑स्थे महिं जज्ञानमभि aaa 
तिष्ट। तव॑ waa युज्येन सख्या वक्रेण धृष्णो अप ता 
नुदस्व ॥ ७॥ 

{+ Abhi tva pajo raksaso vi tasthe mahi jajnana- 


mabhi tat su tistha. Tava pratnena yujyena sakhya 
vajrena dhrsno apa ta nudasva. 


Against you stands the force of evil powers, O 
potent lord of courage and valour, face that firmly and, 
with your age old ally and friendly thunderbolt of justice 
and punishment, crush those forces and wipe them out 
before they rise to dangerous proportions. 


स तु श्रुधीन्द्र नूत॑नस्य ब्रह्मण्यतो वीर कारुधायः। 
त्वं ह्या पिः प्रदिवि पितुणां शश्व॑द्‌ बभुथं सुहव एष्टौ ॥ ८ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


664 RGVEDA 


8. Sa tu $rudhindra nutanasya brahmanyato vira 
karudhayah. Tvam hyapih pradivi pitrnam 
sasvad babhutha suhava estau. 


Indra, potent lord of courage and valour, 
sustainer of the artist, scientist and their creations, listen 
to the prayer of the latest seeker of the wealth and 
wisdom of existence. O lord responsive to our call in 
cherished plans and programmes, you are and have been 
the constant friend and guardian of our forefathers in 
their search divine for light and fulfilment. 


प्रोतये वरुणं मित्रमिन्द्रं wed: कृष्वाव॑से नो अद्य । प्र पूषणं 
विष्णुंमिं पुरन्धिं सवितार मोष॑धीः पर्व तांश्च ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Protaye varunam mitramindram marutah krsva- 
vase no adya. Pra pusanam visnumagnim puran- 
dhim savitaramosdhth parvatamsca. 


O scholar of science, study, research, realise and 
bring for our protection and advancement the divine 
bounties of nature: vital udana and prana energies, 
electricity, winds, nourishing vitality of samana energy, 
vyana and dhananjaya energies, heat, cosmic energy of 
universal sustenance, solar energy, herbs, clouds and 
mountains for showers and herbs. 


इम उ त्वा पुरुशाक प्रयज्यो जरितारो अभ्यंर्चन्त्यकैः | श्रुधी 

हवमा ह॑वतो हुवानो न त्वाव अन्यो अमृत त्वद॑स्ति ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Ima u tva purusaka prayajyo jaritaro abhyar- 

cantyarkaih. Srudhi havama huvato huvano na 
tvavan anyo amrta tvadasti. 

O lord omnipotent, adorable in yajna, these 

celebrants of your divine powers honour and worship 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 21 665 


you with their offers of homage and adoration. Listen 
to the devotee’s call and supplications while invoked. 
There is none other than you who is like you and who 
commands powers and virtues such as yours, immortal 
as you are. 


नू म aren याहि विद्धान्विश्वेभिः सूनो सहसो यजं त्रेः 1 
ये अंिजिह्वा ऋतसाप आसुर्ये मनु चक्रुरुपरं दसाय 22 1 


11. Numa व vacamupa yahi vidvan visvebhih suno 
sahaso yajatraih. Ye agnijihva rtasapa asu- 
rye manum cakruruparam dasaya. 


O lord of knowledge, creator and giver of 
strength, listen to my words of prayer and come to me 
with all universal forms of wealth and those adorable 
powers worthy of being cherished who have the tongue 
of fire, serve the truth of divine law and who raise 
humanity high like the cloud for charity toward the weak 
and exhausted. 


सनो बोधि पुरएता सुगेषूत gtd पथिकृद्िदानः। ये 
अश्र॑मास उरवो afer इन्द्राभि afar वाजं॑म्‌॥ ९२॥ 


12. Sano bodhi pura-eta sugesuta durgesu pathikrd 
vidanah. Ye asramasa uravo vahisthas-tebhirna 
indrabhi vaksi vajam. 


May he, Indra, the lord all-knowing, know us 
and enlighten us, the leader who goes forward as pioneer 
over paths both easy and difficult, carving new channels 
of progress over annals of history, and may he bring us 
those modes of energy, power and transport which are 
wide and versatile beyond wear and tear, indefatigable, 
inexhaustible. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


666 RGVEDA 


Mandala 6/Sukta 22 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


य एक इब्दव्य॑श्चर्षणीनामिन्द्रं तं गीर्भिरभ्यर्च आभिः। 
यः पत्य॑ते वृषभो वृष्ण्यावान्त्सत्यः सत्वा पुरुमायः 
सह॑स्वान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. Ya eka iddhavyascarsaninamindram tam girbhir- 
abhyarca abhih. Yah patyate vrsabho vrsnyavant- 
satyah satva purumayah sahasvan. 


The one sole lord of humanity worthy of yajnic 
homage is Indra, whom I adore with these words of 
praise. He it is, lord generous, giver of showers of 
strength and bliss, eternal, imperishable, omnificent, 
omnipotent and forbearing who protects and sustains 
life as supreme father and guardian. 


ad नः पूर्वे' पितरो नव॑ग्वाः सप्त विप्रासो अभि वाजय॑न्तः। 
नक्चदाभं ततुरि पर्वतेष्ठामद्रोघवाचं मतिभिः शविं्ठम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Tamu nah purve pitaro navagvah sapta vipraso 
abhi vajayantah. Naksddabham taturim parvate- 
sthamadroghavacam matibhih Savistham. 


Him our ancient forefathers and the seven sages, 
like our five senses, mind and intellect, alongwith their 
fellow men, have celebrated and glorified, the lord that 
is tamer and controller of opposition, saviour from 
suffering, pervasive in clouds and over mountains, sweet 
of tongue and strongest in force and power. 


तमीमह इन्द्र॑मस्य रायः पुरुवीरस्य Jad: पुरुक्चोः। 
यो अस्कुधोयुर जरः tater भर हरिवो मादयध्यै 113 1 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 22 667 


a Tamimaha indramasya rayah puruvirasya 
nrvatah puruksoh. Yo askrdhoyurajarah svarvan 
tama bhara harivo madayadhyai. 


We pray to Indra for his gifts of wealth, happy 
progeny, man power and generous abundance which 
he, lord of unlimited potential, ageless and blissful, 
commanding men and transport, would, we hope, bring 
us for his joy and ours. 


तन्नो वि वोचो सदिं ते पुरा चिज्जरितार आनशुः GE । 
कस्ते भागः किं वयो qa fag: पुरुहूत पुरूवसो ऽ- 
AUS: NSU 


4. Tanno vi voco yadi te pura cijjaritara anasuh 
sumnamindra. Kaste bhagah kim vayo dudhra 
khidvah puruhita puruvaso’suraghnah. 


Indra, speak to us how the ancient celebrants of 
yours were blest with the gift of peace and joy. Say what 
is your share and contribution therein, what joy and 
ecstasy of being, O lord irresistible, forceful, universally 
invoked, commanding immense riches, destroyer of evil 
and the wicked. 


तं पृच्छन्ती aderd रथेष्ठामिन्द्रं वेपी वक्करी यस्य नू गीः | 
तुविग्राभं तुविकूर्मिं र॑भोदां गातुमिषे नश्च॑ते तु ्रमच्छ॥ ५ ॥ 


= Tam prechanti vajrahastam rathesthamindram 
vept vakvari yasya nu gth. Tuvigrabham = tuvi- 
kurmim rabhodam gatumise naksate tumra- 
maccha. 


If the voice and words of a person are vibrant 
with devotion and eloquent with enquiry in right earnest 
about Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


668 RGVEDA 


wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, riding the chariot of 
life, strong with iron grasp, bold in action, giver of 
tempestuous strength and commander of cosmic force, 
then such a person wins the lord’s favour of dominion 
over land for food, energy and the happiness of his 
heart’s desire. 


अया ह त्यं माय्यां वावृधानं म॑नोजुवां स्वतवः पर्वतेन । 
अच्युता चिद्धीच्ठिता स्वोजो रुजो वि goer धुषता 
विरष्ठिन्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Aya ha tyam mayaya vavrdhanam manojuva 
svatavah parvatena. Acyuta cid vilita svojo 
rujo vi drlha dhrsata virapsin. 


O lord of your own essential strength and 
splendour, divine and exuberant, with this thunder force 
of yours fast as mind, imperishable and indomitable, 
pray shatter that stronghold of evil growing by illusion 
firmly fixed and even reinforced by deceptive reason. 


तं वो धिया नव्य॑स्या ofas प्रलं प्र॑लवत्प॑रितंसयध्यै | 
सनो वक्षदनिमानः सुवद्येनद्रो विश्वान्यति दुर्गहाणि ॥ ७॥ 


i Tam vo dhiyad navyasya Savistham pratnam 
pratnavat paritamsayadhyai. Sa no vaksadani- 
manah suvahmendro visvanyati durgahani. 


May Indra, lord of infinite knowledge and 
power, bless us and you all with the best and latest vision 
and intelligence in order that we may adore and glorify 
the omnipotent eternal lord as ever, and may the lord 
saviour of the celestial chariot bring the universal 
strength of action, otherwise unattainable, and take us 
across all impassable impediments. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 22 669 


आ sala द्रुह्वणे पार्थिवानि दिव्यानि दीपयोऽ -aRer | 
तप वृषन्विश्वतः शो चिषा तान्ब्रह्यद्विषें शोचय 
क्षामपश्च ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. A janaya druhvane parthivani divyani dipayo’- 
ntariksa. Tapa vrsan visvatah Socisa tan brahma- 
dvise Socaya ksamapasca. 


O lord of generous showers of light and purity 
of peace, light up and reveal the blazing magnificence 
of the regions of earth, firmament and heaven for people 
stricken with hate, jealousy and enmity against life, 
humanity, divinity and revelation of the glory of 
existence. Let them feel the heat and light of the blaze 
from all sides, heat up even the green earth and cool 
waters for them and thus let them be cleansed through 
suffering and penitence. 


भुवो जनस्य दिव्यस्य राजा पार्थिवस्य जग॑तस्त्वेषसंदूक्‌ । 
धिष्व वच्च दक्षिण इन्द्र हस्ते विश्वां अजुर्य दयसे वि 
Ara: WS ul 
र Bhuvo janasya divyasya raja parthivasya jagatas- 
tvesasamdrk. Dhisva vajram daksina indra haste 
visva ajurya dayase vi mayah. 
Indra, self-refulgent ruler of earth and the world 
of light, of humanity and the moving world, ageless 
lord of light and justice, take the thunderbolt of light 


and justice in the right hand, destroy the wiles of the 
wicked and give the light of knowledge to the seekers. 


आ संयत॑मिन्द्र णः स्वस्तिं single बृहतीममुश्नाम्‌ | यया 
दासान्यायीणि वृत्रा करो! वचिन्त्सुतुका नाहषाणि ॥ ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


670 RGVEDA 


10. A samyatamindra nah svastim satruturyaya 
bahatim-amrdhram. Yaya dasanyaryani vrtra 
karo vajrint sutuka nahusani. 


Indra, lord of adamantine will and power, ruler 
of the world, bring in that wide ranging and inviolable 
peace and well being in a state of constant vigilance 
and dynamism to win over enmity and opposition by 
which darkness and ignorance can be replaced by light 
and knowledge and the lower and average orders of 
society can be raised to higher state of enlightenment 
and action. 


स नो fate: पुरुहूत वेधो विश्ववाराभिरा ग॑हि प्रयज्यो । 
नया अदेवो ata न देव आभिर्याहि तूयमा म॑द्रय- 
द्विक ॥ ९९॥ 

11. Sano niyudbhih puruhita vedho visvavarabhira 


gahi prayajyo. Na ya adevo varate na deva abhir- 
yahi tuyama madryadrik. 


O lord all wise and worshipful, universally 
adored and invited, come to us by well controlled and 
well directed modes and means of advancement with 
those laws and policies of universal interest and value 
and application, which neither the impious obstruct nor 
the pious camouflage. Come straight here to us with 
these without delay. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 23 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


सुत इत्त्वं निमिश्ल इन्द्र सोमे स्तोमे ब्रह्मणि शस्यमान उक्थे | 
यद्वा युक्ताभ्यां मघवन्हरिभ्यां बिभ्रद्वज्रं बाह्वोरिन्द्र सासिं ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 23 671 


i. Suta it tvam nimisla indra some stome brahmani 
Sasyamana ukthe. Yad va yuktabhyam maghavan 
haribhyam bibhrad vajram bahvorindra yasi. 


Indra, lord of honour, wealth and excellence of 
the world, when the soma is distilled, songs of prayer 
and adoration are sung and the music of Vedic hymns 
swells in the air, and when you move and come, one 
with us, loving and ecstatic, drawn by your own fiery 
motive powers of saving grace and holding the 
thunderbolt in hand, you are great and glorious. 


यद्वा दिवि orf सुष्विमिन्द्र वृत्रहत्येऽ व॑सि शूर॑सातौ । यदा 
दक्ष॑स्य बिभ्युषो अबिभ्यदरन्धयः शर्धत इन्द्र दस्यन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Yad va divi parye sosvimindra vrtrahatye’vasi 
Surasatau. Yad va daksasya bibhyuso abibyad- 
arandhayah sardhata indra dasyun. 


Or when, O mighty lord Indra, free from fear, 
you protect the creator of the soma of life’s joy in the 
battle of the brave for the elimination of darkness and 
want and for advancement of light and showers of love 
and cherished prosperity, or when you scare away even 
the mighty fearsome warriors against life, you shine in 
divine glory. O lord Indra, we pray, subdue the forces 
of violence, fear and destruction. 


पातां सुतमिन्द्रो अस्तु सोमं प्रणोनीरुग्रो Sa । कतौ 
वीराय सुष्व॑य उ तोकं दाता वसु स्तुवते कीरये चित्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


Pata sutamindro astu somam pranenirugro 
jaritaramuti. Karta viraya susvaya u lokam 
data vasu stuvate kiraye cit. 


May Indra, ruler of the world, be protector of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


672 RGVEDA 


the joy of life created with cooperative effort under 
divine guidance. May the lord of splendour be the leader 
to guide the celebrant to the desired goal in protection 
and security of justice. May the lord be the creator of a 
world of beauty for the brave who endeavour to 
contribute to the health and joy of life. May the lord 
bless the divine poet and celebrant with wealth and 
prosperity in life. 


गन्तेर्यास्ति सव॑ना हरिभ्यां बभ्रिर्वज्रं पपिः सोमं ददिर्गाः 1 
कती वीरं नर्य सर्व॑वीरं श्रोता हवं गृणतः स्तोम॑वाहाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Ganteyanti savana haribhyam babhrirvajram 
papih somam dadirgah. Karta viram naryam 
sarvaviram srota havam grnatah stomavahah. 


Listen ye all celebrants and yajakas, Indra, ruler 
of the world, is he who reaches all programmes of 
positive and creative development by the fastest 
transport with dynamic experts of theory and practice 
both, who wields thunderous power and weapons, 
protects, promotes and shares the soma, invigorating 
joys of life, gives cows, fertile lands and brilliant words 
of wisdom and guiding policy, creates bravest of the 
brave leaders, and listens and appreciates the songs and 
celebrations of the admirers among the people. 


अस्मै बयं यद्वावान तद्िविष्म इन्द्राय यो न॑ः प्रदिवो 
अपस्कः | सुते सोमे स्तुमसि शं संदुक्थेन्द्रय ब्रह्म वर्धनं 
यथासंत्‌॥ ५॥ 

=, Asmai vayam yad vavana tad vivisma indraya yo 


nah pradivo apaskah. Sute some stumasi Samsa- 
dukthendraya brahma vardhanam yathasat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 23 673 


Whatever Indra, lord ruler of light and love, 
wishes, we do for him since he creates for us the holy 
acts and does all other divine acts of sustenance. When 
the soma is distilled and the songs of praise arise, we 
celebrate and exalt him so that knowledge, food, energy 
and moral rectitude may arise and grow the way it 
should. 


ब्रह्माणि fedpe वर्धनानि area इन्द्र मतिभिर्विविष्मः | 
सुते सोमे सुतपाः शन्तमानि रन्त्या क्रियास्म वश्च॑णानि 
यज्ञैः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Brahmani hi cakrse vardhanani tavat ta indra 
matibhir-vivismah. Sute some sutapah santa-mani 
randrya kriyasma vaksanani yajnaih. 


Indra, lord ruler, the more noble acts of growth 
and development you do, the more with our intelligentsia 
and our people we do our acts of duty for you. O lord 
lover of honour and excellence, when the work is done, 
the soma is distilled and the time is come for celebration, 
we do praise worthy acts with yajnas and sing most 
delightful songs of joy in your honour. 


Sal ater पुरोव्टाश्चं रराणः पिबा तु सोमं गोऋजीकमिन्द्र | 
एदं बर्हिर्यज॑मानस्य सीदोरुं hie त्वायत उ BIHAN ७॥ 


de Sa no bodhi purolasam raranah piba tu somam 
gorjikamindra. Edam barhir-yajamanasya sido- 
rum krdhi tvayata u lokam. 


Indra, lord of majesty, know and enlighten us, 
happily taste the delicious pudding and drink the 
exhilarating soma seasoned with cow’s milk so soothing 
to the mind and senses. Come, be seated on the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


674 RGVEDA 


yajamana’s vedi, and create a wider and higher world 
of beauty for your devotees. 


स म॑न्दस्वा ह्यनु जोषमुग्र प्र त्वा Aaa इमे अश्नुवन्तु | 
प्रेमे हवासः पुरुहूतमस्मे आ त्वेयं धीरव॑स इन्द्र ARM: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Sa mandasva hyanu josamugra pra tva yajnasa 
ime asnuvantu. Preme havasah puruhutamasme 
a tveyam dhiravasa indra yamyah. 


Indra, refulgent lord, enjoy and rejoice in 
response to these yajnic acts of our homage as they may 
please you, and may these our addresses of invocation 
reach you, lord universally loved, and may this song of 
adoration and enlightened awareness appeal to you for 
our protection and advancement. 


dd: सखायः सं यथा सुतेषु सोमेभिरीं पृणता भोजमिन्द्रम्‌ । 
@ वित्तस्मा असति नो भराय न सुष्विमिन्द्रोऽ व॑से 
Fata ९॥ 


0. Tam vah sakhayah sam yatha sutesu somebhirim 
prnata bhojamindram. Kuvit tasma asati no 
bharaya na susvimindro’vase mrdhati. 


O friends, in all your acts of divine service, 
admire and adore Indra, lord giver of light and food, 
with yajnic offers of water and endeavours of creative 
joy dedicated to him so that the great and magnanimous 
lord would be gracious in the sustenance and protection 
of you and us all, since he never forsakes the earnest 
creator of soma. 


Wafers: सुते अस्तावि सोमे भरद॑जेषु eaters’: । 
असद्यथा जरित्र उत सूरिरिन्द्रो रायो विश्ववारस्य 
दाता ॥ ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 24 675 


10. Evedindrah sute astavi some bharadvajesu 
ksayadinmaghonah. Asad yatha jaritra uta suri- 
rindro rayo visvavarasya data. 


Thus is Indra admired and adored among saints 
and scholars in the world of honour and excellence when 
the soma is distilled and ready for celebration so that 
he, lord of honour, power and knowledge, may settle 
and abide by men of power and prosperity and be the 
giver of universal wealth of value to the devoted 
celebrant. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 24 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


तृषा मद्‌ इन्द्रे श्लोकं उक्था सचा GAG सुतपा ऋजीषी । 
अर्च्य मघवा नृभ्य॑ उक्थे्यक्षो राजां गिरामक्षितोतिः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Vrsa mada indre Sloka uktha saca somesu sutapa 
11747. Arcatryo maghava nrbhya ukthairdyukso 
raja giramaksitotih. 

Indra, refulgent ruler, is generous as a cloud of 
showers in the holy programmes of peace and progress 
of the social order, joy incarnate, delightful as a poem, 
sacred as a hymn, loved as a friend, lover and protector 
of the people’s happiness and achievement, simple, 
honest and natural in conduct, admired, revered and 
consecrated for the people and celebrated by the holiest 
of their voices, lord of honour, power and glory wrapped 
in heavenly light, inviolable, ever protective, a very 
haven of peace and security. 


adReatt नर्यो विचेताः श्रोता हवं गृणात उर्व्यूतिः । वसुः 
शंसो नरां कारुधाया वाजी स्तुतो विदथं दाति वाज॑म्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


676 RGVEDA 


2: Taturirviro naryo vicetah srota havam grnata 
urvyutih. Vasuh samso naram karudhaya vaji 
stuto vidathe dati vajam. 


Pressing fast forward against the enemies, brave, 
leader of leaders, wide awake and all aware, attentive 
to the call of the supplicant, all round protector of the 
people, haven and home and real asset of the nation, 
admired by the people, patron of artists and expert 
professionals, swift and powerful, adored in yajnic 
programmes, Indra, the ruler, gives speed and sustenance 
to the nation’s progress. 


salt न eRe: शूर बृहन्प्र ते मह्या रिरिचे रोद॑स्योः | 
वृश्चस्य नु ते पुरुहूत वया व्यड तयो रुरुहुरिन्द्र पूर्वीः ॥ ३॥ 


3. Akso na cakryoh Sura brhan pra te mahna ririce 
rodasyoh. Vrksasya nu te puruhita vaya vyutayo 
ruruhurindra purvih. 


Like the axis of two moving bodies such as two 
wheels or stars and planets or sun and earth, O mighty 
lord of majesty, Indra, universally invoked and adored, 
the eternal processes of your creation, protection and 
promotion of the expansive universe grow and extend 
like the branches of a tree by virtue of your infinite 
power and excell the light of the sun and generosity of 
the earth. 


शचीवतस्ते पुरुशाक शाका गर्वामिव Sara: संचर॑णीः। 
वत्सानां न तन्तयस्त इन्द्र दाम॑न्वन्तो अदामान॑ः सुदामन्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Sacivataste purusdka §aka gavamiva srutayah 


samcaranth. Vatsanam na tantayasta indra 
damanvanto adamanah sudaman. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 24 677 


Indra, refulgent lord ruler of the world, destroyer 
of suffering, manifold are your deeds, unbounded your 
intelligence, and countless your people. The abundant 
streams of your generous acts are expansive, associative 
and convergent like waves of light rays and paths of 
cows and orbits of stars, and, like tethers of the calves 
and axes of planets, they are controllers and yet givers 
of freedom, O generous lord of law and liberty. 


अन्यदद्य कर्वरमन्यदु Vals स॑च्य सन्मुहराचक्रिरिन्द्रः | 
मित्रो नो अत्र वरुणश्च पूषाऽर्यो वशस्य पर्येतास्ति ॥ ५॥ 


Anyadadya karvaramanyadu $vo’sacca sanm- 
uhuracakririndrah. Mitro no atra varunasca 
pusa’ryo vasvasya paryetasti. 


Indra, our friend here, great and just, life giver 
and sustainer, master and over all controller of 
controllers does one act today, another tomorrow, 
creative and destructive, integrating and disintegrating, 
making and unmaking, and goes on doing thus again 
and again in a positive cyclic order. 


वि त्वदापो न पर्व॑तस्य पृष्ठादुक्थेभिरिन्द्रानयन्त यज्ञैः । तं 
त्वाभिः सुष्टु तिभिंर्वाजय॑न्त आजिं न जग्मुर्गिर्वाहो 
svat: We ॥ 


6. Vi tvadapo na parvatasya prsthadukthebhir- 
indranayanta yajnaih. Tam tvabhih sustutibhir- 
vajayanta ajim na jagmurgirvaho asvah. 

Indra, lord of beneficence sung and celebrated 
in hymns of holiness, just as warriors rush to battle for 


victory, so do joyous devotees and celebrants eager for 
karmic action and life’s victory hasten to you with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


678 RGVEDA 


homage and yajnas performed with these hymns of 
praise and songs of adoration, and then, just as rain 
showers pour from the heights of clouds and streams 
flow down from the top of mountains, so do fruits of 
piety and gifts of divine grace shower down and flow, 
from you. 


न यं जर॑न्ति शरदो न मासा न द्याव इन्द्र॑मवकर्णयंन्ति। 
qed चिद्वर्धतामस्य तनूः स्तोमेभिरु क्थेश्च॑ शस्य- 
AAT ७॥ 


vin Na yam jaranti Sarado na masa na dyava indra- 
mavakarsayanti. Vrddhasya cid vardhatamasya 
tanuh stomebhir-ukthaisca Sasyamana. 


Winters and years wither him not, nor months 
weaken him, nor the sun and days wear out Indra 
celebrated by hymns of divine praise and songs of 
adoration. May the existential manifestation of the lord 
supreme, eternal Indra grow on and on in majesty. May 
the body and mind of this eternal jiva, individual soul, 
grow by the chant of sacred songs and hymns of divine 
praise. 


न died नम॑ते न स्थिराय न शर्धते दस्युजूताय स्तवान्‌ । 
अचरा इन्द्र॑स्य गिरयश्चिदृष्वा गम्भीरे चिंद्धवति गाध- 
aes) i 
8. Na vilave namate na sthiraya na sardhate 
dasyujutaya stavan. Ajra indrasya girayascid- 
rsva gambhire cid bhavati gadhamasmai. 
He bows not to the strong and forceful, nor 


bends before the resolute, nor does he praise or flatter 
the bold nor anyone allied to the wicked. Mighty 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 25 679 


mountains are, for Indra, plain as fields, and for him 
the ocean in the depth becomes firm ground and a 
fordable flow. 


गम्भीरेण न उरुणांमत्रिन्प्रेषो य॑न्धि सुतपावन्वाजान्‌ | स्था 
ऊ षु ऊर्ध्व ऊती अरिंषण्यन्नक्तोर्व्युष्टौ परितक्म्यायाम्‌ ९ ॥ 


Gambhirena na urunamatrin preso yandhi 
sutapavan vajan. Stha u su urdhva uti arisanya- 
nnaktorvyustau paritakmyayam. 

Mighty lord, purifier and sanctifier of things in 
the world of creation, with deep love, profound purpose 
and grace unbound, give us abundance of food and 
energy and wide ranging knowledge and success. Stay 
with us constant with your protection high over us, at 
dawn and at dusk, night and day without hurt or let up. 


सच॑स्व नायमव॑से अभीकं इतो वा तमिन्द्र पाहि रिषः। 
अमा चै नमर॑ण्ये पाहि रिषो मदेम VIASAT: सुवीराः ॥ ९० ॥ 
10. Sacasvanayamavase abhika ito va tamindra pahi 
risah. Ama cainamaranye pahi riso madema 
Satahimah suvirah. 
Indra, ruling lord of the realm, be with us, our 
leadership and our policy, and justice for protection and 
progress. Save the system here and afar, at home and 


abroad, from fear and violence so that, blest with the 
brave, we may live and rejoice for a full hundred years. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 25 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


या त॑ ऊतिर॑वमा या प॑र॒मा या म॑ध्यमेन्द्र शुष्यिन्नस्ति। 
ताभिरू षु वृं त्रहत्येऽ वीर्न एभिश्च वाजैर्महान्न उग्र ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


680 RGVEDA 


I Ya ta utiravama ya parama ya madhyamendra 
Susminnasti. Tabhiru su vrtrahatye’virna ebhisca 
vajair-mahan na ugra. 


Indra, mighty ruler, dispenser of justice and 
giver of inspiring vigour and vision, whatever your 
modes of safety and security at the primary level, 
whatever at the middle level and whatever of the highest 
level of the order, with all those protect us in the battle 
against darkness, want and negation, and bless us with 
these flights of progress and victory, O lord great and 
refulgent. 


आभिः स्पृधो मिथतीररिषण्यन्नमित्रस्य व्यथया मन्युमिन्द्र | 
आधिर्विश्वां अधथियुजो विषुंचीरार्यीय fasits व॑ तारी- 
दासींः॥ २॥ 


2. Abhih sprdho mithatirarisanyannamitrasya 
vyathaya manyumindra. Abhirvisva abhiyujo 
visuctraryaya viso’va tarirdasth. 

Indra, mighty ruler and commander, with these 
forces of defence and protection engaged in action, 
break down the pride and morale of the enemy and, 
with these, without loss of men and materials or interests 
of the country, protect and advance the cooperative 
powers employed across the land, the people, and the 
services for the noble citizens of the nation. 


इन्द्र॑ जामय॑ उत येऽ जांमयोऽ ्वाचीनासो। aqat युयुजे | 
त्वमेषां विथुरा शवांसि जहि वृष्ण्यानि कृणुही पराचः ॥ ३ ॥ 


a Indra jamaya uta ye’jamayo ’rvacindso vanuso 
yuyujre. Tvamesam vithura Savamsi jahi vrsnyani 
krnuhi paracah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 25 681 


Indra, mighty ruler and commander of the 
common wealth, whether it is your own people or other 
distant ones or sabotagers who join upfront against you 
to injure the system, you destroy their forces of sabotage, 
eliminate their growing potential and throw them out. 


शूरो वा शूरं बनते शरीरैस्तनूरुचा तरुषि यत्कृण्वैते | 
तोके वा गोषु तन॑ये यदप्सु वि क्रन्द॑सी उर्वरासु ब्रवैते ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Suro va Suram vanate Sarirais-tanuruca tarusi 
yat krnvaite. Toke va gosu tanaye yadapsu vi 
krandasi urvarasu bravaite. 


When the brave engage the brave in battle with 
brilliance of physical force of body, or when people 
argue, dispute and shout over rights and inheritance in 
relation to children and grand children, or about fertile 
lands and cows or waters, then, too, judge and resolve 
the dispute. 


नहि त्वा शूरो न तुरो न धृष्णु त्वा योधो मन्य॑मानो युयोध । 

इन्द्र नकिरा प्रत्यस्त्येषां विश्व। जातान्यभ्य॑सि तानि ॥ ५॥ 

a, Nahi tva suro na turo na dhrsnurna tva yodho 

manyamano yuyodha. Indra nakistva pratya- 
styesam visva jatanyabhyasi tani. 

Neither the brave nor impetuous nor violent nor 

warrior, however great and proud, can stand and fight 

against you. Indra, lord almighty, none is your equal, 


none adversary, you are supreme over all those that are 
born and existent. 


स प॑त्यत उभयोरनृम्णमयोर्यदी वेधसं: समिथे हव॑न्ते । वत्र 
at महो नृवति क्षये वा व्यचस्वन्ता यदि वितन्तसैते ।॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


682 RGVEDA 


6. Sa patyata ubhayornrmnamayoryadi vedhasah 
samithe havante. Vrtre va maho nrvati ksaye va 
vyacasvanta yadi vitantasaite. 


If two partners in the matter of integration or 
division or separation of finances or management of a 
large corporate organisation of men dispute, then he 
gets control of the money or the assets whom judges of 
piety and penetrative intelligence call upon to manage, 
and above all Indra, the ruler, is the ultimate master. 


अधं स्मा ते चर्षणयो यदेजानिन्द्र arta भ॑वा वरूता । 
अस्माकासो ये नृत॑मासो अयं इन्द्र॑ सूरयो दधिरे पुरो 
a: ie 


4; Adha sma te carsanayo yadejanindra tratota 
bhava varuta. Asmakaso ye nrtamaso arya 
indra surayo dadhire puro nah. 


And also, O lord ruler and master, giver of 
honour and excellence, destroyer of evil and 
wickedness, Indra, be the saviour and protector of all 
your people specially of those who are stricken with 
fear. Be the defender and promoter of those people of 
ours who are the highest leading lights and bravest 
heroes who hold the forts and maintain the cities for us. 


अनुं ते दायि मह dare सत्रा ते विश्वमनु वृत्रहत्ये | 
अनु श्चत्रमनु सहो! यजत्रेन्द्र दे वेधिरनु, ते Tad ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Anu re dayi maha indriyaya satra te visvamanu 
vrtrahatye. Anu ksatramanu saho yajatrendra 
devebhiranu te nrsahye. 


Consequently, O lord most adorable, supreme 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 26 683 


ruler, protector of life and destroyer of negation, 
appropriate to your greatness and majesty, in keeping 
with the honour and dignity of the world social order, 
and in view of the courage and fortitude required to 
face the challenges to humanity, the whole world is 
given unto you and entrusted, in truth, by the leading 
lights and brilliant visionaries of nations in the battle of 
light against darkness, of goodness against evil, and of 
prosperity against want and squalor. 


एवा नः स्पृधः सम॑जा समस्स्विन्द्रं रारन्धि मिथतीरदेवीः 1 
विद्याम वस्तोरवसा गृणन्तो भरद्वाजा उत तं इन्द्र नूनम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


2, Eva nah sprdhah samaja samatsvindra rarandhi 
mithatiradevih. Vidyama vastoravasa grnanto 
bharadvaja uta ta indra nunam. 


Thus, O lord Indra, giver of honour and victory, 
we pray, inspire us to advance in our ambition to win 
over our rivals in the battles of life. O lord destroyer, 
subdue the warring forces of darkness and selfishness. 
Let us all, celebrants and men of knowledge and action, 
singing and celebrating your honour day and night, 
know you for sure and win the victories by virtue of 
your guidance and protection. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 26 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
श्रुधी नं इन्द्र हवयामसि त्वा महो वाज॑स्य सातौ वावृषाणाः | 
सं यद्विशोऽ य॑न्त शूरसाता उग्रं नोऽ वः पार्ये अहन्दाः ॥ ९॥ 


0 Srudhi na indra hvayamasi tva maho vajasya 
sdtau vavrsanah. Sam yad viso’yanta Surasata 
ugram no’vah parye ahan dah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


684 RGVEDA 


Indra, lord ruler and giver of honour and 
excellence, listen to us: overwhelming and exuberant 
we call upon you in the great battle of sustenance and 
advancement. When the people march on in the battle 
of the brave, then on the decisive day give us the blazing 
passion of your force and protection to victory. 


त्वां वाजी dad वाजिनेयो महो वाज॑स्य गध्य॑स्य सातौ। 
त्वां वृत्रेष्विन्द्र सत्प॑तिं तरुत्रं त्वां च॑ष्टे मुष्टिहा गोषु 
युध्य॑न्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Tvam vaji havate vajineyo maho vajasya 
gadhyasya satau. Tvam vrtresvindra satpatim 
tarutram tvam caste mustiha gosu yudhyan. 


The war-like scion of a heroic family of learned 
leaders and scholars, seeker of a great new success just 
at hand in the field of food, energy, knowledge and 
progress, invokes you, Indra, potent lord victor, you 
saviour of devotees and defender of truth, and, fighting 
hand to hand, looks up to you at the decisive moment 
of victory for the acquisition of new wealths of light 
and development of lands, cows and branches of energy. 


त्वं कविं चोदयोऽ कसातौ त्वं कुत्साय शुष्णं दाशुषे ah । 
त्वं ford अपर्मणः पराहन्नतिथिग्वाय शंस्यं करिष्यन्‌ 3 ॥ 


ध Tvam kavim codayo’rkasdatau tvam kutsaya 
Susnam dasuse vark. Tvam siro amarmanah 
parahannatithigvaya samsyam karisyan. 

You enthuse and inspire the creative visionary 
in the work on solar energy, thunder and lightning. You 


break open the secrets of concentrated energy for the 
man of power and generosity. Thus you shake and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 26 685 


subdue the head of invulnerable pride and intransigence 
and do praise-worthy service to the leader who honours 
and keeps open house for visiting scholars. 


त्वं रथं प्र भ॑रो योधमृष्वमावो युध्य॑न्तं वृषभं दश॑द्युम्‌ | 
त्वं तुग्रं वेतसवे सचाहन्त्वं तुजिं गृणन्त॑मिन्द्र तूतोः us ॥ 


4. Tvam ratham pra bharo yodhamrsvamavo 
yudhyantam vrsabham dasadyum. Tvam tugram 
vetasave sacahan tvam tujim grnantamindra 
tutoh. 


Indra, ruler and commander, you create and 
maintain an invulnerable war chariot and protect the 
strong fighting force shining in ten directions for days 
on end. In full dedication to the honour and brilliance 
of the social order, destroy violence and terror and 
advance the strong, promotive and allied powers that 
do honour to the nation. 


त्वं तदुक्थमिन्द्र बर्हणा कः प्र यच्छता Geet शूर दर्षि । 
अवं गिरेदसिं शम्ब॑रं हन्प्रावो दिवोदासं चित्राभिरूती ॥ ५॥ 


a, Tvam tadukthamindra barhana kah pra yacchata 
sahasra Sura darsi. Ava girerdasam sambaram 
han pravo divodasam citrabhiruti. 


Indra, mighty destroyer of evil and preserver of 
the good, it is praise worthy that with your great force 
you destroy a hundred thousand evils, O brave lord, 
and, with wondrous saving powers, release from the 
cloud pent up showers, so soothing and refreshing, and 
thus relieve and protect humanity dedicated as a liberal 
servant of divinity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


686 RGVEDA 


त्वं श्रद्धाभिर्मन्दसानः सोये॑र्दभीत॑ये चुमुरिमिन्द्र सिष्वप्‌। 
त्वं रजिं पिठीनसे दशस्यन्षष्टिं सहस्रा शच्या सचाहन्‌ ॥। ६ ॥ 


6. Tvam sraddhabhir-mandasanah somairdabhi- 
taye cumurim-indra sisvap. Tvam rajim pithinase 
daSsasyan sastim sahasra Sacya sacahan. 


Indra, ruling lord destroyer and preserver, 
rejoicing with faithful homage and joyous celebrations 
of dedicated followers, you send the oppressive ogre to 
sleep in order to save the oppressed and, favouring the 
man of right conduct in keeping with your holiness, 
you give him the right direction and ward off a sixty 
thousand obstacles from his path. 


अहं चन तत्सूरिभिंरानश्यां तव ज्यायं इन्द्र सुम्नमोज॑ः | त्वया 
यत्स्तवन्ते सधवीर वीरास्िवरूथेन Agar शविष्ठ ।॥। ७ ॥ 


i Aham cana tat suribhir-anasyam tava jyaya indra 
sumnamojah. Tvaya yat stavante sadhavira 
virastrivaruthena nahusa Savistha. 


Indra, bravest lord of the house of the brave, I 
pray, may I too, along with the learned and the wise and 
great, attain that high order of vigour and splendour, 
peace and well being, with the grace of your presence 
bestowed by you, lord of three worlds, which the brave 
and learned people value, admire and pray for. 


वयं त अस्यामिन्द्र द्युम्नहूतौ सखायः स्याम महिन प्रेष्ठाः 1 
प्रात॑र्दनिः क्षत्रश्रीरस्तु श्रेष्ठो घने वृत्राणां सनये धना- 
WLU ॥ त त 

8. Vayam te asyamindra dyumnahutau sakhayah 
syama mahina presthah. Pratardanih ksatrasri- 
rastu Srestho ghane vrtranam sanaye dhananam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 27 687 


Indra, greatest lord of grace and glory, may we, 
in this yajnic programme of power and prosperity of 
the human nation, be your dearest friends and supportive 
participants, and may the rising generosity and gracious 
glory of the world order rise highest in our battle against 
darkness of ignorance, injustice and poverty for the 
achievement of all round prosperity and well being. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 27 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


किम॑स्य मदे किम्व॑स्य पीताविन्द्रः किम॑स्य सख्ये daar । 
रणा वा ये निषदि किं ते अस्य पुरा विविद्रे किमु 
नूत॑नासः ॥ ९॥ 


॥. Kimasya made kimvasya pitavindrah kimasya 
sakhye cakara. Rana va ye nisadi kim te asya 
pura vividre kimu nutanasah. 


What does Indra, destroyer of suffering, do in 
the ecstasy of this soma, for the beauty and glory of this 
order? What in the exuberance of the drink, in the joyous 
experience of its management and satisfaction 
therefrom? What in the friendly identity with it and its 
people? And what do they know and discern, the 
veterans and the youngest of the new generation, who 
joyously celebrate in the company of this Indra in the 
House? What do they gain? 


सद॑स्य मदे सद्व॑स्य पीताविन्द्रः सद॑स्य सख्ये च॑कार । 
रणां वा ये निषदि सत्ते ster पुरा विविद्रे सदु नूत॑नासः ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Sadasya made sadvasya pitavindrah sadasya 


sakhye cakara. Rana va ye nisadi sat te asya 
pura vividre sadu nutanasah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


688 RGVEDA 


Noble deeds of the truth of its reality does Indra 
perform in the rapture of its dignity, noble and true 
indeed when he drinks of the soma of that experience, 
nothing but the truth and dignity of action and policy in 
friendly identity with this social order. And they who 
joyously sit in his company in the House identified with 
the glory of this order, veterans as well as new ones, 
they too know and realise the truth and the reality, 
nothing but the truth, whole and undiluted. 


नदहिनु ते महिमन: समस्य न म॑घवन्मघवत््वस्यं विद्य । 
न राध॑सोराधसो नूतनस्येन्द्र नकिर्ददृश seat ते॥ ३॥ 


2; Nahi nu te mahimanah samasya na maghavan 
maghavattvasya vidma. Na radhaso radhaso 
nutanasyendra nakirdadrsa indriyam te. 


Indra, lord of wealth, power and majesty, we 
know not anyone equal to you in greatness and glory, 
nothing like your regality and munificence, nothing so 
perfect as your perfection which reveals ever new 
possibilities. None comprehends your omniscience and 
your omnipotence. 


एतत्त्यत्त इद्धियम॑चेति येनाव॑धीर्वरशिंखस्य sre: । वज्र॑स्य 
यत्ते निहतस्य शुष्पात्स्वनाच्चिदिन्द्र परमो ददार ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Etat tyat ta indriyamaceti yenavadhirvara- 
sikhasya Sesah. Vajrasya yat te nihatasya Susmat 
svanaccidindra paramo dadara. 

Indra, lord of power and perfection, this 
omnipotence of yours is apprehended when with it you 


strike and destroy the greatest and highest adversary to 
the very end, which too is just the tip of the might of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 27 689 


omnipotence, and when, by the force of the mere roar 
and rumble of the thunderbolt hurled, the proudest 
enemy is shattered. 


वधीदिन्द्रो वर्शिखस्य शेषोऽभ्यावर्तिने चायमानाय 
शिक्षन्‌ । वृचीव॑तो य्दरियूपीयायां हन्पूर्वे अर्धे भियसापरो 
दर्त्‌।॥ ५॥ 


Vadhidindro varasikhasya seso’bhyavartine 


han purve ardhe bhiyasaparo dart. 


Just as Indra, the sun, breaks the cloud on high 
to the last drop of rain, so should Indra, eminent teacher 
as well as the ruler, in the act of giving instruction to 
the dedicated learners all round vigilant in a sustained 
manner, while giving them pioneering enlightenment 
in their love of scholars and scholarship, dispel their 
basic fear, ignorance and negative tendencies and thus 
eliminate the possibilities of later resurgence of evil with 
the healthy fear of unknown and unexpected 
consequences. 


त्रिंशच्छतं वर्मिण इन्द्र साकं यव्याव॑त्यां पुरुहूत श्रवस्या | 
तृचीव॑न्तः शर॑वे पत्य॑मानाः पात्रा भिन्दाना न्यथरन्या- 
खन्‌ ॥ 2 I 
6. Trimsacchatam varmina indra sakam yavyava- 
tyam puruhuta Sravasya. Vrcivantah Sarave 
patyamanah patra bhindana nyarthanyayan. 
Indra, mighty lord ruler universally invoked and 
honoured, let thirty hundred renowned warriors in 


armour in a well provided army in top gear breaking 
through the enemy lines, shattering the defences, achieve 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


690 RGVEDA 
their decisive goal. 


यस्य गावावरुषा सूयवस्यू अन्तरू षु चर॑तो रेरिंहाणा। स 
सृञ्ज॑याय तुर्वशं परादाद्‌ वृचीव॑तो दैववाताय शि्च॑न्‌ 1 ७॥ 


7. Yasya gavavarusa suyavasyu antaru su carato 
rerihana. Sa srnjayaya turvasam paradad 
vrcivato daivavataya Siksan. 


The ruler whose power and law, internal policy 
and external defence, both like two healthy, ruddy and 
loving cows, well provided and happily self-satisfied, 
operate in the dominion, he, training the efficient force 
in radiative communication and productive science, 
would throw off the destructive elements of the state. 


gat अग्रे रथिनो विंशतिं गा वधूम॑तो मघवा मद्यं सम्राट्‌ । 
अभ्यावर्ती चायमानो द॑दाति दूणाशेयं afator uref- 
वानाम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Dvayan agne rathino vimSsatim ga vadhumato 
maghava mahyam samrat. Abhyavarti caya-mano 
dadati dunaseyam daksina parthavanam. 


Agni, refulgent ruler, commanding wealth, 
power, honour and excellence, dynamic leader ever on 
the move for progress and victory, revered and 
celebrated all round, gives me both chariot warriors for 
defence of the nation and happy families and a team of 
twenty creative ministers to bear the burdens of the 
nation, which gift from any of global rulers is 
invulnerable indeed. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 28 691 


Mandala 6/Sukta 28 
Gavah or Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


आ Weal अग्मन्नुत भद्रम॑क्रन्त्सीदन्तु गोष्ठे COTA । 
प्र॒जाव॑तीः पुरुरूपा इह स्युरिन्द्राय पूर्वीरुषसो दुहानाः ॥ ९ ॥ 


1. A gavo agmannuta bhadram-akrantsidantu 
gosthe ranayantvasme. Prajavatih pururupa iha 
syurindraya purvirusaso duhanah. 


Let the cows come as rays of the sun, sit and 
rest in the stalls, be happy and bring us happiness and 
good fortune. May they be fertile with many calves, of 
many colours and breeds, abundant, yielding plenty of 
milk for the health and prosperity of the nation, and 
thereby let them be harbingers of light like the morning 
dawns. 


इन्द्रो यज्व॑ने पृणते च॑ शिश्चत्युपेद॑दाति न स्वं मुषायति । 
भूयोभूयो र॒यिमिद॑स्य वर्धयन्नभिन्ने खिल्ये नि द॑धाति 
देवयुम्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Indro yajvane prnate ca siksatyuped dadati na 
svam musayati. Bhuyobhuyo rayimidasya 
vardhayannabhinne khilye ni dadhati devayum. 


Indra, the ruler, gives protection and 
maintenance grants to the man dedicated to yajna. He 
engages him in creative and educational work and thus 
gives him fulfilment and purpose in life. This way too 
he does not deplete his own knowledge and culture but 
maintains it. Constantly and continuously he adds to 
the wealth of the nation and, in every region of the land, 
he looks after and maintains the devotees of learning, 
society and divinity without taking away anything from 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


692 RGVEDA 
them materially. 


न ता asta न द॑भाति तस्करो नासामामित्रो व्यथिरा 
द॑धर्षति । देवांश्च याभिर्यजते ददाति च ज्योगित्ताभिः 
सचते गोप॑तिः सह।॥ ३॥ 


2 Na ta nasanti na dabhdati taskaro nasamamitro 
vyathira dadharsati. Devansca yabhiryajate 
dadati ca jyogit tabhih sacate gopatih saha. 


Knowledge, fruits of yajna, generosity, 
patronage of learning and culture, these rays of light do 
not perish nor deplete nor fade away. The thief steals 
them not, no enemy can afflict them, nor can anyone 
injure or insult them. The lord of these cows, lights and 
radiations, with which he serves the divinities, learned 
and the wise, gives, creates and adds to life’s beauty, 
also, he constantly and continuously lives, lasts and rises 
with them. 


नता अवी रेणुककाटो अश्नुते न A Spa aa यन्तिता 
अभि । उरुगायमभ॑यं तस्य ता अनु गावो मर्त॑स्य वि च॑रन्ति 
यज्व॑नः usu 


4. Na ta arva renukakato asnute na samskrtatra- 
mupa yanti ta abhi. Urugayamabhayam tasya ta 
anu gavo martasya vi caranti yajvanah. 


Neither a vociferous brute raising clouds of dust 
like a war horse attains to these rays of light and culture, 
nor do these radiations penetrate the thick head of a 
violent man insulated against enlightenment. Like cows, 
the rays of refinement roam freely round the open 
pastures of the generous man of yajna and social service, 
a boundless world of freedom and fearlessness. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 28 693 


गावो भगो गाव इन्द्रो मे अच्छान्‌ गावः सोम॑स्य प्रथमस्य 
भश्चः। इमा या गावः स ज॑नास इन्द्र इच्छमीन्दूदा मन॑सा 
चिदिन्द्र॑म्‌॥ ५॥ 


>, Gavo bhago gava indro me acchan gavah 
somasya prathamasya bhaksah. Ima ya gavah sa 
janasa indra icchamiddhrda manasa cidindram. 


May Bhaga, lord of wealth and good fortune, 
give me cows. May Indra, lord of power and majesty, 
give me good cows. May Bhaksha, adorable lord of 
primal food, energy and ecstasy of life, give me good 
cows for milk. O people, O lord of power and glory, 
Indra, I love and love to have all that is cows, 1.€., 
mothers of food and energy, sources of sweetness, light 
and culture, masters of knowledge and wisdom, honour 
and excellence. I love that all with my heart and mind, 
the beauty, the glory, the ecstasy! 


यूयं गावो मेदयथा कृशं चिदश्रीरं चित्कृणुथा सुप्रतीकम्‌ | 
भद्रं गृहं PUA भद्रवाचो बृहद वय॑ उच्यते सभासु ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yuyam gavo medayatha krsam cidasriram cit 
krnutha supratikam. Bhadram grham krnutha 
bhadravaco brhad vo vaya ucyate sabhasu. 


You develop the cows of life, mother spirits of 
body, mind and soul. Give health and vigour to the weak 
and emaciated, turn the ugly and unpleasant to beautiful, 
graceful and illustrious. Make the home overflow with 
peace, prosperity and the bliss of good fortune. You 
command noble speech in the assemblies of the wise 
and powerful leaders so that your life and work is praised 
and appreciated wide and high in the world. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


694 RGVEDA 


प्र॒जाव॑तीः सूयवसं रिशन्तीः weet अपः सुप्रपाणे पिब॑न्तीः | 
मा व॑ः स्तेन ईशत माघशंसः परि वो हेती exe 
वृज्याः ॥ ७ ॥ 


7 Prajavatih suyavasam risantith suddha apah 
suprapane pibantih. Ma vah stena tsata magha- 
samsah pari vo heti rudrasya vrjyah. 


O fertile and abundant cows blest with calves, 
feeding on fine green grass and drinking pure water 
from transparent pools, may no thief ever overpower 
you, may no strike of the cruel and sinful butcher ever 
slaughter you. 


(Swami Dayanand applies this mantra to the 
duties of the ruler: The ruler should look after the cattle 
wealth of the country. The government must protect and 
promote the cows. Not only that. Even the people and 
their education culture and efficiency are, like the holy 
cow, to be protected against violence and promoted with 
good food and water and all means of prevention of 
social crime and violence.) 


उपेदमुपपर्चनमासु गोषूप॑ पुच्यताम्‌। 
उप॑ ऋषभस्य रेतस्युपेन्द्र तव॑ वीर्ये ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Upedamupaparcanamasu gosupa prcyatam. 
Upa rsabhasya retasyupendra tava virye. 


In this social order and in the policy, let there 
be a union and identity of the ruler with the people, 
their lands and their languages. Indra, noble and 
illustrious ruler, all giver, let the people share, join and 
support you in your creative acts of courage and 
development. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 29 695 


Mandala 6/Sukta 29 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


इन्द्रं वो नर॑ः Gerad सेपुर्महो aed: सुमतये VAT: | 
महो हि दाता वच्र॑हस्तो अस्तिं महामु र॒ण्वमव॑से यज- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


10 Indram vo narah sakhyaya sepurmaho yantah 
sumataye cakanah. Maho hi data vajrahasto asti 
mahamu ranvamavase yajadhvam. 


O citizens of the land, leading lights of humanity 
in love with knowledge, wisdom and guidance, to win 
your friendship and to rise to the heights of life for your 
sake, honour and serve Indra, supreme ruler, lord of 
knowledge and power. Great is he, all giver, and wields 
the sceptre of light, power and justice. Join the great 
lord of love and joy and honour him with homage and 
yajnic service for protection and progress. 


आ यस्िन्हस्ते नयी पििक्षुरा रथे हिरण्यये रथेष्ठाः | 
आ रश्मयो गभ॑स्त्योः स्थूरयोराध्वन्नरश्वासो वृष॑णो 
युजानाः ॥ २॥ 


2 A yasmin haste narya mimiksura rathe hiranyaye 
rathesthah. A rasmayo gabhastyoh sthurayo 
radhvannasvaso vrsano yujanah. 


Indra in whose hands are all the gifts of life for 
mankind rides the golden chariot of the cosmos, holding 
reins of the world in his mighty hands, controlling the 
potent forces of nature like horses on the course of time 
and destiny. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


696 RGVEDA 


fart a पादा दुव आ मिंमिक्ुरधुष्णुर्वजरी शव॑सा 
द्चिणावान्‌। वसानो अत्कं सुरभिं दृशे कं स्वधैर्णं 
नंतविषिरो ॑भूथ ।॥ ३॥ 


oi Sriye te pada duva a mimiksurdhrsnurvajri Savasa 
daksinavan. Vasano atkam surabhim drse kam 
svarna nrtavisiro babhiutha. 


Gracious are your feet firmly fixed in liberality 
and compassion. The devotees offer their homage of 
soma there for glory. You are all conquering, wielder of 
the thunderbolt, mighty generous by your own essential 
power and munificence, and, wearing a fragrant, 
glorious and heavenly robe, blissful sight for all to see, 
O director of the cosmic dance, you are the all moving, 
all inspiring, omniscient presence and power. 


aa आमिश्लतमः सुतो भूदास्पिन्पक्तिः पच्यते सन्तिं 
धानाः | इन्द्रं नर: स्तुवन्तो ब्रह्मकारा उक्था शंस॑न्तो 
देवर्वाततमाः is ul 


4. Sa soma amislatamah suto bhud yasmin paktih 
pacyate santi dhanah. Indram narah stuvanto 
brahmakara uktha samsanto devavatatamah. 


That is the blessed dominion of Indra, ideal 
world order raised to systemic purity and integrated to 
organismic unity wherein soma is distilled and seasoned 
in plenty, ample food is prepared for all, food grains are 
grown in abundance, and leading lights of the people, 
divinely occupied, sing songs of appreciation in praise 
of Indra and rise to the heights of excellence bordering 
on divinity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 30 697 


न ते अन्तः शव॑सो धाय्यस्य वि तु बाबधे रोद॑सी afecar । 
आ ता सूरिः पृणति तूतुजानो यूथेवाप्सु समीजमान 
ऊती ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Na te antah Savaso dhayyasya vi tu babadhe 
rodast mahitva. A ta surih prnati tutujano 
yuthevapsu samijamana uti. 


No one can reach the end of your power, the force 
that binds up heaven and earth as a handful of dust in space. 
Still the man of courage and vision without fear, moving 
at supersonic speed under the cover of your protection, 
does attain that pleasure of fulfilment which a host of thirsty 
travellers finds at a shady fount of holy waters. 


एवेदिन्द्रः सुहवं ऋष्वो अस्तूती अनूती हिरिशिप्रः सत्वां । 
एवा हि जातो अस्ंमात्योजाः पुरू च॑ वृत्रा हनति नि 


दस्युंन्‌॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Evedindrah suhava rsvo astuti anuti hirisiprah 
satva. Eva hi jato asamatyojah puru ca vrtra 
hanati ni dasyun. 


Thus may the lord sublime, omnipotent Indra, 
ever active in golden glory, listen to the prayers of 
universal humanity in all direct and indirect modes of 
divine protection and grace. Thus does the lord, self- 
manifest in boundless power and glory, create and 
preserve the abundant wealth of good and destroy 
darkness, enmity and negation of evil. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 30 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
भूय इद्वावृधे dita एको अलुर्यो daa ahr । प्र रिरिचे 
दिव इन्द्र॑ः पृथिव्या अर्धमिदस्य प्रति रोद॑सी उभे।॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


698 RGVEDA 


I Bhuya id vavrdhe viryayan eko ajuryo dayate 
vasuni. Pra ririce diva indrah prthivya ardha- 
midasya prati rodasi ubhe. 


Again and again the one ageless Indra grows in 
manifestation to express his power and creates, 
preserves and gives all wealths of the world. The sun 
from the regions of light covers half of the earth and 
relieves the other half. In turn, the earth and the sky 
both receive only half of the light and heat, and the sun 
exceeds and excels both. 


अधां मन्ये बृहदसुर्यमस्य यानि दाधार्‌ नकिरा मिंनाति। 
दिवेदिवे सूर्यो दर्शतो भूद्वि सदयान्युर्विंया सुक्रतुर्धात्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Adha manye brhadasuryamasya yani dadhara 
nakira minati. Divedive suryo darsato bhud 
vi sadmanyurviya sukraturdhat. 


And I know and honour the extensive luminous 
life giving power and energy of this sun and of the many 
planets that it holds and sustains, which no power can 
deny, disturb, diminish or destroy. Day by day, every 
morning, the sun rises glorious and, holy participant in 
the cosmic yajna of Indra, it generates and sustains many 
abodes of life along with the wide earth. 


अद्या faa fared! नदीनां यदाभ्यो अर॑दो गातुपिन्द्र। 
नि पर्व"ता अद्यसदो न सेदुस्त्वया gaat सुक्रतो 
रजांसि ॥ ३॥ 


3s Adya cinnu cit tadapo nadinam yadabhyo arado 
gatumindra. Ni parvata admasado na sedus- 

tvaya drlhani sukrato rajamsi. 
Indra, refulgent lord, now as ever you draw up 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 30 699 


the waters of the rivers by evaporation, shower them 
and let them flow in river beds to the sea. You attract 
the earth by gravitation and let it move in orbit. You fix 
the mountains in place and float the clouds in windy 
courses, everything in place like guests in a dinner party. 
Indeed, O lord of holy action in cosmic yajna, by you 
are all regions of the universe set in place, firm and 
secure. 


सत्यमित्तन्न waral अन्यो अस्तीन्द्र देवो न मर्त्यो ज्यायान्‌। 
agate परिशयानमर्णोऽ वांसूजो अपो अच्छं समुद्रम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Satyamit tanna tvavan anyo astindra devo na 
martyo jyayan. Ahannahim parisayanamarno 
*yasrjo apo accha samudram. 


Indra, refulgent lord eternal, true it is there is 
no one else divine or human as great as you who break 
the dark and dormant cloud, release the showers of rain 
and let the whirling streams flow and join the rolling 
ocean. Similarly, O lord omnipotent, you break the dark 
silence of sleeping nature from the state of inertness 
and set the processes of creative evolution aflow and 
let them ultimately recede into the fathomless ocean of 
silence again. 


त्वमपो वि दुरो विषुःचीरिन्द्रं qaedea: पर्व॑तस्य । 
राजाभवो जगंतश्चर्षणीनां साकं सूर्य" जनयन्द्या- 
मुषासंम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


Tvamapo vi duro visuctrindra drlhamarujah 
parvatasya. Rajabhavo jagatascarsaninam 
sakam suryam janayan dyamusasam. 


Indra, you break open the impenetrable doors 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


700 RGVEDA 


of the cloud and release the rain showers. You break 
the adamantine mountains and let the waters flow in 
river courses. You break the bottomless inertness of life 
energy and let it flow in evolutionary channels of human 
action and courses of history. Creating the children of 
the moving world along with the sun and dawn of the 
day and the regions of heaven and earth, you reign 
supreme as light of the world, refulgent creator and 
ultimate dispenser. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 31 
Indra Devata, Suhotra Bharadvaja Rshi 


अभूरेको रयिपते रयीणामा हस्त॑योरधिथा इन्द्र ST: | 
वि तोके अप्सु तन॑ये च ats वोचन्त चर्षणयो विवाचः ॥ ९॥ 


1. Abhureko rayipate rayinama hastayoradhitha 
indra krstth. Vi toke apsu tanaye ca sure’vocanta 
carsanayo vivacah. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, in you vests the 
governance and control of the entire wealth and assets 
of the nation, pray be the sole possessor and custodian 
of national wealth, O lord of honour and excellence. In 
your hands alone lies the direction of the nation, 
producers, workers and defence forces all. The wisest 
people of the land speaking different languages in 
different styles, in their words and actions describe and 
celebrate the brilliance of the rule and governance of 
Indra to their children and grand children. 


त्वद्धियेन्द्र पार्थि वानि fasarsetar चिच्च्यावयन्ते रजांसि । 
द्यावाक्षामा पर्व॑तासो वनानि विश्वं gad vad अज्मन्ना 
ते॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 31 701 


2. Tvad bhiyendra parthivani visva’cyuta ciccya- 
vayante rajamsi. Dyavaksama parvataso vanani 
visvam drlham bhayate ajmanna te. 


Indra, sole lord of law and power, by the fear 
and pressure of your presence, all the unshakables on 
earth and in the skies stir and move along their functional 
course. Heaven and earth, clouds and mountains, deep 
forests, indeed the entire fixed and functionary world 
of existence fears the unmoved motion of your pervasive 
presence and dare not relent in their function. 


त्वं कुत्सेनाभि शुष्णमिन्द्राऽणशुषं युध्य कुय॑वं गविष्टौ । 
aot प्रपित्वे अध सूर्यस्य मुषायश्चक्रमविवे रपांसि ॥ ३ ॥ 


3; Tvam kutsenabhi susnamindra’susam yudhya 
kuyavam gavistau. Dasa prapitve adha suryasya 
musayascakramavive rapamsi. 


Indra, lord ruler and giver of light, having fought 
out the voracious drought and bad harvest with the 
thunderbolt of natural energy, keen for success in the 
development of lands and cows and the project of solar 
energy, you deplete ten injurious impediments and ride 
the chariot of the dominion like the sun in orbit. 


त्वं शतान्यव शम्ब॑रस्य पुरोजघन्थाप्रतीनि दस्यो: । अर्शिंश्चो 
यत्र शर्च्या शचीवो दिवोदासाय सुन्वते सुतक्रे भरद्वाजाय 
गृणते वसूनि ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Tvam satanyava sambarasya puro jaghantha- 
pratini dasyoh. Asikso yatra Sacya Sacivo divoda- 
saya sunvate sutakre bharadvajaya grnate vasuni. 

Break open the hundreds of hidden strongholds 
and treasures of the wealth and power of the dark clouds 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


702 RGVEDA 


and hoards collected by the thief, and there, O lord of 
light and power of knowledge and wisdom, with 
knowledge and expertise, provide the means and 
materials of prosperity and well being for the 
advancement of the generous scientist, creative artist, 
pharmacist, technologist and celebrant of divinity. 


स स॑त्यसत्वन्मह॒ते रणाय रथमा fas afeseor भीमम्‌। 
याहि प्र॑पथिन्नवसोप॑ं मद्धिक्प्र च॑ श्रुत श्रावय चर्षणि- 
भ्यः ॥ ५॥ 


2; Sa satyasatvan mahate ranaya rathama tistha 
tuvinrmna bhimam. Yahi prapathinnavasopa 
madrik pra ca sruta Sravaya carsanibhyah. 


O lord commander of the power of truth and 
reality, master of manifold wealth and splendour, ready 
for the arduous battle of life, ride the awesome chariot, 
go forward, traveller of the path of rectitude, come to 
us too with the wisdom of revealed omniscience with 
all your modes of defence and protection and proclaim 
the truth for the people. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 32 
Indra Devata, Suhotra Bharadvaja Rshi 
अपूर्यां पुरुतमान्यस्मै महे वीराय॑ तवसे qa । विर ष्िनें 
ahant शन्तमानि वचांस्यासा स्थविराय तक्षम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


Ls Apurvya purutamanyasmai mahe viraya tavase 
turaya. VirapSine vajrine Santamani vacam-syasa 
sthaviraya taksam. 


Let me compose an original and comprehensive 
song of praise in my own, words in a state of peace 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 32 703 


overflowing with reverence in honour of this great hero, 
Indra, mighty performer of action, admirable wielder 
of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment, unshakable 
embodiment of tranquillity. 


स मातरा सूर्येणा कवीनामवासयद्भुजदद्विः YU: | 
स्वाधीभिकऋक्रभिर्वावशान उदुस्रियाणामस्रजन्निदानंम्‌॥ २॥ 


2. Sa matara suryena kavinamavasayad rujadadrim 
grnanah. Svadhibhir-rkvabhir-vavasana udu- 
sriyanam-asrjan-nidanam. 


By the light of the sun, he illuminates the heaven 
and earth, protectors and inspirers of poets like father 
and mother. Breaking the cloud of showers, shaking 
the mountains of impediments and inhibitions of mind, 
sung and celebrated in songs of praise and jubilation, 
pleased, inspiring and illuminant in response to the 
homage of reverence, he opens the flood gates of light 
and song in words, breaking off all impediments to the 
original vision and imagination of the poet. 


स वह्धिभिऋ क्रभिर्गोषु शश्वंन्मितज्ञुभिः qeareat जिगाय । 
पुर॑ः पुरोहा सखिभिः सखी यन्दूव््हा रुरोज कविभिः कविः 
सन्‌॥ ३॥ ति 

2. Sa vahnibhir-rkvabhir-gosu Sasvan mitajnubhih 
purukrtva jigaya. Purah puroha sakhibhih 
sakhiyan drtha ruroja kavibhih kavih san. 


He is the ruler, himself a visionary, friend of 
friends, relentless hero of abundant action, breaker of 
the strongholds of darkness, and with the company and 
support of assisting partners, celebrants and poetic 
creators sitting in meditative posture, he breaks the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


704 RGVEDA 


adamantine rigidities of dead wood and wins the battles 
for the development of lands and cows and the 
advancement of knowledge, arts and enlightenment. 


स नीरव्याभिर्जरितार मच्छ महो वाजेंभिरर्पहद्धिश्च opel: । 
पुरुवीराभिर्वृषभ क्षितीनामा गिर्वणः सुविताय प्र यांहि॥।  ॥ 


4. Sa nivyabhir-jaritaram-accha maho vajabhir- 
mahadbhisca susmaih. Puruvirabhir-vrsabha 
ksiti-nama girvanah suvitaya pra yahi. 


Indra, mighty brave and generous ruler, sung 
and celebrated in song, come well to the celebrant for 
the well being of the people and bless them with high 
spirits and ambition for victory and latest great powers 
and forces manned by many heroic leaders and warriors 
of the rising generation. 


स सर्गेण शव॑सा तक्तो अत्यैरप इन्द्रो दक्षिणतस्तुराषाट्‌। 
इत्था dart अन॑पावृदर्थ' दिवेदिवे विविषुरप्रमृष्यम्‌ & ॥ 

5: Sa sargena Savasa takto atyairapa indro daksina- 
tasturasat. Ittha srjana anapavrdartham divedive 
vivisurapr-amrsyam. 

Indra, mighty ruler, instant victor, come happy 
and jubilant with vibrant new forces of creation, with 
dynamic pioneers advancing like winds who may, thus, 
creating, preserving, reconstructing, discovering new 
goals day by day, move on, realise anew indestructible 
eternal values and never look back. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 33 
Indra Devata, Shunahotra Bharadvaja Rshi 


य ओजिंछ इन्द्र तं सु नो anal वृषन्त्स्वभिष्िदस्विन्‌। 
सौवश्व्यं यो वनवत्स्वश्वो gar समत्सु सासहदमित्रान्‌ ॥। ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 33 705 


a Ya ojistha indra tam su no da mado vrsant- 
svabhistir-dasvan. Sauvasvyam yo vanavat svasvo 
vrtra samatsu sasahadamitran. 


Indra, lord of honour and excellence, ruler most 
illustrious, generous, victorious and beneficent, inspired 
with ardent passion, give us that stormy force of dynamic 
action for achievement which, equipped with instant 
and unfailing capability, may fight out the unfriendly 
powers of darkness in the contests of life and win the 
wealths of high value in the world for our cherished 
goal. 


त्वां ही ३न्द्राव॑से विवाचो हवन्ते चर्षणयः शूर॑सातौ । 
त्वं विप्रेथिर्विं पणीरंशायस्त्वोत इत्सनिता वाजमवी ॥ २॥ 


2. Tvam hindravase vivaco havante carsanayah 
Surasatau. Tvam viprebhirvi paninrasayastvota 
it sanita vajamarva. 


You alone, O lord ruler, Indra, the people of 
diverse speech adore and invoke in diverse words in 
battles of the brave for protection and success. You 
alone, with the wise and vibrant, subdue the uncreative 
and greedy, and you alone give peace and rest to the 
celebrants. Indeed, under your protection only, does the 
cavalier and the warrior win the light of knowledge and 
victory in action. 


त्वं at इन्द्रो भर्या अमित्रान्दासां garvaret च शूर । 
वधीर्वनैव सुधितिभिरत्कैरा पृत्सु aft नृणां नुंतम॥ ३॥ 


a Tvam tan indrobhayan amitran dasa vrtranyarya 
ca Sura. Vadhirvaneva sudhitebhir-atkaira prtsu 
darsi nrnam nrtama. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


706 RGVEDA 


Indra, brave ruler, leading light of the leaders, 
with focussed, objective and decisive judgement, 
distinguish between both opponents and supporters, the 
vile and the noble, split open both clearly to full 
exposure, and, with decisive blows of unfailing tactic, 
fight out the negatives in the contests of the dominion 
just like a forester felling the dead wood with sharpened 
axe. 


सत्वं न॑ इन्द्राकवाभिरूती wat विश्वायुरविता वृधे भूः | 
स्व॑र्षाता यद्ध्वयामसि त्वा युध्य॑न्तो नेमधिता पृत्सु 
शर ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sa tvam na indrakavabhiruti sakha visvayuravita 
vrdhe bhuh. Svarsata yaddhvayamasi tva yudh- 
yanto nemadhita prtsu Sura. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world, life of life and 
giver of showers of bliss, be our friend and protector 
with all your modes of defence and protection for our 
advancement without reserve or restriction. Fighting our 
battles of life, O brave and generous hero, defender of 
good against evil, we invoke and call upon you to come 
and help us with love and grace. 


नूनं न॑ sara च स्या भवा मृव्टीक उत नों अभिष्टौ । 
इत्था गृणन्तो! महिनस्य शर्मन्दिवि ष्याम पार्ये गोष- 
त॑माः॥ ५॥ 

2; Nunam na indraparaya ca sya bhava mrlika uta 


no abhistau. Ittha grnanto mahinasya Sarman divi 
syama parye gosatamah. 


Indra, lord of life, for sure be our friend and 
protector, and saviour of others too, for now and for 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 34 707 


ever, and for the attainment of our cherished goal be 
kind and gracious. Singing, celebrating and glorifying 
the splendour of the great lord, we pray, may we abide 
in the high heaven of divine felicity and, blest with the 
sacred Word of Divinity, swim across the seas of 
suffering to freedom. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 34 
Indra Devata, Shunahotra Bharadvaja Rshi 


सं च त्वे woh इन्दर पूर्वं वि च त्वद्यन्ति विभ्वो! मनीषाः | 
पुरा नूनं च॑ स्तुतय ऋषीणां पस्पृश्च इन्द्रे अध्युक्थार्का ॥ ९ ॥ 
॥ Sam ca tve jagmurgira indra purvirvi ca tvad 


yanti vibhvo manisah. Pura nunam ca stutaya 
rsinam pasprdhra indre adhyuktharka. 


Indra, lord giver of thought, speech and 
knowledge, all universal thoughts and diverse forms 
and words of the eternal Word, all languages past, 
present and future, proceed from you, return unto you 
and abide in you. For sure, all ancient hymns and 
recitations, all interpretive adorations of the seers 
divining into the visions and meanings of the mantras 
vie with each other to reach and concentrate on the glory 
of Indra. 


पुरुहूतो यः dead sal एक॑ः पुरुप्रशस्तो अस्तिं यज्ञैः । 
रथो न महे शव॑से युजानो ३ ऽस्माधिरिन्द्रो' अनुमाद्यो 
भूत्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Puruhuto yah purugurta rbhvan ekah puru- 
prasasto asti yajnaih. Ratho na mahe savase 
yujano ’smabhirindro anumadyo bhiut. 

Indra who is invoked by many, admired by 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


708 RGVEDA 


many, sole lord adored by many, is sought after by the 
wise through creative and reflective yajnic endeavours 
for the pursuit of great vision and power with 
concentrated mind in meditation. May he be like a 
chariot for us across the world of life and consequently 
give us ultimate freedom and joy. 


न यं हिंस॑न्ति धीतयो न वाणीरिन्द्रं नक्चन्तीदभि वर्धय॑न्तीः। 
afd स्तोतारः शतं यत्सहस्रं गृणन्ति गिर्वणसं शं 
तद॑स्मै ॥ ३॥ 


Na yam himsanti dhitayo na vanirindram 
naksantidabhi vardhayantth. Yadi stotarah satam 
yat sahasram grnanti girvanasam sam tadasmai. 


No thoughts can violate Indra, the ruler, nor hurt 
him, nor can words comprehend him. In fact, the 
thoughts and words of devotees exalt and glorify him. 
And when celebrants offer a hundred and thousand 
adorations to this lord of exaltation, he is pleased and 
then peace and bliss of well being descends on the 
devotee. 


अस्मां एतदिव्यवर्चेव॑ं मासा मिंपिश्च इन्द्रे न्य॑यामि ara: 1 
जनं न धन्वन्नभि सं यदाप॑ः सत्रा वावृधुर्हवनानि यज्ञैः ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Asma etad divyarceva masa mimiksa indre 
nyayami somah. Janam na dhanvannabhi sam 
yadapah satra vavrdhur-havanani yajnaih. 


Just as soma, nectar juice of nature, mixes with 
the moon and the moon mixes fully with the sun once 
in the month on full moon night, so in this heavenly 
relation of life and action between Indra, the ruler, and 
the devotee, I join with Indra, and just as showers of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 35 709 


rain in the desert exhilarate the people so may the 
sessions of yajna advance the devotees and thereby may 
they exalt and glorify the lord. 


अस्मां एतन्मह्याङ्गूषमंस्मा इन्द्राय स्तोत्रं मतिभिरवाचि | 
असद्यथा महति dada इन्द्रो! विश्वायुरविता वृधश्च ॥ ५ ॥ 


5, Asma etanmahyangusamasma indraya stotram 
matibhiravaci. Asad yatha mahati vrtraturya 
indro visvayuravita vrdhasca. 


For this Indra, this ruler, this giver of the light 
of life, is this exalted song of praise and adoration sung 
and offered by faithful and intelligent devotees so that 
for the victory of light over darkness and ignorance in 
this battle of life Indra, lord of all life and the world, 
may be our protector and guardian for advancement. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 35 
Indra Devata, Nara Bharadvaja Rshi 


कदा भुंवत्रथ॑क्षयाणि ब्रह्मं कदा स्तोत्रे Geeraret दाः। 
कदा स्तोमं वासयोऽ स्य राया कदा धिय॑ः करसि वाजं- 
Tat: ॥ ९॥ 


0 Kada bhuvan rathaksayani brahma kada stotre 
sahasraposyam dah. Kada stomam vasayo’sya 
raya kada dhiyah karasi vajaratnah. 


When would your chariots come to rest in the 
garage? When do you give away a thousand prizes of 
support and sustenance at the victory celebration? When 
do you reward the celebrant with wealth for his song? 
And when do you make our acts of thought and will 
fructify with the wealth of success and victory? 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


710 RGVEDA 


al? स्वित्तर्दिन्दर्‌ यन्नृभिर्नृन्वीरैर्वीरान्नीव्छयांसे जयाजीन्‌। 
त्रिधातु गा अधिं जयासि गोष्विन्द्र दयुम्नं cele ST Ut २ ॥ 


2, Karhi 5171 tadindra yannrbhinrn virairviran 
nilayase jayajin. Tridhatu ga adhi jayasi gosvi- 
ndra dyumnam svarvad dhehyasme. 


When is it, Indra, brilliant ruler, that you bring 
people to meet with people, the brave to meet with the 
brave, vying in contest to win the battles of progress, 
conquer threefold wealth of knowledge and minerals 
over the lands and create and bring us celestial and 
blissful wealth, honour and excellence? 


कर्हि स्वित्तर्दिन्द्र asia विश्वप्सु ब्रह्म॑ pura: शविष्ठ । 
कदा धियो न नियुतो युवासे कदा गोम॑घा हव॑नानि 
गच्छः WB 


a: Karhi svit tadindra yajjaritre visvapsu brahma 
krnavah savistha. Kada dhiyo na niyuto yuvase 
kada gomagha havanani gacchah. 


Indra, most potent ruler of the world, when 
would you bring that wealth of knowledge and holiness 
of universal form and character which we too desire for 
the celebrant? Commanding highest virtue, when would 
you join and inspire our thought and will to rise for the 
grand leap forward? When would you lead us to win 
the cherished honour, splendour and glory of the earth 
worthy of you? 


स गोम॑घा जरित्रे अश्वश्चन्द्रा वाजश्रवसो अधिं धेहि get: | 
पीपिहीषः सुदुघामिन्द्र धेनुं भरद्वाजषु सुरुचो रुरुच्याः ॥ ॐ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 35 711 


4. Sa gomagha jaritre asvascandra vajasravaso adhi 
dhehi prksah. Pipihisah sudughamindra dhenum 
bharadvajesu suruco rurucyah. 


Indra, ruler of the world, give us the honour and 
excellence of a free world order, liquid wealth of gold 
in circulation, progressive advancement and renown in 
abundance for a planned programme, and drink the soma 
of attainable success worthy of a nation of knowledge, 
virtue and love of divinity, and thus help us create and 
structure an earthly order of fruitful prosperity for the 
dynamic bearers of science and action, a lovely world 
of beauty and splendour indeed. 


तमा नूनं वृजन॑मन्यथा चिच्छूरो यच्छक्र वि दुरो oie | 
मा निररं शुक्रदुघ॑स्य धेनोराङ्धिर सान्त्र्मणा विप्र जिन्व ॥ ५॥ 


a, Tama nunam vrjanamanyatha cicchuro yaccha- 
kra vi duro grnise. Ma niraram sukradughasya 
dhenorangirasan brahmana vipra jinva. 


Indra, valiant ruler, lord of knowledge and 
power, destroyer of darkness, hate and enmity, let the 
paths of love and progress you approve and proclaim 
and the doors of new knowledge you open never be 
otherwise, keep them wide open onwards. O vibrant 
lover of knowledge and advancement, never forsake the 
faithful scholars of divine nature’s fertility, vitality and 
virility, never desert the visionaries of the divine Word 
of Veda, serve and advance them with means and 
materials for relentless pursuit of knowledge and life’s 
sanctity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


712 RGVEDA 


Mandala 6/Sukta 36 
Indra Devata, Nara Bharadvaja Rshi 


सत्रा मदासस्तव विशूवज॑न्याः सत्रा रायोऽध ये पार्थिवासः। 
सत्रा वाजानामभवो विभक्ता यदेवेषुं धारयथा असुर्यम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


ie Satra madasastava visvajanyah satra rayo’dha 
ye parthivasah. Satra vajanamabhavo vibhakta 
yad devesu dharayatha asuryam. 


Truly all your joys and inspirations, Indra, are 
universal, meant for the world. Truly all your earthly 
wealth, power and honour is for all children of the earth. 
Truly you are the wielder and distributor of all forms of 
food and energy which you bear and bring forth in the 
divinities of nature and humanity as the very breath of life. 


अनु प्र येजे जन ओजो अस्य सत्रा द॑धिरे अनुं वीयीय। 
स्यूमगृभे दुधयेऽ dd च क्रतुं वृञ्जन्त्यपिं व ्रहत्ये ॥ २ ॥ 


2: Anu pra yeje jana ojo asya satra dadhire anu 
viryaya. Syumagrbhe dudhaye’rvate ca kratum 
vrnjantyapi vrtrahatye. 


Consequently people honour, value and worship 
the vigour and splendour of Indra in this world, and 
truly they develop it for the attainment of higher strength 
and vitality, and, for the attainment of united 
advancement of the progressive forces and countering 
the forces of negation in the battle against darkness, 
they gather their powers, perform concerted yajnic 
action and root out evil and wickedness. 


तं सध्रीचीरूतयो वृष्ण्यानि death Fad: सश्चुरिन्द्र॑म्‌ । 
समुद्रं न सिन्ध॑व उक्थशुष्मा उरुव्यचसं गिर आ विशन्ति ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 36 713 


a Tam sadhricirutayo vrsnyani paumsyani niyutah 
sascurindram. Samudram na sindhava ukthasu- 
sma uruvyacasam gira a visanti. 


All modes of protection and security, showers 
of strength and generosity, manliness and vigour and 
allied virtues and actions converge to Indra, join and 
abide in him. Just as rivers flow and reach the sea, so 
do all resonant voices of adoration and admirable 
qualities of life reach the lord all pervasive in the wide 
world. 


स रायस्खामुप॑ सृजा गृणानः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य त्वमिन्द्र aed: | 
पतिर्बभूथासंमो जनानामेको विश्व॑स्य भुव॑नस्य राजां ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Sa rayaskhamupa srja grnanah puruscandrasya 
tvamindra vasvah. Patirbabhuthasamo janana- 
meko visvasya bhuvanasya raja. 


Indra, sole ruler of the whole world, be the one 
unequalled master and protector of the people and of 
the golden wealth of the land, and, adored and glorified 
by them, release the streams of wealth, honour and 
excellence of the world for us. 


aq safe श्रुत्या यो ठुवोयुद्य्निं भूमाभि रायों अर्यः। 
असो यथा नः शव॑सा चकानो युगेयुगे वय॑सा चेकिं- 
तानः UG I 
>; Sa tu Srudhi Srutya yo duvoyurdyaurna bhumabhi 
rayo aryah. Aso yatha nah Savasa cakano 
yugeyuge vayasa cekitanah. 
Listen to our prayers and adorations, Indra, lord 


ruler who love the prayers and adorations of devotees, 
who are resplendent as sun and boundless as space, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


714 RGVEDA 


master, protector and giver of wealth, honour and 
excellence, so that shining by wealth and power, 
growing in knowledge and awareness day by day, you 
be, as you have been, kind and gracious to us as ever 
before. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 37 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


अर्वाग्रथं विश्ववारं त उग्रेन्द्र युक्तासो हर॑यो वहन्तु | 
कीरिश्चिद्धि त्वा हव॑ते स्वर्वानृधीमहि सधमादस्ते अद्य ॥ ९॥ 


Ly Arvagratham visvavaram ta ugrendra yuktaso 
harayo vahantu. Kirisciddhi tva havate svarvan- 
rdhimahi sadhamadaste adya. 


Indra, resplendent lord ruler of the world, we 
pray, may the motive powers attached to your chariot 
of universal wealth and bliss bring you hither to us. So 
does the enlightened celebrant with joy at heart invoke 
and invite you today so that we too who abide with you 
in the hall of assembly may grow and prosper. 


प्रो द्रोणे हर॑यः क्मीग्मन्पुनानास ऋज्य॑न्तो अभूवन्‌ । seat 
नो अस्य पूर्व्यः प॑पीयाद्‌ दयुक्षो मद॑स्य सोम्यस्य राजा ॥ २ ॥ 


De Pro drone harayah karmagman punanasa rjyanto 
abhuvan. Indro no asya purvyah papiyad dyukso 
madasya somyasya raja. 


Let the people go forward and higher in the 
measure of action and achievement and continue to rise 
in the sacred manner of simple and natural rectitude. 
And may Indra, ancient ruler of the world bright as 
heaven on earth, shining and ruling over the delightful 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 37 715 


order of bliss, rise exuberant and drink of the joy of 
soma, peace and glory of the order. 


आसस््राणासंः शवसानमच्छेन्द्रं सुचक्रे रथ्यासो अश्वाः । 
अभि श्रव ऋल्यंन्तो वहेयुर्नू fag वायोर सतं वि द॑स्येत्‌ 3 ॥ 


3: Asasranasah Ssavasanamacchendram sucakre 
rathyaso asvah. Abhi srava rjyanto vaheyurnu 
cinnu vayoramrtam vi dasyet. 


May the motive powers of the chariot of mighty 
Indra, ever on the move in the divine orbit in a simple 
and natural manner, gracefully bear the lord to the chant 
of our yajnic programmes of humanity. Let the immortal 
breath of life never be exhausted, let no one waste away 
the nectar vitality of immortality. 


afer अस्य दश्चिणामियर्तीन्द्रो मघोनां तुविकूर्मितमः । यया 
वञिवः परियास्यंहो मघा च॑ धृष्णो दयसे वि सूरीन्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Varistho asya daksinamiyartindro maghonam 
tuvikurmitamah. Yaya vajrivah pariyasyanho 
magha ca dhrsno dayase vi surin. 


Indra, highest power of the dominion and fastest 
performer among men of wealth and splendour, achieves 
and raises the strength and honour of this social order 
by which, O lord of courage and power, wielder of the 
thunder of justice and punishment, you remove sin and 
crime and give rich gifts of reward and recognition to 
the scholars and the brave heroes. 


इन्द्रो वाज॑स्य स्थविरस्य दातेन्द्रो गीर्भिर्वर्धतां वृन्दमंहाः | 
इन्द्रो Gat हनिं्ठो अस्तु सत्वा ऽऽता सूरिः पूंणति 
तूतुजानः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


716 RGVEDA 


D: Indro vajasya sthavirasya dateindro girbhirva- 
rdhatam vrddhamahah. Indro vrtram hanistho 
astu satva’’ta surih prnati tutujanah. 


Indra is the giver of solid strength and stable 
progress. May Indra, celebrated by the great and exalted 
by our words of adoration, rise in glory. Indra is the 
destroyer of darkness in the extreme, brilliant and brave 
in the essence, and, instant performer as he is, learned, 
he is, and the giver of complete fulfilment. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 38 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


अर्पादित उदु, नश्चित्रत॑मो महीं aig द्युमतीमिन्द् ears 
पन्य॑सीं धीतिं दैव्य॑स्य यामञ्जनस्य रातिं व॑नते सुदानुं: ॥ ९ ॥ 


दु Apadita udu nascitratamo mahim bharsad dyuma- 
tim-indrahutim. Panyasim dhitim daivyasya 
yamanjanasya ratim vanate sudanuh. 


May Indra, lord immaculate, wondrous power 
and glorious ruler, perfect, self-existent and self- 
sustained, be here direct and accept and exalt our sincere, 
abundant and brilliant voice of adoration in honour of 
divinity. The lord is a generous and munificent giver, 
loves the celebrative voice of the heart and cherishes the 
homage of noble godly people on way to divinity. 


दूराच्चिदा व॑सतो अस्य कर्णां घोषादिन्द्रस्य तन्यति FATT: | 
एयमेंनं dag fren गिन्द्रमियमृच्यमाना ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Duraccida vasato asya karna ghosad-indrasya 
tanyati bruvanah. Eyamenam devahitirvav- 
rtyanmadryag-indram-iyam-rcyamana. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 38 717 


The ears of this lord Indra receive the voice of 
the speaker even from far off wherever he be, and from 
that voice, speaking in response, he raises it to the roar 
of thunder. May this voice of mine in honour of divinity, 
reaching and celebrating the lord of glory, come back 
to me, complete the circuit and bless me as voice divine. 


तं वो धिया deat qa fest मभ्यनूष्यरकः । wart 
च गिरो दधिरे सम॑स्मिन्महोंश्च स्तोमो अधिं वर्धदिन्द्रे।॥ ३॥ 


a Tam vo dhiyad paramaya purajam-ajaram- 
indram-abhyanusyarkaih. Brahma ca giro 
dadhire samasmin mahansca_ stomo adhi 
vardhadindre. 


For you all with the best and highest of mind 
and faith I proclaim and celebrate the ancient and 
unaging Indra, cosmic energy of the Divine with yajnic 
gifts of homage. The eternal consciousness of 
omniscience and the voice of the Vedas all resound in 
this cosmic medium and the mighty yajna of creation 
and evolution too renews, evolves and expands under 
this same Indra, divine energy. 


वध्यं यज्ञ उत सोम इन्द्रं वर्धाद्‌ ब्रह्य गिर॑ उक्था च मन्म॑। 
वर्धांहिनमुषसो याम॑त्रक्तोर्वर्धान्मासाः शरदो द्याव इन्द्रम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Vardhad yam yajna uta soma indram vardhad 
brahma gira uktha ca manma. Vardhahaina- 
musaso yamannaktorvardhan masah sarado 
dyava indram. 


Let yajna, corporate programmes of research and 
development, advance Indra, power and application of 
the electric energy of nature. Let soma, positive creations 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


718 RGVEDA 


and the scholar dedicated to peace and universal 
happiness extend the possibilities of power. Let the 
divine words of the Veda and the achievement of food 
and energy of universal value exalt Indra, lord of divine 
energy. And let the dawns, days and nights, hours, 
months, seasons, earth and heaven, all glorify Indra, 
lord of the universe. Let our thought and chants of holy 
word glorify him. 


एवा Sart सह॑से असामि वावृधानं राध॑से च ATs | 
महामुग्रमवसे विप्र नूनमा विवासेम qaqa 


5. Eva jajnanam sahase asami vavrdhanam radhase 
ca Srutaya. Maham-ugram-avase vipra nunama 
vivasema vrtraturyesu. 


Thus for the sake of strength and power, patience 
and fortitude as well as for challenge, for defence, 
protection and victory in our battles against darkness, 
want and evil, for the sake of onward achievement of 
wealth and success, and for the use and advancement 
of the vibrant learned scholar, O holy sage, let us all 
dedicate ourselves decisively and relentlessly to the 
great, illustrious, and perfect energy of divine nature, 
evolving, rising, and constantly developing it for us by 
our yajnic efforts, and let us thus serve and glorify Indra, 
omnipotent lord of the universe. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 39 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


Teed कवेर्दिव्यस्य वद्धर्विप्र॑मनमनो वचनस्य Head: | 
अपां ere cereal देवेषो! युवस्व गृणते MST: ॥ ९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 39 719 


im Mandrasya kaverdivyasya vahnervipram-anmano 
vacanasya madhvah. Apa nastasya sacanasya 
deveso yuvasva grnate goagrah. 


Taste the honey sweet of the Word of this happy 
and blissful divine poet, celebrant of light, inspirer of 
passion and vision of wisdom, and friend of Divinity. 
O refulgent lord of generosity, protect and promote the 
brilliant and revealing Word of the poet, bless the servant 
of divinity with energy and sustenance and reveal the 
words of divinity for the celebrant. 


अयमुशानः पर्यद्विमुस््रा ऋतधींतिभिऋतयुग्युजानः। 
रुजदरुग्णं वि वलस्य सानुं पणीं्वचोभिरभि योधदिन्द्र ॥ २॥ 


2. Ayamusanah paryadrimusra rtadhitibhir-rtayu- 
gyujanah. Rujadarugnam vi valasya sanum 
paninrvacobhirabhi yodhadindrah. 


This poet, like the sun, loving, inspiring and 
impassioned, in unison with the truth and law of 
existence, with waves of energy bearing rays of light 
and showers of rain, breaks the clouds of darkness, lights 
up impenetrable tops of mighty mountains, opens up 
treasures of wealth, and blesses the untainted and the 
celebrants. Thus does Indra fight and shine. 


अयं द्योतयदद्युतो व्यरक्तन्दोषा वस्तोः शरद इन्दुरिन्द्र । 
इमं queer facet शुचिंजन्मन उषसं श्चकार ॥ ३ ॥ 
ध Ayam dyotayadadyuto vyaktun dosa vastoh 


Sarada indurindra. Imam ketum-adadhur-nu 
cidahnam sucijanmana usasascakara. 


Thus does this sun, this cosmic drop of divine 
soma, light up the unlighted: the nights, the mornings, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


720 RGVEDA 


days and seasons of the year. Thus does Indra create the 
light of immaculate dawns which bear up the light as 
banner of the days. 


अयं रोचयदरुचो रुचानो ३ऽ यं वांसयद्‌ व्यु ९तेन॑ पूर्वीः । 
अयमीयत ऋतयुग्िरण्वैः स्वर्विदा नाभिना चर्ष- 
fora: ४॥ 


4. Ayam rocayad-aruco rucano’yam vasayad 
vyrtena purvih. Ayamiyata rtayugbhir-asvaih 
svarvida nabhina carsaniprah. 


This Indra, the sun, itself refulgent, lights up 
the lightless such as earth and moon, and it lights up 
the ancient dawns, by the operation of cosmic law. It 
goes on in orbit by the centre pin of cosmic gravitation 
with other heavenly bodies such as planets and satellites, 
drawn by the motive forces of cosmic law and giving 
light and comfort primarily to the people of the earth. 


नू गणानो गंणते da राजन्निषः पिन्व वसुदेयाय पूर्वीः | 
अप ओष॑धीरविषा वनानि गा अर्व॑तो नृ नृचसें रिरीहि ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Nu grnano grnate pratna rajannisah pinva vasu- 
deyaya purvih. Apa osdhiravisa vanani ga arvato 
nrnrcase_ rirthi. 


Rajan, brilliant ruler, ancient power, praised and 
celebrated by devotees, develop and increase abundant 
food, energy and wealth for the dedicated liberal giver 
of charities, and for the development and accomplish- 
ment of holy programmes give waters, herbs, inobno- 
xious forests, cows, horses and brave leaders and 
competent manpower for the celebrant. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 40 721 


Mandala 6/Sukta 40 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


इन्द्र पिब तुभ्यं सुतो मदायाऽवं स्य हरी fa den सखाया । 
उत प्र गाय गण आ निषद्याऽर्थां यज्ञाय॑ गृणते वयो 
धाः॥ ९॥ 


iP Indra piba tubhyam suto madaya’va sya hari vi 
muca sakhaya. Uta pra gaya gana ठ nisadya-’tha 
yajnaya grnate vayo dhah. 


Indra, refulgent ruler, drink the soma of joy 
distilled for your pleasure and majesty, let the motive 
power of the dominion, the government and the people, 
too be free and relax since they are friends. Sit in the 
assembly of the dominion and sing and inspire the 
people to celebrate the holy occasion, and bear and bring 
food, good health and long age for the celebrant of the 
dominion to carry on the corporate business of 
governance and administration as a yajna for the lord. 


अस्य पिर यस्य॑ जज्ञान इन्द्र मर्दाय क्रत्वे siftiat विरण््छिन्‌। 
तमुं ते गावो नर्‌ आपो अद्विरिन्दुं सम॑ह्यन्पीतये सम॑स्मै tt २॥ 


2. Asya piba yasya jajnana indra madaya kratve 
apibo virapsin. Tamu te gavo nara apo adri- 
rindum samahyan pitaye samasmai. 


Indra, mighty ruler, drink of this nectar sweet 
of soma which you tasted at your birth and which you 
drank for passion and exhilaration while you arose for 
great action in the field of knowledge and governance, 
the same soma which the cows and rays of the sun, men 
and leaders, waters, clouds and mountains have 
collected and seasoned for this drink of yours. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


3222 RGVEDA 


atte अग्रौ सुत इन्द्र सोम आ त्वा वहन्तु हर॑यो ast: | 
त्वायता मन॑सा जोहवीमीन्द्रा याहि सुविताय महे न॑: ॥ ३ ॥ 


Sy Samiddhe agnau suta indra soma व tva vahantu 
harayo vahisthah. Tvayata manasa johavimi- 
indra yahi suvitaya mahe nah. 


When the fire is kindled and rising and the soma 
is distilled, let the strongest motive forces of transport 
and the most powerful leaders who can bear the burdens 
of the commonwealth bring you here. And when you 
are here I invoke and invite you with a mind wholly 
dedicated to you, Indra, destroyer of pain and suffering, 
come for our great pleasure and prosperity of well being. 


आ याहि शश्वदुशता dares महा मन॑सा area 
उप ब्र्हाणि श्ुणव इमा नोऽथा ते यज्ञस्तन्वे ३ वयो 
धात्‌॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A yahi sasvadusata yayathendra maha manasa 
somapeyam. Upa brahmani srnava ima no’ tha te 
yajnastanve vayo dhat. 


Indra, mighty ruler and dispenser of peace and 
prosperity, come here without let up with inspired sages 
and leaders with magnanimous mind and morale to this 
nectar drink of the soma of governance and 
enlightenment. Listen carefully to these songs of 
adoration and words of the Veda, and, we pray, may 
this yajnic business of governance and administration 
bear and bring us good food, energy and a long age of 
good health for our person and the social order. 


यदिन्द्र दिवि पार्ये ageragr स्वे सद ने यत्र वासि 1 stat 
नो यज्ञमव॑से नियुत्वान्त्सजो्षाः पाहि गिर्वणो were: ॥ ५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 41 723 


a Yadindra divi parye yadrdhagyad va sve sadane 
yatra vasi. Ato no yajnamavase niyutvant-sajosah 
pahi girvano marudbhih. 


Indra, enlightened ruler, admired and adored in 
refined words of homage and reverence, whether you 
are in a far off land of your choice you love to promote 
in a special direction or in your own place of residence, 
or wherever you happen to be, from there, O loving and 
friendly leader dedicated to the yajnic order of 
governance for its defence and protection, develop and 
promote the order by the most vibrant force of daring 
commandos. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 41 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


अैव्ठमान sd याहि यज्ञं तुभ्यं पवन्त इन्द॑वः सुतासः | 
गावो न व॑चिन्त्स्वमोको अच्छेन्द्रा ग॑हि प्रथमो यि- 
यानाम्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


i Ahelamana upa yahi yajnam tubhyam pavanta 
indavah sutasah. Gavo na vajrintsvamoko acche- 
ndra gahi prathamo yajniyanam. 


Indra, lord ruler of glory and power, giver of 
freedom and dignity, come loving and favourable, grace 
our yajna of life and living. Drops of soma flow from 
the press for you and sanctify and brighten up the yajna. 
O lord of thunder and justice, first and foremost of the 
holiest guardians of yajna, just as mother cows rush to 
their stalls for their calves, so eagerly come to us and 
bless the devotees. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


724 RGVEDA 


ad काकुत्सुकुता या वरिष्ठा यया शश्वत्पिबसि मध्व॑ 
ऊर्पिम्‌। तया पादि प्र ते अध्वर्युर स्थात्सं ते वजो वर्ततापिन्द्र 
गव्युः ॥ २॥ 


2. Ya te kakut sukrta ya varistha yaya sasvat pibasi 
madhva urmim. Taya pahi pra te adhvaryur- 
asthat sam te vajro vartatamindra gavyuh. 


Indra, ruling lord of Dharma and rectitude, by 
that sophisticated and discriminative palate of yours by 
which you always taste the sweets of the flow of life, 
and by that discriminative and sublimated thought and 
speech by which you always distil the essence and value 
of the sweets and shades of life and respond to human 
action, taste the sweets of our yajnic performance, and 
protect and promote us by your words of wisdom 
through the rise and fall of life’s movement. The high- 
priest dedicated to love and non-violence awaits you at 
the altar. May your wheel of justice and governance 
over the earth ever revolve over the order of humanity. 


एष द्रप्सो वुंषभो विश्वरूप इन्द्राय वृष्णो सम॑कारि सोम॑: | 
एतं पिब हरिवः स्थातरुग्र यस्येशिषे प्रदिवि यस्ते 
अन्नम्‌ ॥ ३॥ 

3; Esa drapso vrsabho visvarupa indraya vrsne 
samakari somah. Etam piba harivah sthatarugra 
yasyesise pradivi yaste annam. 

This soma of the order of beauty and sweetness 
of bliss, flowing, free from intoxication and illusion, 
creative and exuberant, universal and open in form and 


performance, is distilled to the essence in honour of the 
generous and potent lord of power and glory. Drink of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 41 725 


it, taste and judge of it, O lord illustrious ever on the 
move by motive forces yet settled at centre, rule over it 
in the light of heaven, live it, itis the very food for your 
life and existence. 


सुतः सोमो sda; वस्यानयं श्रेयाज्चिकितुषे रणाय | 
एतं तितिर्व उप॑ याहि यज्ञं तेन विश्वास्तविषीरा dors ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Sutah somo asutadindra vasyanayam sreydanci- 
kituse ranaya. Etam titirva upa yahi yajnam tena 
visvastavisira prnasva. 


This soma, blissful order of life fashioned into 
form from the raw materials of life and thought, O lord 
of power and glory, is better, more fragrant and inspiring 
for the man of intelligence and culture in search of a 
life of knowledge, achievement and happiness. Come, 
O lord victorious over opposition and contradictions, 
to this yajnic order of society and thereby strengthen 
all forces of action for advancement and total fulfilment. 


हर्यामसि त्वेन्द्र॑ याह्यर्वाङरं ते सोमस्तन्वे भवाति। 
शत॑क्रतो मादय॑स्वा सुतेषु प्रास्माँ sta पृत॑नासु प्र विक्षु ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Hvayamasi tvendra yahyarvanaram te soma- 
stanve bhavati. Satakrato madayasva sutesu 
prasman ava prtanasu pra viksu. 


Indra, ruler and protector, we invoke and exhort 
you, go forward, let the soma of exhilaration and social 
dignity be sufficient and inspiring for your health and 
the body politic. O lord of a hundred great actions and 
yajnic victories, rise and celebrate the glory of life 
among the people raised and refined to the sweetness 
and beauty of culture. Guide on, protect and promote 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


726 RGVEDA 


us among the nations and powers of the world. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 42 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


प्रत्य॑स्मै पिपीषते विश्वानि विदुषे भर । 
अरंगमाय जग्मयेऽ पंश्चादध्वने नरे ॥ ९॥ 


i; Pratyasmai pipisate visvani viduse bhara. 
Arangamaya jagmaye’pascaddadhvane nare. 


Indra, ruler and patron of knowledge and 
culture, provide all facilities of the world for this bold 
and courageous leading scholar thirsting for knowledge 
and constantly going forward to reach the expansive 
bounds of his subject, never tarrying, never looking 
back. 


एमेनं wads सोमेभिः arora 
अमंत्रेभिऋजीषिणामिन्दरं सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः ॥ २॥ 


Emenam pratyetana somebhih somapatamam. 
Amatrebhir-rjisinam-indram sutebhirindubhih. 


In consequence and return, O scholars and 
citizens of the land, be grateful to this Indra, brilliant 
ruler, lover of the peace and pleasure of the soma of 
knowledge and enlightenment and promoter of scholars 
and men of truth and naturalness. Do all possible 
homage to him with ample measures of work and 
knowledge distilled like soma in the essence from your 
brilliant work and noble conduct. 


यदीं सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः सोमेभिः प्रतिभूषथ | 
वेदा विश्व॑स्य मेधिरो धृषत्तंतमिदेष॑ते ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 43 727 


im Yadi sutebhirindubhih somebhih pratibhusatha. 
Veda visvasya medhiro dhrsat tam tamidesate. 


If you honour the lord ruler with the homage of 
pure and brilliant soma of knowledge and yajnic action 
in response to his magnanimity, the wise and adorable 
lord of the world would acknowledge and appreciate 
each act of homage. 


अस्मा अस्मा इदन्धसोऽध्वर्यो प्र भ॑रा सुतम्‌ । 
कुवित्समस्य जेन्यस्य शर्धतोऽ भिश॑स्तरवस्परंत्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Asma asma idandhaso’dhvaryo pra bhara sutam. 
Kuvit samasya jenyasya sardhato’bhis-astera- 
vasparat. 


O high priest of the yajnic order, bear and bring 
an equable share of bright and inspiring food and 
maintenance for every one. And may the great and wise 
one, the lord, preserve, protect, promote and defend the 
rightful constancy of the admirable force and power of 
the order against violence and calumny. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 43 
Indra Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
यस्य त्यच्छम्बरं मदे दिवोदासाय रन्धयः 1 
अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः पिब॑ ng 
1. Yasya tyacchambaram made divodasaya randha- 
yah. Ayam sa soma indra te sutah piba. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, this is that soma 
distilled and seasoned for you in the exhilaration and 
ecstasy of which you, like the sun on high, break down 
the forces of darkness and evil to promote the spirit of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


728 RGVEDA 


light and generosity. Pray drink of it to your heart’s 
content and protect and promote the spirit of it. 


यस्य॑ तीव्रसुतं मदं मध्यमन्तं च रक्च॑से। 
अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः पिबं॥२॥ 


2: Yasya tivrasutam madam madhyamantam ca 
raksase. Ayam sa soma indra te sutah piba. 


Indra, lord ruler, this is that soma, the power 
and glory of the yajnic order, distilled and refined in 
your honour, the brilliant and pure spirit of which in 
the essence you protect and promote in the beginning, 
in the middle and at the end of its completion. Pray 
drink of it to your heart’s content and rejoice in the 
splendour and ecstasy of it. 


यस्य गा अन्तरश्म॑नो मदे Foal STATIS: | 
अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः पिब॑ ॥ ३ ॥ 

2. Yasya ga antarasmano made drlha avasrjah. 
Ayam sa soma indra te sutah piba. 

Indra, lord of glory, this is that soma of 
knowledge and power distilled and refined for you under 
the force and exhilaration of which you release mighty 
waves of energy confined in the thickest cloud and most 


solid materials. Drink of it to your heart’s content and 
protect and promote the science and power of it. 


यस्य॑ मन्दानो अन्ध॑सो माघोनं दधिषे gra: | 
अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः पिबं ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Yasya mandano andhaso maghonam dadhise 
Savah. Ayam sa soma indra te sutah piba. 


Indra, lord of vision, knowledge and power, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 729 


happy and worshipful devotee of the sweetness, beauty 
and ecstasy of life, this is that soma of existence distilled 
and refined in the essence for you, the mighty energy, 
force and exuberant vitality of which you bear, protect 
and promote. Live it, enjoy it to your heart’s content, 
and protect and promote its glory on and on. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 44 
Indra Devata, Shamyu Barhaspatya Rshi 


यो र॑यिवो र यिन्त॑मो यो द्यु्नैर््युम्नव॑त्तमः। 
सोम॑ः सुतः स इन्द्र तेऽ स्ति स्वधापते मद॑: ॥ ९ ॥ 


I. Yo rayivo rayintamo yo dyumnair-dyumnavatta- 
mah. Somah_ sutah sa indra te’sti svadhapate 
madah. 


Indra, supreme lord of your own nature, power 
and law, that soma beauty and bliss of the world of 
existence created by you, which is most abundant in 
wealth and brilliance, which is most glorious in 
splendour and majesty, is all yours, all for yourself, all 
your own pleasure, passion and ecstasy. 


यः शग्मस्तुविशग्म ते रायो दामा म॑तीनाम्‌। 
सोम॑ः सुतः स इन्द्र तेऽ स्ति स्वधापते मद॑: ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Yah Sagmas-tuvisagma te rayo dama matinam. 
Somah sutah sa indra te’sti svadhapate madah. 
Indra, O mighty lord most kind, master of your 
own power and potential, that exciting peace and 
pleasure of life created, those gifts of wealth showered 


on rational humanity, the exuberance of munificence, 
all is yours, for your own pleasure and ecstasy, and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


730 RGVEDA 


rendered back to you in homage and gratitude. 


येन॑ Seal न शव॑सा तुरो न स्वाभि॑रूतिभिः। 
सोम॑ः सुतः स इन्द्र तेऽ स्ति स्वधापते मद॑: ॥ ३ ॥ 
a Yena vrddho na Savasa turo na_svabhirutibhih. 


Somah sutah sa indra te’sti svadhapate madah. 


Indra, mighty ruler, protector and sustainer of 
your own creation, your power and potential and your 
own forces of protection by which you promote the good 
and positive and destroy the evil and negative like the 
ancient and eternal father guardian and like a protective 
destroyer for preservation, that is the beauty and glory 
and assertive energy of life created by you. That is yours, 
your fatherly pleasure and ecstasy. Pray let it evolve 
and rise. 


त्यमु वो अप्र॑हणं गृणीषे शव॑सस्पतिम्‌। 
इन्द्रं विश्वासाहं नरं aes विश्वचर्षणिम्‌ ४ ॥ 


4. Tyamu vo aprahanam grnise Savasaspatim. 
Indram visvasaham naram mamhistham visva- 
carsanim. 


All ye children of the earth, for you all I praise 
and celebrate that Indra, lord dispenser of justice and 
punishment without anger or violence, commander of 
power and forces of the nation, challenger of all negative 
forces of the world, leader of humanity, and great and 
glorious ruler of the men of vision and acts of universal 
value. 


यं वर्धयन्तीद्धिरः पतिं तुरस्य crete: | 
तमिच्व॑स्य रोद॑सी देवी शष्पं सपर्यतः ॥ ५५ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 731 


a Yam vardhayantid girah patim turasya radhasah. 
Taminnvasya rodasi devi Susmam saparyatah. 


Indra whom universal voices of the world exalt 
and celebrate in adoration, is the ruler and protector of 
all the effective achievers of the world of nature and 
humanity. Him, in truth, the brilliant heaven and the 
green earth both serve under his power and law. To him 
our homage is always due. 


तद्व॑ उक्थस्य॑ बर्हणेन्द्रायोपस्तणीषणि। 
विपो न यस्योतयो वि यद्रोहन्ति सक्षितः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Tad va ukthasya barhanendrayopastrnisani. 
Vipo na yasyotayo vi yad rohanti saksiatah. 


That lord you exalt by the beauty and sublimity 
of your holy song of praise in honour of Indra whose 
protections and modes of advancement then rise together 
like shoots of soma inwardly stirred by the song under 
his umbrella. 


अविंददक्षं मित्रो नवीयान्पपानो देवेभ्यो वस्यो sre 
ससवान्त्स्तौलाभिवर्धोतरीभिरुरुष्या पायुर॑भवत्सखिंभ्यः 1119 ॥ 


1 Avivad daksam mitro naviyan papano devebhyo 
vasyo acait. Sasavantstaulabhirdhautaribhi- 
rurusya payurabhavat sakhibhyah. 


The rising youth, friendly and protective, knows 
and achieves strength and expertise, and provides a place 
of rest and security for the noble and the wise. Well 
provided with food and means of sustenance, eager to 
protect and promote, he rises as a guardian power for 
friends and companions with unshakable forces of 
defence and protection. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


732 RGVEDA 


veal पथि वेधा starts fara मनांसि cara! अक्रन्‌। 
दधानो नाम॑ महो वचोभिर्वपुरदृशयें वेन्यो cata: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Rtasya pathi vedha apayi Sriye manamsi devaso 
akran. Dadhano nama maho vacobhirvapur- 
drsaye venyo vyavah. 


On the path of truth and eternal law, the man of 
knowledge and wisdom is protected, and the noble and 
the wise control and transform their minds for the beauty 
and grace of manners and culture. May the Great one, 
kind and loving, bearing the holy name, reveal his divine 
presence in response to our prayers and protect us 
through the paths of life. 


द्युमत्तमं cat धेद्यस्मे सेधा जनानां पूर्वीररातीः। वर्षीयो 
वय॑ः कृणुहि शचीभिर्धनस्य सातावस्माँ अविद्धि॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Dyumattamam daksam dhehyasme sedha 
jananam purviraratih. Varstyo vayah krnuhi 
sactbhir-dhanasya satavasman aviddhi. 


Grant us strength and expertise of the brightest 
order, accomplish the tasks on hand and ward off the 
age-old adversities of the people, bless us with a long 
age of charity and generosity, and let us join and 
participate in the battles for wealth and success with 
the best of actions and intelligence among people. 


इन्द्र तुभ्यमिन्म॑घवन्नभूम वयं दात्रे हरिवो मा वि aa: 1 
नकिरापिर्दष्दृषो मर्त्यत्रा किमङ्क र॑श्चचोद॑नं त्वाहुः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Indra tubhaminmaghavannabhuma vayam datre 
harivo ma vi venah. Nakirapirdadrse martyatra 
kimanga radhracodanam tvahuh. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 733 


Indra, lord of power and majesty, let us be, let 
us live and work only for you, generous and charitable 
ruler. Pray do not ignore us, do not neglect us. There is 
none visible among the mortals around here our own 
such as you, lord of horse and men, otherwise, O lord 
dear as breath of life, why would they call you the 
inspirer for the achievement of honour and excellence 
in life? 


माजस्व॑ने वृषभ नो ररीथा मा ते tad: सख्ये रिंषाम। 
पूर्वी इन्दर निष्षिधो जनेषु जद्यसुंष्वीन्प्र वृहापरंणतः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ma jasvane vrsabha no raritha ma te revatah 
sakhye risama. Purvista indra nissidho janesu 
jJahyasusvin pra vrhaprnatah. 


Indra, mighty generous destroyer of suffering, 
deliver us not to the unjust and the hungry grabber. Let 
us never suffer in the friendship of the generous lord 
nor fall off from loyalty. Let us take advantage of the 
age old facilities of success among the people. Eliminate 
the uncreative and keep us away from ungrateful 
negationists. 


उदभ्राणीव स्तनय॑न्नियर्तन्द्रो tease treat । त्वम॑सि 
Ufed: कारुधाया मा त्वादामान आ द॑भन्मघ्ोनंः ॥ ९२॥ 


| ^ Udabhraniva stanayanniyartindro radhamsya- 

Svyani gavya. Tvamasi pradivah karudhaya ma 
tvadamana a dabhan maghonah. 

And like thundering clouds, Indra moves and 

declares the gifts of success and munificence, horses 


and fast accomplishment, cows and abundant food and 
drink. O lord, you are the patron sustainer of brilliant 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


734 RGVEDA 


artists, inventive scientists and expert technologists. Let 
the miserly non-giver never deceive you or injure you, and 
never let him deceive the generous and prosperous people. 


अध्वर्यो वीर प्र महे सुतानामिन्द्राय भर स ह्य॑स्य रा्जा। 
यः पूर्व्याभिरुत नूत॑नाभिरगीर्भिंवीवृधे गृणतामृषीणाम्‌ ॥। ९३ ॥ 


13. Adhvaryo vira pra mahe sutanamindraya bhara 
sa hyasya raja. Yah purvyabhiruta nutanabhir- 
girbhirvavrdhe grnatamrsinam. 


O brave high priest of the social order of the 
yajna of love and non-violence, bear the best of soma 
distilled for homage in honour of the great Indra, ruler 
of the world. He alone is the ruler of this order worthy 
to rule who rises in personal and social esteem by the 
holy voices, both old and new, of the admirers and the 
wise seers of the land. 


अस्य मदे पुरु वपी सि विद्वानिन्द्रो वृत्राण्यप्रती ज॑घान । 
तमु प्र होषि मधुमन्तमस्मै सोमं वीराय॑ शिप्रिणे पिव्॑यै 1 ९४॥ 


14. Asya made puru varpamsi vidvanindro vrtran- 
yaprati jaghana. Tamu pra hosi madhumanta- 
masmai somam viraya Ssiprine pibadhyai. 

Under the inspiration and ardent passion of this 
soma, Indra, irresistible lord ruler all wise, destroys 
many covert forces of darkness and evil. That same 
soma, honey sweet and exhilarating you bear for a drink 
to this brave hero who shines in brilliant helmet and 
armour. 


पातां सुतमिन्द्रो अस्तु सोमं हन्तां qa व्रण मन्दसानः | 
गन्ता यज्ञं प॑रावतंश्चिदच्छा वसुर्धीनामविता कारु- 
धरायाः ॥ ९५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 735 


15. Pata sutamindro astu somam hanta vrtram 
vajrena mandasanah. Ganta yajnam paravata- 
scidaccha vasurdhinamavita karudhayah. 


Let Indra, the ruler, drink the soma distilled from 
exhilarating herbs and protect the spirit and honour of 
the nation arisen from the noble rule of the order. Let 
him, happy and inspired, destroy the demon of evil and 
darkness with the thunderbolt of justice and power. Let 
him go and attend the yajna of the order well even from 
afar, provide happy and peaceful settlement for all the 
people, protect and promote intellectual work and 
programmes of corporate action, and sustain and 
advance the experts in art, science and technology. 


इदं त्यत्पात्र॑मिन्द्रपानमिन्द्र॑स्य प्रियममृतमपायि । मत्सद्यथा 
सौमनसाय देवं व्य९स्मद्‌ द्वेषो युयवद्‌ Sle: ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. Idam tyat patramindrapanamindrasya priyama- 
mrtamapayi. Matsad yatha saumanasaya devam 
vyasmad dveso yuyavad vyamhah. 

This is that life-giving cup of Indra’s nectar 
drink, his favourite, from which he drinks the dear 
delicious elixir of life so that he feels happy at heart 
and inspires the divine force of cosmic energy to ward 
off hate and enmity from us and cast away all sin and 
evil, and thereby save and strengthen the immortal soul. 


एना dart जहि शुर seis मघवन्नमित्रान्‌। 
siren अभ्या ३देदिंशानान्पराच इन्द्र प्र मणा जही 
चं ॥ ९७॥ 

17. Ena mandano jahi Sura satrun-jamimajamim 
maghavannamitran. Abhisenan abhyadedis-anan 
paraca indra pra mrna jahi ca. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


736 RGVEDA 


This way Indra, O valiant hero, happy at heart 
and joyous, commanding wealth, power and excellence 
of the world, give up all enemies whether among the 
related or unrelated people, all unfriendly and menacing 
forces, all oppositions up front, and all those who order 
you about like bullies, ward them off, throw them out 
far away, destroy them all. Keep the soul untainted and 
free; 


आसु wt णो मघवन्निन्द्र Yeager महि aRa: सुगं 
कः | अपां तोकस्य तन॑यस्य जेष इन्द्र सूरीन्कृणुहि स्मा नो 
अर्धम्‌॥ eeu 


18. Asu sma no maghavannindra prtsvasmabhyam 
mahi varivah sugam kah. Apam tokasya 
tanayasya jesa indra surin krnuhi sma no ardham. 


In these battles of life, among these forces of 
positive action, O lord of wealth, power and majesty, 
Indra, destroyer of negativities and enmities, make the 
way clear for us for the achievement of life’s great 
honour and excellence. Indra, lord of glory and victory, 
bless us with bravery and spirit of heroism, high 
intelligence, and power and prosperity of success in our 
struggle and attainment of the waters of life, noble 
actions and brave children and grand children. 


आ त्वा हर॑यो वृष॑णो युजाना वृष॑रथासो वृष॑रश्पयोऽ- 
त्याः | अस्मत्राञ्चो वृष॑णो वज्जवाहो वृष्णे मदाय सुयुजो 
वहन्तु ॥ ९९॥ ति 

19. A tva harayo vrsano yujana vrsarathaso vrsara- 
smayo’tyah. Asmatranco vrsano vajravaho vrsne 
madaya suyujo vahantu. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 737 


Indra, O leading light and spirit of the nation of 
humanity, may the pioneers, brave and heroic, united 
with you in thought and action, blazing as sunrays and 
falling as showers, instant in initiative and perfect in 
aim, riding mighty chariots, concentrating on our 
defence and protection, generous and magnanimous, 
wielding thunder and lightning, willing warriors all, 
conduct and bring you here for our strength and joy of 
life’s victory. 


आ ते वृषन्वृष॑णो द्रोणमस्थुर्घतप्रषो नोर्मयो मद॑न्तः । इन्द्र 
प्र तुभ्यं वृष॑भिः सुतानां वृष्णे भरन्ति वृषभाय सोम॑म्‌ ॥ २०॥ 


20. A te vrsan vrsano dronamasthur-ghrtapruso 
normayo madantah. Indra pra tubhyam vrsabhih 
sutanam vrsne bharanti vrsabhaya somam. 


Indra, lord of power and glory, delightful 
showers of soma, exuberant and exhilarating like 
dancing waves of the sea, come and fill your cup of 
nectar and sprinkle your altar of yajna with ghrta. Thus 
do the leading lights of nature and humanity bear and 
bring the soma of life’s light and joy distilled by brave 
and generous leaders of the yajnic order for the mighty 
and magnanimous lord ruler of the world. 


वृषासि दिवो duu: पु.थिव्या वृषा सिन्धूनां वृषभः 
स्तियानाम्‌ । वृष्णे त इन्दुर्वृषभ पीपाय स्वादू रसो मधुपेयो 
वराय ।॥ २९॥ 


21. Vrsasi divo vrsabhah prthivya vrsa sindhunam 
vrsabhah stiyanam. Vrsne ta indurvrsabha pipaya 
svadu raso madhupeyo varaya. 


You are the showerer of the light of heaven. You 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


738 RGVEDA 


are the inspirer of the life of earth. You are the showerer 
of the waters of rivers and the seas. You are the life 
breath of things moving and non-moving all together. 
This is the homage, honey drink, bright, delicious, the 
very nectar of life for the lord ruler. 


अयं देवः VST जाय॑मान इन्द्रेण युजा पणिमंस्तभायत्‌। 
अयं स्वस्य॑ पितुरायुधानीन्दुरमुष्णाद्शिंवस्य मायाः ॥ २२॥ 


22. Ayam devah sahasa jayamana indrena yuja 
panimastabhayat. Ayam svasya piturayudhant- 
ndur-amusnad-asivasya mayah. 


This brilliant and divine soma rising and 
manifesting with exhilaration and ardent passion, friend 
of Indra and one with his glory, stabilises the admirable 
rule and order of the world and strengthens the 
supporters of it. This soma, bright and blissful as the 
moon, keeps the arms and armaments and the justice 
and administration of its creator and ruler in order, and 
it frustrates the plans and wiles of the unruly and the 
unholy. 


अयमकृणोदुषसः सुपलीर यं सूर्ये अदधाज्न्योतिर्‌ न्तः | अयं 
त्रिधातुं दिवि रोचनेषुं free विन्ददमृतं निगम्‌ 23 ॥ 


23. Ayamakrnodusasah supatnirayam surye adadha- 
jjyotirantah. Ayam tridhatu divi rocanesu tritesu 
vindadamrtam nigulham. 


This ardent passion of Indra, lord omnipotent 
creator, makes the dawns bright and blissful inspirers 
of love and devotion, vests the sun with light within, 
creates the universe of three natural principles of mind, 
energy and matter, and infuses the immortal spirit, as 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 739 


mysterious and immanent spirit, in the three bright 
worlds of heaven, earth and the firmament, and helps 
us to discover the immortal bliss with ardent passion of 
holiness. 


अयं द्यावापृथिवी वि ष्कभायदयं रथ॑मयुनक्सप्तर॑स्मिम्‌। 
अयं गोषु शच्या पक्वमन्तः सोमो दाधार दशयन्त्र- 
Aaa २४॥ 

24. Ayam dyavaprthivi vi skabhayadayam rathama- 
yunak saptarasmim. Ayam gosu Sacya pakvama- 
ntah somo dadhara dasayantramutsam. 


This passion and omnipotence of Indra wields 
and stabilises the heaven and earth in orbit. It ordains 
the seven-rayed chariot of the sun in the system. With 
its power and action it places mature living energy in 
the fertility of earths, milk in cows and warmth in the 
rays of sunlight, and thus it holds and sustains soma, 
life energy of existence, in the universe, thereby making 
it a living system of tenfold nature, i.e., five elements 
and five pranic energies. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 45 
Indra (1-30) and Brbustaksha (31-33) Devata, 
Shamyu Barhaspatya Rshi 
य आन॑यत्परावतः सुनीती तुर्वशं सुम्‌ । 
इन्द्रः स नो युवा सखा ॥ ९॥ 


ile Ya anayat paravatah suniti turvasam yadum. 
Indrah sa no yuva sakha. 


May Indra, that eternal lord omnipotent, that 
youthful ruler, and that forceful leader, be our friend 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


740 RGVEDA 


and companion so that he may lead the man of instant 
decision and action and the hardworking people on way 
to wisdom and right living even from far off distance. 


अविप्रे चिद्वयो दध॑दनाशुनां चिदर्वता। 
इन्द्रो जेतां हितं धन॑म्‌॥ २॥ 


12. Avipre cid vayo dadhadanasuna cidarvata. 
Indro jeta hitam dhanam. 


He brings food, health and age, life and light of 
knowledge for the innocent and for the ignorant and 
unintelligent too and wins wealth and honour for the 
good life at the fastest without haste and impatience. 


महीरस्य प्रणीतयः पूर्वीरुत प्रश॑स्तयः। 
नास्य क्षीयन्त ऊतयः ॥ ३ ॥ 

13. Mahirasya pranitayah purviruta prasastayah. 
Nasya kstyanta utayah. 

Great are this ruler’s policies and acts of 
leadership, universal and admirable. Never do his 
honour, reputation and modes of defence, protection and 
progress go down. 

सखायो ब्रह्मवाहसेऽ चत प्र च॑ गायत। 
स हि नः प्रमतिर्मही ux ui 


4. Sakhayo brahmavahase’rcata pra ca gayata. 
Sa hi nah pramatirmahi. 


Come ye friends and comrades, adore the 
harbinger and protector of divine sustenance and light 
of universal knowledge, celebrate him in song and 
proclaim his gifts of kindness. He is the light of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 741 
sublimity, he alone is our vision and wisdom. 
त्वमेकस्य वृत्रहन्नविता GA | SaaS यथा वयम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


a, Tvamekasya vrtrahannavita dvayorasi. 
Utedrse yatha vayam. 


O lord destroyer of evil like the sun, breaker of 
the clouds, you are the saviour and protector of the one, 
the lonely and helpless as well as of both the people 
and the officers of administration as we too likewise 
are supporters of the ruler and the people. 


नयसीद्वति द्विष॑ः कृणोष्युंक्थशं सिनं । 
नृभि: सुवीरं उच्यसे ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Nayasidvati dvisah krnosyukthasamsinah. 
Nrbhih suvira ucyase. 


You control, guide and manage even the 
stubborn hatefuls and convert them to ardent admirers 
of positive knowledge as men of faith and 
enlightenment. So you are called the real heroic leader 
and ruler by the leading lights. 


ब्रह्माणां ब्रह्मवाहसं गीर्भिः सखयमृग्मियंम्‌। 
गां न दोहसे हुवे ॥ ७ ॥ 


a Brahmanam brahmavahasam girbhih sakhay- 
amrgmiyam. Gam na dohase huve. 


I invoke and celebrate in holy words the seer 
and scholar of the universal knowledge of the Vedas, 
adorable friend and exponent of divine knowledge as 
one would serve and milk the cow for living energy or 
study and meditate on the holy Word for living light. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


742 RGVEDA 


यस्य विश्वानि हस्त॑योरूचुर्वसूनि नि fear । 
वीरस्यं geared: ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yasya visvani hastayorucurvasuni ni dvita. 
Virasya prtanasahah. 


Seers and scholars say that in the hands of the 
heroic leader and ruler, brave challenger and subduer 
of all forces, lie and abide all treasures of the world 
both material and spiritual. (The real scholar too is one 
who commands the knowledge of nature as well as of 
the spirit, of this world and of the world beyond.) 


fa gaat चिदद्रिवो जनानां शचीपते। 
वृह माया अनानत ॥ ९॥ 


9. Vi drlhani cidadrivo jananam Sacipate. 
Vrha maya ananata. 


O bold and intrepidable ruler and protector of 
the people, lord of mighty action, you break the clouds 
and shake the mountains. Pray strengthen the 
strongholds of the people and uproot the wiles of the 
wicked. 


aq त्वा सत्य सोमपा इन्द्र॑ वाजानां पते। 
अहूमहि श्रवस्यवः 112011 
10. Tamu tva satya somapa indra vajanam pate. 
Ahumahi Sravasyavah. 
Indra, lord ever true and redoubtable, protector 
of the spirit and culture of the good life, ruler and 
promoter of food, energy and progressive advancement 


of the people, we invoke and call upon you to lead us in 
our pursuit of sustenance, progress, honour and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 743 
excellence and immortal fame. 
तमु त्वा यः Guide यो at नूनं हिते धने । 
हव्यः स श्रुधी हव॑म्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tamu tva yah purasitha yo va nunam hite dhane. 
Havyah sa srudhi havam. 


You who have ever been with us and for us since 
eternity, who surely are with us in our best of prosperity 
and ever at the call of action, the same, O lord adorable, 
we invoke and pray listen to our call and come and bless. 


धीभिरर्व द्धिर्वतो वाजी इन्द्र श्रवाय्यान्‌ । 
त्वरयां जेष्म हितं धन॑म्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Dhibhir-arvadbhir-arvato vajan indra Sravayyan. 
Tvaya jesma hitam dhanam. 


With our intelligence and actions, with our drive 
and horses, and with your helping hand and grace, O 
lord of victory, destroyer and preserver, Indra, rising 
and advancing, we pray, let us succeed in our battles of 
life and win wholesome and reputable treasures of peace 
and prosperity. 


अभूरु वीर गिर्वणो vert इन्द्र ert हिते । 
भरे वितन्तसाय्य॑: ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Abhuru vira girvano mahan indra dhane hite. 
Bhare vitantasayyah. 


Indra, lord giver of honour and excellence, great, 
adored in words of praise and prayer, when the call is 
given, the forces are in array and the battle is raging, 
then, O lord of victory, be with us. And when the treasure 
is won and abounds for the good in life, then too, O 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


744 RGVEDA 
lord pervasive, be with us. 


या त॑ ऊतिर॑मित्रहन्मक्ूज॑वस्तमासंति। 
तयां नो हिनुही रथ॑म्‌॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Ya ta utir-amitrahan maksujavastamasati. 
Taya no hinuhi ratham. 


And when your umbrella of protection and 
promotion grows most extensively fast and wide, then 
by that accelerate our chariot of honour and glory and 
let it range wider and wider. 


स wala र थीत॑मोऽ स्माकैनाथियुग्वंना। 
जेषि जिष्णो हितं धन॑म्‌ ॥ ९५॥ 


15. व rathena rathitamo’ smakenabhiyugvana. 
Jesi jisno hitam dhanam. 


O leader and ruler, Indra, bravest commander 
of the fastest chariot of our social order, thirsting for 
victory, by that united chariot of ours in unison with us 
you win the treasures of life good for the nation of 
humanity. 


य एक say ष्टुहि कृष्टीनां विचर्षणिः | 
पतिंजजि वृष॑क्रतुः ॥ ९६ ॥ 
16. Ya दद्व it tamu stuhi krstinam vicarsanih. 
Patirjajne vrsakratuh. 
O man, invoke, admire and celebrate that one 
alone who is unique by himself, ever watchful guardian 
of the people, generous performer and showerer of 


blissful fruits of his action, and who emerges and rises 
as the protector and ruler of all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 745 


यो गुणतामिदासिंथाऽऽपिरूती शिवः eat 
सत्वं न॑ इन्द्र STI ९७॥ 


17. Yo grnatamidasitha’ ’piruti Sivah sakha. 
Sa tvam na indra mrlaya. 


Indra, potent lord of action, destroyer of 
suffering and giver of bliss, who are good and kind, 
friendly and one with the celebrants as our kith and kin, 
all protective under your umbrella, such as you are, we 
pray, be kind and gracious to us and lead us to the peace 
and happiness of the good life. 


धिष्व at गभ॑स्त्यो रक्षोहत्याय ata: | 
सासहीष्ठा अभि स्पृध॑ः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Dhisva vajram gabhastyo raksohatyaya vajrivah. 
Sasahistha abhi sprdhah. 


O wielder of the thunderbolt of defence and 
power, take up the adamantine mace and thunder of 
power and justice in your hands for the destruction of 
evil and wickedness and face, challenge, resolve and 
win the battles ahead. 


प्रलं रयीणां युजं crake कीरिचोद॑नम्‌। 
ब्रह्मवाहस्तमं हुवे ॥ ९९॥ 

19. Pratnam rayinam yujam sakhayam kirico-danam. 
Brahmavahastamam huve. 


I invoke and celebrate that most eminent sage 
and scholar of universal Vedic knowledge who is great 
as ancient seers, friend, and inspirer of dedicated 
disciples to win the wealth of life both spiritual and 
material. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


746 RGVEDA 


स fe विश्वानि पार्थिवां एको वसूनि पत्य॑ ते । 
गिर्वणस्तमो अधिंगुः॥ २०॥ 


20. Sa क visvani parthivan eko vasuni patyate. 
Girvanastamo adhriguh. 


He alone, most adorable, instant mover and 
omnipresent lord of the universe, solely by himself, 
rules, protects and promotes all treasures of the earth. 


(He alone deserves to be ruler of the world who 
is an earthly embodiment of such universal virtues.) 


सनो नियुद्धिरा got कामं वाजेभिरश्विभिः। 
गोमद्भिर्गोपते धृषत्‌ ॥ २९॥ 


21. Sano niyudbhira prna kamam vajebhir-asvibhih. 
Gomadbhir-gopate dhrsat. 


O lord of land with controlled mind and senses, 
bold and resolute, come to us with your teams of 
harnessed services and commissioned forces 
commanding speed and movement, warriors of horse 
and armour, managers of lands and cattle wealth, 
controllers of information and communication, and with 
all this infrastructure fulfil our desires and ambitions 
for the good life of success and progress. 


तद्वो गाय सुते Gat पुरुहूताय सत्वं ने । 
शं aga न शाकिने ॥ २२॥ 


22. Tad vo gaya sute saca puruhiutaya satvane. 
Sam yad gave na Sakine. 


In your soma yajna in the business of the world 
of the lord’s creation, sing together songs of homage in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 747 


honour of the universally adored, ever true and eternal 
almighty Indra, songs which may be as pleasing to the 
mighty lord as to the seeker and the celebrant. 


न घा वसुर्नि य॑मते दानं वाजस्य ted: | 
यत्सीमुप stafet: २३॥ 


23. Na ghavasurni yamate danam vajasya gomatah. 
Yat stmupa Sravad girah. 


And surely the lord giver of settlement and gifts 
of knowledge, power and speedy progress does not 
withhold the gifts since he closely hears the prayers of 
the devotee and responds. 


कुवित्सस्य प्र हि व्रजं गोम॑न्तं दस्युहा TAC 
शचीभिरप नो वरत्‌ ॥ २४॥ 


24. Kuvitsasya pra hi vrajam gomantam dasyuha 
gamat. Sacitbhirapa no varat. 


May the lord destroyer of evil, negativity and 
poverty visit the homestead of the prayerful devotee 
blest with lands, cows and divine knowledge and open 
up the flood gates of wealth, power and divine grace 
for us with his vision and powers. 


इमा उ त्वा शतक्रतोऽ भि प्र णोनुवुर्गिरः । 
इन्द्रं वत्सं न मातरः ॥ २५॥ 
25. Imautva Satakrato’bhi pra nonuvurgirah. 


Indra vatsam na matarah. 


Indra, lord ruler of the world and guardian of 
the people, just as mother cows look toward and low 
out of affection for the calf, so do these people look up 
to you with love and reverence, and their voices of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


748 RGVEDA 


adoration exalt you, O lord of a hundred acts of kindness 
and holiness. 


दूणाशं सख्यं तव गौर॑सि वीर गव्यते। 
अश्वो अश्वायते भ॑व ।॥ २६॥ 


26. Dunasam sakhyam tava gaurasi vira gavyate. 
Asvo asvayate bhava. 


Indra, potent lord ruler of multifarious acts and 
potential, never can your friendship toward the people 
be lost or destroyed, it is permanent and versatile. You 
are all love and revelation to a person in search of faith 
and knowledge, and you are all impetuous victor for a 
person thirsting for speed and progress. (The way we 
think and act, you respond.) 


स म॑न्दस्वा ह्यन्ध॑सो राध॑से तन्वां महे। 
न स्तोतारं निदे करः॥ २७॥ 


27. Sa mandasva hyandhaso radhase tanva mahe. 
Na stotaram nide karah. 


Indra, ruler of the world of knowledge and 
action, be happy at heart by body, mind and soul with 
good food, energy and soma, and make others happy. 
Subject not your devoted celebrant to the malignity of 
revilers. 


इमा उ त्वा सुतेसुं ते नक्चन्ते गिर्वणो Fr: | 
वत्सं गावो न धेनवः ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Imautva sutesute naksante girvano girah. 
Vatsam gavo na dhenavah. 


These words and voices of adoration, O spirit 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 749 


adorable, reach you, in every yajna, in every cycle of 
creation, like cows rushing to the calf with love. 


पुरूतमं पुरूणां स्तो तुणां विवाचि । 
वाजेभिर्वाजयताम्‌ ॥ २९॥ 


29. Purutamam purunam stotrnam vivaci. 
Vajebhir-vajayatam. 

May the most ancient and eternal knowledge in 
the speech of the ancient celebrants of divinity, 
enlightening and energising humanity with the vital 
spirits of existence, reaching the primeval soul, come 
to us too, enlighten and energise us too. 


अस्माकमिन्द्र भूतु ते स्तोमो वाहिष्ठो अन्त॑मः। 
अस्मात्राये महे हिनु ॥ ३०॥ 

30. Asmakamindra bhitu te 5101710 vahistho antamah. 
Asman raye mahe hinu. 


Indra, lord giver of honour and excellence, may 
our song of celebration in your honour carry our 
message of homage closest to your heart to exalt you, 
and may you, we pray, inspire us to achieve the highest 
wealths of life. 


अधिं gq: प॑णीनां ares मृर्धतनस्थात्‌। 
उरुः कक्षो न गाद्धव्यः॥ २९॥ 

31.  Adhi brbuh paninam varsisthe murdhannasthdt. 
Uruh kakso na gangyah. 


Let the maker, artist, analyst and architect, 
occupy and preside over the highest position in the world 
of business, wide and high like the embankment of a 
mighty river, to contain and control the flow of the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


750 RGVEDA 
current of waters. 


यस्य॑ वायोरिव द्रवद्धद्रा रातिः संहस्तरिणीं । 
सद्यो दानाय मंहते ॥ ३२ ॥ 
32. Yasya vayoriva dravad bhadra ratih sahasrini. 


Sadyo danaya manhate. 


Whose gifts to society flow in a thousand 
directions like the currents of wind, his generosity and 
charities always and instantly, rise and continue to rise 
for the progress of humanity. 
तत्सु नो fave अर्य आ सद। गृणन्ति cara: | 
ललं स॑हस््रदात॑मं सूरि स॑हस््रसातंमम्‌॥ 33 ॥ 

33. Tat suno visve arya a4 sada grnanti karavah. 
Brbum sahasradatamam surim sahasrasat-amam. 


All our artists and artisans always appreciate 
and admire the chief architect, learned, wise and brave, 
giver of a thousand gifts and sharer of a thousand things 
with thousands of people. He indeed is the head of our 
business world. 

Mandala 6/Sukta 46 


Indra Devata, Shamyu Barhaspatya Rshi 
त्वामिद्धि हवामहे साता वाज॑स्य कारवंः। 
त्वां वृत्रेष्विन्द्र सत्प॑तिं नरस्त्वां काष्ठास्वर्वतः ।॥ ९॥ 
Ls Tvamiddhi havamahe sata vajasya karavah. Tvam 
vrtresvindra satpatim narastvam kasthasvar- 
vatah. 


Indra, lord of power and advancement, you 
alone we invoke and call upon for acquisition of food, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 46 751 


energy, honour, excellence and progress. All of us, 
leading people, makers, poets, artists, artisans and 
architects of the nation, fast advancing in all directions, 
invoke and exhort you, protector and promoter of 
universal truth and values in human struggles for light, 
goodness and generosity, and the wealth of life. 


स त्वं न॑श्चित्र वज्रहस्त धृष्णुया महः स्त॑वानो stra: | 
गामश्वं रथ्यमिन्द्र सं किर सत्रा वाजं न जिग्युषे ।॥। २॥ 


2. Sa tvam nascitra vajrahasta dhrsnuya mahah 
stavano adrivah. Gamasvam rathyamindra sam 
kira satra vajam na Jigyuse. 


Indra, lord of wondrous powers and perfor- 
mance, wielding the thunderbolt of justice and 
punishment in hand, great and glorious, breaker of the 
clouds and shaker of mountains, invoked and adored in 
song, with truth and science, power and force, collect, 
organise and win for us the wealth of lands, cows and 
rays of the sun, horses, transports and chariots like the 
victories of wealth and glory for the ambitious nation. 


a: Gare विचर्षणिरिन्द्रं तं daz वयम्‌ । 
सह॑स्रमुष्क तुविनृम्ण सत्प॑ ते भवां समत्सु नो वृधे ॥ ३ ॥ 


त, Yah satraha vicarsanir-indram tam humahe 
vayam. Sahasramuska tuvinrmna satpate bhava 
samatsu no vrdhe. 


We invoke and adore Indra, lord of glory, 
constant watcher of humanity and human actions, and 
pray: O lord protector of truth, commanding 
thousandfold vitality and flames of fiery forces, master 
of universal wealth, be with us for our advancement in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


752 RGVEDA 
the struggles of life. 


बाध॑से जनान्वृषभेव मन्युना घुषौ। tee ऋचीषम | 
अस्माकं बोध्यविता म॑हाधने तनूष्वप्सु ae ४॥ 


4. Badhase janan vrsabheva manyuna ghrsau milha 
rctsama. Asmakam bodhyavita maha-dhane 
tanusvapsu surye. 


Indra, ruler of the world, sacred as hymns of 
Rgveda, as a bull controls the herd, so you control as 
well as defend people with righteous passion and justice 
when they rub against each other or face great conflicts. 
O lord, be our saviour, giver of enlightenment in the 
great battles for wealth, health care, water management 
and the harnessing of solar energy. 


इन्द्र ज्येष्ठं न आ YT ओजिष्ठं पपुरि श्रव॑ः 1 
येनेमे चित्र वज्रहस्त रोद॑सी ओभे सुशिप्र प्राः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Indra jyestham na a bharan ojistham papuri 
5741741. Yeneme citra vajrahasta rodasi obhe 
susipra prah. 


Indra, lord of noblest virtue and knowledge, bear 
and bring us that best and most lustrous food for the 
nourishment of body and mind by which, O wondrous 
hero of golden helmet and wielder of thunder in hand, 
you may reach both this earth and this sky upto the 
heaven. 


त्वामुग्रमवसे चर्षणीसहं राज॑न्देवेषुं हूमहे । विश्वा सु at 
विथुरा पिब्दना dats मित्रान्त्सुषह।न्कृधि ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tvam-ugram-avase carsanisaham rajan devesu 
humahe. Visva su no vithura pibdana vaso 
*mitrantsusahan krdhi. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 46 753 


For our defence and protection, O ruler, of all 
the brilliant, generous and mighty powers, we invoke 
you, illustrious challenger of the enemies of humanity. 
O lord giver of peace and settlement in security, crush 
and scatter the obdurate negative forces within and 
outside, and turn the opponents into friends and 
unquestionable supporters. 


यदिन्द्र नाहषीरष्वोँ ओजो नृम्णं च॑ कृष्टिषु | 
यद्वा usd fart द्युम्नमा भ॑र सत्रा विश्वानि diet ॥ ७॥ 


ह Yadindra nahusisvan ojo nrmnam ca krstisu. 
Yad va panca ksitinam dyumnama bhara satra 
visvani paumsya. 

Indra, ruler of the world, whatever the lustre 
and splendour in humanity across history, whatever the 
power and wealth among communities, whatever the 
virtue and quality in the five elements of nature or lands 
of the earth, or whatever the strength and vigour of the 
world of existence, you bear and symbolise all that. Pray, 
O lord, bear and bring us all that. 


यद्वा gait Haars ara जने यत्पूरौ कच्च वृष्ण्यम्‌ | 
अस्मभ्यं तद्विरीहि सं नृषाह्येऽ मित्रान्पृत्सु तुर्वणे ॥ ८ ॥ 


oe Yad va trksau maghavan druhyava jane yat purau 
kacca vrsnyam. Asmabhyam tad rirthi sam 
nrsahye’mitran prtsu turvane. 


O lord of wealth and power of the world, 
whatever the wisdom among the learned, whatever the 
energy among people of anger and hostility, or whatever 
strength and vigour among people of fullness of virility 
and generosity, at their best, bring us all that in the battles 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


754 RGVEDA 


of human contest and competition so that we may face, 
fight out and eliminate anger, enmity and malice. 


इन्द्र॑ frend शरणं त्रिवरूथं स्वस्तिमत्‌। छर्दिर्य"च्छ 
मघव॑द्धयश्च मह्यं च यावर्यां दिद्युमेभ्यः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9, Indra tridhatu saranam trivarutham svastimat. 
Chardir-yaccha maghavadbhyasca mahyam ca 
yavaya didyumebhyah. 


Indra, lord ruler of the wealth of nations, for 
the men of wealth, power, honour and generosity of 
heart, and for me too, give a home made of three metals 
and materials, comfortable in three seasons of summer, 
winter and rains, a place of rest, peace and security for 
complete well being. Give the light for them, keep off 
the blaze from them. 


ये ग॑व्य॒ता मन॑सा शत्रुमादभुरं भिप्रश्नन्तिं धृष्णुया | 
अधं स्मा नो मघवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणस्तनूपा अन्त॑मो Yat ९०॥ 


10. Ye gavyata manasa satrum-adabhur-abhipra- 
ghnanti dhrsnuya. Adha sma no maghavan-nindra 
girvanastanupa antamo bhava. 


Indra, lord of peace and power, exalted by words 
of adoration, give us warriors who, with their love of 
cows, lands and speech and with the force of their mind 
and strength of arm and courage, press down the enemies 
and destroy their arms and armies, and then, also, O 
lord protector of our person and body politic, be with 
us at the closest, deep within. 


अधं स्मा नो वृधे भवेन्द्र नायम॑वा युधि । यदन्तरिश्चे पतयन्ति 
पर्णिनो दिद्यव॑स्तिग्ममूर्धानः ॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 46 755 


11. Adha sma no vrdhe bhavendra nayamava yudhi. 
Yadantarikse patayanti parnino didyavas- 
tigmamur-dhanah. 


Indra, chief of defence forces, give us those 
flying birds of defence and protection which blaze 
through skies and spaces carrying deep penetrative war 
heads in front, and then, also, be with us for our 
leadership, defend and protect us in the battles for our 
advancement. 


यत्र शूरासस्तन्वो! वितन्वते प्रिया शर्म पितृणाम्‌ | अध॑ स्मा 
यच्छ तन्वे ३ तन च छर्दिरचित्तं यावय द्वेषं: ॥ ९२ ॥ 


12. Yatra Surasastanvo vitanvate priya Sarma pitr- 
nam. Adha sma yaccha tanve tane ca chardiraci- 
ttam yavaya dvesah. 


Give us the sweet home where the brave extend 
the honour and achievement of their forefathers, and 
then, for further extension of the honour, achievement 
and tradition of the nation, give us peace and security 
free from mental worry and keep off all jealousy, malice 
and hostility. 


यदिन्द्र सर्गे अर्वतश्चोदयासे महाधने । असमने अध्व॑नि 
तृजिने पथि paige श्रवस्यतः ॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Yadindra sarge arvatascodayase mahadhane. 
Asamane adhvani vrjine pathi Syendan iva $rava- 
syatah. 

And when, in the effort for creation and in the 
struggle for extension of honour and achievement of 


new wealth, you inspire the stormy pioneers and 
ambitious warriors thirsting for fame, and urge them 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


756 RGVEDA 


on to fly like eagles on unequal paths and winding ways 
of progress and possibility, then also, O lord, be with us 
all through. 


सिन्धूरिव प्रवण आशुया यतो यदि क्लोशामनु ष्वणि । 
आ ये वयो न वर्वृतत्यामिषि गृभीता बाह्लोर्गविं i ex ॥ 


14. = Sindhunriva pravana asuya yato yadi klosamanu 
svani. A ye vayo na varvrtatyamisi grbhita 
bahvorgavi. 


The pioneers and warriors of new projects on 
earth fly on and move like rivers rushing down to the 
sea. They move by superfast carriers whose controls 
are held fast in hands, and instantly act in response to 
the sound signal and pounce upon the target like birds 
on food at sight, intensively. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 47 
Soma, Indra, Dana, Ratha, Dundubhi Devatah, 
Garga Bharadvaja Rshi 


स्वादुष्किलायं vent उतायं तीव्रः fort रस॑वाँ उतायम्‌। 
उतो न्वै स्य पपिवांसमिन्द्रं न कश्चन स॑हत आहवेषु 2 


| Svaduskilayam madhuman utayam tivrah kilayam 
rasavan utayam. Uto nvasya papi-vamsamindram 
na kascana sahata ahavesu. 


Soma: of course it is delicious, honey sweet, 
and it is sharp and strong and intense, and also it has 
wonderful flavour. And when Indra, the mighty one, 
has happily drunk of this soma, this nectar of life, none 
can withstand him in battles. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 757 


अयं स्वादुरिह aids आस यस्येन्द्रो वृत्रहत्य ममाद । पुरूणि 
यश्च्योत्ना शम्ब॑रस्य वि न॑वतिं नव॑ च देयो ३ हन्‌॥ २ ॥ 


2 Ayam svaduriha madistha asa yasyendro 
vrtrahatye mamada. Puruni yasScyautna samba- 
rasya vi navatim nava ca dehyo han. 


It is delicious, most exhilarating here in the 
business of life. Indra, mighty ruler, having drunk of it, 
exults in the battle against want and wickedness for the 
achievement of prosperity and, waxing in strength and 
passion, destroys the multitudinous forces of evil and 
breaks ninety and nine strongholds of darkness like the 
sun breaking clouds for rain. 


अयं मे पीत उदियर्ति वाच॑पयं म॑नीषापयुंशातीम॑जीगः । 

अयं षद्टुर्वीररमिमीत धीरो न याभ्यो भुव॑नं कच्यनारे ॥। ३ ॥ 
3 Ayam me pita udiyarti vacamayam manisam- 

usatimajigah. Ayam salurviramimita dhiro 

na yabhyo bhuvanam kaccanare. 

This ecstasy of soma stimulates and refines my 
speech, it energises and sublimates my mind and 
awareness to love and passion for divinity. Man in the 
state of mental stability and spiritual constancy realises 
the six dimensional universe of existence beyond which 
there is no world of matter or mind higher or lower. 


अयं स यो व॑रिमाणं पृथिव्या वर्ष्माणं दिवो अकुणोदयं 
सः। अयं पीयूषं तिसृषु प्रवत्सु सोमो दाधारोर्वैन्त- 
रिंक्षम्‌॥ ४ ॥ ति 

4. Ayam sa yo varimanam prthivya varsmanam divo 
akrnodayam sah. Ayam piyusam tisrsu pravatsu 
somo dadharorvantariksam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


758 RGVEDA 


This soma is that cosmic energy which causes 
the showers of vitality from the sun and creates the 
fertility of the earth. It bears the nectar sweets of three 
rolling oceans of heaven, earth and the middle region 
and sustains the vast skies. 


अयं विंदच्यित्रदृशीकमर्णः शुक्रसदानामुषसरामनीं के | अयं 
महान्महता स्कम्भं नेनोद्‌ द्याम॑स्तभ्नाद्‌ वृषभो मरु - 
त्वान्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


5: Ayam vidaccitradrsikamarnah sukrasadmana- 
musasamanike. Ayam mahan mahata skambha- 
nenod dyamastabhnad vrsabho marutvan. 


This generous and exuberant energy of the 
universe commanding the force of the currents of 
nature’s inherent power vests the beatific ocean of the 
glorious sunrays of immaculate beauty of the mornings. 
It is great and, by its mighty gravitational force, sustains 
the solar region in position above. 


धृषत्पिब कलशो सोम॑मिन्द्र वृत्रहा शूर समरे वसूनाम्‌ | माध्य॑- 
Fea सव॑न आ duce रयिस्थानो रयिमस्मासु धेहि ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Dhrsat piba kalasSe somamindra vrtraha sura 
samare vasunam. Madhyamdine savana a vrsasva 
ryisthano rayimasmasu dhehi. 


Bold and resolute Indra, ruler, destroyer of 
darkness and poverty, drink the soma from the vessel 
for the battle of life’s wealth. Come to the mid-day 
session of yajna and bring the showers. As you yourself 
are the treasurehold of wealth, bless us with the wealth 
of life. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 759 


इन्द्र प्र ण॑ः: Gadd पश्य Wal नय प्रतरं वस्यो अच्छ॑ । 
भवां सुपारो अतिपारयो नो भवा सुनीतिरुत वामनीतिः ॥ ७ ॥ 


a Indra pra nah pura-eteva paSya pra no naya 
prataram vasyo accha. Bhava suparo atiparayo 
no bhava sunitiruta vamanitih. 


Indra, leader and commander of world power, 
look at us and watch like a leader moving fast forward. 
Lead us to wealth of the world across the oceans. Be 
the unswerving pilot of the nation, take us to the shores 
beyond and lead us on by the policy and practice of 
nobility and gracious living. 
उरू नों लोकमनु नेषि विद्धान्त्स्वर्वज्न्योतिरभ॑यं स्वस्ति। 
ऋष्वा d इन्द्र स्थविरस्य बाहू उप॑ स्थेयाम शरणा 
वृहन्ता ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Urum no lokamanu nesi vidvant-svarvaj-jyo-tir- 


abhayam svasti. Rsva ta indra sthavirasya bahu 
upa stheyama sarana brhanta. 


Indra, sagely scholar and just ruler of the world, 
lead us to the higher regions of life, fearless, full of 
heavenly light, a haven of bliss and well being. O lord 
of constancy, we pray, may we abide in the shelter and 
security of the umbrella of your mighty protective hands. 


वरिष्ठे न इन्द्र वन्धुरे धा afesat: शतावन्नश्व॑योरा। 
इषमा dette वर्षां मा न॑स्तारीन्मघवत्रायो अर्यः ॥ ९ ॥ 


+ Varisthe na indra vandhure dha vahisthayoh 
Satavannasvayora. Isama vaksisam varsistham 
ma nastarin-maghavan rayo aryah. 

Indra, ruler and guardian of the people, master 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


760 RGVEDA 


and controller of the wealth and power of the world, let 
us ride and abide in the best chariot of our choice in 
your well managed system of governance run by the 
strongest and most efficient leaders and forces. O lord 
of a hundred powers and actions, bring us the best and 
most abundant food and sustenance, energy and power. 
Let no one as master tread over our wealth, power, and 
basic rights of life and freedom. 


इन्द्रं WS मह्यं जीवातुं मिच्छ चोदय धियमय॑सो न धाराम्‌ । 
यत्किं चाहं त्वायुरिदं वदामि तज्जुषस्व कृधि मौ देव- 
व॑न्तम्‌॥ OM 


10. Indra mrla mahyam jivatumiccha codaya dhiya- 
mayaso na dharam. Yat kim caham tvayuridam 
vadami tajjusasva krdhi ma devavantam. 


Indra, ruler sustainer of all, be kind and gracious 
to me, please to wish me the good life, sharpen and 
inspire my mind and intellect like the razor’s edge. And 
whatever I wish out of love and devotion, to you I say 
this: Please to accept and grant, and raise me up to the 
love and favour of divinity. 


ara salad ed हवेहवे सुहवं शूरमिन्द्रम्‌ । हयामि 
शक्रं पुरुहूतमिन्द्रं स्वस्ति नो मघवा धात्विन्द्रः ge i 


11. Trataram-indram-avitaramindram havehave 
suha-vam Suramindram. Hvayami sakram pura- 
hutamindram svasti no maghava dhatvindrah. 

In every battle of life one after another, I invoke 

Indra, lord giver of wealth, honour and power, saviour 


Indra, protector Indra, brave Indra invoked with love 
and devotion, pure and powerful, universally invoked 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 761 


and adored. May Indra bring us the good life and all 
round well being. 


इन्द्रः सुत्रामा स्ववं अवोभिः quedtent भ॑वतु favader: 1 
बाधतां देषो अभ॑यं कृणोतु सुवीर्यस्य पत॑यः स्याम ॥ ९२॥ 

12. Indrah sutrama svavan avobhih sumrliko bhavatu 
visvavedah. Badhatam dveso abhayam krnotu 
suviryasya patayah syama. 

Indra, lord omniscient, mighty protector and sole 
lord of his own essential powers may, we pray, be kind 
and gracious with his modes of protection and 
advancement, ward off hate and enmity and grant us 
freedom from fear so that we may be masters and 
promoters of the noble strength and honour of life. 


तस्य॑ वयं सुमतौ यज्ञियस्याऽपिं भद्रे सौमनसे स्याम। स 
सुत्रामा स्ववां इन्द्रो अस्मे आराच्िद्‌ द्वेष॑ः सनुतर्यु- 
योतु ॥ ९ ३ ॥ त 

13. Tasya vayam sumatau yajniyasya’pi bhadre 
saumanase syama. Sa sutrama svavan indro asme 
araccid dvesah sanutaryuyotu. 


May we enjoy the favour, kindness and love of 
that lord adorable, all protective Indra, sole master of 
his own essential powers and forces, who may always 
ward off from us all hate and enmity far or near. 


अव त्वे इन्द्र प्रवतो TRA ब्रह्माणि Fraat धवन्ते। 
उरू न राधः सव॑ना पुरूण्यपो गा व॑िन्युवसरे समि- 
STN ९४॥ 


14. Ava tve indra pravato normirgiro brahmani 
niyuto dhavante. Uru na radhah savana purun- 
yapo ga vajrin yuvase samindun. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


762 RGVEDA 


Indra, O ruler of the world, like streams of flood 
rushing down to the sea, all voices of prayer and 
adoration, offers of homage and chants of the holy Word 
dedicated to your service rise, reach and concentrate in 
you. O wielder of the thunderbolt of power and justice, 
you hold, integrate, treasure and distribute immense 
wealth of means and materials of success, yajnic 
sessions and inspirations, wide ranging waters and social 
programmes of action, lands, cows and lights of 
knowledge, and all things of beauty and joy leading to 
mental and spiritual bliss of peace. 


क ई" स्तवत्कः प॑णात्को य॑जाते यदुग्रमिन्मघवा विष्व- 
wad पादाविव प्रहस्न्नन्यम॑न्यं कृणोति पूव॑मप॑रं 
शचीभिः ।॥ ९५॥ 


15. (व रा stavat kah prnat ko yajate yadugramin- 
ma-ghava visvahavet. Padaviva praharannan- 
yamanyam krnoti purvamaparam Ssacibhih. 


Who can praise and fully celebrate him? Who 
can finally serve and join him? 


Whoever is passionately dedicated and whom 
the lord of glory may favour, govern, and protect day 
and night, the lord who, like a man on the walk 
alternating his feet in motion moving the hind one 
forward and leaving the forward one then behind, 
dispenses people up and down according to their actions 
and the law of karma. 


शृण्वे वीर उग्रमुग्रं दमायन्नन्यमंन्यमतिनेनी यमानः । 
एधमा नद्विव्टुभय॑स्य ust चोष्कूयते विश इन्द्रो मनु- 
ष्यान्‌॥ १६॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 763 


16. Srnve vira ugramugram damayann-anyam- 
anyam-atineniyamanah. Edhamanadvilubha- 
yasya raja coskuyate visa indro manusyan. 


I hear that Indra, potent lord, controller of all 
proud and passionate ones, leading all up and down by 
their performance, favouring the good and punishing 
the rising proud and arrogant, rules all communities of 
humanity, good and evil, and calls them up for justice 
and dispensation. 


परा पूर्वेषां सख्या वरंणक्ति वितर्तुराणो अप॑रेभिरेति। 
अ्नानुभूतीरवधून्वानः पूर्वी रिन्द्र॑ः शरदस्तर्तरीति ॥ ९७ ॥ 


17. Para purvesam sakhya vrnakti vitarturano apare- 
bhireti. Ananubhutiravadhunvanah purvirindrah 
Saradastartariti. 


With love and understanding, Indra, lord ruler, 
gives up the dead wood of the old and goes forward 
taking on other new forms of life and society like waves 
of the sea pressing on fast forward. Shaking off the 
callous who refuse to learn by experience he goes on 
like the sun crossing over the years of time gone by and 
living and shaping new eras of time. 


रूपंरूपं प्रतिरूपो बभूव तद॑स्य रूपं प्र॑तिचक्षणाय । इन्द्रो 

मायाभिः पुरुरूपं ईयते युक्ता ह्य॑स्य हर॑यः शता दशं ॥ ९८ ॥ 

18.  Rupamrupam pratirupo babhuva tadasya rupam 

praticaksanaya. Indro mayabhih pururupa tyate 
yukta hyasya harayah Sata dasa. 

Indra, the supreme soul, pervades all forms of 


existence to reveal that pervasive form of presence 
according to each form. The individual soul, the jiva, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


764 RGVEDA 


takes on one form of life after another to reveal that 
existential form of its real self. The ruler takes over each 
form of the institutions of his governance to reveal his 
power and presence through that institution. Indra thus, 
of many many forms of manifestation goes on by 
manifold powers and potentials, assisted by thousands 
of its motive forces like the master of a chariot drawn 
by horses. 


युजानो हरिता रथे भूरि abe राजति । को विश्वाहा द्विषतः 
पक्ष आसत उतासीनेषु सूरिषु ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yujano harita rathe bhuri tvasteha rajati. Ko 
visvaha dvisatah paksa asata utasinesu surisu. 


With its powers and potentials yoked to its 
chariot-like body form, Tvashta, the soul, shines 
gloriously in its existential form here. It takes the best 
form of its love and choice by karma, for who would 
choose to be with the malicious fools day and night 
when the wise and visionaries are sitting close by? 


अगव्यूति क्षेत्रमाग॑न्म देवा उवी सती भूमिंरं हूर णाभूंत्‌। 
बृह॑स्पते प्र चिकित्सा गविष्टावित्था सते ज॑रित्र इन्द्र 
पन्थाम्‌ २०॥ 


20. Agavyuti ksetramaganma deva urvi ऽवि bhumi- 
ramhuranabhut. Brhaspate pra cikitsa gavista- 
vittha sate jaritra indra pantham. 


O noble people, brilliant pioneers, let us take 
over the vast virgin land which is a field good enough 
for warriors of action to develop and cultivate. O 
Brhaspati, lord of knowledge, protector and promoter 
of great things, Indra, destroyer of suffering, master of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 765 


diagnostics and correctives, let us make the pathway 
for the development of cattlewealth and advancement 
of knowledge and education in the service of the present 
generation of the celebrants of divinity and nobilities 
of humanity. 


दिवेदिवे सदृशीर न्यमर्ध' कृष्णा असेधदप सद॑नो जाः। 
अहन्दासा duet व॑स्नयन्तोदव्र॑ज वर्चिनं शम्ब॑रं च ॥ २९॥ 


21. Divedive sadrsiranyamardham krsna asedhadapa 
sadmano jah. Ahan dasa vrsabho vasnayanto- 
davraje varcinam Sambaram ca. 


Day by day the sun dispels the equal cover of 
darkness arisen at night from its abode to the other half 
of the globe. The mighty solar power of showers breaks 
the dark vapours concealed in the cloud, strikes the 
blazing lightning and opens the flood gates of rain to 
flow into streams on land. 


(So does the ruler dispel the darkness of 
ignorance, injustice and poverty and open the flood - 
gates of light and knowledge with justice and 


prosperity.) 
प्रस्तोक इन्नु राध॑सस्त इन्द्र दश कोशयीर्दश वाजिनोऽ दात्‌। 
दिवो'दासादतिथिग्वस्य wel: शाम्बरं वसु प्रत्यग्र 
भीष्म ॥ २२॥ 


22. Prastoka innu radhasasta indra dasa koSayirdasa 
vajino’dat. Divodasadatithigvasya radhah 
sambaram vasu pratyagrabhisma. 

Indra, lord ruler, the celebrant of your means 


and materials of success and accomplishment has given 
ten treasure gifts of land and ten modes of fast transport. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


766 RGVEDA 


We accept and reciprocate the gifts of the lord’s showers 
of generosity and hospitality from the celebrant giver 
of the treasures of means and materials of success, water 
showers and the gifts of land, home and wealth for 
sustenance. 


दशाश्वान्दश कोशान्दश वस्त्राधिभोजना । 
दशो हिरण्यपिण्डान्दिवोदासादसानिषम्‌॥ २३॥ 

23. Dasasvan dasa kosan dasa vastradhibhojana. 
Daso hirnyapindan divodasadasanisam. 


Let me receive and enjoy in common ten 
transports, ten treasures of wealth, ten garments, ten 
kinds of food and ten pieces of gold from the brilliant 
and generous giver. 


(Swami Dayanand suggests in his commentary 
that the ratio at the maximum between the lowest and 
highest paid working partner in the social order should 
be one to ten.) 


दश रथान्प्रध्िंमतः शतं गा अथंर्वभ्यः। 
अश्वथः पायवेंऽ दात्‌ ॥ २४॥ 

24. Dasarathan prastimatah satam ga atharvabhyah. 
Asvathah payave’dat. 


Let the treasurer give ten chariots equipped with 
powerful steer and motive force to the guard and a 
hundred cows for the non-violent scholars of the 
physical and spiritual sciences of the Atharva Veda 
tradition. 


महि राधो विरुवज॑न्यं दर्धानान्भरद्रा- 
जान्त्साज्जयो अभ्य॑यष्ट।॥। २५॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 767 


25. Mahi radho visvajanyam dadhanan bharadva- 
jantsarnjayo abhyayasta. 


Let the ruler, descendant of the creators of all 
lawful forms of wealth, support and maintain the 
scholars and scientists who create, provide and manage 
the great wealth and power of universal value. 


वन॑स्पते aig St हि भूया अस्मत्सखा प्रतर॑णः सुवीरं: । 
गोभिः Gest असि वीक्छयस्वाऽऽस्थाता ad जयतु 
जेत्वानि ॥ २६॥ 


26. Vanaspate vidvango hi bhuya asmatsakha prata- 
ranah suvirah. Gobhih sannaddho asi vilayasva’’- 
sthata te jayatu jetvani. 


O vanaspati, ruler, protector and promoter of 
forests and light of the sun for energy, be strong of your 
systemic body of governance and strong in the 
constituent parts of the system. Manned with noble 
young supporters, be our friend, pilot and saviour across 
the seas. You are self-controlled in mind and senses, 
strongly endowed with refined speech and manners, 
strengthen us who are committed to you, and let your 
forces win the battles with high morale. 


दिवस्पथिव्याः पर्योज उद्धरं तं वनस्पतिभ्यः प्यभिं तं ae: | 
अपामोज्मानं परि गोधिरावृंतमिन्द्रस्य वरं हविषा रथं 
SATU २७ ॥ 

27. Divasprthivyah paryoja udbhrtam vanaspati- 
bhyah paryabhrtam sahah. Apamajmanam pari 
gobhiravratm-indrasya vajram havisa ratham 
yaja. 

Enlightened ruler and scholar, the energy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


768 RGVEDA 


collected and raised from the sun and earth, the energy, 
vitality and patience received and learnt from the trees 
and forests, the liquid power of the waters rising and 
reinforced with rays of the sun, and the forceful current 
of electric energy, with all these energies together 
harnessed, create and serve the chariot, the fast 
progressive social order worthy of your governance. 


इन्द्र॑स्य वज्रो मरुतामनीकं मित्रस्य गर्भो वरुणस्य नाभिः। 
सेमां नो हव्यदातिं जुषाणो देव॑ रथ प्रतिं हव्या गुंभाय ॥ २८ ॥ 


28. Indrasya vajro marutamanikam mitrasya garbho 
varunasya nabhih. Semam no havyadatim jusano 
deva ratha prati havya grbhaya. 


Enlightened ruler, lord of grace and pilot of the 
nation, loving and kind to participants in yajnic 
governance, you are the thunder and lightning of the 
cloud break of showers, you are the power and splendour 
of the people, you are offspring of the light of sun and 
love of divinity, you are the centre spring of justice and 
discrimination. Lord ruler, accept this offer of homage 
as our share of Raja-dharma in the service of the system. 


sd श्वासय पृथिवीमुत at पुरुत्रा ते मनुतां विष्ठितं seta 
स दुन्दुभे सजृरिन्द्रण देवेर्दूरादवींयो अपं सेध MAT २९ ॥ 


29. UpaSvasaya prthivimuta dyam purutra te manu- 
tam visthitam jagat. Sa dundubhe sajurindrena 
devairdurad daviyo apa sedha satrun. 


O victorious lord ruler of the world, let the roar 
of the victory drum fill heaven and earth with a fresh 
lease of joy and new life. Lord of the whole nation, let 
the wide world moving and non-moving know of you 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 769 


and your glory. Blow over the world, equipped with 
armaments of thunder and vision of the wise, ward off 
the dangers and throw out the enemies far away. 


आ क्रन्दय THe न आ धा निः ष्टनिहि दुरिता बाध॑- 
मानः। अपं प्रोथ दुन्दुभे दुच्छुना इत इन्द्रस्य मुष्टिरसि 
वीव्छय॑स्व।॥ ३०॥ 


30. Akrandaya balamojo na a dha nih stanihi durita 
badhamanah. Apa protha dundubhe ducchuna ita 
indrasya mustirasi vilayasva. 


Call out the forces, challenge the enemies all- 
round, inspire us with vigour and splendour, roar like 
thunder, repel all evils and negativities, scare away the 
barking maligners. You are the strike of lightning, rise 
and let us rise too with might and main. 


आमूर॑ज प्रत्यावर्तयेमाः केतुमहुन्दुभिवीवदीति। समश्व॑- 
पणाश्चर॑न्ति नो नरोऽ स्माकमिन्द्र रथिनो जयन्तु ।॥ ३९॥ 


31. Amiuraja pratyavartayemah ketumad dundubhir- 
vavaditi. Samasvaparnascaranti no naro’sma- 
kamindra rathino jayantu. 


Indra, lord ruler, throw out the enemy forces. 
Rally our forces back in form and array, ever ready. Let 
the battle drum boom, with the flag flying. Our warriors 
on the wing in armour and our leaders in the forefront 
advance and fight out the challenges. Let our heroes of 
the chariot come out with flying colours. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


770 RGVEDA 


Mandala 6/Sukta 48 
Agni (1-10), Maruts (11, 12, 20, 21), Maruts or others 
(13-15), Pusha (16-19), Prshni or Dyava bhumi (22) 
Devatah, Shamyu Barhaspatya Rshi 


यज्ञाय॑ज्ञा at अग्रये गिरागिरा च दक्च॑से । 
प्रप्र॑ वयममृतं जातवेदसं प्रियं fast न शंसिषम्‌ ९॥ 


i Yajnayajna vo agnaye giragira ca daksase. 
Pra-pra vayamamrtam jatavedasam priyam 
mitram na Samsisam. 


In every yajnic programme of your creative and 
constructive work, in every word of our voice, join and 
let us honour, appraise and develop agni, imperishable 
energy pervasive in all things of existence and adore 
Agni, omniscient and omnipresent lord giver of 
knowledge and enlightenment. 


ऊर्जो नपातं स हिनायम॑स्मयुदशिंम हव्यदातये । 
भुवद्वाजेष्वविता भुव॑द्‌ वृध उत त्राता तनूनाम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 

px Urjo napadtam sa hinadyamasmayurdasema 
havyadataye. Bhuvad vajesvavita bhuvad vrdha 
uta trata tanunam. 


Let us honour and serve Agni, infallible cosmic 
light and energy, power that is surely our own, lover 
and benefactor in matters of creation and development. 
May Agni be our protector and promoter in our struggles 
for progress and may he be the saviour and cleanser of 
our health of body, mind and social order. 


वृषा da अजरो महास्विभास्यर्चिषा । अजस्रेण शोचिषा 
शोशुचच्छुचे सुदीतिथिः सु दीदिहि ३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 771 


a Vrsa hyagne ajaro mahan vibhasyarcisa. 
Ajasrena Socisa Sosucacchuce suditibhih su 
didihi. 


Agni, generous lord giver of showers of light 
and energy, wealth and power, you are great, unaging 
and immortal. You shine with lustre and purity. O lord 
pure and purifying, blazing with universal light and 
glory, enlighten us blissfully with the divine rays of 
eternal light, knowledge and purity. 


महो देवान्यजसि यक्ष्यानुषक्तव क्रत्वोत Se | 
अर्वाचः सीं कृणुहयगेऽ da रास्व वाजोत वंस्व ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Maho devan yajasi yaksyanusak tava kratvota 
damsana. Arvacah sim krnuhyagne’vase rasva 
vajota vamsva. 


Agni, giver of light and power, you join, honour 
and serve the bounties of nature and brilliancies of 
humanity. Join the great ones in order by holy acts of 
yajna, raise your actions and turn the divinities 
hitherward for our protection and advancement. Give 
us the courage and power to act and win, and join us in 
the celebrations of success. 


यमापो अद्र॑यो वना faces पिप्र॑ति । सह॑सा यो मथितो 
जाय॑ते नृभिः पृथिव्या अधि सान॑वि ।॥ ५॥ 


a. Yamapo adrayo vana garbhamrtasya piprati. 
Sahasa yo mathito jayate nrbhih prthivya adhi 
sanavi. 

Agni, eternal vitality is the generator as well as 


the generation of the cosmic heat of vitality and the 
cosmic law, whom, in the state of existence, the waters 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


772 RGVEDA 


and actions of men, clouds and mountains, and the 
forests and sun rays feed and promote to the full, and 
which arises and kindles when it is produced by the 
force of attrition and churning by men on the surface of 
the earth. 


आ यः पप्रौ भानुना रोद॑सी उभे eet धावते दिवि । तिरस्तमो! 
ददृश ऊर्म्यास्वा श्यावास्व॑रुषो वृषा श्यावा अरुषो 
वृर्षा ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A yah paprau bhanuna rodast ubhe dhumena 
dhavate divi. tirastamo dadrsa urmyasva 
Syavasvaruso vrsa Syava aruso vrsa. 


Agni is that heat of vitality which fills both 
heaven and earth with sun light and rises to the skies 
from earth by smoke. It is seen to dispel the darkness 
prevailing over dark nights, shining red as harbinger of 
rain, while it shines in sun rays too as harbinger of the 
showers of light and rain. 


बृहद्धिरगे अर्चिभिः शुक्रेण देव शोचिषा। भरद्वाजे 
समिधानो य॑विष्ठ्य रे वन्नः शुक्र दीदिहि द्युमत्पावक 
दीदिहि॥ ७॥ 


Te Brhadbhiragne arcibhih sukrena deva Socisa. 
Bharadvaje samidhano yavisthya revannah Sukra 
वावा dyumat pavaka didihi. 


O resplendent Agni, most youthful unaging 
power, bright and pure, kindled and rising in the mind 
and soul of sagely scholars in pursuit of science, energy 
and progress, shine with mighty flames of light, purity 
and power, and bring us the wealth of life replete with 
light and enlightenment. O generous light and fire of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 773 
life, shine and enlighten us. 


विश्वासां गृहपतिर्विशामसि cat मानुषीणाम्‌ yet 
पूर्भिर्यविष्ठ पाह्यंहसः aan शतं feat: स्तोतृभ्यो ये च 
दद॑ति॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Visvasam grhapatir-visamasi tvamagne manu- 
sinam. Satam purbhir-yavistha pahyanhasah 
sameddharam satam himah stotrbhyo ye ca 
dadati. 


Agni, unaging light and fire of the youthful spirit 
of life, you are the master and guardian of the home of 
all the human communities of the world along with all 
the cities and settlements taken together. O destroyer of 
evil and purifier of life in the crucibles of existence, 
save from sin the yajamana, who kindles, raises and 
develops the fire energy, with a hundred ways of 
protection and bless those who support the developers 
and celebrants of fire with means and materials so that 
they live and work for a full hundred years. 


त्वं न॑श्चित्र ऊत्या वसो राधांसि चोदय। 
अस्य रायस्त्वमंगरे र थीरंसि विदा गाधं तुचे तु न॑: ॥ ९ ॥ 


Tvam nascitra utya vaso radhamsi codaya. Asya 
rayastvamagne rathirasi vida gadham tuce tu nah. 


Agni, wonderful lord of versatile action, giver 
of shelter and security of the home, with protection and 
advancement, inspire and raise our means and materials 
for success and achievement. O lord of knowledge and 
vision, you are the guide and pilot of the chariot and 
wealth and honours of this generation. Give us the 
message and inspiration of peace, progress and security 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


774 RGVEDA 
for our children. 


uff तोकं तन॑यं पर्तृथिष्टमद॑ब्धैरप्र॑युत्वथिः 1 
अग्ने हेव्टांसि दैव्या युयोधि नोऽदेवानि हवरांसि च ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Parsi tokam tanayam partrbhistvam-adabdhaira- 
prayutvabhih. Agne helamsi daivya yuyodhi 
no’devani hvaramsi ca. 


Agni, lord of light and culture, you cleanse, 
refine and enrich our children and teenagers with all 
nourishments and safeguards for body, mind and soul 
with unfailing and unchallengeable modes and methods 
of education and refinement. Resist and overcome the 
passions and negativities which attract natural wrath 
and fight out impious temptations from us. 


आ स॑खायः सबर्दुघां धेनुम॑जध्वमुप नव्य॑सा aa: | 
सृजध्वमनं पस्पफुराम्‌ ॥ ९९ ॥ 

11.  Asakhayah sabardugham dhenum-ajadhvam-upa 
navyasa vacah. Srjadhvam-anapasphuram. 


Come ye friends all, let us develop the language 
and culture of versatile possibilities of creative 
achievement by the latest methods and media of 
communication, and let us create a new and unshakable 
body of knowledge and language of lasting value. 


या शधीय मारुताय स्वभानवे श्रवोऽ WT धुक्ष॑त | 
या dates मरुतां तुराणां या सुम्नैरेवयावरी ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ya Sardhaya marutaya svabhanave Sravo’mrtyu 
dhuksata. Ya mrlike marutam turanam ya sumnai- 
revayavarl. 

O mother teacher, O divine speech, you are the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 7715 


one who create, kindle, refine and raise the word and 
vision of immortal value for the strength and refinement 
of dynamic people for self-enlightenment, and who are 
a divine messenger for the good and well-being of 
vibrant people of fast action with gifts of comfort and 
cultured behaviour. 


भरद्वाजायाव॑ धुक्षत feat धेनुं च॑ विश्वदोहसमिषं च 
विर्वभोजसम्‌॥ ९३ ॥ 


13. Bharadvajayava dhuksata dvita. Dhenum ca 
visvadohasam-isam ca visvabhojasam. 


O mother, you bear and bring the milk of twofold 
efficacy for the brilliant celebrant and bearer of science, 
power and fast action: divine speech yielding universal 
knowledge and enlightenment for all, and universal food 
for the body, mind and soul for the nourishment of all 
without discrimination. 


तं व इन्द्रं न सुक्रतुं वरुणमिव मायिन॑म्‌। 
अर्यमणं न मन्द्रं सूप्रभोजसं विष्णुं न स्तुष आदिशो ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Tam va indram na sukratum varunamiva mayi- 
nam. Aryamanam na mandram srprabhojasam 
visnum na stusa adiSse. 


O lovers of knowledge and fast action, for the 
sake of your guidance and enlightenment, I admire and 
pay homage to the divine teacher who is the hero of 
instant good action like Indra, cosmic electric energy, 
who 18 versatile and resourceful like Varuna, universal 
power of judgement and discrimination, who is happy 
and rejoicing like Aryaman, universal guide, and who 
provides universal food of delicate flavour like Vishnu, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


776 RGVEDA 
all pervasive preserver and sustainer of the universe. 


त्वेषं शर्धो न मारुतं तुविष्वण्य॑नर्वाणं पूषणं सं यथा शाता । 
सं सहस्रा कारिषच्चर्षणिभ्य आं आविर्गूढ्न्हा वसं करत्‌ 
सुवेद। नो वस्तं करत्‌ ॥ ९५ ॥ 


15. Tvesam sardho na marutam tuvisvanyanar- 
vanam pusanam sam yatha sata. Sam sahasra 
karisa-ccarsanibhya an avirgulha vasu 
karat suveda no vasu karat. 


I admire the divine teacher, harbinger of 
knowledge and power, I admire the power like the 
blazing force of the winds, I admire the resounding 
automotive chariot and the nourishing food products 
for sustenance so that wealth may be raised to hundred 
and from hundred to thousand for the people, hidden 
riches may be revealed from the depths, and the brilliant 
scholar may create further wealth and power for our 
peace and security of well being with knowledge and 
enlightenment. 


st at gaa xa शंसिषं नु ते अपिकर्ण आंघुणे। 
अघा अर्यो अरातयः ॥ ९६ ॥ 

16. Ama pisannupa drava Samsisam nu te apikarna 
aghrne. Agha aryo aratayah. 


O lord giver of nourishment and sustenance, 
shining with knowledge and glowing with passion for 
action, come fast to me and I shall sing of your glory in 
truth close to your ear. O master of the community, 
eliminate hate, enmity, adversity and close-heartedness. 


मा काकम्नीरमुद्‌ dat वनस्पतिमशंस्तीर्विं हि =e: 1 
मोत सूरो अदं एवा चन ग्रीवा आद्ध॑ते वेः ॥ 2001 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 777 


17. Ma kakambiramud vrho vanaspatim-aSastirvi hi 
ninasah. Mota suro aha eva cana griva adadhate 
veh. 


Do not uproot the trees such as the banyan which 
provide shelter to the poor innocent birds, but do remove 
the revilers and deplorables. The strong must not hurt 
the weak and their supports like the hunters who catch 
birds by the neck. 


दूते रिव तेऽ वृकमंस्तु सख्यम्‌ । 
अच्छिद्रस्य दधन्वतः सुपूर्णस्य दधन्वतः ॥ ९८ ॥ 


18. Drteriva {८ '17-दवा77व5॥7॥ = sakhyam. Acchidrasya 
dadhanvatah supurnasya dadhanvatah. 


Lord giver of nourishment and sustenance, let 
your friendship be non-violent, and unexploitative. 
Immaculate you are, spotlessly clean, totally self- 
fulfilled, and you command immense plenty, prosperity 
and impeccability. 

परो हि मर्त्यैरसि समो देवैरुत ्चिया। 
अभि ख्य॑ः पूषन्पृतनासु नस्त्वमवा नूनं यथां पुरा ॥ ९९ ॥ 
19. Paro hi maryairasi samo devairuta sriya. Abhi 


khyah pusan prtanasu nastvamava nunam yatha 
pura. 

Pusha, giver of nourishment and sustenance, you 
are highest among mortals by nobility and grace, equal 
to the brilliant in nature and humanity in generosity. 
Watch us, guard us in the battles of life and protect and 
promote us as ever before. 


वामी वामस्य॑ धूतयः प्रणीतिरस्तु सूनृता । 
देवस्य॑ वा मरुतो मर्त्यस्य वेजानस्य प्रयज्यवः 11 २०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


778 RGVEDA 


20. Vami vamasya dhiutayah pranitirastu sunrta. 
Devasya va maruto martyasya vejanasya praya- 
Jyavah. 


O Maruts, tempestuous heroes, movers and 
shakers in action and holy creative performers, let the 
policy, programmes and acts of the people be noble and 
graceful, inspired and directed by truth and 
righteousness, promotive for all, whether the person is 
exceptionally noble, or brilliant, or ordinary mortal, or 
a priest and yajaka. 


waar चर्कृतिः परि द्यां देवो नैति सूर्यः: । त्वेषं शवो 
दधिरे नाम॑ यज्ञियं मरुतो वृत्रहं शवो ज्येष्ठं वृत्रहं शव॑ः ॥ २९॥ 


21. Sadyascid yasya carkrtih pari dyam devo naiti 
suryah. Tvesam Savo dadhire nama yajniyam 
maruto vrtraham savo jyestham vrtraham savah. 


The ruler, whose action is instant, constant and 
ever true, whose people, leaders and warriors command 
sure, brilliant and yajnic force and power of the highest 
order to dispel darkness, evil and wickedness, rises and 
shines like the bright sun across the heavens. 


reg द्यौर॑जायत wesw | 
पुशन्या दुग्धं सकृत्पयस्तदन्यो AM जायते ॥ २२॥ 


22. Sakrddha dyaurajayata sakrd bhumirajayata. 
Prsnya dugdham sakrt payas-tadanyo nanu 
Jayate. 

The sun is born one and once unique, the earth 
is born one and once, unique, the skies and stars, milk 
and waters all are one, born once and unique. None else 
is born after exactly the same. That other, the creator is 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 7719 


never born. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 49 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Rjishva Bharadvaja Rshi 


स्तुषे जनं Gad नव्य॑सीभिर्गीभिर्मित्रावरुणा gaa । 
त आ ग॑मन्तु त इह श्रुवन्तु Gaara वरुणो मित्रो 
अभिः॥ ९॥ 


0 Stuse janam suvratam navyasibhirgirbhirmitra- 
varuna sumnayanta. Ta a gamantu ta tha Sruvantu 
suksatraso varuno mitro agnih. 


With latest words and fresh voice, I honour and 
admire the man committed to duty and discipline, Mitra, 
the friend, and Varuna, the man of judgement and clear 
vision, both givers of peace and pleasure of well being. 
May they come here, I pray, and listen, They command 
the wealth and honour of the admirable social order, 
Mitra, Varuna and brilliant blazing Agni, all three like 
sun, ocean and fire. 


विशोविश ईड्य॑मध्वरेष्वदूंसक्रतुमर तिं gaan: 1 
दिवः शिशुं सह॑सः सूनुमभिं यज्ञस्य॑ केतुम॑रूषं यजध्यै 1 २॥ 


2. Visovisa tdyamadhvaresvadrptakratumaratim 
yuvatyoh. Divah sisum sahasah sunumagnim 
yajnasya ketumarusam yajadhyai. 


I admire and adore Agni, leader of light and fire, 
honoured and worshipped in every community, calm 
and delighted in yajnic projects of love and non- 
violence, free from illusion and infatuation, generated 
by youthful parents, i.e., sun and earth, child of cosmic 
energy, symbol and column of yajna, and crimson red 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


780 RGVEDA 


like the dawn which is brilliant and soothing. I pray 
may Agni come and join us at our yajna. 


अरुषस्य दुहितरा विरूपे स्त॒भि॑रन्या fafast सूरो अन्या । 
मिथस्तुरा विचरन्ती पावके मन्म॑ श्रुतं dart ऋच्यमाने ॥ ३॥ 


Arusasya duhitara virupe strbhiranya pipise suro 
anya. Mithastura vicarantt pavake manma srutam 
naksata rcyamane. 


Two daughters of the glowing fire, the night and 
the day, different in form, one adorned with stars, the 
other lighted by the sun, move on alternating with each 
other. Both of them, pure, purifying and sanctifying, 
adorable and adored, pervade the world, and may they, 
we pray, inspire our thought and mind. (So may men 
and women be complementary to each other.) 


प्र वायुमच्छा बहती मनीषा बृहद्र यिं विश्ववारं रथप्राम्‌ | 
द्युतद्यामा नियुतः पत्य॑मानः कविः कविमियक्षसि 
प्रयज्यो ।॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Pra vayumaccha brhati manisa brhadrayim 
visvavaram rathapram. Dyutadyama niyutah 
patyamanah kavih kavimiyaksasi prayajyo. 


O venerable scholar of vision and imagination, 
dedicated to in-depth research with ambition for the 
honour and glory of success, with your brilliant and 
far-reaching intelligence and application, you study and 
plan to harness the abundantly rich and powerful 
universal energy of the divine wind and its carrier forces 
of energy, immensely useful to drive the chariot over 
the paths of light in space. Venerable scholar, honour 
the visionary seer, his vision and learning. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 781 


(Swami Dayananda applies this manta also to 
the control of breath, pranic energy and mind for flights 
of the soul in samadhi for the achievement of supra- 
sensuous experiences of universal nature.) 


स मे वपुंशछदयदणश्विनोर्यो रथो विरुक्मान्मन॑ंसा Sars: | 
येन॑ नरा नासत्येषयध्यै वर्तिर्याथस्तन॑याय त्मने च ।॥ ५॥ 


कः Same vapuS-chadayad-aSsvinoryo ratho virukman 
manasa yujanah. Yena nara nasatye-sayadhyai 
vartir-yathas-tanaydaya tmane ca. 


That brilliant chariot of the Ashvins, 
complementary currents of universal energy of divine 
nature, directed by the mind, may, I pray, vest my body 
and mind with light and energy, the chariot by which 
leading lights of humanity dedicated to Truth and 
Divinity go by the path of righteousness in search of 
enlightenment for themselves and their children. 


पर्जन्यवाता वृषभा पृथिव्याः पुरीषाणि जिन्वतमप्यानि 1 
सत्यश्रुतः कवयो यस्य॑ गीर्भिजंग॑तः स्थातर्जगदा कुणु- 
ध्वम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Parjanyavata vrsabha prthivyah purisani Jinvata- 
mapyani. Satyasrutah kavayo yasya girbhir- 
jagatah sthatarjagada krnudhvam. 


O generous and showerful winds and clouds, 
move the vapours of water from the earth and the 
firmament. O men of vision and imagination, established 
leaders and scholars of the world dedicated to truth and 
the voice of truth, listen to the scholar by whose words 
of knowledge you discover the world and work for its 
prosperity. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


782 RGVEDA 


पावीरवी कन्यां चित्रायुः सर॑स्वती वीरप॑ल्ी धियं धात्‌। 
ग्राथिरच्छिद्रं शरणं सजोषा दुराधर्षः गृणते शर्म यंसत्‌॥ ७॥ 


bs Paviravi kanya citrayuh sarasvati virapatni 
dhiyam dhat. Gnabhiracchidram Saranam sajosa 
duradharsam grnate Sarma yamsat. 


Gracious Sarasvati, mother harbinger of 
knowledge and sacred speech, wondrous of form and 
life energy, spirit of purity and sanctity inspired and 
protected by omniscient and omnipotent Lord, may, we 
pray, bring us knowledge and wisdom in words of divine 
revelation and, loving and kind as the mother is, may 
she bless the celebrant with faultless haven and home 
of peace and well being free from fear and violence. 


पथस्पथः परिपतिं वचस्या कामेन कृतो अभ्यानव्छर्कम्‌। 
स नो रासच्छुरुध॑र्चन्द्राग्रा धियंधियं सीषधाति प्र 
पूषा ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Pathaspathah paripatim vacasya kamena krto 
abhyanalarkam. Sa no rasacchurudhascandra- 
gra dhiyamdhiyam sisadhdati pra pusa. 

Let the supplicant inspired by love and 
reverence offer homage in holy words to adorable Pusha, 
giver of health and sustenance and guardian of people 
in all paths of life, and may that lord grant the supplicant 
invigorating herbs and brilliant life saving drugs. Pusha 
matures our mind and intelligence and gives us success 
in action and achievement. 


प्रथमभाजं यशसं वयोधां सुपाणिं देवं सुगभ॑स्तिमृभ्व॑म्‌। 
होता यक्षद्यजतं पस्त्यानामभ्रिस्त्वष्ट।रं सुहवं विभावा ॥ ९ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 783 


9. Prathamabhajam yasasam vayodham supanim 
devam sugabhastim-rbhvam. Hota yaksad 
yajatam pastyanam-agnis-tvastaram suhavam 
vibhava. 

Let agni, generous yajaka, join and offer 
abundant homage and service to Tvashta, maker of 
forms and institutions for humanity. Who is freely 
sociable, and first to be invited, famous and adorable, 
giver of health and long age, expert of hand in action, 
generous, brilliant, exceptionally intelligent, adorable 
and openly accessible and responsive to the brilliant 
host, agni. 


भुव॑नस्य पितरं गीर्भिराभी रुद्रं दिवां वर्धयां रुद्रमक्तौ । 
बृहन्त॑मूष्वमजरं सुषुम्नमधंग्घुवेम कविनेषितासः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Bhuvanasya pitaram girbhirabhi rudram diva 
vardhaya rudramaktau. Brhantam-rsvam-ajaram 
susumnamrdhagghuvema kavinesitasah. 


With all these words of homage by day and in 
the night, adore and exalt Rudra, guardian sustainer of 
the world and destroyer of suffering and disease. 
Inspired and exhorted by the wise poet of vision, let us 
all in truth and sincerity invoke and adore Rudra, 
dispenser of justice and punishment, great giver of 
advancement, unaging and blissful giver of peace and 
well being. 


आ dam: कवयो यज्ञियासो मरुतो गन्त Wore व॑र स्याम्‌। 
अचित्रं चिद्धि जिन्व॑था वृधन्तं इत्था नक्षन्तो नरो 
अद्धिर स्वत्‌॥ ९९॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


784 RGVEDA 


11. A yuvanah kavayo yajniyaso maruto ganta grnato 
varasyam. Acitram ciddhi jinvatha vrdhanta ittha 
naksanto naro angirasvat. 


Come O Maruts, youthful, creative visionaries 
and adorable yajakas vibrant as winds, and listen to the 
exhortations of the celebrants: you are leading lights of 
nature and humanity, messengers and harbingers of the 
breath of life, reaching everywhere, advancing yourself 
and raising all thus, you revitalise even the less than 
ordinary lands and rejuvenate worse than terminable 
cases of suffering and bless them with new life. 


प्र वीराय प्र तवसे तुरायाञऽजां aera पशुरक्िरस्त॑म्‌। स 
पिंस्पृराति aa श्रुतस्य cafe नाकं वचनस्य 
fad: nen 


12. Pra viraya pra tavase turaya’ja yutheva pasura- 
ksirastam. Sa pisprsati tanvi Srutasya strbhirna 
nakam vacanasya vipah. 


Reach the brave, the courageous and the instant 
destroyer of suffering and darkness, and, like a shepherd 
leading the flock home, let your words of prayer and 
adoration rest there, and just as the sky is decked and 
adorned by the stars, so the listener is touched at heart 
by the words of the prayerful man of the revealed Word. 


यो रजांसि विममे पार्थिवानि त्रिश्चिद्विष्णुर्मन॑वे बाधिताय | 
तस्य॑ ते शर्म॑न्नुपदद्ययमान राया म॑देम तन्वा तना च ॥ ९३ ॥ 
13. Yo rajamsi vimame parthivani triscid visnur- 
manave badhitaya. Tasya te Sarmann-upadadya- 
mane raya madema tanva tana ca. 
O lord all pervasive, Vishnu, who have created 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 785 


the three regions of the universe for humanity and 
sustain the three to save us from the limitations of 
suffering and darkness, we pray that with the abundant 
and expansive gifts of health and wealth we may live 
and enjoy life in this vast home given by you. 


तन्नोऽदि्बुध्न्यो अद्धिर कैस्तत्र्व तस्तत्सविता चनो धात्‌ | 
तदोष॑धीभिर्‌ भि रतिषाचो भगः पुर॑न्धिर्जिन्वतु प्र 
Wau ९४ ॥ 


14. = Tanno’hirbudhnyo adbhir-arkais-tat parvatastat 
savita cano dhat. Tadosadhibhirabhi 161744८0 
bhagah purandhirjinvatu pra raye. 


That blessed home of ours, Lord of the deep 
caverns of the clouds formed in the sky, may sustain us 
with showers of waters and rays of the sun. That home, 
the mountain and the lord creator, Savita and sun may 
sustain and bring gifts of food for us therein. And the 
same, the lord abundant giver of wealth, power and 
honour and sustainer of the world, Bhaga, may promote 
and vitalise with herbs for us to live in plenty and 
prosperity. 

नू नो रयिं रथ्यं चर्षणिप्रां पुरुवीरं मह ऋतस्य गोपाम्‌। 
क्षयं दाताजरं येन जनान्त्स्पृथो अदेवीरभि च क्रमाम विश 
देवीर भ्य4ङ्नर्वाम ॥ ९५॥ 

15. Nuno rayim rathyam carsanipram puruviram 
maha rtasya gopam. Ksayam datajaram yena 
jana-ntsprdho adevirabhi ca kramama visa 
adevira-bhyasnavama. 


O lord creator and generous giver, give us the 
commonwealth equipped with chariots, good for all 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


786 RGVEDA 


people, blest with many heroic children and warriors, 
great and protector of the truth and law of the world in 
existence. May the lord giver give us an unaging home 
land and shelter by which we may face and overcome 
the impious rivals contesting against us and build a 
nation of brilliant and God fearing people so that both 
the simple and the sophisticated people may live well. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 50 
Vishvedeva Devata, Rjishva Bharadvaja Rshi 


हवे वो देवीमदितिं नमोभिर्मृव्टीकाय वरुणं मित्रमथिम्‌। 
अभिश्चदामर्यमणं सुशेवं त्रातृन्देवान्त्संवितारं भगं च ॥ ९॥ 


hs Huve vo devimaditim namobhirmrlikaya varunam 
mitramagnim. Abhiksadamar-yamanam susevam 
tratrn devantsavitaram bhagam ca. 


For your happiness and felicity I invoke, invite 
and honour with reverence and hospitality the 
Vishvedevas, powers and people of generous and divine 
nature : the brilliant mother scholar, the lady of exalted 
nature and character, and indestructible Aditi, Mother 
Nature, Varuna, udana energy of vitality and the man of 
elevating wisdom, Mitra, pranic energy and the friend 
dear as breath of life, Agni, fire and the man of passion 
and purity of action, Abhikshada, the generous person 
who is a spontaneous giver and fighter against adversity, 
Aryaman, the person who guides with judgement and 
discrimination between good and evil, the person 
committed to selfless service of the community, all noble 
and brilliant powers and people who help as saviours 
and path finders, Savita, giver of light and inspiration 
as the sun, Bhaga, lord of universal wealth and power, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 50 787 


and the man who counts for the honour and excellence 
of humanity. 


सुज्योतिषः सूर्यं दक्ष॑पितृननागास्त्वे ane वीहि cart 
द्विजन्मानो य ऋतसापः सत्याः स्वर्वन्तो यजता अ॑थि- 
जिह्वाः ॥ २ ॥ 


2 Sujotisah surya daksapitrnanagastve sumaho vihi 
devan. Dvijanmano ya rtasapah satyah svarvanto 
yajata agnijihvah. 


O man bright as the sun, if you want to maintain 
your simplicity, innocence and freedom from sin, 
approach, honour and exalt the generous and brilliant 
seniors of parental nature who command the holy light 
of knowledge, expertise of action and greatness of 
character, who are nobly born and divinely educated, 
who are true to the bone and unshakably committed to 
nothing but the truth and the law of Dharma, and who 
enjoy perfect peace of mind with an open door 
hospitality but have a tongue of fire that brooks no 
nonsense and burns double dealing with a whiff of air. 


उत द्यावापृथिवी are बृहद्रोदसी शरणं Cars | 
महस्करथो वरिवो यथा नोऽ स्पे arate धिषणे अनेहः ॥ ३॥ 


a Uta dyavaprthivi ksatramuru brhad rodasi 
Saranam susumne. Mahaskaratho varivo yatha 
no’sme ksayaya dhisane anehah. 


And O heaven and earth, give us the strength of 
a mighty social order, O magnetic and electric energy 
of the earth and firmament, great givers of peace and 
comfort, provide us a vast home of comfort and joy. O 
noble and generous divinities of nature and humanity, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


788 RGVEDA 


great things as you do, give us the best of wealth and 
competence for our life on earth so that our home and 
family may be free from sin and violence. 


आ नो सुद्रस्य॑ सूनवो! नमन्तामद्या हूतासो वसवोऽधृष्टाः । 
यदीमर्भे महति at हितासो बाधे मरुतो stata देवान्‌ ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. A no rudrasya sunavo namantamadya 1711450 
vasavo’dhrstah. Yadimarbhe mahati va hitaso 
badhe maruto ahvama devan. 


May the off-springs of Rudra, lord of justice 
and nature’s vitality, come down to us, invited they are 
today. Modest yet invincible, brilliant and vibrant as 
winds they are, givers of home and comfort, and since 
they are appointed to fight out adversaries in battles 
big or small, we call upon them. 


मिम्यश्च येषु, रोदसी नु देवी सिष॑क्ति पूषा अभ्यर्धयज्वा | 
श्रुत्वा हवं मरुतो यन्द याथ भूमां रेजन्ते अध्व॑नि UATE ॥ ५ ॥ 


=F Mimyaksa yesu rodasi nu devi sisakti pusa 
abhyardhayajva. Srutva havam maruto yaddha 
yatha bhuma_ rejante adhvani pravikte. 


O Maruts, vibrant warriors of nature and 
humanity with whom the energy and generosity of 
heaven and earth is joined and whom Pusha, vital energy 
of nature and humanity, blesses with reverence and 
recognition, go quick in response to the call and meet 
the purpose. And when you proceed in response to the 
call and march on the path, all those who inhabit the 
earth tremble on the route of your advance. 


अभि त्यं वीरं गिर्वणसमर्चन्द्रं ब्रह्मणा जरितर्नवेन । 
श्रवदिन्दधवमुप॑ं च स्तवानो रासद्वाजो उप॑ महो गंणानः ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 50 789 


6. Abhi tyam viram girvanasamarcendram brah- 
mana jaritarnavena. Sravadiddhavamupa ca 
stavano rasad vajan upa maho grnanah. 


O celebrant of nature, divinity and the best of 
humanity, sing in praise of that mighty adorable Indra, 
commander of glory and power, with the best and latest 
of your songs of celebration. And the great Indra, sung 
and celebrated thus, would closely hear the song and 
prayer and would grant you food and sustenance and 
fast progress and victories in the battles of life. 


startarat मानुषीरमृक्तं धात॑ तोकाय तन॑याय शं योः। 
यूयं हि छा भिषजो! मातृतमा विश्व॑स्य स्था तुर्ज॑ग॑तो 
जनित्रीः ॥ ७॥ 


a Omanamapo manusiramrktam dhata tokaya 
tanayaya sam yoh. Yuyam hi stha bhisajo matr- 
tama visvasya sthaturjagato janitrth. 


O waters of purity, Apah, O leaders of humanity 
pure at heart like holy waters, you are a bliss for 
humanity. Bear and bring nourishing, protective and 
unsullied food for our children and for our youth and 
bring about a state of peace free from sin and evil. You 
are the most motherly harbingers of health, the best 
physicians. You are the makers of a new generation for 
all the moving and non-moving world. Pray stay 
constant and friendly as you are. 


आनो देवः स॑विता त्रायमाणो हिरण्यपाणिर्यजतो 
ज॑गम्यात्‌। यो दच्र॑वाँ उषसो न प्रतीकं व्यूर्णुते दाशुषे 
वा्यीणि॥ ८ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


790 RGVEDA 


8. A no devah savita trayamano hiranyapanir-yajato 
jJagamyat. Yo datravan usaso na pratikam 
vyurnute dasuse varyani. 


May the divine and refulgent Savita, creator, 
preserver and generator of golden handed charity, loving 
and adorable, come and bless us, he who, all giving, 
opens up treasures of wealth for the generous giver like 
the first lights of the dawn. 


उत त्वं संनो Gear नो अद्या देवां अस्मिन्न॑ध्वरे व॑वृत्याः । 
स्यामहं ते सदमिद्रातौ तवं Carats व॑सा सुवीरः ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Uta tvam suno sahaso no adya devan asminna- 
dhvare vavrtyah. Syamaham te sadamid ratau 
tava syamagne’vasa suvirah. 


O light and fire of life, Agni, off-spring of divine 
strength and vitality, in this yajnic programme of love 
and non-violent creation of an enlightened society, let 
the divine values and virtues of nature and humanity 
turn and come our way and flow on. O lord of brilliance, 
let me stay established for all time in the bliss of your 
generosity and, under your protection and guidance, let 
me command the heights of heroism with the brave. 


उत त्या मे हवमा Snead नासत्या धीभिरर्युवमङ्क विप्रा । 
अत्रिं न महस्तम॑सोऽमुमुक्तं तूर्व॑तं नरा दुरितादभीके i ९०॥ 
10. = {व (व me havama jagmyatam nasatya dhibhir- 
yuvamanga vipra. Atrim na mahastamaso’- 
mumuktam turvatam nara duritadabhike. 


And may the Ashvins, those two complementary 
currents of nature’s energy, the teacher and the preacher, 
leading lights of the world, vibrant benefactors dear as 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 50 791 


breath of life, both committed to truth and eternal law, 
come in response to my invitation with gifts of 
intelligence and competence for holy action, protect me 
as Atri, the man free from physical, mental and spiritual 
ailments, save me from deep darkness and release me 
from sin and evil all round prevailing. 


तेनो रायो दयुमतो वाज॑वतो दातारो भूत नृवत॑ः पुरुक्षोः | 
दशस्यन्तो, दिव्याः पार्थिवासो गोजाता अप्या मृव्ठतां च 
देवाः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Te no rayo dyumato vajavato dataro bhita 
nrvatah puruksoh. Dasasyanto divyah parthivaso 
gojata apya mrlata ca devah. 


O divine powers of nature and humanity, learned 
and wise teachers and scholars, be you all givers of rich 
gifts of wealth, light, speed and success, human 
resources and food for sustenance. And may all the 
divinities celestial, terrestrial, spatial and aqueous bless 
us with peace and felicity. 


ते नो रुद्रः सर॑स्वती सजोषा मीज्हुष्म॑न्तो विष्णुर्मृव्छन्तु 
वायुः| ऋभुक्षा वाजो दैव्यो विधाता पर्जन्यावाता 
पिप्यतापिषं नः ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Te no rudrah sarasvati sajosa milhusmanto 
visnurmrlantu vayuh. Rbhuksa vajo daivyo 
vidhata parjanyavata pipyatamisam nah. 


May Rudra, lord of justice and punishment, 
Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and speech, Vishnu, 
omnipresent spirit of the universe, Vayu, the winds, 
Rbhuksha, expert artist, universal energy, divine favour, 
law giver, clouds and winds, all virile and friendly, bring 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


792 RGVEDA 
us food and energy and give us peace and felicity. 


उत स्य देवः संविता भगो नोऽ पां नपादवतु दानु पप्रिः । 
wast देवेधिर्जनिंभिः सजोषा द्यौर्देवेभिंः पृथिवी 
WAS: UB 


13. Utasyadevah savita bhago no ’pam napadavatu 
danu paprih. Tvasta devebhir-janibhih sajosa 
dyaurdevebhih prthivi samudraih. 


And that refulgent Savita, the sun, Bhaga, pranic 
energy, Apam-napat, unfailing electric energy born of 
waters, Tvashta, maker of forms with brilliant generative 
powers, the heaven with all its lights, the earth with the 
seas, may all these together, friendly and supportive, 
generously giving and fulfilling, protect and promote 
us in life. 


उत नोऽ federal: श्रणोत्वज एकपात्पृथिवी WAR: | 
विश्वे देवा ऋतावृ धों हुवानाः स्तुता मन्त्राः कविशस्ता 
अवन्तु ॥ ९४॥ 

14. Uta no’hirbudhnyah srnotvaja ekapat prthivi 


samudrah. Visvedeva rtavrdho huvanah stuta 
mantrah kavisasta avantu. 


And the deep cloud in the firmament, the unborn 
Spirit of the universe, the sole divine support of 
existence, the earth, the sea, all the divine forces of the 
universe which prove and maintain the eternal law 
invoked and adored, and Veda mantras taught by seers, 
may all these listen to our prayers and protect us. 


एवा wate मम तस्य॑ धीभिर्भरद्वाजा अभ्य्॑चन्त्यर्कैः। 
ग्रा हुतासो वसवोऽधृष्टा विश्वे स्तुतासो भूता यजत्राः ॥ ९५५ UM 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 793 


15. Eva napato mama tasya dhibhir-bharadvaja 
abhyarcantyarkaih. Gna hutaso vasavo’dhrsta 
visve stutaso bhuta yajatrah. 


Thus do we bearers of science and power and 
our descendants and disciples offer homage with 
thoughts, words and actions of devotion and pray that 
the Vishvedevas, universal creators and unifiers of 
nature and humanity, and their potentials, invoked and 
admired, free and fearless, may continue to be providers 
of peace and shelter for all for ever. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 51 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Rjishva Bharadvaja Rshi 


उदु त्यच्चक्षुर्महि मित्रयोराँ एति प्रियं वरुणयोरदंब्धम्‌। 
ऋतस्य शुचिं दर्शतमनीकं रुक्मो न दिव उदिता व्य॑द्योत्‌॥ ९॥ 


1. Udu tvaccaksurmahi mitrayoran eti priyam 
varunayoradabdham. Rtasya Suci darsatama- 
nikam rukmo na diva udita vyadyaut. 


Lo! the sun, that glorious eye of the universe, 
darling of the day and night, rises up undaunted, and 
like the pure, resplendent, golden face of heaven 
unveiled shines from the regions of eternal light. 


(The sunrise is a metaphor which may be applied 
to the rise of any great light - giving power, say a great 
leader, giver of enlightenment, a teacher, a reformer, or 
a great movement.) 


वेद्‌ यस्त्रीणि विदथान्येषां देवानां जन्म॑ सनुतरा च विप्र॑ः | 
ऋजु मर्तेषु वृजिना च पश्यन्नभि च॑ष्टे सूरो अर्य एवान्‌ 2 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


794 RGVEDA 


2: Veda yastrini vidathanyesam devanam janma 
sanutara ca viprah. Rju martesu vrjind ca pasya- 
nnabhi caste suro arya evan. 


The lord of light who is all wise, too, knows, 
reaches and pervades three orders of the world, i.e., the 
earth, the middle regions of the skies, and the highest 
regions of the light of heaven; three fields of life, 1.e., 
jnana or knowledge, karma or action, and upasana or 
prayer and meditation; and three departments of the 
social order, 1.e., teaching and research, governance and 
administration, and dharma or values of life, law and 
justice. He also knows the birth and life of these 
Vishvedevas, 1.6., the divinities of nature and humanity. 
And watching the simple and straight paths and 
performances as well as the tortuous and crooked 
movements of the mortals, the potent master reveals 
where they reach in consequence. 


स्तुष उ वो मह eed गोपानदितिं मित्रं वरुणं सुजातान्‌ | 
अर्यमणं भगमदब्धधीतीनच्छा वोचे सधन्यः पाव- 
ru ३॥ 


न Stusa u vo maha rtasya gopdanaditim mitram 
varunam sujatan. Aryamanam bhagamada- 
bdhadhitinaccha voce sadhanyah pavakan. 


Happy and blest, I admire and celebrate in words 
of song all of you, Vishvedevas, great observers and 
protectors of the eternal law of Truth and righteousness: 
Aditi, indestructible mother nature, Mitra, sun and 
brilliant friend, Varuna, ocean and venerable judge, 
Aryaman, universal guide and discriminative path 
maker, Bhaga, lord of honour and excellence, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 795 


universally known, dauntless, intelligent and wise 
purifying powers all. 


Renda: सत्प॑तीरद॑ब्धान्महो राज्ञ॑ः सुवसनस्य॑ दातृन्‌ । यून॑ः 
सुक्षत्रानक्षय॑तो दिवो नूनादित्यान्याम्यदितिं दुवोयु ॥ ४॥ 


4. Risddasah satpatinradabdhan maho rajiiah 
suvasanasya datrn. Yunah suksatran ksayato divo 
nrnadityan yamyaditim duvoyu. 


I reach, admire and celebrate Aditi, mother spirit 
of nature, and the offsprings of Aditi, destroyers of evil 
and protectors of the good and true, irresistible great 
rulers, givers of peaceful homes, ever young and 
unaging, makers of great social orders, well established 
leaders of light and all refulgent suns. I approach them 
with prayers for blessings, they love the supplicants. 


द्यौ डष्पितः ufafa मातरध्युगगर भ्रातर्वसवो मुव्ठतां नः । विश्वं 
आदित्या अदिते सजोषा अस्मभ्यं शर्म age वि य॑न्त ॥ ५॥ 


Dyauspitah prthivi mataradhrugagne bhratar- 
vasavo mrlata nah. Visva aditya adite sajosa 
asmabyam sarma bahulam vi yanta. 


O refulgent sun, O father, O earth, O mother, 
compassionate, free from hate and anger, O fire, O 
brother, givers of shelter and protection, give us peace 
and felicity. O children of mother Infinity, O Mother 
Nature, all ever our own, loving friends, pray bring us a 
homely settlement of joy and all round prosperity. 


मानो वृकाय qa समस्मा अघायते रीरधता यजत्राः | 
Wa fest रथ्यो नस्तनूनां यूयं दक्ष॑स्य वच॑सो बभुव ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


796 RGVEDA 


6. Mano vrkaya vrkye samasma aghayate riradhata 
yajatrah. Yuyam hi stha rathyo nastanunam 
yuyam daksasya vacaso babhiva. 


Adorable friends and unifiers, divinities of 
nature and humanity, throw us not to the wolf and the 
thief nor to the rule of the sinner, nor relegate us to 
seizure, deprivation and exploitation. Pray stay you 
constant as our guide in matters of body, health and 
action and in the working of our social institutions, and 
be the carrier medium of the word and voice of the 
eminent expert. 


माव wal अन्यकुतं भुजेम मा तत्कर्म वसवो यच्ययं॑ध्वे। 
विश्व॑स्य हि क्षय॑थ विश्वदेवाः स्वयं रिपुस्तन्वं रीरिषीष्ट i ७॥ 


Ts Ma va eno anyakrtam bhujema ma tat karma 
vasavo yaccayadhve. Visvasya hi ksayatha 
visvadevah svayam ripustanvam. ririsista. 


O Vasus, givers of peace and settlement, 
dispensers of the laws of nature and humanity, let us 
not suffer your dispensation’s punishment for the sin 
and crime committed by others, nor let us do that act 
which you hate and prohibit. You are the rulers of the 
world and dispensers of justice and punishment, O 
divinities of nature and humanity. Let the hater and the 
evil doer be the instrument of his own self-infliction. 


नम इदुग्रं नम॒ आ विवासे नमो दाधार पृथिवीमुत द्याम्‌। 
नमो देवेभ्यो नम॑ ईश एषां कृतं चिदेनो नमसा विवासे ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nama idugram nama 4G vivase namo dadhara 
prthivimuta dyam. Namo devebhyo nama isa esam 
krtam cideno namasa vivase. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 797 


Namas, the thunder of omnipotence and 
universal law, is mighty. Reverence on the human plane 
too has power. I respect law and reverence. Law and 
reverence sustain the earth and the sun. I offer reverence 
to the nobilities and the divinities. The power of the 
Divine and reverence for life rule the actions, good as 
well as evil, of all these people. I accept the power and 
value reverence with humility and submission to the 
divine dispensation. 


waded वो Teal: पूतदश्ानृतस्य॑ पस्त्यसदो अदब्धान्‌ | 
तों आ नमोभिरुरुचक्षसो नृन्विर्वान्व आ न॑मे महो 
य॑जत्राः ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Rtasya vo rathyah putadaksanrtasya pastyasado 
adabdhan. Tan a namobhirurucaksaso nrn 
visvanva ठ name maho yajatrah. 


O great divinities of nature and nobilities of 
humanity, I, moving forward by the chariot of law and 
reverence, bow with homage and surrender to you all, 
powers strengthened and sanctified by the law of eternal 
truth, invincible presences in human homes, who are 
vastly watchful guardians of all the people and their 
actions in the world. 


ते हि seétacdeea उ नस्तिरो विश्वानि दुरिता नय॑न्ति। 
सुक्षत्रासो वरुणो मित्रो अयथिक्ऋतधींतयो वक्मराजं- 
सत्याः ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Te hi Sresthavarcasasta u nastiro visvani durita 
nayanti. Suksatraso varuno mitro agnir-rtadhi- 
tayo vakmarajasatyah. 


They alone are Vishvadevas, men of highest 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


798 RGVEDA 


excellence, they alone lead us over and across all evil 
and suffering of life, and they alone are the right rulers 
and managers of the social order, who are men of 
wisdom, right judgment and discrimination as Varuna, 
universal ruler, unifying sustainers and saviour friends 
as Mitra, the sun, and pure and purifying agents of action 
as Agni, the fire, who are committed in thought, word 
and action to universal truth and eternal values of life, 
and who have the courage of the conviction to speak 
the truth in matters of governance and administration 
in the political order of the world state. 


ते न इन्द्रः पृथिवी क्षाम॑ वर्धन्पूषा भगो sifefa: पञ्च 
जनाः । सुशमीणः स्वव॑सः सुनीथा भवन्तु नः सुत्रात्रासः 
सुगोपाः॥ ९९॥ 


11. Tena indrah prthivi ksama vardhan pusa bhago 
aditih panca janah. Susarmanah svavasah sunitha 
bhavantu nah sutratrasah sugopah. 


May those divine powers of nature and 
humanity, cosmic energy, the firmament, the earth, the 
sustainer, glorious God, mother nature, all people dear 
as five pranic energies, all happy home dwellers nobly 
protected and well guided, be our saviours and 
protectors. 


न्‌ सद्यानं दिव्यं Aft देवा भारद्वाजः सुमतिं याति erat । 
आसानेभिर्यजमानो मियेधैंर्दवानां जन्म॑ वसुयुर्व'- 
वन्द ।॥ ९२॥ 


12. Nu sadmanam divyam namsi deva bharadvajah 
sumatim yati hota. Asanebhiryajamano miye- 
dhair-devanam janma vasuyurvavanda. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 799 


O divine powers, the bearer of knowledge who 
invokes the divinities and serves the nobilities in yajnic 
programmes is blest with divine peace and settlement 
and enjoys wisdom and divine guidance. The yajamana 
in pursuit of wealth and excellence, sitting with inspiring 
and adorable yajakas, obtains the vision of rising 
divinities in his life. 

अप त्यं ait रिपुं स्तेनमग्ने दुराध्यम्‌ । 
दविष्ठ म॑स्य सत्पते कृधी सुगम्‌ ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Apa tyam vrjinam ripum stenamagne dura- 
dhyam. Davisthamasya satpate krdhi sugam. 
Agni, O divine leader, cast away that crooked 
thief, that strenuous enemy, far from the path of the 
aspirant. O protector and promoter of the good and the 
true, make it easy for him to follow the course simple 
and straight. 
ग्रावाणः सोम नो हि कं सखित्वनाय वावशुः 1 
जही न्यत्रिणं पणि वृको fe षः ॥ ९४ ॥ 
14. = Gravanah soma no hi kam sakhitvanaya vavasuh. 
Jahi nyatrinam panim vrko hi sah. 


O Soma, giver of peace and inspiration, our holy 
ones generous as clouds and strong as granite love peace 
for divine favour and friendship. Throw away the ogre 
of crooked behaviour, he is a wolf only. 
यूयं fest सुदानव इन्द्र॑ज्येष्ठा अभिद्य॑वः। 
कर्ती नो अध्वन्ना सुगं गोपा अमा ॥९५॥ 

15. वो hi stha sudanava indrajyestha abhidyavah. 
Karta no adhvanna sugam gopa ama. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


800 RGVEDA 


O Vishvedevas, bounties of nature divine and 
leading lights of humanity, stay you all generous as ever, 
shining as the sun on high above all. Make our march 
of progress simple and manageable, and protect our 
hearth and home. 


अपि पन्थामगन्महि स्वस्तिगामनेहसम्‌ । 
येन विश्वाः परि द्विषो वृणक्ति विन्दते वसुं ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Api panthamaganmahi svastigamanehasam. 
Yena visvah pari dviso vrnakti vindate vasu. 


And also, let us move on by the path which is 
faultless, auspicious, sinless and inviolable, which leads 
to noble attainments with peace, and by which holy 
brave people remove all hate, jealousy and enmity and 
realize all wealth and self fulfillment. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 52 
Vishvedevah Devatah, Rjishva Bharadvaja Rshi 


न तद्दिवा न पुंधिव्यानुं मन्ये न यज्ञेन नोत शमींभिराभिः। 
उब्जन्तु तं सुभ्व: पर्वतासो नि हीयतामतियाजस्य 
यष्टा ॥ ९॥ 


1m Na tad diva na prthivyanu manye na yajnena nota 
samibhirabhih. Ubjantu tam subvah parvataso 
ni htyatamatiydjasya yasta. 


I believe the enthusiastic performer of yajna 
would not be forsaken by heaven or earth, nor would 
he be deprived of the rewards of his yajna or of all these 
noble actions. I pray may the showers of generous clouds 
bless him. (Let none neglect yajna.) 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 52 801 


aia वा यो म॑रुतो मन्य॑ते नो wat ar a: क्रियमाणं 
निनिंत्सात्‌। तपूंषि तस्मै वृजिनानि सन्तु ब्रह्यद्विषमभि तं 
शोचतु द्यौः ॥ २॥ 


2. Ati va yo maruto manyate no brahma va yah 
kriyamanam ninitsat. Tapumsi tasmai vrjinani 
santu brahmadvisamabhi tam Socatu dyauh. 


O maruts, vibrant heroes, whoever hates us, or 
despises our wealth and piety, or deprecates our acts 
and holy programmes in progress, must have his 
tortuous paths exposed by the blazing light of truth. Let 
the loving and brilliant wise men subject the hater of 
nobility and eternal values to disapproval until he feels 
sorry. 


किमङ्क त्वा ब्रह्मणः सोप गोपां किमङ्क त्वाहुरभिशस्तिपां 
4:1 किमङ्क न॑: पश्यसि निद्यमानान्ब्रह्यद्धिषे तपुषिं 
हेतिम॑स्य ॥ ३॥ 


3. Kimanga tva brahmanah soma gopam kimanga 
tvahurabhisastipam nah. Kimanga nah pasyasi 
nidyamanan brahmadvise tapusim hetimasya. 


O dear lover of peace and joy, would they not 
call you protector of the honour and wealth of humanity? 
O friend, shall we not call you protector of our honour 
and reputation? O leader, dear as breath of life, don’t 
you see our detractors and maligners? Pray strike the 
blazing thunderbolt upon the hater of nobility and 
universal values of spirituality. 


अव॑न्तु मामुषसो जाय॑माना अव॑न्तु मा सिन्ध॑वः पिन्व॑- 
मानाः। अव॑न्तु मा पर्व॑तासो garetts व॑न्तु मा पितरों 
देवद्ूतौ ॥ ४ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


802 RGVEDA 


4. Avantu mamusaso jayamana avantu ma 
sindhavah pinvamanah. Avantu ma parvataso 
dhruvaso’vantu ma pitaro devahutau. 


Let the rising dawns inspire me. May the 
swelling seas raise and promote us. Let the steadfast 
mountains, deep clouds and generous warriors defend 
me. May the paternal powers of nature and humanity 
protect and advance us in our holy programmes of 
advancement in values and culture. 


विश्वदानीं सुमन॑सः स्याम पश्येम नु सूर्य मुच्यर॑न्तम्‌। 
तथा करद्वसुपतिर्वसुंनां देवां ओदानोऽ वसाग॑मिष्ठ: ॥ ५५ ॥ 


5. Visvadanim sumanasah syama pasyema nu surya- 
muccarantam. Tatha karad vasupatir-vasunam 
devan ohano’vasagamisthah. 


May we always be happy at heart and see the 
sun rise and sojourn in space higher and higher. May 
the lord protector of health and wealth and honour come 
with all modes of protection and progress, call upon us 
to rise and raise us to the heights of brilliance and 
generosity. 


इन्द्रो नदिं मवसाग॑मिष्ठः सर॑स्वती सिन्धुभिः पिन्व॑- 
माना । पर्जन्यो न ओष॑धीभिर्मयो भुर भिः सुशंसः सुहवं: 
fara ie ॥ 

6. Indro nedisthamavasagamisthah sarasvati sin- 


dhubhih pinvamana. Parjanyo na osadhi-bhirma- 
yobhuragnih susamsah suhavah piteva. 


Let Indra, the ruler, come closest to us with 
modes of protection and progress. May Sarasvati, 
mother of knowledge and dynamic speech swelling with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 52 803 


streams and showers of culture and refinement, come 
and bless. Let Agni, adorable leader of light and fire of 
action, responsive to our invocation, blissful like a father 
and guardian, come with herbs and comforts for health, 
honour and advancement. 


fava देवास आ ग॑त श्रुणुता म॑ इमं हव॑म्‌। 
एदं बर्हिर्नि षीदत ॥ ७॥ 


ध Visve devasa व gata $rnuta ma imam havam. 
Edam barhirni sidata. 


O eminent brilliancies of the world, learned and 
generous presences, come, listen to this invocation of 
mine and grace this holy seat of our yajnic programme 
of study and development. 


यो at देवा घृतस्ना हव्येनं प्रति भूष॑ति । 
तं विश्व sd गच्छथ ।॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Yo vo deva ghrtasnuna havyena pratibhusati. 
Tam visva upa gacchatha. 


O generous and brilliant scholars and leading 
lights of the world, whoever the person that invites you 
and honours you with homage of yajna seasoned and 
refined with fragrant materials overflowing with ghrta, 
come to him and bless him with light, sweetness and 
advancement in knowledge, honour and wealth of life. 


उप॑ नः सूनवो गिर॑: श्रृण्वन्त्वमृत॑स्य ये। 
सुमृव्टीका भ॑वन्तु नः॥ ९॥ 


थ Upa nah sunavo girah srnvantvamrtasya ye. 
Sumrlika bhavantu nah. 


May the Vishvedevas, eminent brilliancies of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


804 RGVEDA 


humanity, children of immortality and creators of the 
language of immortality in knowledge, come and listen 
to the prayers of the seekers and be givers of bliss to us. 
May the children listen to the voices of the immortals 
and be givers of joy to us. 


विश्वे देवा ऋतावृध ऋतुभिर्हवनश्रुतः | 
जुषन्तां युज्यं Ta: ॥ ९० ॥ 


10. 751८ deva rtavrdha rtubhir-havanasrutah. 
Jusantam yujyam payah. 


May the leading lights of the world, sages and 
scholars, generous and brilliant, expanding the bounds 
of knowledge and universal law in truth and 
development, listen to our invitation, love, honour and 
bless the liquid and milky investments in the yajnic 
programmes of research and progress according to the 
seasons of time and social requirements. 


स्तोत्रमिन्द्रो मरुद्र॑णस्त्वष्टमाग्मित्रो अर्यमा। 
इमा हव्या जुंषन्त नः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Stotram-indro marudganas-tvastraman mitro 
aryama. Ima havya jusanta nah. 


May Indra, gracious ruler, leading group of 
dynamic people consisting of expert makers and 
designers, Mitra, expert of vision and future 
possibilities, brilliant and universal friend like the sun, 
and Aryama, pioneer of the paths of progress with 
judgement and directive control, accept, love and honour 
these offers of holy yajnic investments for us. 


इमं नो अगे अध्वरं होतर्वयुनशो य॑ज। 
चिकित्वान्दैव्यं जन॑म्‌ ॥ 2211 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 52 805 


12. Imam no agne adhvaram hotarvayunaso yaja. 
Cikitvan daivyam janam. 


Agni, leading light and majestic ruler, generous 
giver and highpriest of the yajnic order of humanity 
approved and honoured by enlightened people, you 
know the enlightened people and the peaceful non- 
violent order. Pray take over, rule and administer this 
order of ours according to the people’s performance and 
the law. 


विश्वे देवाः श्वणुतेमं हवं मे ये अन्तरिक्षे य उप दवि sia 
अंयिजिह्ा उत वा यजत्रा आसद्यास्मिन्बर्हिषिं मादय- 
ध्वम्‌ ।॥। ९३ ॥ 

13. Visvedevah srnutemam havam me ye antarikse 
ya upa dyavi stha. Ye agnijihva uta va yajatra 
asadyasmin barhisi madayadhyam. 

O Vishvedevas, leading lights and generous 
bounties of nature and humanity, listen to this invocation 
and invitation of ours, you who abide and operate in 
the middle region and the highest region of light, who 
have the tongue of fire and light of truth. You are lovable 
and adorable. Come, sit on this seat of holy grass in this 
yajna, rejoice and let us rejoice with you. 


विश्वे देवा मम॑ श्वण्वन्तु यज्या उभे रोद॑सी अपां नपाच्च 
मन्म॑। मा वो वचांसि परिचक्ष्याणि वोचं सुम्नेष्विदो अन्त॑मा 
मदेम ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. Visve deva mama Srnvantu yajniya ubhe rodasi 
apam napacca manma. Ma vo vacamsi parica- 
ksyani vocam sumnesvid vo antama madema. 


O Vishvedevas, adorable leading lights, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


806 RGVEDA 


protective like both earth and sky, the fire divine, listen 
to my thought and word. Never shall I speak any words 
against your life sustaining powers and science worthy 
of universal celebration. Pray let us rejoice at the closest 
with you in comfort and joy of all aspects of life. 


ये के a ज्मा महिनो अहिमाया feat ज॑ज्ञिरे अपां खधस्थें। 
ते अस्मभ्य॑मिषये विश्वमायुः ad sen व॑रिवस्यन्तु 
देवाः ॥ ९५॥ 


15.  Yekecajma mahino ahimaya divo jajnire apam 
sadhasthe. Te asmabhyamisaye visvamayuh 
ksapa usra varivasyantu devah. 


And whatever great powers of divine nature 
born on the earth and in the regions of firmament waters 
born of the sun, all these divine powers of nature and 
humanity may bring us universal life energy and happy 
days and nights for our sustenance and enlightenment. 


असरीपर्जन्याववंतं धियं मेऽस्मिन्हवे सुहवा सुष्टुतिं न॑ः | 
इ्व्छामन्यो जनयद्र्भ'मन्यः प्रजाव॑तीरिष आ ध॑त्त 
मस्मे ॥ ९६॥ 


16. Agniparjanyadvavatam dhiyam me’smin have 
suhava sustutim nah. Ilamanyo janayad garbha- 
manyah prajavatirisa a dhattamasme. 


May the vital fire energy of light and electricity 
and the clouds of vapour in space protect and augment 
my intellect, and in this yajnic business of life promote 
our honour and fame in response to our invocation and 
invitation to yajna. One of these, the fire divine, 
generates and inspires our speech, and the other, the 
vapours, generate the cloud which fertilises earth and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 53 807 


produces food. May the two bring us food, energy and 
noble progeny. 


स्तीर्णे बर्हिषि समिधाने अग्रौ ert महा नमसा विवासे | 
अस्मिन्नो अद्य विदथे यजत्रा विश्वे देवा हविषि 
मादयध्वम्‌।॥। ९७॥ 


17. Stirne barhisi samidhane agnau suktena maha 
namasa vivase. Asmin no adya vidathe yajatra 
visvedeva havisi madayadhvam. 


O Vishvedevas, holy bounties of nature and 
humanity, the sacred grass is strewn on the vedi, the 
fire is kindled and rising with the holy chant of mantras 
and oblations of fragrant homage of havi. Today in this 
our yajnic programme, O adorables, accept and enjoy 
our offer of homage and hospitality and let us rejoice 
with you. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 53 
Pusha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


वयमु त्वा पथस्पते रथं न वाज॑सातये । 
धिये पुंषन्नयुज्पहि।॥। ९॥ 


ll, Vayamu tva pathspate ratham na vdjasataye. 
Dhiye pusann-ayujmahi. 


O Pusha, lord giver of food and energy and guide 
and director over all our paths of life, for the sake of 
vision and wisdom and to reach the goal in our mission 
of life we take to you as one rides a chariot piloted by 
an all-wise driver. 


अभि नो नर्य वसुं वीरं प्रय॑तदश्चिणम्‌। 
वामं गृहपतिं नय ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


808 RGVEDA 
2 Abhi no naryam vasu viram prayatadaksinam. 

Vamam grhapatim naya. 

Take us to a plentiful home and gracious master, 

a brave leader of men and generous giver of the gifts of 
life’s wealth. 

अदित्सन्तं faarqur पूषन्दानाय चोदय। 

पणेख्चिद्धि dat मन॑: ॥ ३॥ 


तः Aditsantam cidaghrne pusan danaya codaya. 
Panescid vi mrada manah. 


Pusha, generous lord of light and grace, motivate 
the non-giver to give in charity and soften the heart of 
even the mean and miserly. 
वि पथो वाज॑सातये चिनुहि वि मृधो! जहि। 
साधन्तामुग्र नो fare: ew 

4. Vi patho vajasataye cinuhi vi mrdho jahi. 
Sadhantamugra no dhiyah. 

O resplendent leader and master of life force, 
select and secure for us the paths of advancement to 
energy and success, cast off the obstructions, and lead 
our plans and programmes of action to success. 

परि तृन्धि पणीनामास्या हृद॑या कवे | 
अथेमस्मभ्यं रन्धय ॥ ५॥ 
ः Pari trndhi paninamaraya hrdaya kave. 
Athemasmabhyam randhaya. 
O lord of vision and creativity, smite the hearts 


of the callous niggards with a goad, and subdue them 
to correction and maturity for the sake of us all. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 53 809 


वि duane तुद पणेरिंच्छ हदि fre 
अथेमस्मभ्यं रन्धय ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vi pusannaraya tuda panericcha hrdi priyam. 
Athemasmabhyam randhaya. 


Pusha, lord giver of life, nourishment and 
inspiration, smite the callous, calculating and miserly 
in the heart with the pangs of affliction, wish him well 
for love and season him in the crucibles of remorse for 
our sake. 


आ रिंख किकिरा कणु पणीनां हृद॑या कवे । 
अथेमस्पभ्यं' रन्धय ॥ ७॥ 


Te A rikha kikira krnu paninam hrdaya kave. 
Athemasmabhyam randhaya. 


O creative lord of vision and foresight, write 
out the balance sheet of life’s hagglers and bargainers, 
touch their hearts, let them mature all round and let us 
be happy. 


यां पुंषन्ब्रह्मयाचोद॑नीमारां बिभघ्यधुणे। 
तयां समस्य हृद॑यमा Re किकिरा कणु ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yam pusan brahmacodanimaram bibharsya- 
ghrne. Taya samasya hrdayama rikha kikira krnu. 


Pusha, lord of light and grace, giver of food and 
growth for life, you command that analytical intellect 
which discriminates between truth and untruth and 
inspires the mind to have the vision of divinity. With 
that inspiring intelligence, imprint the settled mind with 
holiness and let it expand with ideas. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


810 RGVEDA 


याते अष्टा गोओपशा्ूणे पशुसाधनी । 
तस्यास्ते सुम्नमीं महे ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Ya te astra go-opasa’’ghrne pasusadhani. 
Tasyaste sumnamimahe. 
Lord of creative knowledge and development, 
that versatile vision and expertise of yours which 
develops cattle wealth and builds vast dairies and 
veterinary institutions, we love, and we pray for the gifts 
of that vision for comfort and well being. 
उत नो iret धिय॑मश्वसां वाजसामुत | 
Faure वीतये ॥ ९०॥ 

10. Utano gosanim dhiyamasvasam vajasamuta. 
Nrvat krnuhi vitaye. 


Lord of light and life’s development, give us 
the gift of that knowledge and intelligence which may 
develop the wealth of cows and horses and create modes 
and means of success and prosperity. Give us that 
intelligence inspired with love for people so that we 
may live in peace and joy. 

Mandala 6/Sukta 54 
Pusha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


सं पंषन्विदुषां नय यो अजञ्ज॑सानुशशासंति। 
य एवेदमिति ब्रव॑त्‌ ९॥ 


1. Sam pusan vidusa naya yo anjasanuSsasati. 
Ya evedamiti bravat. 


Pusha, giver of food and nourishment for body 
and mind, take us forward truly with that scholar who 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 54 811 


teaches us of truth with confidence and definiteness, 
saying: This is what it is, and it is not otherwise. 


समु पूष्णा ग॑मेमहि यो गृहाँ अंभिशासंति। 
इम एवेतिं च ब्रव॑त्‌ ॥ २॥ 


2. Samu pusna gamemahi yo grhan abhisasati. 
Ima eveti ca bravat. 


Let us go forward in life with that teacher, giver 
of nourishment for body, mind and soul, that family 
physician, who rules the home and governs home life, 
saying with confidence and definiteness: This is it, this 
way and not otherwise. 


पूष्णश्चक्रं न रिष्यति न कोशोऽ व॑ werd | 
नो अस्य व्यथते पविः ॥ ३ ॥ 


Pusnascakram na risyati na koso’va padyate. 
No asya vyathate pavih. 


The wheel of Pusha, lord of life and provider of 
growth and sustenance, never slackens, nor does it 
violate anything. His treasury never depletes, and his 
knowledge and arms of defence never hurt anything 
positive. 


यो अस्मै हविषाविधन्न तं पूषापिं yer | 
प्रथमो विन्दते वसुं ॥ ४ ॥ 
4. Yo asmai havisavidhanna tam pusapi mrsyate. 


Prathamo vindate vasu. 


Pusha, lord ruler and giver of nourishment and 
growth, does not hurt or challenge him who offers 
homage with creative and constructive projects in 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


812 RGVEDA 


honour of him. Indeed, the first and original inventor 
and maker of basic things wins rewards of wealth for 
the invention. 


पूषा गा अन्वेतु नः पूषा रंश्चत्वर्वतः। 
पूषा वाजं सनोतु नः ॥ ५॥ 

5. Pusa ga anvetu nah pusa raksatvarvatah. 
Pusa vajam sanotu nah. 


Let Pusha, patron sustainer and promoter of 
artists, approve and support the development of lands, 
cows and words of knowledge. Let Pusha protect and 
promote horses and other modes of transport. Let Pusha 
create and provide food, energy and wealth of all kinds 
for us. 


पूषन्ननु प्र गा इहि यज॑मानस्य Grad: | 
अस्माकं स्तुवतामुत ॥ & ॥ 


6. Pusannanu pra ga thi yajamanasya sunvatah. 
Asmakam stuvatamuta. 


Pusha, giver of sustenance, acknowledge, 
protect and promote the developed lands, cows and 
words of knowledge of the yajamana and also of ours 
who are the celebrants of this yajna of development. 


माकिर्नेश्न्माकीं' रिषन्माक्ीं सं शारि केव॑टे। 
अथारिंष्टाभिरा गंहि।॥। ७॥ 


Ti Makirnesanmakim risan-makim sam sari kevate. 
Atharistabhira gahi. 


Let none be frustrated. Let none frustrate 
anyone. Let none throw anyone into the pit of darkness 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 54 813 


and nothingness. O lord of nourishment and growth, 
come, bless us with everything whole and unhurt, with 
inviolable acts and unchallengeable policies. 


श्रुण्वन्तं पूषणं वयमिर्यमन्॑टवेदसम्‌। 
ईशानं राय ईमटे॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Srnvantam pusanam vayam-iryam-anastav- 
edasam. Isanam raya imahe. 

Pusha, lord of nourishment and growth, is 
listening, inspiring and all round ruler and guardian of 
indestructible wealth and knowledge. We pray to the 
lord for wealth and honour of permanent nature. 

पूषन्तवं aa वयं न Raa कदां चन। 
स्तोतारस्त इह स्म॑सि ॥ ९ ॥ 


a, Pusan tava vrate vayam na risyema kada cana. 
Stotarasta tha smasi. 


Lord of life, we are your devotees, celebrants 
here in life. Let us never suffer in the observance of 
your laws and discipline. 

UR पूषा परस्ताब्दस्तं दधातु दक्षिणम्‌ 
पुन॑र्नो नष्टमाज॑तु ॥ ९०॥ 


10. Pari pusa parastaddhastam dadhatu daksinam. 
Punarno nastamajatu. 


May Pusha grant us the perfect umbrella of his 
right hand all over and help us recover the losses and 
accelerate our gains. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


814 RGVEDA 


Mandala 6/Sukta 55 
Pusha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


एहि at विमुचो नपादाघुंणे सं Garay | 
र थीऋतस्य॑ं नो भव ॥ ९॥ 


ly Ehi vam vimuco napddaghrne sam sacavahai. 
Rathir-rtasya no bhava. 


Come resplendent spirit of freedom 
indestructible, be our guide and saviour as master and 
pilot of the chariot on the path of eternity and divine 
truth and we shall be ever together. 


र॒थीत॑मं कपर्दिनमीणानं राध॑सो महः । 
रायः सखखायमीमहे।। २॥ 


0.0 Rathitamam kapardinam-isanam radhaso mahah. 
Rayah sakhayam-imahe. 


We adore the highest chariot hero of flying hair, 
our friend and saviour, great ruler and ordainer of the 
wealth of existence and pray to him for wealth and 
power for advancement in life. 


रायो धारास्याघणो वसो राशिर॑जा्व | 
धीव॑तोधीवतः सरा ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Rayo dharasyaghrne vaso raSirajasva. 
Dhivatodhivatah sakha. 


O resplendent lord unborn and eternal, riding 
the waves of light, you are the treasure house of wealth 
and happy settlement, and you are a ceaseless flow of 
honour and excellence, a happy friend for every person 
blest with intelligence and wisdom. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 56 815 


पूषणं न्व जाश्वमुप॑ स्तोषाम वाजिन॑म्‌। 
स्वसुर्यो जार उच्यते ue 


4. Pusanam nvajasvamupa stosama vajinam. 
Svasuryo jara ucyate. 


We honour and adore the sun, Pusha, giver of 
vitality and potency, rider of the eternal chariot flying 
like a courser in space which steals away the dawn, its 
own creation, they say. 


मातुर्दिधिषुम॑न्रवं स्वसुंजारः torte 7: | 
भ्रातेन्द्रस्य सखा AAG 


2. Matur-didhisum-abravam svasurjarah srnotu 
nah. Bhratendrasya sakha mama. 


I speak of the sun, sustainer of the earth mother, 
lover of its own creation, the dawn, brother of electric 
energy of the cosmos, and my friend and companion for 
life. May the sun be close to us and respond to our prayer. 


आजासः पूषणं tat निश्यम्भास्ते ज॑नश्चियंम्‌ | 
देवं व॑हन्तु बिभ्र॑तः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ajasah pusanam rathe nigsrmbhaste janasriyam. 
Devam vahantu bibhratah. 


May the radiations of the sun, waves of light 
energy firmly yoked in its chariot bearing life and lustre 
for humanity, bring the divine light and life into this 
world. 

Mandala 6/Sukta 56 
Pusha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


य एनमादिदेशति कर म्भादितिं पूष्ण॑म्‌। 
न तेन॑ देव आदिशो 2 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


816 RGVEDA 


I Ya enamdadidesati karambhaditi pusanam. 
Na tena deva ववा $€. 


If one were to describe this Pusha, the sun or 
the universal chemistry of nourishment and vital energy, 
and say: It is from the solar suction of waters from earth 
and all space, or that, on the level of the individual 
human, it is from oat meal cooked with milk, then by 
this the divine process is neither to be defined nor to be 
determined nor, yet, to be exaggerated. 


उत a a रथीत॑मः सख्या सत्पतिर्युजा । 
इन्द्रो वृत्राणिं जिश्चते ॥ २॥ 


0. Uta gha sa rathitamah sakhya satpatiryuja. 
Indro vrtrani jighnate. 


In fact, that fastest energy, Indra, heroic ruler of 
the chariot, supportive of the positive forces of nature 
and humanity in combination with friendly powers such 
as electric energy, breaks the clouds of darkness and 
want and thus remains the protector, promoter and ruling 
controller of natural truth. 


उतादः dee गवि सूरश्चक्रं हिरण्ययम्‌ । 
न्यैरयद्रथीतमः ॥ ३॥ 


Os Utadah paruse gavi surascakram hirnyayam. 
Nyairayad rathitamah. 


And that mighty hero, solar energy in 
combination with electric energy, at the fastest chariot 
like velocity, sets in motion the golden circuit of 
developmental evolution in the fierce rays of the sun, 
in the battles of life and in the fiery communication of 
powerful speech. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 56 817 


यदद्य त्वां पुरुष्टुत ब्रवाम दस्त्र मन्तुमः | 
तत्सु नो मन्म॑ साधय ॥ ४॥ 


4. Yadadya tva purustuta bravama dasra mantumah. 
Tat su no manma sadhaya. 


O universal destroyer, preserver and promoter, 
most perceptive and conscientious, universally adored 
Pusha, lord giver of life, whatever we speak to you or 
wish to day, we pray, fructify and accomplish that 
thought and plan of ours. 


इमं च॑ नो गवेष॑णं सातये सीषधो गणम्‌। 
आरात्पूषन्नसि श्रुतः ॥ ५॥ 


9, Imam ca no gavesanam sataye sisadho ganam. 
Arat pusannasi srutah. 


And this body of thought and speech of our 
socio-economic plan, pray, lead to completion and 
success. O lord, you are renowned far and wide as giver 
of success and onward progress for the achievement of 
wealth and honour. 


आ ते स्वस्तिमीमह आरेअंघामुपावसुम्‌ | 
अद्या च॑ सर्वतातये vase सर्वतातये ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. A te svastimimahe are aghamupavasum. 
Adya ca sarvatataye $vasca sarvatdtaye. 


We pray for your gifts of happiness and well 
being of the perfect order for all for today, for tomorrow 
and for all time for the elimination of sin and evil and 
for the attainment of wealth and excellence in a state of 
peace and harmony. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


818 RGVEDA 


Mandala 6/Sukta 57 
Indra - Pushanau Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


इन्द्रा नु पूषण। वयं सख्याय स्वस्तये । 
हुवेम वाज॑सातये ॥ ९॥ 


iL, Indra nu pusana vayam sakhyaya svastaye. 
Huvema vajasataye. 


We always invoke and call upon Indra, lord 
commander of power, honour and excellence, and 
Pusha, giver of nourishment energy and intelligence, 
for the sake of friendship and all round joy and well 
being and for the achievement of success and victory in 
the battles of life. 


सोम॑मन्य उपासदत्पातवे चम्वोः EAT 
करम्भमन्य इच्छति ॥ २॥ 


2. Somamanya upasadat patave camvoh sutam. 
Karambhamanya icchati. 


One of them, Indra, abides in the middle region 
between earth and heaven and drinks the soma distilled 
there, i.e., it catalyses the vapours of the clouds into 
rain through electric charge, while the other, Pusha, 
loves karambha, i.e., the sun sucks up the vapours of 
water and herbal juices and turns them into soma clouds. 
Thus the two sit together and act. 


अजा अन्यस्य aga हरी अन्यस्य Sar । 
ताभ्यां वृत्राणि Rrra २॥ 


Aja anyasya vahnayo hart anyasya sambhrta. 
Tabhyam vrtrani jighnate. 


The carriers of one, Pusha, are the sun beams 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 57 819 


while those of the other, Indra, are positive and negative 
currents of electricity, and thereby the duo, Indra and 
Pusha, work together and break the clouds, and 
humanity gets the boons of food, energy and wealth. 


यदिन्द्रो अनयद्रितो महीरपो वृष॑न्तमः। 
तत्र॑ पूषाभवत्सचा ॥ ४ ॥ 

4. Yadindro anayad rito mahirapo vrsantamah. 
Tatra pusabhavat saca. 


When most generous Indra moves and brings 
about heavy showers of rain, then Pusha too is the 
corporate power of natural energy. (Thus making and 
breaking, consumption and creation are simultaneous 
processes of natural metabolism in life.) 


तां aT: सुमतिं वयं वृक्षस्य प्र वयामिंव। 
इन्द्र॑स्य चा र॑भामहे ॥ ५ ॥ 

Tam pusnah sumatim vayam vrksasya pra vaya- 
miva. Indrasya ca rabhamahe. 
That immanent will and wisdom of Pusha, 
divine nature’s creative and promotive power, and that 
catalytic power of Indra, natural electric energy, we love, 
join and apply at our level to have results like extensive 
branches of the tree. 
उत्पूषणं युवामहेऽभीर्ुरिव arta: 1 
मह्या इन्द्रं स्वस्तये ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ut pusanam yuvamahe ’bhisunriva sarathih. 
Mahya indram svastaye. 


Just as a charioteer joins, holds and controls the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


820 RGVEDA 


reins of his horses, and just as the supreme charioteer 
of the universe holds and controls the activity of natural 
forces such as radiations of the sun and exudations of 
the earth or the gaseous vapours and electric charge, so 
do we join Pusha and Indra, study and apply 
complementary forces and processes for the earth and 
for the great happiness and well being of her children. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 58 
Pusha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


शुक्रं ते अन्यद्यजतं ते अन्यद्विषुरूपे अहनी द्यौरिवासि । 
विश्वा fe माया अव॑सि स्वधावो भद्रा a पूषि 
रातिरस्तु।॥ ९॥ 


iF Sukrari te anyad yajatam te anyad visuripe ahani 
dyaurivasi. Visva hi maya avasi svadhavo 
bhadra te pusanniha ratirastu. 


O Pusha, giver of nourishment for body, mind 
and soul, you are the light of the world as the sun. Two 
are the forms of your beauty and glory, both different 
yet alike like the twin forms of the day: one is bright 
and inspiring, the other is soothing sweet adorable as 
the night. Lord of your own essential might, you 
animate, inspire, preserve and promote all intelligence, 
energy and powers of the world community. We pray, 
may your gifts of generosity be good for all in this world. 


अजाश्वः पशुपा वाज॑पस्त्यो धियंजिन्वो भुव॑ने विश्वे 
अर्पि्तः। अष्टं पूषा शिंथिरामुद्धरीवृजत्संचर्ाणो भुव॑ना 
देव इभ्यते॥ २॥ ` ति 

2. Ajasvah pasupa vajapastyo dhiyanyinvo bhuvane 
visve arpitah. Astram pusa Sithiram-udvarivrjat 
samcaksano bhuvana deva iyate. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 58 821 


Conducted by radiating beams for horses as 
motive power, protector of animal life, giver of plentiful 
homes, inspirer of intelligence and wisdom, the brilliant 
sun, generous light of life dedicated to the entire world, 
moves on and on watching the regions of the world and 
inspiring and elevating general intelligence and 
unambitious minds to initiative. 


यास्ते पूषन्नावो! अन्तः Uys हिरण्ययीं र न्तरिश्चे ora | 
ताभिर्यासि दूत्यां सूर्य॑स्य कामेन कृत्‌ श्रव॑ इच्छमानः ॥ ३ ॥ 


SF Yaste pusannavo antah samudre hiranyayi- 
rantarikse caranti. Tabhiryasi dutyam suryasya 
kamena krta srava icchamanah. 


O sagely scholar and realised soul, Pusha, giver 
of nourishment for body, mind and soul, golden are your 
vessels moving over the sea and in the sky. By these 
vessels you go round the world with love and desire for 
further food for knowledge and acting as messenger of 
the sun for the world. 


पूषा सुबन्धुर्दिव आ पुंथिव्या इव्टस्पतिर्मघवां दस्मवर्चाः | 
यं देवासो अद॑दुः सूयय कामेन कृतं तवसं स्वञ्च॑म्‌ ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Pusa subandhurdiva a prthivya ilaspatirmaghava 
dasmavarcah. Yam devaso adaduh suryayai 
kamena krtam tavasam svancam. 


Pusha, giver of nourishment, is a noble friend 
and brother of all from earth to heaven, master of holy 
speech and light, possessing power, honour and 
excellence, and commanding extraordinary brilliance. 
A realised soul inspired with love and desire, mighty 
strong and self-cultured, the divinities dedicate him to 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


822 RGVEDA 


Surya, dawn of a new day. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 59 
Indragni Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
प्रनु वोचा सुतेषुं वां वीर्यां ३ यानिं चक्रथुः | 
हतासो वां पितरों देवश॑त्रव SAH जीव॑थो युवम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 
i; Pra nu voca sutesu vam virya yani cakrathuh. 


Hataso vam pitaro devaSatrava indragni jivatho 
yuvam. 


Indra and Agni, electric and heat energies of 
nature and their parent sources, I celebrate deeds of 
wondrous order you have performed in the yajnic 
creations of the world of nature. Gone are the opposite 
forces, and you two are alive and active. 


afar महिमा afa-akhit पनिष्ट आ । 
समानो वां जनिता भ्रात॑रा युवं यमाविहेहमातरा Ut २ ॥ 
2. Balittha mahima vamindragni panistha a. Samano 
vam janita bhratara yuvam yamav-iheha-matara. 
Indra and Agni, great and true and most 
admirable is your might and majesty. Your father, source 
of generation, is one and the same, you are twins, and 
your mother is right here, Nature, Shakti of the Supreme 
sovereign Spirit. 
ओकिवांसा सुते war अश्वा सीं इ वाद्‌ ने। 
इन्द्रा न्व¶ ग्री अव॑सेह वचिर्णां वयं देवा ह॑वामहे ॥ ३ ॥ 
Okivamsa sute sacan asva sapti ivadane. Indra 
nvagni avaseha vajrina vayam deva havamahe. 
Indra and Agni, wielders of the thunderbolt, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 59 823 


homogeneous powers in this business of life and nature, 
voracious consumers, like stormy war horses and 
creators, we, enlightened yajakas in developmental 
yajna, invoke, invite and develop you with all your 
protective and promotive powers right here. 


य Sant सुतेषु वां स्तवत्तेष्वुंतावृधा । 
जोषवाकं वद॑तः पज्रहोषिणा न दैवा भसथंश्चन i ४॥ 


4. Ya indragni sutesu vam stavat tesvrtavrdha. Josa- 
vakam vadatah pajrahosina na deva bhasatha- 
gscana. 


Indra, lord of power and energy, Agni, lord of 
light, bold speakers of truth, observers and promoters 
of the law of truth, whoever honours and adores you in 
creative yajnic acts of life, you respond to him in words 
of truth and favour loud and bold. The divines never 
speak words void of value. 


इन्द्रागी को अस्य वां देवौ मर्तःश्चिकेतति। 
विषुंचो अश्वान्युयुजान ईयत एकः समान आ रथे ॥। ५॥ 

a: Indragni ko asya vam devau martasciketati. 
Visuco asvan yuyujana tyata ekah samana @ rathe. 


Indra and Agni, energy and power of heat and 
electricity, who is the mortal man in this world that 
knows both of you divines and who, using the all 
pervasive fire and electricity like horses moving in all 
directions, solely travels in a uniformly structured 
systemic chariot all by himself? 


इन्द्रा्री अपादियं पूर्वागात्यद्वतीभ्यः 1 हित्वी fort जिह्या 
वाव॑दच्यरं त्तरिंशत्यदा न्य॑क्रमीत्‌ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


824 RGVEDA 
6. Indragni apadiyam purvagat padvatibhyah. Hitvi 
Siro jihvaya vavadaccarat trimsat pada nya- 
kramit. 
Lightning and fire divine, this light of the dawn, 
shaking up its locks of hair and proclaiming its rise with 


its flames, radiates before life on the earth is on wheels, 
and moves on thirty steps of time and space. 


इन्द्रासरी आ हि त॑न्वते नरो धन्वानि are: 1 
मा नो अस्मिन्महाधने परां वर्तं गविष्टिषु ue i 


Te Indragni व hi tanvate naro dhanvani bahvoh. 
Mano asmin mahadhane para varktam gavistisu. 


Indra and Agni, cosmic energy and heat of life, 
leaders and best of humanity, stretch their bows between 
their arms. In this great battle business of life, pray do 
not forsake us in the heat of action in which light and 
fire must be integrated as life and inspiration. 


इन्द्राग्नी तप॑न्ति माऽघा अर्यो अरातयः। 
अप द्वेषांस्या कृतं युयुतं सूर्यादधि ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Indragni tapanti ma’ gha aryo aratayah. 
Apa dvesamsya krtam yuyutam suryadadhi. 


Indra and Agni, lords of existence, enmities and 
sinful negativities of life heat up and consume me. 
Throw off all hate and enmities and keep them away 
from the light of the sun. 


sah युवोरपि वसुं दिव्यानि पार्थिवा । 
आ न॑ इह प्र य॑च्छतं रयिं विश्वायुंपोषसम्‌॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Indragni yuvorapi vasu divyani parthiva. 
A na tha pra yacchatam rayim visvayuposasam. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 60 825 


Indragni, give us here not only your own gifts 
but also the wealths and honours of the earth and heaven 
and bless us with full life and health distilled from the 
world of nature. 


Sa उक्थवाहसरा स्तोमे भिर्हवनश्रुता । 
fasalfinit भिरा ग॑तमस्य सोम॑स्य पीतये ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Indragni ukthavahasa stomebhir-havanasruta. 
Visvabhir-girbhira gatam-asya somasya pitaye. 


Indra and Agni, light and energy of the spirit of 
life, carriers and harbingers of songs of adoration, 
listening close by to the invocations and celebrations 
of the yajakas, come with all words of appreciation and 
praise and all voices of commendation and elevation to 
our yajnic performance and to taste the nectar sweet of 
its essence distilled. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 60 
Indragni Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


श्नथ॑द्‌ Gaga स॑नोति वाजमिन्द्रा यो अस्री सहुरी सपर्यात्‌। 
इरज्यन्ता वसव्यस्य भूरेः सहस्तमा सह॑सा वाजयन्ता le 


ie Snathad vrtramuta sanoti vajamindra yo agni 
sahuri saparyat. Irajyanta vasavyasya bhureh 
sahastama sahasa vajayanta. 


One who honours and adores challenging and 
victorious Indra and Agni, vibrant, stormy and fiery 
electric forces of nature and humanity, conquers 
restraining opposition and wins food, energy and wealth 
of life. Both are most courageous and enduring 
commanders of power and victory, givers of honour and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


826 RGVEDA 


excellence, ample peace and settlement and harbingers 
of the glory of success and fulfilment. 


ता योधिष्टमभि गा इन्द्र नूनमपः स्व॑रुषसो! अग्र ऊक्हाः। 
दिशः स्व॑रुषसं इन्द्र चित्रा अपो गा अग्रे युवसे नियुत्वान्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ta yodhistamabhi ga indra nunamapah svarusaso 
agna ulhah. Disah svarusasa indra citra apo ga 
agne yuvase niyutvan. 


Indra, lord of power and excellence, Agni, lord 
of light and vision, like lands and waters, sun and dawns 
joined together, defend and fight for lands and waters, 
words and wondrous actions to expand to the quarters 
of space, and shine and join the sun and the dawns. 
Indra, O controller, you join the sun and dawns, and 
Agni, O ruler, you control the lands and waters, words 
and actions. 


आ daeun वृत्रहथिः शुष्यैरिन्द्र यातं नमोभिरगे अर्वाक्‌ | 
युवं राधोभिरकवेभिरिन्द्राऽगरं अस्मे भ॑वतमुत्तमेभिः ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. A vrtrahana vrtrahabhih Susmairindra yatam 
namobhiragne arvak. Yuvam radhobhir-akave- 
bhir-indra’ gne asme bhavatam-uttamebhih. 


Indra, thunderous ruler, Agni, enlightened 
teacher and citizen, both destroyers of evil and darkness, 
come hither to us with defensive, positive and protective 
forces and with ample measures of food, energy and 
advancement. O Indra, O Agni, both of you, pray, be 
ours, wholly for us all, with the best of unlimited and 
commendable means of success and progress. 


ता ga ययोरिदं पप्रे विश्वं पुरा कृतम्‌। 
Brant न मर्धतः ॥ ४॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 60 827 


4. Ta huve yayoridam papne visvam pura krtam. 
Indragni na mardhatah. 


I invoke, admire and celebrate Indra, cosmic 
energy, and Agni, cosmic heat and light, both 
manifestations of divine vision, will and action, by 
whose power and operation this whole universe has 
evolved as of eternity. The two do not hurt, injure or 
destroy us. 


उग्रा विघनिना gel इन्द्रामी ह॑वामहे । 
a At मृव्ठात ईदृश ।॥ ५ ॥ 

Ugra vighanina mrdha indragni havamahe. 
Ta no mrlata tdrse. 


We invoke, invite and develop Indra and Agni, 
divine and blazing powers of nature’s energy and light, 
both destroyers of adversaries and life’s negativities. 
May they protect us and bless us with peace and 
prosperity in this world of our action and existence. 


हतो वत्राण्यायी हतो दासानि सत्प॑ती । 
हतो विश्वा अप fea: ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Hato vrtranyarya hato dasani satpati. 
Hato visva apa dvisah. 


Indra and Agni, divine powers of omnipotent 
will and vision, of holy nature, character and action, 
defenders of Truth and Law, destroy evil, darkness and 
want, destroy pain, suffering and slavery, destroy and 
eliminate all hate and enmity. 


इन्द्राग्री युवामिमे ३ऽ भि स्तोमां अनूषत | 
पिब॑तं शंभुवा सुतम्‌ ॥। ७ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


828 RGVEDA 


ie Indragni yuvamime ’bhi stoma anusata. 
Pibatam sambhuva sutam. 


Indra and Agni, powers of will and vision of 
action in nature and humanity, these songs of adoration 
celebrate you. O givers of peace, prosperity and well 
being, drink of the nectar of this joy and bliss distilled. 
या वां सन्तिं पुरुस्प्रहो Haat दाशुषे नरा | 
इन्द्रासरी ताभिरा ग॑तम्‌॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Ya vam santi purusprho niyuto dasuse nara. 
Indragni tabhira gatam. 


Indra and Agni, leading powers of humanity, 
come to the generous giver and celebrant yajaka with 
all those gifts and powers of yours which are loved and 
cherished by all. 
ताभिरा ग॑च्छतं नरोपेदं सव॑नं सुतम्‌। 
इन्द्रानी सोम॑पीतये ॥ ९ ॥ 

9. Tabhira gacchatam naropedam savanam sutam. 
Indragni somapitaye. 


Indra and Agni, leading lights, with those 
cherished gifts and powers come and join this yajnic 
session to drink of the soma of joy distilled. 


तमींर्ठिष्व यो अर्चिषा वना विश्वां परिष्वजंत्‌। 
कृष्णा कृणोति Meat ॥ ou 


10. Tamilisva yo arcisa vana visva parisvajat. 
Krsna krnoti jihvaya. 


O celebrant, love and adore that power of 
divinity which with its refulgence pervades all rays of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 60 829 


the sun, moves all floods of water, and envelops all 
forests and makes them green with its radiations. 


य इन्द आविवासति Gates मर्त्यः: | 
द्युम्नाय सुतरा अपः ॥ ९९॥ 


11. Ya iddha avivasati sumnam-indrasya martyah. 
Dyumnaya sutara apah. 


Whoever the mortal that honours and adores the 
favour and grace of Indra when the fire is burning for 
the sake of excellence, the waters of his life and the 
flow of his actions would be blest with fulfilment. 


तानो वाज॑वतीरिषं आशुग्पिंपृतमर्वतः। 
इन्द्र॑पिं च arada ॥ ९२॥ 
12. Tano vajavatirisa asun piprtam-arvatah. 
Indram-agnim ca volhave. 
May the two, Indra and Agni, electricity and fire, 
give us food and sustenance full of energy and 
excellence and provide us with modes of travel and 


transport. Let us too develop the fire and electricity, 
energy for transport and communication. 


उभा वामिन्द्राग्नी आहुवध्या उभा राध॑सः सह मादयध्यै | 
उभा दाताराविषां स्यीणासुभा वाज॑स्य सातये हुवे 
वाम्‌॥ ९३॥ 


13. Ubha vamindragni ahuvadhya ubha radhasah 


mubha vajasya sataye huve vam. 


I invoke you both, Indra and Agni, lords of 
cosmic electricity and fire energy, to develop both heat 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


830 RGVEDA 


and electricity in order to celebrate both with honours 
and wealth of success. And I honour and adore you both, 
beneficent givers of food, energy and wealth, for the 
winning of victory in life’s battle for excellence and 
advancement. 


आ नो गव्यभिरश्व्यैर्वसव्यै रुपं गच्छतम्‌ । 
सखायौ देवौ स॒ख्याय॑ शं भुवेन्द्रागरी ता ह॑वामहे ।॥ ९४ ॥ 


14. A no gavebhir-asvyair-vasvyairupa gacchatam. 
Sakhayau devau sakhyaya sambhuvendragni ta 
havamahe. 


Indra and Agni, come you both to us and bring 
us the wealth of cows, horses and homes, lands and 
graces of speech and knowledge, travel, transport and 
communications, peace and prosperity of settled homes. 
Come friends, brilliant divine givers of good and well 
being for friendship and bonhomy. Pray come, we 
invoke, invite and adore you both. 


इन्द्रासरी श्णुतं हवं यज॑मानस्य Yaa: | 
वीतं ह॒व्यान्या ग॑तं पिब॑तं सोम्यं मधुं ॥ ९५॥ 


15. Indragni srnutam havam yajamanasya sunvatah. 
Vitam havyanya gatam pibatam somyam madhu. 


Indra and Agni, scholars of fire and electric 
energy, listen to the invitation and adoration of the 
yajamana and institutor of the yajnic programme of 
creative development. Accept the invitation and offers 
of homage, come, and taste the honey sweets of the 
pleasure of somaic achievement distilled from natural 
energy. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 61 831 


Mandala 6/Sukta 61 
Sarasvati Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


इयम॑ददाद्रभसम्रणच्युतं दिवोदासं वध्यश्वाय॑ दाशुषे । या 
शण्व॑न्तमाचखाद।वसं पणि ता तें दात्राणि तविषा 
स॑रस्वति ॥ ९॥ 


iP Iyamadadad rabhasamrnacyutam divodasam 
vadhryasvaya dasuse. Ya sasvantamacakhada- 
vasam panim ta te datrani tavisa sarasvati. 


Sarasvati, this perennial stream of divine 
awareness, which stabilizes a permanent, all protective 
and adorable perspective dedicated to the light of 
Divinity, gives to the generous man of yajna blest with 
expansive mind and senses the zeal for action dedicated 
to fulfilment of obligations, a dynamic spirit which leads 
the man to freedom from all debts of life. These are thy 
brilliant gifts, O mother, to humanity. 


इयं शुष्मेभिर्बिसखा इवारुजत्सानु गिरीणां त॑विषेभि- 
wha: | पारावतष्नीमव॑से सुवृक्तिभिः सरस्वतीमा 
विवासेम धीतिभिः ।॥ २॥ 


Iyam susmebhir-bisakha ivarujat sanu girinam 
tavisebhir-urmibhih. Paravataghnim-avase 
suvrktibhih sarasvatima vivasema dhitibhih. 


This stream of divine awareness and knowledge, 
with fierce blows and powerful waves of light and 
inspiration, breaks through the height of mountains and 
depths of clouds covering darkness and concealing 
treasures and opens them out like one who digs up and 
out the roots of lotus flowers. Let us adore and serve 
this brilliant mother stream, Sarasvati, breaking over 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


832 RGVEDA 


the banks of floods, with sincere thoughts and holy 
actions and let us root out darkness and ignorance from 
life. 
सर॑स्वति देवनिदो नि बर्हय प्रजां विश्व॑स्य बृस॑यस्य 
मायिनं; । उत क्चितिभ्योऽ वनीरविन्दो विषमेभ्यो अस्रवो 
वाजिनीवति ।॥ ३॥ 


ai Sarasvati devanido ni barhaya prajam visvasya 
brsayasya mayinah. Uta ksitibhyo’vaniravindo 
visamebhyo asravo vajinivati. 


O Sarasvati, mighty stream of light and 
inspiration, uproot the maligners of divinity and divine 
knowledge, take over the children of the wise givers of 
enlightenment across the world, adopt lands and nations, 
and let the streams of knowledge and culture flow for 
all peoples of the earth. 


Wun देवी सर॑स्वती वाजेंभिर्वाजिनीवती | 
धीनामवित्र्यवतु ut ४॥ 


4. Pra no devi sarasvati vajebhir-vajinivati. 
Dhinamavitryavatu. 


May Sarasvati, bright mother of divine light and 
knowledge, overflowing with streams of wealth, honour 
and spirit, protector and promoter of intelligence, will 
and enlightened action, save us from darkness and evil 
and advance us into the light of life. 


यस्त्वा देवि सरस्वत्युपन्रूते धने fad । इन्द्रं न वृत्रतूर्ये ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Yastva devi sarasvatyupabrute dhane hite. 
Indram na vrtraturye. 


O brilliant and generous Mother Sarasvati, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 61 833 


whoever calls upon you like one who calls upon Indra, 
omnipotent ruler, for the destruction of the demon of 
evil at the time when the battle is raging at the door, 
you listen, come and save the supplicant. 


त्वं दैवि सरस्वत्यवा वाजेषु वाजिनि। 
रदा पूषेव नः सनिम्‌॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Tvam devi sarasvatvava vajesu vajini. 
Rada puseva nah sanim. 
O brilliant and generous mother of divine vision 
and wisdom, dynamic giver of knowledge, strength and 
energy in the struggle of life, remove the veil from our 
intelligence, give us nourishment like the earth and light 
of discrimination like the sun, and then draw out the 
plan of our destiny. 
उत स्या नः सर॑स्वती घोरा दहिरंण्यवर्तनिः। 
वृत्रघ्नी व॑ष्टि सुष्टुतिम्‌ ॥ ७॥ 

7. Uta sya nah sarasvati ghora hiranyavartanih. 
Vrtraghni vasti sustutim. 


And may that Sarasvati, awful breaker of the 
clouds of darkness, come by the golden paths of light, 
listen and, with love and grace, acknowledge our song 
of praise. 

यस्यां अनन्तो se तस्त्वेषश्चं रिष्णुरं्णंवः। 
अमश्चरंति रोरुवत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yasya ananto ahrutas-tvesas-carisnur-arnavah. 
Amascarati roruvat. 


Whose radiation of light and dynamic flow of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


834 RGVEDA 


speech moves on and on endless, straight and upright, 
roaring across the ocean of space, that is the Mother 
92125011. 


सानो विश्वा अति द्विषः स्वसुंर॒न्या ऋ ताव॑री। 
अतन्नहेव सूर्यः: ॥ ९॥ 
9. Sa no visva ati dvisah svasrranya rtavari. 
Atannaheva suryah. 
And may that flow of speech, warding off all 
hate and enmity, bearing truth like the light of dawn, 
lead us to other, different, sister streams of knowledge 


like the sun moving to other successive days, the same 
yet new. 


उत न॑: प्रिया प्रियासु सपस्व॑सा सुजुष्टा । 
सर॑स्वती स्तोम्या TATU ९०॥ 
10. = Uta nah priya priyasu saptasvasa sujusta. 


Sarasvati stomya bhut. 


And may Sarasvati, dynamic stream of light, 
knowledge and speech, dearest among seven lovely 
sister streams of knowledge, word, and mind and senses, 
loving and blissful, be adorable and remain favourable. 


आ परुषी पार्थिवान्युरु रजो sahara 
सर॑स्वती निदस्पातु ॥ ९९॥ 
11. Apaprusi parthivanyuru rajo antariksam . 
Sarasvati nidaspatu. 
Pervading the objects of earth, the vast skies, 


the middle regions and the particles of nature, may the 
divine awareness and enlightening speech protect us 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 61 835 
against hate and enmity. 


त्रिषधस्था सप्तधातुः पञ्च॑ जाता वर्धय॑न्ती। 
वाजेवाजे हव्या भूत्‌ ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Trisadhastha saptadhatuh panca jata vardha- 
yanti. Vajevaje havya bhiut. 


Existent and all pervasive in three regions of 
the world, sustained in seven, five elements, ahankara 
and mahat tattva, produced by five pranic energies, 
rising and expanding, Sarasvati, fluent speech and 
awareness, may, We pray, arise at our invocation. 


प्रया महिम्ना महिनांसु चेकिते द्युम्नेभिर न्या अपसरामप- 
स्त॑मा। रथंडव बहती विभ्वने कृतोपस्तुत्या चिकितुषा 
सर॑स्वती ॥ ९३॥ 


13. Pra ya mahimna mahinasu cekite dyumnebhi- 
ranya apasamapastama. Ratha iva brhati vibh- 
vane krtopastutya cikitusa sarasvati. 


She that is distinguished as great by her grandeur 
in these things and regions, appears different and 
exceptional to different people by her light and lustre. 
She is most dynamic in the dynamics of existence, vast 
and expansive as space, created for the glory of Infinity 
by the lord creator, adorable by the celebrant: that is 
Sarasvati, dynamic spirit of omniscience. 


सर॑स्वत्यभि at नेषि वस्यो ard स्फरीः cater ar a आ 
ध॑क्‌ । जुषस्वं नः सख्या वेश्यां च मा त्वल्केत्राण्यरंणानि 
TAU 

14. Sarasvatyabhino nesi vasyo mapa spharth payasa 


ma na ठ dhak. Jusasva nah sakhya vesya ca ma 
tvat ksetranyaranani ganma. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


836 RGVEDA 


Sarasvati, perennial harbinger of divine gifts of 
enlightenment and prosperity, pray bring us all that is 
lovely and excellent more and ever more. Pray do not 
spurn us, don’t cast us away, nor let us be consumed by 
excess of exuberance and power. Help us with love and 
friendship, and let us never fall off from you into lands 
forlorn and void of joy. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 62 
Ashvins Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


स्तुषे नरां दिवो अस्य प्रसन्ताऽश्विनां FA जर॑माणो अकैः | 
या सद्य SET व्युषि ज्मो अन्तान्युयंषतः पर्युरू वरां सि ॥ ९ ॥ 


iL Stuse nara divo asya prasanta’svina huve jara- 
mano arkaih. Ya sadya usra vyusi jmo antanyu- 
yusatah paryuru varamsi. 


I praise and celebrate the Ashvins, leading lights 
of heaven pervasive in this world, and worshipfully 
invoke them with holy chant of mantras. 
Complementary powers of nature’s circuitous energy 
and fertility, they always conduct the rays of the sun at 
dawn and fill the earth from end to end with choice 
things of excellence. 


ता यज्ञमा शुचिभिश्चक्रमाणा रथ॑स्य भानुं SST रजोभिः। 
पुरू वरांस्यमिता मि्मानाऽपो धन्वान्यति याथो अजान्‌॥। २॥ 

2, Ta yajnama sucibhiscakramana rathasya bhanum 
rurucu rajobhih. Puru varamsyamita mimanda’po 
dhanvanyati yatho ajran. 


Continuously energising nature’s sacred 
Operations and augmenting the yajna with purest 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 62 837 


splendours, they light up the light of this beautiful world 
on the move with showers of mist and energies. Creating 
many gifts and waters of measureless value, they pass 
over and across regions of space yet untraversed. 


ता ह त्यद्वर्तिर्यदरश्चमु ग्रेत्था धिय॑ ऊहथुः शश्वदश्वैः | 
मनोजवेभिरिषिरैः शयध्यै परि व्यधिं्दाशुषो मर्त्यस्य ॥ ३॥ 


Ta ha tyad vartir-yadaradhram-ugrettha dhiya 
uhathuh sasvad-asvaih. Manojavebhir-isiraih 
Sayadhyai pari vyathir-dasuso martyasya. 


They are the divinities vibrant and blazing as 
wind and lightning that reach the yajna by unfailing 
radiations of energy fast as mind and sensitive as 
thought. They inspire the mind and will of the mortal 
man otherwise groping in the pathless woods of action 
and raise the generous yajnic giver so that he may cross 
the hurdles and rest in peace with a perfect sense of 
fulfilment. 


ता नव्य॑सो जर॑माणस्य मन्मोप॑ भूषतो युयुजानसंसी । 
शुभं पृश्चमिषमूर्जं वह॑न्ता dat यक्षत््रलो अध्युग्युवाना ।। ४ ॥ 


4. Ta navyaso jaramanasya manmopa bhiusato 
yuyujanasapti. Subham prksam-isam-urjam 
vahanta hota yaksat pratno adhrugyuvana. 


They bless the mind and fructify the intentions 
of the new celebrant in search of knowledge and power. 
Ever young and energetic as wind and lightning, using 
seven currents of nature’s centrifugal and centripetal 
energy, they bear and bring excellent gifts of water, food, 
energy and psychic determination. Let the learned 
yajaka, then, free from hate, jealousy and pride, dedicate 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


838 RGVEDA 


himself to the youthful powers with faith and 
persistence. 


a वल्गु दस्ता पुरुशाकतमा War नव्य॑सा वचसा विंवासे। 
या शंसते स्तुवते शंभ॑विष्ठा बभूवतुर्गृणते चित्रराती ॥ ५ ॥ 


2: Ta valgu dasra purusakatama pratna navyasa 
vacasa vivase. Ya Samsate stuvate Sambhavistha 
babhuvatur-grnate citrarati. 


With the latest words of homage, I celebrate and 
glorify the twin Ashvin divinities: graceful, destroyers 
of want and suffering, most versatile of power, ancient 
and eternal powers of the divine, who may, we pray, be 
good and blissful to the devoted celebrant and bring an 
immense variety of wondrous gifts for the yajaka. 


ता भुज्युं fait: समुद्रात्तु ग्र॑स्य सूनुमूहथू रजोभिः | 
अरेणुभिर्योजंनेभिर्भुजन्तां पतत्रिभिरर्णसो निरुप 
स्थात्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 

6. Ta bhujyum vibhiradbhyah samudrat tugrasya 
sunum-uhathu rajobhih. Arenubhir-yojanebhir- 
bhujanta patatribhir-arnaso nirupasthat. 

I celebrate and glorify the twin Ashvins, 
protectors and sustainers of life, who raise by radiation 
usable products of nature’s energy from the waters and 
the seas by the regions of light, and who by forces of 


gravitation bring down by dustless usable paths of space 
energy from the depths of spatial waters. 


वि जयुषा रथ्या areas श्रुतं हवं वृषणा वध्िमत्याः। 
दशस्यन्ता शयवे पिप्यथुर्गामिति च्यवाना सुमतिं 
भुरण्यू iW ७ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 62 839 


7. Vi jayusa rathya yatamadrim srutam havam 
vrsana vadhrimatyah. Dasasyanta Sayave pipya- 
thurgamiti cyavana sumatim bhuranyu. 


Ever anxious for all round victory and riding 
the chariot of waves of energy, you top the mountain 
and reach the cloud. Generous givers of showers, you 
perceive the invitation of the productive earth and the 
expansive skies. Mighty strong, you promote the earth 
and prompt the voice of her people so that they may be 
at peace, and, ever vibrant on the move, nourishing and 
sustaining, you inspire the mind with noble thoughts 
and will for holy actions. 


यद्रोदसी प्रदिवो अस्ति भूमा tal देवानामुत मर्त्यत्रा | 
तदादित्या वसवो रुद्रियासो रक्षोयुजे तपुरघं द॑धात ।॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Yad rodasi pradivo asti bhuma helo devanamuta 
martyatra. Tadaditya vasavo rudriyaso raksoyuje 
tapuragham dadhata. 


O heaven and earth, O light of the world, 
howsoever great be the anger of the holy ones and of 
the average mortals, that same anger, O Adityas, seasons 
of time, Vasus, shelter homes of life and sustenance, 
Rudras, powers of natural justice and dispensation, all 
that sin and sufferance, bear on and reserve for 
correction of the negative forces of hate and enmity. 


य ई राजानावृतुथा विदधद्रजसो मित्रो वरुणश्चिकेतत्‌। 
गम्भीराय रक्च॑से हेतिमस्य द्रोघाय चिद्रच॑स आन॑वाय ॥ ९ ॥ 


1 Ya im rajanavrtutha vidadhad rajaso mitro 
varunasciketat. Gambhiraya raksase hetimasya 
droghaya cid vacasa anavaya. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


840 


Let Mitra, man of love, and Varuna, man of 
judgement and discrimination, who fully knows and 
serves the Ashvins, pervasive and dynamic lights and 
rulers of world regions, according to the seasons of time, 
wield and duly order their power and force in respect 
of the inscrutable, the demoniac, the malignant as also 
for the latest word of praise or calumny. 


अन्तरैश्चक्रस्तन॑याय वर्तिर्द्युमता यातं नृवता रथेन । सनुत्येन 
त्यज॑सा मर्त्यस्य वनुष्यतामपि शीर्षा व॑वृक्तम्‌॥ ९०॥ 


10. Antarais-cakrais-tanayaya vartir-dyumata yatam 
nrvata rathena. Sanutyena tyajasa martyasya 
vanusyatamapi Sirsa vavrktam. 


O brilliant lords of humanity and nature, come 
by the chariot of internal wheels of the social order with 
leading lights of the people, making new paths for the 
coming generation with inspiring message of selfless 
performance of duty and also take off the heads of the 
terrorist forces of destruction. 


आ परमाभिरुत म॑ध्यमाभिर्नियुद्धिं्यातमवमाभिरर्वाक््‌ | 
दृव््दस्य॑ चिद्रोम॑तो वि व्रजस्य दुरो वर्तं गृणते चिंत्र- 
राती।॥ ९९१॥ 


11. A paramabhiruta madhyamabhir-niyudbhir- 
yatamavamabhir-arvak. Drlhasya cid gomato vi 
vrajasya duro vartam grnate citrarati. 


Ashvins, complementary ruling powers of love 
and judgement of the nation of humanity, creators and 
givers of wondrous gifts of plenty, come here by the 
highest, middling and lowest order of cooperative 
participants in the social order and open the doors of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 63 841 


the fixed as well as of the movable treasures of the nation 
for the celebrant. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 63 
Ashvins Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


क्व} त्या वल्गू Wega दूतो न स्तोमो!ऽ विदन्नमंस्वान्‌। 
आ यो अर्वाङ्नासत्या aad प्रेष्ठा ह्यस॑थो अस्य 
मन्म॑न्‌॥ ९॥ 


0 Kva tya valgu puruhutadya duto na 5160711 ' - 
vidannamasvan. A yo arvannasatya vavarta 
prestha hyasatho asya manman. 


Where are the handsome twin divines, 
universally adored, today? Let the song of adoration 
reach them like an humble messenger so that the divines 
ever true come here and abide as the dearest divinities 
celebrated in song. 


अरं मे गन्तं हव॑नायास्मै गणाना यथा पिबाथो sted: 1 
UR ह त्यद्वर्तिंयीथो रिषो न यत्परो नान्त॑रस्तुतुर्यात्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 
2. Aram me gantam havanayasmai grnana yatha 


pibatho andhah. Pari ha tyad vartiryatho riso 
na yat paro nantarastuturyat. 


Come well and happy in response to this 
invitation of mine and, revered and adored, drink the 
nectar sweets offered. Pray come by the path and to the 
home where no adversary far or near within may hurt us. 


अकारि वामन्ध॑सो वरीमन्नस्तारि बर्हिः सुंप्रायणत॑मम्‌। 
उत्तानहस्तो युवयुर्व वन्दाऽऽ वां नक्षन्तो अद्रय आञ्जन्‌ ॥ २॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


842 RGVEDA 


Ds Akari vamandhaso varimannastari barhih supra- 
yanatamam. Uttanahasto yuvayurvavanda’’vam 
naksanto adraya anjan. 


Most excellent foods and drinks have been 
prepared for you and the softest grass carpet has been 
spread for you. With raised hands the high priest 
welcomes and adores you with love and reverence, and 
the devotees wait to honour and anoint you like the 
clouds of rain approaching. 


ऊर्ध्वो वामभिर॑ध्वरेष्वंस्थात्प्र रातिरेति SUT घृताची । 
प्र होता गृर्तम॑ना उराणोऽ युक्त यो नासत्या हवीमन्‌ ॥ ॐ ॥ 


4. Udhrvo vamagnir-adhvaresvasthat pra ratireti 
jurnini ghrtaci. Pra hota gurtamana urano ’yukta 
yo nasatya haviman. 


Brilliant leaders ever true, in honour of you both, 
up goes the fire in flames in the creative acts of love 
and non-violence. The abundant overflowing ladle of 
powerful ghrta moves forward with the oblation. And 
the zealous dedicated priest with faithful mind calls upon 
you to come and bless the yajna. 


अधिं fara दुहिता सूर्यस्य रथं तस्थौ पुरुभुजा शतोतिम्‌ । 
प्र मायाभिर्मायिना भूतमत्र नरां नृतू जनिंमन्यज्ञिया- 
नाम्‌ ॥ U 
3, Adhi Sriye duhita suryasya ratham tasthau puru- 
bhuja Satotim. Pra mayabhir-mayina bhutamatra 
nara nrtu janiman yajniyanam. 
Just as the dawn, off spring of the sun, rides the 


radiant chariot of light with a hundred gifts of beauty 
and grace, similarly, O twin divines of nature, leaders 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 63 843 


of humanity, sustainers of many, lords of vision and 
power, come hither with all your gifts of light and graces 
and be inspirers of humanity in the life of revered 
performers of sacred acts of yajnic creation. 


युवं श्रीभिर्दशाताभिराभिः शुभे पुष्टिमूहथुः सूर्यायाः। 
प्र वां वयो वपुषेऽ नु पप्तन्नक्चद्वाणी सुष्टुता धिष्ण्या 
वाम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Yuvam Sribhir-darsatabhirabhih subhe pustimu- 
hathuh suryayah. Pra vam vayo vapuse’nu paptan 
naksad vani sustuta dhisnya vam. 


Ashvins, twin divines of nature’s dynamics, 
generous, devout and bold, with these open and gracious 
radiations of the light of dawn, you bring inspiring 
rejuvenation for the good of humanity, and then, like 
birds on the wing, excellent hymns of thanks and praise 
rise and reach you to do honour to your grace. 


आ वां वयोऽ वांसो वहिष्ठा अभि प्रयो नासत्या वहन्तु | 
प्र वां रथो मनोजवा असर्जीषः gar इषिधो अनुं पूर्वी 9 


as A vam vayo’svaso vahistha abhi prayo nasatya 
vahantu. Pra vam ratho manojava asarjisah prksa 
isidho anu purvih. 


Ashvins, twin divines ever real beyond 
destruction, may your strong carriers flying as birds, 
bring you to the food and fragrance of our yajna, and 
may your chariot of nature’s energy radiations faster 
than mind create food, energy and delicacies to our 
heart’s desire as of all time for our yajnic libations for 
further development. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


844 RGVEDA 


पुरु हि वां पुरुभुजा देष्णं धेनुं न इषं पिन्वतमसक्राम्‌ । 
स्तुत॑श्च वां माध्वी सुष्टुतिश्च रसाश्च ये वामनु राति- 
मग्म॑न्‌॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Puru hi vam purubhuja desnam dhenum na isam 
pinvatamasakram. StutaSca vam madhvyi sustu- 
tisca rasasca ye vamanu ratimagman. 


O sustainers of all, great are your gifts. Pray 
give us and increase the food and gifts of the cow, the 
earth, the knowledge and the language of knowledge 
beyond challenge and deterioration. Celebrated are the 
songs of adoration in your honour, and honey sweet the 
flavours of your gifts which are all appropriate and 
enjoyable in respect of your generosity. 


उत म॑ ऋज्रे पुर॑यस्य र्वी Utes शातं पेरुके च॑ पक्वा | 
शाण्डो दाद्धिरणिनः स्मदिष्टीन्दशं वशासो! अभिषाच 
ऋष्वान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥ 


9. Uta ma rjre purayasya raghvi sumilhe satam 
peruke ca pakva. Sando daddhiraninah sma- 
ddistin dasa vasaso abhisaca rsvan. 


In the simple, straight and bountiful social order 
of the pioneer ruler, let all the small and sophisticated 
rights and duties toward all simple and sophisticated 
projects be mine in a hundred ways, and let the giver of 
peace, freedom and refinement give me great, focussed, 
obedient and efficient assistants and co-workers directly 
responsible to me, in tens and hundreds of strength. 


सं वां श॒ता नासत्या सहस््राऽर््वानां पुरुपन्था गिरे ata 
भरद्वाजाय वीर नू गिरे दाद्धता रक्षांसि पुरुदंससा स्युः ॥ ९०॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 64 845 


10. Sam vam Sata nasatyad sahasra’s§vanam puru- 
pantha gire dat. Bharadvajaya vira nu gire 
daddhata raksamsi purudamsasa syuh. 


Ashvins, ever true and indestructible powers of 
divinity, let the brave pioneer of your manifold path 
give hundreds and thousands of your motive forces to 
the celebrant and the man of science and energy with 
directions for noble policy and communication in correct 
language and then, O givers of a thousand gifts, the 
wicked and the destroyers shall be eliminated of their 
own destiny. 


आ वां सुम्ने वरिंमन्त्सूरिभिः ष्याम्‌॥ ९९॥ 

11. A vam sumne varimant-suribhih syam. 

Ashvins, pioneer lights of Divinity, let us ever 
abide in the peace and well being of the highest order 
under your protection along with the wise and the brave. 

Mandala 6/Sukta 64 
Usha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
उदु fara उषसो रोच॑माना अस्थुरपां नोर्मयो esta: | 
कृणोति विश्वा सुपर्था सुगान्यभूदु वस्वी दर्णा 
मघोनीं ॥ ९॥ 

ll, Udu Sriya usaso rocamana asthurapam normayo 
rusantah. Krnoti visva supatha suganyabhudu 
vasvi daksina maghoni. 

Bright and blazing, the lights of the dawn arise 
like waves of the sea for the beauty and glory of the 


earth. It brightens all noble paths of the world and makes 
them easy for us to follow. Bearing treasures of wealth 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


846 RGVEDA 


and energy, let it be generous for the people of the world, 
we pray. 


wat deat उर्विया वि भास्युत्ते शोचिर्भानवो erataers 
आविर्वक्षः कृणुषे शुम्भमानोषो देवि रोच॑माना महोभिः ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Bhadra dadrksa urviya vi bhasyut te Socirbhanavo 
dyamapaptan. Avirvaksah krnuse Sumbhamanoso 
devi rocamana mahobhih. 


Excellent and blissful you look and shine along 
the wide earth, the pure bright rays of light rising to 
heaven. O refulgent lady of morning divinity, graceful 
with the beauty and dignity of holiness, you reveal the 
heart and love of your bosom by the light apparel you 
wear. 


वहन्ति सीमरुणासो रुश॑न्तो गाव॑ः सुभगामुर्विया प्र॑थानाम्‌ | 
अपेजते शूरो अस्तेव शब्रून्वाधंते तमो अजिरो न 
वोक्छा ॥ ३॥ 

of Vahanti simarunaso rusanto gavah subhaga- 


murviya prathanam. Apejate Suro asteva Satrun 
badhate tamo ajiro na volha. 


Bright red and crimson rays of light conduct the 
glorious dawn expanding over the earth, the sun takes 
her over as a smart bride-groom leads away the bride, 
and, as a brave warrior shoots away the enemies like an 
archer, it dispels the darkness of the night. 


सुगोत ते सुपथा पर्वतेष्ववाते अपस्तरसि स्वभानो । 
सान व॑ह पृथुयामन्नृष्वे रयिं feat दुहितरिषयध्यै ॥। 2 ॥ 


4. Sugota te supatha parvatesvavate apastarasi 
svabhano. Sa na ठ vaha prthuyamannrsve rayim 
divo duhitarisayadhyai. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 64 847 


O self-refulgent dawn, holy and easy are your 
paths over the clouds and mountains over which you 
radiate across the calm oceans of space without a stir of 
the wind. O glorious child of the light of heaven, 
commanding wide expanses of the universe, bring us 
the wealth, honour and excellence of the world for 
complete fulfilment of our heart’s desire. 


सा व॑ह योक्षभिरवातोषो at वह॑सि जोषमनु । 
wa दिवो दुहितां हं देवी पूर्वहूतौ मंहना दर्शता भूः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Sa vaha yoksabhiravatoso varam vahasi josa- 
manu. Tvam divo duhitarya ha devi purva-hutau 
manhana darsata bhuh. 


O dawn, you who rise with the love and 
excellence of your heart’s desire freely without the 
obstruction of even a whiff of air, come and bless us 
with the virilities and fertilities of the world. You, O 
child of heavenly light, brilliant and generous, be comely 
and gracious with all your glory at the first invocation 
of the day’s opening yajna. 

उत्ते वय॑श्चिद्रसतेर॑पसन्नरश्च ये पितुभाजो ast । 

अपमा सते व॑हसि भूरिं वाममुषो देवि दाशुषे wetter ६ ॥ 
6. Ut te vayascid vasaterapaptan narasca ye pitu- 

bhajo vyustau. Ama sate vahasi bhuri vamamuso 

devi dasuse martyaya. 

O brilliant dawn, at the rise of the day, birds 
and men leave their dwelling to work for the day and 
enjoy their family dinner in the evening. O generous 


and brilliant lady of the morning light, you bring ample 
gifts of a happy home and delicious dinner for the mortal 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


848 RGVEDA 


man of yajnic generosity abiding with you in love and 
faith. 

Note: Swami Dayananda interprets the dawn as 
the bride and the sun as the groom coming together in 


marriage by choice and beginning a new day of their 
life. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 65 
Usha Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


एषा स्या at दुहिता eaten: ्चितीरुच्छन्ती मानुंषीरजीगः। 
या भानुना रुश॑ता राम्यास्वन्ञायि तिरस्तम॑सख्चिद क्तन्‌ ॥ ९॥ 


il Esa sya no duhita divojah ksitirucchanti manu- 
strajigah. Ya bhanuna rusata ramyasvajnayi 
tiras-tamasas-cidaktun. 


Lo! there is the dawn, born daughter of heavenly 
light awakening and shining up our human habitations. 
Shining by the light of the sun, it is perceived shooting 
her rays of light across the darkness of the nights. 


वि तद्य॑युररुणयुग्भिरश्वै श्चित्रं भान्त्युषसंश्चन्द्ररंथाः | अग्रं 
यज्ञस्य॑ बृहतो नय॑न्तीर्विं ता बाधन्ते तम ऊम्यीयाः ॥ २॥ 


a. Vi tad yayur-arunayugbhir-asvaiscitram bhan- 
tyusasas-candrarathah. Agram yajnasya brhato 
nayantirvi ta badhante tama urmyayah. 


The dawns proceed by the golden chariot of 
bright crimson rays of the sun and wonderfully 
illuminate the world of humanity. Leading the yajnic 
business of the wide world, they dispel and stem away 
the darkness of the night. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 65 849 


श्रवो वाजमिषमूर्ज वहन्तीर्निं दाशुषं उषसो मत्यीय। 
मघोनीर्वीरवत्पत्य॑माना अवो धात विधते retreat ३॥ 


9, Sravo vajam-isamurjam vahantirni dasusa usaso 
martyaya. Maghonir-viravat patyamana avo 
dhata vidhate ratnamadya. 


O glorious dawns, bearing food, energy, 
knowledge and the message of divinity for the generous 
mortals, your lights descending like brave powers of 
heaven, bear and bring protection, advancement and the 
jewel wealth of life for the celebrant devotee. 


इदा fe वो विधते रल्नमस्तीदा वीराय॑ areal उषासः | इदा 
विप्राय जर॑ ते यदुक्था नि ष्म मावं ते वहथा पुरा चित्‌ ॥ ठ ॥ 


4. Ida hi vo vidhate tatnamastida viraya dasusa 
usasah. Ida vipraya jarate yaduktha ni sma 
mavate vahatha pura cit. 


O dawns, here and now is the jewel wealth for 
the servant, for the brave, and for the generous giver. 
Here it is for the wise sage and for the worshipper. Here 
is the word of worship as before, pray bring the wealth 
of life as before for the celebrant like me. 


इदा हि त॑ उषो अद्रिसानो गोत्रा गवामद्धिरसो गृणन्ति | 
व्यतैर्क्णं बिभिदु्ब्रहयणा च सत्या नृणाम॑भवदेवहूतिः ॥ ५ ॥ 


Ida hi ta uso adrisano gotra gavam-angiraso 
grnanti. Vyarkena bibhidur-brahmana ca satya 
nrnamabhavad devahutih. 


Here and now itself, O dawn of the light of 
heaven riding the heights of clouds, the sages of science 
and wisdom sing and celebrate in praise of you with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


850 RGVEDA 


chant of the Veda and offer of yajna and worship and 
break open the treasures of knowledge divine and 
secular. May the people’s yajna and worship be true 
and fruitful at the call of the divinities. 


उच्छा feat दुहितः waa भरद्वाजवद्विधते Hart । 
सुवीरं रयिं dort रिरीद्युरूगायमधिं धेहि श्रवो नः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Uccha divo duhitah pratnavanno bhara-dvajavad 
vidhate maghoni. Suviram rayim grnate rirthyu- 
rugayamadhi dhehi sravo nah. 


O dawn, child of the light of heaven, harbinger 
of light and glory, shine as ever before and let us shine 
too like the celebrated sage of knowledge and power and 
servant and celebrant of the dawn of divinity. Bestow 
love and care upon the worshipful admirer, bless the 
supplicant with wealth and noble progeny, and favour 
us with honour, fame and excellence of universal order. 


Note: Swami Dayananda interprets this hymn 
as a metaphor of the virtues of women. He says that the 
birth of a girl child and the bride’s coming to her new 
home is like the dawn of a new day which brings light, 
grace and prosperity to the family. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 66 
Maruts Devatah, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
aud तच्िंकितुष चिदस्तु समानं नामं धेनु पत्य॑मानम्‌। 
मर्तेष्वन्यदोहसे पीपायं सकृच्छुक्रं दुदुहे पृश्निरूधः ।॥ ९ ॥ 


१ Vapurnu taccikituse cidastu samanam nama 
dhenu patyamanam. Martesvanyad dohase pipaya 
sakrcchukram duduhe prsnirudhah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 66 851 


For the man of vision and wisdom, the motherly 
form of nature is equal and similar by one name, Dhenu, 
mother cow. One on earth abounds with milk among 
the mortals to nurse her children, the other is Prshni, 
the middle region, mother of Maruts, winds or pranic 
energies, which simultaneously feeds the cloud with the 
purest soma of life energy. 


ये sat न शोशुचन्निधाना द्विर्यत्तरिर्मरुतों argerd| 
अरेणवो हिर ण्यर्यास एषां साकं नृम्णैः पौँस्ये भिश्च 
भूवन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Ye agnayo na Sosucannidhana aviryat trirmaruto 
vavrdhanta. Arenavo hirnyayasa esam sakam 
nrmnaih paumsyebhisca bhivan. 


They, the Maruts, vital pranic energies, pure and 
shining like fires, grow double and triple. Non-particle 
and golden are their forms and conductors carrying 
simultaneously both bio-energy and intelligence for life 
on earth. 


रुद्रस्य ये Hoge: सन्तिं पुत्रा यांश्चो नु दाधुंविर्भरं ध्यै । 
विदे हि माता महो मही षा सेत्पृश्निः सुभ्वेडै गर्भ 
मार्धात्‌॥ ३॥ 


2; Rudrasya ye milhusah santi putra yamsco nu 
dadhrvir-bharadhyai. Vide hi mata maho mahi 
sa set prsnih subhve garbhamadhdt. 


These Maruts are children of Rudra, virile 
spiritual energy, and the mother is there to receive, hold 
and nourish them in her womb. For the reason of 
conceiving and bearing ‘the great ones, the mother is 
known as the great’, the Mother, the mother cow, the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


852 RGVEDA 


mother earth, the holy and the noble, the one who bears 
and gives birth to life. 


न य ईष॑न्ते जनुषोऽ या न्व ऽन्तः सन्तोऽवद्यानि पुनानाः | 
Preig) शुचयोऽ नु जोषमनु ्चिया तन्वमुक्षमाणाः ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Na ya tsante januso’ya nva’ntah santo’vadyani 
punanah. Niryad duhre Sucayo’nu josamanu Sriya 
tanvam-uksamanah. 


The Maruts neither hurt nor forsake their 
nativity, nor do they neglect any creature by their ethics 
and policy, but being noble, pure and shining in the midst 
of life, purging away weaknesses and perfecting virtues, 
vitalising and refining their body and personality with 
beauty, virility and splendour according to their love 
and ambition, they absorb the essences of nature, distil 
the soma and give showers of joy. 


मक्षू न येषुं दोहसे चिदया आ नामं धृष्णु मारुतं दर्धानाः | 
न ये स्तौना अयासो मह्या नू चित्सुदानुरव यासदुग्रान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


on Maksu na yesu dohase cidaya a nama dhrsnu 
marutam dadhanah. Na ye stauna ayaso mahna 
nu cit sudanurava yasadugran. 


There is none among them but instantly moves 
forward with showers of generosity. Bold and vibrant, 
they bear the name of children of the winds. They move 
not like thieves and sluggards by virtue of their might 
and grandeur, and only the generous man of holiness 
can approach and pacify these blazing heroes. 


त इदु्राः शव॑सा धृष्णुषैणा उभे asd रोद॑सी सुमेके | 
अधं स्मैषु रोदसी स्वशोचिराम॑वत्सु तस्थौ न रोकः ।॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 66 853 


6. Ta idugrah savasa ghrsnusena ubhe yujanta 
rodast sumeke. Adha smaisu rodasi svasoci- 
ramavatsu tasthau na rokah. 


Shining and blazing by strength and superior 
power, commanding mighty forces of nature, they join 
the beautiful heaven and earth by their presence. And 
when these forceful presences pervade heaven and earth, 
therein abides the self-refulgent electric energy like light 
and splendour itself. 


अनेनो वों मरुतो यामो अस्त्वनश्वणश्चिद्यमजत्यस्थीः। 
अनवसो अनभीशु रजस्तूर्वि रोद॑सी पथ्यां याति साध॑न्‌ ॥ ७॥ 


cP Aneno vo maruto yamo astvanasvascid yamaja- 
tyarathth. Anavaso anabhisu rajasturvi rodast 
pathya yati sadhan. 


O Maruts, vibrant powers of nature and 
humanity, let your course and chariot be free from sin 
and error. Let it be powered without horses and let it be 
driven without the driver. Let it be protected without 
external forces, moving without food and fuel, without 
reins, dispelling waves, clouds and the dust of earth 
and space, and let it go by paths of heaven and earth, 
fulfilling the ambitions of humanity. 


नास्य॑ वर्ता न त॑रुता न्वस्ति मरुतो यमव॑थ वाज॑सातौ | 
तोके वा गोषु तन॑ये यमप्सु स व्रजं दतां पार्ये अध द्योः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Nasya varta na taruta nvasti-maruto yamavatha 


vajasatau. Toke va gosu tanaye yamapsu sa 
vrajam darta parye adha dyoh. 


O Maruts, in the serious warlike business of life, 
whoever you protect and promote for the sake of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


854 RGVEDA 


children, grand children, or lands and cows or waters, 
no one can overwhelm or circumvent, no one can cross, 
defeat and destroy. Indeed he will be the breaker of new 
paths and open new treasures and then cross through 
the skies to the bounds of the regions of light. 


UW faa गुणते तुराय मारुताय स्वत॑वसे भरध्वम्‌ | 
ये सहांसि सह॑सा सह॑न्ते रेज॑ ते अगे पृथिवी मखेभ्यः ॥ ९ ॥ 


च. Pra citramarkam grnate turaya marutaya 
svatavase bharadhvam. Ye sahamsi sahasa 
sahante rejate agne prthivi makhebhyah. 


O men of learning, bear and offer unique and 
wonderful songs and presentations of reverence for the 
adorable, vibrant, prompt and forceful band of heroes 
of their own essential power and excellence, those who 
meet the challenges of life and confrontations by their 
own strength and courage. O brilliant sage, Agni, the 
earth itself vibrates and shines by the holy and mighty 
exploits of the Maruts, heroes of the winds. 


त्विषीमन्तो अध्वरस्येव feed षुच्यव॑सो Gers नायः | 
अचत्रयो धुन॑यो न वीरा भ्राज॑जनन्मानो मरुतो अधूं्टाः॥ ९०॥ 


10.  Tvisimanto adhvarasyeva didyut trsucyavaso 
juhvo nagneh. Arcatrayo dhunayo na vira 
bhrajajjanmano maruto adhrstah. 


Bright and blazing, flames of a great yajna of 
love and non-violence, instantly moving to action and 
adorable, brave warriors born of light and fire, 
intrepidable heroes of the winds are shakers of the earth 
like the heroes of heaven. Such are the Maruts. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 67 855 


तं वृधन्तं मारुतं भ्राज॑दृष्टिं exe सू नुं ह वसा विवासे । 
fea: शर्धीय शुच॑यो मनीषा गिरयो नाप॑ उग्रा अस्प 
FLU I 


11. 3 Tam vrdhantam marutam bhrajadrstim rudrasya 
sunum havasa vivase. Divah sardhaya sucayo 
manisa girayo napa ugra asprdhran. 


With homage and reverence I adore and serve 
that rising and exalting hero of the winds and the blazing 
lance of action who is a very child of Rudra awful divine 
power of force and justice, whom, for the sake of 
celestial power, the pure, immaculate heroes of fire and 
conscientious intelligence envy and emulate. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 67 
Mita-Varunara Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


विश्वेषां a: सतां ज्येष्ठ॑तमा गीर्भिर्मित्रावरुणा वावृधध्यै | 
सं या र॒श्मेव॑ यमतुर्यतमिं्ा द्वा जनाँ अस॑मा बाहुभिः 
स्वैः॥ ९॥ 


1. Visvesam vah satam jyesthatama girbhirmi- 
travaruna vavrdhadhyai. Sam ya rasSmeva 
yamaturyatamistha dva janan asama bahubhih 
svaih. 


Mitra and Varuna, complementary pranic 
energies, holy powers of love and justice, I adore and 
exalt you both, highest of the divinities of the world, 
with the best of my voice and words, you both, unique 
and incomparable, most self-controlled controllers of 
humanity who guide and lead the people on the right 
path with your own hands, holding them by the reins 
and the light rays of their own inner mind. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


856 RGVEDA 


इयं मद्वां प्र स्तुणीते weitere प्रिया नम॑सा बर्हिरच्छ | 
यन्तं नो! मित्रावरुणावधुं टं छर्दिर्यद्वां वरूथ्यं सुदानू ॥ २॥ 


2 Iyam mad vam pra strnite manisopa priya namasa 
barhiraccha. Yantam no mitravarunayv-adhrstam 
chardiryad vam variuthyam sudaniu. 


Mitra and Varuna, dear, loving and just teachers 
and preachers, the holy grass is well spread for you on 
the vedi, and this sincere address and invitation from the 
core of my heart reaches out to you with homage and 
humility. O generous masters of holiness and knowledge, 
come and bless us with your gifts of the peace and 
happiness of a comfortable home free from fear. 


आ यातं मित्रावरुणा सुशस्त्युपं प्रिया नम॑सा saa । सं 
यावप्रःस्थो अपसेव sss धीयतच्चिंद्यतथो महित्वा ॥ २ ॥ 
A yatam mitravaruna susastyupa priya namasa 
huyamana. Sam yavapnahstho apaseva jana- 
nchrudhiyatascid yatatho mahitva. 


Mitra and Varuna, holiest loving and just powers 
of nature and humanity, dear as our own, invoked and 
invited with homage and humility, come and receive 
our prayer and adoration, you who, like parents of 
children, inspire obedient people keen for nourishment 
by your own action and greatness to rise together. 


अश्वा न या वाजिनां पूतब॑न्धू ऋता यद्धर्भमदिति्भररंथ्यै । 
प्र या महि महान्ता जाय॑माना घोरा मतौय रिपवे नि 
ater: usu 

4. Asva na ya vajina putabandhu rta yad garbham- 
aditirbharadhyai. Pra ya mahi mahanta jayamana 
ghora martaya ripave ni didhah. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 67 857 


Fast, strong and bright as heat and light all 
pervasive, akin to the purity of brotherly relationship, 
embodiments of truth and law of the universe, mother 
nature bears you for eternity, O Mitra and Varuna, who 
ever move forward as greater than the great ones, 
emerging, rising and blazing as terrible to the enemies 
of mankind from birth itself. 


विश्वे यद्वां मंहना मन्द॑मानाः क्षत्रं देवासो अद॑धुः सजोषाः | 
परि यद्भूथो रोद॑सी चिदुर्वी सन्ति स्पशो अदब्धासो 
START: ॥ ५५ ॥ 


5. Visve yad vam mamhana mandamanah ksatram 
devaso adadhuh sajosah. Pari yad bhutho rodasi 
cidurvi santi spaso adabdhaso amurah. 


Since you pervade over and across the wide 
earth and heaven by your presence, the brilliant and 
generous great powers of the world, rejoicing by virtue 
of your grandeur and majesty, loving and cooperative 
together, hold sway over the social order of the earth 
and rule, intelligent and enlightened, undaunted and 
perceptive all over like watchful eyes and ears of the 
nation. 


ता हि श्चत्रं धारयेथे अनु दयून्दुंहे थे aa पमादिंव eM: | 
Goal नक्ष॑त्र उत विश्वदेवो भूमिमातान्द्यां धासिनायोः ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Ta hi ksatram dharayethe anu dyun drnhethe 
sanumupamdadiva dyoh. Drlho naksatra uta 
visvadevo bhumimatan dyam dhasinayoh. 


Indeed, you hold the wealth of the nation, and 
you sustain and expand the bounds of world order day 
by day like the sun, for example, expanding the bounds 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


858 RGVEDA 


of light over the world. It is through you that the 
refulgent lord of the universe expands and lights the 
world of heaven and earth in existence by the food and 
energy of life. 


ता विग्रं धैथे जठरं पृणध्या आ यत्सद्म सभूंतयः पृणन्ति | 
न मृष्यन्ते युवतयोऽ वाता वि यत्पयो विश्वजिन्वा 
भरन्ते ॥ ७॥ 


7. Ta vigram dhaithe jatharam prnadhya a yat 
sadma sabhrtayah prnanti. Na mrsyante yuva- 
tayo’vata vi yat payo visvajinva bharante. 


They bring the heave of passion and they bring 
the food too to quench the fire of that passion, and thus 
they sustain the wise with the food they aspire for, they 
who also lead the bearers of holy materials to fill the 
house of yajna and to feed the fire. And just as the 
sparkling sacred streams bear the waters of life, and 
unmarried maidens bear life-giving vitality, but they are 
never neglected and never injured in any way, so the 
wise and the sustainers of the wise must never be 
neglected, never injured. 


ता जिह्यया सदमेदं सुं मेधा आ agi सत्यो अर तिक्ते भूत्‌। 
तद्वां महित्वं घृ तान्नावस्तु युवं दाशुषे वि चयिष्टमंहः ॥ ८ ॥ 

8. Ta jihvaya sadamedam sumedha ठ yad vam satyo 
aratirrte bhut. Tad vam mahitvam ghrtannavastu 
yuvam dasuse vi cayistamanhah. 


Mitra and Varuna, givers of ghrta and food for 
the fire, whoever the disciple, intelligent, faithful and 
true, established in truth and the law of truth by virtue 
of your voice of truth in this house of yajna, let that be 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 67 859 


your gracious gift of achievement. And we pray throw 
out all sin and crime for the sake of the giver in this 
holy programme of moral culture. 


प्र यद्वां मित्रावरुणा स्पूर्धस्प्रिया धाम॑ युवधिता मिनन्ति। 
न ये देवास ओदह॑सा न मर्ता अय॑ज्ञसाचो अप्यो न पुत्राः ॥ ९ ॥ 


Pra yad vam mitravaruna spurdhan priya dhama 
yuvadhita minanti. Na ye devasa ohasa na marta 
ayajnasaco apyo na putrah. 


O Mitra and Varuna, divinities of love and 
justice, those holy persons, who emulate and follow the 
rules and injunctions loved and ordained by you, and 
never violate them by their power and potential, are like 
your children by their karmas. On the other hand, those, 
who envy and are jealous, who violate the principles 
and institutions dear to you, who are not good and 
generous people, and in spite of their power and 
potential are mortals of inferior calibre without the love 
and performance of noble acts, deserve to be neither 
you, friends nor your children. 


वि dere कीस्तासो भर॑न्ते viata के falfataral मनानाः। 
आद्वां ब्रवाम सत्यान्युक्था afHdafudaat महि- 
TATU ९०॥ 


10. Vi yad vacam kistaso bharante Samsanti kecinni- 
vido mananah. Ad vam bravama styanyuktha 
nakir-devebhir-yatatho mahitva. 


The wise ones bear and offer words of praise in 
honour of you. Some others, thoughtful and faithful, 
offer songs of celebration. Then we too chant and 
address hymns of adoration to you. Joining with all holy 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


860 RGVEDA 


ones by your grace and grandeur, there is none you hurt 
or injure. 


अवोरित्था वां छर्दिषो अभिष्टौ युवोर्मिंत्रावरूणावस्कुधोयु । 
अनु यद्राव॑ः स्फुरानुंजिप्यं TOUT यद्रणे वृष॑णं युनज॑न्‌ ॥ ९९ ॥ 


11. Avorittha vam chardiso abhistau yuvormitrava- 
runavaskrdhoyu. Anu yad gavah sphuran-rjipyam 
dhrsanum yad rane vrsnam yunajan. 


Mitra and Varuna, thus under your care and 
protection and in matters of family peace and prosperity 
of the home gifted by you, the beneficiary feels great 
and grateful. And in the battle business of life which is 
exciting and delightful, you engage the brave, generous, 
simple and straight man of truth and honesty celebrated 
in words of praise and adoration all round. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 68 
Indra-Varuna Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


श्रुष्टी वां यज्ञ उद्य॑तः सजोषा मनुष्वद्‌ वृक्तबर्हिषो यज॑ध्यै | 
आ य इन्द्रावरुणाविषे अद्य महे सुम्नाय मह आववर्तत्‌॥ ९॥ 


॥ Srusti vam yajna udyatah sajosa manusvad 
vrktabarhiso yajadhyai. A ya indravarunavise 
adya mahe sumnaya maha avavartat. 


Indra, glorious lord of power, and Varuna, lord 
of justice, peace and excellence, this yajna of evolution 
and advancement, kindled, conducted and jointly 
sustained by people in your honour, is for the union 
and cooperation of men dedicated to yajnic development 
and progress of the world community. Let it go on today 
and for ever onward for the growth of abundant food, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 68 861 


energy and sustenance and for a high order of peace 
and excellent well being of life as a whole. 


ता हि set देवताता तुजा शूराणां शविष्ठा ता हि भूतम्‌। 
मघोनां मंहिंडा तुविशुष्म ऋतेन वृत्रतुरा सर्व॑सेना ॥ २ ॥ 

2. Ta hi Srestha devatata tuja Suranam Savistha ta 
hi bhutam. Maghonam manhistha tuvisusma 
rtena vrtraturda sarvasend. 


You are the best and holiest, dedicated to the 
divine scheme of evolution, development and progress, 
being most vigorous, bravest of the brave, commanding 
highest power and excellence among the excellent and 
powerful, most high spirited by dedication to truth and 
the law of truth, breakers of the darkest clouds for 
showers of vitality. Indeed you are the leaders and 
commanders of the total forces of nature and humanity 
on the paths of universal progress. 


ता गरणीहि नमस्येभिः शुषैः सुम्नेभिरिन्द्रावरुणा AMT | 
वच्रेणान्यः शव॑सा हन्ति वृत्रं सिष॑क्त्यन्यो वृजनेषु 
fad: usu 


3 Ta grnihi namasyebhih susaih sumnebhirin- 
dravaruna cakana. Vajrenanyah Ssavasa hanti 
vrtram sisaktyanyo vrjanesu viprah. 


Honour and celebrate the two, Indra and Varuna, 
lords of peace, power and justice, with reverence and 
homage. Brilliant with strength and power, over-flowing 
with vitality and generosity, they are loving and kind. 
One of them, Indra, like the sun, breaks the clouds and 
destroys the enemies with the force of thunder, and the 
other, Varuna, cool as water and vibrant as the winds, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


862 RGVEDA 


follows to bless humanity with strength and energy on 
the paths of life. 


य्राश्च यन्नरश्च वावृधन्त विश्वे देवासो नरां tate: | 
teal इन्द्रावरुणा महित्वा द्यौश्च॑ पृथिवि भूतमुर्वी ॥ 2 ॥ 


4. Gnasca yannarasca vavrdhanta 1151८ devaso 
naram svagurtah. Praibhya indravaruna mahitva 
dyausca prthivi bhiutamurvi. 


All the holy voices, men and women, leading 
lights of humanity and the holiest of the holy for the 
world, grow on by their own vision and performance in 
the course of nature. For all these who grow thus, O 
lords of power and peace, vision and wisdom, be good, 
kind and generous by your own grace and grandeur like 
the light of heaven and the wide expanse of mother earth. 


स इत्सुदानुः taal ऋतावेन्द्रा यो वां वरूणा दाशति त्मन्‌ । 
इषा स द्विषस्त॑रेदास्वान्वंसं ate र॑यिवतंश्च जनान्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Sa it sudanuh svavan rtavendra yo vam varuna 
dasati tman. Isa sa dvisastared dasvan vamsad 
rayim rayivatasca janan. 


He that is liberal, self confident and upright in 
matters of truth and divine law, and in his very soul 
does honour to you, shall, with his resources, conquer 
his opponents and enemies and, with his generosity, 
achieve wealth and power and win over men of wealth 
and power to his side for support and cooperation to 
give and share. 


यं युवं दाश्वध्वराय देवा र॒यिं धत्थो वसुंमन्तं पुरुश्चुम्‌। 
अस्मे स इन्द्रावरुणावपि ष्यात्प्र यो भनक्ति वनुषाम- 
ऊस्तीः ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 68 863 


6. Yam yuvam dasvadhvaraya deva rayim dhattho 
vasumantam puruksam. Asme sa indravarunav- 
api syat pra yo bhanakti vanusamasastth. 


Indra and Varuna, lords of brilliance, power and 
wisdom of justice, that wealth and power which you 
bear and bestow upon the liberal yajaka of love and 
non-violence may, we pray, be for us too so that we 
share the honour and excellence which silences and 
shatters the calumny and criticism advanced by the 
selfish opposition. 


उत न॑: सुत्रात्रो देवगोपाः सूरिभ्य इन्द्रावरुणा र यिः ष्यात्‌। 
येषां शुष्मः पृत॑नासु साह्वान्प्र सद्यो द्युम्ना तिरते ततुरिः ॥ ७॥ 


a. Uta nah sutratro devagopah suribhya indra- 
varuna rayih syat. Yesam Susmah prtanasu 
sahvan pra sadyo dyumnaé tirate taturih. 


And for us, O lords of power and justice, for 
the wise and brave whose force of arms and intelligence 
challenges the enemy and wins the victory in battles of 
life, let there be that common wealth of nations and 
that ruler who protects the protectors, defends and 
supports the wise and brilliant, and, as a superleader, 
wins wealth, honour and excellence for humanity always 
in the struggles for progress. 


नू न॑ इन्द्रावरुणा गृणाना Ves रयिं सौश्रवसाय देवा | 
इत्था गृणन्तो महिन॑स्य शर्धोऽपो न नावा दुरिता त॑रेम ॥ ८ ॥ 


8. Nu na indravaruna grnana prnktam rayim 
sausravasaya deva. Ittha grnanto mahinasya 
sardho ’po na nava durita tarema. 

Indra and Varuna, brilliant and generous lords 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


864 RGVEDA 


of nature and humanity praised and adored by all, bless 
us with abundant wealth for honour and excellence of 
life so that grateful and worshipful, celebrating the 
power and glory of your grace and grandeur, we may 
cross over the difficult problems, evils and negativities 
of the world as we cross the seas by boat. 


प्र सप्राजें बहते मन्म नु fea? देवाय वरुणाय स॒प्रथ॑ः | 
अयं य उर्वीं महिना महिव्रतः त्वां विभात्यजरो न 
शोचिषा ॥ ९ ॥ 


0. Pra samraje brhate manma nu priyamarca 
devaya varunaya saprathah. Ayam ya urvi mahina 
mahivratah kratva vibhdatyajaro na Socisa. 


Offer the dearest homage and sincere adoration 
in full self-knowledge and awareness to the refulgent, 
generous and mighty benevolent ruler of the world, this 
lord Varuna who is vast as earth and shines by his glory 
and universal law, and illuminates the world by his holy 
action and light of glory blazing as refulgence beyond 
the rule and order of time and age. 


इन्द्रावरुणा सुतपाविमं सुतं सोमं पिबतं मद्यं धृतव्रता | 
युवो रथों अध्वरं देववीतये प्रति cade याति 
पीतये ।॥ ९०॥ 


10. Indravaruna sutapadvimam sutam somam piba- 
tam madyam dhrtavrata. Yuvo ratho adhvaram 
devavitaye prati svasaramupa yati pitaye. 


Indra and Varuna, rulers of power and justice, 
dedicated to your own law and discipline, protectors 
and sustainers of your own creation, come and drink of 
this exhilarating nectar of joyous celebration distilled 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 69 865 


for you. Your chariot moves to the constant self- 
sustaining yajna of love and non-violence every day so 
that you may drink of the soma in the company of 
divines. 


इन्द्रवरुणा मधुमत्तमस्य वृष्णः सोम॑स्य वृषणा वुंषेथाम्‌। 
इदं वामन्धः परिंषिक्तमस्मे आसद्यास्मिन्बर्हिषिं मादये- 
थाम्‌॥ VU 


11. Indravaruna madhumattamasya vrsnah somas-ya 
vrsana vrsetham. Idam vamandhah parisikta- 
masme asadyasmin barhisi madayetham. 


Generous Indra and Varuna, give us abundant 
showers of the most exhilarating honey sweets of soma. 
This nectar of devotion is distilled and seasoned for 
you. Come, sit on the holy grass and rejoice with us and 
for us. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 69 
Indra-Vishnu Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


सं वां कर्म॑णा समिषा हिनोमीन्द्रौविष्णु अपसस्पारे अस्य | 
जुषेथां यज्ञं द्रविणं च धत्तमरिष्टैर्नः पथिभिः पारय॑न्ता ॥ ९ ॥ 


0 Sam vam karmana samisa hinomindravisnu 
apasaspare asya. Jusetham yajnam dravinam ca 
dhattam-aristairnah pathibhih parayanta. 


Indra, lord commander of energy and power, 
Vishnu, lord provider of sustenance, whole heartedly I 
call upon you with food and energy and with action to 
take us successfully to the end of this programme of 
work and development. Join and enjoy the yajnic 
programme, create and bring wealth and honour. Indeed, 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


866 RGVEDA 


you are pilots of the nation to lead us on by paths of 
freedom without fear and danger. 


या विश्वासां जनितारा मतीनामिन्द्राविष्णु कला 
सोमधाना । प्र वां गिर॑ः शस्यर्माना अवन्तु प्र स्तोमासो 
गीयमानासो अर्कैः ॥ २॥ ति 

pa Ya visvasam janitara matinamindravisnu kalasa 
somadhana. Pra vam girah Sasyamana avantu 
pra stomaso giyamanaso arkaih. 


Indra and Vishnu, you are creators and producers 
of all things of the world. You are inspirers of the mind 
and intelligence of all people. You are the treasure 
caskets of wealth, honour and joyous excellence of the 
world. May our voices of invocation and invitation and 
our songs of adoration full of appreciation, praise and 
homage reach you with our reverence and holy 
presentations. 


इन्द्राविष्णू मदपती मदानामा सोमं यातं द्रविणो द्धाना। 
सं वामञ्जन्त्वक्तुभिर्मतीनां सं स्तोमासः शस्यमानास 
उक्थे: ॥ ३॥ 


Indravisnu madapati madanama somam yatam 
dravino dadhana. Sam vamanjantvaktubhir- 
matinam sam stomasah Sasyamanasa ukthaih. 


Indra and Vishnu, ruler of power and sustainer 
of life, you are creators and protectors of the joy of life. 
Come and join the joyous celebrants over a drink of 
life’s soma of excellence and ecstasy, and bring the 
wealth and honour of human values for us. And may 
the songs of our leading intelligent people full of 
homage and service exalt you by day and by night with 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 69 867 
a chant of Vedic mantras. 


आ वामश्वासो अभिमातिषाह इन्द्राविष्णू सधमादो वहन्तु | 
जुषेथां विश्वा हव॑ना मतीनामुप ब्रह्माणि sora गिरो 
मे॥ ४॥ 


4. A vamasvaso abhimatisaha indravisnu sadha- 
mado vahantu. Jusetham visva havana matina- 
mupa brahmani srnutam giro me. 


Indra and Vishnu, leaders of the world vibrant 
as wind and brilliant as light of the sun, may the greatest 
and fastest challengers of want and enmity escort you 
to the joyous fellowship of the world. There share the 
offers, invitations and common wealths of the peoples of 
the world, and then listen to my voices of exhortation 
too. 


इन्द्राविष्णू तत्प॑नयाय्यं वां सोम॑स्य मद॑ उरु च॑क्रमाथे | 
अकुणुतमन्तरिं्चं वरीयोऽ प्र॑थतं जीवसे नो रजांसि ।॥ ५॥ 


च Indravisni tat panayayyam vam somasya mada 
uru cakramathe. Akrnutam-antariksam_ vartyo- 
*prathatam jivase no rajamsi. 


Indra and Vishnu, lord omnipotent and lord 
omnipresent of generosity, admirable is that act of yours 
by which, in the ecstasy of creation, you conceive, create 
and expand the excellent middle region of the universe 
between heaven and earth, and then for the sustenance 
of our life you create and expand other regions of earth 
and space. 


इन्द्राविष्णू हविषा वावृधानाऽग्राद्वाना नम॑सा रातहव्या | 
घृतासुती द्रविणं धत्तमस्मे समुद्रः स्थ॑ः कलशः सोम- 
धानं: ue ul 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


868 RGVEDA 


6. Indravisnu havisa vavrdhana’ gradvana namasa 
ratahavya. Ghrtasuti dravinam dhattamasme 
samudrah sthah kalasah somadhanah. 


Indra and Vishnu, you are exalted by the 
oblations of sacrificial havi and thereby you exalt all 
others. First receivers and consumers of food and 
homage, you give back every thing finer in return for 
others. O lords, receiving oblations of ghrta and blessing 
others with the best of things, bear and bring the wealth 
and honour of life for us. Be like the sea full of jewels, 
be like a cask of soma and the ecstasy of life. 


इन्द्राविष्णु पिब॑तं मध्वो अस्य ates cer जटरं पृणेथाम्‌ | 
आ वामन्धांसि मदिराण्यग्मन्नुप ब्रह्माणि sod हवं 
Anew 


7. Indravisniu pibatam madhvo asya somasya dasra 
jJatharam prnetham. A vamandhamsi madiranya- 
gmannupa brahmani Srnutam havam me. 


Indra and Vishnu, destroyers of want and 
suffering, drink of the honey sweets of this soma and 
quench the hunger and thirst of body, mind and soul. 
Both of you together, receive the exhilarating food and 
drinks of life, acknowledge our offers of homage, and 
listen to my voice of invocation and celebration. 


उभा जिग्यथुर्न परां जयेथे न परां जिग्ये कतरश्चनैनोः | 
इन्द्र॑श्च विष्णो यदप॑स्पृधेथां त्रेधा weet वि तदैरये- 
थाम्‌।॥। Ul 

8. Ubha jigyathurna para jayethe na para jigye 


katarascanainoh. Indrasca visno yadapas- 
prdhetham tredha sahasram vi tadairayetham. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 70 869 


Both Indra and Vishnu are ever victorious. They 
are never defeated. Neither of them is ever vanquished 
or deprived. Indra and Vishnu, when you act together 
and contend with others, you stabilise your thousand 
forces, threefold raise their power and potency, and 
reduce the adversary to the lowest degree of efficiency. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 70 
Dyava - prthivi Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


घृतव॑ती भुव॑नानामथिश्रियोर्वीं पृथ्वी म॑धुदुघे सुपेशसा । 
द्यावापृथिवी वरुणस्य धर्म॑णा विष्कभिते अजरे भूरि- 
रेतसा ॥ ९॥ 


1. Ghrtavati bhuvananamabhisriyorvi prthvi 
madhudughe supesasa. Dyavaprthivi varunasya 
dharmana viskabhite ajare bhuriretasa. 


Radiant and fertile, beauties of the worlds, vast 
and abundant, extensive, replete with honey sweets, the 
sun and the earth are sustained by the laws of nature 
with the immanent will of Varuna, centre-hold of the 
universe. Undecaying they are, immensely creative and 
exuberant with the waters of life, beautiful, blissful. 


असश्चन्ती भूरिधारे cata घृतं दुहाते सुकृते शुचिंत्रते। 
राजन्ती अस्य भुव॑नस्य रोदसी अस्मे रेत॑: सिञ्चतं 
यन्मनुर्हितम्‌ २॥ 


2 Asascanti bhuridhare payasvati ghrtam duhdate 
sukrte Sucivrate. Rajanti asya bhuvanasya rodasi 
asme retah sincatam yanmanurhitam. 


Both separate yet releasing together abundant 
streams of liquid vitality, they are holy in action and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


870 RGVEDA 


pure of purpose and discipline of the divine law, and 
they give us ceaseless showers of milk and water. 
Shining over and illuminating this world, O sun and 
earth, let streams of vitality, virility and fertility flow 
down to us for the good of humanity. 


यो वामृजवे क्रम॑णाय रोदसी मर्तो caret धिषणो स साधति । 
प्र प्रजाभि॑ंजयते धर्मणस्परि युवोः सिक्ता विषुरूपाणि 
सव्रता ॥ ३ ॥ 


श Yo vamrjave kramanaya rodast marto dadasa 
dhisane sa sadhati. Pra prajabhirjayate dhar- 
manaspari yuvoh  sikta visurupani savrata. 


O heaven and earth, sustainers of life and 
illuminators of mind and intelligence, whoever the 
mortal that dedicates himself to you and abides by the 
laws you manifest for the sake of simple, straight 
guidance in the natural course of his life, wins success 
and honour and advances in life with his progeny higher 
and higher in the observance of Dharma, since it is from 
you that the diverse forms of life proceed alongwith the 
laws and manners of their species. 


घृतेन द्यावापृथिवी अभीवुं ते घृतश्रिया घृतपृचा घृतावृधा । 
उर्वीं पृथ्वी होतृवूर्ये पुरोहिते ते इद्विप्रा gad सुम्नमिष्टये i ठ ॥ 


4. Ghrtena dyavaprthivi abhivrte ghrtasriya 
ghrtaprea ghrtavrdha. Urvi prthvi hotrvurye 
purohite te id vipra tlate sumnamistaye. 

Heaven and earth are surrounded by cosmic 
waters, they are brilliant in beauty by waters, they are 


joined and grow in and by waters. O vast earth and 
heaven, wise sages serve and pray to you for the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 70 871 


fulfilment of their desire and attainment of happiness, 
you being foremost in their selection of the highpriest 
who would lead them to honour and success. 


मधुनो द्यावापृथिवी fara मधुश्चुता मधुदुघे Hea । 
दर्धाने यज्ञं द्रविंणं च देवता महि श्रवो वाज॑मस्मे सुवी- 
्यम्‌॥५॥ 


Madhi no dyavaprthivi mimiksatam madhus-cuta 
madhudughe madhuvrate. Dadhane yajnam 
dravinam ca devata mahi Sravo vajamasme 
suviryam. 


May heaven and earth create and provide for us 
the honey sweets of life. They shower the sweets of 
honey and honeyed pleasures of life and they are 
dedicated to the holy laws and purposes of nature for 
us. Divine they are, great and generous, they conduct 
nature’s yajnic cycle of life, they hold the treasures of 
the world for us, wealth and honour, knowledge and 
progress, and the virility and fertility of life’s continuity 
for us. 


ast नो dive पृथिवी च॑ पिन्वतां पिता माता विश्वविदं 
सुदंससा । संरराणे रोद॑सी विश्वशम्भुवा सनिं वाजं रयि- 
मस्मे समिन्वताम्‌ ६ ॥ 

6. Urjam no dyausca prthivi ca pinvatam pita mata 
visvavida sudamsasa. Samrarane rodasi visva- 
Sambhuva sanim vajam rayimasme saminvatam. 

Let the light of heaven and fertility of the earth, 
divine source givers of all achievement and performance 


of good works like father and mother, create, radiate 
and increase food and energy, knowledge and science. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


872 RGVEDA 


May they, abundant earth and heaven together, brilliant 
and joyous givers of comfort and happiness, both 
sources of bliss, bring us wealth and honour and 
fulfilment in togetherness. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 71 
Savita Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


उदु ष्य देवः सविता हिरण्यया बाहू अयंस्त सव॑नाय सुक्रतुः | 
घृतेन॑ पाणी अभि प्रुष्णुते मखो युवां सुदश्चो रज॑सो 
विधर्मणि।॥ ९॥ 


॥ Udu sya devah savita hirnyaya 04/17 ayamsta 
savanaya sukratuh. Ghrtena pani abhi prusnute 
makho yuva sudakso rajaso vidharmani. 


That refulgent and generous Savita, creator, 
generator and inspirer, ruler of the world, lord of holy 
action may, we pray, raise his golden hands and bless 
us with will and wisdom to perform creative and 
productive actions for common good. With showers of 
waters and grace, the lord of generous and adorable 
hands blesses the world regions and their people, as he 
is holy, creative, youthful, generous and perfect in 
various specific fields of action. 


देवस्य॑ वयं daa: सवीमनि se स्याम वसुनश्च दावने | 
यो विश्व॑स्य द्विपदो यश्चतुष्पदो निवेशने प्रसवे चासि 
भूम॑नः ॥ २॥ 


2. Devasya vayam savituh savimani Sresthe syama 
vasunasca davane. Yo visvasya dvipado yasca- 
tuspado nivesane prasave casi bhumanah. 


Let us be established with dedication in the 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 71 873 


highest generosity, prosperity and abundance of the 
refulgent and gracious lord Savita’s dynamic creation. 
You, O lord, are absolute and omnipresent in the 
creation, generation, evolution and sustained 
development of the multitude of humans and animals 
of the wide world of peace and settlement for all. 


अदब्धेभिः सवितः पायुधिष्ट्रं शिवेभिरद्य aft पाहि नो 
गय॑म्‌ । हिर॑ण्यजिह्छः सुविताय नव्य॑से रक्षा माकिर्नो अघशंस 
ईशत ॥ ३ ॥ 


440004/1८6/17/1 = 5८1771८1 payubhistvam Sivebhi- 
radya pari pahi no gayam. Hiranyajihvah 
suvitaya navyase raksa makirno aghasamsa 1Sata. 


Savita, ruling lord of inspiration, protect and 
promote our home, our people and our wealth and 
honour by benevolent and inviolable modes of defence, 
peace and development. O lord of golden word and 
voice, bless us with the latest forms of protection, 
progress and well being. Let no thief or sinner dare rule 
or boss over us. 


उदु ष्य देवः संविता दमूना हिरण्यपाणिः प्रतिदोषमस्थात्‌ | 
अयोहनुर्यजतो मन्द्रजिह्व आ दाशुषे सुवति भूरिं वामम्‌॥ 1 


4. Udu sya devah savita damuna hiranyapanih 
pratidosamasthat. Ayohanuryajato madrajihva 
a dasuse suvati bhuri vamam. 


That brilliant and generous lord Savita of yajnic 
action, inspiration and advancement, golden generous 
of hands and honeyed sweet of animating voice, wearing 
a steel helmet, rises like the sun every day after night 
and abides by us, and blesses the generous giver and 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


874 RGVEDA 


yajaka with abundant wealth, honour and graces of life. 
A friend and protector of the home and family, no one 
dare oppress, suppress or terrorize him. 


उदू stat उपवक्तेव arg हिरण्यया सविता सुप्रतीका | 
दिवो रोहांस्यरुहत्पृथिव्या अरीरमत्यतयत्कच्िदभ्व॑म्‌।॥ ५ ॥ 


5. Udu ayan upavakteva bahu hiranyaya savita 
supratika. Divo rohamsyaruhat prthivya 
ariramat patayat kaccidabhvam. 


Savita, refulgent illuminator and ruler of the 
world, glorious in form, raises his golden gracious arms 
like a rousing orator, ascends the heights of heaven, 
and sets in motion, conducts, directs and enjoys the great 
systemic business of the earth over day and night. 


वाममद्य सवितर्वाममु श्वो दिवेदिवे वाममस्मभ्यं सावीः। 
वामस्य हि क्षय॑स्य देव भूरेरया धिया वामभाजः स्याम ॥ ६ ॥ 


6. Vamamadya savitar-vamamu 510 divedive 
vamamasmabhyam savih. Vamasya hi ksayasya 
deva bhureraya dhiya vamabhajah syama. 


O Savita, lord of illumination and inspiration, 
great creator and ruler of the world, create the best and 
most beautiful, the most satisfying and blissful, 
intentions, actions and results today and tomorrow in 
endless succession. O lord generous and refulgent, bless 
us with bright intelligence and spirit of holy action so 
that by virtue of that intelligence and action we may 
abide in and enjoy the peace and well-being of a home 
of great comfort, peace and grace divine. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 72 875 


Mandala 6/Sukta 72 
Indra - Soma Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


इन्द्रासोमा महि तद्वां महित्वं युवं महानि प्रथमानिं चक्रथुः । 
युवं सूर्य विविदथुर्युवं var fever तमांस्यहतं निदश्च ॥ ९ ॥ 


i Indrasoma mahi tad vam mahitvam yuvam 
mahani prathamani cakrathuh. Yuvam suryam 
vividathur-yuvam svarvisva tamamsyahatam 
nidasca. 


Indra, lord of cosmic energy, and Soma, spirit 
of cosmic vitality, the greatness of your lustrous 
grandeur is this that you have done the first elemental 
grand acts of creation: you fashion forth the sun, you 
create the regions of light and the peace and paradisal 
bliss of existence, you dispel the darkness and ignorance 
of life, and you ward off the malice and negativities of 
the earthly community. 


इन्द्रासोमा वासय॑थ उषासमुत्सूर्य' नयथो ज्योतिषा सह। 
उप द्यां स्कम्भथुः स्कम्भ॑नेनाप्र॑थतं पृथिवीं मातरं far २॥ 
2. Indrasoma vasayatha usasamut suryam nayatho 


Jyotisa saha. Upa dyam skambhathuh skambha- 
nenaprathatam prthivim mataram vi. 


Lords of cosmic energy and universal bliss of 
life, you light up the dawns and lead the sun on course 
with its light. By the balance of forces you hold up and 
sustain the regions of light, and you unfold and sustain 
the earth in her motherly expense and variety of life. 


इन्द्रासोमा वहिंमपः परिष्ठां ह थो वृत्रमनु at द्यौर॑मन्यत | 
प्रा्णीस्यैरयतं नदीनामा संमुद्राणिं पप्रथुः पुरूणि ॥ ३ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


876 RGVEDA 


Ds Indrasomavahimapah paristham hatho vrtram- 
anu vam dyauramanyata. Prarnam-syairayatam 
nadinama samudrani paprathuh puruni. 


Lords of cosmic lightning energy and vibrating 
winds, you break the dark clouds of vapour up on the 
high skies and release the closed up waters, and as the 
skies are clear, the heavens acknowledge your grandeur 
with cheer and thankfulness. You set the floods of rivers 
aflow and fill the wide expanses of boundless seas in 
abundance. 


इन्द्रासोमा पक्वमामास्वन्तर्निं गवापिद॑धथुर्वक्षणांसु । 
जगृ भथुरन॑पिनब्दमासु रुशच्यित्रासु जगतीष्वन्तः ॥ ॐ i 


4. Indrasoma pakvama-masvantarni gavamid 
dadhathur-vaksanasu. Jaghrbhathur-anapina- 
ddhamasu rusaccitrasu jagatisvantah. 


Lords of sun light and vital energy, you infuse 
the unripe forms of vegetation with ripe herbal juice, 
the udders of cows with delicious milk, the flowing 
streams with energising waters, and you concentrate the 
unbound energy of sun rays and put this shining vitality 
into these various and wonderful forms of existence. 


इन्द्रासोमा युवमङ्क तरुत्रमपत्यसाचं श्रुत्यं रराथे । 
युवं शुष्मं नर्य' चर्षणिभ्यः सं विव्यथुः पृतनाषाहमुग्रा ॥ ५ ॥ 
क Indrasoma yuvamanga tarutramapatyasacam 


Srutyam rardathe. Yuvam susmam naryam 
carsanibhyah sam vivyathuh prtanasahamugra. 


Indra and Soma, lords of energy and life’s 
vitality, both dear as breath of life and bright as sun and 
moon, give us the light of knowledge worthy of 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 73 877 


remembrance that may save us from want and suffering 
across the present and future generations of our children. 
Interweave for all people strength and power worthy of 
leading heroes with which we may face and win all our 
battles of life against the adversaries of life and human 
society. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 73 
Brhaspati Devata, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 


यो अद्विभित्प्र॑थपजा ऋतावा ब॒हस्पतिराङ्किरसो हविष्ान्‌। 
द्विबर्हज्या प्राघर्मसत्पिता न आ रोद॑सी वृषभो रोरवीति ॥ ९॥ 


| Yo adribhit-prathamaja rtava brhaspatir- 
angiraso havisman. Dvibarhajma praghar- 
masat-pita na a rodasi vrsabho roraviti. 


Breaking the clouds and shattering mountains, 
first self-manifested among things born, the very 
embodiment of universal law and the truth of existence, 
Brhaspati, lord creator, ruler, protector and promoter of 
the expansive universe is the very essence of the life 
and breath of existence who wields and governs all 
matters and materials of the world. Lord and master of 
the earth by virtue of knowledge and power of action, 
illustrious with the light and fire of life, he is our father 
generator who, like the mighty thunder, proclaims his 
power and presence across heaven and earth. 


wate चिद्य ईव॑त उ oth बुहुस्पतिर्देवहूतौ चकारं। 
घ्नन्वृत्राणि वि पुरो दर्दरीति जयञ्छत्र मित्रानपृत्सु साहन्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 


2. Janaya cidya twata u lokam brhaspatir-devahutau 
cakara. Ghnan-vrtrani vi puro dardariti jayan- 
chatrunramitranprtsu sahan. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


878 RGVEDA 


Brhaspati, lord ruler of all, is he who, for the 
people in need, creates and gives a world of beauty and 
plenty when they approach him in the mood and spirit 
of supplication and prayer. When people invoke the 
divine lord, he breaks the thickest clouds of darkness 
and suffering, shatters the strongholds of exploitation 
and slavery, and challenges and wins over enemies and 
adversaries standing up in arms against humanity. 


बहस्पतिः sass महो व्रजान्‌ गोम॑तो देव एषः। 
अपः सिषांसन्त्स्व१रप्र॑तीतो ब॒हस्पतिर्हन्त्यमित्रमर्कैः ॥ ३॥ 


तः Brhaspatih samajayad-vasuni maho vrajan 
gomato deva esah. Apah sisasant-svar-apratito 
brhaspatir-hantyamitram-arkaih. 


This divine and illustrious lord of the universe, 
Brhaspati, overcomes the enemies, wins wealth and 
happiness, and reveals mighty treasures of lands and 
light of knowledge. Ruling over the dynamics of waters, 
energies and the karmic flow of nature’s law and light 
of heaven and bliss of life, himself unseen and 
undefeated, Brhaspati destroys all unfriendly forces 
confronting humanity by the strikes of his thunderbolt 
of justice and punishment by law. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 74 
Soma - Rudra Devate, Bharadvaja Barhaspatya Rshi 
सोमारुद्रा adam) प्र वांमिष्ट योऽ र॑मश्नुवन्तु | 
दमेदमे सप्त रत्ना दर्धाना शं नो! भूतं द्विपदे शं चतुष्पदे ॥ ९॥ 


ls Somarudra dharayetham-asuryam pra vami- 
stayo’ram-asnuvantu. Damedame sapta ratna 
dadhana sam no bhitam dvipade sam catuspade. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 74 879 


O Soma and Rudra, lords of health and well 
being and of the health and vitality of life, ruler of the 
land and powers of health services, you maintain the 
balance of nature and environment and the health and 
vitality of the community so that the desired results of 
social welfare be achieved to your satisfaction. Bearing 
seven-fold jewels of health and prosperity, bless the 
inmates of every home so that our people may be happy 
and healthy in peace and joy, and our bipeds and 
quadrupeds too may be healthy and happy. 


सो्मारुद्धा fa ded विषुंचीममींवा या नो गयमाविवेश । 
आरे बाधेथां निऋतिं परायैरस्मे भद्रा सौश्रवसानि 
STU २॥ 

2. Somarudra vi vrhatam visucim-amiva ya no 
gayam-avivesa. Are badhetham nirrtim paracair- 
asme bhadra sauSsravasani santu. 


O Soma and Rudra, lords of peace and vitality, 
uproot sickness, ill health, disease and epidemics such 
as cholera and others which spread to our homes and 
affect our children and institutions. Ward off want and 
adversity and keep it far away so that they never recur 
and we enjoy good health, well being and abounding 
graces. 


सोमारुद्रा युवमेतान्यस्मे विश्वां तनूषु, wasnt err 
अवं स्यतं मुञ्चतं यन्नो अस्तिं तनूषु बन्धं कृतमेनो 
अस्मत्‌॥ ३॥ 

3. Somarudra yuvametanyasme visva tanusu 


bhesajani dhattam. Ava syatam muncatam yanno 
asti tanusu baddham krtameno asmat. 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


880 RGVEDA 


Soma and Rudra, lord of health and vitality, ruler 
and physician, bear and bring all those herbs and 
medicaments for our body’s health and mental and 
spiritual strength by which you may throw off and 
eliminate from us whatever pollutes our body system 
and whatever sin or trespass or indiscretion has been 
committed by us. 


तिग्मायुधो तिग्महेती सुशेवौ सोमारुद्राविह सु dod नः। 
Wal मुञ्चतं वरुणस्य पाशाद्रोपायतं नः सुमनस्यमाना ॥ ४ ॥ 


4. Tigmayudhau tigmaheti susevau somarudrav-iha 
su mrlatam nah. Pra no mujicatam varuna-sya 
pasad gopayatam nah sumanasyamana. 


Soma and Rudra, lords of health and total well 
being, bearing weapons of blazing efficacy and 
shattering blows of thundering strength, givers of peace 
and joy, bless us with health of body, mind and soul and 
lasting well being. Release us from the snares of Varuna, 
bondage of sin and disease by the laws of nature. Happy, 
kind and gracious, protect and promote us in life against 
sin, disease and indiscretion. 


Mandala 6/Sukta 75 


Varma, Dhanu, Jya, Artni, Ishudhi, Sarathi, Rashmayah, 

Ashvah, Ratha, Rathagopa, Ishavah, Pratoda, Hastaghna, 

Sangramashishah (yuddhabhumi-Brahmanaspati-Aditi, 

Kavacha Soma-Varuna, Deva-Brahma) Devatah, Payu 
Bharadvaja Rshi 


जीमूत॑स्येव भवति ude यद्वर्मी यातिं समदामुपस्थे । 
अनाविद्धया तन्वा जय त्वं स त्वा वर्म॑णो महिमा 
fda ue i 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 881 


im Jimutasyeva bhavati pratikam yad varmi yati 
samadam-upasthe. Anaviddhaya tanva jaya tvam 
sa tva varmano mahima pipartu. 


When a warrior in armour advances to the battle 
front of war he looks like a mighty rain cloud. Go 
forward with your body unhurt, win the battle, and may 
the grandeur of your armour protect and defend you in 
war and peace. 


धन्व॑ना गा धन्वनाजिं ज॑येम॒ धन्व॑ना तीव्राः समदो जयेम | 
धनुः शत्रोरपकामं कृणोति धन्व॑ना सर्वौः प्रदिशो 
जयेम ।॥ २॥ 


2 Dhanvana ga dhanvanajim jayema dhanvana 
fivrah samado jayema. Dhanuh satrorapaka-mam 
krnoti dhanvana sarvah pradiso jayema. 


Let us preserve and win lands and cows by the 
bow and reach our targets by the bow. Let us fight out 
the fiery passions by the bow and arrow of concentrated 
meditation. The bow and arrow thwarts the evil designs 
of enemy forces within and without both. Let us advance 
in all directions by the bow. 


वक्ष्यन्तीवेदा ग॑नीगन्ति कर्ण प्रियं सायं परिषस्वजाना | 
ada Bre वितताधि धन्वञ्ज्या इयं सम॑ने पारय॑न्ती ॥ ३ ॥ 


3. Vaksyantiveda ganiganti karnam priyam 
sakhayam parisasvajana. Yoseva sinkte vitatadhi 
dhanvan-jya iyam samane parayanti. 


Like a maiden embracing her dear lover and 
whispering into his ear as if saying something sweet, 
this string of the bow, its ends like loving hands clasping 
the ends of the bow, is stretched to the archer’s ear, rings 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


882 RGVEDA 


and seems to say: Shoot, advance and make way through 
the opposite ranks. 


ते आचरन्ती सम॑नेव योषां मातेव पुत्रं बिभृतामुपस्थे | अप 
शत्रून्विध्यतां संविदाने आरवी इमे विष्फुरन्ती अमि- 
ar ४॥ 


4. Te acaranti samaneva 2050 mateva putram bibhr- 
tamupasthe. Apa Satrun vidhyatam samvidane 
artni ime visphuranti amitran. 


Just as a young mother holds the baby in her 
lap with both hands, so may the two ends of the bow 
operative together in balance hold the string at both ends 
and shoot the arrow upon the enemies and thus scatter 
the unfriendly forces out of gear. 


wer पिता ages पुत्रश्चिश्चा कुणोति सम॑नावगत्यं। 
इषुधिः सङ्काः पृतनाश्च स्वः पृष्ठे निन॑न्दो जयति 
प्रसूतः ॥ ५ ॥ ति 

a: Bahvinam pita bahurasya putrascisca krnoti 
samanavagatya. Isudhih sankah prtanasca sarvah 
prsthe ninaddho jayati prasutah. 


Like a guardian having many children under his 
care, the quiver borne on the warrior’s back holds many 
arrows and rattles as the warrior enters upon the battle. 
The warrior with the bow and arrows in the quiver 
emerging on the battle field scatters all the enemy forces 
and wins all the battles of life. 


रथे fasaata वाजिन॑ः पुरो यत्र॑यत्र aA सुषार धिः | 
अभीशुनां महिमानं पनायत मन॑ः पश्चादनु यच्छन्ति 
र॒श्मय॑ः ॥ ६ ॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 883 


6. Rathe tisthan nayati vajinah puro yatrayatra 
kamayate susarathih. Abhisunam mahimanam 
panayata manah pascadanu yacchanti rasmayah. 


An expert driver on the steer of the chariot 
directs and leads the horses forward wherever he wants. 
Know this and admire the great importance of the bridle 
strings. As the driver controls the horses so does the 
mind control the senses. Control the strings of the mind 
and the senses would follow in your conduct of the 
chariot of life. 
तीब्रान्ोषान्कृण्वते वृष॑पाणयोऽ var रथेभिः सह वाज- 
dea: | अवक्रामन्तः प्रप॑दैरमित्रान्‌ क्षिणन्ति शर्ँरन॑पव्य- 
यन्तः ॥ ७॥ 

a Tivran ghosan krnvate vrsapanayo’sva rathebhih 
saha vajayantah. Avakramantah prapadair- 
amitran ksinanti Satrunr-anapav-yayantah. 


Rushing on with the chariots, the warriors of 
mighty arm and war horses roar with awful war cries 
and, crushing the unfriendly forces with their advances 
without ever retreating, they eliminate the enemies. 


रथवाहनं हविर॑स्य नाम यत्रायुधं निहितमस्य वर्मं । 
तत्रा रथमुप॑ शग्मं स॑देम विश्वाहा वयं सुंमनस्यर्मानाः ॥ ८ ॥ 
8. Rathavahanam havirasya nama yatrayudham 


nihitamasya varma. Tatra rathamupa Sagmam 
sadema visvaha vayam sumanasyamanah. 


Where the chariot war materials of this warrior 
are collected and deposited, and where his arms and 
armour which routed the enemy are secured and 
guarded, there let us find our chariot of peace and well 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


884 RGVEDA 


being for all time, planning and designing as we are 
always for the peace and joy of the mind. 


स्वादुषंसदः frat वयोधाः कृच्छश्चितः शक्तीवन्तो 
गभीराः। चित्रसेना इषुबत्ा अमूराः सतोवीरा उरवो 
व्रातसाहाः ॥ ९॥ 


9. Svadusamsadah [7141-0 vayodhah krcchresritah 
Saktivanto gabhirah. Citrasena isubala amrdhrah 
satovira uravo vratasahah. 


Those who abide in the home or sit in the 
assembly with peace and joy at heart, who are senior 
parental people, advanced and experienced in age, 
observing Dharma without fluctuating from peace and 
rectitude even in crises, commanding strength and depth 
of wisdom, leading wonderful armies, having full forces 
of arms and armaments but never violent and 
destructive, brave heroes of truth and honesty, many, 
mighty and magnanimous, observers of self-chosen 
discipline and law of conduct, let such be our friends, 
ideals and leader guardians for a life of peace and 
happiness. 


ब्राह्मणासः fade: aretha: शिवे नो द्यावापृथिवी 
अनेहसा । पूषा न॑: पातु दुरितादूतावृधो रक्षा माकिर्नो 
अघशंस ईत ol 

10. = Brahmanasah pitarah somyasah Sive no dyava- 
prthivi anehasa. Pusa nah patu duritad-rtavrdho 
raksa makirno aghasamsa (वाल. 


Sagely scholars, parental seniors, men of peace 
and good will, holy and blissful sun and earth which 
hurt no one, protective and promotive powers of nature 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 885 


and humanity, all observers and protectors of truth and 
law, may, we pray, protect us from sin and evil and 
defend us against violence. May no evil and violent 
power, no thief, rule over us. 


सु पर्ण aed मृगो अंस्या दन्तो गोभिः tar पतति wea | 
यत्रा नरः संच वि च द्रव॑न्ति तत्रास्मभ्यमिष॑वः शर्म 
यंसन्‌॥ ९९ ॥ 


11. Suparnam vaste mrgo asya danto gobhih 
sannaddha patati prasuta. Yatra narah sam ca vi 
ca dravanti tatrasmabhyam-isavah sarma 
yamsan. 


The sun wears the beauty of a divine bird and 
flies. The earth, its mountain tops illuminated by sun 
rays, moves on, urged and energised by the sun. On this 
earth where men run around together yet scattered, may 
the arrows of defence and protection and the light of 
the sun provide us a home of peace and stability. 


ऋजीते परि वृङ्धि नोऽ vat भवतु Wert: | 
सोमो अधिं ब्रवीतु नोऽ fefa: शर्म" यच्छतु ॥ ९२॥ 


12. Ryjite pari vrndhi no’sma bhavatu nastanuh. 
Somo adhi bravitu no’ditih Sarma yacchatu. 


O ruler, let natural honesty and rectitude protect 
and promote us. Let our bodies be adamantine strong. 
Let soma, nectar juice of herbs, inspire us with its 
message of good health and rejuvenation. Let mother 
earth bless us with peace and comfort in a happy home. 


आ Wea सान्वेषां wear उप॑ जिघ्रते । 
अश्वाजनि प्रचेतसोऽ शवान्त्समत्सु चोदय ।॥ ९३॥ 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


886 RGVEDA 


13. A janghanti sanvesam jaghanan upa jighnate. 
Asvajani pracetaso’svant-samatsu codaya. 


O inspirer of the brave like a goad, inspire the 
wise and brave warriors of the earth who break down 
the forces of these enemies of humanity and strike down 
the saboteurs and terrorists in the battles of life. 


अर्िरिव भोगैः पर्येति ag ज्यायां हेतिं परिबाधमानः 1 
wera विश्वा वयुनानि विद्धान्पुमान्पुमांसं परिं पातु 
विश्वतंः ॥ ९४॥ 


14. Ahiriva bhogaih paryeti bahum jyaya hetim 
paribadhamanah. Hastaghno visva vayunani 
vidvan puman pumansam pari patu visvatah. 


Wrapped round the arm of a warring man of 
action like the coils of a snake, like an arm guard 
protecting the shooting arm against the strike back of 
the bow string after the shot of an arrow, or against the 
recoil of a gun, the man of knowledge well versed in all 
the ways of life and the world should protect the man 
of bold action all round. 


आलाक्ता या रुरुशीष्ण्यथो यस्या अयो wet 
इदं पर्जन्य॑रेतस इष्वै देव्यै बृहन्नमः ॥ ९५॥ 


15.  Alakta ya rurusirsnyatho yasya ayo mukham. 
Idam parjanyaretasa isvai devyai brhannamah. 


Poison-tempered with head like a doe’s and a 
mouth of steel, generous and abundant like a rain cloud 
is the brave ruling queen of arrows. For the lady of 
divine velocity, unbounded praise and homage of a 
thousand salutations! 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 887 


अव॑सृष्टा परां पत शरव्ये ब्रह्मसंशिते । गच्छामित्रान्प्र प॑द्यस्व 
मामीषां कं चनोच्छिषः ॥ ९६ ॥ 


16. Avasrsta para pata Saravye brahmasamsSite. 
Gacchamitran pra padyasva mamisam kam 
canocchisah. 


O sharpest and fastest of missiles, tempered and 
tested by the best of defence scientists, shot and released, 
fly far, reach the target and fall upon the enemies. Spare 
none of them whatsoever even at the farthest distance. 


यत्र बाणाः संपत॑न्ति कुमारा विंशिखाइव । तत्रा नो ब्र्मण- 
स्पतिरदिंतिः शर्म यच्छतु विश्वाहा शर्म॑ यच्छतु 1 ९७॥ 


17. Yatra banah sampatanti kumara visikha iva. 
Tatra no brahmanaspatir-aditih Sarma yacchatu 
visvaha Sarma yacchatu. 


O ruler, where the young soldiers with shorn 
hair fall upon the enemy and showers of missiles rain 
down upon the targets, there let the controller of nation’s 
wealth provide us total security and let the mother earth 
provide us a safe and comfortable shelter, a shelter of 
all round security. 


ममीणि ते वर्म॑णा छदयापि aren राजामतेनानुं AeA | 
उरोर्वरीयो वरुणस्ते कृणोतु जय॑न्तं त्वानु देवा म॑दन्तु ॥ ९८ ॥ 
18. Marmani te varmana chadayami somastva 


rajamrtenanu vastam. Urorvariyo varunaste 
krnotu jayantam tvanu deva madantu. 


O warrior of the bow, I cover the vital limbs of 
your body with armour for protection. Let the ruler 
Soma, immortal spirit of life’s vitality, give you close 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


888 RGVEDA 


cover against death and mortality. Let the wise and 
judicious commander of the forces provide you the best 
and most abundant food and maintenance, and let the 
excellencies of the nation rejoice with you when you 
win the battle. 


यो नः स्वो अरणो यश्च Peat जिघांसति । 
देवास्तं सर्वे' धूर्वन्तु ब्रह्य वर्म ममान्त॑रम्‌ ॥ ९९॥ 


19. Yonah svo arano yasca nistyo jighamsati. Deva- 
stam sarve dhurvantu brahma varma maman- 
taram. 


Any one, whether our own or a stranger far away 
non-fighting, or far off and low, that hurts and violates 
us deserves that the best and enlightened of the nation 
punish him to nullity. For me, the Lord Almighty and 
the divine knowledge and awareness within me is my 
best armour for protection. 


॥ इति षष्ठे AISI 


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution. 


