| AUM ॥






[Names: Original, Sanskrit, Text, Transliteration]
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda)


English translation by


[Names: Tulsi, London]
(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer)


Sanskrit Text as per publication of














[Names: Paropakarini, Sabha, Ajmer, Publisher, Vijaykumar, Govindram, Hasanand, Delhi, Edition, First, Price]
RIGVEDA Vol. I by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D.


P




[Names: Dedication]
The Mother’s Gift
For all her children


Your path is up and onwards,


[Names: Never]
S R


( vii )


Homage, Thanks and Acknowledgements


Homage to Jyeshtha Brahma, the Eternal Guru.
Homage to Immanent Brahma and Will Divine


Homage to Mother Trinity of Ida, Saraswati, Mahi
with Barati.


Homage to the Rshis from Brahma to Dayananda.
Homage to Vedic scholars and teachers.
Homage to parents for inspiration and blessings.


Homage to the sacred memory of my wife Maya Jyoti
who waited until the last word of this project was written.


Thanks and best wishes to my son Gianendra Sharma
for his long, continuous, relentless and indispensable
dedication to the practical management of this project till
the completion.


Thanks and best wishes to my daughter Indira
Sharma and son-in-law Gulab Sharma and my brother Ram
Kishan Sharma, wishing, waiting and assuring, with
Gianendra Sharma, the publication of this work.


Thanks to Shri Ajay Kumar Arya, of Messrs Govind
Ram Hasanand, Delhi, for the start of this publication project.
Thanks to Shri Dharampal and Shri Rajvir Shastri of

Arsh Sahitya Prachar Trust for this publication.


Thanks to Sarvashri Amar Erry, Bhai Anand Roop
[Names: Narain, Aditya, Kumar, Amar, Doody, Ross, Ashwini, Adit, Kumar, Ravi, Prakash, Arya, Pandit, Satish, Prakas]
Chopra and members of Arya Samaj Markham, Toronto and


[Names: Shakti, Nagar, Dharma, Vira, Secretary]
( viii )
Paropakarini Sabha, Ajmer, Acharya Gianeshwar of Darshan
Yoga Vidyalaya, Roger (Gujrat), and Shri K.C. Garg Manager,
Rukmini Devi Public School, Pitampura, New Delhi for their
generous offers of practical help, assistance and cooperation
toward publication of this work.


Thanks to Shri Ramesh Gupta, President Arya Samaj
North America for his supprot and good wishes.


Thanks and homage of gratitude to the scholars and
translators of the Vedas from Swami Dayananda to the
[Names: Shripad, Damodara, Satavalekara, Jaya, Deva, Swami, Kshema, Karana, Trivedi, Prof, Vishwa, Nath, Vidyamartanda, Vidyamartanda, Acharya, Vaidyanath, Shastri, Swami, Satya]
Prakash, Pt. Devi Chand and a lot many others.


[Names: Professor, Vachaspati, Upadhyaya, Vice, Chancellor, Bahadur, Vidyapeeth]
Delhi, who first read the manuscript of the “Voice of
Yajurveda’” and enthusiastically encouraged me to go ahead
with translation of all the four Vedas for lovers of the Rshis’


Thanks to all the schollars who read the manuscript
and expressed their candid openions on this work.




[Names: Sharma]
(ix )
[Names: Particulars]
From the Publishers Desk


Homage, Thanks and


[Names: Acknowledgements]
1. About the Author


[Names: Foreword, Subhash, Vedalankar, About]
English translation of the


[Names: Rigveda, Krishan]
4. English Translation of Vedic


Page


XVi


[Names: Hymns, Opinion, Bhawanilal, Bhartiya, Message, Balvir, Message, Mahavir, Appreciation, Baldev, Singh, Sadbhavana, Good, Umakant]
9. To the Reader —Dr. TulsiRam xxii
[Names: Introduction]
11. Diacritical Marks of Transliteration xliv
MANDAL-1 1-852
MANDAL-2 853-1057
MANDAL-3 1058-1218


(x)


About the Author


[Names: English]
academic administrator, researcher, and writer of long
standing with prestigious assignments:


Lecturer in English, Hans Raj College, Delhi


Reader in the Department of English, Kurukshetra




[Names: University, Kurukshetra, Haryana, Principal, Shivaji, College, Principal, Shraddhanand, College]
Visiting Ford Foundation Scholar, University of


[Names: Leeds, Leed]
Professor of English, Department of Languages,


[Names: Pilani, Rajasthan]
Professor Head of the Department of English,


[Names: Maharshi, Dayanand, Rohtak]
Besides his professional studies of secular literature
in English, Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu, Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma
has devoted his life and time to the study and discipline of
[Names: Sacred, Vedas, Upanishads, Darshan]
Philosophy, Puranas, Ramayana, Mahabharata with
concentration on the Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian
and English Epics, Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran, and
the writings of Swami Dayananda, and Swami Vivekananda,
in search of the essential values of Sanatan Vedic Dharma
with reference to their realisation in life and literature through
and religious variations across the fluctuations of history.


(21 )
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma’s research and publications
include:


The Neo-Classical Epic: an Ethical Interpretation


Trading in Language: The Story of English in India


The Original Philosophy of Yoga: Commentary on
the Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali (Gurukul Jhajjar, Haryana, 1989)




[Names: Bharat, Main, Angrezi, Khoya, Paya]
Swami Dayanand’s Vision of Truth (Delhi, 2002)
Translation of Nine Upanishads (Delhi, 1992)


Translation of Swami Dayanand’s Sanskar Vidhi


Translation of Swami Dayananda’s short writings
in Dayananda Granth Mala (Paropakarini Sabha,




Translation of Swami Satya Pati’s God Realisation


[Names: Simple, Yoga]
And a number of articles such as:


“Swami Vivekananda’s Vision of Man” (Prabuddha


“G.D.Birla: Gandhi’s child’, in Birla Felicitation

[Names: Volume]
“Search for a Medium of Instruction in India’, in


[Names: Mitra, Felicitation]
“Shakespeare as a Creative Yogi” in Shakespeare:
the Indian Icon, edited by Vikram Chopra for J.L.Halio


( 11)
And now translation of the Vedas, in the Arsha


tradition of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda


[Names: Saraswati]
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has spent the last ten years
on this translation of the four Vedas, all the time saying: “T
came for this”. While English has been the language of his
professional communication, Sanskrit is the voice of his life
and living.


( xiii )




Veda Bhashya by Prof. Tulsiram — A step to make
Vedas available to the English World


I have had the privilege of going through some of the
chapters of Yajurveda Bhashya written by Prof. Tulsiram, a
well known Vedic scholar and author of English language
and literature. I congratulate him because he has done this
translation for an average English reader who is keen to know
the Vedas. Knowledge of the Vedas is like the knowledge of
science. Vedic language is a scientific language and nobody
can understand that without the profound knowledge of
Vedangas, especially Nirukta of Maharshi Yaska and the
grammar of Panini and Patanjali. Nobody can interpret the
Veda mantras without these two. This translation proves that
Prof. Tulsiram has done this insightful translation after doing
hard work in both Vedangas.


In translating the Vedas, only literal meaning is just
not sufficient, sometimes it may create confusion and
[Names: Tulsiram]
Vedic Mantras, thinking deeply about words, derivatives and
analyzes the hidden nuances of meaning in their context. For
[Names: Sumitriya, Yajur]
23’: If we take literal meaning in the ordinary sense, “may
the waters, vital forces of life, and herbs be friendly to us
and may they be enemies to those who hate us and whom we
[Names: After]
questions, he says, “How can we accept this?” So, after going
deeply into the words and context he gives this meaning of
the said mantra: May waters, tonics, pranic energies and
medicinal herbs be good friends of our health system and
immunity and let the same waters, tonics, pranic energies
herbal medicines act against those ailments, diseases and


( xiv )


negativities which injure us, which we hate to suffer and
which we love to destroy, moreover let them have no side
effects because side effects too help the negativities and


After giving the actual sense of the Mantra he writes
that this Mantra is a reasonable prayer for the health
programme of an advanced society, and then, logically in
the next Mantra, follows the prayer for a full hundred years
and more of life and healthy living (Tacchakshurdevahitam


The translation by Prof. Tulsiram is without any
extraneous motive and without any extra-academic intention.
The translation has been done purely as communication of
the Vedic message for the welfare of mankind.


While giving his opinion on the Vedas Prof. Tulsiram
writes in his Introduction. ...Veda is the Voice of God revealed
in scientific Vedic Sanskrit free from local color and historical
facts, therefore Vedic language is to be interpreted and
understood according to its own laws and structure, and the
only key available for such interpretation is the Nirukta of
Maharshi Yaska and the grammar of Panini & Patanjali.
According to Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati, ‘without
reference to these bases of Vedic interpretation certain words
have been given a distorted meaning in the translations of
Max Muller, Griffith, Whitney and even Sayana.’ Actually
the torch light for proper translation today, as Aurobindo
says, is the Arsha tradition followed by Maharshi


[Names: Dayananda]
At the end I will say that this translation of Yajurveda,
based on Nirukta and Grammar, follows the known ancient
Indian tradition. It is factual, without prejudice or hidden
motive. Prof. Tulsiram thinks deeply on every word of the


(xv )


mantra, looks into the context and etymology according to
Nirukta and then does the translation. I congratulate him on
this one more pioneering step to make the knowledge of
Vedas available to the western world and the average English
knowing reader. May God give him long and healthy life so
that he continues to do this kind of stupendous work.



Ex-Prof and Chairman of Sanskrit Department,

[Names: Jaipur, India]
Presently Chairman, Dept. of Sanskrit and Vedic


[Names: Vangmaya]
( xvi )


English translation of the Rgveda


I feel myself fortunate and blest with the Grace of
God that I received a few pages of the English translation by
Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma with introduction of the Yajurveda.
The comparative views expressed by him about the Vedas
are essential for every student of the Veda since it is a further
pointer to scientific research in the field of Vedic


Its conclusion is true: “In short Veda is an eternal
articulation of omniscience, the voice of God”. Each work
of Prasthana Trayi i.e. Vedanta, Upanishads and Gita is not a
take off from the Vedas but a continuation of Vedic studies
in its own context of meditation, meditative teaching and a
rousing call to action in a situation of karmic crisis. This
English translation is a welcome addition to Vedic studies
opening truly a new path establishing with ease the Vedas in
the service of humanity.


[Names: Krishna]
Former Professor and Head of Sanskrit Department,
University of Delhi. Delhi.


( xvii )
English Translation of Vedic Hymns: An Opinion


Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has taken an uphill task of
translating all the four Vedas in lucid and thought provoking
English. Most of the translations of Vedas by European
scholars depend on the ritualistic meaning given by the
medieval commentators like Sayana and others. But Dr.
Sharma has taken a new course of translation. He agrees with
the idea that the Yajurveda basically propounds the theory of
Karma which it explains as Yajna, which neither denotes
sacrifice nor mere ritual (Agnihotra etc.). The term Yajna
carries a threefold meaning: the worship of God, unification
of diverse factors of human society, selfless charity and
replenishment of nature and the environment.


The hymns of the Yajurveda carry lofty ideas of
spiritual and ethical significance. Most of these mantras are,
however, complicated and tough. It is difficult to make out
useful meaning and draw important conclusion out of the
text. But Dr. Sharma has fully succeeded in drawing out the
natural and meaningful content of these mantras. In brief I
can say that the present translation of the Vedas will be
appreciated by the scholars of this Vedic lore as well as by
the lay man who wants to understand the deep meaning of
the Vedic texts or at least the basic knowledge hidden in these
ancient works. It is all the more satisfying that Dr. Sharma
has followed the dicta laid down by Maharshi Yaska and
Swami Dayananda Saraswati in translating and explaining
the inner wisdom of the sacred mantras.



[Names: Bhawani]
Ex. Chairman and Professor
Dayananda Chair for Vedic Studies


[Names: Punjab, Chandigarh, Xviil]
AUM


It has been gratifying to go through the English
translation of the Vedas rendered by Dr Tulsi Ram Sharma
in as much as it conveys to the English-knowing world
effectively the profound meaning and transcendental secrets
enshrined in the Vedas. The most salient feature of this
translation is its simple and lucid English. The Vedic words
have been expounded here following the yaugik method of
the Arsh tradition set up by Yaska, Panini and Patanjali (as
opposed to the rudhi method which takes only the historically
fixed meanings of words caring little for the context and the
subject). As per the Arsh tradition name words like Agni,
Vayu, Indra, Marut, etc., are synonyms indicating the various
attributive names of the One that is the greatest and the most
comprehensive “Tattva’ of existence, the Cosmic Spirit. It
was Maharshi Dayananda who for the first time after Yaska
and Patanjali advocated and followed this principle of
interpretation on the basis of ancient supporting material.
Dr. Sharma has religiously stuck to this theory while
unfolding the truths enshrined in the Vedas. Obviously Dr
Sharma’s interpretation of Vedic hymns enjoys the
authenticity of the Arsh tradition and challenges the western
Vedic perspective and the medieval Indian interpretations of
the Vedas which now need to be seriously reviewed in our
present day context of science and inter-cultural




[Names: Head]
Department of Sanskrit, Pali & Prakrit


( xix )


AUM




Above the narrow boundaries of country, time, caste
and creed, the Vedas have been a treasure house of eternal
universal knowledge and spiritual wisdom. There have been
numerous attempts by Indians and foreigners to make the
knowledge of these Vedas available to the people at large.
Among them the Vedic commentaries of the great social and
spiritual leader, Maharshi Dayananda are the best works in
this field. Inspired by Swami Dayananda, the translation of
the Yajurveda into English by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma is a
commendable work in this line. Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma has
been a great devotee of sacred literature, especially Vedas,
Upanishads, and various philosophies. His life long study of
the Vedas has given him deep insight into Vedic philosophy.
His translation of the Yajurveda reveals it fully. Here he has
translated the Yajurveda, the Veda of Karma, in such a way
that even a common reader can grasp its essence. He has
very effectively brought out how this Veda teaches us to apply
spiritual knowledge in practical life. Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma
deserves our congratulations and best wishes for having done
translation of all the four Vedas in simple and clear English
for the international community.





[Names: Gurukul, Kangri, Vishwavidyalaya, Haridwar, Uttarakhand]
(xx )


I have gone through some chapters of the English
translation of Yajurveda by Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma. As he has
stated at the very beginning of the Introduction, this
translation of Yajurveda is meant for an average English-
knowing reader who is keen to know: What is Veda? What is
it about? Is it old or new? To achieve this object, he has
followed the Arsh method of interpretation. Accordingly, for
example, he has mostly followed the etymological method
of literal translation. But whenever he finds that the literal is
not helpful in achieving his intended objective, he adds the
implied explanation so that the essence of the Vedic hymn is
quite clear. For example, his translation of, ‘Yathemam
Vacham Kalyanimavadani janebhyah’ is rendered as
follows—‘Just as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word
of the Veda for all people (without discrimination of high or
low), so should you too communicate it to all people of the
world, whosoever, whatsoever, where so ever they be’. That
is the technique of Swami Dayananda also.


I regard Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma as one in the
commendable line of Pundit Damodar Satavalekara who
studied Sanskrit at a mature age and did unique work in that
language. Dr. Sharma has also mastered the Sanskrit language
after his retirement and done full justice to the translation of
the Veda. He richly deserves our gratefulness, our expression
of gratification and our appreciation for succeeding in his
sacred mission of presenting an understandable, logical and
above all sensible English translation of Vedas which hitherto
was unavailable. Thus a long felt need has been fulfilled. I
am sure Dr Sharma’s method of translation will not only be
widely approved but will also be followed by others while
translating the Vedas in other languages.


Formerly Professor of Sanskrit


[Names: Himachal, Pradesh, Shimla]
( Xx1 )




Dr. Tulsi Ram Sharma, is a profound scholar of English,
Hindi, Sanskrit and Urdu. But his heart felt devotion goes to sacred
[Names: Philosophy]
Puranas, Ramayana, and Mahabharata with concentration on the
Bhagwad Gita, Greek, Roman, Sumerian and English Epics,
Gathas of Zarathustra, Bible, Quran and the writings of Swami
Dayananda and Swami Vivekananda, in search of the essential
values of Veda and Sanatan Vedic Dharma. It seems his real spirit
and scholarly interest lies in the interpretation of the Vedas. I
have gone through some portions of his English translation of
Yajurveda and on perusal of this translation, I have marked two

1. His language is perfectly lucid and

2. His translation is faithful to the word and spirit of the


[Names: Mantras, Veda]
is knowledge of existence, pure and simple, as Science is
knowledge. Science is the knowledge of nature as nature is and
as it works according to its own laws. In Science, there is no
story, no history. Similarly, in the Vedas, there is no story, no
history. And just as Science is knowledge in Scientific language,
free from local colour and historical variations of form and
meaning, so Veda too is knowledge in scientific language, free
from local colour and historical variations.”

Veda is ‘Knowledge’ and knowledge is eternal. The
interpretation of the Vedas requires the knowledge of the Arsh
technique as explained by the Rshis like Yaska, Panini, Patanjali,
Dayananda and Aurobindo.

As Veda is pure knowledge, so is this translation in theArsh
tradition, free from myth and history with no local colour, no
attitude, no motive, except pure communication of the Original
for all.


With best wishes to the author and specially to the readers,


Formerly Professor of Economics,


[Names: Calcutta, Xxii]
To the Reader


This translation of the ‘Hymns of Yajurveda’ is an English
Version of the Yajurveda for the common reader who wants to
acquaint himself or herself with the content of this divine message
of the dynamics of Karma, both human and divine, in the context
of the nature, structure and purpose of the universe and the
condition and position of the human being in it. While the opening
mantra launches the human being on life with the exhortation:
“Be vibrant as the winds’, the closing mantra seals the success of
vibrant humanity in action with the final achievement of “Om
Kham Brahma” with Grace Divine.


Life according to the Yajurveda is a journey from the
beginning-less beginning to the endless end with the message:


Immortal child of Divinity,

Your roots go deep to Eternity,
Your reach is unto Infinity.

And your path is up and onwards,


This version is a scientific translation of the text within
the parameters of Yaska and Dayananda with rational
understanding of Sayana at the one end and the western scholars
at the other. Sayana’s translation is ritualistic especially with
reference to yajna. It came at a time when the “Renaissance, Re-
awakening of Learning” was far off, not yet just at the next door.
Even communication between the East and the West was not as
hectic as it became after the advent of the East India Company
into India. Thus mutual criticism and appreciation too was silent
rather than vocal. Hence Ritualism was just the thing acceptable
to a society settled on the side of stagnation more than of


Ritual, of course, is sacred. It is the most meticulous
programme of action in pursuit of a holistic plan of life and living
which arises from a spiritual vision of Divinity. It is conducted
with unreserved commitment of will in faultless action, and
completed with total surrender in absolute faith. For this reason


( Xxlil )

yajna in Veda and Upanishad, is described as the highest human
action, “Shreshthatamam karma”. This view is accepted in this
translation too. But in addition, an extended interpretation of the
same view of yajna is incorporated and followed in the light of
Swami Dayananda, and also as warranted by the exhortation in
the opening mantra: “Apply yourself to the highest form of action,
yajna, in the service of Indra, lord of the universe, for the glory of
the human 18110117". The highest actions in the world of existence,
the creative evolution of the universe under the immanent
presiding presence of Divinity, and the total corporate action of
humanity for progress, peace and freedom, all this is yajna. And
this idea leads us to discover for ourselves and understand the
science, art and technology of participative living for progress,
from the individual level, through the social, to the cosmic, as
universal Yajna, human, natural and divine.


There may or may not be an escape from Sayana, but there
is no possible escape from Dayananda, and even from westerners
especially for the sake of caution and self correction.


I respect the western translators for their clarity and their
art of communication. In addition, I find that they did recognise
that the ideal way to interpret and explain the Sanskrit words of
Indian scriptures such as Vedas was to trace back every word to
its root, deconstruct and reconstruct it with the addition of the
affixes, and then structurally explain its meaning. That precisely
was the approach of Yaska, Panini, Patanjali and Swami
Dayananda. Monier Williams, author of the well known Sanskrit
English Dictionary, himself admired the Indians for their scientific
approach to language, specially Sanskrit:


“TI draw attention at the very threshold to the fact that
the Hindus are perhaps the only nation, except for the Greeks,
who have investigated, independently and in a truly scientific
manner, the general laws which govern the evolution of


He continues in relation to Sanskrit: “The synthetical
process which comes into operation in the working of those laws
may be well called Samskarana, ‘putting together’, by which I
mean that every single word in the highest type of language (called


( Xxiv )


Sanskrita) is first evolved out of a primary ‘Dhatu’—a Sanskrit
term usually translated as ‘Root’, but applicable to any primordial
constituent substance, whether of words, or rocks, or living
organisms, and then, being so evolved, goes through a process of
‘putting together’ by the combination of other elementary
of the evolution, structure and dynamics of the world of reality,
and Veda as articulation of the reality of existence. |


“Furthermore, the process of ‘putting together’ implies,
of course, the possibility of a converse process of vyakarana. by
which I mean ‘undoing’ or decomposition (deconstruction), that
is to say, the resolution of every root-evolved word into its
component elements. So that in endeavouring to exhibit these
processes of synthesis and analysis, we appear to be engaged,
like a chemist, in combining elementary substances into solid
forms, and again in resolving these forms into their constituent
ingredients.” (p. xii). And in respect of this special character,
Sanskrit, he says, is a different language from the Semitic
languages (of which the Bible and the Quran are expressions).


And yet, in spite of this clear understanding of Sanskrit,
an Arsha dictionary remained with him only “a beautiful
philological dream, a dream, however, which could not receive
practical shape without raising the Lexicon to a level of scientific
perfection unsuited to the needs of ordinary students.” (p. x1i1)


Why unsuited? The answer lies in his mission and the
main object of his mission. The scientific way of interpretation
and explanation was counter to the purpose for which Monier
Williams was appointed Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford where
he occupied the Boden Chair after H.LH.Wilson who had been a
member of the Committee of Public Instruction in India under
Lord Macaulay as Chairman and Lord William Bentinck as
Governor General of India. And then English had been accepted
and introduced as the medium as well as the content of Education.


Monier Williams says: “One consideration which led my
predecessor (Professor H.H.Wilson) to pass on to me his project
of a root-arranged Lexicon was that, on being elected to the Boden
Chair, he felt that the elaboration of such a work would be


( xxv )


incompatible with the practical objects for which the Boden
Professorship was founded. . . The main object was really a
missionary one, as I have shown in the Preface of this volume.”
(p. Xi)

The object, Professor Williams explains in the Preface to
his Dictionary (p. 1x): “I must draw attention to the fact that I am
only the second occupant of the Boden Chair, and that its founder,
Colonel Boden, stated most explicitly in his will (dated August
15, 1811) that the special object of his munificent bequest was to
promote the translation of the Scriptures (that is, the Bible) into
Sanskrit, so as ‘to enable his countrymen to proceed in the
conversion of the natives of India to the Christian Religion’.


[Names: Surely]
following in the footsteps of my venerated master, I have made
it the chief aim of my professional life to provide facilities for
the translation of our sacred Scriptures into Sanskrit, and
for the promotion of a better knowledge of the religions and
customs of India as the best way to a knowledge of the religious
needs of our great Eastern Dependency (India). My very first
public lecture delivered after my election (to the Boden Chair)
in 1860 was on ‘The Study of Sanskrit in Relation to
Missionary Work in India’ (published in 1861)’’. (pp. xxi)


For any student of Veda, specially in India, in fact
anywhere, it is difficult to overlook the words of Monier Williams
in the Preface and Introduction to his Dictionary of Sanskrit, for
the reason that from translation of Christian Scriptures into
Sanskrit with a missionary motive, the translation of Sanskrit
Scriptures into English was but the next and ‘logical’ step
with that same missionary motive of conversion, one to extol,
the other to denigrate:


One example, of extolment, is the following translation
of the Bible, “The Gospel according to John’:




[Names: Yohana, Susamvadah, Ishvarasya, Yishor]
Jesus here is presented as an Avatara, someone a very God
for the traditional Hindu, although the Gospel does not mention
the incarnation at all. (The translation of The Bible in Sanskrit by


( 1)
J.Wenger is available on the internet.)


The other example, of denigration, is given here below
from W.D. Whitney’s translation of the Atharvaveda (7, 107, 1)
edited and revised by K.L. Joshi, published by Parimal




[Names: Publications, Namaskrtya, Meksamyurdhvastisthan]
“Having paid homage to heaven and earth, to the
atmosphere, to Death, I will urinate standing erect; let not the


[Names: Lords, Ishvara]
I give below an English rendering of the same mantra
translated by Pundit Satavalekara in Hindi:


“Having done homage to heaven and earth and to the
middle regions and Death (Yama), I stand high and watch (the
world of life). Let not my masters hurt me.”


An English rendering of the same mantra translated by
Pundit Jai Dev Sharma in Hindi is the following:


“Having done homage to heaven and earth (i.e. father and
mother) and to the immanent God and Yama (all Dissolver),
standing high and alert, I move forward in life. These masters of


I would like to quote my own translation of the mantra


“Having done homage to heaven and earth, and to the
middle regions, and having acknowledged the fact of death as
inevitable counterpart of life under God’s dispensation, now
standing high, I watch the world and go forward with showers of
the cloud. Let no powers of earthly nature hurt and violate me.”


‘Showers of the cloud’ is a metaphor, as in Shelley’s poem
‘the Cloud’: “I bring fresh showers for the thirsting flowers”,
which suggests a lovely rendering.


The problem here arises from the verb ‘mekshami’ from
the root ‘mih’ which means ‘to shower’ (sechane). It depends on
the translator’s sense and attitude to sacred writing how the
message is received and communicated in an interfaith context


( 3311 )
with no strings attached (or unattached).


This extolment and denigration was happening around
the time when the English language, English education and
missionary work had been introduced into India and was raging
on top. Swami Dayananda faced this challenge with boldness and
caution, still with an open mind, all prepared even for correction.
He based his interpretation of the Vedas on Nirukta and the
etymological principles of word interpretation, and interpretation
of the word in the context, both local and total, because the local
is an integral part of the total whole.


We are living in an age of science and reason, democracy
and freedom, globalism and global communication, and we feel
the need for a free and frank interfaith dialogue. In such an age,
ritualism and mythology is not enough. If we want to understand
and present Veda as a body of universal knowledge and articulation
of divine awareness of existence, there is no escape from Yaska,
Panini, Patanjali, Dayananda and Aurobindo, because they provide
the key principles and practice of scientific interpretation of an
ancient scientific language such as Vedic Sanskrit which has no
historical parallel for comparison. The language of science tells
no stories, no myths. It states the truth pure and simple. Hence
the resort to Swami Dayananda, either before or after Sayana and
the western scholars, is indispensable.


There is one observation I must make on Swami
orientation to the Vedic mantras because he underscores the
relevance of the Vedas to the social, economic and political
situation of humanity, especially in India, which was necessary
and highly meaningful. For example, the Ashwins, in general,
are the complementary powers of nature and humanity working
as twin forces like the positive and negative currents of electricity,
or like the theoretician and the laboratory man, or the curative
and recuperative powers of medicine and nature’s powers of
rejuvenation. Swami Dayananda often explains such powers in
the interest of practical understanding: he defines them as teacher
and preacher, or father and mother, sun and moon, fire and water,
prana and Apana energy, ruler and council, scientist and engineer,
and so on, depending on the mantra context. Sometimes it appears



as if he is delimiting the open-ended general meaning of the Veda.
But we should be careful before we say so, and realise that the
definiteness of his meaning is illustrative and in no way
exhaustive. In this translation such situations have been
appreciated and the meaning has been kept open ended, inclusive
of the meanings given by Swami Dayananda, as suggested by
Yaska and the etymology of the terms. In short, this translation
has been done with cautious reference to Sayana, under the
guidance of Swami Dayananda, with respect for Pundit
Satavalekara and with very careful observance of the western


Pundit Satavalekara comes in between Sayana and swami
Dayananda for his excellent syntactic structures of mantra
meanings in continuous Hindi. But he explains words such as
[Names: Indra, Agni, Ashwins, Vrtra, Trita, Bhujyu, Kashyapa, Jamadagni]
etc. as proper names so that the mantra appears to be a mythical
or historical statement of either fact or fiction. But Swami
Dayananda interprets these terms in the yaugic manner and
explains them as scientific terms of the forms, functions, orders
and attributes of the powers of existence representing the
manifestive diversity of one Divinity and one Prakrti in the state
of objective existence. These words are not historical names,
because the time context of the creation of the Vedas remains
unknown beyond history and imagination as even Max Muller
confessed in his Gifford lectures in 1890.


This translation respects the entire tradition of Vedic
interpretation, and under the guidance of this tradition takes Vedic
interpretation to the original level of scientific rationality in the
context of modern consciousness, modern language and global
culture, a message both sanatan and, at the same time, modern


[Names: Atharva]
Take just one example of the problem I have faced, with
the solution I have suggested: Yajurveda (36, 23) says, if we take
the literal meaning in the ordinary sense: “May the waters, pranic
energies and herbs be friendly to us and may they be enemies to
those who hate us and whom we hate.” How can we accept this?
How can the same waters, tonics and herbs be good friends to us
and enemies to those we hate or those who hate us? Medicine 1s


( XXIV )


medicine after all. This is excellent stuff for a translator who
believes that Vedic poetry is nothing but the voice of a tribal society
in the barbaric, not civilized, state of social evolution. But let us
think deeply. What is the context? Who are our enemies in that
context? Who or what are those that injure us? What are those
we hate or want to injure and destroy? The context is health. In
the context of health, they are the ailments, diseases, germs and
bacteria, viruses, negativities and side effects of medicines in our
system. So the correct and scientific interpretation in the context
of health would be: “May waters, tonics, pranic energies and
medicinal herbs be good friends of our health and immunity
system and let the waters, tonics, pranic energies and herbal
medicines act against those ailments, diseases and negativities
which injure us, which we hate to suffer and which we love to
[Names: Moreover]
effects too aggravate the negativities and injure us.” This is the
reasonable prayer and health programme of an advanced society.
And then, logically in the next mantra, follows the prayer for a
full hundred years and more of life and healthy living (Yajurveda,
36, 24). Veda thus is food for thought.


In human terms: If a legendary celebrity can admire
poem written in flesh and blood”, how much more — infinitely
more— mysterious, inscrutable, apocalyptic would be the Cosmic
Poem (Devasya Kavyah) created in the language of the Ultimate

[Names: Vision]
Veda is a Cosmic Poem: the more we know, the more we


know the Veda, and the more we know the Veda, the more we


Indeed, every reader should stand before the Veda, every
verse of It in fact, as Arjuna stood before the Cosmic Krishna,
waiting and watching intently, for the burst of a thousand suns,
for the Dawn on top of the Earth, for the Revelation.


May the light burst forth, I pray.




( Xxx )


Introduction to Rgveda


This translation of Rgveda is meant for an average
English knowing reader who is keen to know:


What is Veda? What is it all about? Is it old or new?


If it’s old, what is its relevance today? And if it is
relevant, is it relevant to me also? Or is it relevant only to
some particular community in some particular country at


These are relevant questions especially in an age of
science, democracy and globalism.


Veda is Knowledge. The very word ‘Veda’ means
knowledge. It is derived from the root ‘vid’, which means:
‘to be, to know, to think, and to benefit from’.


So whatever is is Veda, the very world of existence
is Veda. The knowledge of the world of existence is Veda.
The extension of knowledge through thought and research
further is Veda. And to use that knowledge for the benefit of
mankind with the protection and preservation of nature and
the environment, without hurting any form of life, that is


Veda is knowledge, pure and simple, as science is
knowledge. Science is knowledge of nature as nature is and
as it works according to its own laws. In science, there is no
story no history. Similarly in the Veda, there is no story, no
history. And just as science is knowledge in scientific
language free from local colour and historical variations of
form and meaning, so Veda too is knowledge in scientific
language free from local colour and historical variations.
Therefore Vedic language has to be interpreted and
understood according to the laws and technique of its own
structure as stated by seers such as Yaska, Panini and Patanjali


( XxXxi )


and as explained by Swami Dayananda in his grammatical
works and his notes on Vedic words in his commentary on
the Vedas.


But there is a difference between scientific
knowledge and Vedic knowledge: While science is
knowledge of nature to the extent that man has been able to
discover it, Veda is the quintessential knowledge of all that
is, including nature, all that happens, all that we are, all that
we do, and all that we reap in consequence of our action. It
is the Original and Universal knowledge of the Reality of
Existence and the Ideality of our aspirations, covering the
facts and processes of existence, their interaction and the
laws that operate in the interaction. In short, Veda is an eternal
articulation of Omniscience, The Voice of God.


Vedic knowledge is classified thematically into three:
Stuti, Prarthana and Upasana. Stuti, praise, is solemn
reverential remembrance and description of the attributes,
nature, character and function of divine powers. Prarthana,
prayer, is an autosuggestive resolution to realise our
limitations and rise above those limitations by calling on
Divinity for aid and blessings when we have exhausted our
effort and potential. Upasana is meditation, the surrender of
our limited identity to participate in the Divine Presence.
[Names: Stuti, Janana, Prarthana]
and action (Karma), and Upasana implies total love and
surrender (Bhakti). In consequence, formally, Vedic
knowledge is divided into four:

Rgveda is the Veda of Knowledge, Yajurveda is the
Veda of Karma, Samaveda is the Veda of Bhakti, and Atharva-
veda is Brahma Veda, an umbrella, celebrating the Divine
Presence as in Book 10, hymns 7 and 8.

Rgveda is the Veda of knowledge revealed by
Parameshvara, Lord Supreme Himself. All the four Vedas


( Xxxil )


were received by the primeval Rshis from That Supreme
Divinity (Rgveda, 10, 90, 9). That Supreme power and
presence is One and only one, wise sages call it by many
names such as Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna and others. That
one Lord creates this wonderful world of many forms and
pervades it simultaneously (6, 47, 18). The creative evolution
begins from that and when one cycle is complete, the
involution ends up therein (10, 129, 7). The light of the sun
radiates from there (10, 37, 3), the streams of life flow from
there through the medium of five elements (1, 164, 3). We
too come from there and retire unto That when the existential
sojourn terminates (8, 44, 23), that is the covenant of man
and God. The truth of Vedas is eternal (5, 25, 2). Law is


Our life is a lovely sojourn of our active and
intelligent choice (5, 1, 2; 6, 15, 9) in the fivefold body (5,
47,5), or outside the body (1, 164, 30), in a homely paradise
on earth (6, 120, 3), or in a fools paradise (9, 64, 20-1).
Therefore the one basic commandment of Vedas is “Be man’,
intelligent human being (10, 53, 6), be a visionary which
you ought to be (1, 31, 6), in the category of Deva, godliness
(1, 68, 2), remembering fully well that each one comes alone
for a short time (10, 97, 5), to live in a house of clay (8, 44,
23) which is not our ultimate destination. Therefore our self-
fulfilment lies through breaking the threefold bonds of body,
mind and spiritual ignorance (1, 24, 15), rise beyond the
darkness and reach the light Divine (1, 50, 10). The Light is
our real potential as children of Immortality, unhurt,

Rgveda begins with an invocation and prayer to
Agni, Lord of light and energy, giver of life and light, the
first, original and ultimate High-priest of the yajna of creative
evolution and ends with a prayer to Agni for the gift of the



fragrance and nectar of yajnic life from the vedi of
the earth. It exhorts humanity to live together in creative and
cooperative unity, to act and move together, to speak together,
and to think together for a united decision and common
achievement, knowing each other’s mind in harmony in the
same tradition as the ancient wise followed in the
performance of Dharma.


Rgveda gives a clear picture of the socio-political
and economic organisation of humanity from the local to the
international level. The Vedic word for a brilliant,
enlightened, sovereign republic is Swarajya (3, 49, 2; 3, 46,
1; 3, 45,5; 1, 36, 7). The word for such an organisation is
Rashtra. For such a Rashtra, efforts have to be made (1, 80,9),
there should be three assemblies: the Executive, Legislature,
the Law and Order and Defence forces (3, 38, 6), and the
Educational Authority. The ruler and the assemblies have to
be elected by the people from amongst the educated and
socially dedicated people (Atharva, 3, 4, 2). Yajurveda and
Atharva- Veda provide further details. The Vedic ideal of any
human organisation and its law is that the organisation, in
order to be just, creative, productive and egalitarian, must be


The universe, the social system too, is a Purusha, a
person (10, 90,2) of which the intellectual is the spokesman
of values, of knowledge, rectitude and piety, the law and
order and defence forces are the guards, the produces are
providers, and the ancillary services are assistants, all
governed by law which should be a human version of Rtam,
the law of Nature and Divinity governing the universe.


There are many other Themes as prayers to
Parameshvara, divine attributes of the forces of Nature,
attributes, potential and limitations of the individual soul,


( Xxxiv )


life and death, individual freedom, marriage and family life,
free social mobility under the Verna-Ashrama Dharma based
on merit, precreation stage of existence (10, 129, 1-7) which
was the Zero state which we can describe neither as existence
nor as non-existence: There ‘was’ or, may be, there ‘was not’:


It was the state of Zero Absolute,
The Hour beyond the hour.

Darkness beyond the dark.

Silence, mother of speech,

Void, mother of space and time,
THAT One beyond the name,

[Names: Breathing, Ever]
The flow consumed in the point of no dimensions


[Names: Potential, Infinity]
This is Vision beyond the vision of mind, the mystery
of Rgveda.


Between this point of Potential Infinity for creation
and the time of cosmic dissolution there is the evolutionary
and involuntary interplay of natural forces Agni, Indra, Soma,
[Names: Pusha, Vaishvanara, Ashvins, Savita, Maruts, Sarasvati, Marut, Ashvin]
heaven and earth, and the social dynamics of humanity for
four billion and three hundred and twenty million years, a
drama of infinite variety, ultimately all sucked in into the
mysterious Black Hole, and then the breath out, back again.


So, says Rgveda, be good, do good, and make the


Samaveda is Bhaktiveda in song, a symphony of




Veda mantras chiefly from Rgveda in celebration of the Truth,
Beauty and Goodness of life and the Power, Glory, Sublimity
and Beatitude of Divinity. It begins with an invitation to Agni,
Light and Life of the universe, moves to Indra, the Power
and Glory of Divinity and then to Beatific Soma, divine Spirit
of peace and universal joy, and ends with thanks and prayer
to All-listening Indra, All-embracing Pusha, inviolable
Tarkshya, and Brhaspati, Lord of Infinity, for the gifts of
peace, progress, prosperity and total well being.


Yajurveda is Karma Veda, knowledge of the
application of knowledge in practical living in a positive,
creative and constructive manner at both the individual and
the collective level. This way of living and working is “Yajna”’
which, in simple words, means a selfless and participative
way of living and thereby creating the maximum out of the
minimum for all, including nature, humanity, the environment
and the whole universe, with complete faith in the living,
Sovereign System. Living the yajnic way, we realise that
Nature is an organisn, a tree, Ashwattha, and the entire cosmos
including ourselves is a Purusha, and we as human beings
are but cells in this Divine Purusha. Without living this way
in a state of full awareness, we cannot realise that you and I,
Mother Nature and the Supreme Brahma are all together,
one in union and communion.


Vedic knowledge then is the Divine knowledge of
existence from the dimensionless point and particle unto
Infinity. And prayerful living and communion in meditation
and yoga means: Self-integration of the particle, Re-
integration of the part with the whole, and Re-Union of the
finite with the Infinite.


This is the climactic close of Yajurveda: The light
and life that shines in and beyond the sun is that Supreme


( XXXvi )


Purusha. That is there, and that is here, in me too.


Om is the saviour. Om is Bramha. Bramha is Infinite,


[Names: Sublime]
The message of Yajurveda begins with the rousing
divine call to live: “Be vibrant as the winds!” But we must
be gratefully vibrant: “O Lord we pray for and thank thee for
the gift of food and energy for life, for the health and
efficiency of body, mind and soul.” All of us must dedicate
ourselves to Savita, giver of life and light, with devotion to
the highest, yajnic, action, we must not hurt the ‘Cow’, and
we must not allow a thief to boss over us and deprive us of
our creative freedom of thought, word and deed.


Atharva- Veda is Brahma Veda, umbrella knowledge
of existence both Murtta and Amurtta, concrete and abstract.
It is the knowledge of Prakrti, Mother Nature, as well as of
Purusha, the Soul, the individual Jiva as well as the Cosmic
Soul Brahma. It begins with a celebrative description of the
thrice-seven variant evolutes of Prakrti and a prayer to
Vachaspati, Lord of Nature and the Word of Knowledge, to
bless us with strength, energy, intelligence and knowledge
emanating from those thrice-seven forms of the world of
Nature and Spirit. It covers the world of humanity from the
individual to the total collective personality of humanity,
including social structures from the family, community and
the nation up to the international United Nations. It pays
homage to Divinity, Jyeshtha Brahma, Supreme Presiding
Spirit and Power, immanent and transcendent, which creates
and sustains and winds up the world of existence in each
cycle of creation, eternally (10, 7-8, and 19, 6). Towards the
end Atharva-Veda pays homage to Brahma and Mother Veda
with thanks for the gifts of good health and full age, vibrant
achievement and divine lustre of life. These are the gifts of


( XXXvil )


Vedic knowledge in life, and when one cycle of
existence reaches the hour of completion, the Mother
Knowledge returns to her eternal and Original abode,
Jyeshtha Brahma Itself, the mighty, mysterious, awful Silence,
impenetrable Darkness, Smaller than the smallest
conceivable, yet Greater than the greatest imaginable, the
Original and Ultimate Home of all that matter, energy, thought
and Speech is, beyond time and space.


As you open the text of Rg- Veda, you find the words:
Agni, Madhucchanda Rshi. ‘Devata’ here means the subject
which is dealt with in the mantra. ‘Devata’ as a Vedic term
means a presence, a power, a force, which is brilliant,
illuminative, and generous. The “Devata’ of a mantra may
be God, the One Sacchidananda Brahma as in the closing
mantra quoted above, or Savita, the same One self-refulgent
God as in the opening mantra of Yajurveda, or it can be a
generous divine power of Nature such as the sun, moon, earth;
or it can be a noble person of brilliant quality of nature,
character and performance as a ruler, leader, commander,
teacher, etc. What the ‘Devata’ means in any particular mantra
depends on the total context that emerges from the mantra in
its thematic environment of the hymn.


Madhucchanda is the Rshi of the opening mantra.
The Rshi in the Arsha tradition is not the author of the mantra,
Rshi is the exponent of the meaning of the mantra. As
Maharshi Yaska says in the Nirukta, Rshis are the ‘seers of
the mantras: they are the sages who went into deep meditation
unto the universal frequency of the Cosmic Mind and
experienced the voice of Divinity speaking in the mantra,
the mantra, a semantic correspondence of the Divine Voice,
the Divine Voice, a sound correspondence of Divine
Awareness of the Reality of Existence in the modes of Being
and Becoming.


( XXXVili )

Who then is the poet of the Vedas? The answer is in
Yajurveda 40, 8: That Cosmic Spirit which pervades and rules
every moving particle in the moving universe is “the poet,
thinker, all-comprehending, and self-existent”. That is the
Lord who creates the world of existence, ordains the Laws
of its dynamics, and reveals the poetry of its beauty and
majesty, the Vedas. “From that Lord of universal yajna were
born the Rks and Samans. From Him were born the Chhandas
of Atharva-veda and from Him were born the Yajus”,
(Yajurveda 31, 7). The Vedic lore comes in Pura-kalpa, the
beginning of the world of humanity (Shvetashvataropanishad,
6, 22) and when its function is over at the end of the kalpa,
one cycle of existence, it retires into Brahma-loka (Atharva-
veda 19, 71, 1).


The Vedas were revealed by the Lord Omniscient to
four primeval Rshis: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to Vayu,
Samaveda to Aditya, and Atharva-veda to Angira, directly in
their spiritual consciousness. The Sage Brahma received and
collected the four from them and passed them on to other
sages.


When were the Vedas revealed? What is their age?
How old are they? As old as the age of humanity on earth.
The Lord who creates humanity leaves them not to nature
like animals. He enlightens them with the knowledge of
existence and their place in the world with the vision of their
journey and its culmination. Swami Dayananda works out
the age of the Vedas on the basis of Surya Siddhanta which
in the year 2010 A.D. comes to 1,96,08,53,110 years.


If someone does not accept it and insists on historical
proof, let us listen to Max Muller from whom we learn of
the problem of the date or dates but with no possibility of
solution on scientific and historical grounds.


Max Muller is known as a world renowned Vedic


( XXX1x )


scholar and exegesist of the West. Max Muller once ventured
to pronounce a purely arbitrary date based on unproven
assumptions that around 1200 B.C. was the date of the
Rgveda. Later, he himself warned his students that “Whether
the Vedic Hymns were composed in 1000 or 1500 or 2000
B.C., no power on earth could ever fix .... Whatever may be
the date of the Vedic hymns... they have their own unique
place and stand by themselves”. Such daring presumptions
of western scholars about the date of the Vedas are exposed
by Graham Hancock in his latest researches, in his explosive
book: Underworld: The Mysterious Origins of Civilization
(2002).


Hancock first gives the range of dates accepted by
Western scholars such as Max Muller and Dr. Mitchiner, a
[Names: Brahmanas, Aranyakas, Mahabharata, Ramayana, Puranas]
“Amazing!” says he: “Whether starting in 1500 BC, 1400
BC or 1200 BC, the timelines, suggested for the compilation
and codification of the Vedas, all rest on the now thoroughly
falsified and bankrupt (and rejected) idea of an Aryan
invasion of India around 1500 BC”. He continues: “There
was no such thing as an Aryan race that spoke Indo —European
languages and authored the Vedas, there was no such event
as an Aryan invasion of India. ‘Arya’ does not mean a race,
it means a noble, educated and cultured person. So once the
hypothesis of the Aryan invasion is rejected, the structure of
the supposed dates of the Vedas and other texts crumbles
like a house of cards.’ And then he sums up his view of the
Western approach to the Vedas and Indian civilization:
“Almost everything that was ever written about this literature
and civilization before five years ago (i.e., before 1997) is


(xl)


Max Muller himself in his Gifford Lectures in 1890
had confessed that “no power on earth could ever fix” the
date of the Vedas. Even Mitchiner himself concedes that “the
dating of Sanskrit texts is a notoriously difficult problem”
(Quoted Ibid p. 131).


Who could then possibly speak the truth about
ancient Indian civilisation and the Vedic literature? Says
Hancock (p. 105): “Perhaps we are coming to a time when
ancient India will speak for herself again after millennia of
silence.” It was Swami Dayananda who spoke for India and
the Vedas in the Rshis’ tradition after millennia of silence to
correct the distortions of Indian history and redeem Vedic
literature and the Vedic tradition.


[Names: Science]
help, better follow the sages tradition, Surya Siddhanta, and
the daily sankalpa of the dedicated Brahmanas. And lastly
follow the internal evidence of the Vedas themselves: Vedas
are the Original, Universal, Eternal articulation of Divinity,
by Divinity, for humanity at the beginning of human creation.


[Names: Yajurveda, Shvetashvataropanishad]
Since Vedas are the oldest recorded knowledge of
the world, no one can guess how much time, even ages, might
have passed between the Vedas and the next work in Sanskrit.
If so, there is no other work in Sanskrit comparable to the
Vedas. Consequently the language of any other work would
not provide any clue for the interpretation of Veda mantras.
Vedic language then has to be interpreted on its own, and the
only key available for such independent interpretation is the
Nirukta and Nighantu of Maharshi Yaska, the grammatical
works of Panini and Patanjali, and Swami Dayananda’s notes
in his commentary on Vedic verses explaining the structure
and meaning of the words. Without reference to these bases
of Vedic interpretation, certain words have been given a very


( xli )


distorted meaning in other translations by Max
Muller, Griffith, Whitney, and even Sayana. The torch light
for proper translation today is the Arsha tradition followed
by Swami Dayananda.


The Arsha way is the only right way, the key, to
discover the truth of the Vedas. According to Shri Aurobindo,
Swami Dayananda alone, in modern times, possessed this
key to the secret of the Vedas. Interpreted this way the Vedas
shine in their essential scientific refulgence. As science is
pure knowledge, no story, no history, no mythology, so are
the Vedas, pure knowledge: knowledge of nature, mind, spirit,
human society, Dharma, the dynamics of existence and the
right way of living as individuals and as members of
organised society upto the international level. Even Max
Muller, though he was once committed to uprooting the
religion of India by his arbitrary translation of Rgveda, had
to admit in his Biographical Essays that: “To Swami
Dayananda, everything contained in the Vedas was not only
perfect truth, but he went one step further and, by their
interpretation, succeeded in persuading others that everything
worth knowing, even the most recent inventions of modern
science, were alluded to in the Vedas. Steam Engines,
Electricity, Telegraphy and Wireless Marconogram were
shown to have been at least in the germ known to the poets
of the Vedas”. In fact Shri Aurobindo in his essay on
“Dayananda and the Veda” goes even further: “There is
nothing fantastic in Dayananda’s idea that Veda contains truth
of science as well as truth of religion (i.e., Dharma). I will
even add my own conviction that Veda contains other truths
of a Science the modern world does not at all possess, and in
that case, Dayananda has rather understated than overstated
the depth and range of the Vedic wisdom (see ‘Bankim, Tilak,


(>)

The basic requirement of scriptural interpretation for
us is faith and intellingetial solemnity, not doubt and cynicism.
This way, if we want to confirm our faith in the scientific
vision of the Veda, refer to Rgveda 1, 34, 7 and 9 for three-
stage rocket chariot of the Ashwins, to 1, 36, 18 for Agni
missile, to 1, 37, 3 for winds and communication, to 1, 46,
10 for concentration of light, to 1, 52, 1 and 1, 36, 1 for the
science of missile defence and space-craft, to 6, 46, 11 for
missiles and war heads, and so on. The position of the solar
system with planets and satellites, earth’s and sun’s
organisational structure of the nation and the international
world, water and electric energy, and so many other subjects
are hinted at in Vedic verses. We need serious research to
work out the details. Had even Einstein read the Purusha
Sukta of the Vedas, Brahma Sutras and Sankhya Vaisheshika
philosophy, probably he would have found clues to his search
for Unified Field theory of the universe.


Beyond faith and intelligential solemnity we need
vision, potential Darshan of the Vedic Rshis. Once you have
had the vision of truth, doubts disappear and questions recede
into silence because, then, nothing shines but the Truth, and
Divinity Itself reveals It’s Reality with showers of Grace. In
this mood and in this spirit, I suggest, you start your search
for Vedic Truth and the Mystery of Existence.


Lastly, if the Vedic lore is as old as humanity itself,
what is its relevance today in the modern world? Ask yourself
other questions: What is the relevance of Galileo or Newton
or the Theory of Relativity, two plus two makes four, Swaraj,
the Vedic word for freedom and self-discipline? Truth is truth,
when the statement was or is made is irrelevant. Vedic truth,
if you find it convincing and acceptable, is relevant not only
for today but also for all time, to every person, everywhere.


( 31111 )


[Names: Yathemam]
Just as I speak (reveal) this auspicious holy Word of
the Veda for all people (without any discrimination of high
or low), so should you too communicate it to all people of
the world whoever, whatever, wherever they be.




( xliv )
DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION


[Names: Vowels]
a de aq r
() fi



[Names: Consonants, Guttural]
Palatal










[Names: Lingual, Dental, Labial]
= # ~ 1 1 व्‌ ४
cs)° 2S a


AUM




Mandala 1/Sukta 1

[Names: Agni, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Agnimile, Agnimil, Hotaram]
I invoke and worship Agni light of life, self-
refulgent lord of the universe, foremost leader and
inspirer, blazing light of yajnic creation, high-priest of
cosmic dynamics, controller of natural evolution, and
most generous giver of the treasures of life.






[Names: Agnih]
Agni, lord of light and power, is ever adorable
by the saints and scholars of old and modern times. May




He bless us with divine vision, knowledge and power
in this world.






[Names: Agnina]
By virtue of Agni, light and energy of the
universe, one advances in health and wealth day by day,
blest with honour and fame of the highest order of
heroes.


[Names: Agne]
Agni, lord pervasive of yajna, you are all round
protector and promoter of all yajnic acts of love,
compassion and creation. May the yajna advance and


expand among the noblest powers of nature and





[Names: Agnirhota, Devo]
Agni, self-refulgent lord of the universe, high-
priest of nature, poetic creator of cosmic yajna,
wondrous and most resounding, come and bless us with
the noblest gifts of life.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 1 3





[Names: Yadanga, Tavet]
Agni, life of life, surely you would do good to
the person who is generous and giving. Dear as the
breath of life, this is ever true of your divine nature.






[Names: Namo]
Agni, lord omniscient, day by day, night and
day, with all our heart and soul we come to you bearing
gifts of homage in faith and humility.






[Names: Rajantamadhvaranam, Vardhamanam]
Bearing gifts of homage with faith and humility,
we come to Agni, self-refulgent ruling lord of yajnic
acts of love and compassion, protector of the earth and
the environment and illuminator of the Divine Word
and the universal law, immanently growing with the
expansive universe of His own creation.








[Names: Sacasva]
As a father is ever one with his child in love, so
may Agni, lord of life and light and father guardian of
His creation, be ever close to us in love and benediction.
Father of us all, give us the grace of life divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 2
Devata: Vayu (1), Indra- Vayu (4-6), Mitra-Varunau (7-




[Names: Madhucchanda, Rshi, Vayava, Soma, Tesam, Srudhi]
Vayu, lord of grace and majesty, come, listen to


our prayer, and protect and promote these somas
vitalized as nectar and adorned in beauty.






[Names: Vaya, Sutasoma]
Vayu, lord of life and majesty, the celebrants
who know the time and season of yajnic ecstasy, having
distilled the soma nectar of life, sing songs of joy in
praise of your glory.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 2 5




[Names: Vayo, Uruci, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Vayu, breath of life and love, your voice of
omniscience resounding across heaven and earth
overflows like the mother cow for the generous yajnic
soul and gives him a surfeit of soma, drink of






[Names: Indravayu, Indavo]
Indra, lord of light, and Vayu, breath of life and
energy, distilled are these vital essences with joyous
experiments of yajna. They manifest and glorify your
divine light and power. Come and bless us.





[Names: Vayavindrasca, Tava]
Vayu and Indra, Lord’s powers of breath and light,
you vitalise and illuminate the objects of creation with
strength, energy and intelligence. Divinities of creation,
come and inspire life and nature farther at the fastest.








[Names: Maksvittha]
Vayu and Indra, divine breath of life and divine
light of intelligence, both divinities of nature, inspire
the objects of creation with the sap of life. So do they
invest the human being with spirit and intelligence and
thus accomplish their creative yajna of evolution.






[Names: Mitram, Varunam, Varuna, Mitra, Dhiyam]
I invoke, with dedication, Mitra the sun, pure,
generous and sanctifying, and Varuna, pranic energy of
nature, nourishing and immunizing, both divine agents
of cosmic intelligence and natural powers of human
evolution (in science and art).




[Names: Rtena, Kratum]
By virtue of the divine law, Mitra and Varuna,
sun and pranic energy, both extend the operation of the
natural law of cosmic evolution and inspire the human
intelligence to reach unto divine realisation. They both
pervade and energize the mighty yajna of the expanding





[Names: Kavi, Mitravaruna, Daksam]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 3 7


Creative, illuminative and inspiring, Mitra and
Varuna, sun and pranic energy, like the breath of life,
are universally pervasive and mighty potent, and both
wield the divine power of versatile action.


Mandala 1/Sukta 3


Devata: Ashvinau (1-3), Indra (4-6), Vishvedevah (7-9),






[Names: Sarasvati, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Asvina, Purubhuja]
Ashvins, fire and water, are powers of the Divine
for quick motion through yajnic science. They are
sources of splendour, food and energy, comfort and joy.
Men of learning and science, let the two be developed
in a spirit of delight and dedication.




[Names: Purudamsasa, Dhisnya]
Ashvins, divine powers of creative energy
working through fire and water, are wondrous heroic
achievers of mighty deeds with relentless acts of
scientific study and research. Rich and generous, may
they respond to our invocations and grant our voice of
hope and prayer.







[Names: Dasra, Rudravartani]
Scholars of distinction dedicated to divine
science, experts of natural metabolism, seated on the
sacred vedi of scientific yajna, working on the
marvellous powers of the Ashvins, fire and water, eternal
media of divine power, for the elimination of suffering,
let the gifts of divinity come (for the benefit of





[Names: Indra, Anvibhistana]
Indra, Lord Supreme of wondrous light and
power, come and bless us. All these sacred objects in
existence, created, energised and extended over spaces
from the subtlest causes by you are sustained in your
divine power.




Indra, Lord Supreme of light and life, meditated
by the pure at heart, realised by the enlightened, distilled
from the Veda and the world of existence by the visiona-
ries, come and inspire the chant of the dedicated yajakas.



MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 3 9




[Names: Sute]
Indra, lord and breath of life, energy and speech,
come fast at the speed of light, vitalise our songs of
praise in yajna and bless us with food for the body, mind
and soul.





[Names: Omasascarsanidhrto, Dasvamso]
Come ye, lovers of Om, lord creator and
protector of the universe, masters of light and lovers of
humanity, noblest visionaries of the world, generous
givers and benefactors of all, come and give us the
essence and wisdom distilled from life and literature.





[Names: Visve, Usra]
Visionaries of the world, generous givers, wise
scholars of life and literature, fast as winds and eager
as dawn for the day and mother-cow for the calf in the
stall, come to your own and bring us the essences of
knowledge and wisdom.








[Names: Medham]
Divinities of the world, unerring and unfouling
lovers of Omniscience, free from hate and fear, come at
the fastest and join the ecstasies of the brilliant fires of
the yajna of love, compassion and knowledge.






[Names: Pavaka, Yajnam]
May Sarasvati, goddess of divine speech,
mother knowledge of arts, science and divinity, come
with gifts of food for the mind and intellect and purify
us with the light of knowledge. May the mother grace
our yajna of arts and sciences and bless us with the light
divine.



[Names: Codayitri]
Sarasvati, mother stream of eternal knowledge
and divine speech, inspires the seekers of universal truth
and cosmic law and enlightens the admirers of noble
wisdom and understanding. The divine flow of light
and knowledge carries on the universal yajna of nature
and humanity.






[Names: Maho, Dhiyo]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 4 11


Sarasvati, mighty ocean flow of mother
knowledge and divine speech, shines with her radiance
of omniscience and illuminates the universal mind and
the minds of humanity across the worlds of existence.


Mandala 1/Sukta 4





[Names: Indra, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Surupakrtnumiutaye, Juhumasi]
Just as the generous mother cow is milked for
the person in need of nourishment, so every day for the
sake of light and knowledge we invoke and worship
Indra, lord omnipotent of light and life, maker of beautiful
forms of existence and giver of protection and progress.





[Names: Somasya, Somas, Somapah, Somapa, Goda]
Indra, lord of light, protector of yajnic joy,
promoter of sense and mind, come to our yajna, accept
our homage of soma and give us the light and ecstasy
of the soul.








Indra, lord of light and knowledge, come, so
that we know you at the closest of those who are
established in you and hold you in their heart and vision.
Come, lord of life, come close, forsake us not.






[Names: Parehi, Yaste]
Keep off the malicious maligner. Go even far,
farthest to Indra, lord of divine knowledge, love and
kindness, light and vision, experience and wisdom, who
is good and the best choice for you and me and your
friends. Go, ask, and pray.





[Names: Dadhana]
Indra, lord of light and bliss, may the wise and
visionaries who cherish the divine in their heart speak
to us. Let the others, ignorant, malicious and maligners
be off from here.





[Names: Syamedindrasya, Sarmani]
Let us pray and seek the protection of Indra,
lord of might unchallengeable, so that men of knowledge
and wisdom bring us the voice of divinity and even those


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 4 13
who oppose appreciate and speak well of us.






[Names: Emasumasave, Patayanmandayatsakham]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, give us the
secret of the speed of motion for the giant leap forward
in progress. Bless us with the wealth of the nation’s
yajna exciting for the people and joyous for our friends.






[Names: Asya, Satakrato, Pravo]
Hero of a hundred yajnic projects, having
accomplished the programme and having drunk the
soma of success, concentrate and consolidate as the light
of the sun and be the breaker of the clouds of rain, and
then advance and promote the wealth and defence of
the nation through the battles of progress.


[Names: Dhananamindra]
Indra, lord of light and power, hero of a hundred
yajnic creations, we celebrate your glory of speed and


success in the battles of humanity for the achievement
of the wealth of life and prosperity of the people.







[Names: Tasma, Indraya]
People of the land and children of Indra, sing
and celebrate the glories of Indra, lord supreme of life
and light, great and glorious, creator and protector of
wealth, saviour pilot across the seas, and friend of the
makers of soma.


Mandala 1/Sukta 5






[Names: Indra, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Sakhayah]
Friends and celebrants of song divine, come,
sit together and join to meditate (on life, divinity,
humanity, science and spirituality, and freedom), and
sing in thankful praise of Indra, lord of life and energy.


[Names: Purutamam, Purutama, Purunamisanam, Purunamisana, Indram]
Friends and comrades in study and meditation,
when you have distilled the essence of soma, life and


spirit present at the heart of things, then sing in praise
of Indra, closest at hand of things in heaven and earth,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 5 15
and ruler dispenser of the fruits of love and desire.






[Names: Gamad]
Indra, life and energy of the universe, is at the
heart of our meditation. That is the spirit and secret of
the wealth of the world. That is the inspiration at the
centre of our thought and intelligence. May that lord of
life and energy come and bless us with gifts of
knowledge and power in our joint endevours.





[Names: Yasya, Satravah, Tasma, Indraya]
Sing in honour of that Indra in the field of whose
power and force no enemies can have the courage to
stand in opposition and sustain themselves.






[Names: Sutapavne, Sucayo, Somaso]
All these bright and pure creations of the soma-
yajna of science and meditation, sweet and vitalising as
nectar-sweet delicacies of milk and curds (are created
by Indra through His light and wind energy) and flow
for the beneficiary, humanity, for their pleasure,


protection and promotion.






[Names: Tvam]
Indra, noble soul of purity and yajnic meditation,
hero of a hundred acts of goodness, for a drink of the
soma of Lord Indra’s creation, rising to new honour and






[Names: Somasa]
Indra, noble soul, high-priest of yajna and the
divine voice, may all these brilliant creations of lightning
speed be good and beneficial to you and humanity. May
they bring bliss and peace to you, prince of knowledge
and grandeur.






Indra, supreme lord of omnipotence and majesty,
the Stoma hymns of the Veda celebrate your glory. Lord
infinite of countless acts of creation, the Uktha hymns
sing of your power and action. So may all our songs of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 6 17


devotion and homage light up your presence and


[Names: Aksitotih, Yasmin]
Indra, whose omnipotence and protection is
infinite and imperishable, may, we pray, bless us with
this thousand-fold knowledge and power of science in
which are contained all the secrets of nature’s vitality.





[Names: Isano]
Indra, lord adorable in sacred song, let no mortal
hate or injure our body and mind from anywhere. Keep
off hate, violence and murder far away from us. You
are the ruler, ordainer and dispenser of justice and


Mandala 1/Sukta 6
Devata: Indra (1-3, 10), Maruts (4, 6, 8, 9), Indra and




[Names: Maruts, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Marut, Yunjanti, Rocante]
Pious souls in meditation commune with the




great and gracious lord of existence immanent in the
steady universe and transcendent beyond. Brilliant are
they with the lord of light and they shine in the heaven
of bliss.







[Names: Yunjantyasya, Sona]
Scholars of science dedicated to Indra study and
meditate on the lord’s omnipotence of light, fire and
wind, and harness the energy like two horses to a chariot,
both beautiful, equal and complementary as positive-
negative currents, fiery red, powerful and carriers of





[Names: Ketum, Samusadbhirajayathah]
Children of the earth, know That who creates
light and knowledge for the ignorant in darkness and
gives form and beauty to the formless and chaotic, and
regenerate yourselves by virtue of the men of knowledge
and passion for action.






[Names: Adaha, Dadhana]
Bearing the sacred vapours of yajna as is their


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 6 19


wont and nature, the winds rise to the sky, hold the
clouds in their womb, and after the rain carry on the
cycle with the sun-rays and yajna-fire.
[Names: Vilu, Avinda, Anu]
The mighty sun with its piercing rays breaks
down things in the sky, and the wind with its currents
after the sunbeams reconstructs and replaces new forms
of things in the sky.



[Names: Devayanto, Mahamanisata]
Just as noble scholars develop and brighten up
their generous mind and intelligence after the principles
of Vedic revelation, so do the Maruts, currents of energy,
intensify, magnify and adorn the sound that is produced
and heard.





[Names: Indrena, Mandi]
Marut, wind energy, is seen while moving
alongwith the indomitable sun, both beautiful and
joyous, divinities coexistent, equal in splendour by


virtue of omnipresent Indra, Lord Supreme.






[Names: Anavadyairabhidyubhirmakhah, Ganairindrasya]
The yajnic dynamics of nature’s currents of
energy, Maruts, so potent and effective, illuminates the
world and does homage to the Lord of creation with the
immaculate blazing radiations of glorious sun light.






[Names: Atah, Samasminnrnyjate]
The currents of energy, Maruts, travel up from
here, the earth, to the region of the sun, and from up
there down to the earth. And in this space they sustain
all the objects of the world and all the voices divine
and human.






[Names: Indram, Indra]
From here we rise to the sun, and to Indra, lord
omnipotent blazing in the sun, with prayers, with
homage and oblations, Indra who is greater and higher
than the earth, the skies and the heavens and rules over


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 7 21


Mandala 1/Sukta 7






[Names: Indra, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Indramidgathino, Indram, Indra]
The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra,
infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the sun,
lord of light, Indra, vayu, maruts, currents of energy,
and Indra, the universal divine voice, with prayers,
mantras, actions and scientific research.






[Names: Indro]
Indra, the omnipresent Spirit, Indra, the universal
energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy,
the bond of unity and sustenance in things, co-existent
synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of
positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the
thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year.






[Names: Suryam, Surya]
Indra, lord omnipotent, raised the sun high up
in the heavens for expansive light and vision. With the


rays of the sun, He forms and moves the cloud for rain.





[Names: Ugra]
Indra, lord of light and omnipotence, in a
thousand battles of life and prize contests, protect us
with bright blazing ways of protection and advancement.





[Names: Indramarbhe, Indramarbh, Yujam]
In battles great and small, we invoke Indra, lord
omnipotent, we call upon sun and wind, mighty breaker
of the clouds, friend in darkness, wielder of the






[Names: Sano, Asmabhyam]
Indra, lord of the universe, light of the world,
generous lord of wealth, irresistible wielder of power,
generous giver of showers, grant us the yajnic prosperity
of life and open the doors of freedom and salvation at
the end.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 7 23
[Names: Tunjetunje, Indrasya, Indras]
On success in battle after battle, follow songs
of celebration in honour of Indra, lord wielder of the
thunderbolt, and I love to go on and on with the song

[Names: Vrsa, Isano]
As the virile bull leads the herd it rules, so does
Indra, generous lord indomitable and ruler of the world,
inspire and lead His children to joy and freedom.



[Names: Indrah]
One and only one without a second is Indra, lord
supreme of the universe, the lord who rules and guides
humanity, showers treasures of wealth, and sustains and
ultimately disposes the five orders of the universe.






[Names: Asmakamastu]
For the sake of you all of humanity, we invoke
and worship Indra, the one lord ruler over the universe,




and we pray He may be with us in vision in a state of


Mandala 1/Sukta 8






[Names: Indra, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Endra, Varsisthamutaye]
Indra, lord supreme of power and glory, bless
us with the wealth of life and well-being that gives us
the superiority of action over sufferance, delight and
victory, courage and endurance, excellence and
generosity, and leads us on way to progress under divine





[Names: Tvotaso]
Indra, lord of power and glory, give us that
strength of life and character whereby, under your
blessed protection, we may hold back the enemy, evil
and darkness with less than a blow of the fist and less
than a dart of the lance.






[Names: Jayema]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 8 25


Indra, lord of might and splendour, under your
divine protection, may we develop, we pray, strong and
sophisticated weapons of defence so that fighting battles
of mutual contest we may win the prize of victory.


[Names: Vayam, Sasahyama]
Indra, lord of might, protection and progress,
joined as we are with you in spirit, may we, with our


heroes, shotsmen and missiles, challenge, fight out and
win over our contestants in battle.






[Names: Maham, Indrah, Dyaurna]
Indra is great, supreme and transcendent, self-
refulgent like the sun, extensive like space and more.
May all the power and grandeur be for the lord of justice
and the thunderbolt. May all be dedicated to Him.





[Names: Samohe, Vipraso]
Men of valour and heroism engage in battles,
men of knowledge and piety in learned gatherings and
in the training of youth.








[Names: Somapatamah, Somapatama, Urvirapo]
Indra, the sun, is the womb of life, it feeds and
promotes the life-giving vegetation. Just as the sea and
the space-ocean of vapours augment the waters, the wide
earth generates and promotes life, the throat cavity
sustains prana, and prana promotes speech, so does the
sun nourish and promote life, soma and joy.






[Names: Pakva]
Verily the divine voice of Indra, Supreme Lord
of Omniscience, is the richest treasure of eternal truth,
generous mother of the language of existence and great.
It is an abundant branch of the divine tree laden with
ripe fruit for the faithful devotee and yajnic giver.






[Names: Sadyascit]
Indra, lord omnipresent, omniscient and
omnipotent, such are your wondrous works and
attributes, such are your powers, protections and
promotions, of life, knowledge and happiness for a
person like me. They are ever abundant for the faithful


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 9 27
and generous devotee dedicated to love and service.





[Names: Samsya, Indraya, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Such are the songs of praise, adoration and
celebration of this lord of life, light and power, sweet,
enchanting and elevating, offered in honour of Indra,
creator, protector and promoter of life and its joy.


Mandala 1/Sukta 9






[Names: Indra, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Indrehi, Somaparvabhih, Somaparvabhi, Maham]
Indra, lord of light and life, come with all the
soma-celebrations of food, energy and joy, great as you
are with majesty, power and splendour omnipresent, and
give us the ecstasy of living with enlightenment.





[Names: Emenam, Cakrim]
Scholars of eminence, in this world of Indra’s
yajnic creation, come up for the sake of joyous humanity
and accomplish all those works of creation and
construction which are needed for its prosperity and








[Names: Matsva, Sacaisu]
Indra, Lord omniscient of universal presence,
light and vision, with joyous songs of praise and
celebration we invoke you and dedicate ourselves to
you as our constant friend and guide. Come lord, and
give us the bliss of existence in our yajnic acts of
creation.






[Names: Asrgramindra, Ajosa]
Indra, lord of light and splendour, the songs of
divinity reveal and manifest you in your glory, protector
of the universe and generous rain-giver of favours and
kindness. And I too, in response, celebrate your
magnificence and magnanimity without satiety.






[Names: Asaditte]
Indra, lord of light and glory, creator giver of
wondrous beauty, wealth and joy, infinite, mighty and
supreme, whatever is worthy of choice in the world of
your creation, grant us here and now.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 9 29





[Names: Asmantsu, Tuvidyumna]
Indra, lord of light and infinite power, guide and
inspire us on way to the wealth of life and divinity, zealous
seekers of love, honour and excellence as we are.





[Names: Sravo, Visvayurdhehyaksitam]
Indra, infinite lord of life and light, wealth and
honour, grant us a full life of knowledge and divine
speech, wealth of food and energy, great reputation, high
and inexhaustible honour, and the vision of infinity.






[Names: Asme]
Indra, lord of honour, wealth and power, grant
us great honour and knowledge, wealth and happiness
of a thousand sort, a strong economy and a mighty force
of chariots (moving on land and sea and in the air).








[Names: Vasorindram, Homa]
For our defence, protection and advancement,
we invoke and celebrate in song with homage, Indra,
lord protector of wealth, ruler of the earth, fire, breath
and other sustainers of life, self-revealed and honoured
in the Rks and immanent ruler and mover of everything.






[Names: Sutesute, Indraya]
Even if a person is opposed to faith in Indra and
is an enemy of the pious, but (on repentance) offers
sincere homage to Him, Great Lord and universal home
and haven of everything of the world, worshipped in
every act of piety, he is saved.


(11) The pious, and even the impious, if he
offers homage to Him, Great Lord who is the haven


and home of everything in the world, worshipped in
every act of piety, he is saved.


Mandala 1/Sukta 10




[Names: Indra, Devata, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Gayanti, Brahmanastva, Satakrata]
The singers of Gayatri celebrate you, Indra, lord
of song and joy, with the hymns of Sama-Veda. The
devotees of Rgveda worship Indra, lord of light, with
Rks. And the sage scholars of all the Vedas, O lord of a


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 10 31


hundred noble acts of cosmic yajna, maintain the line
of divine worship as the centre-string of the human






[Names: Yatsanoh, Tadindro]
As the sun-beams radiate with waves of energy
from one peak to another of a mountain illuminating
each in succession, similarly when a person rises from
one peak of action to another, accomplishing one after
another as holy duty, then Indra, lord of light, illuminates
one meaning of life and mystery after another for him.






[Names: Yuksva, Somapa]
Indra, lord of light blazing in the sun, protector
and promoter of the soma of life and joy, yoke your team
of sunbeams like chariot-horses, equal, opposite and
complementary as the positive-negative currents of
energy-circuit, beautiful in their operative field, generous,
pervasive in the skies all round, listen to our prayer and
advance the yajna of knowledge and action on earth.








[Names: Brahma]
Indra, omnipresent omniscient lord sustainer of
the universe and support of all, come in response to our
prayer, reveal the secrets of knowledge, let the light
shine in our heart, inspire us to proclaim, let the sacred
science of life and nature prevail, and promote the yajna
of creation at the human level for the earth and her






[Names: Ukthamindraya, Purunissi, Sakro]
Just as a man rejoices with his children and
friends and bestows lots of knowledge and wealth on
them, so does Shakra, omnipotent Indra, lord of wealth
and knowledge, rejoice to bestow admirable mantras
of elevating light of Vedic lore on the generous soul for






[Names: Tamit, Sakra]
We invoke Indra and pray to Him for friendship,
wealth and wisdom, courage and heroism, that Lord
Omnipotent, Indra, lord of power and honour, strength
and support of all, who has the power to give, to protect,
and to destroy sin and evil, He alone.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 10 33




[Names: Suvivrtam, Gavamapa]
Indra, lord of light and honour blazing as the
sun, lord of magnanimity as the clouds of rain, the
honour and fame given by you is open and brilliant,
transparent and free, even from a speck of dust. Lord of
generosity, open the doors of knowledge, augment the
wealth of the world, and illuminate the honour of






[Names: Nahi, Jesah]
Lord omnipotent and infinite, transcending the
expanse of space, the heaven and earth contain you not.
Dominant over the holy waters of the universe, ruling
over the noblest actions of humanity, liberate our mind,
thought and speech, electrify our sense and will, and
give us a shower of knowledge and wealth of life divine.






[Names: Asrutkarna]
Lord of instant and universal ear, listen to my
voice. Hold my prayer in your heart. Indra, it is the song
of a dear friend. Take me in along with it, cleanse and
sanctify my heart and soul.








[Names: Vidma, Vrsantamasya]
Indra, lord of love and power, we know you as
the most generous giver of the showers of blessings,
instant listener to our call in the battles of life. We pray
for the divine protection of the most generous guardian
and giver of victory, best and highest of a thousand other
modes of protection and redemption.






[Names: Navyamayuh]
Indra, lord giver of infinite joy, universal teacher
of humanity, come and taste the sweets of our divine
celebrations. Create a new and higher life for us, and
let a new seer and prophet of a thousand visions and




[Names: Pari, Vrddhayumanu]
yah.


May all these holy songs of the divine singers
from all sides celebrate you, sole object of the sacred
voice of eternity. May all the songs of love and worship
glorify the lord of eternal existence. May all these songs


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 11 35


be acceptable to the Lord and delightful and elevating
for us.


Mandala 1/Sukta 11






[Names: Indra, Devata, Jeta, Madhucchanda, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Rathitamam]
May all the songs of divine love and worship
celebrate and glorify Indra, lord infinite and glorious like
the expansive oceans of space, highest redeemer, higher
than all other saviours, sole true lord victorious of the
battles of life between good and evil, ultimate protector
and promoter of humanity and ruler of existence.






[Names: Sakhye, Ssavasaspate, Tvamabhi]
We are the friends of Indra, we are the fighters
of life and humanity. Indra, lord of might, never shall
we succumb to fear while we are under the cover of
your protective friendship. We offer homage and
worship to you, supreme victor, unbeaten since eternity.








[Names: Purvirindrasya, Yadi]
The eternal gifts of Indra, lord magnificent,
never fail, His favours and protections never fade, nor
exhaust, because the munificence of the lord of earth
and His bounties of wealth and honour always flow in
abundance more and ever more for the devotees.






[Names: Puram, Indro, Purustutah, Purustuta]
Breaker of the enemy forts, youthful, creative
and imaginative, hero of boundless strength, sustainer
of the acts of the world and disposer, wielder of the
thunderbolt, universally acclaimed and celebrated is





[Names: Tvam, Tvam]
Indra, blazing as the sun, wielder of the clouds,
you break open the water-hold of the clouds. The devas,
planets, seekers of the lord of light and centre-home,
moved round in orbit, hold on to their place in the solar





[Names: Tavaham, Sura, Upatisthanta]
Hero of generosity, drawn by your gifts of light


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 12 31


and grace, I come to you as to the sea, singing songs of
praise. Lord and lover of the voice of celebration, they,
all your servants, know you and they abide by you in
adoration.




[Names: Mayabhirindra, Viduste, Sravamsyuttira]
Indra, lord of supernal powers, with your vision

and extraordinary intelligence ward off the artful
opponent and exploiter. Your friends and admirers know
you. Listen to their voice and overthrow the enemies.




[Names: Indramisanamojasabhi, Anusata, Sahasram]
All the hymns of praise celebrate Indra, lord
ruler over the universe with His power and splendour.
Thousands, uncountable, are His gifts and benedictions,
Mandala 1/Sukta 12






[Names: Agni, Devata, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Asya]
We choose Agni, the fire, as prime power of




social yajna, which carries the fragrance of yajna
universally across the earth, the sky and even to the
heavens, and which is the chief creator of prosperity
and maker of beautiful forms.





[Names: Agnimagnim, Agnimagni, Havyavaham, Purupriyam, Purupriya]
We choose Agni visible and invisible, and
invoke it with faith and holy action, Agni which is the
protector of the people, carrier of yajnic fragrance, and
favourite of the wise.





[Names: Agne]
Agni, omniscient and omnipresent power, bring
us here the brilliant divine gifts of yajna for the pure at
heart. You alone are the chief priest and performer of
the yajna of creation. You alone are adorable.


[Names: Devaira]
Agni, purify and activate the libations lighted


by the fire which you have carried to the skies, and bring
them back home to the seat of yajna with gifts divine.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 12 39






[Names: Ghrtahavana]
Agni, brilliant and resplendent, fed on ghee and
blazing, burn up the jealous, the negative and the wicked
who destroy.


FAAS WANE: ॥ ६ ॥




[Names: Agninagnih, Agninagni, Havyavad]
Agni is lighted, generated and raised by agni,
universal energy. It is the creator of new things, protector
and promoter of the home, and ever young—powerful
catalytic agent carrying holy materials to the sky and to
the heavens across space, and a voracious consumer
(and creator) with its mouth ever open to devour (and
convert) holy offerings (to divine gifts of joy and






[Names: Kavimagnimupa, Devamamivacatanam]
In the holy acts of yajna, light, serve and adore
Agni, brilliant creator of new things of beauty, prosperity
and joy, illuminator and observer of the eternal laws,
generous giver, and destroyer of evil and disease.







[Names: Yastvamagne, Tasya]
Lord omniscient and resplendent, protector and
harbinger of the holy gifts and blessings of life,
whosoever be the yajnapati of service with holy offering
unto you, save, protect and promote.





[Names: Tasmai]
Whosoever offers yajna with holy materials in
honour and service to Agni for the gifts of the divine, to
him, brilliant power, be kind and gracious with blessings.





[Names: Sanah]
That holy purifying brilliant power and presence
may, we pray, bring us the finest gifts of divinity and
humanity, and endow our yajna with holy riches and
offerings for the fire.






[Names: Rayim]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 13 41


May Agni, omnipresent and self-refulgent Lord,
adored again and ever again with Gayatri hymns and
new versions of prayer, bless us with wealth, food and
energy and heroic progeny.


[Names: Sukrena, Socisa, Imam]
Agni, self-refulgent Lord, be gracious to accept
this adoration of ours with the pure and purifying radiance


of yours, this prayer and service offered with all our
sincere invocations to the generous powers of divinity.


Mandala 1/Sukta 13
Agni and others Devata, Kanva Medhatithi Rshi


[Names: Susamiddho, Hotah]
Agni, invoked, lighted and blazing refulgent,
creator and chief agent of cosmic yajna, universal
purifier, bring the divine gifts for us and for the yajamana


offering holy materials to the fire, and carry on the yajna
for ever.








[Names: Madhumantam, Adya, Agni]
existent and preserver of the body, poetic power of
creation and illumination, let the yajna rise to the heights
of joy among the divinities of nature and bring the
honey-sweets of bliss to the dedicated people of



[Names: Narasamsamiha, Madhujihvam]
I invoke Agni, universally adorable lord of light
and life, in my heart, and kindle the fire in this dear
auspicious yajna with offerings of holy materials to be
tasted and consumed by the honey flames of fire for the
good of the people.



[Names: Agne]
Agni, invoked, lighted and honoured by all, you
are the lord and agent of yajna for the benefit of
humanity. Come and bring the best powers and divinities
of nature in the most comfortable chariot.



[Names: Strnita, Yatramrtasya]
Men of science and wisdom, cover the sacred


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 13 43


grass of yajna sprinkled with holy water, reach the skies
pregnant with the waters of space, and there you will
have a vision of nectar.






[Names: Srayantamrtavrdho]
Scholars of science, servants of eternal truth who
extend the bounds of knowledge, open the holy doors
of inexhaustible light, the yajna must be performed to-
day.






[Names: Naktosasa, Idam]
I invoke the glorious dawn and the deep-
soothing night, both beautiful and elevating, and invite
them to come and grace this holy seat of yajna.






[Names: Yajnam]
I invoke and kindle two divine and visionary
priestly powers of yajna, fire visible and invisible,
energy physical and grace divine, both of beautiful
flames of light, so that they accomplish this socio-
scientific yajna of ours.








[Names: Sarasvati, Barhih]
I invoke three divine graces, brilliant and
blissful, Hla, eternal speech of divine omniscience,
Sarasvati, universal speech of divine revelation, and
Mahi, realised speech of earthly communication. May
the three come and sanctify the holy seats of our yajna
here and now without delay, without fail.






[Names: Asmakamastu]
Here to this house of yajna, from the core of my
heart, I invoke and invite Tvashta, first pioneer of all,
omnipresent lord of cosmic dynamics and maker of
beautiful forms of existence. May He be the sole object
of our worship.






Vanaspati, generous lord of love, light and
beauty, nature and the forests, create, produce and
provide the food for the divinities of yajna. And may
that creation, production and provision initiate extension
of the study, knowledge and awareness of the generous


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 14 45
yajnics who offer the libations.




[Names: Svaha, Tatra]
In the house of the devotee of yajna where the
scholars and artists perform yajna and offer libations of
creation in truth of word and deed with the divine voice,
I invoke and invite brilliant and dedicated scholars for
the performance and the extension of power and glory
for Indra on earth.


Mandala 1/Sukta 14





[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Aibhiragne, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Devebhiryahi]
Agni, lord of light and life, listen to our words
of reverence and prayer, come with all these generous
powers and gifts of nature for the protection and
promotion of the soma-joy of our yajna, and inspire us
to carry on with the performance.






[Names: Devebhiragna]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, the wise and




intelligent invoke you. Power of vision and inspiration,
they sing and celebrate your will and omniscience. Come
lord, we pray, with the gifts of the universal powers of




[Names: Indravayu, Mitragnim, Mitragni, Pusanam, Pusana, Adityan, Marutam, Maruta, Aditya]
Scholars of science and men of wisdom, study
and celebrate the nature and powers of Indra, universal
energy, Vayu, air, Brhaspati, nourishing and protective
light of the sun, Mitra, pranic energy, Agni, heat and


[Names: Pushan, Bhaga]
and prosperity, Adityas, zodiacs of the sun vis-a-vis the
earth and other planets, and Maruts, the currents of wind.






[Names: Drapsa]
All of you maintain these assets, soothing,
inspiring, exhilarating, energising, honey-sweet and
highly strengthening of growth and protection.



[Names: Ilate, Havismanto]
The intelligent and the wise, pure at heart and
ready for yajna, endowed with holy-materials, cultural


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 14 47


and graceful, keen to have divine protection, adore and






[Names: Lord, Supreme, Ghrtaprstha]
Holy yajna, the flames of fire laden with waters
and currents of energy rise from the vedi and carry your
purpose to the skies and space. They are friends of the
wind to be raised and used by the intelligent and the
wise. They invoke the divine powers of nature and bring
their blessings to the desire of humanity for protection
and progress of joy and prosperity.


[Names: Madhvah]
Agni, lord of yajna with the flaming fire and
power, advance the scholars of yajna who extend the
bounds of truth and knowledge, give them a protective
home of comfort, and give us all a honey taste of life.

[Names: Madhoragne]
Those who conduct the yajna, those who are


worthy of reverence and adoration, they taste the honey-
sweets of yajna with flames of fire.






[Names: Akim, Suryasya, Suryas, Vipro]
When the sun is on the rise and nature wakes
up with the dawn, the holy man of yajna who offers
libations into the fire receives all the blessings of
divinities from the light of the sun there and then (and
communes with nature).





[Names: Visvebhih, Vayuna, Piba, Mitrasya, Mitras]
The Holy fire of yajna alongwith the wind and
currents of energy collects the soothing sweets of vitality
from all the quarters of universal prana and the light of
the sun for the benefit of humanity.





[Names: Tvam, Semam]
Universal fire, lover and sustainer of humanity,
you are the prime agent of the cosmic dynamics of life,
and you preside over all the yajnas of nature and mankind.
Pray grace this yajna of ours and help it rise to success.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 15 49



[Names: Yuksva, Tabhirdevan]
General power of brilliance, fire of yajna,
brilliant scholar of the science and power of heat and
energy, yoke the blazing red flames of fire like horses
to the chariot, and with the currents of energy bring the
noble divinities of power here.


Mandala 1/Sukta 15






[Names: Rtavah, Indra, Marutah, Tvashta, Agni, Mitra, Maruta, Varuna, Dravinoda, Ashvinau, Agni, Devatah, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Indra, Somam, Soma, Matsarasastadokasah]
Indra, power divine blazing in the sun, drink up
the soma juices of nature according to the seasons, and
let these essences, inspiring and exhilarating, abide
there, their home, according to the seasons.






[Names: Yuyam]
Maruts, pure and purifying powers of the winds,
drink the sap of nature according to the seasons, purify
the yajna of nature according to the seasons by your
powers of purity. Stay you all in your element, noble





[Names: Tvam]
Electricity, purifier of everything, generous
giver of things, receive and appraise the fragrance of
our yajna, drink the sweets of it according to the seasons
and give us the jewels, treasure of jewels as you are.



[Names: Agne, Pari]
Agni, universal energy of fire, bring here the
divine powers of nature, convert and fix them in three
orders at three levels, physical, mental and spiritual.
Beautify, beatify and sanctify, and drink the fragrance
according to the seasons.





[Names: Brahmanadindra, Somamrtumranu, Taveddhi]
Indra, pranic energy of air, according to the seasons
drink the soma juices of nature from the earthly treasuries
created by the Supreme Lord of the universe. The vital
relation of life with you is universal and inviolable.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 15 51




[Names: Yuvam, Mitravaruna, Rtund]
Mitra and Varuna, vital energies of prana and
udana, both versatile, formidable and committed to life,
pervade and endow yajna with power and vitality
according to the seasons.






[Names: Yajnesu]
Priests of yajna, keen to have the wealth of life
and spirit and soma, and holding the stone-press in hand
for the purpose in the yajna of love and non-violence,
worship the generous lord giver of wealth with hymns
of praise in yajnas of piety, science and technology.





[Names: Srnvire, Devesu]
May the lord creator and giver of wealth bless
us with treasures of wealth which we have heard of,
which we love, and which abound in the generous stores
of nature, in yajna, and in the products of science and








[Names: Dravinodah, Nestradrtubhirisyata]
The generous devotee of yajna thirsts for a drink
of soma, the wealth and joy of life. Listen ye all, perform
the yajna and be steadfast therein. Know the art and
secrets of yajna and create wealth from yajnic studies
of natural energy such as electricity, in accordance with
the seasons.






[Names: Yattva, Adha]
Lord creator and giver of the wealth of the
universe, we worship you, lord transcendent of the
fourth estate of spirit and existence, in yajna in tune
with the seasons of nature. Your devotees as we are,
bless us with the gift of wealth and joy which is on top
of heaven beyond paradise.





[Names: Asvina, Sucivrata, Rtuna]
Ashvins, twin powers of sun and moon, earth
and heaven, night and day, vested with light and fire,
committed to purification, carriers of the fragrance of
yajna, create and receive the honey-sweets of yajna
according to the seasons.






[Names: Garhapatyena, Devan]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 16 53


Agni, as bountiful master-power of home life,
you are the leader of yajna according to the seasons.
Carry on the yajna of the divine powers for the yajamana
dedicated to holy development of power and energy in
honour of the Divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 16




[Names: Indra, Devata, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi]
is A tva vahantu harayo vrsanam somapitaye.


Indra, light and power blazing as the sun, may
the rays of light, brightest and fastest waves of energy,
transmit your power, generous harbinger of light and
rain, to the earth for a drink of soma as well as the
protection of the joyous gifts of life. May the specialist
scholars of light and solar energy develop the light and
energy for the protection and prosperity of humanity
and the environment.






[Names: Indram]
These rays of light, laden with waters and
fertility, day and night, in the dark and bright fortnight
of the moon, and in the equinoctial and solstitial courses
of the sun, bring Indra, solar energy, in the most
comfortable chariot to the earth and her environment.






[Names: Somasya, Somas]
Every morning, in every yajnic programme of
body, mind and soul, we invoke, awake and develop
Indra, lord omnipotent of light and honour, Indra, solar
and electric energy, and Indra, energy of wind and prana
for the protection, promotion and enjoyment of soma,
spiritual bliss, pleasure and joy, and power and






[Names: Sute]
Indra, lord of light and honour, universal energy,
come to our yajna with the sun, wind and electricity,
with the rays of light and currents of energy. In all our
yajnic programmes we feel the joy of your presence and
offer worship, pray awake and promote your power and






[Names: Semam, Gauro]
May Indra, rays of the sun and currents of
energy, come to this celebration and yajna of ours and
drink of the sweets of this creative programme of ours
as a thirsty golden stag drinks of the water of a stream.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 16 55






[Names: Somasa]
Indra, lord of sun and wind, these streams of
soma are distilled on the holy seats of grass around the
vedi, and their sweets and fragrance rise into the skies.
These, O Lord, protect, promote and accept for the sake
of strength and courage of constancy for the devotees.






[Names: Ayam, Somam, Soma]
Indra, this song of celebration and yajna in your
honour, first and foremost programme of creativity, may
be, we pray, a pleasure to the heart and a source of peace
and solace. And now, therefore, protect and promote
the soma distilled, and drink of it freely with the gift of






[Names: Visvamitsavanam, Vrtraha, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Indra, lord of creative energy that breaks up the
clouds of darkness and releases the locked up rain for
growth, moves to the universal yajna of evolution for
the pleasure of created humanity, and for the protection,
promotion and enjoyment of the beauties of His own


creation.


[Names: Ssata, Stavama]
Indra, Lord of infinite acts of creative yajna and
joyous fulfilment, fulfil our noble desires and ambitions
with cows and horses, health of mind and senses and


the fastest modes of motion and attainment. Pious,
thoughtful and meditative, we worship you alone.


Mandala 1/Sukta 17


[Names: Indra, Varuna, Devata, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Indravarunayoraham]
I pray for the gifts and protection of the glorious
and brilliant Indra and Varuna, sun and moon. May they
be good and gracious to bless us with a similar state of
brilliance in our life.





[Names: Gantara, Dhartara]
I pray to Indra and Varuna, lords of fire and
water, both sustainers of mankind, to listen to the prayer
of devotees like me, come to our yajnic projects of life


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 17 57
and abide by us for our protection and progress.





[Names: Anukamam, Anukama]
Both Indra and Varuna, we pray, stay closest
with us and bless us with the wealth of life according to
our desire, intention and performance.



4. Yuvaku hi Sacinam yuvaku sumatinam.


[Names: Bhuyama]
And it is our prayer and earnest desire that we
be ever close and abide by the words of the sages, advice
of the wise and gifts of the generous.






[Names: Indrah, Varunah, Kraturbhavatyukthyah]
Indra (fire, sun and electric energy) is one of
the givers of a thousand gifts. Varuna (water, air and
moon) is one of the adorable celebrities. May our yajnic
projects of science and technology be successful and
worthy of praise.








[Names: Tayoridavasa, Syaduta]
By the gifts and protection of these two, Indra
and Varuna, may we succeed and prosper with treasures
of wealth and fulfilment, and may we ever enjoy an
economy of abundance and excellence.



[Names: Indravaruna, Asmantsu]
We invoke and adore Indra and Varuna, and we
enact yajnic projects to develop solar, fire, air and water
energy for the realisation of various and wondrous
attainments of progress. May the two divinities grant
us success in our desire and ambition for victory.



[Names: Asmabhyam]
May Indra and Varuna, we pray, establish us in
the state of noble mind and action and bless us with
peace, comfort and security.






[Names: Yamrdhathe]
Indra and Varuna, self-refulgent in the sun and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 18 59


moon, and lords of nature and energy, may the holy song
of praise which I sing, and the joint yajna of science
and technology you both advance and bless, may that
song and yajna come out successful and reach you as a
mark of thanks and hope for grace.


Mandala 1/Sukta 18








[Names: Brahmanaspati, Indra, Soma, Brhaspati, Dakshina, Sadasaspati, Narashansa, Devatah, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Somanam, Somana, Kaksivantam]
Brahmanaspati, brilliant lord of Vedic
knowledge, zealous for learning I am, born of learned
parents, kindly take me up as a disciple, train me as an
expert of soma-yajna, a scholar of language and
communication with a vision of the Word and meaning,
and as an artist and craftsman of eminence.






The Lord Supreme that is lord of universal
wealth and knowledge, destroyer of evil and disease,
absolute master of the Vasus, prime cause of creation
and evolution, power of instant action and beneficence,
may He, we pray, bless us with the knowledge and


wealth of the world.






[Names: Manah, Raksa]
Lord omniscient of the universe, may our
honour and fame never die. Save us from the miser and
the graceless man. Let there be no wickedness in or






[Names: Somo]
Surely that brave man never suffers any hurt or
injury whom Indra, lord giver of honour, Brahmanaspati,
lord omniscient of the universe, and Soma, lord of peace,
beauty and joy initiate and call on the way to action and
honour.






[Names: Tvam, Indrasca, Daksina]
Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient of the universe,
you, Soma, lord of herbs and health, Indra, lord of wind
and energy, and Dakshina, yajnic generosity, save and
protect that heroic man from sin who is on way to action
and piety on call of the divine.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 18 61






[Names: Sadasaspatimadbhutam, Sanim]
May I realise, I pray, and attain to the direct
presence of the Lord of the Universe, wondrous darling
love of the soul, with gifts of the divine and
discriminative vision of meditative intelligence.






[Names: Yasmadrte]
The Lord omniscient and omnipresent is the One
without whom no yajna, not even the yajna of creation,
can be accomplished, and He manifests His presence
directly in the meditative intelligence of the dedicated
soul.






[Names: Adrdhnoti, Hotra]
Sadasaspati, lord of the universe, then,
accelerates the offer of holy materials of nature into the
creative process and expands the holy yajna further with
self-generative libations till it reaches the noble
humanity and the divine presence emerges in the






[Names: Narasamsam, Divo]
I see like the light of the sun the holy presence
of Divinity, adored of humanity, most resolute wielder
of the universe, of infinite expanse and prime yajamana
as well as the home of the yajna of creation.


Mandala 1/Sukta 19






[Names: Agni, Marutah, Devatah, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Maruta, Prati, Marudbhiragna]
Agni, fire energy of nature, come with the winds,
you are invoked and kindled for the preservation and
promotion of the beautiful holy yajna (of the earth for






[Names: Nahi]
Lord self-refulgent and omniscient, come with
pranic energy and manifest into the meditative
[Names: Neither]
your refulgence and glory or your action which is


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 19 63






Those who are visionaries of the world inspired
by Agni and free from jealousy and malignity, only they
know the great worlds of the Lord’s creation. Agni, light
of Divinity, come with the vibrations of pranic energy
in meditation.

Light and fire, Agni, come with the winds and
waves of energy, Maruts which are awful and undaunted,
and which blaze and light up the sun with splendour.



[Names: Subhra]
Those are the winds blessed and beautiful, awful
and catalytic, dominating rulers of nature’s metabolism,
destroyers of evil and disease. Agni, come with the winds.








The brilliant powers are Maruts which abide and
preside over the regions of bliss in the light of the solar
region, and which hold, sustain and light the earth, moon
and others. Agni, come with those divine Maruts of light
and power. Agni, come and bless.





The winds which scatter the clouds and shatter
the mountains, agitate the seas and shake the oceans of
space, with those winds, Agni, come to us and bless.


The winds which, with their power, churn the
seas, and with their waves of splendour light the sun


and expand the space, with those winds, Agni, come
and bless.





I create and concentrate from all sides the honey
sweets of life with yajna for you as your first and only
drink of ecstasy. Come, Agni, with all the power and
splendour of the winds and bless us one and all.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 20 65


Mandala 1/Sukta 20






[Names: Rbhavah, Devatah, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Ayam, Akari]
This song of celebrity full of divine treasure of
joy sung by sagely poets in their own voice leads to a
new birth full of divine happiness.





[Names: Indraya, Indra, Samibhiryajiiamdsata]
Those sagely scholars who study and analyse
the subtleties of motion and gravitation with their mind
and speech, and with scientific apparatuses actualise
the power for use, in fact, extend the creative yajna for
God and humanity toward its fulfilment.






[Names: Taksannasatyabhyam, Taksandhenum]
Those scholars and scientists who create a
comfortable chariot of universal motion with fire and
water power create a language of immense possibilities
of knowledge, indeed a mother cow for universal








[Names: Yuvana, Rbhavo]
Sagely scholars, simple men of rectitude
dedicated to the secrets of nature and service of humanity,
searching, researching, joining, disjoining again and again
in experiments ultimately achieve speed and success.





[Names: Marutvata, Adityebhisca]
Ye sagely scholars of science and divinity,
dedicated and rejoicing together, march on with the
winds, with the speed of lightning, and with the power
and splendour of sun-beams.






[Names: Akarta]
When the scholars see a new work of discovery
or invention created by Tvashta, a brilliant sophisticated
creator of new forms, they advance the work further to
fourfold dimensions with the energy of earth, water, fire
and wind.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 21 67




[Names: Ekamekam]
May the sagely scholars create and provide gems
of wealth for us. Indeed they create the means of seven
kinds of joyful service for us, each with care and
laudable work, three ways in thought, word and deed,
that is, three kinds of yajnic activity of reverence to the
seniors, social cooperation and charity to be performed
by all the four classes of society at each one of the four
stages of life.





[Names: Adharayanta, Bhagam]
Brilliant and generous people, who bear the
burdens of humanity, who undertake and carry out their
part of yajnic duty with honesty and expertise enjoy
their share of happiness and rejoice among the divinities.


Mandala 1/Sukta 21


[Names: Indragni, Devate, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Thendragni, Somam, Soma, Somapatama]
I invoke Indra and Agni, air and fire. We love to
study and appraise their properties. They are the most
joyous protectors and promoters of soma, peace,
pleasure and prosperity of life.








[Names: Samsatendragni, Sumbhata]
All ye men and women, sing and celebrate the
qualities of fire and air in yajna, develop and illuminate
them in use, and glorify them in Gayatri music of the






[Names: Veda, Mitrasya, Mitras, Somapa, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
We invoke and honour Indra and Agni, air and
fire energy, in the yajnic projects of humanity for the
delight and comfort of noble friends and for the
protection and promotion of the wealth and joy of the
world. Indeed, they are the protectors and promoters of
soma, pleasure, peace and prosperity for all.






[Names: Ugra]
We invoke and honour Indra and Agni, powers
of air and fire, both powerful and brilliant, to come and
join this yajnic project of ours for the creation of wealth
and joy. May they come here, promote the yajna and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 69





[Names: Aprajah]
Indra and Agni, air and fire, both are great, both
protect and illuminate halls and assemblies and destroy
sin and evil and the wicked people. Enemies do not last
till the next generation if they be friends.






[Names: Tena, Sarma]
Indra and Agni, pranic energy and vital heat
energy, are ever awake in their state of real and constant
qualities with their blissful and beatific virtues. May
these two provide us with peace and comfort in a safe
and happy home.


Mandala 1/Sukta 22


[Names: Ashvinau, Savita, Agni, Devyah, Indrani, Varunani, Agnayya, Dyava, Prthivi, Prthivi, Vishnu, Devah, Devatah, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Prataryuja, Asya, Somasya, Somas]
Ashvins, twin masters of the science of motion,




come early morning to this yajna of ours and enlighten
us (on knowledge and application, fire and earth, power
and gravitation, and acceleration and retardation). Come
for the enjoyment, protection and promotion of our






[Names: Asvina]
We invoke the Ashvins, divine master makers
of the chariot, most powerful energies of motion, water
and fire, fire and earth, who can touch the skies.




[Names: Taya]
Ashvins, masters of the science of motion, with
your words of knowledge, power, energy and velocity


in nature, so sweet and so true, come and accomplish
our yajna of creation and technology.






[Names: Nahi]
Ashvins, masters of the celestial chariot,
wherever you reach by the chariot, even farthest to the
house of the lord of soma wealth, nothing is too far for
you.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 71






[Names: Hiranyapanimutaye]
For protection, love and progress, we invoke
the golden-handed Savita, creator, energiser, omniscient
giver of knowledge and awareness, light of the universe
and the supreme destination.






[Names: Apam, Tasya]
For the sake of protection, knowledge and
progress, invoke and worship Savita, creator of the
universe, imperishable lord pervasive of spaces and the
waters of life, since we all abide by the laws ordained
by Him.





[Names: Vibhaktaram, Savitaram]
We invoke and worship Savita, creator and
sustainer of the universe, giver of the wonderful wealth
of the world, and dispenser of the fruits of human action
and endeavour and to all. He watches from within and






[Names: Sakhaya, Data]
Friends, come and sit together, Savita alone is


our lord for worship and adoration. Universal giver, He
beautifies and beatifies His gifts of wealth and light.






[Names: Agne, Tvastaram, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Agni, lord of light and life and evolution, bring
home to us here those generous energies of heat and
light which warmly and profusely feed and promote the
life and joy of the earth and other sustaining powers of
nature, and bring Tvashta, that divine artificer, who
creates beautiful new forms of existence and promotes
life.



[Names: Varutrim]
Agni, lord of light, life and learning, youngest
and most brilliant creative power, bring home to us here
the beauties of the earth, fragrance of oblations, life-
giving sunlight and language of learning, soothing
nights and days, and the fiery speech of heaven and
earth for our protection and progress.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 73




[Names: Acchinnapatrah]
May noble and generous women of brilliance,
supporters and sustainers of their men, bless us with
great and comfortable happy homes and the wealth of
security, peace and progress.






[Names: Varunanim, Agnayim]
I invoke Indrani, light of the sun, Varunani,
coolness of water and soothing softness of air, and
Agnayi, heat of fire and warmth to bless our homes and
women with peace and progress, protection and
prosperity for the sake of happiness and well-being.





[Names: Mahi, Piprtam]
May the high heavens with their light and
energy, and the dark green earths with their sustenance
and gravitation feed and accomplish this holy scientific
yajna of ours and, with their support and nourishment,
bless us with fulfilment.








[Names: Tayoridghrtavatpayo, Gandharvasya]
By the force of attraction and repulsion of those
two, sun and earth, do eminent men of knowledge
receive liquid life on earth and move around in the
steady space of the universal hold of the sustainer of
the stars.






[Names: Syona, Yaccha, Sarma]
Dear green earth, beautiful, free from thorns of
sufferance, wide expansive happy haven for all, give
us a happy home of pleasure and delight.





[Names: Prthivyah]
May the scholars of light and vision favour and
protect us with knowledge of the seven stages of creation
from earth to Prakrti through which Vishnu, lord
omnipresent, created the universe (of five elements,
Virat and Prakriti).






[Names: Idam, Samulhamasya]
Vishnu created this threefold universe of matter,
motion and mind in three steps of evolution through
Prakriti, subtle elements and gross elements, shaped the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 22 75


atoms into form and fixed the form in eternal space and
time.


[Names: Trini]
Vishnu, universal sustainer and unchallengeable
protector, fixed the order of the threefold universe of
forms, comprehensible, apprehensible and spiritually
attainable, and hence the forms abide in and observe
the laws of their existence and function.
[Names: Visnoh, Indrasya, Indras]
Watch the creation and actions of Vishnu.
Thence the souls know and observe the law and
discipline of their existence. Vishnu is the friend and
constant companion of the soul.


[Names: Tadvisnoh, Diviva]
Heroic souls of vision realise the supreme


presence of Vishnu in their soul as they see the light of
the sun in heaven.







[Names: Tadvipraso, Visnoryat]
Visionary souls, celebrants of Vishnu, ever
awake, invoke, kindle and light up the spirit within and
realise that supreme light of Divinity in the soul.


Mandala 1/Sukta 23






[Names: Vayu, Indra, Mitra, Varunau, Marutvan, Marutva, Vishvedeva, Pusha, Apah, Agni, Devatah, Kanva, Medhatithi, Rshi, Tivrah, Somasa, Vayo]
Sharp and lovely tonics are these somas, distilled
essences of herbs. Vayu, vitality of the winds, take them
on as they flow and energise them as food for the mind
and soul.






[Names: Ubha, Asya, Somasya, Somas]
We invoke Indra and Vayu, divine powers of
fire and wind which touch the skies, for the protection
and promotion of soma, the beauty and joy of life in the
world, which we have been able to create.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 77






[Names: Indravayu, Sahasraksa]
For the protection and progress of the world in
a State of peace and happiness, scholars of vision and
piety invoke Indra and Vayu, divine energies of wind
and electricity, which move at the speed of the mind,
and which are givers of a thousand powers of sensitivity
and promoters of human intelligence and its creations.






[Names: Mitram, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Varunam, Varuna, Jajnana]
For the creation, preservation and promotion of
soma, peace and joy of life, we invoke Mitra and Varuna,
life energies of prana and udana in systemic circulation,
which are purifying, vitalising and enlightening for the
body, mind and soul.






[Names: Rtena, Mitravaruna]
For our enlightenment and spiritual advance-
ment, we invoke Mitra and Varuna, light of the sun and
motive energy of the wind, both guardians of the light
of truth and natural laws of Divinity, which, by that very
light of truth, extend the operation of that law in the
Lord’s creation upto the mind and soul of humanity.








[Names: Varunah, Karatam]
Varuna is breath of air, and Mitra, light of the
sun, with energies and all the vitalities and immunities
of human life and prosperity. May they both help us
rise to the noblest wealth of body, mind and soul.





[Names: Marutvantam, Indrama, Marutvanta, Sajurganena]
We invoke Indra, electric energy of nature which
carries the energy of the Maruts, tempestuous winds of
higher skies. May the electric energy, omnipresent in
nature and co-operative with the winds, bless us with
comfort and happiness in life.




[Names: Indrajyestha, Visve, Ssruta]
May all the divine powers of nature, of which
the sun is the chief, especially the winds blissfully
working in unison with sun-rays, listen to our invocation
and bless us with power and prosperity.



MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 79




[Names: Hata, Sata]
Working with tremendous force in unison with


the sun, the winds break up the clouds and bless us with
rain.


Indra, Lord of universal power and honour, we
pray, let no man of evil mind and dishonour exploit their
power and rule over us.





[Names: Visvan, Marutah, Maruta, Ugra]
We invoke all the divinities of nature and
humanity, and we invoke the Maruts, fierce children of
mother skies, all for a drink of soma — to celebrate our
creation of power by yajna and join our prayer for
protection by Grace.






[Names: Jayatamiva, Yacchubham]
Whatever good a person achieves in life is
achieved by courage and daring such as the force of
winds, or the thunder of lightning or the power of a








[Names: Haskarad, Maruto]
May the lights born of flashes of lightning spare
and protect and help us advance. May the Maruts give
us peace and comfort.






[Names: Pusan, Pusa, Just]
found animal, so the sun, lord of brilliant rays and
supporter of life with nourishment, lights up and reveals
the wondrous skies and spaces and lights up and moves
around the stars and planets such as the earth.






[Names: Avindaccitrabarhisam]
Pusha, lord creator and supporter of life, and
lord of light of the universe creates, manifests and
illuminates the wondrous universe of light and beauty
which was hidden deep but safe and secure in the cave
of the night of annihilation.


(The mantra also applies to the creation of the
earth and other planets of the solar system, in
continuation of mantra 13 above. It also applies to the
revelation of the light of the soul hidden in the cave of
the heart.)


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 81





[Names: Utosamahyamindubhih, Anusesi, Gobhiryavam]
And then, just as a farmer tills the land and
[Names: Lord, Creator]
for me — humanity — the earth with sweets of green
and the cycle of six seasons, cows and barley food.






[Names: Ambayo, Pracatirmadhuna]
May the motherly waters, protectors of
humanity, flow by the same paths, the flow mixing with
honey-sweets of the earth, performing part of the
creative yajna for us.


[Names: Amurya, Suryah, Surya]
And those distant waters which are close to the
sun, or which are in the sun itself, or with which the


sun nourishes life, may all those come, accomplish and








[Names: Sindhubhyah]
I invoke the celestial waters whereby the rays
of the sun suck up the vapours in order to create holy
materials for our yajna.



[Names: Apsvantaramrtamapsu, Deva]
There is nectar in the waters. There is health
and medicinal efficacy in the waters. General scholars
of eminence, rise and act fast for special studies and
appraisal of waters.





[Names: Apsu, Agnim]
Soma, the moon and the herbs, creates and
shows there 18 universal medicine 11 the waters for me.
And the waters, universal medicine, create the vital heat
of life which is the universal sustainer of us all.





[Names: Jyok, Suryam]
Waters create the best medicine for my body
for a long life time for me to have a sight of the sun,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 23 83






[Names: Idamapah, Yadvahamabhidudroha, Sepa]
May these holy waters wash off and carry away
whatever evil there be in me, whatever I hate, or
whatever I curse, or whatever false there be in me.






[Names: Payasvangana]
Let us to-day taste of the holy waters mixed with
vital juices. And whatever I have drunk, whatever I have
performed in action as my Karma, Agni, come to me
and recreate me with the power and splendour I deserve






[Names: Vidyurme]
Agni, Lord omniscient and omnipotent, recreate
me with power and splendour, with family, with good
health and age. May the divinities know me as [ am.
May Indra, lord of splendour and honour, know me,
along with all the seers of the universal eye. They know.




Mandala 1/Sukta 24






[Names: Prajapati, Agni, Savita, Bhaga, Varuna, Devatah, Ajigarti, Shunahshepa, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Kasya]
Who, which one, is that supreme lord of the
many immortals whose auspicious name we adore and
worship? Who is that for sure who sends us back to the
great earth so that we may again behold and be with
our father and mother?




[Names: Agnervayam]
We adore and worship the auspicious name of
Agni, lord of light and life, first of the immortals and
the highest. He it is who sends us back to this great


world of Prakrti so that we may behold and be with our
father and mother again.






[Names: Sadavanbhagamimahe]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 24 85


Of all the immortals, we worship you alone,
Savita, glorious lord of light and life, ruler of the regions
and favourite things of our choice, eternal protector and
adorable dispenser of universal justice.






[Names: Yasciddhi, Adveso]
Whatever your gifts of dispensation thus,
whether admirable wealth as a result of former adoration
and worship, or otherwise as a result of blame and





[Names: Bhagabhaktasya, Murdhanam]
Lord of glory, we pray, let us receive our share
of divine dispensation with your protection and grace
in order to rise to the top in wealth and reach the glory
of your presence.






[Names: Nahi, Nema]
All those that move in space comprehend not




your order and dominion, nor violate your power or
force or constancy. Nor do these waters and currents of
universal energy ever on the move surpass your
presence. Nor even the velocities of the wind can ever
violate the immensity of your power which is eternal
and immortal.






[Names: Abudhne, Nicinah]
The ruling lord Varuna, the brilliant sun, pure
and generous, radiates a flood of light in the bottomless
astral sphere over the atmosphere, flowing down, the
rays of light stop over the atmosphere and filter down
to the clouds and impregnate them over the earth. May
the rays of the sun, the clouds and the vapours absorbed
in the clouds be for our good.






[Names: Urum, Varunascakara, Suryaya, Surya, Apade]
Varuna, ruling lord of the universe, carved out
a wide path for the sun to move and thus created an
orbit-path in the pathless space for His deputy wielder
and sustainer of the sub-system, meticulously averting,
as if, a pinhole in the heart of the cosmic system, like a


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 24 87






[Names: Badhasva]
Glorious ruler, hundred are your healing balms
and medicaments, thousands your wide earths, and deep
is your noble intelligence. Drive off adversity far away.
And whatever sin is committed by the wicked, keep
away, and liberate us.






[Names: Adabdhani, Varunasya, Varunas, Saccandrama]
Those constellations of stars such as the Great
Bear set in motion high and far, which are seen at night
— where do they go in the day?


Fixed, inviolable are the laws and rules of
Varuna, rules of the stars. So the moon shines at night
and moves on in its orbit.








[Names: Tattvayami, Ahelmano]
Varuna, lord ruler of the stars, praised and
celebrated by many, I come to you singing in worship
the hymns of divinity, offering holy fragrances in yajna
with faith and reverence. Lord kind and gracious, give
us the light of life here itself. Let not our life waste
away.






[Names: Tadinnaktam, Sunahsepo]
Of that the wise men nightly speak to me. Day
in and day out they sing of that for me. And the same
presence this voice of the heart reveals to me. The sagely
scholar, inspired and possessed, proclaims His honour
and dominion. May the same ruling lord of glory,
Varuna, deliver us from sin and slavery unto light and





[Names: Avainam, Varunah]
Shunah-shepa, man of knowledge dedicated to
light and happiness, inspired and possessed by ambition,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 24 89


bound within the yajnic pillars of knowledge, action
and meditation, should invoke and develop Aditya,
power of sun and wind. May Varuna, lord omniscient
ruler of the world, shape him (as a maker and saviour
of humanity). May He, inviolable lord omnipotent,
deliver us from bonds of sin, ignorance and poverty.






[Names: Avate, Ksayannasmabhyamasura, Sisrathah]
Varuna, self-refulgent lord of omniscience, giver
of knowledge, life of our breath, we pray for the gift of
your light and favour with acts of homage, yajnas and
holy offerings. Reducing and destroying our sins as you
are, we pray, be kind and gracious to loosen the bonds
of our actions performed.






[Names: Uduttamam, Srathaya]
Varuna, dearest lord of our choice, we pray,
loosen the highest, middling and the lowest bonds of
our sin and slavery so that, O Lord Supreme of light,
free from sin and slavery and living within the rules of
your law, we may be fit for the attainment of the ultimate
freedom of Moksha.




Mandala 1/Sukta 25








[Names: Varuna, Devata, Ajigarti, Shunahshepa, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Yacciddhi, Varuna, Minimasi]
Varuna, brilliant and generous lord of creation,
since after all we are your children, and we do (out of
ignorance) violate your rules of discipline and conduct
day by day, we pray for your compassion as our father.






Lord of compassion, let us not feel excited to
take up a deadly weapon against the person who offends
us and excites our passion for revenge, and save us from
the wrath against the person who feels ashamed of his






[Names: Girbhirvaruna]
Like a driver who has yoked the horse to his
chariot, we control and concentrate our mind on you
with thought and prayers for the gift of your compassion


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 25 91
and grace.






[Names: Para, Vayo]
For the sake of my domestic good and well-
being, I pray, may those who are ill-disposed and
leave their nests and fly away.






[Names: Kada, Varunam, Mrlikayorucaksasam]
How shall we adore and pray to Varuna, lord of
universal eye and guide of humanity, for His favour and
grace, and when shall we realise the beauty and
prosperity of the social order.




===




[Names: Taditsamanamasate, Dhrtavrataya]
Both Mitra and Varuna yearning with love for
the man of the vows of Dharma and yajnic generosity
forsake him not, they abide by him constantly and bless
him with fulfilment.








[Names: Veda, Veda]
The specialist of the sea and the sky is the man
who knows the science and paths of the birds and planes
flying across the skies, and he knows the science and
routes of the ships sailing across the seas.





The man of the discipline of science and Dharma
who knows the twelve months of the year and the
thirteenth which is supplementary every third year, and
also knows how they raise the produce of the earth like
a father, is the specialist of time, seasons, fertility and






One who knows the course of the winds, vast,
abundant and stormy, and knows those that are sustained
by it, and also knows those that control it, is a specialist
of the earth and the skies.






[Names: Varunah, Samrajyaya]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 25 93


Varuna, man of brilliance and leadership,
dedicated to holy vows, yajna and Dharma, hero of noble
watchful action, would sit among the people with power
and grace and rise to the heights of governance and





[Names: Krtani]
And hence wide awake and all aware, he
watches and oversees all the wonderful things which
have been done and which have yet to be done.





[Names: Sano]
And may He, Aditya, imperishable lord of light
and omniscience, sun and life’s energy, lord of noble
and watchful action, keep us on the right path all days
and nights and thus bless us across a full life of total





[Names: Bibhrad, Pari]
Varuna, self-refulgent lord of the universe,
wearing a golden mantle (as the sun) shines pure and




shines all (covering them with the golden light of His

purity). All the tangible objects of the world abide in Him.



The enemies of humanity dare challenge Him
not, the jealous affect Him not, the proud can touch Him
not, Lord of light and universe since He is.





[Names: Asmakamudaresva]
It is He who bestows perfect honour on
humanity and creates food and water for us. It is He
who shines in glory over humanity and others in and






[Names: Icchantirurucaksasam]
As cows run to their stall yearning for home, so
do my thoughts rise and travel far and high yearning
for Varuna, Lord Supreme of universal vision, watching
over all, and my haven and home.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 25 95




[Names: Samnu, Hoteva]
Let us speak together again and again since you
give me dear sweet food for knowledge collected from
versatile sources just as a priest gives honey-sweets to
the yajamana for dispelling his ignorance with





[Names: Darsam]
For a vision of the Lord omniscient of the
universal eye who is also an object of world vision, and
for a model of the chariot over earth, air and sea, listen
carefully to these words of mine in a mood of patience
and forbearance.



[Names: Imam, Tvamavasyura]
Varuna, Lord Supreme of our highest choice,
listen to my prayer to-day, be kind and gracious. In search
of love and protection, I come and praise and pray.





[Names: Tvam]
Varuna, Lord of cosmic intelligence, light of the
universe who illuminate the heaven and earth over time,
we pray, listen to our prayer and respond.





[Names: Uduttamam, Avadhamani]
Varuna, Lord of Law and Light, snap our highest
bonds of the mind and loosen the middle bond of the
senses and the lowest bond of the body for real life of


Mandala 1/Sukta 26
[Names: Agni, Devata, Ajigarati, Shunahshepa, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Vasisva, Semam]
High-priest of yajna, yajamana, disseminator of
yajna fragrances into the skies, preserver of energy, put


on the holy clothes and perform this sacred non-violent
yajna for us.






[Names: Agne]
Agni, ever most youthful power of yajna, may


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 26 97


the chosen high-priest with noble thoughts and hymns
always help us realise the words of our prayer with your
gifts of heavenly light and joy.






[Names: Sakha]
Agni, self-refulgent lord of light, dearest yajnic
power of our choice, just as a father for the son, a
benefactor for the beneficiary, a friend for a friend
performs the yajna, so may you, we pray, bless us. (So
may we too perform yajna for one another.)






[Names: Sidantu]
May Varuna, lord of knowledge, Mitra,
universal friend, and Aryama, lord of justice, all
destroyers of sin, enemies and disease, grace the seats
of our yajna with their blissful divine presence, as may
the sagely scholar, our friends, and our dispensers of
justice, all fighters against sin, enmity and negativity,
come and take their seats on the vedi, sanctify and








[Names: Purvya, Srudhi]
Agni, self-refulgent eternal power of yajna,
friend of our forefathers and high-priest of our noble
creative acts of yajna, exhilarate, enjoy and brighten up
this friendly yajna of ours and listen to these holy chants
and prayers.






[Names: Yacciddhi]
By whichever eternal and extended holy powers
of cosmic yajna were the brilliant and generous powers
of nature created, to the same divine powers we offer
yajna, to one and all. And to the same powers is the
holy material of yajna offered for all time.





[Names: Priyo, Priyah]
May the happy, charming and venerable ruler
of the people, worthy of choice, be dear to us. May the
venerable people who offer yajna in honour of Agni,
eternal lord of cosmic yajna, and the leader of the people,
be dear to us.






[Names: Svagnayo, Svagnayo]
Noble people dedicated to the fire and
performance of yajna, brilliant and generous, as also


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 27 99


the motherly powers of nature such as the earth and
showers of rain, bear and bring for us the blessings of
our choice. We know them, and we honour and meditate






[Names: Mithah]
Lord eternal and immortal, by your kindness and
grace, may the mutual praise and appreciation of both
kinds of people—all subject to mortality, both average
and exceptional of knowledge and achievement—be for
our good.




[Names: Visvebhiragne, Agnibhirimam, Agnibhirima, Cano]
Agni, lord of knowledge, mighty of strength and
power, kind and gracious, with all these forms of heat
and energy, take on this yajnic programme of ours,
fructify our words of prayer, and bless us with the delight
of well-being.

Mandala 1/Sukta 27





[Names: Agni, Vishvedevah, Devatah, Ajigarti, Shunahshepa, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Asvam, Agnim, Agni, Samrajantamadhvaranam]
Agni, brilliant and illuminating power and
presence of yajnas from the homely agnihotra to the
highest programmes of humanity, like a tempestuous
horse of flying hair, we praise you and celebrate you
with homage and offerings of food and oblations.



[Names: Midhvan]
May our children and successors, travelling far
and wide with power and knowledge, be good and kind
to us and give us showers of wealth and prosperity.

[Names: Sano, Pahi]
May he, lord of light and knowledge, giver of
all joys of life, protect our life, home and industry from
far and near against any and every sinful person.



[Names: Imamu, Agne]
Agni, eternal lord omniscient, this divine
knowledge, blissful, sweet and musical in Gayatri and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 27 101


other musical metres, ever new and giver of new ideas,
pray reveal it to the sages and whisper it into our soul.






[Names: Siksa]
Lord of knowledge and power, in the highest,
medium and closest battles and businesses of life,
enlighten us and give us the joy and wealth of life both
material and spiritual.






[Names: Vibhaktasi, Sadyo]
Versatile lord of wide and various knowledge
such as analysis of sea waves and water particles, come
soon, you always give a shower of knowledge to the
man of faith, reverence and generosity.






[Names: Yamagne, Sasvatirisah]
Lord of light and power, let the man you protect
in fighting armies, whom you inspire to join battles for
knowledge and development, who protects these people
who have lived free since time immemorial, let him be
the leader, ruler and protector of the people and their


wealth and power.




[Names: Nakirasya, Vajo, Sravayyah]
No one is his challenger, no vanquisher of the


hero whose battle for life and humanity is worthy of






[Names: Viprebhirastu]
May he, protector of humanity, be the winner
of battle for progress with the horses that run fast and
reach the goal. With the scholars and sages, may he be
the generous benefactor and saviour of the people.




[Names: Jarabodha, Stomam, Rudraya, Rudra]
Hero of high knowledge and wide fame, create
and provide for every people and offer to adorable yajnic
Rudra, brilliant lord of justice and power, that wealth,
honour and celebration which is magnificent and worthy
of praise.



MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 27 103




[Names: Puruscandrah, Puruscandra, Dhiye]
May the yajnic science of fire, great, immeasura-
ble, universal delight with banners of smoke and flame,
call up and inspire us for the achievement of intellige-
ntial technology and creative power and progress.






[Names: Ukthairagnirbrhadbhanuh]
That Agni, divine protector and sustainer of
humanity, destroyer of disease with rays of light, mighty
brilliant, may listen to our prayers and hymns of praise
like a generous man of wealth and prosperity.






[Names: Namo, Yajama, Saknavama]
Brilliant scholars of eminence, saints and sages,
we offer homage and hospitality to great scholars, love
and hospitality to beginners, reverence and hospitality
to youthful scholars, homage and hospitality to veterans
of knowledge and wisdom. We do homage, reverence
and service to the noble and brilliant people and to the
divinities of nature as far as we can make it possible.
You must not, no one should, malign or uproot the
honour and reputation of the great and generous power


and people.


Mandala 1/Sukta 28








[Names: Indra, Yajna, Soma, Devatah, Ajigarti, Shunahshepa, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Yatra, Ulukhalasutanamavedvindra]
Indra, organiser of the yajna for development,
where the broad-based stone is upraised for extraction
and straining of the refined soma essences, there, for
specific treatment, take the materials ground in the
mortar, test them and proclaim your judgement.






Indra, where the two stones of the soma press
are intensely juxtaposed like the two gear meshes, there
take the materials fine ground in the mortar for straining
and refinement for the special purpose, take out for
testing and say whether it is of the right quality.






[Names: Siksate]
Where the house-wife teaches the methods of


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 28 105


sifting and mixing of the soma materials, there take the
materials ground in the mortar for the special purpose,
test and judge the quality and control.






Where they fix the churner and the cords for
working control as does a driver, there, Indra, take the
materials ground in the mortar for the specific purpose,
try and test and judge the product.






[Names: Yacciddhi]
Pharmacist of the soma refinery, whatever the
knowledge, technique and process that you use in
operation in every home, announce here itself the
brilliant results of that loudly as if with the drum of a
victor.





[Names: Atho, Indraya, Somamulikhala]
Lord of herbs and trees, the wind of your
achievement blows ahead far and wide, so then, for the
health and joy of humanity, refine and prepare tonics
and medications in the refinery for Indra.








[Names: Ayaji, Hart]
Worshipful men and women, heroes of the
creative battles of life, holding up their own yajnic
achievements high, enjoy the delicacies of life and good
health as the sun rays drink up the juices of herbs.


Men and women who are dynamic with yajnic
ambition, and experts of herbs and forests may provide
for us to-day refined essences of soma replete with


honey-sweets distilled by brilliant specialists of the
science.






[Names: Ucchistam, Somam]
High-priest of soma-yajna, come and create the
purest soma as prescribed by experts, hold it on in
special containers for vitalisation and place it on the
floor of the earth for Indra.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 29 107


Mandala 1/Sukta 29








[Names: Indra, Devatah, Ajigarti, Shunahshepa, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Yacciddhi, Somapa, Samsaya, Subhrisu, Indra]
Indra, lord of glory, eternal and imperishable,
protector and promoter of soma, beauty and prosperity
of life, if ever we are found wanting (for our acts of
rehabilitate and re-establish in a splendid world of a
thousand cows and horses (in a state of good health and
a sound economy of plenty and progress).






[Names: Siprinvajanam, Sacivastava]
Indra, lord of glory, giver of secular and sacred
wealth and well-being, protector and supporter of our
struggle for progress and prosperity, master of man-
power and great action, by virtue of the divine voice
and under your presence and protection, bless us to rise
to a splendid state of thousand-fold good health of sound
sense and knowledge and speedy progress in prosperity,
transport and communication.








Indra, glorious lord of vitality, vision and will
to live, eliminate the phantom of illusion and sloth of
body and mind which mislead and depress, and let us
awake and rise to a splendid state of a thousand-fold
brilliance of knowledge, generous prosperity and fast






[Names: Sasantu, Sura]
Indra, lord of glory, heroic strength and courage,
let adversities go to sleep and breathe out, let good
fortunes awake and prosper, and let us advance and
establish in an admirable state of thousand-fold wealth
and generosity, cows and horses.





[Names: Samindra]
Indra, glorious lord of justice and power,
upholder of truth and Dharma, discriminate and throw


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 29 109


out that brayer shouting his praises with that vile
intention of his and help us establish ourselves in a
splendid state of thousand-fold purity and truth with
wealth of cows and horses.






[Names: Patati]
The wind blows over the forest and clusters of
lotus, over and across the world and soars high with the
rays of light in waves up and down. Indra, lord of light
and winds, commanding the wealth of the worlds,
inspire and establish us in a splendid state of thousand
beauties, generosities of the cow and mother earth and
the speed of winds.






[Names: Sarvam]
Indra, lord of the world’s wealth and glory,
silence the wail of lamentations, crush the spirit of evil,
and inspire and establish us in a splendid state of
thousand-fold purity of conduct, free dominion over the
earth and meteoric speed of progress and attainment.




Mandala 1/Sukta 30








[Names: Indra, Ashvinau, Usha, Devatah, Ajigarti, Shunahshepah, Krtrima, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi, Sata, Indram, Indra, Mamhistham]
Just as strong winds carry the cloud for rain on
the earth, just as men dig the well for irrigating the field,
so you serve Indra, most generous and powerful hero
of a hundred acts of creation and growth, with each
drop of your powers and energies.



[Names: Satarn, Sucinam]
Indra, controller of fire, water and electric
energy, raises the pure ones to power hundred, and the
mixed and synthesised ones to power thousand. Never
does He or His power or the efficacy of His creations



[Names: Samudro]
For the creation of life’s joy and for the
development of food and energy for life, I take on these


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 30 111


hundreds of powers of Indra implicit in the potentials
of fire, water and electricity just like the jewels hidden
in the depths of the wide wide sea.






[Names: Ayamu, Vacastaccinna]
Indra, light and power of existence, this creation
is yours for sure. Just as a pigeon flies into the nest to
meet its mate so do you pervade and impregnate nature
to create the world of forms, and listen to our words of
praise and prayer.



[Names: Stotram, Vibhutirastu]
Indra, celebrated in the divine voice of
revelation, creator and guardian of the world and its
wealth, mighty lord of omnipotence, great and true is
your glory, and may our praise and prayer to you be
truly realised for our strength and joy of life.



[Names: Urdhvastistha, Satakrato, Samanyesu]
Indra, hero of a hundred great acts of yajnic
creation, rise and stay high for our defence and




protection in this battle of life. And we would sing your
praises in prayer with joy in other battles too together
with you.






[Names: Yogeyoge, Sakhaya, Indramutaye, Indramutay]
Friends together and friends of Indra ever
stronger and mightier, in every act of production and
progress and in every battle for protection and
preservation, we call upon Indra for defence and victory
for well-being.

[Names: Sravatsahasrinibhirutibhih, Vajebhirupa]
with a thousand ways of protection and progress of
prosperity and well-being.



[Names: Anu]
I invoke and call upon the Primeval Man, eternal
father, who creates this multitudinous existence from
the eternal womb of nature, the same whom our original
forefathers invoked and worshipped.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 30 113


[Names: Puruhuta, Sakhe]
Lord of universal love and choice, all benefactor,
invoked and worshipped by all, friend, immanent and


universal home, we invoke and worship you and pray
for light from the celebrants of Divinity.


[Names: Asmakam, Siprininam, Somapah, Somapa, Somapavnam, Somapavna]
Friend of friends, benign protector of the
protectors of soma, life’s joy, lord of the thunderbolt of


light and lightning, supreme deity of us all and of all
noble women, we love and pray for light and life divine.


[Names: Tatha, Yatha]
Protector of soma, peace and happiness, friend,
lord of light and destroyer of suffering, as we love and


pray to you for our good, so may you be and so may
you do for us.








[Names: Revatirnah, Ksumanto]
May our people, wives and children be rich in
wealth, knowledge and grace of culture, so that we,
abundant and prosperous, may rejoice with them and live
with them in happy homes in a state of honour and glory.






[Names: Rnorkasam]
Lord of inviolable might, yourself your own
definition, omniscient, instantly comprehending all that
moves, you manifest your presence to the vision of your
celebrants just as the one axle of two chariot wheels


[Names: Rnoraksam, Sacibhih]
Lord of a hundred blissful acts of the yajna of
creation, who by the prayers and pious actions of the
celebrants come into their vision and experience like


the axis of a wheel, you fulfill their love and desire
wholly and entirely.







[Names: Sasvadindrah]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 30 115


Indra, the eternal creator, with roaring, moving,
non-moving and animate things and materials, creates
the wealth of existence such as earth, gold and
knowledge and rises in glory. May He, lord of generosity
and dispensation of justice, give us golden chariots and
bless us with wealth of the world for happiness and well-





[Names: Saviraya, Gomadasra]
Ashvins, scientist and technologist of eminence,
president and commander, moving like the earth and
light, create the chariot with golden materials and earthly
comfortable provisions and take us to distant places at
the wanted speed with chosen acceleration and reach
distant places for our goals.






[Names: Samanayojano, Samudre]
Ashvins, generous and imaginative experts,
indestructible is your chariot of balanced technology
of velocity. It goes over the sea and soars into the sky,
at the wanted speed and acceleration, for the wanted








[Names: Nyaghnyasya, Paridyamanyadiyate]
Ashvins, on top of your indestructible chariot
fix a rotating machine, chakra, which will take it over
the sea and the sky. Fix another below, and this other
will take it over the sky into space, the region of light.






[Names: Kasta]
O Dawn, immortal light of the divine sun, lover
of divine songs and stories, darling of the singers and
celebrants, which mortal man is able to comprehend
your beauty and bliss? Lady of Light, who do you see
as such?






[Names: Vayam]
Golden lady of Light Divine, refulgent, riding
as if on a wondrous flying horse, we pray we may know
and attain to you wholly from within and from far off
above.






[Names: Tvam, Asme]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 31 117


Come, daughter of the light of Heaven, with all
the light and speed and message of time and space. Bear
all the wealth and knowledge and bring us the blessings
of the Divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 31






[Names: Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Hiranyastupa, Rshi, Tvamagne, Ssivah, Tava, Maruto]
Agni, Lord Supreme of the universe, you are
the first of existence and pre-existence, life and spirit
of the worlds, seer and teacher, light and light-giver of
nature for scholars of humanity. Friend and lord of bliss,
the scholars, saints and poets, and the fastest geniuses
of the world abiding in your laws of Dharma and Karma,
with full consciousness and responsibility rise to a state
of glorious light and vision.







[Names: Angirastamah, Angirastama, Vibhurvisvasmai]
Agni, lord of light, eternal and ever first
existence and prime cause of creation, life of life,




omniscient, you create the laws of the lights of nature
and humanity and invest them with beauty and grace.
Immanent, omnipresent and infinite, for all the worlds
of the universe you are the mother maker and mover of
the world of light and dark, subtle and gross, all. You
send them to sleep in pralaya (annihilation) and wake
them up into the light of existence for a life-time in so






[Names: Arejetam]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, you are the
first of existence and eternal wakeful presence. By your
yajnic vibration of divine intention you manifest for the
creation of Matarishva, universal energy of nature, and
Vivasvan, the refulgent sun. By the same cause, the all-
containing heaven and the generous earth, all
productive, come into existence, move and shine. Haven
and home of all, immanent power, bear the burden and
create the mighty and subtle knowledge of the super-
power for us.







[Names: Pururavase, Pururavas, Svatrena]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 31 119


Agni, lord of light and knowledge, greater
creator of beneficence than anyone else, you create the
light and heaven for the man of knowledge, divine
speech and noble action. O soul, jiva, who are freed of
the obligation and causal link of father and mother by
virtue of knowledge and action, the same lord who led
you to the previous birth takes you to the next, after
this and even after moksha.






[Names: Sravayyah]
Agni, lord giver of the showers of blessings,
promoter of growth and progress, you listen to the praise
and prayer of the yajakas holding up the ladle of offering
for the fire, now as before and after. Lord eternal,
constant and imperishable existence, you wholly know
the offers of libations and accept all yajnic actions of
the performers, and all the people of the world abide in
you and serve you.





Agni, friend and associate lord of comprehen-
Sive vision, you support the man who goes with the man




of strength in yajna, and resist and defeat the man who
supports a man of crooked ways of power. And in battle
of the brave for the creation of wealth and joy, you
destroy many evils with limited men and means
dedicated to righteousness.






[Names: Tvam, Sravase, Yastatrsana]
Agni, into the best state of moksha you place
that intelligent person who is keen to hear the divine
voice day in and day out and longs for freedom. And
then for the man of wisdom who loves both the previous
state and the next human birth, you do good and create
the best of desired happiness and comfort in life.






[Names: Rdhyama]
Agni, lord giver of honour, sung and celebrated
in hymns, for the management and growth of our wealth,
give us a reputed expert of economy so that we may
advance and prosper with new enterprises, and both
heaven and earth may promote us with the blessings of
nature and the environment.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 31 121






[Names: Tanukrdbodhi]
Agni, light of the world and giver of knowledge
and progress, keep us close in the presence of father
and mother under the care and protection of heaven and
earth. Brilliant and generous, lord immaculate beyond
words of evil and calumny, you are ever awake and
active in the lights of nature and hearts of pious
humanity. Lord creator and maker of the finest forms
of existence, give us the knowledge, give us the
protection and expertise for the worker specialist
entrepreneur. You are the peace, you are the bliss. You
are the wealth, you are the Home. Let the world awake,
arise and reach where they belong.






Agni, light of the world, you are the power of
exalted knowledge. You are our father and protector.
You are the giver of life for us, life ever new. We are
your children of enlightenment. The wealths of the world
in hundred forms in a thousand streams flow unto you,
lord inviolable, bravest of the brave, observer and


protector of the laws of life and nature.






[Names: Ilamakrnvan, Sasanim]
Agni, lord of light and life, ruler, sustainer and
protector of the people, brilliant powers of nature
manifest you, brilliant men of knowledge and generosity
elect and kindle you, first power, leading light and
protector of the people for their life, enlightenment and
advancement. They envision, proclaim and disseminate
the divine voice, eternal truth and ruling law of the world
and humanity. And, as in my case, the son is born of the
father, so is light and knowledge born of parental light
and knowledge.






[Names: Tvamno, Trata]
Agni, universal protector and sustainer of life,
generous and brilliant lord, adorable power, blest are
we with wealth and prosperity. Protect and promote us
and our health and age with all your powers of protection
and sustenance. You are the saviour and vigilant
guardian of our children, our land and cows, and our
sense and mind for the sake of our posterity. And we


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 31 123


are steady and dedicated to the rules and discipline of
your law.






Agni, ruling lord, you are the protector and
promoter of the man of yajna who creates wealth and
contributes to prosperity. Lord of all round vision and
power, you shine within for the man of objective wisdom
and judgement. You are the creator and giver of wealth
and prosperity for the non-violent man of action and
generosity, and you listen with love and accept that
prayer and mantra of the celebrant which springs from
the heart.






[Names: Tvamagna, Adhrasya, Sassi]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, ruler of the
world, for the man of celebrated eminence and for the
man of yajna and divine speech, you create and give
that wealth of life which is the best and most wanted of
all. Lord of vision and wisdom, you are called the father
of the world you hold in sway, and you superintend the




rule of law, and you rise as redeemer of the world in all
quarters of space.






[Names: Svaduksadma]
Agni, lord of light and law, guardian of all, like
a strongly fabricated armour you protect from all sides
the man initiated and consecrated who abides in the
home with delicious foods, doing noble deeds with yajna
and dharma and serves life as an example of the saving
light of heaven.






[Names: Imamagne, Apih]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, remove this
destructive ignorance of ours so that we come back to
the right path from afar. Lord of vision and wisdom,
giver of the light divine, omnipresent, ever on the move,
immanent and accessible to the people of peace and




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 125




[Names: Manusvadagne, Angirasvadangiro, Accha]
Agni, lord of the world, Angira, life-breath of
existence, the very light of purity, come well beautifully,
come like a human presence, come like the breath of
freshness, come like the effort and achievement of life,
come as ever before. Come to the dear holy man of
divinity, bear him on to knowledge and Dharma, seat
him on the sacred grass of the vedi in the house of yajna,
and conduct the yajna for us unto the light of heaven.





[Names: Etanagne]
Agni, lord of light and fire of yajna, grow and
let us grow by this divine voice of Veda, and by whatever
we may do and achieve with our spiritual and physical
strength or with our knowledge and action for the
Divine. And bring us all-round wealth, and in-vest and
exalt us with holy, creative and dynamic intelligence of
a positive and victorious order.


Mandala 1/Sukta 32








[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Hiranyastupa, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras, Ahannahimanvapastatarda]
I recite and celebrate the first and highest
exploits of Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, refulgent ruler,
which he, like the sun, performs with the shooting rays
of His light. He breaks down the cloud like an enemy,
releases the waters and opens the paths of mountain
streams. (The ruler too, similarly, breaks down the
enemies holding up the powers of the nation for
movement, releases the energies and resources of the
nation, and carves out the paths of progress.)






[Names: Ahannahim, Vasra]
Indra, lord of shooting rays of light, breaks the
cloud resting on the mountain. Tvashta, creative power
of the Divine, making fine forms and subtle energies,
creates the catalytic power for Him and His shooting
rays against the cloud. And, like cows eager for the
calves, rushing to the stalls, the waters instantly rush
down to the sea.






[Names: Vrsayamano, Somam, Soma]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 127


Indra, generous lord of showers of light and rain,
receives and drinks up the vital essences present in
heaven, earth and sky, three regions of the created world.
The sun, glorious possessor of heat and water, takes up
the thunderbolt of electric energy and strikes and breaks
up the first born of the dense clouds of vapours.

(So does the ruler hold and rule and enjoy the
rule over his dominion. He takes up his forces and
deploys them to destroy the worst of the nation’s
enemies. And just as the sun is mighty and generous for
the earth, so should the ruler be for his subjects and





[Names: Yadindrahan, Suryam, Surya]
Indra, since you break up the first born of the
clouds of dark vapours and also disperse the powerful
forces of these wonder demons, creating and revealing
thereby the sun and the dawn and the heavens, you will
not, for sure, encounter any enemy.

(So should the ruler too eliminate the enemies
of the land and ensure peace and security for his people.)









[Names: Ahanvrtram, Skandhamsiva, Sayata]
Indra, sun and vayu energy, breaks up Vrtra, the
dark thick cloud, denser than demonic, with the fatal
blow of the thunderbolt of lightning. Its shoulders
chopped off by the shooting sharpness of the sword-
like waves of sun-rays, the cloud lies flat on the floor
of the earth (its body turned to rain water).






[Names: Ayoddheva, Nataridasya, Indrassatruh, Indrassatru]
Like a naive warrior gone mad, Vrtra, the cloud
dared and challenged the sun, great and valiant Indra,
vanquisher of many, reducing them to juice. But he could
not take the force of the blows of Indra, failed and lay
crushed. The streams flow over hills breaking down
mounds of earth.






[Names: Vrsno, Purutra, Legs, Vrtra]
Indra. Impotent fool he was, desiring equal rivalry with
the mighty hero. Indra struck the lightning thunderbolt
on his shoulder. Beaten and broken all over, Vrtra lies
flat on the earth.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 129






[Names: Nadam, Sayanam, Yascid, Sirbabhuva]
Like a flood let loose, the showers of rain, so
soothing and beautiful to the mind, defy Vrtra, the cloud,
which is now lying shattered on the ground — waters
which, earlier, the cloud had held up with its own might.
Their master now lies trampled under feet on the ground.
(This is the fate of a presumptuous man who proudly
and foolishly challenges the Almighty.)






[Names: Nicavaya, Uttara, Saye]
The earth is the mother of the cloud, below. The
other is the sky up on high. Indra, the sun, strikes Vrtra,
the cloud, with its thunderbolt in the sky and the cloud
comes down with the showers. The earth lies with the
cloud like a cow sleeping with its calf.

(The presumptuous ruler who, thrown up by his
forces, challenges the world ruler meets a fate like the
cloud’s with his forces.)








[Names: Atisthantinam, Sariram, Vrtrasya, Indrasatruh, Indrasatru]
In the non-stop ever flowing streams of the
tracks of the sky is diffused the mysterious body of Vrtra,
the cloud, in the deepest dark. The same rival of Indra
which covered the sun now lies flat on earth and the
water-streams flow (open and beautiful).


(Indra, the ruler, should strike the hidden forces
which cover the light of the order, condense them and
make them flow out openly for the good of the nation.)




[Names: Dasapatnirahigopa]
panineva gavah. Apam bilamapihitam yadasid-


Like women supported by their husbands, the
waters stay supported by the cloud, hidden in its
darkness like cows in the stall guarded by the cowherd
or the trader. The water-hold that was hidden and closed
was opened and released through the door by the slayer
of Vrtra, Indra, the sun.





[Names: Asvyo, Ajayo, Sura]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 32 131


Tempestuous of speed and power of defence and
offence and as the choice lord and hero do you arise,
Indra, then when the one unique rival, Vrtra, throws its
darkness over your rays of light and catalysis. Arising
then you conquer the earth, you win and collect the vital
soma of life, and you release the seven streams of nectar
to enrich the seven seas of existence as they flow.






[Names: Nasmai, Indrasca]
Neither lightning nor thunder, nor storm and
shower, nor the roar and rumble which Vrtra produces
does resist and stop Indra. When Indra and Vrtra both
battke—Vrtra with inadequate forces—then Indra,
powerful and glorious, comes out victorious.






[Names: Aheryataram, Jaghnuso, Nava]
Indra, who ever sees anyone else other than you
as the killer of Vrtra, since in every heart it is your fear,
the victor’s fear, that prevails? And like a victorious
hawk not-afraid you shine and rule over regions of the
world and feed nine and ninety streams of water that


flow and sustain life.






[Names: Indro, Samasya, Sedu]
Indra, lord of thunder force of arms, is the ruler
and illuminator of the moving world, settled and
peaceful humanity and the animals. The same ruler holds
and sustains the order of humanity and the world
together and keeps it going.


Mandala 1/Sukta 33






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Hiranyastupa, Rshi, Etayamopa, Indramasmakam, Indramasmaka, Anamrnah]
Come ye, come all, seekers of health and
brilliance of mind and sense, let us approach Indra, lord
supreme of light and knowledge, who feeds, increases
and refines our intelligence along the right lines.
Undying, unborn and eternal, great is He. He increases
the beauty and grandeur of the wealth and grace of this
earth in many ways and then He bestows on us supreme
knowledge and the possession of it.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 33 133




[Names: Upedaham, Syeno, Indram]
Just as a falcon flies to its favourite haunt and
home, so bowing and praying with exemplary songs
and offerings I yearn to reach Indra, lord of honour and
splendour, giver of wealth, but invisible and
incomprehensible, who alone is adorable for the
worshippers in the world of time.






[Names: Coskuyamana]
Indra, lord of hosts and battle, take up the bow
and quiver, shine as you will and win. The victor carries
the prize. Generous and profusely rewarding to the noble
and the splendid, be not ungenerous to us, lofty and
great overlord as you are over us.






[Names: Vadhirhi, Dhanoradhi]
Indra, lord of power and justice, marching ahead
by yourself, strike down the wicked affluent hoarder
alongwith his supporters with a single blow of the
thunderbolt. Eliminator of smugglers and infiltrators,
fix the selfish fun-lovers on the point of your arrow and








[Names: Para]
Indra, lord of light and justice, firm and
steadfast, mighty strong, commander of horse power
and armoured force, just as the sun, blazing lord of light
and sustainer of earth, heaven and the middle skies,
breaks up and scatters the cloud, so do you blow off
and scatter the top-notch selfish, uncreative and lawless
elements who rival and stall the yajnic creative,
constructive and productive powers of your dominion.






[Names: Ayuyutsannanavadyasya, Vrsayudho]
Settled heroes of the nation, brave fighters,
trained in the latest arms and tactics, experts of offence
and defence, strengthening and elevating the striking
power of the admirable commander of the ruler and
supreme commander, try to fight and fight on so that
the enemies, defeated and demoralised, flee away from
Indra down hill by the swiftest course, like emasculated


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 33 135






[Names: Tvametan, Avadaho, Samsamavah]
Indra, ruler and commander, fight out these
ogres and those, weeping and wailing, away from the
middle regions of the dominion. Throw off the wicked
from the higher regions, and from higher positions.
Raise those who are creators of soma, peace and joy.
Protect those who appreciate and raise the honour of
the world and humanity.






[Names: Cakranasah]
The fighting forces of the sun, beautified by
golden jewels of light by the sun, messengers of peace
and joy of the earth, do not break the protective cover
of the earth, nor do they violate the purpose of the sun,
and by virtue of the same sun they serve and glorify
Indra, lord ruler of the earth and her children.


(Similarly, the dynamic forces of the earth’s
dominion, invested with the golden jewels of royal
robes, dedicated to service and well-being, do not violate
the bounds of the earth’s protective laws and, as
messengers and agents of the universal lord of light,
they uphold the ruler and the rule of law.)








[Names: Pari, Amanyamanan]
Just as Indra, the sun, with its own power and
glory, holds both earth and heaven in orbit all round in
a State of equilibrium by the force of its gravitation and
throws off the unwanted forces by its own laudable
forces of heat and light, so you, Indra, lord ruler of the
earth, with your power and glory, hold and sustain the
earth and the people and, with the assistance of
responsible and respectable people of knowledge and
divine wisdom, control and correct the unruly elements,
and throw off the selfish and the wicked.






[Names: Yujam]
There are those who do not understand the end
and purpose of the earth and heaven, nor can they, with
all their magic and power, conquer or insult the mother
giver earth. Indra, virile and generous lord ruler of earth
and heaven, uses his ready weapon of the thunderbolt
of light and force, kindles the sense and mind of the
people and delivers the earth from the darkness of
ignorance and evil.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 33 137






[Names: Anu, Sadhricinena]
The waters of this cloud flow according to their
nature, in response to this Indra’s power after the yajnic
offers of holy havi, and they collect in the navigable
lakes, rivers and seas. Indra, lord of lightning power,
strike that cloud of darkness pregnant with waters with
your own essential and most lustrous fatal weapon fast
as mind, break the darkness, and release the light and
waters to flow to the earth.





[Names: Nyavidhyadilibisasya, Yavattaro]
Just as Indra, the sun, lord of light and power,
breaks and scatters the dense cloud into rain water lying
in the depressions of the earth such as lakes and oceans,
and scatters and condenses the mountainous cloud in
the sky which has sucked up the waters from the earth,
similarly, O lord ruler of the earth’s wealth and glory,
strike the underground enemy forces with thunder and
and your lustre and morale sustains.








[Names: Satrunvi]
Just as the never-failing triumphant light of this
sun goes straight and takes on the cloud like an enemy
and, with penetrating but generous force, breaks up the
cloud like enemy fort, just as Indra, solar energy, with
its lightning force, scatters the clouds proclaiming its
distinguished power to the world, so should the ruler
take on and destroy the enemies of the dominion and
proclaim the generous power of his sovereignty.






[Names: Avah, Kutsamindra, Saphacyuto]
Indra, as the sun desirous of protecting the earth
takes to the thunderbolt in the battle and engages the
roaring fighting cloud full of showers of rain filling all
the directions, and as the dust raised by the hoofs of the
cows and horses rises to the sky, so may the ruler, son
and protector of the earth, stand firm for the protection
and promotion of humanity.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 34 139




[Names: Jyok]
Indra, Maghavan, lord of power and glory, just
as in matters of the prosperity of the various fields of
the earth the sun directs its catalytic rays of energy to
engage the cloud in battles of precipitation to rain down
the soothing life sustaining showers, so may you, like
the sun and showers, help the people settled here in
peace so that they may for long carry on their earthly
chores. Like the sun, bring the hostile elements of the
dominion to book and keep them down to suffer as they


Mandala 1/Sukta 34






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Angirasa, Hiranyastupa, Rshi, Ashvin, Triscinno, Yuvorhi]
Ashvins, brilliant experts of eminence like the
sun and moon, working together complementarily, be
three ways good to us today: May your chariot be
universal in movement. May your gifts of wealth, too,
be of universal value. May your machine too be of
universal purpose in design, structure and performance.
Carry on together with the scholars and thinkers as a
team like the night and day of winter or like the cold


and warm cover.




[Names: Trayah, Somasya, Somas, Trayah]
diva.

Ashvins, scientists and engineers of eminence,
three are the thunderous wheels and dynamos in the
chariot which brings you honey-sweets of wealth and
comfort. The scholars of eminence know the pleasure
of soma and beauty of the moon. Three are the sustaining
beams and pillars fixed in its motive system. By this
you can reach your destination thrice in the day and
thrice in the night.






[Names: Samane, Trirvajavatiriso]
Ashvins, scholars of science and locomotion,
covering your gaps and weaknesses, in one day complete
the threefold yajna of science (in food, energy and speed
of locomotion with fire and water). Both of you develop
for us thrice powerful food and energy, and let the days
and nights abound in food, energy, speed and progress.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 34 141






[Names: Trirvartiryatam, Siksatam, Trirnandyam]
Asvins, scholars of knowledge and practice,
come our way thrice to guide us. Follow thrice in the
way of an easily accessible man of noble discipline and
dedication and lead us too, teaching us three ways the
art of defence, industry and automation. Conduct the
programmes of joy and celebration three ways for body,
mind and soul. And like the flowing waters augmented
by showers of rain, develop the knowledge of mixing,
compounds and mutual contact threefold.






[Names: Trirno, Trih, Sravamsi]
Ashvins, generous as earth and heaven, bring
us, develop and sustain threefold wealth of knowledge,
power and protection. Brilliant and godly scholars of
science, technology and yajna, three-way benefactors
by inspiration, action and achievement, give us threefold
enlightenment, protection and sustenance of body, mind
and soul. Give us threefold beauty, honour, and grace




of prosperity, well-being and noble family. Give us the
threefold capacity of listening, reflecting and meditating
on Vedas, Shastras and the economics and polity of
practical living. And lo! by virtue of your inspiration,
action and achievement, the dawn, daughter of the sun,
would ride your chariot of glory and in-fuse strength
and peace and joy into our body, mind and soul.






[Names: Omanam, Sarma]
Ashvins, scholars of knowledge, light and
progressive expansion, protectors of all that is good and
blissful, create for us and give us threefold heavenly
essences such as soma, three earthly ones and three from
waters. For my child create something soothing and all-
round protective, a three-metal tonic panacea for a
healthy and comfortable state of health in which the
three humors of vitality are balanced in peace, without





[Names: Tisro]
Ashvins, expert powers of science and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 34 143


technology, truthful, devoted to yajna and working
together like fire and water, and masters of the three-
metal chariot, day by day go round the earth and sky
thrice for us and then come to sleep on the earth. Just as
the soul goes from one body to another, as winds blow
from one place to another, so by the threefold, three
way, three speed chariot, move from one chariot to
another and go to the destinations of your choice.






[Names: Trirasvina, Tisrah]
Ashvins, scientists of yajna, brilliant and fast
as sun and wind, with the materials collected, refined
and sanctified thrice with the rivers and seas which are
distilled by mother nature from seven sources (earth,
waters, fire, wind, space, sun and electric energy) by
days and nights, sent up by three paths of solid, subtle
and atomised forms, to three (the earth, the region of
joy and the region of light), you serve and replenish
three, earth, sky and heaven.






[Names: Kada]
Ashvins, truthful and dedicated scientists, where




are the threefold three wheels of the chariot’s design,
structure and speed? Where are the three bonds of the
structure strong and fixed? When and where the ignition
and start of the roaring hawk by which you fly to your






Ashvins, high-priests of truth and nature, come,
the input oblations are offered. Taste the honey sweets
of your achievement with your honeyed lips. The sun
itself before the dawn energises your wondrous paradisal
chariot for the pursuit of truth and right.






[Names: Prayustaristam]
Ashvins, high-priests of nature, truth and yajna,
come with three-eleven divinities of nature and the
universe, having crossed the seas in three days and the
globe in eleven, come for a drink of honey-sweets. Sail


[Names: Destroy, Drive]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 35 145






[Names: Srnvanta]
Ashvins, high-priests of nature, science and
technology, come by the multipurpose chariot across
the land, over the sea and through the skies, and bring
us wealth and honour worthy of the brave this side of
the horizon. Listeners as you are, I call upon you for
protection and promotion. Be favourable to us for
advancement and victory in the battles of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 35








[Names: Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Night, Savita, Devata, Angirasa, Hiranyastupa, Rshi, Hvayamyagnim, Hvayami]
I invoke Agni, vital heat, first basic sustainer of
life, for physical well-being. I invoke Mitra-and-Varuna,
pranic energies of the breath of life, for protection and
immunity. I invoke the night which envelops the world
in restful sleep. And I invoke Savita, the sun, lord of
light, refreshment and inspiration for the sake of
protection, promotion and advancement here upon the








[Names: Hiranyayena]
Savita, lord of life and light, existing and abiding
with the regions of the universe, sustaining them with
his centripetal force of gravitation, enveloping the
mortals and the immortals, goes on and on in self-
refulgent glory in his golden chariot, watching and
illuminating the worlds of existence.


(The mantra is applicable to both Ishvara, Lord
creator, and the sun, sustainer and illuminator of the






[Names: Yati]
The lord of light, adorable and in company, goes
on by lower and higher paths, descending and ascending,
by beautiful horses, white and glossy (1.e., day and night,
bright and dark fortnights). Savita, lord effulgent, goes
on travelling hitherward and far off away dispelling the
darkness and evil of the world.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 35 147






[Names: Abhivrtam, Asthadratham]
Savita, adorable and companionable lord of
the world regions by his subtle waves of gravitation,
rides the vast, beautiful and autonomous world of






In the lap of Divine Savita, eternal Lord of the
universe, reside all the worlds of existence and the
children of the divine. So in the gravitational field of
the sun, heavenly light, are held all the regions of the
solar system alongwith the living beings ever abiding
therein. And the rays of the sun, white and brilliant,
bearing the world-chariot of the golden yoke, shine and
proclaim the glory of the lord to the people.







[Names: Tisro, Anim]
Three are the lights: sunlight, fire and universal
electric energy. Two of these, sun-light and fire (which
is of the earthly sphere) are in the sun’s field of power
and gravitation. The third, universal energy which holds
the spirit and soul of the brave resides in antariksha,
the middle region of yama, the vital wind (which
overtakes and carries the soul after death of the body).
Like the pin of a chariot wheel axle in battle, all these,
fixed in their place with their role, abide by the Immortal
Supreme Savita. Whoever here really knows the secret,



[Names: Suryah, Surya]
The sun is mighty brilliant, illuminates the
middle regions, awfully vibrating with fusion, gives
pranic life to nature and humanity, holding and guiding
things in orbit. And then, where is the sun now, (when


itis no more there)? In what heaven does its light shine
now? Who knows?


Kah knows. The Lord Supreme only knows.




[Names: Astau, Hiranyaksah]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 35 149


Savita, generous lord of golden light, comes
illuminating the eight directions and sub-directions of
the earth, the three sustaining regions of earth, heaven
and the middle skies, and the seven seas of space,
holding and bringing choicest gifts for the man of charity
and yajna.






[Names: Hiranyapanih, Apamivam, Suryamabhi]
Savita, the sun, lord of the golden hand of
generosity, creator of the sap of life, shines across the
regions of heaven and earth. It destroys and eliminates
disease and dirt, spreads its light all over, blazes in the
heavens and over-reaches the regions of darkness.






[Names: Hiranyahasto, Apasedhan]
Savita, generous and self-refulgent lord, giving
and blessing, with a golden hand, breath and inspiration
of life, universal guide, creator giver of peace and well-
being, lord of universal wealth, may come to us in direct
experience and bless us all ways and every way, warding
off the wicked, the evil and the violent destroyers, and
stay with us in the heart day and night, praised and




celebrated as we ought to praise and celebrate the Divine






[Names: Lord, Tebhirno]
Savita, self-refulgent lord creator and giver of
light, by those paths of divinity set out by you which
are ancient and eternal, free from dust and smoke, well
laid out on high in heaven, by those very paths simple,
straight and pleasant, come to-day, guide and protect
us, and reveal into our soul the Voice Divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 36




[Names: Agni, Devata, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Purunam, Puruna, Agnim, Agni]
tate.


With songs of praise and words of worship we
adore Agni, Lord and light of the universe, whom other
devotees too adore in many ways, and we pray to the
lord of light and power and instant action, worthy of
the love and devotion of many people far and wide
who are seekers of divine knowledge and bliss for


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 36 151






[Names: Janaso]
The ancient people of vision and wisdom hold
on to Agni, Lord of light and knowledge. We have the
will and devotion, and we have the offerings, with these
we worship you, lord giver of strength and courage more
and ever more. Lord of wealth and generosity, we pray,
be good and kind to us here and now, be our saviour
and protector in the battles of life.




[Names: Mahaste]
navah.


Agni, light and fire of yajna, harbinger of
blessings Divine and carrier of the fragrance of yajna,
we opt for you, we kindle you. You are the yajaka, you
reach the world over and over. Great and true you are,
the flames and lights of your power reach the heavens
and, like the rays of the sun, bless everything with a
touch of new life and inspiration.








[Names: Devasastva, Visvam]
Agni, brilliant power of heat and light of yajna,
harbinger of joy and inspiration, the noblest of the wise
and generous people of the world and powers of nature,
Varuna the high, Mitra the friendly, and Aryama the fair
and just, all kindle and raise you high for the world’s
yajna of growth and progress. The man who offers you
the holy materials of yajna wins wealth of the world by
virtue of your yajnic action.






[Names: Mandro]
Agni, deep and grave and joyous, giver of peace
and prosperity, protector and promoter of home and
family, you are the fighter and ambassador of the people.
In you abide all those steady laws and discipline which
go with the observance of Dharma and good conduct
and which the noblest in nature and humanity observe
and have observed.






Agni, fire and power of yajna, strongest
catalyser and noblest creative and constructive agent,
to you alone are offered all the inputs of yajna (for the
sustenance and advancement of life). Right to-day and
to-morrow and all through future, be good and kind to


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 36 153


us, act with the generous powers of yajna and help us
grow as brave and noble people.






[Names: Hotrabhiragnim]
Surely men of faith and reverence wielding
power and weapons sit and abide by the brilliant
sovereign ruler. They kindle the fire and do homage to
Agni with sacrificial offers and, wishing to get over the
violent and destructive forces, win the battles of life.






[Names: Ghnanto, Bhuvat]
Just as Indra, the sun, with its rays, strikes the
cloud and fills the earth and heaven with light and
waters, so does Agni, brilliant ruler and commander,
with his forces, break through evil and darkness, filling
heaven and earth with the light and fame of his actions.
He works for the settlement of his people in spacious
homes and, invited and celebrated among the intelligent,
he shines as generous and prosperous, while his fame
resounds like the roar of the victor in battle.








[Names: Socasvadevavitamah]
Agni, Lord of light and power, brilliant,
admirable, adorable, divinely superb, you are great.
Come be seated, wipe out evil, shine and create the light
without smoke, and beauty most sublime.






Agni, lord of light and fire, most dedicated to
yajna, loved and honoured, creator and harbinger of the
noblest wealth of life, you — whom the brilliant,
intelligent and generous people accepted for enlightened
rule, whom the scholars and teachers with their disciples
and yajnic friends accepted as the man of wealth and
knowledge, whom the generous pious people accepted,
whom the popular and respected people accepted —
such as you are, we accept, elect, appoint and consecrate
you as the ruler and commander of the nation.






[Names: Yamagnim, Tasya]
The fire and energy which kanva, expert scholar
of science and practical work, karma kanda, in company


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 36 155


with his disciples of technical yajna, captured and
lighted from the waves and waters over the sky, and
whose flames reach beyond the sky over the clouds,
these hymns of celebration illumine and the same we
develop and augment.




[Names: Rayaspurdhi, Tvam]
asi.


Agni, lord of power and wealth in your own
right, fulfil our life with honour and prosperity, so
friendly and accessible you are among the noble and
the generous. You shine in battles and your fame
resounds. Be good to us for our well-being. Great and
glorious you are indeed.




[Names: Urdhvaitsunaiutaye, Urdhvo]
mahe.


Agni, lord of light and life, brilliant as the sun,
stay high with grace in glory for our protection and
progress. Rise high as the hero of life’s battles of honour
and prosperity. It is for the reason of your glory and
generosity that we invoke and pray to you alongwith
the scholars with holy offers of yajna and celebration.






[Names: Krdhi]
jivase vida devesu no duvah.


Agni, high and great, save us from sin and evil
with the gift of intelligence and knowledge. Burn up all
grabbing and robbing of other’s food and freedom. Help
us rise to the heights of knowledge, comfort and
happiness for a full life. Accept our prayer that we may
rise to our place among the noble and the brilliant.






[Names: Pahi, Pahi]
Agni, lord of light and fire, youthful and blazing
with mighty glory, save us from the destroyers. Protect
us from the wicked and the ungenerous. Protect us from
the cruel and the violent. Protect us from the killers.
(Let these negative and destructive elements be
eliminated.)







[Names: Ghaneva]
Agni, lord of fire and justice, whosoever is
jealous and destructive toward us, whosoever is
ungenerous and an exploiter, destroy wholly with the
blow of the thunderbolt. Whosoever bleeds humanity


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 36 157


with instruments of torture and death, such an enemy






[Names: Agnirvavne, Agnirvavn, Agnih]
Agni is mighty power for one who cares and
prays for it. It is great good fortune for the man of
knowledge. It is a great friend and protector in battle,
and provides all help and encouragement to the man
who is loved and admired by his colleagues and






[Names: Agnina, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu, Agnirnayannavavastvam]
By the might and splendour of Agni, we
challenge from afar the fast invader, robber, ferocious
warrior who hides in new hideouts and suddenly
emerges in a big chariot with the intention of instant
kill. May Agni, great and blazing, destroyer of the
wicked, take on such demons and throw them off.








[Names: Ssasvate, Didetha]
Agni, lord of universal light and power, I, Manu,
man of thought and intelligence, enlightened in truth
and divine Law, consecrated in the joy of piety, hold on
to you in the heart. Shine, eternal light, in the heart of
Kanva, man of knowledge, for the sake of humanity.
The devotees bow to you in obedience and obeisance.






[Names: Raksasvinah]
Agni, lord of light and power, like blazing and
fearful flames of fire, burn all the ailments and destroy
all the thieves and demons of the world and, for the
knowledge and enlightenment of people like us, protect
us and the world.


Mandala 1/Sukta 37




[Names: Maruts, Devata, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Marut, Krilam, Kanva]
Men of science and knowledge, sing and
celebrate the playful, superior and irresistible power of
the wind harnessed in the chariot without the horse.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 37 159




[Names: Ajayanta]
Those men who, like the winds, with liquid
thrusts of motion in smooth, refined, chiselled and
lubricated language and style, express themselves and
their ideas, rise with their own brilliance like the rays
of the sun.





[Names: Theva, Srnva, Whatever]
the stimulation of the nerves and motions of the muscles
in the hands, whatever people speak, whatever varied
and wonderful they straighten, realise or obtain in the
business of life, all that is by the motion of these winds.


(Research into the energy, power and uses of
the winds.)


[Names: Susmine, Devattam]
For your strength, for your refinements, for light
and prosperity, for health, food and plenty, study the
divine gift of the winds and sing in thanks and praise of
the sacred hymns of the Veda.








[Names: Jambhe, Marutam, Maruta]
Study and celebrate that refreshing and
inviolable strength and power of the winds which
operates in the earths and cows and in the wind and
senses and which issues forth in the juices pressed out
by the jaws in the mouth and soma press and which
increases the strength and vitality of the body.





[Names: Yatstmantam]
Ye men, energetic as the winds, movers and
shakers of earth and heavens, who is the mightiest so
great of you that you shake the world around you to the
very end like the leaves of a tree or the hem of a gown?


[Names: Jihita]
The mightiest great man among you sustains
your passionate morale and directs your might and main


for the onward march of life. Shake the clouds. Cross
the mountains.






[Names: Yesamajmesu, Bhiya]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 37 161


Just as on the stormy movements of a heroic
leader’s armies the decrepit ruler of a broken nation
shakes with fear and flees, so under the force of the
motions of the winds, electric energy of the lord of the
universe, the earth moves and goes whirling round and
round in orbit.






[Names: Sthiram, Savah]
Still is the cause of these winds, 1.e., space
(akasha) whence they have their birth. By virtue of their
mother source, their power is two-fold: Sound, which
is the property of space which the winds carry, and
motion which is their specific property, so that things
such as birds may move in space by the force of the





[Names: Vasra]
Those children of space, the winds, in their
motions, carry and expand the waves of sound and the
currents of waters and other energies across the spaces
so that they reach their destinations like the mother cows
hastening on their legs to their stalls.






[Names: Tyam]
The winds, by their motions of mighty currents,


drive the dark and deep and heavy clouds holding the
waters and make them rain down in incessant showers.





[Names: Maruto, Girinracucyavitana]
Maruts, warriors of the nation, just as the powers
of the winds shake up the clouds, so may your power
and force inspire the people to do great deeds in the





[Names: Yaddha, Marutah, Srnoti]
The Maruts, wind powers of nature, like the
dynamic heroes of humanity, go together, and as they
go by the paths of their movement, they speak together
and proclaim their presence and their work. But only
some exceptionally perceptive people listen to their
voice.






[Names: Tatro]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 38 163


Maruts, dynamic heroes of the nation, go fast
by the straightest paths set out for you. Your honour
and achievement lies in the heart of the learned and the
wise. And there, with the learned and the wise, we’ll





[Names: Asti, Visvam]
Surely life is for the joy of living for all of you.
May we too enjoy and be happy. Indeed life is for the
joy of living for all living beings of the world.
Mandala 1/Sukta 38




[Names: Maruts, Devata, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Marut, Kaddha, Dadhidhve]
Heroes of yajna, lovers of the stories of life and
nature, you have collected the sacred grass for the yajna
vedi. When for sure are you going to take the work of
the nation in hand like a father taking up the child in
arms for its nurture and nourishment?








Heroes on the move, Maruts incarnate, where
for sure is the end and purpose of your march, when are
you going to reach it like the end and purpose of heaven
and earth? Where is the place of destination whence
the purpose calls you like cows lowing for their calves?
Where do your mind and senses and spirits direct you?






[Names: Marutah, Maruta]
Maruts, heroes of the nation of humanity, where
are your latest dream loves? Where your ideals? Where
all your good fortunes to which you all move?



[Names: Yadyuyam, Stota]
Maruts, children of mother-space, heroes of the
nation and children of the colourful mother earth doing
good work, though you are mortal, the Immortal is your


[Names: Patha]
As the deer takes delight in the grass, so should
you take delight in learning. May your teacher never be


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 38 165


unwelcome to you. May he have full life before he goes
by the divine path. May he never go close to the path of
the wind prematurely, early in life.






[Names: Padista]
May the fatal adversity of life far or near never
strike us. Instead, O Winds, powers of the Immortals,
let it fly away from us alongwith the thirst and
deprivation of life.


[Names: Satyam, Miham]
The bright and blazing lightning winds, strong
and impetuous in the sky, sustained benefactors of living
life, cause ceaseless showers of rain on the thirsty earth.


And that is truly the divine work of nature (which the





[Names: Vasreva, Yadesam]
Just as the mother cow hastens to the calf,
overflowing with milk, just as the mother suckles her
baby, so does the bright blazing lightning, roaring and
raining powers of the winds, bless the living beings




when the showers released by them fall upon the thirsty


[Names: Diva]
When the winds overflood the earth with
showers of rain from the dense clouds overladen with
vapours of water, they overcast even the bright day with
darkness deep as that of the night.



[Names: Adha, Arejanta]
And then by the roar of lightning winds the
whole earth and the entire human world shake and
tremble like a house built of clay.





[Names: Maruto, Yatema]
Maruts, lightning powers of the winds,
wondrous forces of the nation, resistant and inviolable,
march on with invincible arms by the irresistible paths
(to your goal in sight).




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 38 167


[Names: Sthira, Susamskrta]
Let the wheels of your chariots be strong and
steady. May your chariots of horse and fire be strong by


wind and electric energy. Let the reins and steering be
very sensitive and sophisticated.





[Names: Accha, Agnim, Agni, Mitram, Mitra]
Speak well with expansive words in detail for
full understanding of power and energy to the brilliant
scholar of the Vedas like a very very dear friend worth
visiting again and again.



[Names: Parjanya, Parjan, Gaya]
Receive the sacred words, fix them in your
speech and mind, specify the sense, expand the
knowledge, language and communication further as the
cloud holds and expands the vapours of water. Sing and
speak of the sacred knowledge extensively.








[Names: Vandasva, Marutam, Asme]
Honour the powers of the winds and Marut-
group of nature and prana, brilliant, admirable and awful
source of light and energy. Reverence the brilliant,
dynamic scholars of light and energy rich in possibilities
of growth and nourishment. Honour and respect power
and these people so that great men may arise among us
here.


Mandala 1/Sukta 39






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Marut, Socirna, Kasya, Marutah, Maruta]
Maruts, heroes of light and power, movers and
shakers, just as the sun radiates its rays of light from
afar, so by whose idea and purpose is it that you thus
strike your light and weapons far off? By whose thought
and action? By whose energy, strength and power? Who
do you wish to reach? Who do you want to shake?





[Names: Sthira, Yusmakamastu]
May your weapons be strong and steady to drive
off the enemy, and strong and firm to stem the onslaught.
May your forces be admirably intelligent and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 39 169


resourceful. Let the cunning and wicked people have






[Names: Para]
Men of heroic character as the winds, whatever
stands unmoved and inflexible against you, move and
throw off. Whatever is dense and impenetrable, break
through and scatter. Like rays of light and currents of
winds, go round the earth in all directions, reach the
clouds and cross over the mountains unto the skies.






[Names: Nahi, Rudraso]
Scourge of wrong and enemies of injustice, no
enemy will stand against you on earth or on high in the
light of your justice and rectitude. May your forces be
blazing brilliant, wide and expansive, expert and well-
provided with weapons and equipment for your struggle
and battles for life and humanity.




[Names: Maruto]
1744.




Just as Maruts, the winds, shake up the
mountains, scatter the clouds and uproot the trees, so
you, brave heroes, intelligent, brilliant and creative,
together with all the people, throw off the evil and the
wicked like drunkards lost in intoxication.






For your travel on earth and in the sky, yoke to
your chariot horses fast as winds. Let the red fire with the
mist be the leader in front as motive power of the carrier.
Let the earth hear the boom and people feel fear and awe.






[Names: Rudra, Ganta]
O Rudras, heroes of might and rectitude, we
choose comfort and well-being for you and for posterity.
We choose freedom and security for ourselves and for
the man of knowledge and wisdom. And we call upon
you for safety, security and well-being. Come soon with
protection and freedom for us all as you came ever
before post-haste for the protection and progress of the
wise suppressed in fear.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 39 171



[Names: Yusmesito, Savasa]
Maruts, veterans of knowledge and heroes of
might and right, if the monstrous enemy whom you
would wish to subdue and whom the people wish to
suppress attacks us, then with your valour and splendour
and with your means of protection and promotion for






[Names: Asami, Asamibhirmaruta]
Heroic yajakas, brilliant men of knowledge and
wisdom, mighty heroes of the speed of winds, just as
flashes of lightning bring showers of rain for us, so with
spontaneous, unqualified and unreserved powers and
protections give us peace, freedom and comfort, whole,
complete and undisturbed. And to suppress the evil and
the wicked, go to the man of wisdom and vision for
light and guidance.





[Names: Asamyojo, Savah, Rsidvise]
Heroes of the world powerful as the winds,
movers and shakers of evil, overflowing with love and




charity, wield power and splendour whole and complete,
undisturbed strength and valour, and just as men of
righteous passion shoot the arrows at the enemy, so shoot
at the enemy of the seer and his vision of knowledge
and reality.


Mandala 1/Sukta 40




[Names: Brhaspati, Devata, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Uttistha, Indra, Marutah, Maruta]
sacd.


Arise Brahmanaspati, Master of Divinity, seer
blest and lord of universal knowledge. Lovers of Divinity,
we approach you and pray. Let the Maruts, heroes of
valour and splendour fast as winds and liberal men of
yajnic charity come and march ahead. May Indra, lord of
knowledge and power bless them with light and success.




[Names: Tvamiddhi, Suviryam]
acake.


Child of valour and victory, courage incarnate,
tolerance and endurance, in the interest of wealth and
well-being, people invoke and call upon you. Maruts,
heroes of knowledge and divinity, whoever may
sincerely invoke and call upon you to your satisfaction,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 40 173


for him you bear the gift of heroic manliness and
effective battle power and achievement.






[Names: Praitu, Accha]
May the lord of divine knowledge move forward.
May the lady scholar of divine truth and law move
forward. May the generous and brilliant men of yajna
carry and conduct our yajnas of the achievement of manly
heroes for five-fold gifts of wealth and well-being.




[Names: Sravah, Tasma]
timanehasam.

The man who gives to the scholar of divinity
and the high-priest of yajna wealth by which noble
people arise commands imperishable honour and fame.
For him we pray and work for the gift of divine speech
and sacred earth, inviolable, holy and instantly
productive, which creates and raises noble heroes.








[Names: Yasminnindro]
Surely the master of divinity and high-priest of
yajna and Vedic speech chants the celebrated hymns of
the Lord of the Universe in whose infinite presence Indra
(electric energy), Varuna (sun, moon and oceans, etc.),
Mitra (prana energy), Aryama (winds) and other divine
powers of nature such as earth find their abode and






[Names: Tamidvocema, Imam]
Noble and generous people, in yajnas and holy
congregations, if we chant that sacred blissful and
imperishable mantra of science and divine mystery of
Veda, and you, O men and women, if you receive, realise
and follow this holy speech in action, it would bring
you all the splendid wealth of the world.






Who would reach the man of divine love? Who
would go to the man of yajna who has collected the
holy grass for the vedi? Who is the generous giver that
finds a settled home with noble presences on open airy
land and holds the fort? (Answer: Brahmanaspati).


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 41 175






[Names: Nasya]
Brahmanaspati consolidates the ruling power.
With warriors and statesmen he eliminates the enemies.
In a state of fear and challenge he maintains his cool
constancy. Wielder of the thunderbolt as he is, none can
turn him, none can defeat even in the greatest battle. In


Mandala 1/Sukta 41




[Names: Varuna, Mitra, Aryama, Adityah, Devata, Aditya, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi]
The man whom Prachetas, men of knowledge
and wisdom, Varuna, distinguished and meritorious
man, Mitra, friend of all, Aryama, man of justice, all
these protect and advance (is really strong). Can he ever








[Names: Aristah]
Those men whom Varuna and others support and
protect against the violent as if with the force of their
own arms advance and grow in life safe and secure.






[Names: Nayanti]
Brilliant rulers and others who shine, rout the
forts and cities of these enemies and cast off all evil
and suffering far away.






[Names: Sugah, Adityasa, Natravakhado]
Adityas, men of divine brilliance, the path of
those who go by truth and divine law is straight and
simple. For you too (who are dedicated to Divinity and
universal truth) there is no fear or danger.






[Names: Adit]
Adityas, heroes of light and the law, people of
the land, the yajna of creation and development which
you carry forward by the path of truth and piety for
knowledge, science and art must not disappear from
the scene.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 41 177





[Names: Accha]
The man of invincible love and non-violence
by his very mind and soul gets the wealth and jewels of
the world and very dear lovely children.






[Names: Katha, Mitrasyar, Mahi, Varunasya, Varunas]
Friends, how shall we realise in truth of fact the
great celebration we offered for the power and glory of
Mitra, friend of the people, Aryama, lord of justice, and
Varuna, highest leader of our choice, and how shall we
achieve the high standard of our comfort and well-





[Names: Sapantam, Sumnairidva]
Friends, I must not even speak to the man who
hurts or curses you. In stead, I must love and serve the
man who feels divine love for you and wishes you well
all comfort and joy.








[Names: Prenat, Caturascid]
Trust not, fear the man who gives you four: hurt,
curse, pain and depression. Off with the thief, the
encroacher and misappropriator. Love not one who


Feel reverence and awe, without fear, for the
man who gives you four: Dharma, Artha (wealth), Kama
(fulfilment), Moksha (ultimate freedom). Respect the
parent. Love not the man of evil tongue.


Mandala 1/Sukta 42


[Names: Pusha, Devata, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Saksva]
Pusha, lord giver of nourishment and growth,
lord imperishable, brilliant and generous, cross over
through the paths of life and help us cross. Free us from
sin and evil, join us and guide us to move forward.






[Names: Pusannagho]
Pusha, lord of physical, moral, spiritual and
intellectual nourishment, whoever be the sinner, the
thief, the malignant enemy that orders us to be off from


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 42 179
the right path, remove him from the path.



[Names: Duramadhi]
Pusha, saviour and protector lord, remove and
throw off far from our path that highway man, that
robber, who lies in ambush waiting to rob us.

[Names: Tvam, Padabhi]
Pusha, whosoever the sinner, thief or robber,
overt or covert, suppress, and keep his oppressive force



[Names: Yena]
Pusha, wondrous destroyer of evil, generous
saviour and protector, lord of knowledge, we pray for
your love, grace and protection by which you inspire
and enlighten our parents and seniors (to follow the right




[Names: Adha, Dhanani]
Pusha, lord of universal good fortune, generous
giver of the light of knowledge and golden lustre of
honour, create for us and bless us with liberal gifts of
wealth of knowledge, prosperity and well-being.



[Names: Pusanniha]
Pusha, lord of light and enlightenment, save us
from the enemy, take us far on way to knowledge by
the simplest noble path. Let us have the light and vision
of good yajnic action.



Pusha, lord of growth and advancement, take
us to the land of manna, beauty and joy. No new
obstacles, no sufferance on the way. And then know the
noble acts (we do in the new land).



[Names: Sagdhi, Sisthi]
Pusha, you are the power and the glory. Give us


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 43 181


strength and power. Give us fulfilment. Give us the
wealth of life. You are the light and peace. Give us peace
and lustre. Give us plenty of food to our satisfaction
and delight. Know our battles of action.






[Names: Pusanam, Pusana, Vasuni]
sustainer and ruler of the world. We celebrate him in
sacred songs. We pray to the generous lord for the
wealths of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 43








[Names: Rudra, Mitra, Varuna, Soma, Devatah, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Rudraya, Rudra, Vocema]
When shall we sing hymns of peace and bliss
most soothing in celebration of the glory of Rudra, lord
of justice and mercy, omniscient, most generous,
omnipotent and dearest ever present in the heart?


(With a little modification of meaning, the
mantra applies to the soul and to Vayu, universal energy
as well as prana energy of life. Rudra stands for Isvara,
jiva and vayu/prana. )








[Names: Yatha, Aditih, Aditi, Yatha]
Just as Aditi, mother, does good to the child,
the shepherd to his animals, the ruler to his people, the
master to the cows, so, we pray, may Rudra, lord of life
and energy, grant us kindness and grace.






[Names: Rudrasciketati]
Just as Mitra, universal friend and breath of life,
Varuna, lord omniscient and the teacher, Rudra, lord of
love and justice, and all friends of life and common
humanity energise and enlighten us, so may all the
teachers of the earth give us the light and energy of life.






[Names: Gathapatim, Rudram, Tacchamyoh]
We pray to gathapati, lord protector of hymns
and celebrants, medhapati, lord protector and promoter
of yajnas, jalashabheshajam, universal balm of life, and
Rudra, lord of life, love and justice for the bliss of peace
and ultimate freedom.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 43 183






[Names: Srestho]
Rudra, lord of love and justice and the ruling
power of humanity, who shines like the refulgence of
pure light, who blazes like the sun and pleases like the
beauty of gold, is the highest of the generous and
brilliant, and he is the haven and abode of the living






[Names: Nrbhyo]
Rudra, lord of the world, ruler, healer and
teacher may, we pray, bring good health, peace and well-
being to our horses, sheep and goats, men and women,
cows and our mind and sense and to the earth and the






[Names: Asme, Sriyamadhi, Satasya, Mahi, Sravastuvinrmnam]
Rudra, lord ruler of the world, Soma, joyous,
kind and beatific, bring us and establish over the earth
wealth and beauty, honour and fame, dignity and
grandeur of a high exciting kind and quality for all the
hundred orders of humanity.








[Names: Somaparibadho]
Lord of beauty and dignity, may the enemies of
peace and prosperity and the agents of poverty and
adversity never be able to challenge us. Help us and
strengthen us in the struggle for peace, prosperity and



[Names: Yaste, Murdha]
vedah.


Soma, lord of peace and prosperity, Vena,
blessed presence of beauty and grace, these are your
people trying to reach the prime centre of immortal truth
and law. Know these, love these, and help them reach
and abide in the highest heaven of joy.


Mandala 1/Sukta 44




[Names: Agni, Devata, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Agne, Suse]
Agni, lord of life, blazing as the sun, immortal,
omniscient of things born, for the man of charity who


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 44 185


has surrendered himself to you, you bring today
wonderful wealth of the dawn, and let the yogis and
blessings of nature awake at the dawn.






[Names: Justo, Sajurasvibhyamusasa]
Agni, ruling lord of light and the world, invoked
and lighted, you are the blazing catalyst and carrier of
yajnic materials offered and fragrances received. You
are the leading chariot hero of the world’s yajnic acts of
love and creation. Friend of the Ashvins, sun and moon,
water and air, working with the complementary powers
of nature, friend and companion of ours too, bring us
noble strength and valour, bless us with universal honour
and fame.






[Names: Adya, Purupriyam, Purupriya, Dhumaketum]
Today we choose to invoke, invite and light up
Agni, lord of light and life and knowledge, leader of
the dynamics of existence, homely sustainer of all and
giver of wealth, darling of everybody, moving with the
flag of smoke in dazzling flames of light, and giving us
brilliant success and glory in the holy yajnas of our








[Names: Srestham, Devan, Agnimile, Agnimil]
In the lights of the dawn of desire and to reach
the holy splendours of Divinity, I invoke, worship and
serve Agni, lord of light and life and universal
knowledge, best and youngest holy light, loving,
burning and ever on the move as a blessing for the man
of faith and charity with surrender to the Lord.






[Names: Stavisyami]
Agni, self-refulgent lord of creation, eternal and
imperishable, sustainer of the universe, holiest of the
holy and giver of highest gifts of yajna, I shall ever
sing in celebration of your glory as the eternal saviour
and protector of the world and the worthiest object of
worship in yajna.






[Names: Susamso, Praskanvasya]
Agni, lord of light and universal knowledge,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 44 187


honey tongued, invoked and deeply honoured,
protecting the life of the wise for the joy of living,
worthy of obedience and obeisance, save the man of
divinity and bless the celebrant with enlightenment.






[Names: Hotaram, Puruhita]
Agni, lord of light and life, ruler of the world,
the people invoke, kindle and honour you, lord
omniscient and high-priest of cosmic yajna. Lord
universally celebrated, let the brilliancies of nature and
humanity come and bless us here straight at the earliest
and fastest. Let the wise scholars come and bless us.






[Names: Savitaram, Usasam, Usasa, Kanvasastva]
Agni, lord of light, high-priest of great yajnas,
wise scholars, and those who have distilled the soma
essence of life in their visions of light and life’s joy,
invoke, study and develop the powers and blessings of
Savita, inspiring light of the sun, the dawn, the Ashvins,
water and air, Bhaga, universal vitality and majesty of
divine nature, Agni, energy of heat, light and electricity,
the nights and showers of peace, and yajna which is the
harbinger of all the blessings of life and its wealth.








[Names: Patirhyadhvaranamagne, Usarbudha, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, protector and
promoter of the noblest yajnic acts of humanity, you
are the conscience of the people and harbinger of joy
for them. Bring here the brilliancies of nature and
humanity who wake up with the dawn. They have the
vision of light and heaven. Let them come for partici-
pation in the celebration of soma-success of the yajna.




[Names: Anusaso]
manusah.


Agni, blazing lord of light and knowledge, you
are the leading light of the world. You shine before,
with, and after the dawns. You are the protector of life
in human habitations. You are the image and life of the
people and the leader and high-priest in their yajnas
from the family yajna upto the world programmes of
creation, so human, sacred and divine.






[Names: Manusvad]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 44 189


Agni, lord of light and life, you are the ultimate
cause, means and end of universal yajna, the high-priest
and the yajaka. Lord of brilliance, we constantly
perceive, reflect, and meditate on you, worship and
dynamic, illuminating and imperishable.






[Names: Mitramahah, Mitramaha, Sindhoriva]
Lord of light, you are the greatest friend of the
brilliant men of knowledge and vision, morning call of
the high-priest in the mind, leading light of the voice
divine, and the invitation to live by the yajna fire. And
the flames of fire blaze like the rolling waves of the sea
(at the dawn).






[Names: Srudhi, Srutkarna]
Listen lord, you have the ear, listen to the
constant crackle of the blazing flames of fire within.
Come Mitra, friends of humanity, come Aryama, powers
of justice, come moving travellers to the house of yajna,
join the sacred cause of love and non-violence and sit
on the holy grass around the vedi-fire.








[Names: Sranvantu, Marutah, Maruta, Pibatu, Somam, Soma, Svibhyamusasa]
Listen to the songs of celebration, Maruts,
heroes of the human nation moving at the speed of
winds, generous, brilliant as flames of fire and rising in
the realms of universal yajna of the divine laws of life
and truth. Let Varuna, highest powers of nature and
humanity, committed to universal laws, come with the
lovely dawn and the Ashvins, complementary currents
of life’s energy, and participate in the joys of yajna.


Mandala 1/Sukta 45






[Names: Agni, Devah, Devatah, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Tvamagne, Adityan, Aditya, Rudran, Rudra, Yaja]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, sagely
scholar of wisdom and piety, bring together into this
yajna of love and non-violence the people, children of
reflective humanity, who sprinkle the vedi with holy
water and offer ghee into the fire. Bring together the
celibate scholars of twenty four, thirty six and forty eight
years discipline and perform yajna in honour of the
Vasus, eight abodes of life in nature, Rudras, eleven
vitalities of life, and Adityas, twelve phases of the yearly
round of the sun.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 45 191






[Names: Srustivano]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power of the
world, moving at lightning speed of the red flames of
fire, bring here for the generous man of charity and
brilliant piety the thirty-three divinities of the universe
such as earth and vital airs which are givers of light and
intelligence and which instantly bring up the blessings
of life.



[Names: Priyamedhavad, Atrivaj, Angirasvanmahivrata]
havam.


Agni, lord of existential knowledge, committed
to the great laws of eternity, listen to the invocation and
prayer of the man of intelligence and reason like a lord
of beauteous wisdom, above ignorance, injustice and
poverty, and free from physical, mental and spiritual
want, a power of versatile form and present within as
the breath of life.






[Names: Mahikerava, Rajantam, Socisa, Agnim]
Great artists and men, who love intelligence,




industry and research for the sake of progress and
protection, invoke, study and explain agni, fire and
electricity, brilliant power of creative and constructive
yajnic programmes blazing with instant energy.






[Names: Ghrtahavana, Srudhi, Yabhih]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, generous,
receiving libations of ghee and waters, listen well to
these voices of prayer with which the disciples of the
distinguished genius of science invoke and serve you
for the sake of protection.






[Names: Tvam, Sociskesam, Purupriya, Purupri]
Agni, lordly power of light and knowledge, most
wondrous in fame and prosperity, flaming with flashes
of lightning, widely loved and pursued, earnest men
among people invoke, study and serve you for generous
gifts of knowledge and power.






[Names: Srutkarnam]
Agni, power of light and knowledge, men of


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 46 193


genius invoke, install and kindle you in the holiest acts
of yajna as the yajaka and high-priest, richest in gifts of
prosperity, easy listener ever in readiness and widest in
fame and possibility.






[Names: Brhad]
Agni, lord of blazing brilliance and treasure of
wealth and knowledge, men of genius who have distilled
soma, spirit of joy and meaning of life, from nature,
bearing offers of yajna come to you for the sake of food
and delight of living for the man of yajnic generosity.






[Names: Prataryavnah, Somapeyaya, Somapeya, Thadya]
Noble genius of light and knowledge, Agni,
generous creator of strength, courage and endurance,
holy shelter for the seekers, here and now institute the
yajna and seat the lovers of divinity and morning
pilgrims of yajna on the sacred grass to join the yajna
for a drink of soma.




[Names: Arvancam, Ayam, Somah, Soma]
yam.




Agni, fiery genius of yajna, welcome the lovers
of divinity come up for the yajaka and conduct the yajna
with joint invocations and libations into the holy fire.
Generous creators of wealth and honour, this is the soma
of delight and beauty earlier distilled in the day. Protect
it, promote it and enjoy it.


Mandala 1/Sukta 46




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Stuse]
This glorious dawn, darling of the sun, shines
forth from heaven and proclaims the day. Ashvins,
harbingers of this glory, I admire you immensely —





[Names: Dhiya]
Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, wonder-
workers are they. Born of the oceans of space, they create
the seas of morning mist. Faster than the mind, they
bring wealths of the world. With intelligence and
inspiration, they reveal the treasures of the Vasus, they
are brilliant, generous, divine.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 46 195




[Names: Vacyante]
Ashvins, harbingers of light, knowledge and
wealth across the Vasus, scientists and technologists,
veterans of vision and wisdom celebrate your
achievement when your chariot flies like a bird into the
ancient sky over the heavens.



[Names: Havisa, Pita]
Ye men and women of the world, the sun, lover
of the dawn, father, protector and illuminator of the
tortuous paths and human habitations nourishes and
promotes life with the consumption and creation of
waters across the heavens over the earth.



[Names: Adaro, Patam, Somasya, Somas]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and destroyers of
enemy forces, dedicated to truth and holy speech, defend
your people and protect their peace and prosperity with
confidence and daring courage.








[Names: Tamasme]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and inspiration, like
the dawn give us that light of heaven which may help
us cross over beyond the night and darkness of life and



[Names: Yunjathamasvina]
Ashvins, harbingers of light, knowledge and
power, design and prepare and bring us the chariot for
the people to cross over land and sea and sky and reach



[Names: Aritram]
Ashvins, scientists and engineers, for crossing
of the seas and skies to your destination, let your chariot
and propulsion be elaborate and powerful by design and
structure using water and fire power and electric and






[Names: Divaskanvasa, Svam]
Ashvins, eminent scholars, in the depths of the
seas and over the rolling waves, in the rays of light and
in the mists of waters, there is wealth and energy. And


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 46 197


where do you place the value of your own intelligence
(in the design and structure of the chariot of your own
choice)?






[Names: Abhudu, Suryah, Surya, Vyakhyajjihvayasitah]
The light is for collection in focus. Sunlight so
collected is an image of gold. And so collected and
focussed, the light, otherwise free, uncontrolled and
undirected, burns like a tongue of fire (as power).






[Names: Adarsi]
The path of the laws of science and nature, as
the path of Truth, is for simple and sure travel across
the seas of existence to the cherished goal. See the flow
of light divine from the doors of heaven.






[Names: Tattadidasvinoravo, Made]
Every worshipful seeker of knowledge, wisdom
and power explores and supplements the paths of
protection and progress in the business of life’s joy
created by the Ashvins (divinities of nature and
humanity who are harbingers of light and inspiration).








[Names: Vavasana, Manusvacchambhu]
Ashvins, blissful powers of nature and
humanity, living and working in the light of the sun,
come to us like our own men, bringing with you the
love and protection of Soma, lord of happiness and
glory, alongwith the voice of the Divine.






[Names: Yuvorusa, Sriyam, Anu]
Ashvins, inspiring and protective powers of
nature and humanity, ever on the move like the sun and
moon, let the dawn of light and joy follow upon your
beauty and glory. High-priests of truth and universal
law, shine, illuminate and create the joy of life by nights
and days.





[Names: Ubha, Avidriyabhirutibhih]
Ashvins, powers of protection and inspiration,
both of you drink the delight of life and protect its
sanctity, and, with relentless actions and modes of
defence, give us the peace and well-being of happy


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 47 199


Mandala 1/Sukta 47




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Ayam, Soma, Tamasvina]
dasuse.

Ashvins, brilliant powers like the sun and moon,
promoters of light and truth, science and industry, this
is the sweetest soma distilled for you so far till yesterday.
Taste it and enjoy it and bring the jewels for the generous
man of yajnic charity.





[Names: Tribandhurena, Kanvaso, Srnutam]
Ashvins, brilliant scholars of science and
technology, come by three-stage, three armoured,
beautifully structured chariot. The geniuses study and
advance universal knowledge for you in scientific yajna.
Listen to their prayers, accept their holy call.




[Names: Asvina, Somamrtav, Athadya]
mupa gacchatam.


Ashvins, powerful like the sun and wind,




extenders of the bounds of natural knowledge, taste and
protect the sweetest soma of yajnic joy and prosperity
of humanity. And, O destroyers of enemies, come to
the generous man of charity, to-day, bearing in your
charity the wealth of the world.






[Names: Trisadhasthe]
Ashvins, masters of universal knowledge and
creators of the world’s wealth, in the three-stage yajnic
house of space—on the earth, across the skies and over
the heavens—try to conduct and enrich the yajna with
honeyed fragrances. Brilliant sages who have distilled
the soma for you call you up to the heavens.




[Names: Yabhih, Tabhih, Somam]
Ashvins, universal harbingers of light and
knowledge, defenders of good and promoters of Truth
and Law, by the cherished plans and noble desires by
which you protect and promote the sagely scholar, protect
us too and promote the beauty and glory of the world.



MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 47 201




[Names: Sudase, Sudas, Rayim, Purusprham, Purusprha]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and prosperity,
destroyers of enemies, who ride the well-piloted chariot
and bring wealth and abundance for the man of
generosity, come bearing universally desired honour and
excellence of wealth from the sea and sky and also from
the heavens.






[Names: Yannasatya, Turvase, Turvas, Suryasya, Suryas]
Ashvins, friends of truth and humanity, whether
you live and operate far off in a distant place or you
rule close by over noble people of dedication, all the
same come by the beautiful flying chariot alongwith
the rays of the sun.




[Names: Arvanca, Isam]
sidatam nara.


Ashvins, brilliant creative powers of humanity
and nature, may your horses of the speed of the dawn
bring you hither close to the beauties and glories of yajna
in the sessions. Bearing food, energy and excellence
for the generous people of noble yajnic action, come by


the chariot and grace the yajna on earth and in space.




[Names: Tena, Yena, Suryatvaca, Somasya, Somas]
pitaye.

Ashvins, ever true and dedicated to the light of
truth, come by that very chariot of sunbeams by which
you always bear and bring the wealth of life for the
man of charity, for the taste and protection of the
honeyed soma of yajnic glory.






[Names: Ukthebhirarvagavase, Puruvasu, Sasvat]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and power like the
sun and wind, lords of abundant wealth among the wise,
with songs of praise and sacred words of prayer we
invoke and invite you to the distinguished house of
eminent scholars and leaders, in faith and love, for our
protection and advancement here. Come, and then enjoy
the comfort and have a taste of somaic ecstasy for ever


Mandala 1/Sukta 48


[Names: Usha, Devata, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 48 203




[Names: Saha, Saha]
Glorious dawn, daughter of heaven, come with
splendour, come with majesty. Lady of light, generous
giver, come with infinite wealth, shine forth and inspire
us with fresh lease of life and joy.






[Names: Udiraya, Usascoda]
The abundant lights of the dawn, blest with sun-
rays and the speed of divine energy, move to the earth
to usher in the morning and stir their cows and horses
to start their day, as the sunrays illuminate the world. O
dawn, bring me the blessed voice of truth. Inspire the
munificence of the rich to charity and social creativity.






[Names: Uvasosa]
As the brilliant dawn arrives and shines in
splendour, it sets the wheels of life’s chariots in motion.
On its arrival the yogis concentrate their minds in
meditation as rich merchants send their ships over the
sea. (As the sea is vast for the ships, so is the Divine
presence vast for the yogi’s mind.)








[Names: Atraha]
Usha, O lady of divinity, blessed are those brave
and brilliant spirits who, during your revelations of the
light, concentrate their mind in meditation on the divine
presence to surrender it back to mother Prakrti in the
state of Kaivalya here itself in this life. And surely here
itself in this life, of all these men, that is the wisest sage
of the wise sages who chants and realises the sacred
Name OM which is the direct sound symbol of the Lord.






[Names: Jarayanti]
Like a beautiful young maiden walks the dawn
majestically (across the skies and over the earth),
energising, exciting, exhorting, filling the sky with new
light and life, calling out the humans and animals to
move and the birds to fly away.




[Names: Vayo]
vajinivati.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 48 205


The silent and brilliant dawn replete with energy
stirs up and inaugurates the battles of existence.
Refreshing, and sprinkling, as if, the paths of the seekers
with holy waters, it guides them to their goals. The birds
that fly soar in the splendour of its light.




[Names: Esayukta, Satam]
manusan.


This dawn, clad in wealth and splendour, saddles
her horses long before sunrise and, by a hundred
chariots, comes and joins the world of humanity and
engages them in their activity.






[Names: Visvamasya]
The whole world bows in homage to this dawn.
Noble guide and leader, it brings the light of the world
for all so that they may see the glory of the universe.
Daughter of light Divine, Queen of wealth and
splendour, it lights up and life drives out the darkness
of jealousy and throws off the violence of enmity.








[Names: Avahanti]
O Dawn, daughter of the light of heaven, come
and shine with the beauty of the moon and splendour of
the sun, bearing for us all plenty of good fortune and
brilliant success in our sacred programmes.






[Names: Visvasya, Yaducchasi]
O Dawn, leading light of humanity, when you
shine in splendour, you hold the breath and life of the
world in you. The same, lady of light, harbinger of
wondrous wealth and good fortune, come by your
magnificent chariot and listen to our prayer.






[Names: Tena]
O Dawn, Light Divine, accept and enlighten
whatever best and noblest food, energy and wealth is in
the world of humanity and, by that, lead our fires and
performers of yajna, who sing in praise of your glory,
close to the sacred acts of love and piety in non-violent


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 48 207






[Names: Visvan, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Sasmasu]
Light of Divinity, you bring us from the skies
all the divine powers and energies of the world to partake
of the soma of our yajna and vest in us the best of food,
energy and virility of the early morning which may give
us admirable wealth of sense and mind, speed and
agility, and plenty of cows and horses.






[Names: Yasya]
That light of Divinity whose bright and blazing
lights of bliss shine for us to see and which dispel the
darkness of the night and ignorance, may that dawn of
light give us the wealth of life, universal, beautiful and







[Names: Sukrena, Socisa]
Great and Blessed Light of Divinity, whom the
saints and seers of ancient and eternal vision and wisdom




invoked and invoke for the sake of protection and
advancement, may you, the same lady of light, listen
and approve our songs of praise and prayer with gifts
of light, action and wealth of success and prosperity.




devi gomatirisah.


Light of Divinity, since you have opened the
doors of the light of heaven at the dawn today, bless us
now with a spacious home of love and peace free from
violence and the gift of food and energy, mind and sense
of the Divine, and plenty of land and cows.




Light of Divinity, great mistress of the dawn of
power and energy, bless us with the wealth of life, great,
beautiful and universal, food and energy, dynamic
knowledge, action and splendour, and vision of the
Divine Word and beauty of the earth.

Mandala 1/Sukta 49




[Names: Usha, Devata, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 49 209




[Names: Vahantvarunapsava]
O Divine light of the Dawn, come with
auspicious living energy from the top of refulgent
heaven, and may the red beams of splendour, we pray,
carry the creative energy to the yajnic home of the lover
of Soma.






[Names: Supesasam, Tena, Usastvam, Usastva]
Daughter of Heaven, blessed dawn, by the
refulgent beautiful and luxurious comfortable chariot
you ride, protect and promote this morning the man
dedicated to the Word Divine who loves to eat the holy
food of yajna.






[Names: Vayascitte, Usah]
Blessed Dawn, fiery messenger of light and life,
may humans and animals as the birds of flight, we pray,
rise and reach unto the bounds of heaven in pursuance
of the time and seasons of your arrival.







[Names: Vyucchanti]
Illuminating and revealing this world of beauty
with the rays of light, you shine in glory and divine
majesty. Lady of light, daughter of heaven, O Dawn,
saints and sages of vision and wisdom devoted to life
of the earth and her children celebrate you in songs of
adoration and dedication.


Mandala 1/Sukta 50


[Names: Surya, Devata, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Drse, Suryam, Surya]
The rays of the sun (like the banners of a mighty
monarch) carry the brilliance of light revealing the
omnipresence of the omniscient Lord Supreme of the





[Names: Suraya]
And, as thieves of the night steal away at dawn,
so do all those stars steal away alongwith the darkness
of the night so that the world may see only the sun, lord
supreme of the heavens.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 50 211




[Names: Adrsramasya, Anu, Bhrajanto]
O that I could see the banners of the Lord of
sunbeams, the rays of the sun, alongwith the other
people, blazing like the explosions of fire in heaven.






[Names: Taranirvisvadarsato, Visvama]
O Sun, light of the world, creator of light and
Light Itself, it is you alone who light the lights of the
universe and reveal the wondrous worlds of beauty and
glory. You are the saviour, you are the redeemer, taking
us across the seas of existence.



[Names: Pratyandevanam, Pratyan]
Lord Light of the world, to the noblest powers
of nature and humanity, to the people in the business of
life, to the people in general, you rise directly and reveal
your presence directly in their heart and soul so that the
world may see the light divine directly through their
experience.





[Names: Yena, Tvam, Varuna]
Lord purifier and sanctifier, with the eye with
which you watch the mighty world of dynamic activity
and humanity holding everything in equipoise, with the
same kind and benign eye watch and bless us.






[Names: Pasyanjanmani]
O sun, watching the species of various forms
and traversing and measuring the wide worlds of
existence by days and nights, you move to the regions
of light and heaven. So may the Lord of Light Supreme,
we pray, watch us, guard us and sustain in measure our
life and actions through successive lives and births.






[Names: Sapta, Sociskesam]
O sun, self-refulgent lord of blazing flames and
universal illumination, seven are the colourful lights of
glory which like seven horses draw your chariot of time
across the spaces. In the same way, seven are the
chhandas, metres, which reveal the light of Divinity in
the sacred voice of the Veda.






[Names: Ayukta, Sundhyuvah, Tabhiryati]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 50 213


The sun, bright and illuminant, yokes the seven
pure, immaculate, purifying and infallible sunbeams like
horses to his chariot of motion, and with these self-yoked
powers moves on across the spaces to the regions of


So does the Lord of the Universe with His laws
and powers of Prakrti move the world like His own
chariot of creative manifestation.



[Names: Udvayam, Devam, Suryamaganma]
Let us rise beyond the dark seeing the light
higher and still higher and reach the sun, the highest
light and Lord Supreme of the divinities of the universe.



[Names: Udyannadya, Mitramaha, Hrdrogam]
O sun, greatest friend for the health of life, risen
to day and rising higher to the regions of light, destroy
my heart’s ailment and consumptive disease of the body.






[Names: Sukesu, Atho]
Our consumptive and bilious diseases we




attribute to abuse, fear, infatuation, schizophrenia, infect
any severe mental disturbance, and for cure we assign
these to green and yellow birds, and green and yellow
fluids, soma, sandal, acasia sirissa and turmeric, and
close it with cicatrix.






[Names: Udagdadayamadityo, Dvisantam]
There arises this sun with all the light and power
and glory of the world, scorching and burning off
whatever is negative and injurious to me. O Lord of
Light and Glory of power, I pray I may never be
subjected to the jealous and the destructive forces of
life.

Mandala 1/Sukta 51


[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Puruhutam, Puruhuta, Yasya]
arcata.


Worship Indra, lord of power and glory,
destroyer of enemies. Celebrate and exhilarate Him who
is generous and virile, universally invoked and


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 51 215


honoured, master of the Rks, wielder of wealth, deep as
ocean, greatest of the great, and lord of knowledge and
wisdom. People roam around Him, approach and
meditate on His presence for a vision and experience of
the presence as the rays of the sun do homage to their
source and master.






[Names: Abhimavanvantsvabhistimutayo, Satakratum]
Powers of protection, expertise and excellence
shower love and honour on Indra, lord of power and
glory, giver of desire, pervasive and blazing in the skies,
clad in his own might and splendour, giver of showers
of joy and hero of a hundred noble acts of creation.
And may the youthful and inspiring voice of Eternal
Truth see him rise to the heights.






[Names: Tvam, Sasena]
Indra, you open up the cloud-showers for the
sake of pranic energies. Lord of the earth and master of
motion and dominions of the earth, you open up a
hundred outlets into wealth for the alleviation of want
and threefold suffering of body, mind and soul. You bear
wealth and comfort with food and energy for joy of the




people in a state of sobriety. And reeling the dense forces
of the overwhelming enemy into confusion, you throw
off the adversaries in battle.






[Names: Tvamapamabhidhanavrnorapa, Vrtram, Savasavadhira, Suryam, Surya]
The vapours hold up the wealth of waters in the
cloud. Indra, you open up the cloud-hold of waters when
you break up the cloud with the thunderbolt. And then
you raise up the divine and brilliant sun high up in space
for the world to see.






With your intelligence and tactics, blow off the
cunning fellows of wicked designs, who cheat the
sleeping unwary people and who offer the oblations into
their own mouth. Admirable hero, pride of all, break down
the forts of the demons, and in the conflicts of good and
evil, protect those who follow the paths of rectitude.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 51 217




[Names: Susnahatyesvavitharandhayo, Kutsam, Kutsa, Mahantam]
In the battles against exploiters and destroyers,
protect the men and materials of defence. Destroy the
demon and the highway man for the safety of travellers.
Crush with your feet the great serpentine bubbles of
poison. You always rise and stand for the destruction of
the wicked enemies.






[Names: Tava, Somapithaya, Somapitha, Satrorava]
In you is concentrated all the force and power
together with your love of service. Your wealth, power
and success exhilarates the lover of soma-yajna. Your
thunderbolt in hand is held for the enlightened. Protect
all the powers of generosity, as you destroy all the
inimical negativities.



[Names: Saki]
Know the good, know the evil too, eliminate
the wicked, for the sake of the man of yajnic action.




Ruling over and controlling the lawless, be a source of
strength and inspiration for the yajamana. May all your
actions in yajnas and pious homes be for success of the
good. This is my prayer and earnest desire.






[Names: Anuvrataya, Anuvrata, Vrddhasya]
Subduing the lawless for the law-abiding, fixing
the traitors by proper acts of the patriots, appreciating
and honouring the seniors, the progressive, and the
growing and rising ones to the heights of knowledge
and light of heaven, rejecting the scoffers and
eliminating the skeptics, Indra, ruler, fighter and saviour
marches on.






[Names: Taksad, Sravah]
Ushana, power of love and honour, with courage
and dignity tempered and sharpened, your valour and
grandeur, and your valour and splendour with its speed
and sharpness bounds the heaven and earth. Indra,
admirable hero of humanity, may the currents of wind


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 51 219


fast as mind elevate you, lord of fulfilment, and amply
fulfilled, may they carry your fame to the heavens.






[Names: Mandista, Yadusane, Yadusan, Ugro]
Indra, most rejoicing and specially delighting
in the exciting exhortations of the poets, with his own
essential force and versatile perception of the crooked,
rules over the crooked and the wicked. And, just as the
sun breaks the cloud and drains out the vapours in floods
of rain, so does he, bright and blazing with passion,
advance upon the strongholds of the social suckers,
breaks open their dens and marches ahead with his noble
exploits great as the sun’s.






[Names: Saryatasya]
Indra, in the soma-celebrations of humanity you
ride the chariot of glory won by the brave and the
intelligent and rejoice in the celebrations. And as you
rejoice in the delightful celebrations of blessed
achievements, you pilot the celestial car worthy of praise
and ascend to the heights of heaven.








[Names: Adada, Menabhavo]
Indra, wondrous lord of science and vision,
knowledge and power, you gave just a limited amount
of new knowledge of analytical and creative technology
in short indicative formulae to the distinguished and
dexterous man of discipline keen to listen and create.
And that word of yours, generous lord of noble yajnic
action, became worthy of proclamation and celebration
in world meets for eminent achievements. Generous lord
of vision and wisdom, carry on the order of creation.






[Names: Asvayurgavyu]
Indra, lord of power and governance, who
invites and maintains high intellectuals in the study and
practical programmes of definite sciences has his
reputation among people as sure and prominent as a
column at the door or a sacrificial post in the yajna.
Progressive and advancing, developing the wealth of
cows, lands and intellectuals, horses and other modes
of fast communication, chariots and other modes of
travel and transport, he augments, manages and rules
over all forms of national wealth and takes the country


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 271






[Names: Asminnindra, Sarmantsyama]
This salutation in words of homage is offered
to Indra, lord virile of generosity, sovereign lord of
[Names: Lord]
Adorable, in this world we may live in happy homes,
blest with brave children, in the company of high and


Mandala 1/Sukta 52






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Tyam, Satam, Atyam]
Honour that Indra, lord of glory and virile
generosity who takes us high to the skies. Hundreds of
noble and creative craftsmen together with their expert
performance work on and engineer his glorious chariot
which can cover the spatial paths across the skies for
the sake of protection and defence. I wish I too could
fly by that chariot.








[Names: Indro]
Unshaken like a mountain within the bounds of
its own hold, providing a thousand ways of protection
and promotion for life, that Indra, sun/wind/ electric
charge, waxes in strength and power when it kills Vritra,
breaks the demon cloud holding up the streaming waters,
when it releases the showers of rain, and rejoices with
the food and energy that it creates through the showers.
(So is the ruler for the demons and the people.)






[Names: Indram]
Indra is deep and grave among the serious. In
the light of the dawn, he is a cloud of generosity. He is
brilliant and blissful as the moon in the firmament. Sober
in joy, he is surrounded by sages and intellectuals. With
the best of my intelligence and action I invoke and call
upon this lord Indra, extremely generous and munificent
of food and energy.






MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 223




[Names: Anu, Indramavata]
Indra is in his heaven of light and justice. The
high-priests sitting on seats of grass in his house of
people assist, complete and promote him, Indra who is
the ruler, guide and protector, in the same manner in
which the lovely streams and mighty rivers join and fill
the sea. In his battles against Vritra, clouds of darkness,
hoarders of national wealth and natural resources, his
fighting forces of defence, powerful, undisturbed and
unopposed, straight and sincere in action stand by him
and follow him steadfast in the battle.






Like streams rushing down to the sea, the
defence forces of this warrior hero, Indra, rush to him
to join in his celebration by soma, Indra, wielder of the
thunderbolt, daring the enemy, who showers the enemy
with a rain of arrows and breaks down the threefold
defence lines of the enemy three ways, up, down and








[Names: Parim, Savo, Vrtrasya]
Vritra, the cloud that holds and confines the
vapours of water sleeps in body in the sky. Indra, the
sun, strikes the thunderbolt of lightning on the jaws of
Vritra, a real formidable adversary for the release of the
showers of rain. And then the splendour of Indra spreads
around, glory of power blazes.






[Names: Hradam, Tvasta]
Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world, just
as streams of water reach the sea augmenting it, so do
all the wealths of the world and all the songs of divine
celebration converge to you, centre as well as
circumference of existence, and glorify your sublimity.
Tvashta, maker of the forms of existence, designs and
creates the thunderbolt of lightning to augment your
force of arms to use in battle, and he provides that
splendour of valour for you which breaks open the might
of Vritra, hoarded wealth of nature, for the joy of




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 225




[Names: Jaghanvam, Ayacchatha, Suryam, Surya]
Indra, prosperous lord of noble actions, breaker
of the clouds with currents of lightning energy to let
the streams of rain showers flow on the earth for
humanity, take up the thunderbolt of steel in arms and
strike, and rise to the heavens so that all may see the
sun in all its glory.






[Names: Brhat, Yadukthyam, Yadukthya, Yanmanusapradhana, Maruto]
When humanity, stricken with fear of Vritra and
and powerful songs of praise and prayer rising to the
heavens in honour of Indra, and when the protective
forces of nature such as winds and pranic energy fighting
for humanity move into action and bring showers of
joy from heaven for humanity on earth, then all these
forces and humanity rejoice with thanks and praise to







[Names: Dyauscidasyamavan, Savasabhina]
Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world, when
under the inspiration of soma your thunderbolt with
terrible force breaks open the peak of Vritra, the cloud
overcasting the earth and skies, then with thunder and
lightning, the powerful heavens shaking in the operation
catalyse and turn the vapours into rain showers.






[Names: Yadinnvindra, Atraha]
Indra, lord of power, wealth and glory, if the
earth, which is enjoyable with the ten senses, and all
the people were to wax in peace and joy all days and
nights by virtue of the light of your knowledge and
justice and your power of protection and progress, then
your fame and splendour on earth would touch the
heights of heaven.






[Names: Tvamasya, Cakrse]
Lord of omnipotent force, master of your own
essential splendour, you are beyond this world of earth
and sky. You create the earth, a symbolic measure of
your power, for the sake of life and protection. You


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 52 227


pervade the earth, the waters, the regions of bliss and
the heavens of light and you are transcendent even






[Names: Tvam, Visvamapra]
You are the ultimate measure of the earth and
the skies. You are the highest lord and master of the
wondrous world of heroes. Having pervaded the world,
having measured the spaces and transcended, you are
the ultimate truth of eternal reality. No one is like you,
none in image, symbol or measure, none, nothing.






[Names: Nota]
The heaven and earth approach not His infinite
expanse. Nor do the oceans of waters and spaces find
the end of His universe of glory. Nor can any one rival
the power and passion of the generosity of this warrior
against Vritra, the demon of darkness and drought, in
matters of the joy of living. Nor has He Himself, sole
Lord as He is, created any one else, or any other world,
like Himself or like the world He has created.








[Names: Arcannatra, Marutah, Maruta]
Indra, lord of universal power, when you strike
on the jaws of Vritra with the fatal thunderbolt of
dazzling force in all the battles against darkness and
drought, then the Maruts, high-priests of nature and
humanity, sing hymns of praise for you, and all the
divinities of nature and humanity rejoice with you.


Mandala 1/Sukta 53






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Indraya, Indra, Sasyate]
In this great yajnic house of Vivasvan, lord of
light, we raise our voice of celebrations in honour of
Indra, lord of power and action, for the sake of honour
and prosperity. Rarely is the jewel obtained by the lazy
loons asleep. And slander finds no favour among the
givers of wealth.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 53 229




[Names: Duro, Siksanarah]
Indra, lord of knowledge, wealth and power, you
are the gateway to speed and fast advancement. You
are the giver of divine speech and wealth of cows, earth
and prosperity of life. You are the treasure house of food
and energy. You are the lord giver of wealth and
splendour. You are the leading light of education and
scholarship. You are the refulgent lord of light. You are
the chastiser of the lazy, an inspiration for the ambitious.
And you are the friend of friends. Such is Indra whom
we praise and celebrate in song.





[Names: Saciva, Purukrd, Atah]
Indra, lord of power and glory, lord of wisdom,
Word, and action, versatile giver of success and victory,
most brilliant and omniscient, the wealth all round is
yours, you know. Therefore, O lord of victory, take that
up and bear it along to bless us. Neglect not the desire
and ambition of your celebrant, discount him not.


tafe usu







[Names: Ebhirdyubhih, Indrena]
Indra, lord of power and glory, pleased at heart,
with these lights of knowledge and these streams of
soma, preventing our want and poverty of wealth and
knowledge, bless us with cows and horses, gifts of
divine speech, lands and wealth of mind and wisdom,
and speedy movement in progress, so that, subduing
the evil and wicked enemies, and free from the jealous
and hateful, we may enjoy and live happily with plenty
of food and energy and joyous drinks of soma in a state
of power and prosperity.






[Names: Samindra]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, honour and
prosperity, let us begin well, advance, succeed and
celebrate with noble wealth and power, food and energy,
knowledge and speed, universal beauty and joy and the
light of brilliance. Let us advance and enjoy with divine
wisdom, forceful arms of the brave, prime lands and
cows and sophisticated intelligence, and all this at the
top speed of advancement.





MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 53 231


Lord of truth and protector of the people of truth
and piety, when in the battles against Vritra, demon of
darkness and evil, for the defence of the hero of yajnic
action you resolutely overthrow tens of thousands of
the forces of darkness, then those joyous and generous
fighters and lovers of soma celebrate the victories with
you.






[Names: Yudha, Namya]
With the courage and arms of a mighty warrior
you go forward, engage the enemy and with your valour
and splendour destroy the hostile fort yonder. With your
friends and disciplined warriors, in the far off country,
you uproot the guileful adversary who, otherwise is a
constant challenge and terror to humanity.




[Names: Tvam, Tvam]
By your ardour and brilliance you destroy the
man who troubles the pious, who steals others’ money


and property, and who waylays the travellers and
prevents hospitality. By your own strength you rout a




hundred strongholds of the purveyors of poison and
exploitation and you protect the good creations and
productions of people by disciplined expert masters of






[Names: Sastim, Sruto]
Indra, mighty sovereign, far and wide is your
fame. Twenty are these rulers of the republics in need
of help and they too are of noble fame, come here for
protection. Sixty thousand ninety-nine are their people.
Save them from violence and loss of freedom with the
strong chariot wheel of your sovereignty.






[Names: Tvamasmai, Kutsam, Kutsa]
Indra, lord of power and force of divinity, with
your modes of protection and your modes of sustenance
you cover and protect the man of noble fame and fast
motion and, with your power of fulfilment and
prosperity, you grant good health and full age, love of
hospitality and the mighty thunderbolt of arms and
justice to this great and youthful ruler commanding
honour and brilliance.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 54 233





[Names: Sivatama]
Indra, lord omnipotent of the world, dedicated
as we are to the light of the Rks, we are protected by the
divinities. All friends of yours, we pray, may we be at
perfect peace in holy comfort and sing in praise of your
glory. And by your grace, may we be blest with noble
children and live a long, full and happy life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 54






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Mano, Savasah, Akrandayo]
Indra, lord of the universe and the wealth and
grandeur of life, let us not be boggled in sin and conflicts
of the world. You make the rivers roar, streams to flow
and the springs to sing in praise. Shake us not with fear.
Why shouldn’t the earth and her children, then, attain
to you?








[Names: Arca, Sacivate, Savasa]
Offer homage to Indra, lord of strength, power,
knowledge and wisdom. Sing songs of praise glorifying
the Lord who, with His mighty strength and power of
knowledge and wisdom, creates both heaven and earth
and the sky, and with the same strength and generosity






[Names: Brhacchrava]
Offer resounding words of strength and creative
imagination in honour of Indra, great lord of light and
grandeur. Great is the sovereign republic of the lord of
awful power, awful in his mind capable of wondrous
acts of wisdom. The lord is a good listener and giver of
vital energy and fresh life, and subduer of enemies. He
rides and rushes forward in a chariot drawn by the winds
and sunbeams.





[Names: Tvam, Yanmayino]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 54 235


From the great regions of light, feeling
passionate and indignant, you strike the top of the cloud
and break it with the shattering thunderbolt of sun-
beams. Similarly, righteously and conscientiously
feeling passionate and indignant, with your formidable
actions, subduing the forces of the wicked and guileful
powers, you raise an army to fight for light and justice.






[Names: Svasanasya, Ssusnasya, Pracinena]
Just as the sun strikes the thunderbolt of
sunbeams on top of the cloud which holds the life-giving
waters but deprives the earth of rain, so you, striking
the thunderbolt on the head of the living rich but
hoarding wicked powers of society, with your ancient
and advancing powers of knowledge, make them cry
even to-day. Since you were earlier, and now you are,
the hero of action, who can be superior enough to act




[Names: Tvamavitha, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu, Satakrato]
nava.


Indra, lord and hero of a hundred noble actions,




you protect the good among humanity, the best of them,
the industrious, who destroys the evil and who knows.


Now that the battle is on and almost won for
success and prosperity, protect the tempestuous chariot
of advance and progress and break down the ninety nine
forts of the enemies of humanity.






[Names: Uktha]
He surely is the king, the man, who protects the
good and the true, who knows, enlightens and advances,
who liberally offers in yajna and himself commands
reverence, who advances every unit of the human order
and himself advances in response, who chants the hymns
in honour of Divinity, who is rich and liberal in
prosperity and bright in law and justice, and a liberal
giver over all else. For such a man as this, the higher
powers from above shower rains of grace in generosity.






[Names: Asamam, Somapa]
Indra, unique is your order of governance. Your
intelligence and imagination is unique. May all the
citizens, lovers of soma as they are, prosper by their


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 54 237


karma who, generous and giving, advance your great
strength and system, stability and generosity.






[Names: Tubhyedete, Vyasnuhi, Indrapanah, Indrapana]
Indra, lord of power and governance, for your
service are these many warrior heroes, overflowing with
generosity like the clouds, strong as adamant,
formidable in battle and embodiments of national genius
fit for service and sacrifice for the honour and glory of
the nation. Accept these, grant them the desire and
ambition they have, and make up your mind and resolve
for the growth of honour, prosperity and generosity.





[Names: Rrra, Apam, Abhimindro, Anusthah, Anustha]
The darkest dark mountainous body of vapours
stays enclosed in the depths of Vritra, the dense cloud.

Indra, lord of light and lightning energy, releases the

waters in the form of all the streams earlier withheld by

Vritra and makes them flow in their usual course.








[Names: Raksa]
Indra, lord of power and glory, friend and
protector of the people, bring us the most felicitous
honour, rule over the great republic, protect us, advance
us to power and fame, support the wise, let us march to
plenty of food and energy, and wealth and prosperity
for our noble generations to follow.


Mandala 1/Sukta 55






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Divascidasya, Indram, Indra, Bhimastuvisman, Sisite]
The splendour of this Indra, lord of rule and
light, extends to the lights of heaven. The earth too
cannot rival his greatness with all its expanse. Lord of
strength and power, he is fearsome for the enemies,
warm for the good, and hot and blazing for others. He
radiates light for the dark and strikes the thunderbolt
into the hoarded waters of Vritra and walks around as
the leader among people as leader of the flock.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 55 239




[Names: Indrah, Somasya, Somas]
Just as the ocean with its bottomless depths
receives and holds the streams of water flowing over
the expansive lands and heading towards the sea, and
just as the sun, with its expanse of heavens, receives
and holds the streams of vapours flowing across the
spaces of the skies and then, like the most generous
lord of life, showers the rains for the earth to have a
drink of the soma of joy, so does the ruler lord of light
and power receive and hold the streams of incoming
wealth heading to the vast expanse of the treasury, and
then like a generous lord of fertility showers the rain of
wealth upon the people for them to have a drink of the
joy of life. This ocean, this sun, this ruler, mighty warrior
and protector rises in strength with his glory since time




[Names: Tvam]
hitah.


Just like that cloud of rain, you rule and govern
the great wealth and the rules and laws for the enjoyment
and well-being of life on earth and shine. Thus mighty
and blazing by your own power and splendour, leader
in front of all noble action, you are celebrated as a very






[Names: Vrsa]
vati.


Celebrated is Indra, far and wide in town and
forest and in distant lands, by his admirers in worship
and reverence, lord and bold as he is, expressing his
knowledge and power among people gracefully.
Generous he is, joyous and free, full of blessings for
those who are keen to learn and earn the wealth of life.
And generous of knowledge, power and protection,
glorious all round, he commands the voice of praise
and appreciation everywhere.






[Names: Adha, Indraya]
Great warrior as he is, fighting with the
brilliance of his knowledge, wealth and power against
ignorance, injustice and poverty, he wins great battles
for the people. He strikes the thunderbolt against evil,
wickedness and hoarding for the glory of the order, and
then the people vest full faith in him, lord of splendour


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 55 241
and majesty as he is.






[Names: Sravasyuh, Jyotimsi]
He, ruling lord of power, hero of noble actions,
keen to hear the Shastras for knowledge and food for
the soul, developing projects of growth and progress,
growing stronger and stronger by the earth, destroying
evil and wickedness with his valour and splendour,
creating the lights of art, science, beauty and culture,
rendering the homes and highways free from danger
and highway men, should set the wheels of humanity in
motion and keep the waters flowing abundantly for the
yajamana and the yajnic nation.






[Names: Danaya, Somapavannastu, Yamisthasah]
Indra, lord creator of soma and lover of the drink
of joy, may your heart and mind concentrate on giving.
Lord of fame commanding admiration and reverence,
direct your dynamic and magnetic forces this way for
progress and stability. May your charioteers, leaders and
guides of the nation, be experts on the steering wheel




and in the direction of Dharma. Realise your noble and
brilliant intentions. May no enemies be able to injure
and suppress or terrorize you.






[Names: Apraksitam, Sruto, Avrtaso]
Indra, indestructible wealths you hold in your
hands, and informidable strength in your body. Lord of
fame and good listening ear, innumerable yajnic actions
of dedication are internalised by your admirers in their
mind and body like precious jewels enveloped in beauty,
the same I hold and cherish.


Mandala 1/Sukta 56






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Daksam]
This Indra, lord protector of the land, advances
to meet, guide and protect his people just as the smartest
young man advances and wins the hand of his lady love.
And, holding them as sacred libations in the ladle for
offering into the yajna fire, he ascends the excellent,
golden chariot prepared by experts and driven by the


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 56 243


fastest fuel power, and advances to protect the glory of
the Lord of humanity for them.






[Names: Patim]
Just as the streams flow to join the sea in
common and waters glide round the mountain, so hosts
of admirers, loving and loved and eager to join Indra,
lord and protector of the mighty and versatile order of
humanity, rise and, with their strength and splendour,
augment his power and majesty deep as the ocean and






[Names: Savah, Yena, Susnam]
He, Indra, blessed and blissful, great, inviolable,
shines in his bloom of youth like the peak of a mountain
with the force and brilliance of his knowledge and
power, by which he, formidable hero of the armour of
steel, delights and rules a strong and enlightened nation
in a state of joy and self-restraint in all situations of








[Names: Devi, Indram, Suryah, Surya]
If a generous and brilliant beauty were to come
and join Indra, a brilliant young man of culture,
education and universal values of Dharma, join him as
life partner and inspire him to advance for the safety,
security and progress of society, then, just as the sun
having joined the wonderful dawn, dispels the world
enveloping darkness with his blazing splendour so
would Indra dispel the darkness and suffering of
humanity with his power and splendour.






[Names: Svarmilhe]
Mighty is Indra, blazing in splendour and
rejoicing in the light of heaven. In the vast spaces of
the universe, he wields and sustains indestructible life
supports such as earths and skies. He catalyses the
vapours of water held in the depths of space, breaks the
clouds, and in the mood of power, glory and joy makes
them shower the rains on the earth, thereby forming the
ocean.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 57 245






[Names: Tvam, Tvam]
Indra, with your splendour of omnipotence you
wield the sustaining powers of heaven and earth. You
are all great and glorious in the halls and homes of the
earth. With your power of catalysis you break the clouds
and release the waters by the season, and then in
celebrations of soma yajna you bless the devotees with


Mandala 1/Sukta 57






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Savya, Rshi, Apamiva, Savase]
To the most generous lord of the world, Indra,
great, awfully wealthy, truly fragrant blissful, and
mighty strong, I offer my homage of faith and
celebration whose universal gift of wealth, knowledge
and efficiency of karma, released and open to all for
strength and enlightenment, flows freely like streams
of water rushing down to the sea.








[Names: Adha, Yatparvate, Indrasya, Indras]
Just as the golden glorious thunderbolt of Indra
struck at the cloud reaches to the heart of the vapours
and the treasure streams of water flow down to the sea,
so may the fruits of the holy works of yajnic people and
the wealth of the world flow to you like streams of water
for your fulfilment and freedom. (The ruler is the
nation’s centre and chief yajamana of the nation’s yajnic






[Names: Asmai, Yasya]
O man of knowledge, come to the auspicious
yajna like the glorious dawn bearing gifts of food power
and energy for this awful lord of majesty and charity,
whose house, famous for gold and chant of the Word,
emanates the light and power of science and knowledge
as the spaces in the morning reflect the light and glory
of the dawn.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 57 247




[Names: Purustuta, Nahi]
These are yours, Indra, We are yours, lord
praised and celebrated by all. Beginning with you we
go about the business of living, lord of existence and
shelter of life. Other than you there is no one else, lord
of holy Word, who would listen to our prayer. Hear our
prayer as the voice of earth and humanity and respond
with grace.






[Names: Bhuri, Anu]
Great is your power and splendour, Indra. We
are yours, under your law and shelter. Lord of glory,
listen to this devotee and grant his prayer. The vast
heaven acknowledges and celebrates your power and
glory. This earth too does homage to your might and






[Names: Tvam, Avasrjo]
Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you break that




mountainous cloud of vast dimensions part by part with
the thunderbolt of lightning energy. You release the held
up waters for downward flow in the streams. Eternal
and absolute lord of omnipotence, you alone wield and
sustain the universe and universal energy.


Mandala 1/Sukta 58




[Names: Agni, Devata, Nodha, Gautama, Rshi]
rajo mama ठ devatata havisa vivasati.


Agni, surely born of strength and omnipotence,
and immortal, never hurts. Giver and receiver of
oblations, it is the carrier of yajna and inspirations of
the Divine. Coexistent with other powers of nature, it
traverses the paths of spaces from earth to heavens.
Divine among divinities, when it is fed on holy offerings,
it shines itself and shines others with light.







[Names: Atyo]
Unaging and immortal, instantly consuming its
food, it protects the environment and abides in the winds


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 58 249


and the vast skies. Like a courser on the wings, it flies
and shines on top when it is sprinkled with ghrta, and
as on the peak of heaven, it thunders as lightning.






[Names: Krana, Ratho]
Immortal agent of nature’s karma, living and
acting with pranic energies and the abodes and supports
of life, it is the high priest of cosmic yajna both offering
and receiving the oblations in the dynamics of existence,
and it is the treasure source of wealth. Beautiful and
moving like a chariot, mixing with people, it integrates
with life and age and, brilliant and generous, it creates
and provides the choicest gifts of life.






[Names: Trsu]
Impelled by Vayu, Agni abides in its natural
abodes, in wind and air and in its own flames, moving
on loud and bold by its yajnic actions. Agni, unaging
and ever young, refulgent with your own light, since
you instantly shower the supplicants with favours, may
we, we pray, share your love and protection.








[Names: Tapurjambho, Abhivrajannaksitam]
Voracious power of the jaws of flame, enveloped
in the rays of its own light, inspired by the energy of
Vayu, it moves around bold and fearless like a bull in
the herd of cows in the forest far and near. It moves
across the moving and undecaying world of earth and
sky up and down with its force, and the world feels
afraid of it whether it stays or flies like a bird.






[Names: Dadhustva, Hotaramagne, Sevam, Mitram, Mitra]
Agni, eminent scholars of science among humanity
hold and install you as precious wealth for the people, Agni,
of choice, deserving of hospitality like a dear friend, bliss
incarnate. They install you so that you kindle, rise and
blaze like a divinity of heaven.






[Names: Hotaram, Agnim]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 58 251


Intelligent men of knowledge and divine speech
offer to invoke Agni, as generous yajnic power of seven
beautiful tongues of flame, worthiest of adoration in
yajna. That same power, a very jewel, giver of all wealths
of the world, which they invoke in yajna, I too serve
and attain.




of Acchidra suno sahaso no adya stotrbhyo mitra-


[Names: Agne]
Agni, child of omnipotence, greatest friend most
and comfort of a happy home, energy and power of the
world. Save the devotee and admirer from sin and
perfect him with the strength of steel and beauties of






[Names: Bhava, Urusyagne]
Agni, lord of light and brilliance you are, be a
very home for the admirer. Lord of wealth and honour,
be the very light and honour for the men of wealth and
power. Save the devotee from sin and crime with
protection from within and without. Agni, you are the
lord of intelligence, wealth and knowledge, come post-
haste in the morning and bless me.




Mandala 1/Sukta 59






[Names: Agni, Vaishvanara, Devata, Nodha, Gautama, Rshi, Vaya, Vaisvanara]
Agni, light and life of the universe, other agnis,
lights, fires and vitalities are reflective branches of you
only. All the immortals of the world, devas, jivas and
lights such as the sun rejoice in you. Vaishvanara, vitality
and leading light of the earthly worlds, you are the navel,
centre-hold of the earths and the people, and, like the
pillar of a house or the hub of the wheel of existence,
you hold the people in the law of Dharma and keep
them in their orbit.






[Names: Murdha]
Agni is the top of heaven and the centre hold of
the earth, and it is the ruler of the earths, the skies and
the heavens all. Vaishvanara, leading light of the
universe, such as you are, the brilliancies of nature such
as sun and moon reveal your presence and the nobilities
of humanity celebrate you as light of the Word and life
of the world for the good and the pious.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 59 253






Just as the sun-rays abide in the sun, so do the
stars and planets and the Vasus, abodes of life, abide in
Vaishvanara Agni, self-existent power and force of the
universe. Lord supreme, whatever wealth and vitality
is there in mountains, herbs, waters and humanity, you
are the ruler and ordainer of it all.






[Names: Brhatiiva, Svarvate]
Just as the wide and expansive heaven and earth
honour and serve the sun, source of light and inspiration,
so should the hota, the yajaka, like an expert man of
yajna, offer great, eternal and divine hymns of praise in
honour of Vaishvanara, life universal, self-existent, ever
truly powerful and the best friend of humanity.







[Names: Divascit, Raja]
Vaishvanara, lord omniscient and omnipresent
life and leader of the universe, your greatness and
majesty exceeds the light and grandeur of the heavens.
You are the lord ruler of the classes of humanity, and
with your warlike exploits create treasures of wealth
for the divinities of nature and humanity.






[Names: Pranu, Vaisvanaro, Agnirja, Sambaram]
Spontaneously I celebrate the greatness and
grandeur of the mighty and generous Vaishvanara Agni,
Lord Omnipotent and Omnipresent, whom all people
of the world seek and worship. Lord of light, breaker of
the cloud, dispeller of darkness and destroyer of the
wicked, He shakes the quarters of space and terrifies
the demons of evil.






[Names: Satavaneye, Satinibhiragnih, Puru]
Vaishvanara, lord pervasive and leader of the
world of existence, is the lord of world humanity by
virtue of His might and grandeur. Among the sources
of life sustenance such as earth and showers of rain, He
is the light and glory of the man of yajna. Lord of the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 60 255


reality of existence and the word of truth, in the world
of hundredfold splendour, Agni is praised and
worshipped in a hundred manners in choric songs by
the celebrants.


Mandala 1/Sukta 60






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gautama, Nodha, Rshi, Vahnim, Dvijanmanam]
Matarishva, Vayu energy existent in space and
operative in wind and electricity, bears Agni, carrier of
oblations, mark of fame and honour, honour flag of the
yajna of the world, worthy of preservation and
advancement, instant mover and messenger, always
valuable, twice born of Heaven and Vayu for earth and
the skies. Vayu bears it like a real celebrity and beauty
and generous giver in life and conducts it to Bhrgu,
scientist and technologist, for heat treatment from
cooking to tempering of sophisticated materials. (The
Bhrgu collects and develops the fire.)





[Names: Asya, Divascit]
Ordinary people and men of means both, who




are ambitious for noble yajnic acts, abide by the law
and order of this ruler of truth and justice. Giver as well
as receiver of the gifts of yajna, man of discriminate
wisdom, protector of the people, intelligent and highly
knowledgeable, he takes his place among the people
like the sun before the rise of day.






[Names: Yamrtvijo]
To the man of noble honey tongue, whom men
of yajnic service, men of means and knowledge, seniors
with vision and experience and the people in general
raise higher and greater in the battle of life, to such a
man rising high and higher, may new and newer
appreciation and admiration reach from our heart and
soul.






[Names: Usik, Damuna, Agnirbhuva]
The man of love and initiative worthy of love,
pure and purifying as fire, generous among people,
worthy of choice, commanding loyalty, dedicated to
yajna and social good, such a person should be given a
prominent position among people. Man of peace and


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 61 257


self-control, keeper and protector of the home, creator
and protector of wealth, such a person shines as fire on
top and commands the nation.






[Names: Samsamo, Asum]
Agni, lord of light and leader, Agni, lord creator
and protector of the wealth of nations, instant in action,
commanding speed and prosperity, we, men of the
Divine Word, with all our mind and intelligence, with
all the saints and the wise, cleansing, sanctifying and
anointing you as leader, praise and celebrate you, and
we pray that the lord of wealth and intelligence may
come post-haste and bless us in the early morning.


Mandala 1/Sukta 61






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gautama, Nodha, Rshi, Asma, Rcisamayadhrigava]
In honour of this lord Indra, mighty power, great
leader, holy celebrity and commander of the brave,
informidable to the enemies, I offer an excellent song
of praise in adoration and holiest offerings of the most
spontaneous and liberal homage.








[Names: Indraya]
You offer to this Indra, lord of life and power,
libations of homage and reverence like gifts of dainty
food. So do I bear and offer to him songs of praise well-
structured and formulaic modes of defence and
protection against the enemies of humanity. Come ye
all, cleanse your mind honestly by heart, mind and soul
for Indra, ancient and eternal lord of life and light, and






[Names: Manhistham]
For the sake of the advancement of Agni, the
ruler, and of the people of knowledge and wisdom, I
speak noble and powerfully persuasive words in support
of this exemplary, generous, revered and magnanimous
hero, a great man of wisdom and piety of conduct.






[Names: Girasca]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 61 259


For this Indra, ruling lord of knowledge and
power, master promoter of divine speech and veteran
of wisdom, I create and float a song of praise of universal
and persuasive purport and use words of discriminating
wisdom to strengthen his power and control over the
land and people just as an engineer creates a strong
structure for the chassis of the master’s chariot.






[Names: Viram]
As a driver yokes the horse to the master’s
chariot to drive him on, so, in honour of Indra and in
order to celebrate and exalt him, the brave hero as he is,
treasure home of charity and destroyer of enemy
strongholds, whose fame rings far and wide, I compose
a song in my own words and offer it as a libation to him
with my own ladle in homage.






[Names: Vrtrasya]
Let Tvashta, the Maker, design and form for this
Indra, ruling Lord of power and defence, the thunderbolt
of lightning force blazing for the battle so that he (Indra),
striking with this fatal weapon, taking many enemies
on, may reach the mortal centrespot of Vritra, the cloud




of darkness and ignorance (and release the showers of
rain and prosperity and the light of knowledge).






[Names: Asyedu, Musayad]
In the yajnic programmes of this Indra, lord of
rule and power who measures everything to size, Vishnu,
the great sun pervading everything with its light, drinks
up the delicious holy foods prepared and sent up
sanctified from the yajna, and then, challenging the
mountainous cloud hoarding up the wealth of the same
yajnic foods in the form of vapours, breaks up the cloud
and throws it down (releasing the showers of rain).






[Names: Pari]
For this Indra, blazing as the sun with light and
grandeur, holy voices served and preserved by noble
sages and scholars composed hymns of praise and
offered homage to Indra on the break up of the cloud.
Indra holds both the vast heaven and earth, but these
two do not comprehend his grandeur and greatness
(which exceeds heaven and earth both).


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 61 261


MAUS




[Names: Asyedeva, Svaralindro]
Surely the greatness and grandeur of this Indra
exceeds the heaven, skies and earth. The self-refulgent
hero, universal warrior, brilliant and brave, infinitely
strong and bold, resounds in the universe for battle
against evil and negation.






[Names: Savasa, Susantam]
O lord of power and law, with the strength and
rectitude of this Indra, the universal force of Divinity
uproots the exploitative forces, just as the sun breaks
down the cloud which holds up the rain and scorches
the earth. And just as held up cows are released from
the stalls, so the ruler releases the streams of life on the
earth, enlightened hero as he is, who releases food and
justice for the powers of generosity.








[Names: Isanakrd]
By the might and splendour of this Indra, the
rivers flow and seas roll at will since he gives the blow
(to Vritra and releases the waters below). Ruler,
controller, and giver of power and honour, instantly
victorious, giving liberally to the generous, he creates
firm standing ground for the speedy success of






[Names: Gorna]
Indra, ruling lord of manifold power, fast and
impetuous, wields the thunderbolt of sunrays for this
Vritra, cloud of vapours and darkness, and releasing
the waters for the streams to flow on earth, breaks the
layers of vapours with the thunderbolt as lightning
breaks things into pieces bit by bit.





[Names: Yudhe, Satrun]
Sing and celebrate the old and new exploits of
this fast and powerful Indra in songs of praise, Indra
who, passionate and tempestuous, updating and
wielding the weapons for battle, strikes and destroys
the enemies.


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 61 263






[Names: Janusastujete]
By the power and holy fear of this omnipotent
Indra, the mountains stay firm and fixed, and the heaven
and earth and the people shake with awe. The leader,
abiding in the protective shade of this intelligent and
handsome power and chanting words of praise
immediately rises and grows capable of great action.






[Names: Praitasam]
Indra, sole one lord of himself is the absolute
ruler of many. Whatever he wills of these and
commands, the same is rendered in reverence and
obedience. And Indra himself advances and protects the
hero of power and honour who, fighting for victory in
the battle of horse, spurs on his steed in the direction of
the sun.







[Names: Aisu]
Indra, O Lord of sunbeams, these are the songs
divine, purest and serene, offered by the highest souls
of faith and vision. Bless these souls with universal
brilliance of vision and intelligence, lord omniscient.
Lord Omnificent, reveal your presence in our mind
instantly with the light of the dawn.


Mandala 1/Sukta 62






[Names: Indra, Devata, Nodha, Gautama, Rshi, Susam, Suvrktibhih, Angirasvat]
With selected words of purity and pious deeds
we offer songs of adoration to Indra, lord omnipotent,
poet of Divine omniscience, universal object of worship,
celebrated in the Rgveda, sole guide of humanity and
celebrated in story all over the world, and we pray for
strength and knowledge as for the very breath of life.






[Names: Savasanaya, Yena, Angiraso]
All ye men and women of the world, bear and
offer to Indra, great lord of strength and power,
celebrative songs of adoration and holy offerings in


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 62 265


Samans and hymns of knowledge and enlightenment,
by virtue of which our ancient forefathers, who knew
the life stages of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha
and who were scholars of divine knowledge and
worshippers of the Lord, received the gift of holy speech
and universal knowledge.






[Names: Indrasyangirasam, Brhaspatirbhinadadrim]
Just as a mother gives milk to the child, as
Brihaspati, the sun, breaks the cloud with its rays and
the light reaches the earth, so you, men and women of
the world, in the yajna of Indra and the yajnic
programmes of the scholars of science and society,
shining and advancing like sun-rays, spread the light of
knowledge and the joy of life.






[Names: Saranyubhih, Sakra]
Just as the bright sun breaks the powerful clouds
with its fresh, all embracing, all expansive, sustaining
and sustained but resounding rays of light, similarly
Indra, powerful ruler of the world, shining and
resounding, with balanced and all-sustaining order,
seven orders of the wise, his rolling voice, new and all




expansive radiating powers and burning and roaring
weapons, breaks down the thick and powerful clouds
of darkness which hoard the system’s life and progress.






[Names: Grnano]
Indra, lord of wondrous deeds, proclaiming his
power and presence by the pranic energies of nature,
the dawn, the sun and the sun-rays, dispels the darkness
and creates the food for life and growth. He expands
the earth and the hills and mountains of the earth and
stabilizes the heights of the skies and the heavens.


So should the ruler proclaim his power and
presence dispelling the darkness of ignorance, injustice
and poverty, create food and prosperity and thereby
expand the character, power and potential of the land
and stabilize the common wealth of humanity.






[Names: Tadu, Upahvare, Yadupara]
The most charming act and the most admirable
achievement of this lord Indra of wondrous deeds 18
that in the business of life on the earth all the streams
and rivers and all the four directions of space are full
and abundant with delicious waters and flow for all the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 62 267








[Names: Dvita, Bhago]
Indra, valiant lord of infinite action, concealed
and held and then revealed a duality of creation, two
complementarities, both born of the same mother,
Prakrti, and both coexistent and cooperative, both held
by waves of energy (light and dark), both doing homage
to the lord creator. He, Bhaga, lord of existence and
master of materials, held the two in space as two co-
workers, complementary like the sun holding heaven
and earth and the skies in eternal space.






[Names: Sanad, Krsnebhiraktosa]
Since time immemorial, from the same eternal
cause, co-existent and cooperative from heaven to earth,
the two complementarities of distinctive forms, night
and day, both ever young and born again and again,
move on and on by their own path together yet
separately, the night in the forms of darkness and the
day in the forms of light. Both move in and on serving
the heaven and earth.








[Names: Sanemi, Savasa, Amasu]
Lord of the thunderbolt, eternal creator, master
of wondrous actions, beatific in performance by his own
might holds and maintains equality of company and
cooperation between the light and the dark, raw and
ripe, just as he holds the same herbal juice in the mature
as well as the maturing vegetation and the same white
milk in the white, dark and ruddy cows.






[Names: Sanat, Puru]
Since time immemorial, born of the same cause,
Prakrti, coexistent and cooperative, thousands of earths
immortal in their own nature, undisturbed even by a
breath of wind, observe the eternal laws of their
existence with their innate powers. And as mothers
nourish their child, wives love and serve their husbands,
and sisters love and cooperate with their brothers, they
do homage to the bold and intrepidable Indra.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 62 269




[Names: Sanayuvo, Patim, Savasavanmanisah]
Indra, lord adorable of wondrous action, bright
and generous, people of intelligence, faith and
meditation, desirous of wealth and food for the body,
mind and soul, lovers of yajna, rush to you offering gifts
of homage with hymns of praise and prayer as loving
wives in passion approach the loving husbands and feel
immortalised by the beatific touch of your presence.






[Names: Sandadeva, Dyuman, Sacivastava]
Since eternity, O lord of infinite light and
generosity, the wealths in your open hand never
decrease, never will they exhaust. You are the lord
supreme of light and knowledge. You are the lord of
omnipotence. You are the master of the dynamics of
existence. You are calm and constant. You are the lord of
kindness, favour and grace. Enlighten us with the light
of knowledge. Bless us with your favours and grace.








[Names: Sanayate, Sunithaya]
Indra, lord of omnipotence and infinite action,
lord omnipresent of infinite motion, since eternity you
are ever present just at hand. Nodha, the poet of constant
adoration, Gotama, spirit of fastest thought and
imagination, creates the latest songs of celebration in
honour of you, lord of universal light and humanity,
lord giver of infinite freedom and joy. May the lord of
eternal wealth and joy, may the spirit of eternal vision
and imagination be with us upon the instant with the
light of the dawn.


Mandala 1/Sukta 63






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gautama, Nodha, Rshi, Tvam, Susmairdyava, Indra, Yaddha]
Indra, lord omnipresent, great you are indeed
who, manifest in creation, hold the heaven and earth in
your power and law of omnipotence. It is by that eternal
power and awe that all the mighty mountains and the
impetuous rays of light do not deviate from their fixed






[Names: Yenaviharyatakrato, Puruhuta]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 63 271


Indra, lord almighty of immaculate action,
universally invoked, when you deploy your forces of
movement and advance, observing the rules and
discipline of your universal law, your worshippers and
admirers too hold in their arms the same thunderbolt of
law by which you destroy the many strongholds of the
enemies of life and humanity.






[Names: Susnam, Kutsaya, Kutsa]
Indra, you are ever true, constant destroyer of
these negativities of life and nature. You are the protector
and promoter of the wise artists and scientists. You are
the leader and friend of humanity. You are ever patient
and forbearing. In the great battles of unity and
fulfilment, you eliminate want and drought for the sake
of the young generation, bright and brave wielders of
the force of the thunderbolt of plenty and righteousness.






You only, for sure, Indra, are the universal friend,
wielder of the thunderbolt, and hero of vast operation
who take on the cloud of darkness and want, overthrow
the demon of want and darkness and shower the




blessings of plenty and fulfilment and who, O brave
one, generous at heart, by nature and instinct nip evil
and wickedness in the bud itself.






[Names: Vyasmada]
Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you surely are he
who is unwilling to injure the strong and firm among
humanity and the strong and stable system of the order.
Fall like a hammer upon the disagreeables of humanity,
fix them, and scatter the unfriendly as the sun scatters
the clouds, and open the paths of advancement for
progress in all directions.






[Names: Tava, Jesvatasayya]
In the tumult of the battles of the brave for
victory and the showers of peace and joy, the leaders of
humanity call upon you, Indra, to join the strife and
win. Lord of innate wealth and power, may this help
and protection of yours be available to us in our joint
ventures and our battles for food, knowledge, science
and social progress.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 63 273




[Names: Barhirna, Sudase, Sudas, Purukutsaya, Purukutsa]
Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, ruler of the world,
fighting seven evils and defending the seven-fold power
of the order, you break down the strongholds of sin and
crime for the sake of the generous and the many
splendoured social order. Uproot the sin and crime like
grass and deliver the wealth to the people for the sake
of joy and fulfilment and take the order to the heights
of the sky. (The sevenfold powers are: the council,
councillors, president, army, commander, services and
the people.)






[Names: Yaya, Sura]
Indra, brilliant lord of generosity, ever present and
all protective, brave hero, ruler and holder of the world,
like the flow of nature’s waters, let that various and
wondrous energy, mind and means flow freely for us for
the expression and fulfilment of our spiritual self by which
you again and again direct and guide the conduct of our
soul as well as the psychic flow of our energy.








[Names: Akari, Supesasam]
Indra, lord of the world, by the most eminent
sages of vision and intelligence, like fast motions of
light rays for the sun, songs of homage have been
presented with heart and soul with offerings of faith
and reverence and sung for you.


May the same lord of wealth and intelligence
come to us and bless us with wondrous wealth of food,
light and energy at the break of dawn.


Mandala 1/Sukta 64






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Gautama, Nodha, Rshi, Marut, Vrsne, Sardhaya]
Nodha, poet of vision and wisdom, come and
sing a song of celebration in selected words of pure
beauty for the generous, mighty and omniscient lord of
universal yajna and in honour of the Maruts, divine
energies of universal motion. Settled and constant, pure
and fluent as waters, dexterous of hand in structure and
form, with heart and soul I compose, adorn and chant
holy voices revealed in meditation, presenting
themselves as celebrants of the Lord.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 64 275




[Names: Rudrasya, Rudras, Pavakasah, Sucayah, Surya]
Those Maruts, waves of winds, children of the
light of heaven, reveal the light of knowledge. Friends
of humanity, they are the breath of Rudra, cosmic energy
of prana, generous, inspiring, pure and unpolluted, pure
and purifying, brilliant as sunbeams, replete with vitality,
carrying particles of living energy, they are awful and
sublime in form.





[Names: Yuvano, Rudra, Drlha]
Fresh, powerful and ever young, dynamic
catalytic energies, unaging, free from suffering and
death, they grow and augment. Unseen and irresistible
in motion, strong and steady as mountains, with their
power and force they move everything on earth and in
heaven and all the worlds in existence.




[Names: Citrairanjibhirvapuse, Subhe, Amsesvesam]
In various colourful shapes they manifest and




define themselves in beautiful forms of nature. They
activate the heat and light of vitality in the body system.
Their dynamic powers shine in the athletic shoulders
of their favourite heroes. Life of heroic people, they
arise and shine with their innate light and power from






[Names: Isanakrto, Duhantyudhardivyani]
Creators and makers of ruling powers on earth,
they are the movers and shakers of things and people.
Destroyers of the destroyers, they generate winds and
lightning with their blazing splendour. They distil the
essence of energy from the celestial sources of nature
and, vibrating every particle of matter and energy, they
feed the earth with the nectar of vitality while they go
round in spaces at their tempestuous speed.






[Names: Pinvantyapo, Marutah, Maruta, Atyam]
The generous Maruts, waves of cosmic energy,
feed the vitality of waters. Instantly present at the yajnas
of nature and humanity, as they radiate the ghrta across
the spaces, so they feed and augment milk and juices


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 64 277


from spaces. And for the sake of rain, like a horse in the
reins, they rule the floating cloud and the lightning
thunder and milk the cloud like a perennial spring for
life.




[Names: Mahisaso, Mrga]
Mighty strong and strengthening, magical
stimulators of intelligence and performance, various and
versatile in heat and light, innately powerful and firmly
rooted as mountains and inherently rich as clouds, the
winds are impetuous in motion as the shooting deer and
mighty as the elephants which destroy the forests. If
you use these brilliant powers of light and winds in your
fieriest forces of creation and defence you would destroy
the destroyers and protect the beauties of life and nature
and enjoy yourselves.





[Names: Simha, Ksapo]
Like lions, the Maruts roar and proclaim the
nature of nature (since, as waves of energy, they are in
touch with everything 111 existence and hence know what




itis). Powerful as they are possessed of minute particles
of energy they possess the world and put you in touch
with everything if you know them. Keeping everything
in its own shape and order, coexistent with the clouds
in their action of sun and shower, they vitalise the nights
with the showers of their waves like mists.


(If you know the Maruts, you know what they
touch and proclaim.)






[Names: Rodasi, Maruto]
Maruts, scholars, soldiers, leaders of humanity,
organised in graceful classes, friends of mankind, brave,
breakers of the clouds, with your own power reach over
earth and heaven, address them and proclaim of them.
And may the Maruts, energies of winds, like lightning,
electric energy, in beautiful body form, come and sit in
the strong structure of your cars to take you over earth
and heaven.








[Names: Visvavedaso, Astara, Heroic]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 64 279


Maruts, voracious eaters, excellent and exuberant, who
know and rule the world live together with all their
wealth together, mix together in equal homes with all
their light and power of the elements, hold immense
strength in their hands, fix the arrow on the bow and
shoot. They are the real men, the Maruts.






[Names: Hiranyayebhih, Makha]
Maruts, creators and promoters of water, juice
and milk, powers of cosmic yajna, advancing, self-
driven, shakers of the fixed, makers of the firm,
brandishing their burnishing steel, shatter the mountains
and scatter the clouds like leaves on the pathways by
the golden wheels of their chariots.






[Names: Ghrsum, Rajasturam, Sriye, Marutam]
We invoke, praise and celebrate in song the band
of Maruts, nature’s powers of grinding and crushing,
purifying as fire with refinement, generous, ever active,
children of Rudra, 1.e., products of cosmic metabolism
in the process of joining, disjoining, consuming and




creating. You too love, study and serve the Maruts, most
active energy of the universe, fiery and powerful,
creative and collective forces which bestow the gifts of
life on us. Do so for beauty, prosperity and grace.






[Names: Pranu, Savasa, Arvadbhirvajam]
O Maruts, surely that person soon surpasses
other people with power and merit and settles whom
you protect and promote with your favours. He achieves
food, energy and success with the fastest means of
movement and progress, gets the desired wealth for the
asking with the people around, and collects and
advances the wealth and beauty of yajnic life.





[Names: Carkrtyam, Dhanasprtamu, Satam]
O Maruts, heroes of the world, bear for us valour
and virility of sustained value for work, strength and
courage irresistible in battles, and brilliant excellence
among people of power and honour. Bless us with a
son and a grandson, winner of wealth and victory,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 65 281


worthy of praise and universally admirable, whom we
may nurse, nourish, protect and promote for a hundred
years to advance in life.






[Names: Sahasrinam, Satinam]
O Maruts, heroes of humanity fast as winds, bear
who are ever felicitous and victorious, and happiness
of a hundred fold and a thousandfold order. May the
spirit of pious intelligence and wealth of mind and soul
visit and bless us instantly with the light of dawn.


Mandala 1/Sukta 65






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Pasva, Sajosa]
Tracing and following the foot-prints of the
animal, the master finds where the cattle carrier is hiding
in the cave. So do all the yajakas, loving together and
dedicated, patient and constant in their search, follow
you, Agni, by yogaic stages and find you where you are
hiding in the cave of the heart, creating and commanding
food and energy, bearing and bestowing food and energy




of life, and they sit close around you, preparing and
feeding the fire, seeking and finding.






[Names: Rtasya, Anu, Vardhantimapah]
Noble yajakas dedicate themselves to the Law
of Truth in sacred vows. The search for Agni goes on.
They augment the waters, exalt the earth and, with their
noble actions, promote the agni born in the vedi at the
centre of the womb of nature and the Laws of Divinity.
And the earth grows bright and blest as heaven.





[Names: Pustirna, Sambhu, Atyo]
Delightful as the glow of health, vast and happy
waters, fast as a flying horse in rapid motion, deep and
rolling as the sea, who can stop it, just at hand as it is?






[Names: Jamih]
It is a friend of the seas, dear as a brother of his


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 66 283


sisters. It rules over the wealthy as over its attendants,
and devours the forests. Driven by the winds, it abides
in the waters, clouds and the sunbeams. And it is only
Agni which matures and harvests the grasses and herbs
of the earth.





[Names: Svasityapsu, Somo]
It breathes in the waters, vitalising them, playing
with them like a swan. Most intelligent and wide-awake,
it awakens the people at dawn with its light and yajnic
action. Born of Divine Law and Truth of Nature, it is an
inspirer and energiser like soma. Playful as a calf, it is
omnipresent, shining far and wide.


Mandala 1/Sukta 66






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Rayirna, Takva]
Wondrous as wealth and beauty, illuminating
as the sun, breath of energy as life itself, ever present
and essentially constant as a son, restless as a falcon,
abiding with the forests and sunbeams, a very mother
cow, nourishing and life-giving as milk, it is pure and


blazing, shining and revealing all.






[Names: Dadhara, Rsirna]
It is the treasure of peace and welfare. Soothing
as ahome and food as barley, it is the winner of victories
for humanity. Worthy of reverence as a seer, it is admired
of people. It is worthy of admiration as a war-chariot
and bears life, energy and long age for us.






[Names: Durokasocih, Citro]
Lord of awful light for all places, eternal like
the yajna of creation, beauty of the home like the wife,
for all, wondrous of form and character that shines
among people like the very sunlight, it is magnificent
as a watrior’s chariot, blazing in battles with victory.






[Names: Seneva, Yamo]
Like an army sent up to advance in battle, it


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 67 285


wields power and force. Like an electric missile of fire
itis blazing and voracious, a symbol of light and fire. It
is the guide, controller, and destiny of all that is born,
and the guide, controller and destiny of all that is on
way to life. It is the paramour of maidens and the
protector of wives.






[Names: Sindhurna]
Just as cows return to their stall, just as rays of
the sun withdraw to the sun, just as streams and rivers
flow down to the sea, so may we all, moving as well as
settled people, attain to you, Agni, light of the sun, and
the Lord Almighty.


Mandala 1/Sukta 67






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Vanesu, Srustim, Ksemo]
Just as a ruler selects a young, unaging and
enthusiastic worker, best of the desirable lot and
friendliest among people, so does Agni select and bless
a devotee for the divine mission of life’s yajna. May
this Agni, Lord of yajna, Itself the giver and receiver,




carrier of the fragrances across life and the world,
immanent in forests and manifest in sunbeams,
happiness incarnate, creative and blissful as yajna itself
be our sustainer, protector and promoter in life and select
us for the sacred mission of Divinity.






[Names: Haste, Vidantimatra]
People of faith and dedication, possessed of
sacred intelligence who chant and meditate on mantras,
divining into the secrets of nature and divinity with their
heart and soul, come to know and realise here itself in
actuality the presence and attributes of Agni which is
immanent in the depth of the soul, reveals Itself, holding
the wealths of the world for the devotees, and establishes
the dedicated generous brilliancies in knowledge, power
and wealth of the world and protects and promotes them
in life.


[Names: Priya]
The eternal lord of existence, Agni, light and


life of the universe, holds the earth as He holds the sky
and sustains heaven in space with true mantras of Rtam


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 67 287


(which are identical with His thoughts and laws of
nature). Agni, lord and spirit of the universe, deepest in
the depth of the soul as you are, protect the steps of the
growth of the soul’s vision of divinity, guard them
against the violence and vulgarity of brute force.






[Names: Yaim]
One who knows Agni existent in the cave of
the heart, takes the shower in the stream of Truth and
life flowing from Divinity. Those who tie the knot with
the presence, serve It and shine the path of realisation
along the steps, to them Agni reveals the secrets of the
wealths of life and light of the Spirit.






[Names: Cittirapam]
Agni, that universal spirit and energy of life
which manifests in form and measure in the shoots that
come forth in the herbs and trees and in the child in the
womb of the mother, that superconsciousness, the
realised souls experience when they have collected their
consciousness as if behind closed doors, when even the
motion of their pranas has been stilled.


(The energy of life which is the heat, vitality




and glow of health in life forms, which is universally
active, the scientists and yogis realise in a state of total


Mandala 1/Sukta 68






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Srinannupa, Pari]
The blazing, vibrating, ripening, perfecting
power and energy of the Lord, Agni, that sustains and
beautifies the world pervades and abides by the moving
and non-moving forms of existence and covers as well
as brightens and defines the day and night with His
presence. He is the sole one lord and light of all the
brilliancies of the universe by virtue of His own might.






[Names: Adit, Suskad, Jivo, Bhajanta]
Brilliant lord of existence, most generative
support of life-force arising from dry sources of energy,
all the brilliancies of the universe join your sacred act
of creation. All of them worship your divinity in truth
and faith. All of them with all their manners, customs,
rituals, in short with every motion of their thought and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 68 289


body, do homage to your laws of existence and your






[Names: Rtasya, Yastubhyam, Siksat]
Agni, first impulse of creative intelligence,
wielder of the laws of Truth and laws of evolution, life
of the universe, all the forces of existence do your
bidding and perform their action. Lord all percipient
and omniscient, whosoever be intelligent and give away
charity in homage to you or learn from your eternal Word
and universal acts, bless him/her with the wealth of the






[Names: Hota, Icchanta]
Lord of light, high-priest of the cosmic yajna of
creation and generation, receiver of oblations and
creator and begetter of blessings, immanently seated in
humanity, Agni is the lord ruler and controller of these
wealths of life, and its yajnic creations. Ye men and
women of intelligence and generative science mutually
desirous of creative energy and fertility together in your
body system, know the science of generative yajna with


your knowledge, education and expertise.






[Names: Piturna, Puruksuh, Puruksu]
If men of genius and action were to dedicate
themselves to yajna and listen to the divine voice and
obey the discipline and command of this divine Agni as
children listen to the father and do his behest, then the
omnificent Lord of wealth and omnipotence would bless
them with showers of wealth and open the beautiful
doors of heaven and happiness to them.


Mandala 1/Sukta 69






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Sukrah, Pari, Prajatah]
Bright and blazing, pure and purifying as the
sun, lover of the dawn, filling both earth and heaven
like the light of the sun, Agni, emerging and rising,
shines over all with its light and power, being both
generator and generated of the divinities of the earth.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 69 291




[Names: Vedha, Jane, Seva]
Lord of light and intelligence, free from pride
and infatuation, knower of right and wrong, light and
dark, generous as cow’s udders overflowing with milk,
Agni ripens and sweetens the food of life. Like a
benefactor of humanity, worthy of invocation and
invitation, sanctified in the middle of the home, it adds
to the delight of the family.




Be Putro na jato ranvo durone vaji na prito 1750 vi

[Names: Viso, Agnirdevatva]
Rising like a darling son, delight of the home,
beautiful and joyous as a horse, Agni takes people across
the hurdles of life. To whatever creative and productive
yajnic programmes people invite and invoke Agni, It
joins the people with Its light and divinity of power and
blesses them with all the wealths of life.






[Names: Nakista]
Agni, none of these people violate your laws
and discipline since you do good to them, for them.
Agni, Lord of light and life, it is your grand act of




generosity that you, joining with people of equality,
repair their infirmities and ward off their sins without
doing violence to anyone or anything.






[Names: Tmana]
Agni, bright and blazing like the sun, lover of
the dawn, is the dispeller of darkness like the first ray
of morning light and reveals the beauteous forms of
things, opening the doors of yajna, and destroys
suffering. Carrying gifts of homage for it with their heart
and soul in every noble act of yajna, let all the people
know It and bow to it.


Mandala 1/Sukta 70






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Vanema, Agnih, Agni, Janasya]
We, ancient people, with our heart and soul
honour and worship Agni, Lord of universal wealth and
power, brilliant and blazing Divinity, who knows,
pervades, reaches and controls all the divine laws and
rules of the world and the origin, birth and history of all
the people and nations.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 70 293






[Names: Garbho, Garbhasca, Adrau]
Agni abides at the heart of the waters and the
pranic energies of the universe. It is at the heart of
forests, sunbeams and all the lovely and beloved
beauties of the world. It is at the heart of all that is still
and all that moves. It abides in the cloud and in the
mountain and it is the centre of the homes of people.
Universal, immortal, free and absolute, it is the very
life and ruler of everything in nature as it is the life and
ruler of all the people for their sake only.






That Agni is the lord of night and day. It is the
giver of wealth and power in ample measure for anyone
who adores it with hymns of divinity. It is aware of all,
knows the manifestations and operations of all the
divinities of nature, and it knows all that are mortal.
Lord of knowledge, wealth and power, protect and
promote all these children of nature and the earth.








[Names: Vardhanyam, Arddhi]
The nights and days of various hues and forms
since time immemorial serve this Agni born of constant
Prakrti inspired and energised by the Divine Laws of
Rtam, which is the delight and impeller of all that is
still and on the move. Let the man of the yajna of science
and research study and advance the knowledge of this
Agni abiding in light and the sun, doing all the real
actions and operations of the natural world.






[Names: Gosu, Purutra]
Agni, lord sustainer of life and the world, you
in-vest the cows and forests and the earth and sunbeams
with excellence of quality, virtue and wealth. May all
powers of nature and humanity bear and bring joy for
us. May all people doing homage to you in various ways
receive from you and bear and advance knowledge like
children receiving patrimony from the parents.






[Names: Sadhurna]
Immensely loving, generous and venerable as a
saint, heroic like a brave archer, terrible like the
dispenser of punishment, and blazing and brilliant in


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 71 295


the battles of life: such is Agni, light, life and might of
the world.


Mandala 1/Sukta 71






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Svasarah]
Like married women in a state of love and desire
meeting the loving husband for the joy of living, like
cows of the same stall going up and out to welcome
and feel the sallow, ruddy, wonderful and brilliant dawn,
harbinger of light, for a fresh lease of life, let all the
people together in love and faith always worship the
wondrous, loving protector, Agni, eternal father, for a
fresh lease of life and the joy of living.






[Names: Vilu, Cakrurdivo]
Our forefathers sustain our strength and
constancy. The Angirasas, sustainers of life, the winds,
and our fathers with Veda-mantras, break the cloud for
us with the voice of thunder. They create the path to the
vast heaven and the space and show us the way to rise




to the sun. They know the light of the dawn, the
brilliance of the day and the bliss of heaven. They give
us the light, the day and the bliss and vest us with an
identity of splendour, a banner of recognition and a ruler
and the law.






[Names: Dadhannrtam, Atrsyantirapaso]
Holding on to Truth and Dharma, wielding the
knowledge and power of Agni, lord of light, then
possessing wealth as the Vaishyas, giving nourishment
and help without thirst or selfishness, doing good acts
with generosity of giving food and social service and
promoting nobilities, specially children, the people and
specially Brahmacharinis move on in life with grace.






[Names: Mathid, Syeto, Adim]
If the wind, bearing the wealth of agni, and
others were to churn out and produce fire and electricity
which then emerges bright and victorious in every home,
then the scholars of science would refine and develop
it for the purpose of communication and transport and


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 71 297


use it as ambassador for the grand ruling power and
order of the society between one people and another in






[Names: Mahe, Srjadasta]
It is the sun, self-refulgent giver of comfort and
bliss, reaching all with its rays, knowing all and revealing
all, who creates the nectar of life for the great fatherly lord
of heaven, Agni, who radiates light like a mighty hero of
the bow shooting arrows for the purpose of humanity,
and who vests the light and splendour of the morning in
its daughter, the dawn, dispelling the darkness. Who can
get away from it or steal the light? None.






[Names: Vardho, Anu]
Agni, lord of light and life, who ever lights the
fire in the home in the vedi, whoever in fervent love
and faith offers food and reverence in yajna every day,
you, giver of twofold advancement in knowledge and
valour, grant him full age of honour and glory. Who
ever you inspire and send up to battle of the chariot,


you bless with the all-round wealth of life.






[Names: Agnim]
All foods, all that move and ripen go to Agni
like the seven restless streams heading to the sea. The
web of our life is incomprehensible to those on the move.
May the Lord of Omniscience direct our will and
intelligence and establish us among the wise and the
brilliant sages of vision.





[Names: Agnih]
When pure light and lustre, living and sanctified,
come to the ruling soul for the fulfilment of desire and
perfection, then Agni creates the strong, praiseworthy,
healthy and self-dependent youth, perfects and guides
him in the battle of life.






[Names: Mano, Rajana, Mitravaruna]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 72 299


The sun that instantly goes on its course in orbit
all by itself as at the speed of mind and rules over all
the Vasus, and Mitra and Varuna, brilliant powers of
universal love and justice of the Divine with hands of
generosity, which protect and promote the cherished
immortal values of life on earths as milk in the cows:
all this is the gift of Agni.



[Names: Nabho]
Agni, lord giver and protector of life, let not
our ancestral values of love and friendship be destroyed,
all-knowing and visionary creator as you are. Old age
destroys the health and beauty of life as the cloud covers
and hides the sun and sky. Lord protector and preserver,
come before the onslaught of that, stop that and help us


Mandala 1/Sukta 72






[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi, Agnirbhuvad, Puruni]
Agni, the man of faith and devotee of Agni, lord
of life, light and wealth of existence, holding in hand
the many hymns of the poetry of the eternal poet of
omniscience, all-time beneficial to humanity, observing
the rules of Dharma, and doing all the essential acts of
immortal value becomes the highest master of the
wealths of life and existence.






[Names: Asme, Sramayuvah]
People ordinarily do not attain to our darling
Agni, immanent and transcendent lord of existence. But
all the immortal souls, men of divine intelligence
dedicated to divine love, relentlessly following the paths
of Divinity, holding on to piety of faith in reason and
passion both, reach and abide in the beatific state of
supreme bliss in Agni’s direct presence.






[Names: Saradastvamicchucim, Sucayah, Namani]
Agni, lord of light and cosmic yajna of
evolution, those people of pure and dedicated soul who
serve you, lord of purity, for three years with oblations
of ghrta in yajna would justify their name with fame
and yajnic karma and also perfect their physical


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 72 301


existence in perfect bodies reborn in happy and






[Names: Vidanmarto]
Dedicated yajnic souls, lovers of Rudra pranas
and devotees of Rudra, lord of justice and dispensation
of karma, know, reach and replenish the vast heaven
and earth with the fragrance of yajna. Such a man in
mortal body finds the objects of his desire and, rising to
divine knowledge, attains to the beatific vision of Agni
abiding in the highest state of man’s spiritual experience.




oF Sanjanana upa sidannibhijnu patnivanto nama-


[Names: Ririkvamsastanvah]
Knowing well the science of yajna, let men of
yajna with their wives sit on their knees doing homage
to the adorable Agni and to others, parents, teachers
and seniors. Men of purity, they would be purifying their
own bodies, and they would abide as friends protecting
each other in yajnic action and protected by yajna every
moment of their life.








[Names: Trih, Tebhi]
Agni, lord of life and positive living, those
devotees established in you and dedicated to yajna, who
know and achieve the thrice-seven deep and secret
stages of yajna and abide therein, protect and preserve
thereby the immortal wealth of life. Lovers of yajna and
the yajnics, protect and promote all movable and
immovable wealth of life, humans and animals all.


(According to Swami Dayanand the thrice-seven
are: reading, reflection and meditation across the four
Vedas, knowledge, practice and industry through
Dharma, universal values of life, Artha, economic and
social achievement, Kama, love and emotional
fulfilment, and Moksha, ultimate freedom. Another way
to explain it is to refer to the threefold meaning of yajna:
reverence and worship, socialisation and social service,
and charity including protection and replenishment of
the environment, and then apply those to the seven
stages of existence: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Swah, Maha, Janah,
Tapah and Satyam. This mystique of yajna is described
in detail in the Brahmana works on the Veda and briefly
in the Upanishads, Katha and Chhandogya specially.)




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 72 303




[Names: Vidvan, Vayunani, Antarvidvan]
Agni, lord omniscient of the sciences and ways
of the world, you continuously provide nourishing
foods, healing herbs and means of comfort for the life
and sustenance of the children of the earth. You know
the divine paths of spiritual evolution between earth
and heaven. Pray, be the harbinger of holy fragrance of
Divinity like a prophet for us without relent or delay.


faze ॥




[Names: Svadhyo, Vidad]
Men of noble thought and action, who know
the seven streams of light flowing from heaven, who
know the paths of Divine truth and spiritual evolution,
who know the celestial doors of existential wealth and
divine bliss, realise and bring to the earth all good for
the cows, for the mind and senses, message of
knowledge, strength and constancy, and immunity
against suffering, virtues by which the human
community enjoys peace, health and comfort in life.








[Names: Mahna]
Just as all parents abide by their children, men
of noble action abide by the way of knowledge and
virtue for the attainment of the nectar of salvation, the
earth abides by her children with her great virtues and
universal generosity, the mother abides by her children,
the vast heaven abides for the support of her creations,
and the sun light abides by the birds, so do I abide with
life for the sake of good actions in the yajna of life.






[Names: Ssriyam, Adha]
The Immortals, realised souls with the vision
of Divinity, create the beauty of knowledge, honour and
happiness here on earth itself as if the light of heaven is
blessing the world with its benign eyes through the
divinity of Agni. Agni, like streams released from the
waters of space flowing on the earth and blessing it with
joy, the rays of light and flames of fire: all constantly
revitalise humanity like the light of the dawn
resurrecting life and nature after the cover of darkness.


Mandala 1/Sukta 73


[Names: Agni, Devata, Parashara, Shaktya, Rshi]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 73 305




[Names: Rayirna, Syonasiratithirn]
Agni is young and fresh, a philanthropist like a
noble heir to the knowledge, power and wealth of
ancestors, a controller and disciplinarian with policy
like the noble and benevolent policy and orders of the
wise, pleasing and blissful like a wise and learned guest
enjoying liberal hospitality, and one who helps you cross
over the seas of life like a priest conducting the yajna in
the house of the yajamana.






[Names: Devo, Puruprasasto]
Protector and promoter of truth like the bright
sun, he saves from sin and evil and defends and
augments all the strength and powers of humanity.
Highly praised and revered like light and beauty, he
knows the essences of things and traverses the right
paths of life. He is kind and helpful like the very soul of
the community, and like the conscience of the people
he wields, supports and commands the nation in every
respect. Such is the ruler.








[Names: Purah]
Holding the world like the brilliant sun, ruling
over the heart like a sincere friend, he closely abides by
the earth. The people of the state live together in unison
like young and brave children of the house living
together in a blessed home. The women are pure and
worthy of praise like wives dedicated to the husband.
Such is the leader.






you every day in the home in the land of peace and
stability and winning ample knowledge and power,
wealth and honour. Lord of universal energy, life of the
world, be the treasure home and giver of the wealths of
existence for all in this life in this world.






[Names: Sanema]
Agni, lord of light and life, may the men of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 73 307


wealth and power be blest with abundance of food and
energy. May the brilliant men of knowledge, generous
teachers, be blest with long and full age and good health.
May the people engaged in economic endeavour win
science and success in their battles of the people, playing
their part among the brilliancies of the nation for the
sake of honour and fame.






[Names: Rtasya, Paravatah]
Cows yearning for their calves and overflowing
with milk in the udders drink of Agni’s law of nature
and follow it in love. Rays of light, sharing the splendour
of the sun from afar bring favours to the earth by the
law of Agni. Rivers flow from the vicinity of the
mountains to the far off seas by the law of Agni.
Sunbeams break the cloud by the law of Agni. (So
should mankind follow nature’s law of generous Agni
in yajna and shower love and favour on all life and the







[Names: Sravo, Nakta]
Agni, lord of cosmic yajna, praying for will and
intelligence and sharing your immanence of power and
splendour, the high-priests of nature sent up their
oblations into the vedi of heaven and created the night
and the dawn, both different in form as flame and smoke.
They filled the dark into the night and the blazing red
into the dawn.


Agni, lord of cosmic yajna, praying for pious
will and intelligence, the high-priests of human yajna
sent up the fragrance of their oblations into heaven and
realised the mystery of night and dawn, both different
in form like flames and smoke arising from the vedi.
They associated the dark with the night and the blazing
red with the dawn.


(Note: To understand this mantra further,
reference may be made to Rgveda 10, 90, Yajurveda 31
and Atharva-veda 19, 6, and 10, 8, 23.)






[Names: Chayeva]
Agni, the mortals whom you inspire and guide
for the achievement of wealth, may they all and we all
be blest with wealth and honour and the favours of
Divinity. Lord omnipresent, pervading the earth, the
skies and the heavens, the entire universe abides with
you inseparably since you are one with it as body is
with the shadow and you shelter them all.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 74 309






[Names: Arvadbhiragne, Isanasah]
Agni, lord of light and wealth of life, we pray,
under your shelter and protection, let us continuously
have horses with horses, brave men with men, and heroic
children with children. Inheritors of the wealth and
knowledge of our ancestors, let us be good managers
of our heritage and move ahead. And may men of heroic
vision and wisdom give us protective guidance for
hundreds of years.




[Names: Sakema]
Agni, lord of light and life, omniscient giver of
knowledge and vision, may these holy words of divinity
be songs of faith and love for our mind and soul. May
we, holding holy foods and blest by words of divine
souls, be steady on our path of life and be able to conduct
the management of life’s wealth in proper yajnic manner.

Mandala 1/Sukta 74






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Upaprayanto]
Are asme ca Srnvate.


Moving close to the vedi of the yajna of love
and non-violence, let us chant holy words of thought
and devotion in praise of Agni, lord of light and yajna
who listens to us from far as well as from near.




[Names: Araksad]
Agni is the eternal lord of yajna who, in
gatherings of people meeting for the purpose of
fellowship and yajna of love, protects and promotes the
wealth of the generous yajamana.



[Names: Dhananjayo]
And let the people praise and celebrate Agni
who dispels the clouds of darkness, creates and protects
the wealth of the charitable yajamana, and gives us
victory in the battles for wealth one after another.





[Names: Yasya, Dasmat]
Agni, you are the harbinger of light. Wherever
you go, you carry holy sacrificial materials into the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 74 311


house for the joy of the family and conduct and
accomplish blissful yajna which dispels want and
suffering from the home.






[Names: Tamit, Jana]
Agni, Angira, breath of life for the world arising
in yajna as the child of omnipotence, you are the same
whom people call the lord of brilliance, master of
science, waters and of the skies, worthy of being invoked
in yajna for the gifts of wonderful wealths.



[Names: Havya]
Agni, lord of light, beauty and joy, you are the
power who bring in here close to us the brilliant and
generous divinities worthy of invocation for their
celebration and harbingers of holy gifts for the joy of
the yajamana.



[Names: Yadagne]
Agni, lord of light, power and yajnic communi-
cation, when you move on your mission then the




tempestuous roar of your superfast chariot is not even




Lord of light and power, Agni, protected by you
and blest with your speed, the generous and creative
yajamana of scientific adventure, superfast, free and
bold, shoots from one place and reaches the other.





[Names: Devebhyo]
Agni, lord of light, wealth and generosity, you
are ever keen to shower upon the charitable yajamana
and eminent scholars of scientific brilliance abundant
gifts of valour, honour and universal excellence.


Mandala 1/Sukta 75




[Names: Agni, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Jusasva, Havya]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and speech, since
you accept sacred words and sacrificial foods into your
vedi-like holy mouth, be kind to receive and enjoy the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 75 313


most liberal and extensive words and most divinely
inspired prayerful exhortations of ours and be pleased
to bless us.






[Names: Angirastamagne, Angirastamagn, Vocema]
of enlightenment, bless us, and then we would speak
the eternal victorious words of divinity dear to you.






[Names: Kaste, Sritah]
Agni, who among people is your brother that
knows well? Who is the giver? Who is the yajaka? Who
are you? Wherein do you abide.



[Names: Tvam, Sakha]
Agni, you are the brother and saviour of the
people. You are the friend. You are so dear and
affectionate a source of fulfilment. You are the friend
of friends, adorable for your companions.








[Names: Yaja, Mitravaruna, Agne]
Agni, do yajna for Mitra and Varuna, pranic
energy of prana and apana. Do yajna for the divine
energies of nature. Do yajna for Rtam, promotion of
Eternal Knowledge of divine Law. Do yajna for the sake
of your own home and for self-control and self-culture.


Mandala 1/Sukta 76




[Names: Agni, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Santama]
va te manasa dasema.


Agni, lord of peace and enlightenment, what is
your way to the improvement of mind? What is the most
tranquillising exercise of the mind? Who attains to
laudable success in the realisation of Divinity by yajnas
of study, socialisation and self sacrifice? By what state
of mind shall we offer to serve and honour you?




[Names: Ehyagna, Avatam]
mahe saumanasaya devan.


Agni, lord of kindness and benevolence, come
to us fearless and bold and lead our yajna as high-priest
to take us forward. May the heaven and earth which


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 76 315


sustain the world be with you. Come to the noblest
brilliancies of humanity for the sake of peace and joy
of the mind and soul.






[Names: Somapatim, Somapati]
Agni, lord of light, power and justice, burn off
the evil to extinction. Be the saviour and protector of
yajnas of common endeavour from violence. Bring in
Indra, lord of energy and the joy of soma. And we shall
extend the heartiest welcome and hospitality to him.






[Names: Prajavata, Vesi]
Agni, power of yajna and harbinger of joy and
prosperity, creative force of nature in yajna, voracious
consumer of input oblations and creator of a
thousandfold wealth and energies of life and prana, I
invoke you with holy words of social import for the
sake of all my people. Come to the yajna with blessings
of divine brilliancies and sit on the vedi. Front leader
as you are, creator of wealth as you are for the hearth
and home of people, spirit of yajna as you are, bring us
the holiest sanctifying materials for our life of yajna
and enlighten us on the art of advancement and progress.








[Names: Yatha]
Just as a person, being a poet going with the
poets, performs yajna in honour of divinities and brilliant
persons, with the sacred materials of a noble and
noble visionary, truer and more sincere than truth and
sincerity itself, perform yajna for us in the home today
with a beautiful ladle and the divine voice of wisdom.


Mandala 1/Sukta 77






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Katha]
What shall we offer, how shall we offer, what
appropriate words worthy of divinities, to this Agni,
lord of yajna, light of knowledge, loving, kind and
righteous, who, immortal among the mortals, is the
master of eternal truth and Law, lord promoter of yajnic
projects, most adorable and most sacrificing, creates
brilliant and generous celebrities?




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 77 317




[Names: Agniryad]
All ye yajakas, do honour and homage with
salutations and oblations in yajna to Agni, harbinger of
peace and bliss, ever true in nature, attributes and
functioning, most creative and generous performer in
yajna, who invokes the divinities for humanity, knows
and awakes all to knowledge and self-awareness, and
guides and leads the yajakas with his heart and soul.






Agni is the power and performer of yajna. He is
human, close to humanity. He is good and saintly. May
he abide as our friend, master of the wonderful chariot
of existence. Lord of love, beauty and goodness as he
is, him only, in the noblest yajnic programmes the
loving, pious and knowledgeable people approach for
address and redress, first and supreme as he is.







[Names: Agnirgiro, Tana]
He who among our people is the most human
and gracious, destroyer of violence, is Agni, lord of light,




power and leadership. May he join our voices and the
powers of governance with defence, protection and
progress and hold it together with the wealth of the
nation and those who are men of honour, strongest in
courage, endowed with food and energy and have the
desire for knowledge and wisdom.






[Names: Evagnir]
And Agni, lord ruler of truth and law, omniscient
of things in existence is praised and acclaimed by sincere
admirers and men of piety and dedication. And he,
among these, providing for food, energy and prosperity
and the light of knowledge in abundance, himself
growing higher in knowledge, self-satisfaction and all


Mandala 1/Sukta 78




[Names: Agni, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Dyumnairabhi]
Jataveda, Agni, omniscient lord of universal
vision, we, men of knowledge and your admirers, offer
homage to you with all our wealth and honour and our
noblest songs of praise.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 78 319



[Names: Tamu]
The man of knowledge and admiration, desirous
of wealth and honour, offers homage and prayer to you,
Agni, lord of light and power, with his voice of the heart.
We do homage to you with all our wealth and power
and with noblest songs of praise.



Agni, you who are lord of light, knowledge and
power and giver of victory, we invoke like the very
breath of life and do homage with all our honour, wealth
and virtue.






Agni, breaker of the cloud and dispeller of
darkness, who shake the evil and wicked to destruction,
we celebrate you in homage with all the power and








[Names: Avocama]
We all, free from sin and evil, offer honey-sweet
songs of praise and celebration in honour of Agni with
all our knowledge and brilliance.


Mandala 1/Sukta 79






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Hiranyakeso, Sucibhraja, Usaso]
The sun, lord of golden beams blazing in the
expanse of spaces, skies and the earth, shaker of the
clouds and tempestuous like the winds, is Agni. The
dawns of pure splendour like fairies and angels of truth
and honour, shining and rising like flames of yajna fire,
revealing like the vibrations of primordial knowledge,
these are Agni too.






[Names: Sivabhirna]
Agni, if your golden sunbeams were to expand
with their forces across the spaces, and if the sun holding
the skies and the earth were to break the cloud pregnant
with vapours, the cloud would roar and showers would


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 79 321


fall, coming to the earth as if with smiling blissful
breezes of joy.






[Names: Yadimrtasya, Aryama, Varunah, Varuna]
When the sun drinking and waxing with the
vapours of water takes these up by the straightest and
speediest paths, then Aryama, the sunlight, Mitra and
Varuna, complementary energies of the sun holding the
earth and skies together, and Parijman, winds and
electric energies in the higher space, create the body of
the cloud.





[Names: Agne, Asme, Sravah]
Agni, lord of the knowledge of existence, creator
and ruler of food, energy and wealths of life and lord of
cows and sunbeams, child of omnipotence, bring us the
brilliance of knowledge and great splendour of life’s
victories.








[Names: Revadasmabhyam]
Agni, that brilliant lord of light and knowledge,
treasure home of wealth and joy, divine visionary of
creation, adorable with holy words, lord of wealth,
blazing with flames and flaming with forces, may he
ever shine and shine us with knowledge.





[Names: Ksapo]
Agni, blazing with light and power, creating and
ruling over nights, days and the dawns, lord of the
mighty order of justice and dispensation, burn up the
evil and the wicked.





[Names: Visvasu]
Lord adorable all over the world in the affairs
of enlightenment, protect and advance us with your care
and powers of defence and development in the
transactions of knowledge and happiness of the people
with your heart and soul.






Agni, lord of wealth and power, bless us with
cherished wealth and power, formidable and invincible


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 79 323
in all the battles of life, overcoming all and ever.




[Names: Mardikam]
Agni, lord of life, light and wealth, bring us and
bless us with wealth along with knowledge, science and
technology that may provide nourishment and health
for all, soothing and joyful for happy living.

[Names: Bharasva]
Most dedicated celebrant in search of peace and
well-being of the soul, raise your voice and say holy words
and sing pure songs of knowledge, wisdom and prayer in
honour of Agni, blazing lord of splendour and vision of
omniscience who would purify your mind and soul.



[Names: Yono, Asmakamid]
Agni, lord of light and power, whosoever far or
near hate us or enslave us, may he be destroyed. Lord
of life and wealth, be kind and gracious for our growth
and progress.


Also: Agni, lord of light and wealth, whatever




you give us, or whenever and wherever you oblige us
in person, that may be for our good and advancement.






[Names: Sahasrakso, Hota]
Agni, lord of a thousand eyes (such as the sun),
lord of universal vision, dispels and destroys the evil,
the demons, darkness and suffering and poverty. High-
priest of cosmic yajna, he is adorable and reveals the
voice of omniscience in the soul.


Mandala 1/Sukta 80






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Ittha, Soma, Savistha]
Giving to freedom and self-government an
exalted place of honour, Brahma, lord creator, in-vested
the joy and excitement of life with animation, growth
and independence. And for the same reason, Indra,
strongest in courage and valour, wielder of the
thunderbolt of freedom and self-government, with your
might and main, strike off the serpent of evil, suffering
and slavery from the earth for all time.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 80 325




[Names: Somah, Yena]
That excitement and enthusiasm arising from
the eagle-shaped vedi of yajna and defended and
advanced by the army in eagle array, raining from
showers of divinity from Brahma, may boost your
morale, and thereby, O Indra, lord of the thunderbolt,
doing homage to the freedom and self-government of
your people with your valour and heroism, you break
the cloud of darkness, want and suffering and release
the flow of plenty and prosperity.






[Names: Prehyabhthi, Savo]
Indra, lord of power and brilliance, ruler of the
land, go forward. Go forward all round. Shake the evil.
Irresistible is your thunderbolt of light and power. Your
power and force is the wealth of the nation. Destroy the
demon of want and drought, release and win the waters,
plenty and prosperity and, in homage and reverence
advancing the freedom and self-government of
humanity, move ahead and higher.







[Names: Nirindra, Srja, Marutvatirava]
Indra, all-ruling creative power of enlighten-
ment and freedom, eliminate evil, darkness and
ignorance from the face of the earth, bring the light of
knowledge and vision of spirit from heaven and,
reverentially advancing the republic of human freedom
and self-governance, create and release these life-giving
and energising waters to vitalise the nation of humanity
to the speed and vibrancy of the winds.






[Names: Indro, Abhikramyavajighnate]
Indra, lord ruler of might, hero of war, adored
and passionate, striking with the thunderbolt on the top
of the ferocious cloud of evil fighting against sustenance
of life, exhorts his own forces of freedom and, in
reverence and homage to the land of freedom and self-
governance, breaks the cloud to let the waters of light
and life aflow.






[Names: Sataparvana, Mandana]
Indra strikes on the head and shoulders of Vrtra,
demon of want and suffering with his thunderbolt of a
hundredfold power and, rejoicing and doing honour and
reverence to freedom and self-government, wants and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 80 327


plans to clear the way for the food and joy of his friendly
allies and citizens of the nation.






[Names: Yaddha]
To you, Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, mighty
ruler of the republic, high as mountain and the cloud,
cheers for incomparable excellence of valour since you,
doing honour and reverence to the freedom and self-
governance of the republic, destroyed that artful roaring
demon of a cloud of darkness with your extraordinary
power.






[Names: Mahat, Anu]
Indra, your naval forces of the thunderbolt stand
by ninety rivers and the sea. Mighty is your power, awful
the valour concentrated in your arms, great ruler,
dedicated in faith and reverence to freedom and the








[Names: Sahasram, Satainamanvano]
Let all together with unanimity honour Indra,
the ruler dedicated in faith and honour to the freedom
and sovereignty of the Republic and the law and
constitution in force under the rules of Veda, universal
knowledge and universal values of humanity. Let a
council of twenty assist and support him for work and
stability of the government. Let hundreds of
commanders obey and admire him for the success and
glory of the land and the people.






Indra, lord mighty as the force of lightning, with
his courage and valour breaks down and eliminates the
force and power of Vrtra, demon of ignorance, injustice
and poverty. Great is that manliness and virility of his.
Destroyer of the forces of darkness and slavery, he
releases the spirit of freshness and the waters of new
life in dedication and reverence to freedom and
sovereignty of the grand world order of humanity.






[Names: Yadindra, Marutvan, Marutva]
Indra, lord of law and the thunderbolt of strength
and power, both these, the great earth and the vast


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 80 329


environment, feel stirred with awe in reverence to your
spirit and passion when you, O lord of stormy troops,
with your valour and blazing brilliance, attack and
destroy Vrtra, demon of darkness and want, to defend
and maintain the sanctity and glory of the freedom and
sovereignty of the republic.






[Names: Abhyenam]
Neither by thunder nor by lightning can Vrtra,
the cloud, terrorize Indra, the sun. Similarly neither by
force nor by fear can the forces of evil, injustice and
violence shake Indra, the ruler, who is dedicated with
faith and reverence to the freedom and self-government
of the people and the republic. Instead, the thunderbolt
of inviolable steel and a hundred-fold lightning blaze
overwhelms this demon of destructive forces from all






[Names: Ahimindra]
Indra, heroic ruler, dedicated in reverence and
faith to the freedom and sovereignty of the republic,
when you fight Vrtra, the cloud of evil and violence,
shoot the force of lightning with your thunderbolt killing




the demon, then your valour and fame as killer of the
serpent of evil reaches heaven and abides there.






[Names: Abhistane, Tvasta]
Indra, lord ruler of the republic, dedicated to
the freedom of the people and sovereignty of the state,
when in the resounding fame and reverberations of your
power, everything non-moving and everybody moving
shines with brilliance, and the artists and technologists,
Tvashtas of the nation, creators and makers of beautiful
things, move with awe in homage to your spirit and
passion for freedom and governance, then your
dedication to the republic would be complete and wholly






[Names: Nahi, Tasminnrmnamuta]
Who would not approach Indra? We all
approach and admire him. Supreme are his virtues and
attributes. Who can surpass? The divinities vest in him
all the wealth desired by humanity, noble yajnic action
and all the valour, splendour and heroism, dedicated as
he is in reverence and faith to freedom and self-
government. In him and under his rule all good people


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 81 331


are blest with wealth of knowledge, action, valour and
fame.






[Names: Yamatharva, Tasmin, Samag]
That intelligence, knowledge and enlightenment
which Atharva, men of love and settled peace, Manu,
men of thought and science, Pita, parents and teachers,
and men of attainment and acquisition developed and
spread across the land in faith and service to the
sovereign republic of the peoples’ freedom and self-
governance, and, like the ancients, vested in Indra, the
ruler, the same multiple sciences and songs of
celebration, the same intelligence, knowledge and
enlightenment, you all, people of the land, acquire and
develop in furtherance of the freedom and sovereignty
of the republic with faith and reverence.


Mandala 1/Sukta 81




[Names: Indra, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Indro, Taminmahatsvajisutemarbhe]
Indra, the hero who destroys Vrtra, the cloud of
want and suffering, and releases the showers of plenty
and prosperity, goes forward with the people for the




achievement of strength and joy of the land of freedom
and self-government. And him we invoke and exhort in
the battles of life, great and small, so that he may defend
and advance us in all our struggles for progress and
lead us to victory.




[Names: Siksasi]
te vasu.


Indra, you are the valiant hero. You are the
warrior taking on many enemies and oppositions at a
time. Even the small, you raise to greatness. You lead
the creative and generous yajamana to knowledge and
power. Hero of the battles of existence, may your wealth,
power and honour grow higher and higher.






[Names: Yadudirata, Yuksva]
When battles confront the nation, means and
money are raised and prizes won for the brave.
Commander of the forces, yoke the forces exuberant
and raging for war. Destroy the enemy. Settle the
victorious in wealth and peace. Indra, pray settle us in
peace and comfort.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 81 333




[Names: Kratva, Anusvadham, Anusvadha, Savah, Sriya, Sipri]
Great by knowledge, awful by action, in his own
right and by his own might, he grows in power and
majesty. Elevated and sublime, blazing brilliant, lord
of horses and speed of motion, he wields the golden
thunderbolt of power and force in both his hands for
the beauty and dignity of life and the republic of






You pervade the earth and all that is earthly. You
pervade the sky. You pervade and fix the bright heaven
in place. Indra, none like you was ever born, nor shall
ever be born. Indeed, you hold, rule, pervade and
transcend the entire universe of existence.






[Names: Ssiksatu]
Indra, lord of the universe, master of life,
provides food and sustenance for living beings. He gives
wealth and comfort for the generous giver and for us.
May the lord take us unto himself and give us knowledge




and instruction. O lord, may we, we pray, share your
abundant treasure of wealth and divine happiness. May
I enjoy the wealth and knowledge given by the lord.






[Names: Mademade, Sisthi, Puru]
Indra, lord of wealth, power and generosity, in
every joy of life, you are the giver. You are the giver of
plenty of cows and abundance of light and sense. Lord
of simple, natural and divine action of yajna, may he
provide hundreds of kinds of wealth for us and bless us
with both of his hands generously. Lord of wealth and
glory, bring us the wealth of joy, dignity and glory and
let us shine with honour.






[Names: Madayasva, Savase, Sura, Vidma, Puruvasumupa]
Brave hero, be with us in this holy yajnic
programme of the land of freedom and sovereignty for
the creation of wealth, power and joy. Join us and let us
celebrate together. Lord of abundant wealth, power and
joy you are. May we, we pray, know you and be with
you at the closest. Be our saviour, our protector, our
promoter, so that we may creatively realise all our
desires and ambitions.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 82 335






[Names: Antarhi]
Indra, lord of life and spirit, these living beings,
yours all, do homage to you and augment the wealth
and glory of the entire world. Lord and master of the
people, you know the very heart of them inside out.
Bring us the wealth of knowledge and spirit. Restore
the wealth and knowledge of those ungenerous
miserables who have lost it.


Mandala 1/Sukta 82




[Names: Indra, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Srnuhi, Yada]
te hari.


Indra, lord of wealth and glory, listen to our
prayer at the closest, not like one distant or different.
And when we pray bless us with a voice of sweetness
and the light of holy truth. Lord of speed and motion,
yoke your horses (and come to join the yajna).







[Names: Aksannamimadanta, Asto, Noble]
dearest favourite saints and sages brilliant with their
innate genius and virtue, ward off the evil and pray to
Indra with latest words of wisdom and homage. Indra,
yoke your horses (on the wing and come to join the





[Names: Susamdrsam, Anu]
Indra, lord of wealth, power and universal glory,
we pray to you, lord of the blissful eye. Lord in perfect
covenant with humanity, worshipped and prayed to in
sincerity, proceed and overwhelm the enemies of yajna
and humanity. Yoke your horses (and come to bless the






Indra, only that person who knows the science
and technology of that horse-powered chariot which is
perfect and fully capable of defence and safety against
the enemy, would ride that prize-winning chariot of
victory which would lead him to the conquest of territory
and prosperity. Indra, yoke your horses (and come to
join the yajna of defence and protection).


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 82 337






[Names: Yuktaste, Satakrato, Tena]
Indra, hero of a hundred yajnic battles, let your
horse power on the right, and your horse power on the
left of the chariot be yoked, and, happy at heart, with
presents of delicacies, go to meet your darling wife.
Lord of love, power and victory, yoke your horses and








[Names: Yunajmi, Uttva, Pusanvan, Pusanva]
I yoke your horses of beautiful mane to the
chariot with holy chant of divine hymns and delicacies
for sacred presents and gifts. Hold the reins in your
hands and proceed for home. And then, lord of the
thunderbolt and leader of heroic warriors, there,
enthusiastic and ecstatic friends, well-trained, educated
and cultured would join you for delightful company.
And then, go and meet your wife and, with her, enjoy
yourself with the family.




Mandala 1/Sukta 83






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Asvavati, Tamit]
O Indra, lord ruler and protector, in a horse-
powered chariot the pioneer goes forward first over
lands and oceans in the world, man of zeal and courage
as he is, protected by all your means of safety and
defence. And him you bless with abundant wealth and
fame which come to him as prominent rivers from all
round join and flow into the sea.


Ra NU




[Names: Pracairdevasah]
Just as holy waters go to the sea and the vapours
concentrate in the cloud, so do holy people go to yajna
and to Indra, lord of yajna, and as they see the yajna
spread around from the vedi as shelter of life’s
protection, so they conduct themselves in the tradition
of ancient scholars and go forward to the holiest of the
holies of existence and, like the best people of
knowledge, action and devotion, love the divine lord


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 83 339
and the divine lore as the highest boon of life.






[Names: Asamyatto]
Indra, lord of yajna, just as you accept the
offerings held in the ladles raised by the wedded couple,
so graciously listen and accept the holy prayers of the
two, ancients and moderns, teacher and disciple,
husband and wife, parent and child, for the good of both.
Even the loose and the wanton, under your care, find
shelter and protection and grow. The gracious power of
yajna creates and offers everything for the yajamana.






[Names: Adangirah, Samya, Sarvam]
And then the scientists of fire and energy, leaders
of mankind who light the fires and who first offer the
libations into the fire with holy acts of love and peace,
win their share of praise and fame with the reward of
horses, speed and motion, wealth of cows, sensitivity
of mind and senses and the joy of life and celestial
vision.








[Names: Yajnairatharva]
As Atharva, scholar of sustained constancy like
energy in stasis, discovers and creates the prime path of
motion by yajnic research, the noble solar scientist
brilliant as the sun dedicated to his vow rises in
knowledge and discovers the path of the earth. Then
the poetic sage prophetically inspired sings of the beauty
of Venus and satellites born of the sun. And we meditate
and pray for immortality of the state of moksha.






[Names: Barhirva, Slokama, Grava]
Where knowledge and science is collected like
holy grass of yajna for the sake of noble posterity, where
holy verses illuminating as the sun in heaven are
chanted, where the artist carves around the vedi and
holy mantras resound as thunder of the clouds, there in
the blessed foods and offerings, Indra, lord of yajna,
rejoices and speaks.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 341


Mandala 1/Sukta 84






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Asavi, Savistha, Indra, Soma]
Indra, lord ruler of power, strong and resolute,
come, this soma has been distilled for you. May it
exhilarate and strengthen your mind as the sun fills and
brightens the sky with its rays.






[Names: Indramiddhari, Rsinam]
The horses carry Indra, lord of informidable
force and resolution of mind, to the Rshis’ songs of
praise and yajnic programmes of the people.






[Names: Arvacinam]
Indra, lord ruler, breaker of the cloud, releaser
of the waters of life, ride your chariot of the latest design
and come. The horses are yoked with the right mantra
and necessary stuffs. And may the high-priest of
knowledge with his words of knowledge exhilarate you








[Names: Imamindra, Sukrasya]
Indra, lord of light and universal rule, drink of
the ecstasy of joy distilled, highest and immortal. The
streams of pure and brilliant power and glory flow
towards you in the house of Truth and Law.






[Names: Indraya, Suta]
All ye children of the earth, in truth and sincerity,
do reverence and homage to Indra, ruling lord of light
and life. Speak words of thanks and praise in
appreciation of his dominion. Let the drops of distilled
soma give him delight and ecstasy. Bow to him, lord
supreme of courage and power.






[Names: Nakistvad, Nakistvanu]
Indra, while you yoke and drive the horses,
powers of the chariot of your dominion, none could be
a better master of the chariot. None could equal you in
power, courage and force. None as master of horse and
chariot could claim even to approach you in power,
efficiency and glory.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 343






[Names: Isano]
Dear friend, the one sole lord who gives
everything in life to the man of charity and generosity
is Indra, supreme ruler of the world, who is constant,
unmoved and unchallenged.






[Names: Kada, Kada]
Dear friend, when would Indra, lord of wealth,
power and justice, shake the miserly, uncreative,
ungenerous and selfish person like a weed? Who
knows? And would he listen to our prayers? Any time!






[Names: Ugram, Sava]
Dear friend, it is Indra, creator of energy, vitality
and the joy of soma, who, for the sake of many does
special favours to you and makes you shine, and it is
he, again, who controls violent force, that which could








[Names: Svadorittha]
The golden and brilliant people and forces of
the land drink of the delicious, exciting and universal
honey sweets of national pride and prestige and joyously
celebrate their achievements in the company of generous
and valorous Indra for the advancement of the honour
and glory of the republic in obedience to the demands
and discipline of the freedom and self-government of
the nation.






[Names: Srinanti, Somam, Priya, Indrasya, Indras]
Those forces of Indra, the ruler, close together
in contact and unison, of varied forms and colours,
brilliant as sunrays and generous and productive as
cows, who are dearest favourites of the ruler, create the
soma of joy and national dignity and hurl the missile of
the thunderbolt upon the invader as loyal citizens of
the land in accordance with the demands and discipline
of freedom and self-government.





[Names: Vratanyasya, Puruni]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 345


Those forces, noble and intelligent, serve and
augment the courage and power of this Indra with food,
energy and armaments and, as citizens of the land, as a
matter of duty to the freedom and discipline of the
republic, predictably join many dedicated projects and
programmes of his in anticipation of success.






[Names: Indro, Jaghana]
Indra, lord of light and space, unchallenged and
unchallengeable, wields the thunderbolt and, with
weapons of winds, light and thunder, breaks the clouds
of ninety-nine orders of water and electricity for the
sake of humanity and the earth.






[Names: Icchannasvasya]
Just as the sun reaches and breaks the densest
concentrations of vapours in the clouds fast moving in
the regions of the sky, so should the ruler know the best
part of his fastest forces stationed on the mountains and
of the enemy forces lurking around and in the forests if








[Names: Atraha, Ittha]
Just as here on the surface of the earth and in its
environment, we know, there is the beautiful light of
the sun penetrating and reaching everywhere, similarly,
let all know, it is there on the surface of the moon. (Just
as the sun holds and illuminates the earth and the moon,
so should the ruler with his light of justice and power
hold and brighten every home in the land.)






[Names: Koadya, Simivato, Asannisun]
Who joins the bullocks to the front yoke of the
chariot of Truth to-day as ever? The Lord Ruler of the
universe. And he who joins men of noble action, heroes
of passion and righteousness, frightful fighters, archers
of the bow and arrow who pierce the hearts of
contradictions and maintain peace and joy, may he who
joins these to truth and promotes these servants of truth
to prosperity live long.





[Names: Kastokaya]
Who attacks and wins? Who is attacked and
overthrown, who is smothered by fear? Who knows


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 84 347


Indra being at the closest? Who speaks for the child?
Who for the household? Who for wealth and prosperity?
Who for the body? And who for the people? Who speaks
for these with authority? The ruler knows.






[Names: Koagnimitte, Kasmai]
Who worships Agni with ghrta and holy
materials for the progress of life? Who performs yajna
with ladles of offerings definitely according to the
seasons? For whom do the divinities instantly bear and
bring the blessings of holiness? Who, noble and
generous yajaka and brilliant scholar, really knows? The




[Names: Tvamanga]
te vacah.


Anga, dear friend, Indra, dear and saviour, giver
of joy, omnipotent lord, self-refulgent and omniscient,
reveal the truth for mortal humanity. Lord of universal
wealth, none other than you is the giver of peace and
bliss. I speak the very word of yours in covenant.








[Names: Mate, Visva]
Indra, universal shelter of the world, may all
your blessings of wealth and modes of protection never
forsake us. Loving father of humanity, grant us all the
wealth of knowledge and bliss here and hereafter for
all the people of the world.


Mandala 1/Sukta 85






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Marut, Rodast, Maruta, Rudrasya, Rudras]
Maruts, the winds, currents of energy,
tempestuous warriors of noble action, children of Rudra,
lord of justice and dispensation, move on their highways
and shine like graceful beauties and coursers of lightning
speed. They fill the heaven and earth with their
vibrations and actions for the sake of progress and
expansion. Heroes of mighty power, they fight and
rejoice in yajnic acts of creation and growth of life.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 85 349




[Names: Rudraso, Arcanto]
Maruts, children of Rudra, lord of might and
justice, born of space, showerers of fertility over the
earth, they win grandeur for themselves and build their
home high over the skies in heaven. Worshipping the
sun and creating wealth of mind and material, they shine
with grace over the wealth and beauty of the mortal






[Names: Gomataro, Badhante]
Maruts, children of the earth, shining with
noblest sciences and actions, commanding glowing
health and handsomeness, bear light and grace of body
and mind. They stall all their opponents in the world,
and wherever they go, life’s nectar, ghrta and waters
flow in abundance and follow in their footsteps.







[Names: Manojuvo]
They are the heroes, Maruts, who shine with




their own lustre, powers of noble yajnic action and
scientific achievement who, moving at the speed of
mind, shake even the unshakable with their mighty
weapons, using the energy of wind, water and electricity.
Ye, rulers and commanders of the forces, powerful
tacticians and organisers, deploy the maruts and use the
power of versatile wind, water and electricity in your
cars and battle chariots.






[Names: Utarusasya, Maruto]
O Maruts, heroes of the nation, when in the
battle of life you apply the versatile winds and water
which move the cloud to shower the rains, then the
brilliant streams issue forth and cover the earth with
water just as the streams of soma flow and soak the
filter spread out for distillation.






[Names: Sidata]
here and everywhere. May the flying planes at top speed
take you anywhere by the force of their arms. Come,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 85 351


the chamber is made ready for you. Come and be
comfortable in the seats. Enjoy yourselves with honey
sweets of food and drink.






[Names: Visnuryaddhavad]
They surely grow and advance by their own
strength and high merit, abide in regions of bliss and
expand their home whom Vishnu, lord of knowledge
and science, protects while they ride a luxurious plane
powered by wind and water and, seated in a beautiful
and comfortable chamber, they fly like birds.





[Names: Sura, Bhayante]
Like heroes they are warriors. Like warriors they
rise and advance. In battles they strike like flying
dragons. The entire world quakes with fear of the
Maruts. They are leaders of men blazing in majesty like






[Names: Tvasta, Dhatta]
navam.


Tvashta, the expert maker of weapons, tools and
instruments for defence and development, provides the
thunderbolt, total infrastructure, well-done, golden and
capable of countless possibilities of performance. Indra,
mighty ruler, defender and creator, wields that
thunderbolt and apparatus for the accomplishment of
desired and planned actions in the world of humanity.
He strikes Vrtra, the cloud holding waters of fertility,
the resources of materials and energy, and thus releases
the oceanic flow of wealth. (This is how scientific,
technological and economic development of the human
nation goes on for the achievement of economic
prosperity, political stability and generous happiness and
well-being for all. All through, the Maruts are active
since they are nature’s forces ever at work anywhere
and everywhere.)






[Names: Urdhvam, Dhamanto, Marutah, Somasya, Somas]
With their lustrous power and valour, up and
high they impel the cloud holding the reservoir of water,
drive it on and break it to release the flow of energy for
earth’s fertility. Blowing the conch, they call upon the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 85 353


nation and, playing the veena and burnishing their
weapons, the tempestuous Maruts, commanders of
Indra, generous heroes of humanity, perform delightful
acts of joy and martial celebration in the midst of life’s






[Names: Jihmam]
Maruts, powers of wondrous light with their
might and generosity direct the controlled waters of the
cloud by various paths in the desired directions, filling
wells, tanks, springs and depressions for the thirsting
children of the earth. Thus do the powers of beneficence
come to the earth with protection and progress fulfilling
the need of noble humanity with their power and






[Names: Yavah, Sarma, Sasamanaya, Asmabhyam]
O Maruts, dynamic powers of nature and
humanity, creative, generous and kind, whatever your
gifts of shelter, comfort and protection there be,
whatever gifts of balanced health and triple physical,




mental and material wealth there be, bear and bring for
the toiling, working, worshipping humanity, specially
for the generous man of philanthropy. Powers and
showers of divine favours, bear and bring for us those
gifts of wealth and brave progeny.


Mandala 1/Sukta 86





[Names: Maruts, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Marut, Maruto]
Maruts, dear as the breath of life, bright as the
light of heaven, agents of great and adorable action, the
person whose house you visit and bless with protection
grows to be the most secure and meritorious person.



[Names: Yajnairva, Marutah, Maruta]
Maruts, carriers and promoters of universal
yajna by various acts of yajna in nature and society,
listen to the prayer and invocations of the pious and
intelligent people and promote their acts of holiness.



MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 86 355


Maruts, powers of exceptional speed and
intelligence, the man of knowledge whom you shape
into a sophisticated scholar of eminence grows to be a
pioneer on the path of the stars.





[Names: Asya, Uktham, Sasyate]
The soma of honour and fame distilled on the
holy seats of yajna, the holy chant of praise, and the joy
and celebration of the brilliant achievement of this brave
young man is exceptional and it is raised all round.





[Names: Srosantva, Suram]
Let all people of the world listen to this brave
young man and let their homage reach him as the
homage and gratitude of the world reaches the sun for
the gift of light and life.






[Names: Purvibhirhi, Avobhiscarsaninam]
Maruts, dynamic powers of brilliance and
generosity, old and ancient, just as you have been giving
knowledge, power and protection to humanity since the
earliest years of life, so may we, we pray, do honour




and homage to you with the faithful gifts of a grateful






[Names: Subhagah, Yasya]
Maruts, adorable yajnic powers, generous and
self sacrificing, surely that person is fortunate and
prosperous whose delightful oblations you bless and
sprinkle with the showers of your favours.






[Names: Sasamanasya, Vida]
Maruts, dynamic powers of action and
generosity, know and fulfil the plan and desire of the
man truly courageous and powerful, knowledgeable,
cultured and graceful who honestly lives by the sweat
of his brow.






[Names: Yuyam, Vidhyata]
Maruts, men of real courage and power, with
your honour and reputation and technological weapons,
let that power and force come into play which would
fix and break down the forces of crime and evil from
the social scene.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 87 357






[Names: Guhata, Jyotiskarta, Yadusmasi]
Maruts, powers of courage and justice, uncover
and reduce the deep darkness of want and ignorance to
nullity, eliminate the voracious hoarders of the world,
and create the light that we love and adore.


Mandala 1/Sukta 87






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Marut, Pratvaksasah, Justatamaso]
Maruts, shaping and refining powers of life and
unshaken, lovers of truth, knowledge and joy to the last
drop of soma, most adorable, foremost leaders of
humanity shine as the lights of dawn with their
splendour and cover the beauty of life with their
blessings of protection.








[Names: Upahvaresu, Scotanti, Marutah, Maruta]
O Maruts, tempestuous heroes of the human
nation, flying like birds by whatever path you choose,
whatever the prize of success and victory you collect
on your winding courses, the clouds consecrate you
around your chariots, and shower golden honey-ghrta
on the admiring faithfuls dedicated to you and your






[Names: Praisamajmesu]
During their mighty operations the earth vibrates
like a maiden stricken with awe when the Maruts launch
upon their noble courses. And they, sporting, shaking,
burnishing their weapons and storming, mount up their
own grandeur by themselves.






The same force of Maruts, troop of heroes,
young, self-inspired and inspiring their people, equipped
with variety of tempestuous horse-power, all ruling with
comprehensive intelligence, clothed in the light of
essential merit and grandeur, you are realistic and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 87 359


dedicated to truth, acquitting yourselves of your
obligations, worthy of praise, protectors of this
intelligence of the nation with promotion and progress,
and generous as blessed winds that bring showers of
rain.





[Names: Pituh, Somasya, Somas, Yadimindram]
We speak of the ancient and eternal Lord by
virtue of birth from the same father of creation. By virtue
of the joy of being and the sight and light of the sun, the
tongue celebrates and advances the language of
knowledge. Those researching and activating water and
energy study the Rks and realise the knowledge and
power, and then define the names, properties and yajnic
uses of these in peace for progress.





[Names: Sriyase, Marutasya, Marutas]
For the sake of the beauty, comfort and culture
of life, they mix water with the flames of fire and clouds
with the rays of the sun with the advice of the scholars
of Rks, and they bring showers of rain. And, blest with




sophisticated instruments and weapons, impetuous of
speed and power, free of fear, they know the secrets
and sources of the wondrous and dear energies of the


[Names: Maruts, Marut]
Mandala 1/Sukta 88






[Names: Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi]
Maruts, heroes of the speed of winds, masters
of wondrous science and power, go far by brilliant
electric chariots fitted with high-powered weapons and
equipped with aerial wings and, flying like birds, come
to us with food and energy of the best and highest






[Names: Rukmo]
Maruts, heroes of the speed of winds, come to
high comfort for the sake of noble work by chariots
powered by red flaming and yellow fire power and used
for horses on the wing. The troop of heroes, brilliant as
well as wonderful, commanding the force of thunder-


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 88 361


bolt, arrives striking and breaking the ground with the
felly of the chariot wheel.






[Names: Sriye, Yusmabhyam, Marutah, Maruta]
For the grace of beauty, freedom and power, and
to provide you comfort, they raise the level of
intelligence and knowledge of the divine Word of the
Veda in your personality just as they raise and develop
the trees of the forest. The Maruts, high born, abundant
and exuberant in the wealth and knowledge of nature
and mind, enrich the cloud and the mountain to bear
fruit and provide comfort and joy for you.






[Names: Ahani, Brahma]
Lovers of noble ambition, good days are come
for you all round. Scholars of divine knowledge creating
food for knowledge and spirit with the chant of holy
mantras inspire this brilliant vision and intelligence of
yours pure as celestial waters. Just as they uplift the
water to provide drink and irrigation to dry area, so they
impel our knowledge and intelligence to rise high.








[Names: Etat, Pasyan]
Maruts, heroes of knowledge and action moving
at the speed of winds, this order of knowledge, action,
science and progress which the scholars of science and
Divinity, seeing the chariots of golden wheels and jaws
of steel flying around and roaring, describes and teaches
like an ideal teacher, awakens you to higher
consciousness of knowledge and responsibility.






[Names: Maruto, Astobhayad, Anu]
Maruts, heroes of the winds and leaders of
humanity, this voice of celebration is replete with
nourishment and confirmation of your honour and
valour. It defines your action and achievement and, in
consequence, it commits you to your honour and duty
as the voice of the high priest commits the yajamana to
his duty on purpose, according to the power and
potential in his hands.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 89 363


Mandala 1/Sukta 89






[Names: Vishvedeva, Deva, Aditi, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Deva]
From all sides, may noble thoughts, actions and
meritorious people come and bless us, people fearless,
indispensable, creative and all round saviours. Long
lived they be, these noble ones of divine character, ever
progressive and protective for us so that our life and
home may grow and advance day by day.






[Names: Devanam, Devanam]
May the holy wisdom of the noble people
dedicated to truth, simplicity and divinity come and bless
us. May the wealth and generosity of the self-realised
souls ever shine on us. May we ever be close to the
love and friendship of the creative and brilliant people.
May all powers of divinity bless us with good health
and long age for a noble and full life.








[Names: Aryamanam, Mitram, Mitra, Aditim, Somam, Soma, Varunam, Varuna, Sarasvati]
Them, with the ancient and eternal Vedic voice
of omniscience, do we invoke and celebrate: we praise
and celebrate Bhaga, lord of glory, Mitra, universal
friend, Aditi, mother of light, Daksha, lord of skill and
expertise, Asridha, lord of love and ahinsa, Aryaman,
lord of justice, Varuna, lord of all virtue worthy of
choice, Soma, lord of beauty, peace and joy, Ashvins,
lords of natural complementarities, and Sarasvati,
mother of knowledge and learning and giver of good
fortune who may, we pray, do us all the good in life.






[Names: Somasuto]
May the wind, refreshing and delightful, blow
good and bring us that healthful medicinal freshness
and joy. May mother earth and father sun give us that
fresh lease of life. May the clouds, showers of joy, and
the soma press of yajna rain down peace, health and
happiness on us. O Ashvins, both nature’s powers of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 89 365


growth, complementarity and enlightenment, innately
vested with universal wisdom, listen to our prayer.






[Names: Tamisanam, Jinvamavase, Pusa]
For our safety and protection, we invoke and
pray to that Lord Ruler of the universe, father and
controller of the moving and the non-moving world who
inspires and enlightens our mind and sense so that
Pusha, lord of health and growth, beyond fear and
violence, protector and giver of nourishment be kind
and favourable to us for our good and for the growth of
our knowledge and competence.






[Names: Svasti, Svasti]
May Indra, lord of power and majesty, abundant
in food, energy and honour, be for our good and bless
us with favours. May Pusha, lord of universal growth,
be for our good and bless us with progress. May
Tarkshya, lord inviolable, worthy of love and friendship,
destroyer of suffering, be good for us and bless us with




good fortune. And may Brhaspati, lord of universal
knowledge and wisdom be good and bless us with
knowledge, wisdom and sweet language.






[Names: Prsadasva, Marutah, Maruta, Agnijihva]
Maruts, tempestuous heroes of war, of a variety
of horses and chariots, children of the earth, lovers of
good and beauty, moving to yajnas and marching to
battles, having tongues of fire, thoughtful, radiant as
the sun, all of them choice nobilities of the world may,
we pray, come to us with the gift of protection and






[Names: Bhadram, Sthirairangaistustu]
Noble people of brilliant, generous and divine
nature, help us to hear with our ears what is good and
beneficial. Noble people dedicated to yajna, may we,
by your favour and kindness see with our eyes what is
good and elevating. May we, enjoying with firm and
strong bodies and body parts, thanking the Lord Divine
and praising the things given by Him live a full life fit
for and blest by the divinities.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 89 367






[Names: Sataminnu, Putraso]
O Devas, powers of nature and divinity, hundred
years is the proximity of our life in which are also
provided the years of our old age. In that very period,
our children will grow to be the fathers of their children.
We pray, let not the life line of a person moving on to
the hundred year mark be snapped on the way.






[Names: Aditirdyauraditirantariksamaditirmata, Visve, Aditih, Aditirjata]
Heaven, the region of light, the lord of light, is
eternal, imperishable. Akasha, i.e., the sky region is
eternal. Mother is eternal. The father is eternal. The son
is eternal. All the divinities of nature and humanity are
eternal. The five orders of society are eternal. All that is
born is eternal. All that is being born and will be born is


[Names: Note, Eternal]
terms are to be understood in the context of Vedic
philosophy, and not in the context of daily life. Things
are eternal in two ways: essentially and existentially.
God, i.e., Ishvara/Brahma, jiva/ the soul, and Prakrti,




these are eternal essentially. They are there when the
universe is created and they remain after the life of one
creation is over at the time of pralaya, annihilation. But
the things that come into existence at the time of
and other forms of life, human relations such as father,
mother, son, daughter, classes of people etc., go out of
existence to annihilation at the time of pralaya. And yet,
at the time of the next creation, they come into existence
again. Thus they come into existence and go out of
existence, and this flow of existence-non existence
continues for all time, eternally. This flow is eternal.
This flow is called Pravaha. These things are eternal in
relation to this flow of existence. They are eternal
existencially. The three, God, soul and Prakrti (nature)
are eternal essentially.


Mandala 1/Sukta 90






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Rjuniti, Aryama]
May God, Lord Omniscient, Varuna, lord of
justice and worthy of our intelligent choice, Mitra, lord
of universal friendship, and the man of knowledge,
wisdom and divine vision bless us with a natural simple
and honest way of living. May Aryama, lord of justice
and dispensation, bless us with a straight way of living
without pretence. May He, lord of love who loves us
and whom we love bless us with the company of noble,


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 90 369


generous and brilliant people in humanity, and may He
grant us the benefit of such generous powers of nature.






[Names: Vrata]
They are the wealth, they are the values. They
shower all with wealth and the values of life. They are
intelligent, they know, they are great with great things
and grandeur of existence. They guard and maintain the
discipline and laws of life for all time.






[Names: Sarma, Badhamana]
May they, lords of power and intelligence,
immortal and free, bring us, for all the mortals, comfort
and well-being, keeping off hate and enmity.






[Names: Marutah, Maruta, Pusa]
May Indra, lord of power and majesty, Maruts,
vibrant powers of nature and leaders of humanity, Pusha,
lord of health and growth, Bhaga, lord of plenty and
good fortune, all worthy of adoration, select and prepare
for us the right paths of living and confirm us in the
good life for comfort and well-being.






[Names: Pusan, Karta]
Pusha, lord of health and growth, Vishnu, lord
omnipresent, and the leading man of enlightenment may,
we pray, guide us to the intelligence and imagination
which may issue in the right sense of perception, will
and action, and may they confirm us in the good life of
plenty and well-being.





[Names: Madhu, Madhvirnah]
Sweet as honey the winds blow for the soul of
simplicity and naturalness. The waters rain, rivers flow
and the oceans roll sweet as honey. May the herbs too
be sweet as honey for us all.






May the night be soothing sweet as honey. May
the days be energetic sweet as honey. May the dust of
earth be fragrant sweet as honey. And may the sun in
heaven, our father, shine bright and sweet as honey.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 371




[Names: Madhumanno, Suryah, Surya, Madhvirgavo]
May the trees be full of honey for us. May the
sun be full of honey for us. May the cows be abundant
in honey sweet milk for us.






[Names: Varunah, Varuna, Mitrah, Mitra]
May Mitra bless us with peace. May Varuna
bring us peace. May Aryama lead us to peace. May Indra
and Brhaspati shower us with peace. May Vishnu, lord
of mighty action, bless us with peace and action.


Mandala 1/Sukta 91






[Names: Soma, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Tvam, Soma, Tava]
Soma, lord of peace, power and joy, you are
wide-awake with understanding and alertness of mind.
You lead to the simple, natural and truthful path of life
and action. By virtue of your guidance and leadership,
soothing and gracious as the moon, our wise seniors
and forefathers enjoy the very jewels of life among the
divinities.








Soma, lord of peace and joy, with acts of
knowledge, vision and wisdom, you are a hero of noble
action. With science and expertise, you are the specialist,
possessed of universal knowledge. With showers of
generosity and noble qualities, you are generous as the
cloud. Lord of knowledge and vision of humanity, with
your wealth and charities, you are the ideal honoured




of Rajno nu te varunasya vratani brhadgabhiram


[Names: Sucistvamasi]
Soma, royal and exceptional are your vows of
discipline dedicated to the world ruler Varuna. Grand
and deep is your home. Pure and immaculate are you,
dear as a bosom friend, Soma, and master of ceremonies
as the foremost leader of a yajna.





[Names: Tebhirno]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 373


Soma, ruling lord of vitality, life and joy,
whatever and wherever your homes in the regions of
light, wherever on earth, wherever on the mountains,
wherever in the herbs and waters, with all of them, lord
good at heart and well-disposed, bless us with the holy
materials for yajna and, in return, accept our homage of






[Names: Somasi]
Soma, you are the lord and ruler of the ultimate
and essential reality of existence. You are the ruler and
controller of the negativities of existence and a breaker
of the clouds of rain. You are the ultimate good and
kind father, lord of yajna, omniscient, giver of
knowledge, creator of knowledge and yajna.






[Names: Priyastotro]
Soma, you are the pleasure, beauty and charm
of our life for health and age. By virtue of you, we shall
not die. You are the darling magic mantra against
mortality, the ultimate Tree of Life and freedom.








[Names: Daksam]
For the great and young and the devotee of
simplicity, nature and universal law, you bring science
and expertise and great wealth of special knowledge
for life, well-being and full age.






Soma, ruler of life and nature, you are the all
round protector of ours against all sin and evil. No friend
and devotee of yours under your divine protection ever




[Names: Tabhirno]
Soma, whatever safeguards, protections and
immunities of yours there be, refreshing and


rejuvenating for the generous and the charitable, with
those be the saviour and protector for us too.





[Names: Imam]
Soma, accept this yajna, this yajnic homage of
divine words, come close and be good and kind for our
growth and progress.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 375





[Names: Sumrliko]
Soma, lord of health and well-being, we praise,
celebrate and extol you in the words we know, which
describe your virtues and powers. Harbinger of peace
and well-being, come and be with us.






[Names: Gayasphano, Sumitrah]
Soma, you are the giver and promoter of pranic
vitality. You are the destroyer of disease. You are the lord
giver of the wealth of good health and growth with
nourishment. You are a good friend. Come and be
with us.






[Names: Marya]
Soma, come and abide with pleasure in our
heart, and let us be at peace with delight at heart as
cows are in the fields of rich barley and humans are at
peace in security in their own homes.








Soma, lord of health and happiness, lucky is the
man who enjoys life in your company with your
delightful gifts. The man of efficiency loves to have
him for company, and the poet loves to sing of him.






[Names: Urusya, Sakha]
Soma, lord of health and happiness, guard us
against hate, imprecation and depression. Save us from
sin and damnation. Come, we pray, and be with us a
good friend, philosopher and guide.






[Names: Bhava]
Source and secret of health and life, Soma, lord
giver of strength and vitality, grow and help us grow.
May growth and progress come to you from all round.
Let it come to us from all round. Be at the heart of
congregations and in the thick of battles where strength
and courage rule the life for victory.






MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 91 Sd 7


Most ecstatic Soma, grow all round with every
filament of growth, with the rays of the sun all round,
with every libation in the vedi, and help us grow too.
Be a friend of ours, most reputable and prosperous, for






[Names: Apyayamano, Sravamsyuttamani]
Soma, lord of light, health and energy of life,
may all the waters, foods and vitalities of existence,
antidotes to the negativities of existence come to you
in abundance, and may all those abundant and powerful
drinks, foods and energies of yours come to us and
augment our vitality to fight out the negative and
cancerous forces of life. Lord of life, thus strengthened
by nature in the regions of light and blessing us for health
and immortality, bear for us the best of foods and
energies of life for growth and for victory in the battles
of life.





[Names: Yate, Gayasphanah]
Soma, lord of life, energy and vitality, all those




places and nature’s activities which feed and promote
your yajna of evolution may, we pray, bless and benefit
us. Lord supreme over all, generous giver of promotion
and progress, saviour across the seas of life, commander
of the brave and support of the meek, be close to us,
our families and our homes.






[Names: Somo, Sadanyam]
Blessed is the man who gives in faith in homage
to Soma, this lord of life, to augment his yajna of
evolution at the human level. And Soma gives him the
cow, the fast horse, the brave hero for progeny dedicated
to the family and the home, yajna and the battles of life,
the congregation and the assembly, and the words and
wishes of the parents.






[Names: Asalham, Bharesujam]
Soma, lord of joy, ecstasy and generosity in
abundance, informidable in battles, protective and
promotive in contests, abundant in the shower of waters,
preserver of strength, hero of abundance in means of
defence, lord of land and shelter, commanding fame and
honour, and always victorious, we praise and celebrate


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 92 379
you and enjoy life with you.






[Names: Tvamima, Tvama, Jyotisa]
Soma, lord of creation and evolution, you create
all these herbs of the world, you create the waters, the
mind and senses, the cows, the earths and all else that
moves. You create, expand and pervade the skies, and
you dispel the dark and cover the spaces with light.






[Names: Devena]
Soma, lord of generosity and invincible force,
move and, with brilliance of mind and intelligence, fight
against opposition for the creation of our share of wealth.
No one would oppose and thwart you. You rule the
strength for both body and mind. In the battles of
humanity for light, freedom and prosperity, increase
your power and influence.


Mandala 1/Sukta 92
Usha and Ashvins Devata, Gotama Rahugana Rshi


380




[Names: Usasah, Usasa, Niskrnvana]
The lights of the dawn over there in the eastern
half of the sky over earth reveal the sun and proclaim
the day. Like resolute warriors burnishing their swords,
the flames of the dawn, shining scarlet red, move
forward with the rising sun bringing a fresh breath of
life for humanity, like mother cows.






[Names: Udapaptannaruna, Akrannusadso, Vayunani]
Up rise the red flames of the dawn, naturally
and spontaneously like willing red horses yoked to the
chariot. The ruddy lights of the dawn awakening
humanity to their daily chores as before proclaim the
rise of the brilliant sun in obedience to his command.






[Names: Arcanti, Isam]
The lights of the dawn, like blessed women
expert in their noble work, serve and illumine from afar
with equal brilliance various regions of the world,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 92 381


bearing vital food and rejuvenating energy for the pious
and generous yajamana dedicated to the creative service
of life and nature everywhere every day.






[Names: Jyotirvisvasmai]
Just as a dancer puts on various costumes and
characters and just as a cow waxes its udders full of
milk for the calf, so does the dawn assume many forms
and bares her bosom of light to illuminate the whole
world with lights as the flames dispel the darkness from






[Names: Pratyarct, Svarum]
The brilliant light of the dawn arises in the east,
radiates and expands, it stalls and dispels the deep dark
of the night. And just as an artist decorates a yajnic post
in great congregations so, adorning the wondrous sun
as an ornament of light, this daughter of heaven reveals
the glory of the sun.








[Names: Atarisma, Vayuna, Sriye]
At the rise of the dawn, we cross this dark of
the night. Rising and radiating, the brilliant dawn
awakens us to the bright business of the day. Like the
joyous hymns of the Veda for the beauty, prosperity and
graces of life, it smiles, shining, consumes the darkness
and, itself beautiful of form, it reveals the beauties of
the world for our refreshment and rejuvenation.





[Names: Bhasvati, Prajavato]
Brilliant and radiating, inspiring the devotees
of truth and piety, the Dawn, daughter of light, is
celebrated by divine scholars. So do I sing in honour of
her. She brings over the foods, energies, inspirations
and noble aspirations and battles of action which lead
to awakening of family people and leaders of men to
speed of advancement, planning for land and cows,
human development and family management.





[Names: Usastamasyam, Usastamasya, Sudamsasa, Sravasa]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 92 383


O Dawn, daughter of sunlight, divine and
charming, who shine with the morning splendour of
action and glory of fame and generosity, I pray, with
your inspiration and initiation, may I be blessed with
that great growing and highest wealth of life which is
full of honour, maintained by brave heroes and multitude
of manpower, and characterized by speed, advancement
and achievement.






[Names: Visvani, Visvam]
Dawn, brilliant daughter of light and heaven,
eye of the eye, watching all the regions of the world,
shines and moves to the west in relation to the earth,
awakening all the forms of life to daily activities,
speaking as if and inspiring the language of the people
of thought and imagination.



[Names: Punah, Svaghniva]
Old and ancient, born and reborn again and


again, ever a new, the Brilliant Dawn, shining in glory
with the same refulgence of beauty, an artificer of




eternity consuming time today and tomorrow collects
the stakes at play and counts out the age of mortals day
by day.






[Names: Vyurnvati, Praminati]
The Dawn wakes up, illuminating and revealing
the bounds of heaven and expanse of the sky, and
constantly dispels her sister, the dark night. Wearing
away and counting out the ages of humanity, she shines
by the light of the sun like a maiden blooming and
blushing at the sight of her admirer.


SITU VI




[Names: Pasunna, Aminati, Surya]
Wonderful and glorious, waxing like animals
spreading and roaming around out of the stalls, like a
river in spate and like swell of the sea, the Dawn radiates
and expands over the expanse of the earth. Transgressing
no laws of Nature and holy observances of Truth,
shining with the rays of the sun, she reveals herself to
our eyes.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 92 385






[Names: Usastaccitrama, Yena]
O Dawn, harbinger of food, energy and
rejuvenation of thought, will and action, bear and bring
that health and wealth of wondrous and various kinds
for us by which we may be able to beget, maintain and
advance our children and grand-children and others,
friends and assistants in life.






[Names: Revadasme]
O Dawn, lady of light, generous with cows and
fertility, horses and fast movement, light and knowledge,
truth and piety of life with favours of divinity, bear and
bless us here and now in this life with wealth of
prosperity and a happy home.


[Names: Yuksva]
O Dawn, lady of radiance and the energy and
vibrancy of life, yoke the red rays of sunbeams to your


celestial chariot and then bear and bring us all the
wealths and good fortunes of the world.








[Names: Asvina, Arvagratham]
Generous scientists of fire and waters, Ashvins,
expert technologists working together with equal
sensitive in reception and communication of signals,
golden in quality and extremely fast in motion anywhere
on earth, over water and in the sky.






[Names: Yavittha]
Ashvins, scientist and technologist of fire and
water, both of you thus from the sun create the mantra,
light and energy and bring it for us and the people for






[Names: Usarbudho, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Let the Ashvins, people of divine nature,
scientists and technologists, generous experts of fire and
water, water and air, creators of comfort and joy,
working on the golden sunbeams of the morning dawn,
create and bring us energy and vitality for the health,
vitality and joy of humanity.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 93 387


Mandala 1/Sukta 93






[Names: Agni, Soma, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Agnisomavimam, Agnisomavima, Prati]
Agni-Soma, power divine both fire and water
in one, beauty and brilliance of the Lord’s Nature in
existence blissful as sun-and-moon, fire and air, exciting
and soothing, lord of dynamic knowledge, kind
disposition and steady action, generous and abundant,
listen to this prayer of mine, respond with love and
kindness to these honest words and be gracious to me,
this dedicated child and faithful disciple.



[Names: Agnisoma, Tasmai]
yam.

Agni-Soma, whoever may listen to this word of
yours, and faithfully follow it in spirit and action, bless
him with health and nourishment, speed and success in


advancement, sensitivity of mind and brain and
generous productivity and social dynamism.








Agni-Soma, fire, air and waters of the
firmament, whoever the person offering you oblations
in yajna and holy gifts of yajna in charity, may he, we
pray, be blest with best of health and energy and a full
age of universal prosperity with a happy family and






[Names: Avatiratam, Seso]
Agni-Soma, fire and water, your valour and
power is revealed and known when you acquire and
absorb the protective power of sun-rays, retain a part of
the blaze, release the rest of the sun’s heat and bring
down one uniform light for the many forms of life to
survive and grow.






[Names: Yuvametani, Yuvam]
Agni and Soma, you two, electric energy and air
of equal power and joint function, hold and sustain these
wondrous lights of the stars in heaven. Agni and Soma,
you two release the rivers and seas of waters held up above
and save them from disagreeable imprecations below.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 93 389




[Names: Anyam]
Agni and Soma growing by the energy and
power of Brahman extend and expand the universe
wider and wider for the divine yajna of creation. Of
these, Matarishva, electric energy that rolls in space,
derives from and holds another, i.e., the subtle energy
from the sun in heaven. And Agni, moving like a
celestial horse at the speed of light, holds the other, that
is, the subtle Soma, from the sun and the cloud.






[Names: Susarmana]
Agni and Soma, fire and wind, vitalise and impel
the holy materials offered into the fire, carry it on and
delight in their creative and expansive process. Creators
and givers of comfort and joy, protectors of life they
are, they bring peace and happiness for the yajamana,
catalyse, refine and create new materials for him.









[Names: Tasya]
Whoever is dedicated to Agni and Soma, fire
and wind, and with an honest mind offers homage to
them with ghrta and other holy materials, Agni and Soma
protect and support his vows of piety for life, save him
from sin, and give the citizens, people high and low all,
great and noble peace, comfort and joy.






Agni and Soma, invoked and served together,
sharing the offerings together in yajna, pray listen and
grant our prayers, come and be with the noble and
dedicated people at the yajna.






[Names: Agnisomavanena, Agnisomavan]
Agni and Soma, whoever offers homage to you
with this ghrta and water in scientific yajna, bless him
with great good fortune and wealth of life.





[Names: Agnisomavimani]
Agni and Soma, fire and wind, both of you
accept these holy materials of ours in scientific yajna,
come and be our friends and benefactors.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 391






[Names: Asme]
Agni and Soma, yajnic leaders of the nation,
feed and empower our horses, modes of travel and
transport. Nourish and upbreed our cows for the gift of
holy milk and ghrta for our yajnas. Invest our economic
and governing powers with strength and generosity and
universalise our yajnic endeavours with instant response
and rich production for all of us.


Mandala 1/Sukta 94






[Names: Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Imam, Bhadra]
This song of celebration and worship in honour
of venerable Jataveda, Agni, omnipresent in the created
world and lord omniscient, we sing in praise of his glory
with our mind and soul in sincerity and offer it to him
as a joyous holiday chariot fit for his majesty. Blessed
is our mind in his company, while we sit in the assembly
of devotees.




Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may
we never come to suffering while we enjoy your
company and friendship.






[Names: Yasmai]
Agni, whoever you bless grows in strength and
competence. He lives and moves undisturbed,
irresistible, wins power and valour, and rises to greatness
and prosperity. Want, anxiety and poverty touch him
never. Agni, we pray, we may never suffer want and
misery while we enjoy your friendship and company.






[Names: Sakema, Tvamdadityan]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may
we be able to kindle and develop the fire power of yajna.
Pray refine our intelligence and bless us with success
in our intellectual endeavours. Whatever we offer in
yajna, the divinities receive and share. Bring over the
scholars of the highest order of brilliance and realise
the light of the stars on earth. We love them, honour
and cherish them. Agni, we pray, may we never suffer
any want or misery in your company.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 393






[Names: Bharamedhmam, Jivatave]
Lighting the fire, observing and learning step
by step, yajna by yajna, the full and fuller preparation,
we collect the fuel and create the inputs of yajna for
Agni. Agni, lord of light and fire, refine our mind and
intelligence to be more subtle and sophisticated for the
sake of better and better life. Agni, we pray we may
never suffer a set back or loss of success while we are
in your company.






[Names: Visam, Yaduta, Citrah, Usaso]
Agni is people’s protector. By the rays of this
quadrupeds such as cows, and others move around days
and nights.


Agni, various and brilliant you are, greater than
the dawn and the days. Lord of light and action, may
we never suffer misery in your company and friendship.








[Names: Tvamadhvaryuruta, Visva]
You are the high priest and the yajamana, ancient
and eternal, of the yajna of creation. Teacher and ruler,
sanctifier, invoked and worshipped since creation and
manifestation, omniscient leading priest of creation, lord
of universal knowledge, constant and imperishable, you






[Names: Lord, Ratryascidandho]
Agni, you are the lord who are universally
beatific of form and constant of eye. You may be far
off, yet you awfully blaze like the explosion of lightning.
Even in the darkness of the night you shine and see and
reveal things for all. Lord of light and revelation, we
pray, may we never suffer ignorance and misery but
ever enjoy your company and friendship.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 395




[Names: Purvo, Tada]
Scholars of science and technology, may the
chariot of the man of yajnic project be the first and
foremost, the same as ours, so admirable, yet difficult
for the ill-intentioned even to understand. Therefore,
know the word, the secret of it, feed it with more
research and knowledge, grow and let us grow too. Agni,
lord of light, power and speed, may we never suffer
any misery, injury or onslaught from anywhere under
your friendship and protection.






[Names: Vadhairduhsamsan]
With punishments and even with the
thunderbolt, strike away, even eliminate, the despicable,
evil intentioned and those who are enemies of the society
whether they be far away or lurking close by. Clear the
path for the dedicated who chant and work in faith for
the yajna of development and progress. Agni, lord of
light, knowledge and progress, may we never suffer any
set back, injury or defeat under your guidance and








[Names: Yadayuktha, Adinvasi]
Agni, lord of light and nature’s power, when
you yoke, employ and ignite the red and fiery power at
the speed of wind for your chariot, your roar is like the
thunder of clouds. You cover the forest trees with grey
smoke and leave it behind like the trail of a shooting
star. Agni, lord of knowledge, power and speed, may
and friendship.






[Names: Adha, Sugam]
When on the roar of the chariot the birds fly in
fright, when the flames of fire shake the grass and rise
to the optimum, then the path is clear for the flight of
your chariots. Agni, lord of light, fire and flight, may
power, guidance and friendship but fly on and on.





[Names: Ayam, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Mrla, Marutam, Maruta]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 94 397


This Agni is the power for the support of Mitra
and Varuna, friends and the best people among humanity.
Itis also the awful terror of the Maruts, forces of defence
and justice, against the people of anti-human values.
Lord of light, justice and generosity, such as you are,
be kind and gracious and a source of peace and joy to
the mind of these good and law-abiding people. We pray
that we may not suffer any want and misery under your
guidance and control as friends.






[Names: Devo, Sarmantsyama]
Agni, lord of light and peace, you are the
divinest of divinities, a friend of friends most wonderful.
You are the shelter of shelters for all and the treasure of
all treasures. In your vastest and supreme order of yajnic
existence, we pray, we may enjoy perfect peace of mind
and soul. May we never face any suffering or misery
under your rule of friendship, gracious as you are.




[Names: Soma, Dadhasi]
tava.




Agni, lord of light and grace, it is the highest
blessing of yours that, self-lighted and self-manifested
in your own house, this house of existence of your own
creation, worshipped with oblations of soma in yajna,
you spontaneously become gracious to bless the
admiring devotee and bestow jewels and wealths of the
world upon the generous yajamana. Lord of generosity,
we pray, we may never suffer any misery of poverty for
the body, mind and soul under the control of your grace
and friendship.





Agni, lord of divine wealth of existence, power
imperishable, whoever the person you bless with purity
and sinlessness in all the affairs of life, whoever you
inspire with noble courage and valour, he begets good
children and a happy family and obtains abundant
wealth of the world. Lord of wealth and generosity, we
pray, bless us with that same wealth and good fortune.






[Names: Tanno]
Agni, lord of light and wealth of the world, lord


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 95 399


and giver of all good fortune, honour and glory of life,
give us a happy and full life here and let it thrive and
prosper. The same may Mitra, prana energy, Varuna,
udana energy, Aditi, Mother Nature, the sea, the earth,
the heaven and the skies support, strengthen and
promote. The same, lord Agni, giver of life, bless and
let us cross the seas of existence with grace divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 95






[Names: Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Hariranyasyam]
Night and day, two different forms of nature,
two divisions of time, two different states of Agni, one
direct, the other reflected, move on with their priest-
like task. Both, co-existent and continuous but
separately, like two women, feed and nurse each other’s
child as their own. In one, the night, the moon grows
on with its inherent character of beauty, peace and bliss,
while the sun in the other, the day, blazes with light and
fire, pure, immaculate, glorious. The sun sleeps at night
and the moon sleeps in the day.







[Names: Dasemam, Tigmanikam]
Ten directions of space, young and unaging, and
ever-vigilant, create, produce and manifest this sun,
child of Tvashta, Vayu, cosmic energy. It is of versatile
action and purpose and sustains the various forms of
existence. It is blazing and beautiful, self-refulgent with
inherent glory, glowing and showing among the people,
and the same directions move it around for the
accomplishment of the tasks of creation.






[Names: Trini, Purvamanu]
Three manifestations of this Agni shine in
nature, space and time, the womb of the universe: one
is in the oceans, another one is in the heavenly region
of light, and yet another is in the waters in the middle
region. Accordingly, it creates and controls the seasons
in relation to the sun and earth and, in relation to the
earth and her people, it creates the directions such as
east and others.







[Names: Bahvinam]
Who among you could know this mysterious
nursling of the day and night, the sun born of Agni and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 95 401


Vayu, cosmic energy, who creates its own mothers, the
day and the night? It is the creature of many forces of
nature and itself the womb of many, being the measure
of physical time and creator of the directions of space.
Great, visionary, and innately powerful, it moves on and
across the regions of water and air in space.






[Names: Avistyo, Ubhe]
Having entered these directions of space and
the objects therein, it grows and expands. Present within
the oblique and wavy motions of wind, air and the rays
of light, it rises above by its own power. On the rise of
the sun, the day and night split up as if out of fear. The
same split marks the west. And yet the night and day
again nurse the hero of light as a favourite hero.






Both night and day, noble and loving, nurse and
serve the sun, Agni, just as lowing cows stay by the
calves with all their love and care. Of those dedicated
experts of yajna who serve Agni with oblations, he rises
above all who offers the oblations from the south.







[Names: Ucchukramatkam]
As the sun, this Agni raises its rays upward as
two arms continuously and, growing awful and blazing,
it joins both the horizons, brightening them both
together. All round it radiates its light as if it offers new
clothes to its mothers, the day and the night or the heaven
and earth which hold the light in their lap.






[Names: Tvesam, Kavirbudhnam]
When Agni, sunlight, assumes a brighter and
higher form mixing the rays of light and vapours of
water in its own region, then, shining as lord of celestial
light and vision, it purifies the sky, elevates intelligence
and refines knowledge and science, and that state of
intelligence and knowledge is divinely pious and







[Names: Visvebhiragne]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 95 403


Agni, mighty as the sun, the vast expanse of
your sphere travels and reaches across and over the
bright regions of the skies. Bright and blazing with all
your own powers and irresistible modes of protection,
protect and promote us.






[Names: Dhanvantsrotah, Visva]
Agni as electric power and vital heat of life
creates paths over the deserts and in the skies, makes
waterways to flow with rippling waves, and with bright
rays of light illuminates the earth. It creates all the foods
and vitalities for the internal organs of the living body
systems and vibrates in all the new and upcoming forms
of nature and human generations.






[Names: Sravase, Tanno]
These, O Agni, light, life and vitality of the
world of existence, pure and purifying, treasure and
dispenser of universal wealth, growing by fuel and
making us grow, pray shine and illuminate us with
nourishments, light and honour. Thus also may Mitra




and Varuna, sun and air and pranic energies, the skies,
the sea and the earth, and the light of heaven and the
electric energy of Agni may shine and make us shine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 96






[Names: Dravinoda, Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Apasca, Mitram, Mitra, Agnim, Agni]
That is Agni, light and fire of life, instantly rising
as ever with power and force for the devotee. He bears
the strength, vision and wisdom of the world and helps
the dedicated person to realise the values of life with
waters, energy, intelligence and friendship in the society.
The devas, divinities of nature and humanity dedicate
themselves to Him, lord giver of universal wealth, and
bear on the fire of yajna from generation to generation.


[Names: Vivasvata]
With the ancient and eternal poetry of


omniscience and from the eternal cause, He, the lord of
light, creates these children of Manus, men of thought


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 96 405


and vision. And with the brilliant light of the sun, he
creates the regions of light and waters and others such
as the earth. The devas, divinities of nature and the
noblest of humanity, hold on to him and bear on the fire
of yajna from generation to generation, universal giver
as He is.




[Names: Tamilata, Urjah, Bharatam, Bharata]
O grateful and dynamic people, serve and
worship Him, Agni, first and highest of existence,
invoked and loved with homage through yajna,
visualised and realised through vision and
discrimination, manifested in energy and products of
energy, sustainer of all and inspiring all with knowledge.
Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity,
hold on to Him and bear on the fire of yajna from
generation to generation, universal giver as He is.






[Names: Visam]
He, Agni, is Matarishva, universal breath of life
replete in the middle regions of space. He is the
inexhaustible treasure-home of energy and nourishment.
He revealed the Holy Word of the Veda for His child,




the humanity. He is the giver of light and happiness. He
is the protector of the people and creator of heaven and
earth and the skies. Devas, divinities of nature and
humanity, worship Him, universal and generous creator
and giver of wealth, and bear on the fire of yajna from
generation to generation.






[Names: Naktosasa, Dyavaksama]
The night and the day both of different light and
form like two nursing mothers together feed the same
one child. The child, Agni, the sun, pervades and shines
in heaven and over earth. The devas serve and worship
Agni, giver of universal wealth, and move on bearing
the fire of yajna from generation to generation.






[Names: Rayo, Amrtatvam]
Agni is the foundation and magic mantra of
wealth and power. It is the companion of the Vasus,
sustainers of life such as the earth, and our guide to
achieve them. It is the flag-post and light-house to the
yajnic projects of life, and means to the fulfilment of


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 96 407


cherished desires. The seekers of immortality and
protectors of eternal values hold on to this giver of
universal wealth and bear on the fire of yajna from
generation to generation.






[Names: Satasca]
Agni is the new as well as the old and eternal
cause and the haven and home of all the material wealth
of the created universe already born and what is
continuously being born. It is the holder, sustainer and
protector of the constant and the mutable forms of the
vast creation. The devas, divinities of nature and
humanity, hold on to Agni in faith and maintain the fire
of yajna from generation to generation, giver of






Agni, universal creator and giver of universal
and omnipresent wealth, may, we pray, grant us the
wealth of knowledge and piety. The creator and giver
of social wealth may, we pray, grant us our share of
material wealth. The creator and giver of food and




energy may, we pray, grant us the food and energy which
gives rise to a community of heroes. The creator and
giver of life and health may, we pray, grant us our full
share of life and age with health and plenty.







[Names: Sravase, Tanno]
Thus may Agni, lord of wealth, pure and
purifying, flaming and growing with fuels and oblations,
shine for our honour and fame. And may Mitra, the sun,
Varuna, the air and pranic energies, Aditi, the sky, the
sea, the earth and the light of heaven, bless us with
health, wealth, knowledge and piety.


Mandala 1/Sukta 97





[Names: Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Sosucadagham]
Agni, lord of light, power and purity, pray shine
on us, burn off our sins and purify us. Shine, purify and
sanctify our wealth of body, mind and soul. O lord, burn
off our sins and let us shine in purity.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 97 409




[Names: Suksetriya]
With our desire and plans for waving green
fields, straight and simple highways for movement, and
honest wealth for body, mind and soul and for the power
of defence and protection do we approach and honour
you, Agni, lord of light and power. Pray burn off our
sins and let us shine in purity.





Lord most shining and excellent, whosoever
among these people be the best of our people, let them
be the leaders of the assembly and administrators. Agni,
lord of light and power, cleanse us of our sins and let us





Lord of light and power, Agni, as your leading
and brilliant brave heroes and devotees are, so may we
rise to be. Lord, we pray, save us from our sins and let








As the lights of this powerful Agni go up in
flames all round and blaze, so may we be, we pray. Lord
of light and power, purge us of our sins and let us shine
in purity.






[Names: Tvam]
Agni, lord omnipresent of universal face and
all-seeing eye, you are the lord supreme over all the
worlds. Lord of light and fire, burn off our sins and let
us shine pure and powerful.



[Names: Dviso]
Agni, light of life, all-watching eye, saving ark
over the seas of existence, lead us over and across the
whirl-pools of jealousies and enmities of the world and
conquer the flood for us. Purge us of our sins and let us
shine in purity.



MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 98 411


Just as we cross a river in flood by boat, so for
the sake of good life and ultimate joy, may Agni, lord
of light and life, help us cross the seas. Lord of light
and purity, cleanse us of evil, burn off our sins and help
us shine in purity, power and piety.


Mandala 1/Sukta 98






[Names: Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Vaisvanarasya]
May we abide in the pleasure and good will of
Vaishvanara Agni, ruler of humanity and indeed the
spirit and vitality of all life on earth. The ruling power,
for sure, is the order, beauty and grace of the world, the
real wealth and life of existence. Born of the original
cause, Prakrti, and manifesting here, this Agni shows
this world and acts in unison with the sun and prana.




[Names: Prsto, Agnih, Vaisvanarah, Agnih]
It is sanctified: sanctified as light in heaven, as


heat in fire, as energy in earth, as vitality in all the herbs
in which it has entered. Vaishvanara Agni, sanctified




and replete with strength, energy and courage, may, we
pray, protect us against hate, enmity and negativity day
and night, both in the waking and in the sleeping state.






[Names: Vaisvanara, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
May that divine nature, energy and vitality of
Vaishvanara Agni, ruling and breathing power of life,
be right and true for the world. May all the treasures
and holders of the wealth of this world be kind and
friendly to us. May Mitra, universal friend, Varuna, the
best, just and reasonable worthy of choice, Aditi,
motherly powers of nature and humanity, the earth, the
seas, the cool waters above and the light of heaven bless
us with the health and vitality of existence.


Mandala 1/Sukta 99




[Names: Agni, Jataveda, Devata, Maricha, Kashyapa, Rshi]
iB Jatavedase sunavama somam aratiyato ni dahati


For the sake of Jatavedas Agni, lord omnipresent
and omniscient of creation, we love and respect the
abundant things of the world and, in a spirit of thanks


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 100 413


to Him, distil every drop of soma joy from it. Indeed,
He burns off the easy wealth of those who are jealous,
hateful, ungrateful and wasteful. Just as a boatman helps
us cross the river by boat, so does the omnipresent lord
help us cross all the evils and the most difficult problems
of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 100








[Names: Indra, Devata, Varshagirah, Rjrashva, Ambarisha, Sahadeva, Bhayamana, Suradhasa, Rshi, Satinasatva, Marutvan, Marutva]
He, Indra, who is mighty and generous, existing
with his showers and powers of generosity, who rules
over the great heaven and earth, who collects the clouds
of water and commands the force of windy Maruts,
tempestuous heroes, and who is ever invoked in the
yajnic battles of life, may that Indra, lord of power and
glory, be for our protection and promotion in prosperity.






[Names: Yasyanaptah, Suryasyeva, Vrsantamah]
Unapproachable is Indra’s speed and power for




the wicked. In battle after battle of life he is the same
breaker of the cloud and destroyer of evil. Lord of
Maruts, tempestuous heroes, most generous and
powerful, may he with his friends and their exploits be
for our protection, promotion and prosperity.






[Names: Divo, Savasaparitah, Tarad]
The showers of the favours of Indra overflow
like the rays of light from heaven. They hurry on apace
uninterrupted on their paths with force and overwhelm
hate, fear and enmity. May he, lord of courage and
valour, commander of tempestuous Maruts, with his
irresistible forces be our protector for progress and






[Names: Rgmibhirrgmi, Jyestho]
With inflow of pranic energies, Indra is the life
of life, mighty generous with showers of strength and
joy, being a friend with friends. With scholars of Rks,
he is master of divine knowledge and supreme of
movement with those who are ever on the move. Lord


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 100 415


and commander of Maruts, heroes of tempestuous speed
and force, may he be our protector for progress and






[Names: Sanilebhih]
Indra, prudent and wise, commander of the
Maruts, challenging his opponents in the battle of the
brave with the assistance of Rudras, fierce fighters dear
as his children, and overthrowing the shooting bowmen
of the enemy with the force of his companions, may he,
we pray, be our leader and protector on way to progress.






[Names: Asminnahantsatpatih, Suryam, Surya, Puru]
Let Indra, ruler of the world, passionate
controller of anger and passion, creator of projects for
freedom and joy, bring the light and bliss of heaven on
earth. Protector and promoter of truth and the true,
invoked and praised by many, may he, commander of
the force of tempestuous Maruts, we pray, be our leader
and guide and protect us on way to progress with the
assistance and cooperation of our people.








[Names: Tamiutayo]
Him, the battles of defence inspire for victory
of the brave. Him, the people elevate to the status of the
protector of peace and prosperity. He, unique among
all, rules the projects of love and cooperation among
the people. May he, commander of the Maruts, be our
leader and protector for peace and progress.






[Names: Tamapsanta, Savasa]
Him, in battles of greatness and celebrations,
the people discover as a man among men for the sake
of protection and prosperity. May he, creating light in
the midst of utter darkness and commanding the force
of Maruts, be our defender and promoter on way to
peace and progress.





With his left hand he overcomes even the strong


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 100 417


oppositions, and with the right he holds and secures the
fruits of his success. With his acts of success and
assessment, he manages and distributes the wealth of
the nation. May he, commander of the Maruts, be our
protector for freedom and progress.






He shares the wealth of the nation with the
farming people in the villages, warriors of the chariot,
and all sections of the people without exception, and
thus he faces and overcomes all shades of criticism and
opposition with the strength of his body, mind and soul
and his noble actions for the sake of mutual confidence
and understanding for harmony. May he, commander
of the Maruts, be our protector for progress and
prosperity in unison and freedom.





[Names: Apam, Puruhuta]
When invoked and called upon by many, Indra
goes to battle with his friends, opponents and the
indifferent ones with all his might and main, he fights
at his best for victory for the future generations of sons
and grandsons of the nation. May Indra, commander of
the Maruts, be our leader and defender for our protection


and progress.






[Names: Savajrabhrd, Satanitha, Camriso]
Indra is the wielder of the force of the
thunderbolt, destroyer of the wicked, fierce, passionate,
knowledgeable of a hundred things and problems,
versatile with a hundred plans and policies, mighty,
concentration of the force of armies as the centre of
yajna congregations, manager of all the five
communities with his power and intelligence. May be,
commander of the Maruts, he our ruler and protector
for freedom and progress.






[Names: Tasya, Simivan]
The thunderbolt of Indra is vocal and effective
appropriately: It is a call to action for the warrior, roar
of terror for the wicked, soothing shower of rain for the
generous, blaze of the sun for the hero, song of the
cuckoo for the artist, and whirring of the wheels for the
industrious. Varieties of wealth abound in him, streams
of generosity flow from him. May Indra, commander


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 100 419


of the Maruts, be our leader and protector on way to
progress and prosperity in peace with freedom.






[Names: Yasyajasram]
Whose constant measure and grandeur divine,
the heaven and earth with their power and potential share
and celebrate all round, may that Indra, we pray, happy
with our yajnic performances, take us across the seas of
existence. May he, commanding the Maruts, be our
protector in life and hereafter.






[Names: Nayasya]
The end of whose power and potential, neither
divinities, nor the mind and sense and imagination of
any one, nor the human mortals, nor even the realised
souls reach and comprehend, that Indra pervades and,
with his subtle and mysterious omnipotence, transcends
heaven and earth. May he, lord of Maruts, be our
protector and saviour.








[Names: Rohicchyava, Vrsanvantam]
Red and dark, bright and beautiful flames, as a
banner mark, touching the heaven, carrying the mighty
chariot of Indra, master of horse power, shooting straight
on wheels for the target of wealth and knowledge, shine
glorious for the people on earth, a blessed sight indeed.






[Names: Etat, Rjrasvah]
Indra, lord of power and prosperity, this is that
song of praise which the children of divine voice
alongwith friends and companions sing as a gift of love
and homage for the lord of eternal prosperity and infinite
generosity: they are Rijrashvas, sages of simple thought
and honest conduct, Ambarisha, scholar of holy word
and knowledge, Sahadeva, who loves to be with lovers
of divinity, Bhayamana, who fears the Divine and whom
the wicked and the crooked fear, and Suradha, man of
honest wealth and versatile genius.







[Names: Dasyunchimyunsca, Puruhita, Sarva, Sanat, Svitnyebhih]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 101 421


Invoked and prayed by many, Indra, wielder of
the defensive and protective thunderbolt, having
destroyed the wicked and removed the aggressive, ought
to root out the weeds, and, with the cooperation and
brilliant actions of his friends and companions, acquire,
enrich, distribute and manage the land, strengthen heat,
light and health and energy, and manage the water
resources.






[Names: Visvahendro, Tanno]
May Indra, lord of power, justice and knowledge
be the supreme speaker and adviser for us. Let us too,
simple, straight and honest in thought, action and
material support, cooperate with him. And we pray: May
Mitra, the sun and human powers of friendship, Varuna,
powers of justice worthiest of choice, the sky, the seas,
the earth and the heavens bless and promote this union
of ours with success.


May this union last for all time!


Mandala 1/Sukta 101






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Avasyavo, Marutvantam, Marutvanta]
mahe.


All ye men and women of the earth, offer words
of welcome and hospitality to joyous Indra, lord giver
of the power of knowledge, who, in a simple natural
manner, breaks open the secret treasures of the dark
womb of nature and makes the streams of knowledge
flow. We, seekers of protection and knowledge, invoke
Indra, lord of light and power, rich and generous, expert
in the use of the thunderbolt of knowledge against the
demon of darkness, and commander of the tempestuous
Maruts of social dynamics, and we pray for his love
and friendship.




[Names: Indro]
havamahe.


For friendship and support, we invoke Indra,
lord of justice, power and generosity, commander of
the Maruts, tempestuous guarding soldiers of humanity,
Indra who, with overwhelming passion and
righteousness breaks the shoulders of Vrtra, dark
demonic cloud of hoarded vapours, and releases the
showers of rain, who destroys the selfish Shambara and
Pipru, undisciplined demons of social unrighteousness,


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 101 423


and who overthrows the mighty but callous and
voracious eater of the nation’s wealth who causes a
drought and famine of the people’s resources for life
and progress.






[Names: Yasya, Yasyendrasya, Suryah, Surya]
For love, friendship and support, we invoke and
pray to Indra, omnipotent lord of the Maruts who post
across the universe and maintain the kingdom. Mighty
is the force in his Law of Dharma for nature and
humanity. The heaven and the moon in their orbits move
as fixed by Law. The seas roll and rivers flow in
accordance with the Law. (We pray, help us, lord, to
follow the Law and enjoy the divine grace.)






[Names: Viloscidindro]
For our protection, friendship and support, we
invoke and pray to Indra, lord ruler of the universe and
humanity. He is the lord of horses. He is the lord of
cows and controller of the moving earths and fluctuating
mind and senses. Ever conscious and wide-awake, he




is constant and active in every act and every movement
that happens in nature and humanity. Mighty powerful
is he, friend of the pious, and the very stroke of death
for the selfish uncreators and violators of yajna.






Indra is the lord ruler, controller and sustainer
of all the moving and breathing universe. He is the first,
creator manifestive in expanding space who created the
mind and senses and the moving earths for the living
creatures. He is the lord of law and justice who throws
down the wicked to the darkest caverns. We invoke and
pray to Indra, lord of Maruts, for our protection and
support as his dear ones and friends.




[Names: Indram]
havamahe.


Indra is invoked and worshipped by the brave,
and he is called upon by the timid as well as by the
fearless, and he is called upon by the victors as well us
by those who flee. Him, all people and worlds in


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 101 425


existence hold at the centre of their being. That Indra,
lord of Maruts, we invoke for support, sustenance and






[Names: Rudranameti, Srutam]
Lord of intelligence, Indra, acts by the paths of
Rudras, that is, Maruts, powers of law and dispensation
and the process of formation and reformation. With the
Rudras, waves of Maruts’ energy, the dawn expands the
lights of the day. Intelligence and mind invoke the
famous powers of Indra, waves of Maruts, as they act
in thought. That Indra, lord of the Maruts’ motion and
energy in space, we invoke for support as divine friend
and benefactor for progress and prosperity.






[Names: Marutvah, Marutva]
Indra, lord of Maruts, tempestuous dynamics of
divine energy, whether you are in the highest heaven of
creation or at the lowest plane of space, there you rejoice
and create joy for the play of life. Lord of light and the
power of joy, come to our yajna of the will to live, and
come well, happy and rejoicing. We are your own, lord




of real wealth of success and giver of bliss. We are ready
with holy and fragrant yajnic havi.






[Names: Tvayendra, Somam, Soma, Adha]
Gracious lord of versatile power, Indra, with you
let us distil the soma of life’s joy and knowledge. Divine
harbinger of universal wealth, let us create the means
and materials of yajnic living with you. And then, lord
of all-competence, allies and equipment, come with the
Maruts, lightning carriers of fragrance, join, enjoy, and
bless us on the holy seats of grass in the yajna.






[Names: Madayasva, Sipre]
Indra, lord of light, power and joy, come by the
lights of the dawn, they are yours. Find the heaven and
earth of freedom and open the flood-gates of song and
joy. Lord of noble helmet, let your horses of the speed
of lightning transport you hither. Come to us and, in a
mood of love and ecstasy, celebrate and bless our gifts
of action and homage in our yajna of life.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 102 427






[Names: Marutstotrasya, Marutstotras, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
We are watchmen of the land of freedom and
joy. We are singers of the song of Maruts in honour of
Indra. May we, we pray, achieve success in our mission
by the grace of Indra. May Mitra, universal friend,
Varuna, our choice lord of justice and dispensation, the
sun and moon, congregations of the learned, the rolling
seas and flowing rivers, mother earth and generous skies,
and the bright heavens help us in that yajnic mission.


Mandala 1/Sukta 102






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Imam, Tamutsave, Savasama]
I hold on to this great and adorable knowledge
and wisdom of yours, Indra, which, loud and bold, is
revealed in this divine song of yours in praise. That
mighty lord Indra of valour and courage, the noblest
leaders and teachers of humanity celebrate with all their
might and wisdom in all yajnic projects for the
expansion and elevation of human life and culture. In




consequence, they too enjoy themselves and feel blest.






[Names: Asya, Sravo, Asme, Suryacandrama]
The power and fame of this Indra, the seven
rivers hold in their flow and reveal. Heaven and earth
and the skies manifest his majestic form. The sun and
the moon shine and move so that we may realise his
glory, have faith, feel the joy of life and finally cross
through the ocean of existence.


ABU


[Names: Anumadama, Purustuta]
yaccha nah.


Maghavan, lord of power, wealth and victory,
reveal and bring up that wondrous and victorious chariot
of yours for our victory and success in battle which we
celebrate in the contests of heroes. Invoked, praised and
worshipped with our mind and soul for the battles of
life, Indra, give us, who are your admirers, our part of
wealth and comfort.


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 102 429






[Names: Vayam, Asmabhyamindra, Satrunam]
Indra, let us win the prizes of life with your help.
In every battle and in every contest, keep our selected
part and our deserved prize safe. Indra, lord of wealth
and power, let the treasures of life be reachable and
make the way to them straight and simple. Lord of power
and force, break down the storms of enemy power for us.






[Names: Nana, Asmakam]
Indra, lord controller and treasurer of the wealth
of the nation, many people are there, your admirers and
worshippers, who invoke you and call upon you with
means of security and protection. Be seated in our
chariot which is unbreakable and victorious and in
which your mind would be cool, collected and at peace,
and come to assign our share of rights and duties and to
dispense our part of endeavour and prize.








[Names: Gojita, Akalpa, Indrah]
Strong armed victor of lands, immensely
intelligent, tactical fighter and winner, protector and
defender in a hundred ways in every battle, heroic
warrior, strongest of the strong, match for the matchless
with his might and power, such is Indra, lord ruler of
the world. Him, the men of admiration invoke for
company and protection.






[Names: Satanmaghavannucca, Sravah, Amatram]
Indra, lord of might and power, more than
your fame and power among the people. Great is your
intelligence and action and noble is your voice which
makes you shine immensely more than brilliant. And
then you break the clouds of rain for the showers and
rout the strongholds of the hoarders.






[Names: Trivistidhatu, Atidam]
Indra, Nrpati, lord of the people and ruler of the


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 102 431


world, in you, threefold is the existence of elements
such as earth, water, fire, air and space, of the order of
matter, motion and mind (sattva, rajas and tamas). You
are the measure of omnipotence. Three are the regions
of space, heaven, sky and earth. Three are the orders of
heat and light, vaishvanara fire in earth, taijasa electric
energy in the sky and Aditya light in heaven. O lord,
Indra, you transcend this entire universe, and by nature
since eternity you are without an enemy, contrariety and




[Names: Tvam, Semam]
purah.


Indra, lord ruler of the universe, first and highest
among devas, divinities of nature and humanity, greater
than your own attributes, we invoke you, pray to you,
and worship you. In the battles of the elements and
conflicts of humanity, you are the unmoved victor. Lord
Indra as you are, in our yajna of life for progress and
prosperity, we pray, advance our chariot made of earthly
materials to the front and raise our technologist maker
and respected worker close at hand among us to high








Indra, lord ruler of the wealth and power of the
world, you win the battles great and small, and stall not
the growth of wealth. In all the battles great and small,
we invoke you, lord of power and passion, for protection
and advancement, deplete the enemies and glorify you.
Then, lord, inspire us in our yajnic programmes for joint
progress and universal prosperity.






[Names: Visvahendro, Tanno]
May Indra, lord of light and power, universal
destroyer, creator and preserver, be our teacher and
supreme speaker for all time. And may we, obedient
and protected, straight and simple, offer him homage,
support and perfect service. We pray, may Mitra and
Varuna, sun and shower, Aditi, saints and skies, Sindhu,
rolling seas and rippling rivers, the earth and heaven
protect and promote this holy programme of ours.


Mandala 1/Sukta 103


[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 103 433




[Names: Ksamedamanyad]
That glory of yours, lord, which is supreme and
eternal, which is essential, subtle and mysterious, and
this which is actual and existential, the poets of vision
and imagination realise by its manifestations. Of this
glory of Indra, this which is on earth is one and distinct,
and the other which is in heaven is distinct and another.
The two mingle in form and mature as one just as two
parties meet in the assembly, each with its identity, and






[Names: Ahannahim, Ssacibhih]
Indra, lord of light and power, like the sun, with
his actions, 1.e., waves of gravitation, holds the earth
and manifests its vast expanse. Striking the electric
thunderbolt of his energy, he constantly creates the
waters of space. He breaks the cloud formed in the
Rohini constellation, striking over its shoulders and
releases the showers of rain on earth.









[Names: Vidvan]
Indra, lord of knowledge and wielder of the
thunderbolt, sustainer of all that is born, faithful and
valorous, routing the strongholds of evil, roams around.
Heroic Indra, having struck the thunderbolt on the
wicked, develops wealth and valour for the noble ones.






[Names: Taducuse, Upaprayan]
Surely that honour and fame for actions, the lord
of power and wealth, Indra, maintains for the admirers
for ages of human memory, which he, wielder of the
thunderbolt, of omnipotence, achieves in action for the
sake of wealth and fame while he advances for the
destruction of the evil and the wicked.






[Names: Tadasyedam, Sradindrasya]
Watch the mighty action, this great achievement
of this lord Indra and take it on with conviction for the
attainment of honour, fame and valour. He develops
lands and cows. He acquires horses and develops modes
of transport and communication. He develops herbs and
trees, creates waters and develops water resources, and
he creates all kinds of wealth and expands the forests.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 103 435






[Names: Bhurikarmane, Somam, Soma]
We create wealth and distil the soma-joy of life
for Indra, lord of abundant action, brave, generous and
truly brilliant. Heroic and fearless, he respects the wise
and, like a detective, uncovers the black money of the
hoarders, shares it with the community and moves on.






[Names: Tadindra, Anu]
when you take on the sleeping cloud with the
thunderbolt. And then the house-wives, the wise seniors,
and all the noble pious people rejoice with you.





[Names: Susnam, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
Indra, when you break down Vrtra, the mighty
cloud which can raise green fields of barley and create




prosperity for the farmers, and when you shatter the
deep caverns of Shambara, the dark cloud pregnant with
vapour as if destroying the formidable forts of an enemy,
then Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the oceans, Aditi, the sky,
the rivers, the earth and heaven rise and inspire us with
reverence and faith.


Mandala 1/Sukta 104






[Names: Indra, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Yonista, Indra, Vimucya]
Indra, this seat of high office is prepared and
reserved for you. Come, take it, rejoicing as a victorious
knight of horse. Come post-haste to join for
refreshments and holy food, leaving behind the birds,
horses and the celestial carriers of the night and day.







[Names: Indramutaye, Indramutay, Devaso]
Those people who approach Indra for protection
and pray for advancement, he leads, all of them, by the
right path at once and always. May the devas, noblest


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 104 437


powers of nature and humanity, allaying the passion and
fear of the demon of opposition, open the path of
progress and bless us with inspiration and guidance for
onward movement and protection.






[Names: Ksirena, Siphayah]
The clever financier carries away the wealth of
others for his heart’s desire. He syphons away the
nation’s wealth down to the scum with a passion and
wallows in the milky waters of his bath. But bathed and
anointed with milk, like the rival mistresses of a swindler
both dying of violent jealousy, he would drown in the
whirlpool of the flood of his own creation.






[Names: Yuyopa, Surah, Anjast]
The life-string of the people’s energy, like the
centre of the waters of the cloud, is implicit and hidden.
And just as the sun breaks open the energy of the cloud
with its rays and shines, so does Indra, the ruler, with
the people themselves, release that energy and shines
as a hero. And then, just as the straight and rapid, brilliant
rivers fed by the heroic Indra, collecting streams of
water, full to over flowing, move on, so the people,




dynamic and brilliant, protected and guided by the
heroic ruler, grow to their full capacity and, creating
and collecting wealth and power, move on their way.






[Names: Prati, Adha]
Seen is the path, the people know: like the one
to the house of the robber and that which leads to the
house of the good in full knowledge. Indra, lord of
wealth and power, take us not away from the path of
good action, throw us not away like the wealth of a






[Names: Mantaram]
Indra, lord ruler of light and power, give us the
brilliance of the sun. Give us the coolness and plenty of
waters. Establish us firmly in sinlessness for a full life
of joy. Pray do not hurt our people, they are worthy of
protection. We are dedicated in faith to you for the sake
of wealth and prosperity.


at: WON


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 104 439




[Names: Ssrat, Puruhuta]
And I believe in you. We have reposed full faith
in you for this life of joy. Great lord of strength and
generosity, inspire us to achieve great wealth and
honour. Honoured and invoked by many, O lord, do not
deliver us, our life and descendants, unto an ignoble
state of existence. Indra, provide ample food and soma
drink for the hungry and thirsty.






[Names: Anda]
Deprive us not of our cherished dreams and desires.
Lord of great action and power, wealth and honour,
destroy not the future in the womb. Neglect not those
who deserve, let them not be lost in oblivion. Alienate
not our brethren, descendents and traditions.






[Names: Arvanehi, Somakamam, Somakama, Uruvyaca]
Indra, come right here and now. They say you
love soma. Distilled is the soma of life’s joy, drink of it




to your fill for the bliss of life. Lord of great honour
and universal reverence, invoked by all with love in
faith, listen to our prayers as a father and shower the
rains of bliss.


Mandala 1/Sukta 105






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Candrama]
The moon glides in the middle regions of
Antariksha in the midst of waters and pranic energies.
So does the sun of wondrous rays run fast in the heaven
of light. But the golden-rimmed flashes of lightning
reveal themselves not to your state of consciousness.
May the heaven and earth know the secret of this
mystery and reveal it to men, the ruler and the people.






[Names: Arthamid, Tunjate]
Those who love things of value get the thing
loves. They vitalise the fluent waters of life, distil the
soma of ecstasy and giving themselves up to the spirit
of life, taste the nectar of existence. O heaven and earth,
know the secret of this mystery of love and life and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 441
reveal it for me.






[Names: Sambhuvah]
O divinities of life and nature, may that ecstasy
and bliss of our life never fall below the top of heaven.
May we never suffer frustration in vacuum of the peace
and joy of the soma of existence. Heaven and earth,
know the secret and mystery of living in the state of
bliss and reveal it to me for all, the ruler as well as the
ruled.






[Names: Yajnam]
Lord of knowledge, you are the harbinger of
truth and the message of Divinity. I ask you of that
supreme yajna of life’s protection and promotion which
sustains existence. Where is that eternal water and law
of life hidden or gone? Who at the present time observes
that same ancient and eternal yajna and law of life, and
how? May the heaven and earth know and reveal the
truth for us.








O lords of knowledge, who or what are those
divine powers of existence abiding in the light of heaven
by their name, identity and state of being in the three
regions of the universe? Where is the law of cosmic
dynamics of evolution? What is truth and what is
untruth? What is eternal and constant? What is
existential and mutable? What was the first mutation of
Prakrti in the cosmic yajna? What is going to be the last
and closing oblation in the cosmic vedi? May the heaven
and earth know and reveal it for us.






[Names: Varunasya, Varunas, Kadaryamno]
O divinities of existence, what and where is the
ultimate cause of the original life and law, what is that
omnipotence? What and where is that omniscient all-
seeing eye that watches the created forms and their
karmic movement? What and where is that awful path
of the great sun by which we may comprehend and cross
the challenges of existence? May the heaven and earth
know of this and reveal the knowledge to me.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 443


7. Aham so asmi yah pura sute vadami kani cit. Tam


I am the same who chant some songs of Vedic
adoration at the dawn of the cosmic yajna of the Divine.
And yet the loves and cares of existence overwhelm me
as a wolf pounces upon a deer thirsting for life and
existence. What is this mystery? May the heaven and
earth know and reveal it to me!






[Names: Muso, Ssisna, Satakrato]
The knives and sickles of life all round cut into
my vitals as rival mistresses consume the lover’s heart
and soul. Just as mice eat up the warp and woof of cloth
in the making, so do the cares of life eat away the original
wealth of me who am, in reality, your admirer and
worshipper, O Lord of a hundred yajnas of the universe.
What is this mystery? Let heaven and earth reveal it to
me.






[Names: Tritastad]
As far as the rainbow lights of the universe




radiate, as far as the five elements, Ahankara, mind-
matter complex and Mahan, first mutation of Prakrti
expand, as far as the five pranas, mind and intellect
energise life, that far exists the sphere of my life’s centre-
hold. The self-realised soul who knows the time past,
present and future upon the instant knows that and
proclaims for the realisation of universal brotherhood
of souls. May the heaven and earth know and reveal the
secret of this universal brotherhood for me.






[Names: Devatra]
There they are, five generous founts of energy,
water and joy which abide in the great heavens, they
being fire, wind, vapours of water, electricity and the
sun. They are simultaneous, coexistent and worthy of
being researched, analysed and explained by and to the
noblest of generous scholars. May the heaven and earth
know this mystery of nature and reveal it to me.






[Names: Suparna]
The waves of solar energy abide in the midst of
the sun’s gravity. They being most potent regulate the
paths and velocities of electricity and the formation and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 445


movement of waters. May the heaven and earth know
this mystery and reveal it to me.






[Names: Navyam, Rtamarsanti]
O men of knowledge and generosity, this new,
laudable, sacred, useful and secret principle of nature’s
truth and law of physical evolution is worthy of study,
discussion and development. The rivers flow and the
sea rolls the waters while the sun creates and expands
the vapours and again sucks up the vapours. This
mysterious cycle may the heaven and earth know and
reveal to us.






[Names: Agne]
Agni, scholar of heat and vitality, that laudable
knowledge of yours is worthy of confirmation with
reference to the presence of vitality in various forms of
nature. Scholar of eminence, come as a participant in
yajna, study those forms of nature, cooperate with other
scholars, and may the heaven and earth know the
mysteries of nature and reveal the same to you and me.








[Names: Satto, Agnirhavya, Agnirhav]
Scholar of eminence, researcher in the yajna of
science, come as a participant in yajna. Specialist of
natural sciences, adorable you are among scholars. Agni
is the vital power that creates, matures and gives the
materials for the yajna of humanity. May the heaven
and earth know the mysteries of vital fire and reveal the
same to you and me.






[Names: Brahma, Vyurnoti]
Brahma, lord supreme, creates, Varuna, lord of
love and justice, reveals the knowledge and shapes the
man of knowledge who knows the ways of nature and
the ways of the world. We pray to the lord supreme, we
request the man of knowledge. He removes the veil of
ignorance with his heart of love and refines our
intelligence. We pray may new and newer facts of nature
and divine law arise. May heaven and earth know and
reveal the knowledge to us.





[Names: Asau]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 105 447


That is the path which is blazing glorious as the
sun in heaven, eternal and imperishable, created in the
light of eternal knowledge, Veda, to be meditated on,
spoken of and followed. Not even the greatest in nature
or humanity can exceed or violate it. O mortal men and
women, you do not see it. I pray, may the heaven and
earth know and reveal it to you and me.






[Names: Tritah, Tacchu, Srava]
Trita, the soul in possession of simultaneous
vision of past, present and future time, having achieved
efficiency in knowledge, action and prayer, withdrawn
into the cave of the heart, or, even the soul fallen into
disarray in all the three ways and deep in the well of
desperation, calls upon the Lord for succour, protection
and spiritual elevation. The Lord, Brhaspati, lord of the
universe and universal voice, listens and creates a wide
path of freedom from sin, despondency and limitations.
May the heaven and earth know that path and reveal
the words of prayer to me.






[Names: Aruno, Ujjihite]
The Lord of golden majesty, creator and




measurer of the months of time, giver of vision and bliss
like the moon, watches the wayfarer going on the path
of life created for humanity. And the person so observed,
even a hunchback suffering the worst pains, is reshaped
into form and, thanking the Lord, leaps and bounds on
way to freedom in a state of perfect health. May the
heaven and earth know that path and reveal the vision
divine for me.






[Names: Enangusena, Tanno]
Inspired by this song of divinity sung by the
sage of eternal vision, let us all, children of Indra, be all
ways great and strong and move forward by leaps and
bounds. And may Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the moon,
Aditi, the sky, the river and the sea, the earth and heaven
strengthen our resolve and advance us on way to
freedom and bliss.


Mandala 1/Sukta 106




[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Mitram, Mitra, Marutam, Maruta, Ratham, Aditim, Aditi]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 106 449


For energy, power and protection, we invoke
Indra, lord of power and natural energy, Mitra, pranic
energy and universal friend, Varuna, noble scholar and
power of will, Agni, fire, solar energy and lord of
knowledge, troop and force of Maruts, power of the
winds, Aditi, children of the earth, powers of nature
and knowledge of the original cause of the physical
world. May the Vasus, sustainers of life, generous and
giving, save us from all sin and evil of the world and
take us forward as a chariot over the difficult paths of
earth, sea and sky.






[Names: Aditya, Adit, Sambhuvah]
Let the Adityas, lights of the world, come for
our total protection and prosperity. Come all the
nobilities of nature and humanity to fight with us in all
the battles against demons of darkness for creation and
production, and may they be good for our peace and
joy. May the Vasus, generous and giving, save us from
all sin and evil of the world and take us forward as a
chariot over the difficult paths of earth, sea and sky.









[Names: Avantu]
May the wise and adorable ancients and seniors
protect us, may the divine earth and heaven, and the
daughters of divine nature help us and advance the rule
of truth and law. And may the generous Vasus, we pray,
save us from all sin and evil and lead us as a chariot
over the difficult paths of earth, sea and sky.






[Names: Narasamsam, Pusanam, Pusana]
With sincere mind and soul, we invoke the
universally praised hero of knowledge and power, ideal
of the brave, lord of protection and progress, heroic
Pushan, fighting here for development of food, energy
and social advancement. And we pray, may the generous
Vasus save us from all sin and evil and take us forward
as a chariot across the difficult paths of earth, sea and





[Names: Brhaspate]
Brhaspati, lord of the wide wide world, lord of


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 106 451


universal knowledge, we pray, make our path of
movement easy for all time. We pray for peace and all
round protection against suffering, all that is good for
mankind. And, we pray, may the generous Vasus save
us from all sin and evil and take us forward as a chariot
over the difficult paths of earth, sea and sky.






[Names: Sacipatim]
Rshi, divine seer, Kutsa, master of knowledge
and power, creator of peace and joy, in his programmes
of peace and progress, invokes for help, inspiration and
protection Indra, lord of universal action, speech and
knowledge and divine destroyer of evil and darkness.
We pray, may the generous Vasus save us from all sin
and evil and take us forward as a chariot over the
difficult paths of earth, sea and sky.






[Names: Devairno, Tanno, Aditih]
May Aditi, eternal knowledge with the gift of
noble virtues protect us. May the scholar and generous
seer, saviour from ignorance, in all sincerity protect us




without relent. And may Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the
moon, Aditi, the sky, the sea and rivers, earth and heaven
support and bless us in our progress onward.


Mandala 1/Sukta 107






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Yajno, Scidya]
Yajna brings peace, prosperity and happiness
to the noble people. O scholars of science and divinity,
be harbingers of peace and joy by yajnic creations and
on successfully so that it may save us from anxiety and
fear, bring us wealth, and win honour and reverence for
the wise.






[Names: Indra, Sarma, Aditih, Aditi]
Invoked, honoured and aroused with the soma
songs of the Angirasa scholars of pranic energies, let
the divinities come with protection to bless: may Indra
come with wealth and powers, Maruts with energy of
winds, and Aditi with the seasonal gifts of sunlight and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 108 453


solar energy. May they, we pray, come close to us and
bless us with peace, comfort and joy.






[Names: Tanna, Indrastad, Tanno]
That food for life and wealth of the world may
the divinities bring us: Indra, that power and wealth
with energy and rain, Varuna, that peace and prosperity
with water, Agni, that knowledge, light and fire for
living, Aryama, that force and speed of the winds, and
Savita, that light and life with solar energy distilled from
nature. May the divinities bring us that food for life,
that strength, enlightenment, justice, dignity and grace.
And may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the seas and rivers, earth
and heaven raise us to the heights of grandeur.


Mandala 1/Sukta 108




[Names: Indragni, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Indragni, Tena, Somasya, Somas]
Indra and Agni, powers of air and fire, wonderful
is the chariot which goes round and shows for you all
the places and planets of the world. Come riding therein




and bring us all that is there in the chariot and enjoy the
beauty and pleasure of the Lord’s creation.






[Names: Yavadidam, Tavan]
Indra and Agni, lords of the chariot, as far deep
and majestic as this world is with its wide expanse and
gravity, that far may be the beauty and pleasure of the
soma for you to drink to your heart’s desire.






[Names: Cakrathe, Tavindragni]
Indra and Agni, together you are, together you
exist, together you do good and together you break the
cloud for rain. Therefore, acting together as ever, bring
generous showers of the abundant soma joy of the Lord’s
creation.





[Names: Samiddhesvagnisvanajana, Tivraih, Somaih, Somai]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 108 455


The flames of yajna fire are blazing, the ladles
are full and raised, the holy seats are spread and occupied
in anticipation of Indra and Agni for whom the yajna is
organised. And now Indra and Agni, we pray, come and
join us with brilliant soma showers for the sake of joy.






[Names: Yanindragni, Sivani]
Indra and Agni, whatever great success you have
inspired and achieved, whatever forms of abundant
generosity you have assumed, whatever ancient and
auspicious actions you have performed as friends of
humanity, with all these drink of the soma distilled in
celebration of your power and glory.






[Names: Yadabravam]
What I spoke of you first, opting to invoke you
in the yajna of science and creation, was true and
faithful. And the soma distilled in yajna is worth
invoking even by the asuras, those who live merely at
the physical level. Come in response to that true and
faithful voice of ours and drink of this soma of the joy








[Names: Yadindragni, Atah]
Indra and Agni, adorable powers of yajna, as
you celebrate your power and achievement in your own
house and enjoy, or celebrate among the learned and
the divines, or the rulers of the nation, the same way, O
generous and abundant powers, holy and heroic, come
and drink of the soma of your own creation with us.






[Names: Turvasesu, Yadusu, Purusu]
Indra and Agni, generous and abundant, holy
and heroic, whether you are among the industrious or
the victorious, or the malicious, or followers or leaders,
from there come and drink of the soma distilled.






MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 108 457


Indra and Agni, whether you abide in the lower
region of the earth, or in the middle region of the sky,
or in the highest region of heaven, from there, powers
generous and heroic, come and then drink of the soma
of joy distilled from the life of existence.








Indra and Agni, whether you are in the highest
regions of the heaven of light, or in the middle region
of the skies of wind and lightning, or in the lowest region
of the earth, from there come, powers generous and
heroic, and then drink of the soma joy of life distilled.






Indra and Agni, as you stay in the region of

heaven, on the earth, in the mountains and the clouds,

in the herbs and in the waters, from there come, powers


generous and life-giving, and then drink of the soma of








[Names: Suryasya, Suryas]
Indra and Agni, generated of the sun in the midst
of heaven, inspire and enlighten with their essential
power of energy and food for life. From there, powers
generous and brilliant, come and then delight with a
drink of soma distilled for you and all.






[Names: Evendragni, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
Indra and Agni, treasure sources of knowledge,
wealth and victory, having drunk of the soma distilled
from life and nature may, we pray, win for us all the
wealth of the world. May Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, rivers
and the seas, earth and heaven bliss this wish and prayer
and raise us to the dignity and prosperity of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 109




[Names: Indragani, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Nanya]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 109 459


O Indra and Agni, wishing with heart and soul
for better life and wealth I speak to those who know
and to my contemporary brethren: Other than you two,
none is my protector, none preceptor, none my subject.
Thus I improve and refine the worshipful and divine
knowledge and understanding about fire and electricity.






[Names: Asravam, Somasya, Somas, Indragni]
I hear that you are much more rich and
munificent in gifts than a son-in-law or a brother-in-
law. Hence an offering of soma for you both, a cherished
gift of study, whereby I create and present the latest
treatise on the energy of fire and electricity.






[Names: Saktiranuyacchamanah, Indragnibhyam, Indragnibhya]
“Let us not snap the life-line, keep the light
flowing”, praying thus for progress and prosperity,
pursuing the tradition of their forefathers’ energy,
imbiding the nourishments of the seasons and directing
themselves by Indra and Agni, heat and energy of
nature’s divinity, the virile and generous children of




humanity live and celebrate life in the magnetic field of
intelligence along the perpetual line of piety and






[Names: Yuvabhyam, Soma, Tavasvina]
Indra and Agni, fire and power, with you and
for you and for the pleasure and dignity of living does
divine intelligence, inspired with love and passion for
life, create beauty and power alongwith joy. Come
generous handed Ashvins, complementary currents of
nature’s energy, with honey sweets and join the two,
fire and power, with waters in the sky.






[Names: Yuvamindragni, Tavasadya]
Indra and Agni, lords of energy and fire power,
you two I hear are the fastest and strongest in the battle
against the clouds of darkness and want and in the
creation and distribution of wealth and joy. Come
benefactors, both of you, grace the seats of this yajna of
science and technology and enjoy the honey-sweets of
creation.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 109 461






Indra and Agni, universal fire, light and electric
energy, by your own power and grandeur, in the battles
of existence and evolution, you exceed humanity, earth,
heaven, seas, mountains and all other regions of the





[Names: Siksatam, Bharatam, Bharata, Sactbhih, Suryasya, Suryas]
Indra and Agni, of strong arms as adamant,
come, sustain us, teach us and protect us with your
knowledge and actions. And these and those far off are
your rays of the sun, both knowledge and nourishment,
by which our forefathers blest us with science,
knowledge and sustenance.









[Names: Puramdara, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
Indra and Agni, strong of arms as adamant,
breakers of the strongholds of darkness and poverty,
we pray, protect us, and advance us in the battles of
success in life. And may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, seas and
rivers, earth and heaven support this prayer of ours and
raise us to the heights of achievement.


Mandala 1/Sukta 110






[Names: Rbhus, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Rbhu, Tatam, Sasyate, Ayam]
Wide is my knowledge and action and it
continues growing wider and higher. Sweet is my word
and wisdom worthy of approval and appreciation in
discourse and communication. Deep as the ocean is this
world of knowledge, wisdom and dharmic action, divine
and adorable, distilled from the voice of Divinity. Come,
devotees of knowledge and wisdom and leaders of noble
action, and drink of it to your heart’s content.





[Names: Abhogayam, Saudhanvana]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 110 463


Saints and sages, living on alms and uncooked
vegetables and fruits, men of ancient knowledge and
wisdom, realised souls for me, if you wish to taste the
joy and ecstasy of life, then, like heroes of the mighty
bow, with all your wealth of noble action, come to the
house of generous Savita, light and life of the universe.






[Names: Tyam]
O Saints and sages, when singing in praise of
Divinity you reach the house of Savita, lord of light
which can never be concealed, then He creates the nectar
of bliss for you. And that one measure of holy food,
which is held in the sacrificial ladle as water is held in
the cloud or soul in the body, He increases fourfold for
the living and breathing souls in existence.






[Names: Vistvi, Sami, Suracaksasah]
People of noble speech and action doing acts of
piety with zeal attain freedom from death to immortality
of bliss though they are still in the mortal state. Heroes




of the mighty bow, commanding wisdom and dexterity,
having universal vision as light of the sun attain
perfection by virtue of good actions just in one year.






[Names: Ksetramiva, Upastuta]
The Rbhus, heroes of knowledge, wisdom and
expertise of action, approached and solicited for
exceptional work, desiring and winning honour and
reputation among immortals, with their genius and
brilliance measure and cross like a field any body of
knowledge effective for one kind of achievement.






[Names: Taranitva]
For the sake of humanity we dedicate our mind
and intelligence and offer it like ghrta in a sacrificial
ladle to the Rbhus, inhabitants of the sky, who share its
food and energy with their zeal and, with their force
and power rise to the regions of heaven.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 110 465




[Names: Rbhurna, Indrah, Indra, Yusmakam]
Rbhu, man of science and wonders is Indra for
us, always new and fresh with discoveries and
inventions. He is ever new and fresh with creation of
food and energy and giver of new wealth and power. O
spirits and dwellers of the sky, may we with your power
and protection in our dearest days win over the force
and armies of ungenerous and selfish people.


ATU Il




[Names: Niscarmana, Saudhanvanasah]
O Rbhus, wondrous scholars of life-science and
rejuvenation, rejuvenate and strengthen the skinny cow
and recreate her as the mother cow with her calf. Heroes
of the mighty bow, leaders of men, with your knowledge
and action vitalise the worn out seniors and restore them
to their youth.





[Names: Vajebhirno, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
Indra, lord of power and force, empowered with




the Rbhus, wondrous force of knowledge and power of
science, move into the battle of life for us and win us
[Names: Mitra]
Varuna, Aditi, rivers and the sea, earth and heaven bless
and advance this united effort of knowledge, power and
the people.


Mandala 1/Sukta 111






[Names: Rbhus, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Rbhu, Taksan, Taksan, Indravaha]
Let the Rbhus, with their knowledge and action
in the field of science and technology, manufacture a
sophisticated multistage chariot for the ride of Indra,
lord of wealth and honour and generous giver of showers
of prosperity. Let them also creates the horse power for
that chariot to carry Indra and the wealth of riches. Let
them create new youthful vigour for the ageing parents
and seniors and the mother cow for the calf to provide
protection for it.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 111 467




[Names: Rbhumadvayah, Rbhumadvaya, Yatha]
O Rbhus, create that youthful and vibrant health
and age for our yajna of social order with science and
technology which shapes the Rbhus for further
advancement, create food and energy for a nation of
the brave worthy of noble acts and expertise, and build
up that science and wealth for our strength by which
we may abide as a heroic nation in peace, security and





[Names: Satim]
O Rbhus, leaders of science and commanders
of the forces, create and refine the wealth of the nation
for us. Create speed and power for the chariot, and
strength and speed for movement and transport. Create
and heighten our capacity for victory and advancement
over the challenging enemy known or unknown, equal
or unequal, in the battles of life.








[Names: Rbhuksanamindrama, Ubha, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Mitravaruna, Marutah, Maruta]
I invoke Indra, lord of glory and master friend
of the Rbhus, for protection and progress. I invoke the
Rbhus, experts of the art of living and creator of the
beauty of life. I invoke these pioneers of intelligence,
Vajas, leaders of knowledge and power, and the Maruts,
spirits and forces of tempestuous movement forward. I
call upon them all for protection, promotion and
enjoyment of the beauty, wealth and excitement of life.
May Mitra, spirit of love and friendship, Varuna, light
of excellence, and surely both the Ashvins,
complementary currents of divine energy, inspire and
exhilarate us for wealth and dignity, intelligence and
passion for victory in the struggle for progress in






[Names: Tanno]
May the Rbhus grant us wealth and victory for
total fulfilment. May the victor, Vaja, inspire us with
courage and valour. And may Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the
seas and the rivers, earth and heaven bless this resolve
and prayer of ours with success.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 469


Mandala 1/Sukta 112






[Names: Dyavaprthivi, Agni, Ashvins, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Ashvin, Yabhirbhare, Saya]
In continuation of the earlier yajnas of prayer
and production, and moving on further on the same path
of desired creation and comfort, I invoke at the outset
heaven and earth and Agni, brilliant fire. O Ashvins,
complementary currents of nature’s energy and teachers
and scholars, come forth with those very means of
protection and advancement by which you inspire and
lead the efficient worker and researcher to play his part
in the programmes of progress.






[Names: Yuvordanaya, Yabhirdhi]
Ashvins, teachers and scholars, complementary
harbingers of natural wealth, just as creators and
producers of food and energy, avoiding idlers and
wastours, come to the man of knowledge for advice, so
they come to your chariot to sit in for the gift of desired
achievement in action. Come forth with those means of




safety and success by which you protect and promote
intellectuals and researchers for progress.






[Names: Yuvam, Yabhirdhenuma]
O Ashvins, teachers, scholars and leaders of the
nation, harbingers of health and vitality from the sap of
nature, who reside in the midst of the socio-economic
and educational system of the people and rule and teach
by the power of celestial soma and by the grace of the
pure and eternal lord of immortality, come and bless us
with those means of vitality, safety and protection by
which you revitalize the enervated holy speech and
education like rejuvenation of the barren cow.






[Names: Yabhih, Yabhistrimanturabhavad]
Ashvins, complementary forces of natural
evolution, teacher and scholar, human forces of social
evolution, come with power and grace with those means
and powers of protection and progress by which the
all-round moving Vayu, wind energy, source of fire and
water, blows and shines among the fast moving forces


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 471


of nature with the light and grandeur of its extension,
the fire, and by which the teacher and scholar shines in
society by the merit of his disciple and power of his
creative work, and by which the man of knowledge,
action and prayer rises to the universal vision of




[Names: Yabhi]
gatam.


Ashvins, catalytic powers of nature’s divinity,
analytic scholars of nature, educational and
developmental powers of society, come up to us with
grace with all those powers and protections by which
you support and advance the scholar wholly and
exclusively dedicated to worshipful study of nature in
the field of water and liquids and see him emerging from
the waters for a sight of divinity through success. Come
with those protections by which you support the scholar
of eminence in his analytical studies of the elements










[Names: Yabhirantakam]
Ashvins, scholars of science and medicine,
come with all that knowledge, protection and
promotions and safety measures by which you develop
pain killers, antibiotics, tonics and anesthetics in the
battle of life and by which you save, sustain and develop
the fetus after conception. Come with all these with




[Names: Purukutsamavatam, Purukutsamavata]
gatam.


Ashvins, scholars, teachers and social planners,
come with grace with all those modes and means by
which you protect and promote the pure hearted creator
and distributor of wealth, the noble parliamentarian,
brilliant enthusiast, protective warrior, the astronaut and
the versatile scholar for the establishment of a social
order free from physical, psychological and spiritual



[Names: Sronam, Yabhirvartikam]
gatam.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 473


Ashvins, powers of nature and humanity,
generous and virile, come with grace with all those noble
acts of protection and mercy by which you restore the
rejected, the blind and the deaf back to their natural
health and efficiency to see clearly and walk with
confidence, and by which you release the poor bird
caught in the falcon’s beak.






[Names: Kutsam, Srutaryam, Svina]
Ashvins, scholars of science and leaders of the
world, young and unaging, come with all those acts of
power and protection by which you cross the sea and
make the honey-sweets of rivers to flow, promote the
pious scholar of Divinity and arm the warrior with
thunder, train the man of information and create the
leader of leaders. Come with all those and come with





[Names: Yabhirvispalam, Yabhirvasamasvyam]
Ashvins, ruler and commander of the army,




come with all those acts and powers by which you
refresh and promote the defence forces which protect
the people, create wealth and remain steady and
unshaken in the war of a thousand battles, and by which
you raise and maintain an impressive cavalry and
armoured corps which is inspired and committed to the
nation. Ashvins, come and come with grace.





[Names: Kaksivantam]
Ashvins, generous and highly creative scholars
and leaders of humanity, come with all those acts and
policies by which you open the treasure secrets of the
wealth of nature and humanity and let flow the streams
of water and honey for the children of the learned, the
man of commerce and industry, and the masters of
knowledge and wide wealth, and by which you protect
and promote the devotees of the nation and national
prestige who command the loyalty of their supporters.

Come soon and come with grace.





[Names: Yabhistrisoka]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 112 415


By feats of irrigation engineering you augment
the stream of water with over-flowing rush of floods of
water. By feats of automotive engineering you protect
and propel the horse-less chariot onward for victory.
By electrical engineering, the leader, feeling the want
of education, justice and economic well-being throws
up the currents of electric energy for development. With
all these wonders of science and technology, O Ashvins,
scientists and leaders, come with grace and protection
for development and progress.




[Names: Suryam, Surya, Yabhirvipram, Bharadvajam, Bharadvaja]
gatam.


With the communication by which you go round
the sphere of the sun in far off orbit, by which you reach
and protect the pious man of thought and action over
the dominions, by which you protect and promote the
scholar of science and the creator and harbinger of food,
energy and speed, with all these gifts of protection and
progress, O Ashvins, leaders of science and
development, come with grace and bless us.








[Names: Yabhirmaham, Divodasam, Divodasa]
Ashvins, promoters and leaders of humanity,
come with those protections and generosities by which
in the most challenging battle of life you protect the
great man of liberality, the manager of water resources
and the promoter of sunlight and the light of Dharma,
and by which you defend and advance the terror-warrior
against the strongholds of the evil and the wicked in
the struggle of life for light and knowledge.




[Names: Yabhirvamram, Yabhirvyasvam]
gatam.


Ashvins, scientists and technologists, come soon
and with grace, with those preventives, protectives,
curatives and restoratives by which you treat sickness
and dehydration, create tonic drinks, protect approved
preparations and specialists, and prepare sedatives and
pacifiers, by which you protect and honour marriage
partners, and by which you launch and protect
technological vehicles and genius scholars.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 112 477




[Names: Yabhirnara]
Ashvins, leaders of humanity, come and bring
us those protections and preparations by which you
provide peace and security for the common man sleeping
in comfort, assure freedom from weakness of body, mind
and soul for the man of virtue, elevate the rule of the
benevolent ruler to the sunlight of love and justice over
the vast earth and wide paths of movement, and shoot
arrows of defence for the rule of light, love and justice.






Ashvins, leaders and protectors of the people,
come with the support and protections by which the
ruler protects and promotes the teachers and the
disciples. Come with the passion and power by which
the warrior, inspired like fire lit up and blazing with the
holy fuel in the vedi, rages and blazes with valour and
rectitude in battle. Come with the defences by which
you protect the warrior facing a shower of arrows in the
mighty battle for justice and development.








[Names: Yabhirangiro, Yabhirmanum, Suramisa]
Ashvins, leaders and commanders, come with
the support by which you satiate the man of knowledge
with peace and joy at heart. Come with the power and
speed by which you fly over the paths of stars. Come
with the plenty and generosity by which you strengthen
the warrior for humanity with food, energy, movement
and refreshment. With all these means of support and
protection, come and bless us in peace and security.






[Names: Sudasa]
Ashvins, generous powers of nature and
humanity, teachers and celibates, come with the love
and protection by which you bring generous and noble
life-partners for young men. Come with the love and
knowledge by which you teach bright girls and prepare
them for life. Come with that bright and divine
knowledge by which you enrich the man of charity and
generosity. Come and bless us with all these modes of
support and protection.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 112 479


[Names: Omyavatim]
gatam.


Ashvins, harbingers of comfort and joy, come
with those gifts of support and protection by which you
bless the generous man with peace and comfort, by
which you protect the man of prosperity and the man of
power and honour. Come with that knowledge which
bears and brings the wealth of peace and joy and the
wealth of truth and right.






[Names: Madhu]
Ashvins, rulers and commanders, come with
those protections by which you protect the archer in
battle, by which you protect the young rider and the
horse in the race, by which you bear and bring the
favourite honey for the bees. Come with all these and







[Names: Yabhirnaram]
Ashvins, rulers and commanders, come with
those powers and protections by which in the battles of
men you exhort the leader bravely fighting for the land
and her cows, by which in the battle of the field you
protect the children of the nation, and by which you
defend the warriors of the chariot. Come with all these
protections and bless us.




[Names: Yabhirdhvasantim, Purusantim, Purusanti]
gatam.


Ashvins, rulers and commanders, heroes of a
hundred acts of war and defence, come with those
powers and protections by which you protect the
lightning missile, by which you protect the tempestuous
warrior terrorizing the enemy, by which you defend and
advance the leader who takes on and destroys many
hosts of the enemy. Come with these protections and
advance us on way to progress.





[Names: Apnasvatim, Adyiutye]
Ashvins, complementary divinities of nature and
powers of humanity, generous harbingers of showers


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 481


of strength and prosperity, give us the holy voice which
is creative and effective. Give us the intelligence and
wisdom for reflection, imagination and planning. I
invoke you for protection and advancement in the sure,
clear and honest business of life for light and progress.
We take no chances, nor gamble with life, be kind and
gracious, lords, be favourable to grant us growth and
prosperity in food, energy, success and advancement.






[Names: Dyubhiraktubhih, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
Ashvins, protect and promote us, we pray, by
days and by nights with steady and unobstructed
progress, with wealth, grace and good fortune. And may
Mitra and Varuna, the sun and shower, Aditi, mother
nature, Sindhu, the sea and the rivers, Prithivi, mother
earth and Dyau, the light of heaven and currents of
spatial energies help, advance and bless this prayer and
programme of ours.


Mandala 1/Sukta 113






[Names: Usha, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Idam, Ssrestham, Yatha]
Here comes this dawn, light of lights, supreme,
wonderful, bright and enlightening, rising and
expanding. Just as the night comes over for regeneration
of the sun, so does it uncover the womb of darkness for
the coming of dawn.






[Names: Svetyagadaraigu, Samanabandhu]
The bright dawn comes shining with light,
bearing the bright sun new born. The dark night leaves
its regions open for the light. Both, like sisters of the
same one brother, immortal, assume their own form of
light, one bright, the other covered and both come in
succession, each retiring and succeeding the other.






[Names: Samano]
One and the same is the path of the two sisters,
which is space, endless and infinite, existentially
speaking, which they follow one after the other as
ordained by the Divine. They neither overlap, nor
encroach, nor clash, nor stand still for a moment. Fixed
and firm, each on its own, and of harmonious nature
are they, although the night and the dawn are of different
forms which are apparently contradictory as light and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 483






[Names: Bhasvati, Prarpya, Rbhuvanani]
Brilliant shines the dawn, leading inspiration
and revelation of divinity for spirits of piety. Wonderful
and splendid, it opens the doors of intelligence and
consciousness. Taking the world over, it reveals the
wealth of nature and envelops the worlds of existence
in beauty and splendour.






[Names: Jihmasye, Dabhram]
O dawn, lady light of wealth and beauty,
inspiring, vast and bright, for the lazy loon oversleeping
or the squint eyed one, for moving around, for enjoyment
of living, for the attainment of desire and yajna, for the
achievement of wealth, for the weak-eyed one, and for
the revelation of things on earth, you shine and wake
up the worlds of existence into light, beauty and activity,
revealing even the tiny things.








[Names: Ksatraya, Sravase, Visadrsa]
O dawn, for governance and administration of
the social order, for food, energy and national prestige,
for honour and grandeur, for reaching the desired goal
in life, and for the attainment of the various and versatile
ways of life, you shine, wake up and envelop the worlds
of existence in light and beauty.






[Names: Sukravasah, Visvasyesana]
Dawn, this daughter of heavenly light, appears
on the horizon, shining bright, a maiden clothed in light,
over-whelming the entire beauty and wealth of the
world. O dawn, lady of noble good fortune, come here
for us and shine.






[Names: Parayatinamanveti, Sasvatinam, Vyucchanti]
The dawn follows the path of those that have
gone before since eternity. It is the first pioneer of those
that would follow for eternity. Shining bright, waking


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 485
it comes on and shines on.






[Names: Yanmdnusan, Suryasya, Suryas]
O dawn, what you do for lighting of the fire of
yajna early morning, what you do to reveal the beauty
of the world with the light of the sun, what you do to
awake and inspire the devotees of yajna, all that you do
is noble action for the divinities of nature and humanity
among the divinities.






[Names: Kiyatya, Anu]
How long did the dawns last which came and
shone earlier? How long would they shine and last
which, lovely and brilliant as the earlier ones, remind
us of the past ones and brighten up the present around?
The dawn would last for ever thus in company with the
preceding and the following.








[Names: Asmabhiru, Usasam, Usasa]
The mortals who saw the bright and blazing
dawn saw the light and passed away. By us too the lovely
and shining dawn has been seen for the light. And those
too who would see the light of life in the dawns that
would follow, would go but with the light of life. (Life
and light thus go together continuously in succession
in the continuum that existence is.)






[Names: Yavayad, Sumangalirbibhrati, Sresthatama]
O Dawn, warding off the jealous, guardian of
divine truth and yajna, born of divine truth and cosmic
yajna, harbinger of peace and comfort, high-priestess
of truth, inspiring and exciting, messenger of felicity,
bearing joy and prosperity fit for divinity, arise and
come, best and highest of lights, shine, inspire and bless
us all with freshness.






[Names: Sasvat, Atho]
The bright dawn, ancient and eternal, shines
since eternity. Bright and generous mistress of wealth,
lights up this world this day and then brightens up the
days following till eternity. Unaging and immortal, the
dawn moves on and on with its own divine powers and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 487
gifts of generosity.






[Names: Vyanjibhirdiva, Prabodhayantyarune]
With her soothing celebrities, shining from
heaven across the quarters of space, the bright dawn
dispels the darkness of night and adorns and reveals
the beauty of the world. Waking up the sleeping
humanity she comes in the early morning by the celestial
car of luxurious light drawn by the glorious sunbeams
of fiery speed and splendour.






[Names: Avahanti, Iyusinamupama]
Bearing and bringing choice nourishments for
body, mind and soul, waking those who sleep, lighting
the dark, the dawn creates wonderful brilliance.
Following upon the heels of the by-gones, first shining
of the succeeding lights, measure of the eternal recurrent
lights of the dawn, she goes on by her chariot of light
drawn not by horses but by sunbeams.








[Names: Udirdhvam, Jyotireti, Araik, Suryayaganma]
Awake ye all who sleep, arise ye all who wake,
life has come, and the energy of life-prana flows for all.
Darkness is gone. Light has come, having cleared the
path for the sun to rise and move. Let us reach there,
enjoy life and elevate life and ourselves.






[Names: Syumana, Adya, Usaso]
The admirer, poet of fiery imagination, sings
inspiring songs in praise of brilliant dawn. O Dawn,
lady of light and harbinger of wealth, shine for the
worshipper and give him the light. And give us the health
and age blest with progeny.






[Names: Vayoriva, Somasutva]
Bright are the dawns, rich in sunbeams and
wealth of cows, creators and inspirers of all the brave
on earth. Generous are they for the man who gives and
sacrifices, giver of horses fast as sunbeams. And when
men of truth and law meditate on them, then, flying as


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 113 489


the wind, they come and bless the man who performs
the soma-yajna of creative joy for life.






[Names: Mata, Prasastikrd, Jane]
Creative power of Divinity, image of Eternity,
fire of the cosmic yajna of creation and evolution, shine
brilliant over the vast spaces. Light adorable, shine and
let us shine for the service of Divinity. Universal giver
of bliss, elevate us to the heights where we belong.






[Names: Yaccitramapna, Sasama, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
Whatever creation and wonderful inspiration the
dawns, lady lights of divinity, bear and bring for the
zealous yajaka, may Mitra, universal friend of life,
Varuna, lord of eternal peace and justice, Aditi, mother
nature, the rivers and the sea, the earth, the sky and the
light of heaven expand and elevate for humanity.




Mandala 1/Sukta 114




[Names: Rudra, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi, Rudraya, Rudra, Yatha]
turam.


We offer these songs of prayer and adoration to
Rudra, omnipotent lord of mercy and justice, father and
protector of the brave, for the sake of the brahmachari
student of the Rudra order so that all may be peace and
joy among the humans and animals and all life on earth
and the environment be healthy and happy in this
settlement, this world and the universe.






[Names: Mrla, Yaccham]
Rudra, be kind to us, be good and give us peace,
comfort and good health. We do homage to you, leader
and protector of the brave, with oblations and
salutations. The peace and freedom which Manu, father
guardian of humanity, procured and secured for us, may
we, we pray, attain under your kind guidance and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 114 491






[Names: Asyama, Sumnayannid]
Rudra, good and generous, protector of the
brave, may we attain the favour of your wisdom and
advice by worship and homage to you. With our heroes
of the nation unhurt and protected, we offer gifts of
oblations and homage to you. Come, we pray, be kind
and gracious to our people.




[Names: Tvesam, Rudram]
kavimavase ni hvayamahe. Are asmad daivyam


For our protection and guidance we invoke
Rudra, blazing brilliant, destroyer of enemies, giver of
success in the yajnic projects of life, lord of instant
motion and action, and seer of universal vision. May
He ward off all furies of nature from us. We choose and
pray for His vision and wisdom for our conduct in life.








[Names: Divo, Haste, Sarma]
With offerings of food and salutations we invoke
Rudra from the regions of light, generous as a cloud,
brilliant, master controller of the gambler’s dice and
blazing magnificent of form. May he come bearing in
hand the choicest herbs for medicine and bless us with
gifts of a peaceful happy home, protective armour, and
preventive and deterrent arms and armaments.






[Names: Idam, Marutamucyate, Marutamucyat, Rasva]
This exhilarating song of homage, holiest of
holies, is offered in honour of Rudra, father and protector
of the Maruts, heroes of the nation. Lord of immortality,
give us the best nourishing food for the mortals, sweetest
of sweets, for our body, mind and soul, for our children
and for our youth. Lord, be kind and gracious to bless us.




ririsah.


Rudra, lord of mercy and justice, frustrate not
our great men, saints and scholars, and our seniors.
Strike not our children. Slay-not our youth. Kill not the


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 114 493


fetus in the womb. Kill not our father, nor our mother.




[Names: Hurt]
8. Ma nastoke tanaye ma na dyau ma no gosu ma


[Names: Viran]
Rudra, lord eternal of mercy and justice, strike
not our baby, nor our child. Snap not our life short. Kill
not our cows, nor horses. If ever you feel angry for our
trespasses, forgive, we pray, strike not our brave. With
our hands raised in prayer with holy offerings, we always
invoke you and pray for kindness and grace.






[Names: Bhadra]
I bring these songs of praise in homage to you,
father and protector of the brave Maruts, heroes of nature
and humanity, just as a shepherd brings milk and curds
to offer to his master. Lord, we pray, give us peace and
joy. Blissful is the vision of Divinity, most beatific.
Therefore we choose to pray for your protection and
guidance, only that and none else’s.






10. Are te goghnamuta purusaghnam ksayadvira


Lord protector and shelter of the brave, let the
butcher of cows and murderer of men be off by your
protection and grace. May the peace and joy of your
blessings be for us. Be kind and gracious to us. Speak
to us in the heart from above. Lord of the world of here
and after, give us peace and joy on earth, and the ultimate







[Names: Avocama, Tanno, Marutvan, Marutva, Aditih, Aditi]
Seekers of protection and bliss, let us sing in
praise of the Lord. May Rudra, omniscient lord
omnipotent, listen to our call and prayer. And may Mitra,
Varuna, Aditi, the sea and rivers, the earth and heaven
raise and sublimate our word of salutation and prayer
to the divine presence. (The word is Namaste.)


Mandala 1/Sukta 115




[Names: Surya, Devata, Angirasa, Kutsa, Rshi]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 115 495




[Names: Citram, Apra, Varunasyagneh, Varunasyagne]
Lo! there rises the sun, wonderful image of
Divinity, the very eye of Mitra, heaven, the soothing
cool of Varuna, the waters, and the beauty of the moon.
It pervades and fills the heaven and earth and the middle
regions of the sky. It is indeed the very soul of the
moving and the unmoving world.






[Names: Suryo, Yatra]
The sun follows the brilliant and beautiful dawn
just like a youthful lover who pursues his beloved. And
therein, with reference to that, the leading astronomers
of the stars extend their noble vision for the calculation
of ages for the good of humanity.







[Names: Bhadra, Suryasya, Suryas, Namasyanto, Anumddyasah, Anumddyasa]
The blissful rays of the sun, reddish, various
and wondrous, exhilarating, invigorating overspread the
expanse of heaven and constantly go over the regions


of space across the sky and the earth.






[Names: Yadedayukta]
That Lord of the universe, Omnipotent Light of
creation, is the Sun, Savita, who holds and sustains the
light and grandeur of the sun pervading in the world of
action. And it is He who withdraws and folds up the
same divinity and grandeur of the sun. And when the
Lord withdraws the light of the sun, then the Night of
Pralaya absorbs everything of existence into her fold of
darkness. (This is the story of the eternal round of
evolution and involution of the universe.)


When the sun, in the daily round of day-light
and darkness at night, collects the rays of light from
down below then the night spreads her cover of darkness
over all. (This is the story of the daily round of the day-






[Names: Tanmitrasya, Anantamanyad]
The Eternal Lord, in order that Mitra and Varuna,
day and night, be seen, creates light and shade and form.
And so, the sun, which is light incarnate, in the close
space of heaven, shows the forms of things. Endless,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 497


different and blazing is its power of one sort, while the
shade of darkness is another, which the rays of the sun
bear in the quarters of space.






[Names: Adya, Tanno, Aditih, Aditi]
O powers divine and vitalities of nature born of
the rising sun, pure and immaculate, save us to-day from
whatever is sinful and despicable. And may the day and
night, the wide space, the rivers and the sea, the earth
and the heavens of light, we pray, bless us to rise in our
hopes and endeavours.


Mandala 1/Sukta 116






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Ashvin, Nasatyabhyam, Yavarbhagaya]
Just as the priest selects and plucks sacred grass
and spreads it over and around the vedi in celebration,
and just as the winds move the vapour laden cloud across
the sky, so do I select words of appreciation for the
Ashvins, scientist and technologist, sincere and true,
compose them into songs of praise and air them over




the skies, for the Ashvins, who fly troops of the army
by acarrier plane over the mountains like friends flying
a damsel for the youthful sober lover.






[Names: Vilupatmabhirasuhemabhirva]
Ashvins, ever sincere and true, flying by the
wings of powerful birds, fast at the speed of clouds, by
the tempests of wind and fire splitting the currents of
winds, eminent scholars and aeronauts, the power
applied, controlled and directed in your chariot would
win victories 111 a thousand battles of wealth against the






[Names: Tugro]
Ashvins, commanders forceful as wind and
lightning, if a great ruler and governor launches a fighter
and pioneer beneficiary of the nation on the bottomless
sea but then abandons hope like a dying man giving up
his wealth of a life-time, you rescue him by self-driven,




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 116 499




[Names: Tisrah, Samudrasya, Satapadbhih]
Ashvins, undeviating from truth and reality, you
carry the ruler beneficiary across the unfathomable
ocean and over the desert three-nights and three days
non-stop by three flying chariots fitted with hundred
wheels and six engines.






[Names: Anarambhane, Jyum, Sataritram]
Ashvins, scholars dedicated to truth and
humanity, in the ocean of space where there is no
beginning and no end, where there is no foothold and
nothing to hold with hand, you carry the man of earthly
enjoyment riding the carrier-boat worked with a hundred
propellers to his haven of rest where there is no want,
no pain, nothing beyond desire. That is great, heroic!






[Names: Yamasvina, Sasvadit]
Ashvins, experts of velocity and motion, the




brilliant white solar car which you provide for the
adventurous traveller is all-time auspicious. That gift
of yours is great, admirable all over the earth. The super-
fast car is of undiminishing value and adorable in the
economic world of business and industry.






[Names: Yuvam, Karotarac]
Ashvins, leading teacher and scholar of herbal
science, you reward the faithful disciple of pious
discipline ever ready in harness with exceptional
knowledge and insight into the science and technology
of restorative nectar by which you can fill a hundred
jars of drink from one horse-hoof measure of virile
essence distilled through the filter.






[Names: Himenagnim, Rbise, Atrim, Atri]
Ashvins, scholars of heat and energy, fight out
fire and heat with ice and cool, and bear edible energy
concentrate for us. Pull out the man fallen into the earth’s
womb of fire and despondency and free him and his
community from physical, mental and spiritual suffering
for their common good.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 501






[Names: Paravatam, Ksarannapo]
Ashvins, high-priests of nature and truth, lite
up the waters from the bottom at the lowest level, raise
it to a higher level by oblique channels, and let the
streams flow for drink for a thousand people, and for
the scholar and the administrator, to quench their thirst
and for the production of wealth.






[Names: Jujuruso, Pratiratam]
Ashvins, recuperative powers of nature, masters
of medicine and psychiatrists, you free the ageing man
from wrinkled skin, remove fear complex from the
escapist running away from life, give a new lease of
life to the depressed heading to suicide, and mature
adolescent girls to grow and match with the right
husband in marriage.






Ashvins, leading lights of humanity dedicated
to truth and reality, the protective and promotive work
you do is appreciable, adorable and blissfully desirable.
Leaders of knowledge and secrets of nature, it is so far
hidden from view like an underground treasure. Let it
come forth so that all may see and admire and do you
the honour you deserve.






[Names: Dadhyan, Sirsna]
Ashvins, leaders of men in knowledge and
action, that marvellous work of yours in the interest of
social good, I explain and proclaim in detail like thunder
and lightning raining showers from the cloud, work and
knowledge sweet as honey which the man of love and
reverence, Dadhyang, child and disciple of the sober
sage of non-violence, Atharvan, taught you from his
mind inspired with wisdom and passion for superfast
action in the form of a full treatise on the subject.






[Names: Ajohavinnasatya, Puru, Srutam]
Ashvins, lovers of truth and reality, munificent


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 503


powers of action and knowledge, liberal givers of joy
and prosperity for all, let the woman of noble
intelligence invite you for the sake of abundant peace
and prosperity, listen to her invocation as a
commandment of the world Ruler, and give the fortunate
woman that superior knowledge which showers the joys
of life with golden hands of generosity.






[Names: Purubhuja]
Ashvins, defenders of truth, light and justice,
leaders of humanity and creators of peace and prosperity
for all, in the human search for progress and
enlightenment, you save the poor bird from the
devourer’s mouth, and give the poet a compassionate
heart for a comprehensive vision of life.






[Names: Caritram, Sadyo]
Ashvins, when the battle is raging for the
defence and sustenance of the people but the issue is
wavering in the night of uncertainty, you instantly take
to the armour of steel for advance, strike and break down
the enemy’s force as you cut off the wing of a bird.








[Names: Satam, Tasma, Adhattam]
If a person were to sacrifice a hundred generous
and creative contenders, meshas, for the pleasure of a
wolfish thief and his wife, even though such a person
were otherwise very intelligent and dynamic, the
fatherly ruler should throw him into the darkness of
prison. And yet, O Ashvins, lovers of ultimate truth,
dispellers of untruth and darkness, generous showers
of bliss, bring the eyes for the waking blind so that he
could see what is real and true and good and be released
from the dungeon of ignorance. (It is better to make the
blind see than keep them in the prison. It is better to
redeem the criminal and the sinner than throw him in
the prison.)






[Names: Visve, Sriya]
Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth in the
battle of life and health of the world, let the dawn,
daughter of the sun, arise and ride your chariot drawn
by horses of light and win the battle. Let all the divinities
of the world heartily applaud the beauty and power, and
may you shine with the beauty and glory of the rise and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 505
may you win the victory.






[Names: Yadayatam, Bharadvajaya, Bharadvaja, Divodasaya, Divodasa, Svina, Revad]
Ashvins, generous givers and protectors, ever
on the move, when you come to the house of Divodasa,
the giver of light and knowledge, and to Bharadvaja,
bearer and giver of food, energy and the fighting force,
let the chariot that transports you be delightful, laden
with wealth, powerfully equipped, victorious and killer
of the enemy.




[Names: Rayim]
Ashvins, protectors of truth and leaders of equal
and agreeable mind, come with food, energy and
noble progeny, good health and age, courage and valour,
and free flowing streams of water for the people
performing their daily duties full three times of the day.








[Names: Parivistam, Vibhinduna]
Ashvins, defenders and saviours of truth and
right, young and unaging, when the commander or a
section of the army or the ruler is besieged on all sides,
launch, and attack by an invincible killer chariot, rescue
the besieged force by easy but misty paths and take over
the caverns and mountains by night.






[Names: Ekasya, Nirahatam, Indravanta]
Ashvins, brilliant as sun and moon, forceful as
lightning and thunder, generous as showers of rain,
leaders of the land and commanders of the army, protect
and promote the freedom of the land for a hundred gifts
and acquisitions of peace and happiness. Protect and
develop the army for battle for the sake of freedom and
advancement. And in a single day rout the destructive
force of the frustrative enemy even if it be of
commanding fame in the world.






[Names: Sarasya, Sayave]
Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth and the
facts of life, with your noble actions of science and
husbandry, you raise the water from the lowest level as
that of a well or lake to the higher level for the drink of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 116 507


the violent as well as of the worshipper, and you develop
the dry cow to fertility for the drooping, depressed and
the exhausted humanity.






[Names: Avasyate, Pasum]
Ashvins, lovers of truth and humanity, with your
noble words and acts of wisdom give that sagely vision
and knowledge to the protective, worshipful, attractive,
simple and sympathetic visionary with which the sages
are blest in a state of samadhi communion with the
divine. Give it like a lovely pet or a valuable treasure
lost but then found and then restored to the master.






[Names: Viprutam, Somamiva]
Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth and right,
just as a boat is tied and transfixed under water for ten
nights and nine days by an envious person, or it is held
up, or drifts over water, but then is upraised and brought
on the track by a noble ferry man, so if an admirer of
truth and right and devotee of divinity feels supressed
by adverse forces, feels depressed or distempered or
drifts from the right track, then, O Ashvins, give him a
hand and raise him like a soma libation raised in the


ladle ready for offering into the fire of yajna.






Ashvins, noble divinities of truth and right
action, generous givers of good health and purpose of
life for a full age, I pray I may sing in praise of your
great actions with gratitude and, blest with cows, noble
speech and abundant land, in the company of brave
children, seeing the world and the light of divinity,
enjoying long and full age, and giving up this ageing
body I should retire, set like the sun and go home.


Mandala 1/Sukta 117






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Ashvin, Madhvah, Somasyasvina, Barhismati]
Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth, givers
of health and joy, the veteran yajaka, high-priest of
knowledge, invokes you for the honey sweets of soma’s
joy for the health and ecstasy of living. Brilliant and
blissful is your gift of peace and prosperity, celebrated
is your voice and wisdom. Come with your gifts of food
and energy and the vibrant ways of living and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 509
advancement at the fastest.






[Names: Yena]
Ashvins, leaders of the people, faster than
thought is your chariot which reaches the people with
you. Wondrously made it is, drawn by horses fast as
sun beams and lightning, by which you go home to the
man of noble deeds. Riding that same chariot come
home for us too (and bless us with light and speed).






[Names: Rsim, Atrim, Atri, Minanta, Anupurvam, Anupurva]
Ashvins, leaders of humanity, generous and
inspiring as ever before with universal knowledge and
human values, destroyers of the envious demonics and
free from the three bonds of physical, mental and
spiritual ailments, self-realised soul with mastery over
all the five pranic energies and dedicated to all the five
classes of universal humanity without discrimination,
and you deliver him along with his band of teachers
and scholars from the evil of prison in utter darkness,
against the light of reason, knowledge and rectitude,




into which, such men of light and freedom are thrown
by the envious and wicked blood suckers of society.






[Names: Asvam]
Rebha, eminent scholar of knowledge and
wisdom, dynamic and productive proclaimer of the
secrets of science, is obscured among the lesser stars
and kept back, by manipulators of evil design, straying
around lost like a horse in the jungle. Ashvins, brave
and generous heroes and leaders of humanity and guides
of knowledge, redeem that seer of light with your noble
actions, he would otherwise be lost and gone. All your
actions, old and ancient as well as new, never fade away
nor die out.






[Names: Susupvamsam, Suryam, Surya, Subhe]
Ashvins, heroic and generous powers of action,
destroyers of want and suffering, like the soul’s
awareness covered in deep sleep, like the dormant seed
enfolded in the soil, like the sun resting as if in the night
cover of darkness, like the lovely shining fold buried in
the folds of the earth, the face of beauty and truth is
hidden. Awaken the awareness of life divine, generate


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 511


the life of the seed, let the sun arise, bring out the hidden
gold of the earth, and sow the seeds of life, energy and
light so that all may see, honour and admire the grandeur
of existence.






[Names: Samsyam, Saphadasvasya]
Ashvins, dedicated to truth and nature, leaders
of scientists and pharmacists, that work of yours is of
universal value and worthy of praise by eminent scholars
by which you manufacture a horse-hoof measure of
herbal essence and from that prepare a hundred potfuls
of honey sweet restorative tonics for the ailing people.






[Names: Yuvam, Ghosayai]
Ashvins, generous givers and leaders of men,
for the man of truth true to his word, kind ruler, planning
development of agriculture, dedicated to parental
seniors, provide the expert of farming on the land, and
for the herdswoman growing old provide a caretaker.








[Names: Pravacyam]
Ashvins, brave and generous harbingers of
fulfilment for the lover of learning, give brilliance of
knowledge for the learned teacher and his resident pupil,
give great strength of will and purpose, and for the
successor of the man presiding over people and pupils,
give communicable knowledge, strength of action, right
reputation and the will to listen above all.






[Names: Puru, Sahasrasam]
Ashvins, harbingers of many things for good
and comfortable life, assuming various forms of workers
and designers, you give to the traveller and transporter
the instant motive power such as electricity, fast, serving
a thousand purposes, invisible, present in earth and
consumable fuels, breaker of the cloud and capable of
crossing the seas.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 513




[Names: Etani, Sravasya]
Ashvins, generous divinities of nature and
humanity, these are your reputable acts of charity. This
is the song of praise for you. The infinite and omniscient
lord, Brahma, is the home and sustenance of heaven
and earth, whom you and your friends and admirers
invoke and worship. Move on, powers of life and light
divine, with your will and gifts of food for life and soul
and with the vision divine for the man and seeker of






[Names: Sunormanenasvina, Agastye]
Ashvins, lovers and defenders of truth and
rectitude, generous harbingers of comfort, prosperity
and happiness, sung and celebrated by the honour and
reverence of the admirer and the lover of soma like a
son, opening the channels of food, energy and
knowledge for the pious and intelligent people, rising
by the light of omniscience in knowledge and acts of
charity in the service of Divinity, release the flow of
vision, will and right policy for the advancement of
humanity on the path of progress.








[Names: Kuha, Sayutra, Hiranyasyeva]
Ashvins, children of light, generous and brave,
guardians of sleeping humanity, moving on the paths
of divinity, where do you find celebration in poetry and
discover the golden vessel of spiritual treasure buried
under the folds of earthly existence, on the tenth day of
yajnic performance, and then sow the seeds of piety?
(The answer is: among the lovers of knowledge, children
of divinity).





[Names: Yuvo, Ssriya, Suryasya, Suryas]
Ashvins, lovers of truth and masters of the
currents of natural energy, by your noble and creative
acts you rejuvenate Chyavana, man of dynamic living
and prayerful culture but ageing and declining in energy,
and you return him to his youth again, and the Dawn,
daughter of the sun chooses you and rides your chariot
in your company in all her beauty and grandeur.






Ashvins, masters of the secrets of nature, youth


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 515


and age, for the sake of vitality and energy and by the
acts and achievements of the ancients, you grow young
and come to know each other again, and you carry the
man of joy and tonics of rejuvenation from and beyond
the bottomless ocean of water and air by transports
flying like birds straight and unobstructed.






[Names: Ajohavidasvina, Nistamuhathuh]
Ashvins, generous and brave experts of energy,
power and motion, let the powerful force assigned to
the sea on the move call on you and you would transport
it without trouble by the chariot meticulously driven at
the speed of thought for the good of all.






Ashvins, heroes of tempestuous speed and
movement, let the army, stuck up, besieged, and helpless
as a poor bird, call upon you for help any time which
you rescue from the wolfish mouth of the enemy. Mount
up to the peak of the mountain by your victory chariot
and destroy the advancing army of the enemy with your








[Names: Satam, Aksi, Jyotirandhaya]
Ashvins, creators of light and givers of eyes,
remove the social butcher who throws a hundred
helpless persons like sheep to the she-wolf, correct the
unkind father and the unreasonable judge who assigns
the innocent youth to the dungeon, bring eyes for the
injured of the swift army of horse, in short, create and
bring light for the blind who may then see the light of






[Names: Sunamandhaya, Jarah]
Ashvins, generous harbingers of the showers of
comfort and joy, leading lights of humanity, bring peace,
comfort and ample light of the eye for the poor blind as
if the she-wolf herself were to call up and save the
hundred and one innocent sheep, or an old wise man of
experience, or the youthful spirit of hope, or the very
pupil of the eye, or the light-giver for the eye of the fast
horse rider were to bring comfort, safety and light for
the needy.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 517






[Names: Mahi]
Ashvins, heroes wise and brave, great, soothing
and inspiring is your presence and protection. Shatter
the injustice, release the lame and the disabled to
freedom. And then the very spirit of wisdom and the
nation would call upon you: come like the breath of
fresh air with favours and fulfilment and be here for
life.






[Names: Adhenum, Sayave, Sacibhir, Purumitrasya, Purumitras]
Ashvins, generous and brave fighters against
suffering, destroyers of want and pain, nourish and
revitalize the dry and barren cow, give nourishment to
the weak and sleeping man, and, with your noble and
generous actions, a wife for the happy and youthful man,
the young and beautiful daughter of the friend of many.








[Names: Yavam]
Ashvins, brave heroes and destroyers of evil,
want and suffering, sowing barley with the plough and
uprooting the weeds, creating and drawing energy from
nature and food, warding and blowing off the evil and
wicked by warning and punishment all round, expanding
and radiating the light of knowledge and justice for the
good and progressive people, you build a grand social
order of freedom and happiness.






[Names: Atharavanayasvina, Sirah]
For the child of the man of faith beyond doubt
and question, for the admirer of men of knowledge and
rectitude, you create the best and most dynamic brain
and inspire him. Ashvins, generous and creative, the
inspired man, in search of the honey sweets of life and
nourishment, speaks of the science of yajna and of the
science of anatomy and the structure of the forms of
life, for you and all.







[Names: Sada, Asme]
Ashvins, poetic visionaries of creation, high-
priests of truth and reality, harbingers of cosmic


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 117 519


intelligence and energy, I pray to you, always bless me
with universal vision and understanding and protect it
from doubt. Give us the wealth which is reputable and
honourable, blest with family and children, and which
is ever growing higher and higher.






[Names: Hiranyahastamasvinad, Tridha]
Ashvins, harbingers of life, leading lights of
humanity, kind and compassionate, rejuvenate the
wedded couple and bless the intelligent woman with a
golden-handed son. Three ways broken is the man of
knowledge, otherwise blooming and brilliant, bring him
back to life and let him rise to full stature again to higher
life.






[Names: Brahma]
Ashvins, brave and generous heroes of noble
action, these are the great actions you have ever done
and still do and which people celebrate in song. We
pray that, blest with friends and brave children, singing
songs of celebration for you, creating food and energy
for life and living for yajna, we may live, and praise
and propagate the yajnic way of creative life (as yours).




Mandala 1/Sukta 118






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Ashvin, Syenapatva]
Ashvins, masters of nature’s energy and natural
resources, let your chariot flying as the eagle,
faster than the mind of man, three staged and
tempestuous in power as the wind.






[Names: Tribandhurena, Pinvantam]
Ashvins, masters of engineering, let the three-
sophisticated chariot come here. Enrich the land,
rejuvenate the people and the social order, develop
transport and communication, and let the brave of the





[Names: Pravadyamana, Slokamadreh, Kimanga]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 118 521


Ashvins, harbingers of life and joy, destroyers
of anti-life forces, travelling by the fastest sophisticated
chariot from the heights of heaven, down the clouds
over the mountain slopes across the valleys, listen to
this rumble of the cloud and mountain echo: Ashvins,
darling friends, going to fight out want and suffering at
your fastest, didn’t the first-born wisest of the sages
exhort you to move this way? And that is the rumble of
the cloud, that is the voice of thunder, that is the
mountain echo. That is our prayer.






[Names: Syendso]
Ashvins, powers of nature’s divinity and
humanity, high-priests of truth and life’s joy, may the
eagle-like motive powers fast as sunbeams yoked to your
over water and vapour in the sky, carry you to your
desired destination like a feathered arrow flying to its






[Names: Pari, Suryasya, Suryas]
Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, may the




lovely maiden, loving daughter of the sun, ride your
chariot with you, may the horses, fiery of body, radiating
like sunbeams and flying like birds take you to the
battlefield from anywhere and everywhere.






[Names: Sacitbhih, Nistaugryam]
Ashvins, generous as rain showers of new life,
brave destroyers of evil, with your noble thoughts, words
and acts, raise the venerable from adversity, rescue the
worshipful from falling to violence, help the brave
warrior cross over the sea and redeem the passionate
youth from decrepitude to regain his youth.






[Names: Yuvamatraye, Yuvam]
Ashvins, powers of intelligence and light of
knowledge, loved and admired of all, bear and bring
seasoned, protective and promotive energy and power
of action to the man free from physical, mental and
spiritual want for the removal of darkness and ignorance.
Bring the vision and wisdom of the world with
appreciation and exhortation for the veteran of wisdom
for the collection and expansion of knowledge and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 118 523






[Names: Sayave, Amuncatam]
Ashvins, for the man of hereditary power and
prosperity sleeping in ignorance and indifference, bring
up the rousing call of divine speech. Rescue and save
the poor, victimised people from sin and violence of
injustice and give them a strong, protective and
promotive social and political policy for development.





[Names: Johutramaryo]
Ashvins, for the traveller you give a brilliant,


productive and firmly structured mode of transport.






[Names: Jusana]
Ashvins, powers of nature’s energy, leading
lights of humanity, born of divinity and risen in blessed




knowledge and noble actions, we invoke you, invite
you and call upon you for our protection and
advancement in the hour of need at the height of power
and prosperity. Listen to our prayer, come riding your
chariot of universal wealth and stand by us for our
freedom and prosperity.





[Names: Syenasya, Have, Sasvatta, Usaso]
Ashvins, highpriests of truth and reality, springs
and harbingers of nature’s eternal power and energy,
come by the speed and force of the eagle new and ever
new with constant love. With offering in hand when
the dawn is breaking bright, I invoke you both to come
and bless.


Mandala 1/Sukta 119




[Names: Asvins, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Purumayam, Purumaya, Sahasraketum, Satadvasum]
Ashvins, leading lights of nature and humanity,
for the sake of a long life and full living and for the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 119 525


desired aim of life, [invoke you and admire your chariot
wonderfully made, quick as mind, drawn by swift
horses, a vehicle for yajnic action, distinguished by a
thousand flags, beautiful and luxurious, giver of a
hundred kinds of wealth, superfast and a very home and
treasure of divine bliss. (I love it for a heavenly ride for
this existential journey.)




[Names: Urdhva, Sasmantsamayanta, Svadami]
hat.


Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, generous
and brave, when your chariot moves forward, our mind
and thought rises in admiration. The quarters of space
are made small and the noblest people come together. I
taste the sweets and beauties of the warmth of yajnic
life. Accordingly protections and paths of progress open
and expand. May heavenly light, wisdom and energy
ride your chariot and rise on earth.







[Names: Yuvoraha]
Ashvins, brave and generous heroes of the




chariot and tempestuous speed, when countless, great
sacrificing, and victorious heroes excelling one another
come together in the splendid battle for justice and
progress, then surely your chariot in which you carry
the noblest hero of valour and wisdom shines with
distinction in its onward march.




[Names: Yuvam, Yasistam, Divodasaya, Divodasa]
vamavah.


Ashvins, brave and generous heroes, with your
own powers and plans and with your chariots flying
like birds, take a powerful force to the protector and
defender of the nation gone to a state of isolation, rescue
him and carry him home to the parental seniors and
sustainers of the people. Your support and protection
for the giver of light and knowledge, who is a servant
of heaven, is great and well-known.




[Names: Yuvorasvina, Sardhyam, Jagmust]
Ashvins, brave, generous and friendly heroes,
to raise your dignity and grandeur, your voice controls


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 119 527


and directs your own chariot and its power and force.
And as the bright and beaming maiden of the morning,
the dawn, victorious over the dark, desirous of your
friendship and protection, opts to join you on the chariot
as her lords, so does the bright and beaming nation select
you as guardians and defenders of the land.




[Names: Sayorava]
yayusa.


You rescue the man of faith and prayer from all
round oppression and relieve the thrice free man from
blazing heat with the cool of snow. For the man in sleep
you provide rest and security on earth and you help the
man worthy of reverence to live a long and full life.






[Names: Ksetrada]
Ashvins, heroes of noble action, destroyers of
suffering, with knowledge and admiration you
reinvigorate the noble reverend scholar stricken with
age and adversity as you would repair and recondition
a chariot with your knowledge and expertise. With




appreciation and praise regenerate and elevate the
veteran of knowledge from his place of birth. Let your
marvellous power and action be dedicated to the lord
of humanity.






[Names: Agacchatam, Svarvatirita]
You go far to the person afflicted by separation
and alienation from his or her own parents and praying
for succour. Surely blessed and brilliant are your
protections, wonderful and cherished, and instant and






[Names: Somasyausijo, Sirah]
Ashvins, that bee, seeker of honey, in a mood
of ecstasy, hums in praise of you her song of search and
celebration. So does Aushija, child of light and grace,
invoke and celebrate you in the ecstasy of soma. Come
both, enlighten and inspire the mind of Dadhicha, the
sagely seeker of knowledge and Dharma, and then, at
the head of the seers he would proclaim the Word of
cherished wisdom and enlightenment.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 120 529




[Names: Saryairabhi, Indramiva]
ham.


Ashvins, masters of nature’s energy, develop and
provide a brilliant mode of transport, communication
and defence superfast as light, the choice of many, carrier
of warriors across to victory, blazing with catalytic
beams like arrows, invincible in wars, constantly active
and unfailing as the thunderbolt of lightning, by which
the people can challenge any enemy whatsoever


Mandala 1/Sukta 120


[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Ashvin, Katha]
What call, Ashvins, leaders and commanders,
would rouse you to action and victory? Who could, if
he were ignorant and unintelligent, lead you to victory


and win your pleasure, and how? (None of the ignorant
and unintelligent.)








[Names: Vidvamsavid]
Let the ignorant man and the imperceptive
unintelligent person ask the Ashvins, men of intelligence
and wisdom, the way forward for progress. Similarly
another, the intelligent and the learned person too in
his own way should ask the way forward for further
advancement. In any case, let them ask the way out and
onward for the sake of the man who would otherwise
stand still doing nothing, in the state of doubt and
inaction.



[Names: Prarcad]
kuh.


The same, Ashvins, harbingers of light and
[Names: Both]
and benefactors, reveal to us the knowledge wanted and
loved at heart today here and now. Invoking, yearning
to join you and the knowledge earnestly desired, praying
for sympathy and grace, may this humanity look up to
you for guidance on the way forward.






[Names: Patam]
Ashvins, generous givers, and destroyers of


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 120 531


want and ignorance, I ask you questions about the
mysterious knowledge of analysis, integration and
formulaic structure and formation of things in creation
and science, brilliant veterans, dynamic and tolerant as
well as enduring as you are, both scholars and teachers.
May we offer you homage and reverence, and may you,
we pray, guide and protect us.


[Names: Praisayurna]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and knowledge,
that voice which rings like the resounding proclamation
of the brilliant visionary, by which the scholar does
homage and reverence to you, the same voice and word,


we pray, may the teacher speak to us like a scholar in
search of food, energy and light for all of us.





[Names: Srutam, Akst, Subhaspati]
Ashvins, eyes divine and harbingers of supernal
bliss, I have heard your song of omniscience and
redemption and, truly by your kindness and grace, I sing
in ecstasy.






in Yuvam hyastam maho ran yuvam va yannira-


Ashvins, harbingers of wealth and universal
shelter of all, you abide by us and bring the gift of
abundance, and you bless with beauty and grace
whosoever you choose. We pray, be our saviours and
protectors, save us from the sinful hungry wolf.





[Names: Stanabhujo]
Ashvins, hold us in protection but not for the
man who is friendless and nobody’s friend. Let our cows
be fertile, rich in milk and blest with calves. Let them
not go off from our homes anywhere, let them not be






[Names: Duhiyan, Mitradhitaye, Mitradhitay]
Ashvins, let people dedicated to you take
advantage of your generosity for the growth and
prosperity of friends. Inspire us and let us grow to plenty
of wealth with horses, speed and progress and have lot
of food and energy with plenty of cows.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 120 533




[Names: Tenaham]
I pray: let me achieve and ride the horseless
automotive chariot of the Ashvins, lords of knowledge,
wealth and speed, so that I may advance and amply






[Names: Ayam, Anu, Somapeyam, Somapeya]
Great and glorious is this chariot, comfortable
and luxurious, by which the Ashvins, noble, generous
and exceptional men of knowledge and power are
transported to places of light and delight in the interest
of the people. May this chariot help us too to rise in
wealth and knowledge.






[Names: Adha, Ubha]
Let me get away from the dreaming slothful and
the uncharitable rich because both of them soon come
to their logical end (since they neglect the vibrancy and
generosity of the Ashvins).




Mandala 1/Sukta 121


Vishvedeva and Indra Devata, Kakshivan






[Names: Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Kadittha, Angirasam, Angirasa]
O man, when would you be like Indra, a
protector, ruler, saviour and friend of the people? When,
in order to help and protect the people, you would hear
the voices of the lovers of light and knowledge who are
keen to rise to divinity, when running to join the people
you would reach their homes over the wide earth, and
when you would raise your voice and inspire them in
their yajnic task of love, cooperation and creation as
the performer of yajna yourself.




[Names: Stambhiddha, Anu]
mataram goh.


Just as Indra, the sun, self-refulgent lord of light
and sustainer of the earth, wields the heaven and showers
the wealth and waters of life for the creation of food
and energy, so should the ruler, luminant with the light
of knowledge and justice and sustainer of the world


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 121 535


system of the earth and environment, uphold Dharma,
justice and rectitude and create the wealth and waters
of stability and progress with nourishment and energy
for the maintenance of the social order. And just as the
mighty sun lights and watches its own creation, the
dawn, beauteous glory of the solar system and nurse of
mother earth, so should the ruler light up and watch the
word of knowledge and the light of justice created by
the social order itself which, in turn, would be the beauty
of the system and sustenance of the order.






[Names: Naksaddhavamarunih, Taksad]
Like the sun illuminating the brilliant dawn
every day, let the ruler follow, illuminate and extend
the brilliant ethics and policies of eternal value and
shine, inspiring the best and dearest people, day by day.
Let him have the armaments deployed, serviced and
sharpened and, as the sun holds the regions of heaven,
let him maintain the light of justice for the quadrupeds,
bipeds and humans and all that concerns the humans.






[Names: Asya, Yaddha]
Just as the sun, in the excitement of the morning,




releases the flood-light of its brilliant rays held up at
night for the yajna fire of the day, and, pervading three
quarters of space (leaving off the nether hemisphere of
the earth), returns and stands firm in the battle of light,
and breaks through the gates of the dark enemy forts,
so should the ruler, for the joy and prosperity of the
social order, release his resounding force of light and
power held in reserve for the occasion to extend the
yajna of justice and rectitude and, raising the resources
of eloquent and brilliant teachers, preachers and
scientists, should break down the strongholds of
opposition in the battle for the development of cows
for the white revolution.






[Names: Tubhyam, Suci]
O man, when for your sake yajnic people offer
oblations of pure milk and ghrta of the all-blessing cow
as the wealth of their choice, then for you, O living and
vibrant humanity, the brilliant heaven and earth, both
generous givers of health and nourishment like mother
and father, bring you showers of rain full of virility,
fertility and all round success and fulfilment.






[Names: Adha, Induryebhirasta, Usaso]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 121 537


Let Indra, the noble soul, self-redeemer from
suffering, arise, rejoice and shine like the rising sun close
upon the heels of the dawn. Blest with grace like the
beauty of the moon, sprinkling the vedi with ladlefuls
of holy offerings and singing songs in praise of Divinity
by which you attain to the city celestial, let the soul
rise, rejoice and shine.






[Names: Svidhma]
Noble soul, brave and shining, whatever famous
you have done, whatever preservation of forests or cow
whatever further you wish to do for the sake of transport,
animal husbandary or superfast travel try to do for the
value of love, non-violence and yajna day in and day out.






[Names: Asta, Harim]
Indra, O ruler, the rays of the sun pervading the
great heaven, reaching here on earth, churn and absorb
the delicious, vitalising fragrances of yajna, soma
strengthened with cows milk and reinforced by the
earth’s energy, and then, swelled up by the wind and
fighting with the clouds rain down showers of wealth


for your growth and advancement.


(So does the yajnic ruler and the pious creative
soul absorb the yajnic production of the earth and society
and returns the same through hundred and thousandfold
production and creation adding thereby to the wealth
and beauty of life.)






[Names: Tvamayasam, Kutsaya, Puruhuta, Kutsa]
Indra, lord of light, power and justice, you go
round earth and heaven, wielding the thunderbolt made
from steel and stone and tempered with heat and
electricity procured and refined by Rbhu, master of
metals, speed and range. Invoked and invited by all for
the defence of the sagely man of wisdom, you go about
with the fatal weapon striking countless blows upon
the wicked and destructive demons. Lord of light and
force, having used the weapon and achieved the aim,
be gracious and call it back.





[Names: Pura, Susnasya]
Indra, brilliant sun, brave ruler of the world, lord
of mountains and the clouds, as earlier, before the


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 121 539


elimination of darkness, you struck the thunderbolt and
broke the cloud of darkness, so now strike the same
thunderbolt, destroy the power and darkness of the
demon that covers the world unto the borders of heaven,
and restore the light that is blissful and enduring across
the heavens and the farthest quarters of space.






[Names: Tvam, Indra]
Indra, may the great, protective and irresistible
heaven and earth rejoice with your exploits. With your
mighty thunderbolt of sun-rays you break the inert cloud
of darkness in showers and make it flow in streams of
water as it has been hoarding vapour and then flowing,






[Names: Tvamindra]
Indra, first of men, guide and leader of the social
order, manage, protect and abide by those men who,
like children of the wind, are cooperative carriers of
the burdens of the state, and protect and abide by that
impassioned lover of Dharma, son of the wise and poetic
creator, who creates, sharpens and gives to you the




thunderbolt, that invincible weapon of defence and law,
which helps you destroy the enemies of light and leads
you to the delight of victory.






[Names: Prasya]
Indra, bright and brave like the lord of
sunbeams, keep the creative yajnic people happy,
wielding and moving the wheel of the nation like the
moving chariot of the sun. And take the uncreative and
non-yajnics, across the ninety navigable streams and
engage them in labour jobs like digging of wells and






[Names: Sravase]
Indra, lord of light, justice and glory, wielder of
the thunderbolt and mover of the chariot wheels of the
nation, we pray to you, protect us from this difficult
army of evil and this sin in our battle of life and, for the
sake of will and resolution, food and energy, honour
and reputation, truth and justice, bless us with dynamic
experts of motive power and velocity across the earth
and the quarters of space.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 122 541






Lord of energy and glory, admired by leading
men among the great, lord of wealth and life’s lustre,
may this wisdom and understanding of ours, by divine
grace, never wear away and fade out from us. May all
people have the best choice of will, food and energy for
life. Lord of noble humanity, bless us with advancement
with wealth of cows, land and the Word of knowledge.
Lord of grandeur, may we ever enjoy the ecstasy of your
love.


Mandala 1/Sukta 122








[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Kaksivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Divo, Rudraya, Rudra, Maruto]
All ye men of high spirit, vibrant as the winds
of earth and skies, along with the brave, ever ready like
the archers of the bow and arrow, bear and offer
nourishing holy food and yajna in honour of Rudra,
generous lord of life and joy. Offer the light of
knowledge to the ignorant suffering in the dark. And
with you all I offer homage to the lord of heaven and


earth and the skies.






[Names: Patniva, Usasanakta, Starirnatkam, Purudha, Sriya, Suryasya, Suryas]
Let the dawn and dusk, light of day and peace
of night, clothed in beauty of the sun, beatific with the
rays of light, dressed like a lady of fulfilment in apparel
of golden hue, bearing rich gifts of life and wealth, come
in response to our invitation to yajna with a shower of
light for our growth and enrichment.






[Names: Mamattu, Sisitam, Indraparvata]
May the light of the sun and heat of fire, all
radiating, all consuming and creating, give us joy. May
the winds, harbingers of rain showers, give us joy. May
Indra, cosmic energy, and the clouds, both, sharpen our
intellect, and may He, the Lord Almighty, and all the
generous divinities of nature and humanity bless us with
the wealth and joy of life.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 122 543




For honour and glory with reputable action, I,
child of noble ambition, invoke the two, fire and wind,
one the product, the other, the giver of waters, both
universal and protective as well as promotive of life
and humanity. And I call upon you all: create and
promote the child of waters, the fire energy, and the
mother of waters, the winds.






Listen ye all, scholars of science and technology,
I, son and disciple of the man of knowledge and noble
ambition, call upon you and, like a voice from above,
proclaim the admirable word of the gifts of the heat and
light of Agni in resounding tones: its form and structure,
analysis and break up, its creative re-structure for life-
support and the gifts for the protection and promotion
of life.




[Names: Srutam, Mitravaruna, Srotu]
Listen ye Mitra-Varuna, friends, and all men of




the chosen few, listen well to this invocation and
exhortation, listen ye members of the yajnic assembly
all round to this gift of wealth and well-being in the
words of one who himself listened well to the voice
Divine, and listen like the river receiving the waters of
rain from above for the onward gift of life and growth
to the fields and the farmers and so on for us.






[Names: Stuse, Sata, Varuna, Mitra, Srutarathe]
Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and lord of water,
friends and chosen comrades, I worship you, I honour
you, for the gifts of your power and generosity. The
gifts of your benevolence and hundred voices of the
Divine and a hundred cows of milky nourishment in
the battles of speed and progress are showered on those
who ride and advance in stout chariots of the Divine
Word and chariots of love and beauty, always and
instantly bearing gifts of nourishment and growth, ruling
out all negativities and nonsense.





[Names: Asya, Jano]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 122 545


I honour and admire the wealth and generosity
of this man of power and prosperity, and pray, we join
the noble man in a spirit of friendship, blest as we are
with noble and brave progeny and friends. I wish the
heroic man of knowledge and the chariot, possessed of
fast conveyances, power and speed, and horses and
horse-power were to share the secret for me.






[Names: Svayam]
Mitra and Varuna, lords of friendship and liquid
in crooked ways, whoever does not support you and
life with nourishment and energy, such a man would
himself wear the canker in his heart. But the man of
truth and generosity supporting life all round with love,
charity and sacrifice would be blest with peace and joy.






[Names: Visrstaratir]
The man of love and generosity, the real man,
inspired by the brave, of exceptional strength, of
universal reputation among men of power and honour,
giving in charity liberally, heroic in performance, always




moves forward over the opponents fast in all the battles
of life.






[Names: Adha, Nabhojuvo]
O Divinities of nature, generous powers of
humanity, brilliant and joyous, flying across the skies
with your own power and grandeur, listen to the prayer
and invitation of the charitable man, brave and immortal
of fame and honour, leave the wealth of the uncharitable
and unprotective unprotected and let it pass on to the
man of love and charity for noble causes.






[Names: Etam, Dyumnani]
O Lord, let me attain to the house of the man of
tenfold knowledge of the Veda, Vedangas and yajnic
liberality of which the wise and pious may say: This is
the great house of the brave and generous man of fame
wherein may all the wealths of the world abound and in
whose rich oblations may all the divinities of nature
and humanity rejoice and partake of the fragrant


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 122 547






[Names: Mandamahe, Kimistasva]
We praise and celebrate the generous man of
tenfold food and knowledge since people come and go
receiving nourishment for body and mind from his
house. And such a man blest with desired power and
speed in life, well in control of his desired reins of power
and prosperity, generous as the flood of the ocean, and
such men as he, of power and discipline worthy of
governance, bring the grace of culture and beauty to
the people’s life.






[Names: Hiranyakarnam, Aryo]
May all the powers of nature and nobilities of
humanity bless the man of oceanic generosity wearing
gold and diamond in the neck and ear, and may they
wide open the paths of progress for him and for us. And
may the generous producer of wealth always try to create
the knowledge of living languages of communication
and the wealth of cows for himself and for us all.








[Names: Catvaro, Ssisvastrayo, Ratho, Mitradvaruna]
The four classes and the four orders of society
and the three councils of the ruling order, destroyer of
evil, prosperous and victorious may, I pray, protect and
advance me. Mitra and Varuna, friendly ruling powers
of our highest choice, may your chariot, far-reaching,
bright and beaming like the rising sun, shine on and
brighten us up in life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 123




[Names: Usha, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Prthu, Krsnadudasthadarya, Scikitsanti]
The great and wide chariot of the glorious dawn
is ready, which the divine immortal powers of nature
would ride. The great noble maiden is arisen from the
dark, radiating health and freedom from disease for






[Names: Purva, Ucca]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 123 549


The great and generous dawn wakes up before
the world, winning, collecting, and carrying health,
wealth and beauty. Ever young, rising again and again,
watching us from far and above, she arrives in response
to our earliest invocation.






[Names: Yadadya, Devo, Suryaya, Surya]
O Dawn, high-born of heaven, inspirer of
humanity, whatever share of your generous gifts you
bring here to-day for men, let the divine Savita, best of
men among friends, brilliant giver of life, say of us to
the sun: These are sinless people.


[Names: Swami, Dayanand]
pretation of this mantra: Usha is the bride beautiful as
the dawn, Savita is the groom, Surya is God, and the
‘sinless’ are members of the family. This interpretation
prevails through the whole Sukta.)






[Names: Grhamgrhamahana, Sisasanti, Sasvadaga]
The light of the dawn radiates from home to
home gracefully day by day clothed in the beauty and
glory of her own name, inspiring and beatifying, shining
bright, new as ever every day. She goes on and on from


550




place to place, sharing the joy of life.





[Names: Bhagasya, Varunasya, Varunas, Pasca]
Sister of glory, daughter of the highest light, O


Dawn, lady of truth, first shine and brighten and be
praised, and then hold him who is the supporter of sin
and then we shall catch him with the gift of your light
and win by the chariot.






[Names: Udiratam, Sparha]
Let the ladies of high truth and generous


munificence sing songs of Divinity. Let the fires of yajna
shining and blazing stay and go on burning. The brilliant
dawns light up and reveal the cherished wealths of life
hidden in the dark.




[Names: Apanyadetyabhyanyadeti, Pariksitostamo, Sosucata]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 123 551


One goes away at dusk, the other comes over in
the morning, thus the lights of the day-night cycle both
different of form move together and coexist. Of these
two cyclic coexistents of the world, the dark covers and
hides things in the cave, the other, the dawn of light,
reveals them in their true form with the beauty of its
chariot.






[Names: Sadrsiradya, Anavadyastrimsatam]
They are the same today as they will be
tomorrow, and in the same manner together, both brave
and beautiful, they go round in the region of the sun,
each traversing thirty stages of its travel time ever and
on in the yajnic cycle of their circulation. (Each stage
of time is of twenty-four minutes.)






[Names: Janatyahnah, Svitict, Rtasya]
She knows and reveals the first, morning, part
of the day and its holiness. Pure and brilliant is she,
risen from the darkness of night. Young and maidenly,
following her daily chores fixed by nature day by day
and hour by hour, she never relents in her observance
of the Law of the Divine.








[Names: Kanyeva, Samsayamana]
Sweet and soothing beauteous, unique in form
and figure of body as a virgin, O brilliant Dawn, you
rise to meet the effulgent lord you love and desire, and
then, charming bright in the splendour of youth, O
maiden, smiling amorous, you stand before him and bare
your bosom for love and adoration.





[Names: Susankasa, Bhadra, Usaso]
Glorious and comely in appearance, a bride as
if anointed by the Mother, O youthful Dawn, you reveal
the light of your beauty and majesty for the world’s love
and adoration. Shine and radiate, O maiden, in all your
glory, and may the sublimity of this glory never fade
but ever abide as now in future manifestations also.




MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 124 553


[Names: Para, Suryasya, Suryas]
nama vahamana usasah.


Riding the rays of the sun, commanding the
beauties of the earth, inspiring the chants of the holy
Word, dispelling the darkness without and within by
the vision of sunlight, arousing universal love and
adoration, bearing the name and spirit of Divinity, the
blissful lights of the Dawn go round, ascending far
above, descending again for the world, and in the end
transcending the world of existence to nameless Eternity.




O Dawn, going round by the light of Eternity in
pursuit of the Law Divine, bring us the bliss of goodness,
give us the vision of truth and beauty and the will to
yajnic action. Listen to our invocation and prayer, shine
and bring us the light. May the wealths of the world
abide in us. May the wealths of existence abound in
those who adore the wealth of Eternity.


Mandala 1/Sukta 124






[Names: Usha, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Jyotirasret, Devo]
The dawn is breaking, the fire is burning, the
sun is rising, and light is radiating over heaven and earth.
May Savita, lord giver of light and life, inspire the
humans and animals to move to activity and create new
wealth and new meaning and purpose in life.






[Names: Aminati, Sasvatinamayatinam]
Not violating the laws of Divinity, counting out
the ages of humanity, shines the dawn, last picture of
the dawns gone by, first of the dawns coming, an
instance of the original and eternal Dawn recurring every






[Names: Rtasya]
Yonder shines this daughter of heaven clothed
in light, rejoicing at heart, following the path of nature’s
law well like a lady of omniscience measuring as if but
not overstepping the bounds of space.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 124 555






[Names: Admasanna, Sasvattamagat]
The Dawn, she appears to stand so close like
the treasure chest of purest sunbeams, open, radiating
and revealing the dearest things like the latest versatile
scholar, giving the wake-up call to the sleeping partners
living and eating together. It appears as if, of all the
dawns coming and rising, she is the most real and
original of the Eternal that has come this morning.






[Names: Purve]
Radiating the rays of light in the eastern half of
the sky, the dawn has unfurled her banner of morning
glory. And sitting as if in the lap of her parents, the
heaven and the earth, she expands the noblest light of







[Names: Evedesa, Purutama, Arepasa]
And this dawn most comely to the sight and
blissful to the heart, neither precludes her own nor
excludes the aliens. Similarly, shining unique and
exceptional by her immaculate body of light, she neither
ignores the small nor neglects the great, but shines bright
and smiles equally on all, giving them the feel of bliss.






[Names: Abhrateva, Jayeva]
Just as a brotherless woman returns to her man,
just as a man reduced to aversity goes to the court to
rejoin his money, just as a wife in all her finery, loving
and passionate, opens her secret charms to her husband,
so does the dawn in all her splendour reveal her beauty
and majesty to the world everywhere.






[Names: Svasa, Vyucchanti, Suryasya, Suryas]
Just as a sister surrenders her place for her elder
sister and having seen her vacates it for her and goes
away, So does the dawn, with the rays of the sun, move
her soothing brilliance from one place to another, of


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 124 557






[Names: Asam, Usasah, Usasa]
Of all these sister dawns of the past age, the
latter, the elder, follows after the former, the younger,
in cyclic succession day after day. May all these dawns,
each new one like the former, bring us happy days
bearing the wealth of the world and illuminate our days
with the light of the world.






[Names: Prabodhayosah, Revaduccha]
O Dawn, abundant in light and wealth, wake up
the generous and giving. The miserly and the ignorant
lost in daily chores would sleep, wake up these too.
Lady of light and wealth, let the wealth of the generous
shine in charity. Mistress of Truth and Law, rousing and
praising the singer of songs divinely blest with wealth,








[Names: Aveyamasvaid, Agnih, Agni]
This Dawn, young maiden, rises yonder in front
from the east, yokes her team of crimson sun-rays and,
fully self-assured, emerges, her banner blazing in the
dark. And as she rises, yajna fire kindles in every home,
giving the heat and light of life all round.






O Dawn, as you rise and shine, birds fly up from
their nests and men move out in pursuit of food and
sustenance for life. Brilliant lady of piety and sanctity,
for the man of generosity and for the inmate of the home
you strive to bear the holiest labours of love and joy.






[Names: Astodhvam, Yusmakam]
O Dawns, loving and inspiring, adorable lights
of Divinity, with the holy voice of Vedic adoration, pray
for me and help me grow in life and piety, and you grow
too in brilliance and sanctity. May we all by your favour,
prayer and grace achieve food for life, energy, progress
and prosperity a hundredfold, thousandfold and more.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 125 559


Mandala 1/Sukta 125








[Names: Dampati, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija, Rshi, Prata, Tena]
The morning bears and brings the jewels of
wealth for us. That wealth, the man of knowledge and
wisdom, rising early, receives, and having received
keeps safe. And by that, this brave man, growing and
advancing in health and age and progeny, lives well
with wealth, nourishment and comfort.






[Names: Sugurasat, Yastvayantam]
He is blest with good cows, good gold and good
horses, and Indra, lord of life and power, brings him
liberal gifts of food and energy for body, mind and soul
for a long life time, who, rising early, binds you, the
needy and deserving man, in a bond of thanks with a
gift of ample means and money, like a calf bound with
a rope to the post, while you come to him for help and








[Names: Ayamadya, Amsoh]
Generous Indra, lord giver of every gift of life,
nourishment, training and honour, by the most precious
chariot I have come today early morning for the reason
of an honest desire, wishing to have a son growing to
be capable of noble yajnic deeds. I pray, nourish and
promote the son born of the most delightful essence of
my life, and with holy words of truth, wisdom and Law
develop the young man to be a centre and shelter of the






[Names: Prnantam]
Streams of joy, peace and prosperity flow from
all round to the man performing the yajna of social
charity and divine dedication now and in the future.
Cows for love of food and care stand round the man
feeding and satisfying the needy. And streams of water,
milk and ghrta flow to the charitable man incessantly
from all round.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 125 561






[Names: Nakasya, Tasma]
The man dedicated to knowledge abides in
inviolable peace and joy. The man who feeds and
maintains children and scholars moves with the noblest
men of knowledge and divinity. For him the waters,
rivers and the seas create showers of ghrta, and this earth
with her generosity always creates the joy of fulfilment.





[Names: Daksinavatamidimani, Daksinavanto, Suryasah, Suryasa]
For the men of charity and yajna are these
wonders of the world. For the men of honour, service
and sacrifice shine the stars in heaven and abide. The
men of knowledge, education and charity enjoy
immortality beyond death, in life and after. And the men
of courage, protection, fearlessness and charity cross
the seas of suffering and slavery in their life of full age.








[Names: Anyastesam]
May the generous never come to sin and
suffering. May the brilliant people of holy vows never
suffer the disabilities of old age. May the orbit of their
Karma be something different from evil and pain, since
sorrow and suffering is the lot of the ungenerous and


Mandala 1/Sukta 126


[Names: Vidvan, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Aushija]
Svanaya Bhavayavya (6), and Romasha Brahma-vadini






[Names: Rshis, Amandantstoman, Srava]
With honest mind and aclear conscience, I offer
enthusiastic tributes of praise and approbation for the
deserving ruler who, dedicated to honour and fame, has
performed a thousand yajnic acts of generosity for me
and the people on the river side without violence and




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 126 563




[Names: Satam, Satam, Sravo]
I always accept and approve of the ruler’s ways
of charity, a man glorious, generous as the cloud and a
protector of the pranic energies of life, and I admire his
gifts of a hundred golds, hundred horses fast and well-
trained, and a hundred cows and pieces of land. Rightly
the man who knows the various ways of knowledge
and charity extends his immortal fame to the heights of
heaven.







[Names: Sastih]
sunbeams drawn by bright mares, assigned by the
commander. And may the man of knowledge be blest
with the wealth of sixty thousand cows and receive
welcome and hospitality for days and nights on his social







[Names: Catvarimsad, Madacyutah]
Forty fiery horses of the commander of ten
chariots march in formation in advance of a thousand.
Golden decorated are they, camouflaged, a pioneer
force, they challenge and break through the defences,
clear the routes for the advance, and the forces move
forward in multiformation.






[Names: Purvamanu, Subandhavo]
Noble brethren, I accept and promote the
tradition laid down earlier, and I accept and apply the
three tier system of education, defence and economic
organisation and the eightfold policy of defence, justice
and administration, development, production and
distribution, health and nourishment symbolized by the
generous and fertile cows. I exhort you all who, strong
and bold, united together like the inmates of a home, as
one body, equipped with chariots, march forward for
the sake of honour and glory.


[Names: Agadhita, Dadati, Sata, Yaduri]
The most valuable policy of the state worthy of


acceptance which is approved and followed and which
is an inspirer of the people of action and advancement


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 127 565


in important matters of the nation, like a goad, spurs
me on to action and helps me get the sweetest delicacies
of life, hundreds of them.






[Names: Upopa, Sarvahamasmi]
Come close and closer to me and consult with
me. Do not think that the little nameless things I say,
advise and do are insignificant. One of the vigilant
guards among the protective supporters of the nation, I
am all over warm and protective like a golden fleece in


Mandala 1/Sukta 127






[Names: Agni, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Ghrtasya, Socisa]
I worship, serve and meditate on Agni, lord of
light and knowledge, spirit of life and heat and
inspiration of noble action, yajaka, generous giver,
treasure of wealth and universal shelter, inspirer and
creator of courage and courageous action like the sun,
omniscient lord of all that is born in existence, master




of knowledge as the supreme scholar of the Veda,
organiser of yajna with love and non-violence with
divine knowledge and awareness, refulgent with
heavenly light and power, loving and consuming with
flames of fire and light the blaze of the purest and most
powerful ghrta offered into the fire of yajna, physical,
mental and spiritual all.’




[Names: Yajistham, Parijmanamiva, Sociskesam]
jutaye visah.

Agni, lord most worshipful, we the performers
of this yajnic assembly, with all our heart and mind,
together with all the saints and scholars with their earnest
desire, invoke and invite you, wisest and senior-most
of the scholar visionaries of Divinity, pure and
immaculate, brilliant as the sun with your reach into
the light of heaven, high-priest of humanity, lord of light
people accept, respect and approach with their desire
and prayer for protection and self-fulfilment.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 127 567




[Names: Puru, Vilu, Sruvad, Nissahamano]
He surely rises to shine very brilliantly with his
own splendid valour and honour who, like the axe which
cuts down the trees, mows down the enemies, in whose
presence even the strong and firm like the dense forest
burst asunder into pieces, and who, commanding brave
warriors, dominates and directs the enemies and, like a
mighty wielder of the bow and arrow, never wavers but
advances in battle against the enemy forces.






[Names: Drlha, Anu, Sthira, Puruni]
Just as the strong man of prosperity and spirit
of service offers homage to the man of knowledge and
wisdom, so does he offer oblations in yajna to Agni for
the sake of protection and advancement. And Agni too,
arising from the fiery potential of arani wood, gives
protection and advancement to the yajaka. Just as fire
overtakes many thick forests and reduces them to ash
with its flames, so does the commanding yajaka reduce
even strong enemies to naught, and just as the light of
the sun ripens the grain with its energy, so does the
yajaka ripen and strengthen the prosperity of the earth


and humanity.






[Names: Tamasya, Adasyayur, Sarma, Bhaktamabhaktamavo]
Let us meditate on and do homage to that
assiduous and uncompromising Agni, leading light of
the world, in all directions, who shines brighter and
stronger at night than in the day and, holding holy
offerings in hand, let us honour and worship him. Just
as a father provides a strong and happy home for the
child so do the unaging leading lights of yajna and
humanity bring us solace and protection with the
gracious judgement of the dedicated and the
undedicated. And thus, let us too, unageing and bright
like the fire, live long and happy.





[Names: Sardho, Marutam, Maruta, Adaddhavya, Adha]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 127 569


That Agni, daring and roaring as the wind, is
admirably fearsome in raging battles, as he is worthy of
honour and homage in yajnas in lands fertile as well as
deserts and among families blest with lovely children.
He receives offerings with love, readily consumes and
uses the same for creative purposes. Indeed he is the
triumphal banner of yajnas, most worthy of honour and
worship. And of course all the people, joyous and
emanating joy all round, follow in his footsteps, follow
him on the path shown by him for the pursuit of
goodness, beauty and joy of life.






[Names: Dvita, Agnirise, Priyan, Agniris]
When the Bhrgus, dedicated seekers and
worshippers, generous members of the community,
brilliant scholars, faithfully take on Agni for study and
meditation, two ways in theory and practice, vision and
pursuit, speak of it in detail analysing and realising it,
then Agni, pure and immaculate power, wise and
intelligent, that rules the wealth of the world and is the
very foundation of these, blesses the darling dedicated
servants with beauty, wealth and success.





[Names: Visvasam, Athithim]
vayah.


We invoke, invite and do homage to you, Agni,
lord protector of all the people of the world, for the
light of life. We invoke and do homage to the lord
protector of the home and family equally for all the
people, for the joy of family life. We do homage to the
lord of the voice of omniscience for the joy of
knowledge. We do homage to the lord as the guest of
honour and fire of yajna for all the people, in whose
presence, as in the presence of the father, all these
seekers of freedom and immortality hope for the food
of life, and in whose honour they offer food and
oblations to the brilliant and generous divinities of
nature and humanity.






[Names: Tvamagne, Susmin, Srustivano]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 127 571


Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, by
courage most courageous of the brave and victorious,
you rise most brilliant and fiery for the advancement of
the noblest powers of nature and humanity, just as wealth
is most effective for the service of the divines. Most
brilliant is your light of joy, most abundant in the service
of yajna. Lord of light immortal, servants of yajna most
obedient and willing, serve you just as they would serve
the Immortal Lord of life.






[Names: Pravomahe, Prati, Agre]
May your song of praise in honour of Agni,
victorious by virtue of great valour, light of the morning
such as the dawn, be as it should be for the lord giver of
life’s wealth. Just so it is that the yajnic faithful offers
oblations to the eternal teacher of revelation anywhere
in all lands, and how an admirer ever offers praise to
the eminent among scholars, or an aged yajaka offers
to the senior physician.






[Names: Sano]
sacanah sucetuna maho rayah sucetuna. Mahi


[Names: Savistha, Mahi, Savasa]
O Lord, Agni, watching, guiding and guarding
us at the closest, with all the brilliant powers of nature
and humanity, bear and bring us, most kindly and
graciously, great, valuable and lasting wealths of the
world. Mightiest Lord, make us great for the experience
and enjoyment of this earth. Lord of wealth, power and
grandeur, bring us, admirers and worshippers, great
valour and honour, and as a fierce disciplinarian churn
us to the essence of magnanimity and majesty of life
that existence is in reality.


Mandala 1/Sukta 128






[Names: Agni, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Ayam, Visvasrustih, Sravasyate, Adabdho]
This man, this Agni, this Brahmachari, yajaka,
most worshipful, arises and shines in his Dharma and
behaviour in pursuit of his own discipline and in
conformity with the laws and customs of the lovers of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 128 a7 3


life and noble ambition. Agreeable and complaisant with
the world, he loves to be friends with all as wealth is
friendly with the man who loves and cares to value it.
Inspiring the dauntless yajamana, soaked in knowledge
and surrounded by the learned, he sits on the vedi of
yajna in the world of action and abides in the knowledge
and vision of Divinity.






That Agni, divine treasure of the wealth of life
and giver of success in yajnic endeavours, we, bearing
holy offerings in divine service, kindle and fan to light
and blaze, and serve along the path of Truth and natural
Law with offers of food and reverence. And that lord of
light and energy never tires of this divine grace, never
fades out of this divine light and splendour, since this
divine blaze and splendour, the wind and solar energy
carries for humanity from a far distance, from the farthest








[Names: Evena, Satam, Sado]
Agni, lord of light, constantly goes by his path,
pervading all that is in the world, celebrated in the voices
of the divines, life of life, generous shower of vitality,
roaring, wielding life and still roaring. The lord of
brilliance, breaking and building in waves of energy,
watching and illuminating the worlds with a hundred
lights, holding, wielding and supporting the homes of
life in the clouds, over the peaks, in the farthest regions
of space on top, he goes on and on in the orbit along the






[Names: Kratva, Yato]
That Agni, lord of light, knowledge and fire,
first agent of cosmic yajna, foremost and leader, inspires
and lights the yajna, fragrant acts of creative love and
non-violence, advances yajna by yajnic acts, issues forth
like penetrative intelligence by the waves of yajnic
energy and inspires all things in existence, and from
the vedi arises with the glory, light of libations like a
guest of honour at its own will, carrier, catalyser,
penetrative, intelligent, illuminative for all.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 128 575




[Names: Krata, Marutam, Maruta]
When a person joins the blazing flames and
forces of this Agni with his gift of oblations and energy
by the yajna of creative and defensive action, as you
would enhance the energy of a vigorous man with
refreshments or you augment the force of the winds,
then Agni receives the gift and, with his force and power,
blesses the givers, and he warns us of the crooked ways
of the world, protects us against scandals of the envious,
saves us from evil and redeems us from sin and fall off
from Divinity.






[Names: Visvo, Ssisrathat, Visvasma, Visvasma]
Agni, universal lord of wealth, honour and
grandeur, like a saviour and redeemer, holds the wealth
of the world in his right hand for the man of endeavour
for his honour and fame, and the gift never slackens,
yes, it never slackens. Lord of brilliance and generosity,
you bear and bring all the sacrificial riches for the man
of martial action and prayer. For the man of yajnic action,




you give all the choice gifts of the world, give them






[Names: Samtamo, Jenyo, Varunasya, Varunas]
That Agni, in the saving paths of human life, is
most blissful, giver of fulfilment, and in yajnas he is
like a victorious ruler and guardian of the people, yes,
dear in yajnic projects and a saviour and protector of
the world. He creates for humanity the materials for
yajnic consumption and brings us the holiest words and
actions of bliss. He guards us against the violence of
nature and saves us from the ravages of misfortune.






[Names: Agnim, Visvayum, Devaso]
The devas, creative men of brilliance inspired
with generosity, who search for light, knowledge and
wealth of the world for the sake of power, protection
and advancement, worship Agni, lord of light and
omnipotent. They honour and admire Agni, leading


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 577


scholar of light and energy. They study, raise and
develop fire and energy, brilliant source of light and
power, productive source of wealth, inspirer of
intelligence to create wealth, dearest friend and generous
power, energiser, arouser and mover of mind and soul,
and generous giver of comfort, joy and bliss. They
worship, honour and develop Agni, creator, harbinger
and giver of holy materials for wealth, yes, they do
worship, honour and raise Agni, lord, scholar and power,
which is life of the world, omniscient and omnipresent
with every atom of the world, great unifier and
integrator, creative power of cosmic yajna at every stage,
poetic creator of beauty, a source of delight and
happiness. That power of truth, beauty and joy, the
seekers of light, wealth, power and divine joy celebrate
in holy words for the sake of protection, guidance and


Mandala 1/Sukta 129






[Names: Indra, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Sasmakam]
Indra, lord of light and knowledge, power
beyond reproach, inspirer of life and people, whatever
chariot you move for the purpose of yajna, that being




faultless and immaculate, you move it fast forward and,
favourable as you are to the yajaka, you instantly lead it
and the master to success, to the desired object. Lord
sung and celebrated, faster than light in motion and
inspiration, faithful admirers we are all, elevate this song
of ours to the height of the word of the wise and
visionaries and graciously accept it as our homage of




[Names: Tamisanasa]
vajinam.

May Indra, lord of wealth and power, listen to
our voice of prayer and suggestion, Indra who is an
expert hero in the projects of social fulfilment in
cooperation with the socially motivated people and an
instant fighter in battles of defence and development
with men of martial nature, who meditates on the
heavenly light of the spirit and with the brave, intelligent
and wise men is the creator and distributor of food and
energy among people, and with whom the strong and
powerful leaders love to work exactly as successful
people love to take to a strong and fast horse to reach
their destination, fast as he is and versatile in everything.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 579






[Names: Dasmo, Sura, Indrota, Rudraya, Rudra, Mitraya, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitra]
Indra, lord of power and wealth, justice and
generosity, brave hero of wondrous deeds, you shower
the generous and protective man with support and
plenty, you strike off the destructive saboteur and root
out the corrupt man. Great you are, broad of mind and
deep in spirit. I say these profuse words of praise for
you, Indra, ruler and leader, light of the nation, dispenser
of justice, commanding honour and fame, friend of all,
universal choice of hearts, inspirer of peace and bliss,
great mind and spirit indeed!





[Names: Asmakam, Asmakam, Nahi, Ssatruh, Satrum]
For your good and ours, we love and celebrate




Indra, friend, the very life breath of the world, patient
and courageous, cooperative comrade, daring and
victorious in battles, dedicated and meditative on life
and Divinity. For our protection, O lord, protect and
preserve our knowledge and Veda in all the battles. No
[Names: Whatever]
defeat, whatever world you win and cover with justice
and protection, no enemy anywhere can overcome you.






[Names: Nesi, Visvani]
In all grace, bow down before the exceptional
wisdom of the learned. And bring down the haughty
pride of the notorious enemy, O fierce lord of raging
power and rectitude, with your burning and brilliant
methods and actions of defence and protection blazing
like the radiant flames of the fire of arani wood. You
know us all, O brave, heroic and sinless, lead us forward
as before, wash off all sin and evil from the life of
humanity. Bearer of the burdens of existence, harbinger
of all that is good, like fire, burn off our evil and let us
shine close to your presence.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 581




[Names: Svayam]
I would speak words of appreciation and sing
that song of praise for one who is worthy of reverence,
brilliant, and like a divinity worthy of invocation, strong,
dynamic and favourable, inspires like soma and shines
like the moon, who shines at heart and destroys evil,
who by himself, with blows, wards off the evil-tongued
and the malicious, and who makes the evil go down the
gutter and even lower just like worms of dirt.






[Names: Vanema, Durmanmanam, Indram]
Let us invoke Indra with most enthusiastic
homage, pray and win his favour. O lord of wealth, let
us win wealth, win noble strength, noble strength of
body and mind abiding with holy joy of the spirit. Let
us, with honest thoughts and earnest desire associate
and be one with Indra who brooks no nonsense and
negativity of mind and spirit. Let us offer prayers and
homage to Indra, holiest of the holy, with truth of mind
and spirit and the richest offerings, the richest that we
have.








[Names: Prapa, Hatemasanna]
Indra, lord of power and glory, by his own power
and honour, is all for your protection and ours, and he
is all out for the total destruction of the men of evil
mind and intention. And may that force which is sent
by our enemies for our destruction never reach us, but
be routed on way as if destroyed of itself even if it is
inspired and moved at the fastest speed. (It must be
prevented and destroyed on the way itself by defence






[Names: Tvam, Sacasva, Pahi]
Indra, lord of power, honour and glory, go
forward, and come to us with abundant wealth by the
paths of non-violence, no-wickedness and no-sin. Be
with us and for us as a friend at the closest and at the
farthest places. Protect and promote us from afar with
all that is desired, give us fulfilment at the closest with


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 129 583


love at heart, always be a friend and saviour with total
protection and fulfilment.






[Names: Tvanna, Ojistha, Mitram, Anyamasmad]
Indra, lord of power and glory, come with great
and victorious wealth, honour and grace, Mighty and
lustrous, may grandeur and dignity abide with you for
protection like a friend as a mark of greatness. Lord
most lustrous, saviour, protector, immortal by fame and
honour, ride the chariot of glory. Lord of the clouds and
mountains of the earth, if you are angry, even violent
whatsoever is violent and destructive, O lord of the
clouds and mountains of the earth.



[Names: Hanta, Adha]
vaso.


Indra, sung and celebrated for honour and




graciousness, protect us from error, blunder and loss of
faith. Always averting the envious and malicious, being
brilliant and lustrous, you take the evil-minded down
to the pit. Destroyer of the sinful and demonic killers,
saviour of the pious and noble scholars and people like
me, haven and home of the needy, may the lord creator
of life rejuvenate you ever. Destroyer of sin and cruelty,
shelter of the good, may the lord bless you ever with
new life, energy and knowledge.


Mandala 1/Sukta 130




[Names: Indra, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Endra, Havamahe, Putradso]
vajasataye.


Indra, lord of wealth and power, ruler of the
world, come graciously from afar to us like this Agni
who comes to the yajnic battles of life. Protector and
promoter of truth and rectitude, friend and protector of
the truthful and righteous, come to our home like the
ruler. Joining you faithfully in this yajna of life,
dedicated to holy action and endeavour, we invoke and
invite you to join us. As children call upon the father to
help them to food, sustenance and protection in their
course of life and growth, so do we call upon you for
safety and protection, great lord of power and prosperity,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 130 585
for victory in our battle of life.






[Names: Piba, Somamindra, Madaya, Suryam, Surya]
Just as a thirsty bull drinks the water of a pool
augmented by the showers of a cloud, so you Indra,
friend and fond of company, drink this soma prepared
from herbs crushed with grinders and seasoned by the
shower of the clouds for your delight, lord versatile and
vibrant, sustainer of life, worthy of love and homage,
and just as the rays of light and all the days bring up the
sun for the world, so may they bring you to our vedi of

[Names: Avindad, Vajram, Apavr, Indrah]
Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt of cosmic


energy, most brilliant of the cosmic brilliancies, creates
from the light of omniscience and divine omnipotence




the wealth of existence hidden in the heart of mystery
and opens out the materials and energies of cosmic
evolution covered in the folds of sleep. He opens the
closed doors of the wealth of existence as you deliver a
foetus from the womb or an embryo from the egg or dig
out a diamond from the heart of a stone lying in the
depth of a mighty mountain or as the sun breaks open
the waters of rain held in the cloud in the vast sky or as
a cowherd opens the gates of a cow stall, wielding his
staff to control their movements. Thus does Indra open
the doors of the wealth of existence and control the order
of evolution with his force of law.






[Names: Dadrhano, Syadahihatyaya, Ssyat, Samvivyana, Savobhirindra, Tasteva]
Indra, firmly holding the thunder-bolt in hand,
like a forceful jet of water or like a flood of penetrating
rays of light to shoot, breaks the cloud and releases the
waters of life. Similarly, one with your lustre and valour,
like a wood cutter and carver, you fell the strongholds
of evil like the trees of a forest, yes, uproot the wicked,
striking the blows as with the axe.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 130 587




[Names: Tvam, Dhenur]
Indra, you release the rivers at will to flow
naturally well to the sea, they are like chariots loaded
with food and energy, yes, replete with immense energy
like chariots ever on the move. Thus, flow with this
flow, you join the rivers with unrestricted wealth and
modes of protection for all equally. And these rivers are
like cows yielding all kinds of food and energy for the
man of intelligence and for all people, for all, whole




[Names: Imam, Sumbhanto, Atyamiva, Savase]
sataye.


Indra, vipra, lord of knowledge, this song of
honour and celebration, for you, men of knowledge,
patience, and noble action seeking wealth and power,
have formed in the mind, as they have created the chariot
for the sake of comfort and well-being, just like men of
knowledge, culture and grace would love to have a fast
horse in life’s battle flying to victory for the achievement
of universal strength and power of wealth for


everybody’s share and everybody’s enjoyment.








[Names: Bhinat, Divodasaya, Divodasa, Atithigva, Maho]
Indra, lord of the world, dancing with the joy of
victory, you break down ninety strongholds of want and
injustice for the sake of the people and for the great
hospitable and philanthropist with your thunder-bolt of
strength, power and energy. Lord of light and lustre, as
the sun, you bring the cloud down in showers to the top
of the mountain for the host, favourite of the visitors.
Lord of sympathy and generosity, with your power and
brilliance, you create great wealths of life, yes, and with
your genius and philanthropy, bring up wealths of the
world for universal benefit.






[Names: Satamutirajisu, Manave, Sasad, Daksanna]
Indra, ruler of the world, master of a hundred
modes and means of protection and promotion, should


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 130 589


protect and advance the noble and creative yajamana in
all the projects of public good, in all the programmes of
heavenly light for the man of thought and pious intention
and action. Let him correct and control the forces of
indiscipline and lawlessness, overthrow the earth’s cover
of darkness, and like the generous benefactor enlighten
all the seekers thirsting for light and knowledge and
cauterise all the festering wounds of humanity.




[Names: Surascakram]
maruno musayatisana a musayati. Usana yat


[Names: Sumnani]
Indra, the sun, lord of crimson glory, rising from
the vast spaces lights up the mighty wheel of the world,
ravishes the imagination with its refulgence and inspires
human speech to silence in adoration, and, ruling the
world specially at the advance of the day and more in
the northern solstice, it inspires as well as silences the
speech with awe. O Poet divine, inspired with light,
love and brilliance, come here on the earth from afar
like a man divine, fast and faster, generous, all days
every hour, and bring us the wealth and joys of the world
for the protection and advancement of humanity.






[Names: Divodasebhir]
Indra, lord of light, might and power, ruler of
the world, hero of generous and universal action, breaker
of enemy strongholds, protect and promote us with the
latest pious, admirable and blissful modes, means and
actions of defence and development. Sung and
celebrated by poets of enlightenment, you too rise and
advance as the sun ascends high and higher day by day
in heaven.


Mandala 1/Sukta 131




[Names: Indra, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Indraya, Indra, Indram, Indra, Indraya, Indra]
manusa.


The heavenly light of the sun and the cloud with
all pranic energy do homage to Indra only. The mighty
Prakrti and the earth, their best characteristic powers
and virtues, do homage to Indra. All the divinities of
nature and brilliancies of humanity together with
unqualified love and faith do homage primarily to Indra
as the Lord Supreme. May all the human work and
wealth and the highest yajnic sessions be surrendered
as gifts of homage to Indra, Lord Supreme of the


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 131 591






[Names: Visvesu, Susasya]
In all their yajnic projects of creation and
development and in their acts of piety, all the liberal
minded people and all seekers of heavenly bliss serve
you and abide by you, sole one universal lord of
existence, individually as well as together. To the same
one lord we too belong, and we too love, meditate on
and serve you, lord, with faith as the very centre of
cosmic energy and as the saviour ship for crossing over
the ocean of existence. All the people born and living
on earth in their mortal existence and all the stars and
planets in their songs and dance of adoration serve and
worship the Lord as Indra, light of the world like the
sun.







[Names: Aviskari]
Indra, lord of might and prosperity, wedded
couples, keen for protection and advancement united
with you and going out in pursuit of their efforts to
promote the wealth of cows, development of land and
related knowledge, extend your glory and eliminate their
want and suffering, since you inspire and exhort both
men and women going out and achieving the light and
joy of life when you open out and wield for action the
thunderbolt of justice and protection, so generous,
promotive and friendly to you and the people.




[Names: Viduste]
Saradiravatirah sasahano avatirah. 965051८ -


[Names: Savasaspate, Mahima]
Indra, lord of power and management, the
people would know and realise your usual power and
valour when you, bold and challenging, would
overcome the autumnal and wintry problems of life and
society, reclaim the habitations, control the rivers, and
restore total civic normalcy after rains, when, O lord of
law and power, you tame the man who is selfish,
possessive, uncreative, uncooperative and unyajnic, and
when, happy at heart and creating the pleasure and joy
of life, you release the great earth, release these waters
and relieve these creative and cooperative people.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 131 593




[Names: Adit, Cakartha]
Indra, lord of generosity, people loving and
dedicated to you in their moods of joy praise and
celebrate this valour and justice of yours since you
protect and promote them, yes, promote and advance
them, so friendly to you and to all as they are. You work
wonders for them in their battles of life and production
for proper distribution and participation while they,
desiring their share of food and wealth, rightfully hope
to gain one thing after another of the flow of national






[Names: Usaso, Yadindra]
Indra, lord of light, now listen and accept this
joyous celebration of ours of the light of the dawn, know
this prayer and, O shower of light and joy, accept our
invocation and holy offerings since, O wielder of the
thunderbolt, lord of generosity, you keep awake for us
for the elimination of violence. Listen to this newest
prayer of mine made in full knowledge in worship, listen
and accept this latest thought and petition.








[Names: Tvam, Sura, Jahi, Srnusva, Ristam]
Indra, lord of power and glory, ever exalting,
friend of ours, universally famous, mighty bold,
eliminate with the thunderbolt every man who entertains
hate and enmity toward us and does sinful acts against
us. Listen lord, since you are the closest listener. Let
the man of evil intention be off from our way like one
broken by evil. Let all evil intentions and evil designers
be off and away from us.


Mandala 1/Sukta 132






[Names: Indra, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Tvaya, Indra, Sasahyama, Nedisthe, Asmin]
Indra, ruling lord of wealth and power, we pray,
guided and protected by you and your power and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 132 595


potential, let us face the men in the very first encounter,
love, tolerate or fight who wish to love, contest or fight,
and let us win the encounter. On this day right now at
the closest, speak to one and all of those who are
conducting the yajna of the business of corporate living.
In this yajna of full measure, while we are up and doing
and winning all round, let us choose the best meritorious
line of action and let us choose you as our guide, leader
and protector.






[Names: Svarjese, Ahannindro, Ssirsnasirsnopavacyah, Asmatra]
In the yajnic battle for the winning of light and
joy, in the chant of the Apri hymns for divine favour, in
the holy performance of the person rising at dawn, in
the instant action of the man of love and grace, Indra
destroys the obstacles in the way of action and
achievement for the man who knows the favours of the
lord, and for these the lord is adorable for every one
and for the best among us. Just as Indra is favourable
thus, so we pray to the lord: With us and for us as you
always are, may all your gifts be for our good. May
your gracious favours be good to the noble humanity.








Indra, that Word of yours, that gracious gift, as
ever, is brilliant. You are the ocean of Rta, eternal light
and law of the truth of existence, the very home from
where it flows like a river, like the radiation of sunlight.
Pray speak of that same Word, reveal it in the yajna
where they have created the choicest altar for your
presence. Surely the same light the dedicated yajnics
see within by the divine rays within and without. And I
too would know of it then and realise. Truly Indra is the
giver of knowledge, the Word, the cows and earthly
wealth. He is the giver of these for the lovers and friends
of our brethren. (The seeker of these too is Indra among




[Names: Aibhyah, Sunvadbhyo]
MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 132 597


Indra, surely the word which you thus reveal
as before for the scholars dear as the breath of life, and
the way you open the doors of knowledge and treasures
of the world, teaching us the wisdom of eternity is worth
admiration and celebration. You fight for us and win
the victories in the same constant way for these and for
us who distil the essence of things. Heat up and season
those indisciplined and lawless people who are funny,
angry, violent or thievish, yes, subject them to the
crucibles of law and education and cleanse them to
purity from culturelessness.






[Names: Sravasyavah, Sravasyava, Tasma]
When Indra, brave and fearless lord of power
and glory, by virtue of his wisdom and noble actions,
closely surveys the forces of the people at the call of
battle, the people, keen for honour, in love with fame,
overcome all opposition, worship him and serve him
with all their valour and lustre in the hour of crisis. They
augment his life and morale as the hero of a mighty
nation. Firm of mind and full of confidence, they repose
complete faith in him as in the divinities and find their
haven and home in him.








[Names: Yuvam, Dure, Asmakam, Satrun, Sura]
You both, Indra and the forces, like lightning
and the mountain, fighting in the forefront, destroy with
the thunderbolt everyone whosoever come to attack and
fight us, see that they are destroyed first to the last,
whosoever it be, even running far away for cover or
even if one has gone deep into the bunker. O lord of
valour and lustre, router of the deadly forces, destroy


Mandala 1/Sukta 133






[Names: Indra, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Ubhe, Abhivlagya]
I purify the earth and heavens both by the light
of truth and the fire and fragrance of yajna, creative
and cooperative action. I subject the elements of hate
and chaos to the heat and power of law and discipline


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 133 599


and burn off the anti-Indra forces on earth to naught.
And having thus seized and crushed the unfriendly
elements wherever they happen to be active, and
confirmed that they are dead and gone, I let them lie
asleep in their grave.





[Names: Sirsa, Chindhi]
Indra, lord of yajna, power and law, firm as rock
and generous as cloud, having caught the lawless and
the violent by the head of the evil-minded, crush them
under the wide wide foot, crush them by the rising forces
of the youth.





[Names: Avasam, Sardho, Vailasthanake]
Indra, maghavan, lord of world power and
wealth, break down and destroy the force of the evil-
minded and throw them out deep into the vault of
darkness, into the hideous world of sin and death.



[Names: Yasam]
Indra, now that you have routed the three times




fifty forces of those agents of hate and violence by your
tactics of seizure and attack, that act excites holy
admiration and celebration, hearty admiration and
reverence.






[Names: Pisangabhrstimambhrnam, Sarvam]
Indra, destroy the fierce ogres of the lance of
red blood and root out the demons all over.







[Names: Avarmaha, Susmintamo, Apurusaghno, Sura]
Indra, lord of earth and heaven, bring down that
fierce demon and break him to pieces. Listen to our
prayer. Purify and let the earth shine like heaven with
tremendous light, lord of clouds and mountains, let the
earth shine with the rule of law as by the blaze of light,
lord of earth and heaven. Lord of highest power, you
move on wielding the most powerful and lustrous
weapons of law and punishment. Gracious and non-
violent with noble humanity, quiet, unseen and brave,
you move with thrice seven heroic purities of existence,


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 134 601


O noblest lord, with the purest and holiest verities of
life.




[Names: Vanoti, Yajatyava, Sunvana]
The yajamana who performs yajna and distils
the soma prays for a home and gets one. Organising the
yajna and the distillation of the soma of joy and
prosperity, he drives away many envious enemies by
yajna, drives the enemies of noble people away. The
organiser of yajna, fast, intelligent and wise, open, free
and fearless wants to create a hundred things, and Indra,
lord of creation, power and generosity creates and gives
blissful wealth for the yajnic people, yes, the lord blesses
with the gift of wealth, peace and joy.


Mandala 1/Sukta 134






[Names: Vayu, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Urdhva, Somasya, Somas, Anu, Niyutvata]
Vayu, spirit of yajnic vitality, may the fast
currents of cosmic energy with love and caress escort
and bring you here for a drink up of soma first of all,
drink of fragrance as ever before, and your consort,
upward current on the circuitous wave, recognising you
as her partner and offering herself as an oblation, join
you in the cycle of yajnic transmission of fragrance.
Come, yoke the horses to the chariot and fly with your
gifts for the generous yajamana.






[Names: Madantu, Yaddha, Sadhricina]
And O Vayu, cyclic energy of nature divine, may
the exhilarating vapours of our yajna, well-created and
activated by our libations into the fire, brilliant as light,
radiating with the waves of the earth energy and rising
with the rays of the sun join and vitalise you. The
dynamic people exerting for advancement achieve
divine protection and success. Only the intelligent ones
working together in unison with yajna and divine energy
receive and reveal the power and wisdom for the
generous yajamana.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 134 603




[Names: Vayuryunkte, Vayuryunkt, Vayuraruna]
Vayu yokes the red and the orange red of nature’s
powers such as fire and light, and it inspires the dawn
and the sun. It uses all the dynamic sources of energy
and power such as air and wind, fire and sunlight, the
mind and senses, and the flow of water, all strongest
and most impetuous for transport and communication.
It awakens them and yokes them to the chariot of cosmic
movement. O Vayu, come and wake up and energise
life like a lover who wakes up and impassions a sleeping
beauty. Light up the heaven and earth, light up the
dawns. Light up the dawn of new life and let it rise to
the top of glory.






[Names: Tubhyam, Usasah, Usasa, Tubhyam, Ajanayo, Maruto]
For you, O Vayu, Divine Energy, the purest and
brightest blissful lights of the dawn in far off spaces
wondrously weave the designs of world beauty in
sunlight, in the newest colourful rays of light. For you
the all generous cow produces all the milky wealths of




food and energy, the divine voice of universal potency
brings all the wealths of world knowledge. For you do
the winds unborn drink up the vapours from the flowing
streams of water and yajna fragrances, and then from
heaven shower the rain of water, energy and bliss for
the world.






[Names: Tvam, Tvam, Suryat]
The brilliant, pure and radiant, fast and zealous,
and the blazing geniuses in the ecstasy of meditation,
in the rapid flow of their karmas have desire only for
you, have love but only for you in the intensity of their
karma and devotion. The man of strength and generosity
going by safest high ways worships you, lord giver of
wealth and power of the world. You alone, by Dharma
save from all the evils of the world, you alone help us
cross through the world through Dharma.





[Names: Somanam, Somana, Visva]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 135 605


O Vayu, first, unprecedented and eternal lord,
you alone deserve to drink of these soma essences
distilled by us, you alone deserve to receive the offer of
our acts of worship. You alone are the object of worship
by purified intelligences and dedicated souls of the
people. All dynamics of the world, lights of the suns,
earths of the universe, divinities of nature and geniuses
of humanity offer the milk of worship, they offer the
ghrta of milky soma in the divine fire for you, only for
you.


Mandala 1/Sukta 135






[Names: Vayu, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Stirnam, Satinibhir, Tubhyam]
Vayu, the assembly hall is ready, the holy seat
is laid, come fast, come close, come for certain by the
chariot drawn by a thousand horses, for rest and drink
of soma reserved for the hero of a hundred forces. The
devas, saints and sages brilliant all, have prepared and
reserved the soma for you first by virtue of your divinity.
May the honey drinks of distilled soma be sure and
stable, reserved for your delight in the joint yajna of








[Names: Tubhyayam, Somah, Soma, Sukra, Tavayam, Vaha]
For you does this soma distilled and purified
with soma-stones and filters, seasoned by clouds,
coveted and brilliant, over flows the jar. Pure, brilliant
and exciting, it flows and overflows. This soma share
of yours, delightful and exciting, is loved and honoured
among the youth and learned divines. For this you are
invoked and invited. Go, with love, your chariot driven
by the team of horses impetuous as the winds, come for
us and take your share of the beauty and ecstasy of life.





[Names: Adhvaryubhir]
O Vayu, lord of power, force and tempestuous


speed, come to our yajnic project of love and non-
violence for protection and participation to enjoy our


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 135 607


offerings and hospitality. Come by your chariot drawn
by hundreds and thousands of horses. Here is your share
of holy offerings in accordance with the time and season,
reinforced with the energy of light radiating from the
sun. It is prepared by our high-priests of yajna, stored
and reserved by them and to be offered by them to you,
O Vayu, an offering holiest pure and paradisal!






[Names: Pibatam, Vayava, Ssca]
O Vayu, may the chariot equipped with horses
fast as winds bring both of you, Vayu and Indra, like
ruler and commander, for our protection and for our
choicest offerings prepared in faith with love, yes for
your gracious acceptance of our gifts. Come and drink
of the honey sweets of soma reserved as special drink
for you first and exclusively. Vayu, come with the golden
gift of wealth and power, and may Indra also come with
the wealth of universal value and success.






[Names: Tesam, Indravayu]
vajada yuvam.


O Indra and Vayu, ruler and commander of the
world, lords of intelligence and power, come close, and
may your intelligence and power strengthen and vitalise
our yajnic actions and inspire men of knowledge and
wisdom, and may they refine and reinforce this soma
and this wealth and honour and this dynamism of ours
as a groom refines and refreshes a fleet and impetuous
horse. May they come for our protection and
advancement and drink of these soma juices prepared
with stones and seasoned with the vapours of clouds
for the gift of joy and excitement. O Indra and Vayu,
givers of joy and strength and speed, come both for the
joy of life for you and for ourselves.






[Names: Yuva, Somaso]
Vayu, these soma juices extracted and distilled
here in yajnas, perfected by the priests, pure and
and Indra. These, flowing to you both in cross currents
as if eager for you are created for you and flow to you.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 135 609


These are of imperishable strength and vitality and have
been filtered through woollen filters of permanent value.
The inspiration is even more than permanent, beyond






[Names: Sasvato]
O Vayu, power of speed and knowledge, pass
by the idle and the sleeping. Both of you, Indra and
Vayu, go to the lovers of permanent values and
knowledge, there to the house where the voice of soma
chant is heard, where truth and universal law of the
universe is celebrated in yajna, and where ghrta flows
into the yajna fire. Go to the yajna both of you, to the
house of yajna by the chariot drawn by a team of horses
in full and perfect form.



[Names: Atraha]
Sakam gavah suvate pacyate yavo na te vaya upa


O noble Vayu and Indra, breath and powers of
omniscience and omnipotence, scholar and commander,




bring us here that holy fragrance of knowledge and
power to our social yajna by which the rising youth
aspiring for victory, sitting round you like nestlings in
the sacred peepal tree, may benefit and reach the goal
of their ambition. Our cows, our lands, our voices bear
fruit. Our grains ripen, our individual and collective
endeavours mature and prosper. O Vayu, your gifts of
nor are they ever stolen away.






[Names: Dhanvancid, Suryasyeva]
These warriors of yours, strong of arm and virile
they are. Generous and creative, they sanctify the earth.
They fly in space between earth and heaven, and,
themselves rising in glory, they add to the glory of earth
and heaven. Rising to the stars like the winds they are
steady and self-restrained. Impetuous as they are like
the winds, their rest and home is beyond words.
Untamable they are like the sunbeams, and awful to
handle by the hands.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 136 611


Mandala 1/Sukta 136




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Bharata, Athainoh]
Take the best and amplest food, and songs and
tributes of adoration, holy and most delicious, and offer
to the eternal, beneficent and gracious lords Mitra and
Varuna, universal friend and adored love of everybody’s
choice. Brilliant are they, regaled, revered and
worshipped in yajna after yajna of social and sacred
programmes with ghrta which they love and consume
with delight. Their rule and power of order none can
challenge, their brilliance and divinity none can resist.








[Names: Adarsi, Dyuksam, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
The great earth is lit for a wide range of activities
for the day. The path of Rtam, divine truth of Law and
yajna is revealed by the rays of the sun, bright as the
rays themselves, as the eye of the lord of world’s wealth
has opened with the sun. The heavenly seats of Mitra,
Aryama and Varuna, lords of love, justice and freedom,
are bright on high. The divinities of nature bear and
bring for humanity admirable food, health and long age.
The noblest of humanity bear and offer holy offerings
to the divinities of yajna with faith and holy chants of






[Names: Vedic, Jyotismatimaditim, Jyotismat, Mitrasta, Aditya, Adit]
Mitra and Varuna, centripetal and centrifugal
powers of cosmic energy, which are the Adityas, children
of Aditi, infinite and inviolable power of the omnipotent
Lord, sustain the beautiful and paradisal indivisible earth
joined with the self-luminant heaven day by day
constantly. Ever wakeful are they, day in and day out,
without a wink of sleep. They are supporters and
protectors of the generous and motivated people and
they pervade, unite and maintain the grand order of the
earth and the world. Aryama, cosmic dynamics, ordains
and harmonises the powers of the two, Mitra and Varuna,
inspires the human creation and impels the entire


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 136 613
universe of the Lord’s creation.






[Names: Ayam, Varunaya, Mitraya, Tatha]
May this Soma, holy peace and brilliant justice
of the social order, be most joyous and blissful for Mitra
and Varuna, friendly and the best intelligent powers be
harbinger of honour and good fortune among saints and
sages and in the daily business and yajnic programmes
of national activity. May all the noble powers today,
observing the common universal Dharma, serve the
same peace and justice. May the ruling powers,
observing the universal law, accept and do what we ask
for, what we, observing the universal law, suggest they
ought to do.






[Names: Tamaryamabhi, Ukthairya]
The man who serves Mitra, lord protector and
friend of all, and Varuna, lord supreme of love and




justice, is generous, free from jealousy and irresistible.
The lords save him from sin and protect him against
evil and wickedness. Aryama, lord of universal law,
gives him all round protection and promotion who is
simple and honest in character and behaviour and
submits to the divine law and discipline in word and
deed, who honours the discipline of Mitra and Varuna
with sincere words of thanks and praise and, in
obedience to their law, abides by them in creative acts
of yajna in regular seasonal performances.




[Names: Namo, Indrama, Jyogjivantah, Somasyoti]
sacemahi.


We offer words of praise and homage in honour
of the great heaven of light, the earth and the skies,
Mitra, lord of universal friendship, Varuna, lord supreme
of love and choice, generous, blissful and virile. O man,
sing in praise of Indra, lord of power, Agni, lord of light
and leadership, the lord of heavenly light, Aryama, lord
of the stars, and Bhaga, lord of wealth and honour. O
Lord, living long, we pray, may we be blest with good
family and friends, may we enjoy the protection of
Soma, lord of peace, light and joy of the world.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 137 615




[Names: Agnirmitro, Sarma, Varunah]
Blest with wealth and power, enjoying fame and
glory, now our own, with youth vibrant as the winds,
we Set our heart and mind on the protection of divinities
and the best great powers of humanity. We pray may
Agni, lord of light and energy, Mitra, the sun, and
Varuna, the moon, grant us peace, comfort and joy of a
happy home, and we resolve that, having that bounty
and munificence of the divinities, we endeavour to do
our Karma and achieve the same.


Mandala 1/Sukta 137






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Paruchhepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Susuma, Somaso, Mitravarund, Somah, Soma]
O Mitra and Varuna, dear as the very breath of
life and motion of our blood, friends of our darling
choice, dazzling with splendour and soothing with
beauty as the sun and the moon, touching the very
heights of heaven in your character and action, come
both, come close to us all and join us. You are ours, our
saviours and protectors. We distill these soma drinks of
life for you. They are refined with soma-stones and




replete with the showers of the clouds, mixed with cows
milk and ripened with sun-rays. Exciting are these,
ecstatic with sensuous joy and sobering with spiritual
peace and enlightenment. These soma gifts of life,
lustrous and delicious essences of the foods of the earth
and light of the sun are for you, Mitra and Varuna,
darlings of our love and admiration in faith, constant
companions as day and night.






[Names: Suto, Varunaya, Mitraya]
O Mitra and Varuna, bright friend as the day
and highest lord of wisdom, broad as the sky and deep
as the night, come, these nectar drops of soma mixed
with curds, distilled at the break of dawn and matured
with life-giving rays of the sun, are for you both, yes,
distilled for the drink of Mitra and Varuna, matured for
a soothing, inspiring and enlightening drink of the truth
and essence of law of the world of existence for both
our friends and wise teachers, ideals of our love and
cherished choice and for the dearest lover of truth.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 138 617




[Names: Asmatra, Somam, Ayam, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Mitravaruna]
O Mitra and Varuna, best of friends and highest
order of the wise, our people extract and distil the soma
drink for you from delicate shoots of soma plant crushed
with soma stones and seasoned with showers, yes, they
extract this soma as they milk a fertile generous cow.
Saviours and protectors of us all, come here close to us
upfront for a drink of soma and for protection of the
soma joy of the people. Listen both of you graciously,
Mitra and Varuna, these somas are distilled by all our
people for you, for your drink, delightful drink of soma
distilled for you.


Mandala 1/Sukta 138






[Names: Pusa, Devata, Paruchepa, Daivodasi, Rshi, Prapra, Sasyate, Arcami, Visvasya]
The greatness and grandeur of this Pusha, lord
of living power, protection and promotion, renowned
among the strongest, resounds all round. None can
and fame. Dedicated to peace and well-being, I adore




him, the very image of strength and protection,
embodiment of peace and joy. Lord of social cohesion
and holy union in yajna, he unites the minds of all
humanity. Brilliant and generous, yajna itself, he joins
everything together in existence as one integrated






[Names: Pusannajiram, Pusannajira, Huve, Asmakamangusan]
Pusha, lord of nourishment, health and
protection, I celebrate you with songs of praise as a fast
and intelligent traveller on the path of life. Just as
warriors go to battle and win, just as camels cross the
desert, so do you help us get over the battles of life. As
Iam mortal, I invoke you and pray, lord of peace, indeed
an embodiment of peace and joy, brilliant and generous,
for help and friendship on the journey. Inspire our
prayers and wise men with power and spiritual strength
in the serious business of life, give us the wealth of
victory in the battles of life.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 138 619


oF Yasya te pusantsakhye vipanyavah kratva cit


[Names: Tama, Ahelamana]
Pusha, lord giver of health and joy, by virtue of
your friendship, being strong of intelligence yajnic
performance and self-protection, people enjoy a good
self-image and self-esteem. And as thus they esteem
themselves by their performance and enjoy life, we pray
to you for the latest and countless forms of the wealth
of life. Lord of health and joy, kind and favourable,
universally adored, accept us as good friends and
soldiers and be with us in every battle of life.






[Names: Asya, Sravasyatamajasva, Nahi, Pusannati]
Pusha, lord of nature and fastest motion, lord of
goats and horses, we pray, be close with us for the gift
of this wealth and intelligence, be kind and generous,
richest of the masters of food, wealth and power. With
our best and holiest songs of praise and prayer, O lord
of riches and generosity, destroyer of suffering, we pray,
we may always abide by you. Lord of light and showers
of nourishment, we never offend your majesty, we never
neglect or disregard your friendship. We are with you,


pray be with us.


Mandala 1/Sukta 139








[Names: Vishvedeva, Mitra, Varuna, Ashvins, Indra, Agni, Maruts, Marut, Ashvin, Indragni, Brhaspati, Vishvedeva, Devata, Paruchhep, Daivodasi, Rshi, Astu, Srausat, Agnim, Agni, Indravayu, Yaddha, Adha]
May my voice be heard! I have realised the
energy and power of Agni, light and fire, in full with
my intellect and understanding. Then we opt for the
divine force and power of nature and move on to the
study and application of the power of wind and
electricity which, active at the centre of the sun, give us
the newest and latest form of energy and power. May
all our intellectual efforts and intelligential vision reach
the forces of nature and analyse and discover their
energy and powers. Let us reach there well with all our
intellect and imagination and let our efforts benefit the




MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 139 621




[Names: Yuvoritthadhi, Dhibhiscana, Somasya, Somas]
O Mitra and Varuna, whatever you win and
achieve by virtue of your love of goodness and
dedication to Truth over untruth with your own valour
and passion and with the expert’s own action and
passion, we see over and above everything, the same
way, shining like gold everywhere in your own homes,
and we pray we too may win and achieve the same lustre
of truth over untruth by virtue of our understanding,
thought and vision and the imagination of Soma, lord
lover of peace and beauty.






[Names: Yuvam, Slokamayavo, Yuvorvisva, Prusayante]
Ashvins, lords and harbingers of light and the
light of wealth and knowledge, mortal men loving and
dedicated to you, celebrating your divinity with words
of praise and singing songs to you in your honour, do
homage to you with holy offerings. Lords of universal
knowledge, yours are the wealth and beauty and all




resources of the world you rule over. Generous lords
and protectors, graceful in your chariot, the golden
wheels of the chariot shower and sanctify you with the
golden beams of radiance.






[Names: Aceti, Patheva]
Ashvins, lords of grace and destroyers of
suffering, you travel by the paradisal paths of joy, it is
universally known, Users of the chariot flying by paths
of the skies on high join you, they fly in the sky without
losing height. Generous lords of light, let us also join
you on your golden and stoutly structured chariot. Going
on high as on highways of the earth, you are rulers of
the skies, you rule the skies with your strength and speed
of motion.




[Names: Sacitbhirnah]
cana.


Ashvins, lords of noble action and givers of
wealth by noble action, for the noble actions of ours,
bless us with the gifts of wealth day and night. We pray,


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 139 623


may your generosity never wear away from us. May






[Names: Vrsannindra, Girbhir]
Indra, lord of power and honour, virile and
generous, these sparkling draughts of soma worthy of
the mighty generous and heroic, extracted with soma
stones, distilled from the vapours of the clouds, bubbling
and exciting they are, are distilled for you. May they be
delightful to you, generous giver, great, wonderful, and
thriving lord of accomplishment and success. Lord
adorable in the holiest words, celebrated in song, giver
of bliss, come, come to us and bless!






[Names: Srunuhi, Devebhyo]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and leadership,
lord adorable and adored, listen graciously to our word:
you speak to the brilliant and revered men of knowledge




and yajna, you speak to the illustrious men of
governance and administration. Say this: O Devas,
divine powers, whatever word of knowledge and life’s
vitality you impart to the scholars of energy and the
science of life, that very knowledge the specialist of
mind, will and emotion, Aryama, has distilled for his
co-worker, the man of action, and the same this friend
and colleague of mine, the judge, knows for practical






[Names: Asmasu]
O Maruts, brave heroes of earth and space
vibrant as waves of energy, may your ancient and eternal
powers and potentials and ours, and our honour and
fame never wear away outmoded, and never forsake
us. Whatever is yours, wondrous and excellent, ancient
and yet ever new from age to age, what is imperishable
from the eternal Voice and your proclamations, fix that
within us deep in the mind, so it is difficult to surpass,






MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 139 625


[Names: Dadhyan, Tesam, Tesam]
name gira.


Dadhyang, the ideal man of virtue who
approaches men of knowledge and wisdom with
reverence, Angira, the scholar of life-energy and science,
Priyamedha, the visionary who loves intellectual
advancement, Kanva, the high-priest of intelligence,
Atri, the saint who has conquered threefold pain and
suffering, Manu, the philosopher of thought and
contemplation, all these perfect souls, realised souls of
wisdom all, know my rebirth into the state of knowledge
and refinement, yes, they know. Our reach is unto the
centre of their holy presence, the centre hold of our
identity is there. In their tradition, at every step, with
every word I speak of exalted speech, I adore Indra and
Agni, lord of honour and power, lord of light and
knowledge, I bow in thought, word and deed.






[Names: Hota, Jagrbhma, Adharayadararindani, Puru]
Let the performer of yajna offer oblations in
honour of the divinities of nature and humanity. Let the




brilliant man of knowledge honour and serve the
virtuous man worthy of choice. Let Brhaspati, scholar
of knowledge and master of the speech of knowledge,
loving and kind, associate with generous and virtuous
people and, with all these noble sacrificing people,
engage in yajna, socially creative work. Let us all, with
equal mind and soul, hear and internalise what words
of truth are spoken even far away as we enjoy the sound
of soma stones and the soothing showers of clouds. Let
the man of holy intelligence and action enjoy the
showers of peace, prosperity and joy, and may the man
of noble yajna enjoy many many homes and havens of
his choice.






[Names: Apsuksito]
O divinities, brilliant and generous powers of
the Divine, existing and active by your great power and
potential, ten pranic life energies and the individual soul,
abiding in the heavenly regions of light, and the same
eleven existing on the earth, and the same eleven abiding
in the waters and the skies, may all these universal
powers come and join this yajna of our life, and help us
to extend it wide and high.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 140 627


Mandala 1/Sukta 140




[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Vedisade, Dhasimiva, Vastreneva]
hanam.


As you bring holy food for the holy fire burning
bright in the vedi, lovely seat of its choice, so for Agni,
with a sincere mind and soul, prepare a happy home
and a brilliant chariot of light, pure, blazing white
dispelling darkness, and cover it safe as with a cloth,
beautifully and fragrantly.






[Names: Anyasyasa]
To the twice born scholar threefold food of jnana
(knowledge), karma (action) and Upasana (prayer and
meditation) is brought and gifted which, received in the
session and assimilated, grows manifold in the session.
By the mouth and tongue (speech) of another, the
teacher, and with the mouth and tongue of others (his
colleagues), through discussion, the strong and
victorious scholar warding off difficulties and




challenges in the company of others refines and shines
all those who love and admire him.






[Names: Krsnaprutau, Pracajihvam]
Both the mothers of this Agni, 1.e., the mother
and the guru-mother of the scholar at school, both equal
in ambition, rising to the clouds in hope, vibrate in
ecstasy like the two arani woods which produce the fire,
and look forward to the success of their child speaking
boldly, destroying the darkness of ignorance and
acquiring knowledge, being reborn fast, worthy of the
company, joy and honour of his father, but carefully to






[Names: Mumuksvo, Asamana]
All lovers of liberation, dynamic pioneers,
explorers of the unknown paths of the world, smartest,
diverse minded, fast and wind-inspired, shooting to the
goal at the speed of light join on the yajna vedi with the
man of thought for the man of self-esteem and honour.


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 140 629




[Names: Adasya]
nanadat.


When this Agni, mighty hero of light and power,
goes forward blowing, roaring, thundering and striking,
covering and vitalising this great earth all round, then
those warriors of his, men of action, advance at will
destroying the monstrous ways of darkness and creating
mighty forms of life and social structure.







[Names: Bhusan, Ojayamanastanvasca]
Graceful among the old sages, he excels, doing
reverence and homage bowing down. Like a virile
husband going to meet his wife, he moves and speaks
loud and bold among creative women dedicated to pious
and holy yajna. Like a man of light and power, he
appears in brilliant form. Like an awful lion difficult to
with his knowledge and power at the peak.








[Names: Saye, Punarvardhante]
Covering or expanding, Agni, the brilliant
scholar, covers and seizes things and subjects well,
intensively as well as extensively, and vitalizes them.
Knowing well, he always associates with those who are
knowledgeable, and they, in association with him,
growing higher and higher, assume a divine from and
thus create a personality different from the personality
of their birth.






[Names: Tamagruvah, Tasam, Jivamastrtam]
The leading lights speak of Agni like flames of
fire and sing of him, and if they ever go down weak and
enervated, they look up to him for fresh life, and Agni,
releasing them from their weakness and enervation and
recreating a high order of fresh vitality and new life,
helps them stay up on high as before and goes forward
roaring and crackling as ever.




MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 140 631




[Names: Adhivasam, Vayo, Syent]
Touching and playing with the upper green
garments of mother earth, going fast with resounding
living beings, bearing foods and health and vitality for
the moving multitudes on earth, always following the
paths it came by, Agni goes on leaving behind a reddish
white trail of its visit.






[Names: Asmakam, Avasya]
Agni, shine among our great and powerful
people, and then, breathing, panting, blowing and
bellowing like a bull, overflowing with energy,
commanding and restraining, dear to the families but
blazing in the battles, protect women, children and the
homes like an armour, throw out the enemy and shine
and brighten up life all around.







[Names: Idamagne, Sukram, Suci]
Agni, may this mind and song of ours composed
with love and dedicated in faith be dearer to you than




the dearest song composed with the greatest effort for
you, and may the splendour of your person which blazes
pure and sacred be auspicious for us by which you bring
us precious jewels of life.






[Names: Rathaya]
Agni, lord of light, fire and knowledge, for our
chariot-car and for our home, give us the power fitted
with life-time mechanism for propulsion, steering and
measuring the depth of water, a transport which may
take our brave heroes, leaders of power and men of
wealth, and the people across the rivers and seas and
which may provide for peace, protection and a






[Names: Gavyam]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, accept our
song and raise our sacred action so that the heaven and
earth, the rivers and seas and the dawns, all self-moved,
may be favourable to us and give us our choice wealth
of cows and plenty of milk, lot of food grains and the
best of jewels for long long days to come for a full and


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 141 633


Mandala 1/Sukta 141






[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Balittha, Yadimupa]
Truly thus, by the grace of Divinity, is radiated
and received the wonderful splendour of Agni’s glory,
and therein lies the seed, the birth, the very life of the
strength and victory of our soul’s existence: therefrom
is the light radiated and received for the beauty of our
embodied soul so that even if our mind ever deviates
from truth, the voices of Law and Truth of Eternity ever
resounding, ever flowing with currents of nature’s light,
call us back to the right path and, thus beatified, our
mind achieves the success we want.






[Names: Prkso, Saye, Trttyamasya]
The eternal Agni, which nourishes and matures
the body of life with food, lives in the physical body (as
vital heat and abides with the earth). The second form
of it abides in the seven motherly forms of nature (which
are the seven lokas bhuh, bhuvah, svah, maha, janah,




tapah and satyam), which empowers seven grades of
natural energy, and matures the seven grades of natural
life. The third form of this generous divinity which
matures and distils the essences of natural life abides in
the sun. And the form which energises ten intelligential
faculties (five senses of hearing, touch, sigh, taste and
memory and imagination, ahankara or sense of identity
consciousness, and the soul, the dynamic spirit), young
mothers with love bring into the living world.






[Names: Niryadim, Yadimanu]
Brilliant scholars of commanding eminence
from the middle regions of the light of the great sun
collect the vitality and convert it into ripening waves
for the maturity of grain. Similarly the vision of the
yogis collects the spiritual vitality of the honey sweets
of heavenly light unto itself in communion and the
pranic energy churns the latent spirit in the depths of
the soul to join it with the heavenly light.




[Names: Ubha, Sucih]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 141 635


The food and nourishment which is collected,
received and assimilated from the highest light of heaven
and the middle regions wonderfully rises and grows into
the hungry herbs and trees and vegetation. And when
both nourish the yajamana and his progeny, the person
grows most youthful, kind and compassionate, and
brilliant and pure.





[Names: Adinmatrravisad, Sucirahimsyamana, Anu]
In the course of evolution, Agni, the vitality of
life, which enters the mother forms of nature, now
grows, pure, brilliant and unhurt, with the soil of its
germination and generation, and then, the one which
grew on the earlier one with the earlier forms of life,
self-impulsive with the eternal will to live, now lives,
vibrates and runs in the latest and most delicate mother





[Names: Adiddhotaram, Devan, Puru]
Yajnic lovers, admirers and worshippers of
Agni, light and life of the world, choose, invoke and




invite this lord of life and yajnic evolution of nature
and humanity in their cherished holy projects and offer
hospitality and gifts of oblations to it as to the lord of
world wealth and power. And then this lord, worshipped
and favourable by pious acts and power joins the noble
humanity in many many ways to the devas, divine and
generous powers of the universe, for sustenance and
progress under the divine eye.






[Names: Tasya]
When Agni, light and fire of life, conducting
the yajna of existence, inspired and impelled by winds,
blazing eloquent like a poet singing in praise of his
patron undisturbed, rises to a state of stability and
omnipresence, then the path of this blazing power going
over areas of darkness, pure and immaculate by birth
shining everywhere across the wide ways of space is
worthy of praise and following by all humanity.





[Names: Ratho, Adasya, Surasyeva]
As a chariot created by scientists and driven by


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 141 637


expert drivers flies across the sky with the brilliant parts
of the machine, so does Agni rise across space with its
blazing flames of fire. Lord of life and light, enlighten
the ignorant, light the paths of darkness, and strengthen
your warriors because, otherwise, at the blaze of fiery
violence like the terror of a demonic hero, life flies away.






[Names: Tvaya, Mitrah, Mitra]
Agni, lord of light, life and power, it is by you
that Varuna, the sea as the sky holds on to its law, Mitra,
the sun, dispels the darkness, and Aryama, the abundant
and dynamic nature and the philanthropic humanity are
creative and generous. For the reason of your nature
and divine action, you are universal, omnipresent, and
omnipotent over all and you manifest as immanent and
concurrent just like the rim of a wheel holding the spokes
together running and working together.






[Names: Tvamagne, Sasamanaya]
Agni, ever young beyond age, for the creative
man of active piety and worship, you bring the universal




wealth of Divinity in meditation. Lord of power and
youth, wealth and value of the universe, eternal and ever
new, such as you are, in every act of our life we worship
you as the lord and master of the power and glory of the





[Names: Asme, Rasminriva]
Bountifully you create and augment for us the
wealth of life good enough for success and value with
honour and discipline of mind and character. Give us
the expert as well as the man of wealth and power to
stabilize and maintain the balance of power and
discipline, law and freedom, individual and society. Lord
controller of both our life here and hereafter like the
rays of light, you who hold the reins of our thought and
action like the reins of a chariot, lord and master of all
noble acts of yajna, pray come and accept the homage
of worship of the dedicated people.






And Agni, lord of divine light, faster than light


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 142 639


and omnipresent, generous giver and performer of
universal yajna, blissful master of the golden chariot of
existence may, we pray, listen to our song of celebration.
May the lord omnipotent, inviolable, ever loving and
lovable, lead us well to the good life and good fortune
by the most virtuous thoughts and actions of faith and







[Names: Astavyagnih]
Thus is Agni, wielding power and splendour for
world governance, praised with songs of success and
thankfulness. And thus the yajakas and we, celebrants
all blest with wealth and power by the Lord’s grace,
raise our songs of adoration to the skies loud and bold
as thunder of the clouds under power of the sun.


Mandala 1/Sukta 142
Agni and others Devata, Dirghatama Auchathya Rshi




[Names: Samiddho, Tantum]
Agni, light of life and life of the universe, the
fire is burning. Bring the devas here and now, let the
sages come and let nature bless the yajamana who has




raised the ladle to offer the oblation. Expand and
continue the ancient line of yajnic action and progeny
for the generous yajamana who has distilled the soma
for the sages and for you.





[Names: Ghrtavantamupa, Yajnam]
Agni, light and spirit of yajna, protector and
preserver of the body, you are the measure of yajna and
with your presence bless the ghrta-sprinkled honey-
sweet fragrant yajna of the adoring generous sagely



oF Sucih pavako adbhuto madhva yajnam mimiksati.


[Names: Narasamsastrira]
Agni, pure and purifier, wonderful of nature,
character and action, is keen to sprinkle yajna thrice
with honey-sweets of fragrance from the light of heaven.
Adorable is he among men, brilliant and generous
among the nobilities of humanity, worthy of company
and honour at yajnas.






[Names: Ilito, Tyam]
Agni, leading light of life and the world, praised


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 142 641


and prayed at yajna, bring us here and now Indra,
wondrous, versatile and dear lord of honour and power,
and bless us with wealth and prosperity. Lord of blissful
voice and word, thus does my mind and understanding
speak well of you and to you in adoration and prayer.






[Names: Strnanaso, Vrnje, Sarma, Indraya, Indra]
The organisers of great yajnas of love and non-
violence collect the holy grass, spread it on the vedi
and hold the ladle in hand for the oblation in yajna in
honour of Indra for the sake of power, wealth and
knowledge. And they build the largest home for the
scholars of divinity and, through yajna, divest
themselves of misery and poverty.




[Names: Srayantam, Pavakasah, Purusprho]
In order to rise to the brilliance of the sages and
towards the heights of divinity, take recource to the
veteran pioneers of Truth, pure purifiers of the spirit,
and the great and distinctive voices of the sages
universally loved and wanted, and join their paths of
action like entering the doors of Divinity.







[Names: Yahvi]
Bright and blissful cyclic sisters, night and day,
both beautiful, moving majestic, mothers of love and
faith in Truth Divine may, we pray, come and grace our
great house rejoicing, and bless our yajna with dignity
and devotion.




[Names: Mandrajihva]
sam.


May the divine poets and visionaries, holy
yajakas, soft and sweet of sacred speech and eloquence,
come and join us today in this auspicious yajna of ours,
the fragrance of which, with their chant, rises to the






[Names: Sucirdevesvarpita, Marutsu, Sarasvati]
Bright and pure, delivered and entrusted to the
divine visionaries and dynamic Maruts, vibrations of
universal mind and brilliant teachers, holy media of
communication between the divine and human, Bharati,
mother speech of the nation for sustenance, Ila, divine
articulation of Omniscience, Sarasvati, everflowing
Word of the Veda, and Mahi, mother spirit of the earth,
all these, we pray, may grace our house of yajna for


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 142 643
honour and adoration and for mutual discourse.






[Names: Tannasturipamadbhutam, Puru, Tvasta]
That wealth of life, knowledge, power and
honour, ever flowing, all protective and self-preserving,
which is the universal choice and conscientious love of
all, may Tvashta, creator of life forms and human
institutions, the very centre-hold of our life and society,
lord our own, create for our sustenance, prosperity and






[Names: Avasrjannupa, Agnirhavya, Agnirhav]
Vanaspati, lord of light and sunbeams, with your
heart and soul you join the devas, seekers of light and
knowledge of divinity, giving them the enlightenment
they love and desire, just as Agni, brilliant light and life
of the universe, refulgent among the lights of nature
and humanity, receives and refines the materials
consumed and recreated in the yajnic evolution of nature
and humanity.








[Names: Pusanvate, Marutvate, Marutvat, Pusanvat, Svaha]
Homage of honour and adoration to the lord of
nourishment, sustenance and advancement of life, to
the lord of energy and movement onward, to the lord of
the universe and ideal of humanity, and to Vayu, lord of
the breath of life and spirit adorable. Do homage with
offer of food and service to the saviour lord beatific of
blessed form and to Indra, lord of honour, power and


[Names: Svahakrtanya]
Indra, lord of light and life, knowledge, power
and honour, come close to our yajna and receive our
homage of worship and prayer, gifts and service in yajna
for the sake of protection and well-being. Come lord,
listen to the prayers and presentations made in faith.
All the devotees invoke, invite and honour you in the
yajna of love and non-violence and in their conduct and
behaviour.


Mandala 1/Sukta 143




[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Apam]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 143 645


I bear and offer the highest, latest, joyously
celebrative and most sacred worshipful homage in words
of adoration to Agni, created of might, who is the grand
child of waters of the skies, dearest favourite with the
Vasu order of scholars, receiver and performer in yajna
corresponding to the seasons and abiding with the earth.






[Names: Asya, Socih]
That refulgent Agni born of the highest cosmic
space manifested itself in energy currents in the middle
region of space in the skies. It is by the action and force
of this blazing power that the heaven is lit bright and
the earth shines on in beauty.






[Names: Bhatvaksaso]
The beams and brilliance of this holy light, clear
and discerning of sight, beautiful of form and blazing
with awe, are unaging, beyond decay. The waves of this
mighty power of light flowing like rivers in flood are
ever youthful, ever wakeful, they ever shine and dispel
darkness as the dawn dispels the night.








[Names: Yamerire, Agnim]
That Agni whom the Bhrgus, men of vision and
knowledge, invoke and realise on the floor of the earth,
in the centre of the world and in the depth of their
consciousness with the power of their knowledge, spirit
and prana, that omniscient Agni, light of the world, with
your words of prayer, invoke and realise in your own
heart and home, yes, Him who alone by Himself is lord
of the wealth of the universe and shines over all as








[Names: Varuna, Marutamiva, Agnir, Satruntsa]
Agni is a mighty power which, like the roar of
winds, like an awful force launched upon the enemy, is
irresistible just like the thunderbolt of lightning in the
sky. With its dreadful jaws, or crushing weapons, sharp
and destructive, it eats up and destroys as a mighty
warrior destroys the enemies, or as the conflagration
burns up and reduces the forests to ash.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 143 647






[Names: Kuvinno, Agnirucathasya, Agnirucathas, Codah]
May Agni, lord of light and power, expand and
heighten our song of praise and celebration. May the
brilliant power, great and beneficent, accord, approve
and accomplish our desire and ambition with comforts
and well-being in life. Great inspirer is Agni. May the
power sharpen and activate our mind and intellect to
create new things with acquisition of success and
victories. With the same mind and intellect we praise
and celebrate the grandeur of Agni, mighty, versatile,
brilliant, blazing and pure of form and action.






[Names: Ghrtapratikam, Indhano, Mitram, Mitra]
The scholar of brilliance and intelligence
researches and develops agni for you, agni, a power
rising with flames of ghrta, firmly active like a friend
of light and truth, sitting and working for humanity
against the forces of falsehood, darkness and
lawlessness. Blazing unresisted, it shines in the yajnic
projects of development, and inspires and sharpens our


pure and transparent intelligence.






[Names: Aprayucchann, Sivebhir, Sagmaih, Adabdhebhir]
Agni, holy power, brilliant and blazing, ever
wakeful, active and working relentlessly, protect us with
good, protective and preservative, and blissful modes
of life, by noble, protective and blissful people. Power
dear, creator and giver of joy and comfort, protect,
promote and advance us all round by sober, irresistible
and intrepidable modes and people ever watchful and
working without a wink of sleep.


Mandala 1/Sukta 144




[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi]
sate.


The yajaka who holds his clear and brilliant
intelligence high with his will and power goes by the
law and discipline of this Agni, light of the Divine power
of the world. He moves forward to hold the sacred ladles


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 144 649


dedicated to the service of yajna-fire and right
circumambulation of the vedi, ladles which first and
directly reach and take the yajamana to the sacred abode
of Agni, light Divine.






[Names: Abhimrtasya, Anusata, Apamupasthe]
Waves of fragrance, streams of nectar, dynamics
of Truth and divine Law, returning, abiding, enveloped
in light, going round Agni in the seat and home of the
lord, the sun, do sing in adoration of the Divine. They
nestle in the womb of the divine mother of waters,
creativity of cosmic energy there held by the mother,
and then the streams of nectar are distilled and rain down
again in showers for the life of the earth and her children,
joining, again with agni, electric energy.






[Names: Yuyusatah, Adim]
When two persons of equal age and equal mind
wishing to cross over a common problem and achieve a
common end, join together in body for mutual love and
support, they accept, hold on and support each other as




beauty and majesty and accept a tribute of love as fire
accepts an oblation of yajna from us, or as a charioteer
accepts and holds the reins of the horses.






[Names: Yamim, Diva, Jani, Puru]
When two persons of equal age, the wedded
couple, living together, the two as one in the same one
body, in the same one house, serve and worship the same
Agni in love day and night, then the same old eternal
Agni, ever vibrating in the human soul as the will to
live and generate, unaging, for ages and ages, is reborn
as new and young as ever in the human form.






[Names: Tamim, Dhanoradhi]
All the human potentials such as thoughts, ideas,
reflection, wisdom, will and understanding, intention,
devotion, prayer and meditation, all ten senses of
perception and volition, the five main pranic energies
and five sub-pranas, though separate, yet jointly, invoke,
enlight and serve the same one Agni as the ten fingers,
though separate, yet jointly, nurse the same one baby
with love and care. We all mortals serve, adore and


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 144 651


worship the same eternal light of life, Agni. It moves
ever so fast and hits its targets as an arrow shot from
the bow, and ever new born and growing, young and
youthful, it receives new knowledge from the sages on
the move. Homage to the Lord for protection,
promotion, peace and well-being!






[Names: Tvam]
Agni, light supreme and power, you light and
rule the heavens. You enliven and rule the earth and the
earthly like a master shepherd with love and care. And
both of them, heaven and earth, move on, mighty, grand
and graceful, golden rich and beautiful, rotating and
revolving in their orbits, rushing on and participating
in the cosmic yajna.






[Names: Agne]
Agni, be pleased, listen to our words of praise
and prayer and respond, charming lord of light possessed
of innate power, born of cosmic energy for the law and
truth of existence, master of yajnic action, universally




kind and favourable as you are, celestial beautiful to
the sight, joyous and brilliant of word, and a haven of
peace and comfort like a generous man of hospitality
for all.


Mandala 1/Sukta 145






[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Tasmin, Savasah]
Agni is the lord of light, knowledge and power:
of him they ask the questions, he goes all round, he
knows, he has the wisdom and awareness and the
knowledge of sciences, he reaches, yes, reaches
anywhere he wants. In him lies the power of governance
and law, in him lies the potential for all you want, and
he is the master, ruler and commander of energy, strength
and valour, and of the fiery forces of his dominion.







[Names: Tamit]
Agni is the lord of knowledge and self-
realisation: of him the learned ask the questions where


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 145 653


they miss the light, not all, everybody doesn’t ask him.
Lord of peace and stability of mind as he is, whatever
he realises or understands with his own mind is not
subject to doubt either before or later. Everybody goes
by the words and holy actions of this power of undaunted
spirit and undisturbed mind free from arrogance.






[Names: Tamid, Srnavad, Purupraisastaturiryajna]
Just as ladles of ghrta reach agni, fire of yajna,
so do youth of noble speech and blessed intelligence
reach Agni, lord of brilliance and exalted soul, bearing
questions and homage. May the lord, sole master of
knowledge, unique and unparallelled, listen to my
prayers and questions too, lord inspirer of many, instant
saviour of the seekers, master of yajnic accomplish-
ments, giver of faultless protection, dispeller of doubts
and darkness, all-great and loving, gracefully receiving
and acknowledging questions as well as the homage of





[Names: Upasthayam, Svantam]
When the devotee approaches this brilliant Agni
with holy offerings, it instantly responds, rises, grows
and expands with its flames. When the maidens with
love and faith approach it, it provides soothing touches
of caress and reflection for their peace and joy in a state
of tranquillity.






[Names: Vyabravid, Vayuna]
That Agni which is ever on the move like a deer,
worthy of research and attainment, abiding in the waters,
in the forests, in the sunbeams, in the woods, in the
skin, and in the dark of the eye, which is a metaphor of
omnipresence and universal eloquence of its presence
for humanity, and similarly for the brilliant scholar
dedicated to Agni, abiding for all everywhere, collecting
the dynamic flow of knowledge and speaking of it to
humanity — that is true, that is abiding: Agni,
knowledge, scholarship, the flow, dynamics of
existence, and living.


Mandala 1/Sukta 146


[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Trimurdhanam, Nisattamasya]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 146 655


Invoke and celebrate Agni, three-headed, seven-
rayed, perfect, nestled in the lap of its parents, which
pervades and fills the lights of this moving but stable
heavenly solar system of the universe.


(Agni is the life-energy of light and heat, born
of akasha and vayu, cosmic space and cosmic energy;
it abides on top of the three regions, earth, middle region
of the skies, and the high and heavenly regions of the
sun. It also abides in the three modes of nature, Prakrti:
sattva, rajas and tamas. It is an integration, or call it the
seed, of the seven rays of light-spectrum, and it energises
all the moving but stable solar systems of the universe.


Agni also is the vital spirit of the articulation of
cosmic awareness in language form in the Veda, which
is learnt from the opening word of the Rgveda. It abides
on top of the three tenses and three persons of the verbs
of the linguistic structure and in the seven vibhaktis,
case endings, and sung in the seven metrical forms and
seven notes of music.


Agni thus is the divine attribute of the spirit at
the individual as well as the cosmic level, and energises,
inspires and illuminates the physical, mental and
spiritual worlds in the spheres of matter, motion and







[Names: Uksa, Urvyah]
The mighty sun, far greater than the earth and
other planets, generously radiating floods of light and
waves of gravitational energy, holds the earth and skies.
Ever young and awfully moving, it is stable, providing
protection and stability to its family. On top, it maintains
its degree and distance from the earth while its light
rays touch and drink up the reservoirs of water.






[Names: Samanam, Anapavrjyan]
Two cows, the earth and the sun, beautiful and
co-existent, tending the same calf, the day-night cycle,
go round and round, sustaining and revealing the great
banners of the identity of various objects in space.






[Names: Dhirasah, Sisasantah]
Poets and scholars, wise and meditative,
protecting and guiding people with their heart in many
ways, lead them to positions of undecaying value. Keen
to share the joy and generosity of life wide as the sea,
they look round and the sun reveals itself to them.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 147 657






[Names: Didrksenyah, Purutra]
Agni, power of light and knowledge in life, so
brilliant as to be admirable by the brilliant victorious
all round in all directions, worthy of praise and
reverence, life-giving to the small as well as to the great,
abundantly creative and promotive to all these people
and projects in the making, is the lord of wealth and
power and universally admired and honourable.


Mandala 1/Sukta 147






[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Katha, Sucayanta, Ubhe]
Agni, lord of light and life, how do your flames
of fire, and brilliant scholars, blazing and purifying,
givers of life with food, energy and knowledge to both
children and grand children, and bearing food both for
body and mind, rejoice and participate in the songs of
Veda and the yajna of Truth, Law and divine knowledge?








[Names: Bodha, Piyati, Anu]
Agni, lord of light, master of your own power
of knowledge, youngest of the lights, listen to me, I
pray, and know my word, highest and most powerful of
mine ever borne: One drinks at the fount of your
knowledge, and the other repeats your words according
as you have directed. Iam your admirer and worshipper.
I bow to your body, mind and soul.






[Names: Raraksa]
Agni, lord of light, power and knowledge, the
flames of your fire, brilliant teachers and warriors, are
the guardians of humanity, seers and visionaries of the
present and future generations, who guard the blind and
the ignorant against evil and crime. O lord and master
of world knowledge, protect all those who do good work
so that even the deadly enemies of society may not be
able to terrorize anyone.






[Names: Mantro]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 148 659


Agni, whoever be envious, sinful and non-
giving and try to mislead us with evil words and double
dealing in action, may the Agni mantra be our right guide
and save us, and may the evil speaker and doer stew
himself in his own juice and destroy himself with those






[Names: Atah]
O Agni, eminent power of knowledge, child of
courage and valour celebrated by many, whoever be the
man of advanced knowledge who enthralls men by way
of right teaching and preaching, protect and promote
him who praises you and teaches us. Let us never be
seized by any evil or sinful person.


Mandala 1/Sukta 148






[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Mathid]
Let us study and develop this Agni, light and
fire energy, which Matarishva, wind and electric energy,
pervading the skies energises, and which the scholars
adopt in human communities like the wonderful sun
for enhancement of the beauty of form and health of




body — Agni which exists in all forms of the universe,
which gives the universe its cosmic form and which
receives, consumes and recreates everything that is
offered to it since it is the catalytic agent of the cosmic






[Names: Dadanaminna, Jusanta, Enemies]
power and the learned scientist, because it is the giver
and it loves and desires the supreme good of me and
everybody. All people love and esteem the celebration
of the scientific and artistic versatility of this power and
benefit from all the arts and crafts of the artist of this
generous source of energy and beauty.






[Names: Nitye]
Let the high-priests of yajna (in the field of
science and meditation) take up Agni, fire energy, in
the laboratory, workshop, the eternal space and the cave
of the mind, develop it with laudable means for
advancement, and harness it for desired purposes, going
forward as by chariot drawn by trained horses.


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 149 661








[Names: Puruni, Adasya, Socirasturna, Anu, Saryamasanamanu]
Agni, mighty power of light and fire, catalyses,
destroys and creates many and, blazing in the light rays,
shines in majesty. And then shining and blazing like a
shooting star of the eternal archer, it releases stormy
currents of energy every day, every minute, every






[Names: Andha]
Existing as it is in the womb of Eternity, no
enemies, no designers of evil, no destroyers, no attacks,
can damage it. The blind and the ignorant hurt it not,
they cannot suppress it. Those who know, those who
love, value and cooperate, permanently protect and

Mandala 1/Sukta 149








[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Mahah]
Agni! Mighty is he, lord and protector of wealth.
Ruler of rulers, abundant and gracious giver of wealth,
he comes to us to give us of his gifts. And when he
comes near, mountains quake in fear and clouds shower
in rain with reverence.






[Names: Sravobhirasti, Sisrita]
Abundant and generous is he like the clouds of
rain, who, in the midst of heaven and earth as amidst
humanity, has drunk deep of the joy of creation, and,
dynamically pervading the universe with his majesty,
who abides at the centre of the form and identity of






[Names: Suro]
Agni, who has illuminated the celestial city of
this imperishable soul, who is fast as the winds of space
and faster than sunbeams, is the visionary creator of
the worlds of eternity, blazing as the very soul of a





[Names: Susu, Hota]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 150 663


Twice born and born of two, akasha and vayu,
manifesting in universal nature and in every distinct
form of nature, illuminating three lights, fire of the earth,
lightning of the skies and lights of heaven, vitalising
all the worlds of the universe, Agni abides all round
everywhere. Worthiest universal yajaka, holding the
worlds unto itself, it abides coexistent with the universal
liquid energy of the cosmos.






[Names: Ayam, Sravasya, Marto]
Such is this Agni, creative lord of cosmic yajna,
wielder of the worlds, born of two and twice born, who
holds the choicest foods, energies and honours of the
universe. And the man who, self-sacrificing, twice born
of natural mother and mother Sarasvati, blest with the
richest gifts of food, energy and honour, with a noble
family gives in homage and surrender to this Agni, he
is the real man.


Mandala 1/Sukta 150




[Names: Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Puru, Todasyeva, Sarana]
Faithful and dedicated, giving in homage, I sing
profusely in honour and celebration of you, and come




in to you for shelter and protection, Agni, lord of light
as the sun, great and glorious.





[Names: Vyaninasya, Kada]
And I would not care to join the company of the
admirer of the rich not dedicated to the divinities and to
the lord of light, Agni, even though he be otherwise






[Names: Prapet]
O lord of light and generosity, Agni, surely that
mortal is blest and brilliant like the moon in the heavens,
great and greater, ever rising most high, who is
worshipful and gives in charity with thanks and divine
admiration. May we, we pray, be dedicated to you,
singing songs of devotion in admiration of the Divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 151




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Mitram, Simya, Mitra, Arejetam, Prati]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 151 665


Agni is dear as a friend and adorable (since it is
the vigour and vitality of life in the human personality,
in the animal world and in the earth and the
environment). Let the people dedicated to the welfare
and protection of humanity, who love the wealth of cows
and milk products, who want to preserve the earth and
the environment, and who value the vitality of their
sense and mind, light and develop Agni, as a dear
adorable friend, with noble acts in yajna and corporate
action to inspire vitality in the cows, in the pranic
energies, in the mind and senses, and in the earth and
environment. And then the heaven and earth would
vibrate with life and joy by virtue of their holy voice
and the power of their songs of adoration. (Let the voice
resound on earth and songs rise to heaven).




[Names: Yaddha, Purumilhasya, Purumilhas, Adha, Mitraso]
vatah.


O Mitra and Varuna, generous heaven and earth
and the skies, listen to the voice of adoration which
people of intelligence and innate virtue bear and offer
as friends to you. Know the yajnic act of the blessed
yajamana of prosperity holding rich libations of soma
for the holy fire. Clear the path of progress for the
worshipper and listen to the songs of the master of a








[Names: Yadimrtaya]
Generous Mitra and Varuna, sun and cosmic
waters, fire and sun, people living on earth admire your
celebrated rise from heaven through the skies for the
sake of spiritual greatness of honour and smartness of
perfect performance, since on their invocation with holy
action you reach their yajna of love and holiness of non-
violence and bear all round fruits of yajna for the man
of science and speed and for the man of truth and cosmic






[Names: Rtavanavrtama, Yuvam]
O Mitra and Varuna, lords of the universal truth
of being and action, wielders of the pranic energies dear
as life, to the great earth which is so dear to you and to
the people, proclaim the great and universal truth of
life: Bring from the vast heaven of light, both of you,
the mighty strength of being and the conviction of will
and action, yoke the two like the driving force of a
chariot, (like the ruler and the people of the world state),
and join the march of life.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 151 667






[Names: Mahi, Svaranti, Suryama, Nimruca]
Mitra and Varuna, you come like sun and shower
to the great earth here and bring choice gifts. Pure cows
unsullied by dust, fertile and generous they are, come
home lowing for their calves like the dawns returning
with homage to the sun in the vault of heaven, or like
the birds on the flight back to the nest.






Mitra and Varuna, powers of love and justice of
society, where the lights of knowledge and the flames
of yajnic fire in action serve and augment you for the
advancement of truth and rule of law, there your powers
of love and friendship and your power of justice serve,
protect and enrich the earth and the character and
conduct of her children. O light and shower of life, love
and justice, with your heart and soul, create, protect and
strengthen the native intelligence and refine and raise
the knowledge and wisdom of the noble saints and








[Names: Upaha]
Mitra and Varuna, teachers, masters and eminent
scholars inspired with love friendship and justice,
whoever does honour and reverence to you and gives
in charity and homage to divinity by yajnas, good
reading, prayer, and noble company, whoever attends
on you with reverence for service, the worshipful man
who has mastered his subject or the poet of vision and
imagination or the generous yajaka, or the man of
knowledge for whom science and honest industry alone
is the key to success, you go to him, I pray, meet him at
his yajna of love, reverence and non-violence, and bless
him with holy words, noble wisdom and discrimination.






[Names: Bharanti]
Mitra and Varuna, first and foremost lords of
truth and rectitude, whoever approach you with respect
and honour you with yajnas and noble words as the first
choice of their heart and soul, and offer you tributes of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 152 669


love and reverence with controlled words of honesty
and sincerity, you bless them with the wealth of
knowledge and honour with a mind and spirit free from
the pride of learning.






[Names: Revadvayo]
Mitra and Varuna, eternal lord of love and spirit
of justice and rectitude, you bear and bring the wealth
of health and age of the natural world. Immanent spirits
of divinity in the world, leaders of humanity, with your
innate powers of protection here on earth, you bring us
immense wealth and honour of life. The lights of the
day to-day or tomorrow reach not the immensity of that
grandeur. The rolling seas swell not to the heights of
that immensity. The human voices fail to touch the fringe
of that power and that glory.


Mandala 1/Sukta 152






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Yuvam, Avatiratamanrtani, Mitravaruna]
Mitra and Varuna, like day and night, with your




expansion over the world you reveal and cover the forms
of things in existence and your revelations of the things
are faultless. You rule out and overcome illusions and
unrealities since you associate with what is real and true.






[Names: Etaccana, Sasta, Trirasrim]
This much, may be, one of these wise ones may
know, one who knows the truth, thinks aright, and is
recognised and praised by scholars of distinction as a
man of vision and discrimination. The brilliant scholar
of the four Vedas masters the three dimensions of
knowledge: pure knowledge of Rks, applied knowledge
of Yajus, and the meditative knowledge of sweet
Samans, and, being the prime force and power of
wisdom ever true, never out of date, defeats those who
deny and dishonour the divinities of existence and
eminence of knowledge.






[Names: Apadeti, Garbho]
Just as the dawn arises and radiates over the
earth before moving humanity rises and goes out on
business, so does the Original Knowledge of Revelation


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 152 671


radiate whole before it is analysed into distinctive
branches. Which of your scholars, O Mitra and Varuna,
powers of vision and wisdom, knows that? Probably
the man-treasure of knowledge bears the burden of it,
maintains it and feeds it with detailed application and
overcomes illusion and confusion.






[Names: Prayantamit, Anavaprena, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
Just as we see the sun, lover of the maidenly
dawns, gather up the lights and moving on, never
resting, so do we see the scholar, treasure-home of
knowledge, lover of rising generations, moving on in
his pursuit of knowledge, never resting and rusting, but
expanding far and wide the light of knowledge, wherein
lies the favourite love of Lord Supreme, lord of light as
well as of the bottomless deep of annihilation.






[Names: Anasvo, Acittam]
The sun is arisen, up on the heights of heaven,
[Names: Bright]
generations pay homage, singing hymns of Infinity,
admiring the treasure love of the Lord for the sake of
Mitra and Varuna, love, light and justice of existence.








[Names: Pitvo, Vayunani]
Just as cows feed their calves on milk from their
darling child of love and promote him in his favourite
studies of Divinity, so should the scholar of the ways
and laws of the world ask for food and maintenance
and, serving and shining, advance the study and
knowledge of nature and eternity.






[Names: Asmakam]
O Mitra and Varuna, brilliant and generous lords
of love and justice, I pray, I may, with your protection,
choose to worship you with the homage of love,
dedication and sacrifice. Bless our songs of adoration
among our people with wealth and honour of success
and may our projects of action be holy and powerful,
taking us across the high seas of life. Let our showers
be showers of divinity and redemption.


Mandala 1/Sukta 153


[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 153 673




[Names: Yajamahe, Ghrtairghrtasnu]
Mitra and Varuna, great, loving, rejoicing,
friends of humanity, lords of love and justice,
resplendent with flames of ghrta, we love, honour and
worship you with salutations, service and oblations of
high grades of ghrta, and the devotees, dedicated and
worshipful, bring holy offerings with sincere prayers
like high-priests of yajna for you and for us.






[Names: Prastutirvam, Anakti]
Mitra, lord of love, and Varuna, lord of justice, I
come to you as to my home and haven of peace, comfort
and grace, having abandoned the storms of disturbance
and temptation. My concentration is complete and my
song of praise is divine. Lords of generosity, brave is
the yajaka, come to join you in congregations of prayer
and action, doing honour and homage to you, waiting
for grace and comfort of well-being.







[Names: Pipaya, Mitravaruna, Hinoti]
Mitra and Varuna, whoever the yajaka giving
oblations in the yajna of love and charity to you like a
noble human being, who invokes you and prays for help
in his tasks of life, thanking you and serving you in
[Names: Mother, Nature]
infinite blessings to that man of truth and sacrifice.






Mitra and Varuna, friends, teachers and leaders
of humanity, may the cows and the holy voices,
consecrated holy waters and food and the juice of soma
among the happy people surfeit you with delight. And
may the ancient master of our yajna of education,
governance and production giving us the fruits of
holiness sustain the yajna, and may you too continue to
enjoy the fruits of that yajna and drink the milk of the
cow as well as the lights of dawn.


Mandala 1/Sukta 154


[Names: Vishnu, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Visnornu]
Let me well recite the grand acts of Vishnu, lord


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 154 675


immanent, all pervasive, of the universe, who creates
all worlds of the universe, who sustains the high regions
of light in upper space and, having created, maintains it
three ways, 1.e., as a system, as part of the cosmic system,
and in relation to the other systems, the lord who is
sung and celebrated everywhere.






[Names: Yasoyrusu]
That Vishnu who is sung and celebrated by
virtue of his might, is the lord who pervades the universe
everywhere just as the awful lion, lord of the mountain
cave, majestically moves around over the tortuous paths
of the forest. In the vast three-fold acts of his mighty
creation, i.e., the acts of projection, sustenance and
withdrawal, reside the entire worlds of existence.






[Names: Susametu]
May this powerful song of celebration reach
Vishnu, celebrated lord, great and generous, who holds
in balance the heights of the universe of space and time
and creates it just in three steps of sattva, rajas and tamas,
1.e., mind, motion and matter, or the three regions of
earth, sky and the heaven of light.








[Names: Yasya]
The threefold worlds of his, earth, heaven and
the middle regions, full and perfect in their own ways
and character, honey sweet and undecaying, rejoice in
the lord’s presence with their inmates by their innate
power of sustenance. He, the sole lord, by himself, holds
the entire worlds of existence including heaven and earth
created of the three modes of Prakrti, sattva, rajas and
tamas.






[Names: Tadasya, Urukramasya]
May I rise to and follow that cherished path of
lord Vishnu and reach that state of being wherein the
noble people dedicated to Divinity live and rejoice in
bliss. This lord of divine power and action is friend of
the industrious men of relentless action, and there in
his supreme presence flows the stream of divine love
and bliss.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 155 677




[Names: Atraha]
Men of dedication, yogis, teachers and
preachers, scholars and scientists, wedded couples, for
your rest and abiding residence where you should go
and rest, we want those places where the sharp and
penetrative rays of the divine sun should reach for
enlightenment. Here only is the place, and we want your
abode here, where the supreme abode of the generous
and the omnipotent Vishnu shines with abundant light
and bliss.


Mandala 1/Sukta 155






[Names: Vishnu, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi]
Of your delicious food and soma drink, offer in
homage to the great and mighty Vishnu, lord of
intelligence, and to Indra, bold and mighty lord of energy
and power. Both stand on top of mountains and clouds
and on top of heaven, firm and inviolable high, as the
mountaineer stands firm on top of a mountain peak by
the best and strongest equipment.


(According to Swami Dayanand, the mantra may
be applied to the teachers and scholars of a nation who
reach on top of learning and knowledge by arduous




efforts of mountainous degree and do their work freely
and courageously.)






[Names: Tvesamittha, Simivatorindravisnu]
Indra, lord of power such as lightning, and
Vishnu, lord of light such as the sun, extend and expand
the range and potential of the mighty shooting archer’s
missile-fitted defence of humanity. And thus does the
man of yajna, protecting, promoting and drinking the
soma-joy of the nation, extend and expand the blaze of
the battle of the mighty defender of the nation and thus
does he glorify you both, Indra and Vishnu.






[Names: Dadhati]
Those oblations of yajna food and distilled soma
augment the great creative power of this Vishnu, spirit
of the universe, for procreative virility and divine
enjoyment of the world of existence. He vests it in the
mother powers of nature, 1.e., heaven and earth. Then
the off-spring bears the name of the father, the one that
is the ultimate, as the child of Divinity, and the other
that is the worldly name of his family. The third the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 155 679


Lord bears over and above the light of heaven.






[Names: Tattadidasya]
That procreative virility of this lord Vishnu at
every step of it, we celebrate in songs of joy, that
creativity of the lord saviour and protector, generous
and not rapacious who takes away nothing for himself,
creator supreme and lord of cosmic fertility, who
completes the creation of the natural universe in three
steps of sattva, rajas and tamas — thought, energy and
matter — for the delightful life of the soul, and then
transcends the work of his own creation.






[Names: Trttyamasya]
To know the grandeur of the lord seer of light
and bliss across two steps of his creation, earth and the
heavens of light, the human soul stirs in mind and
intelligence. The third step no one can, or ought to,
violate, overcome or ignore, not even people of the
highest imagination, like birds of the strongest wings,
can do so.








[Names: Caturbhih, Brhacchriro]
Inspiring, moving, measuring four and ninety
names of the passage of chronological time, circulating
in the cosmic circle of eternal time, rotating, revolving,
eternally recurring, the mighty cosmic bodied Vishnu,
ever young, never a teenager, moves the universe,
himself unmoved and unmoving, and transcendent, and
he listens and attends to our invocations of yajna with
the Rkvi hymns of praise and celebration.


Mandala 1/Sukta 156






[Names: Vishnu, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Bhava, Sevyo, Adha]
O Vishnu, lord of universal knowledge, be like
a friend, giver of peace and comfort, generator of the
waters of life, lord of the wealth and honour of the world,
instant mover and controller of protections, vast and
expanding in influence and inspiration, and being so,
worshipped by the wise and eminent scholars, served
by the generous devotees of yajna, let the song of


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 156 681


celebration and the fragrance of yajna in your honour
rise to the skies. (The mantra is applicable to the teacher






[Names: Sravobhiryujyam]
One who lovingly and generously does homage
to Vishnu, ancient and yet most modern lord of
knowledge, one who creates and imparts new
knowledge for the devotees of knowledge, one who
speaks and communicates this great new message of
the great lord of universal knowledge, and one who
practices this applicable and useful knowledge with
thanks and grateful offerings in yajna for charity and
social service, he is the real man.






[Names: Tamu, Asya]
Admirers and worshippers of the ancient and
eternal lord of knowledge, Vishnu, as much as you know
the lord and his knowledge, please augment and advance
that body of knowledge with your own growth and




And knowing the lord and his knowledge, speak of the
knowledge to the seekers in full confidence. O Vishnu,
lord eternal and master of universal knowledge, all hail
to you! We offer homage and worship to you in honour
of your knowledge and wisdom.






[Names: Tamasya, Varunastamasvina, Dadhara, Marutasya, Marutas]
Brilliant Varuna, lord of light and favourite
choice of all, and the Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn
of new knowledge, in unison, join that noble and yajnic
act of the knowledge and revelation of Vishnu, lord of
universal knowledge and instant controller of the
Maruts, tempestuous heroes of action, for furtherance
and application. Vishnu, commanding the force of his
friends, wields the highest knowledge and expertise of
action and opens the paths of action brilliant as day for
humanity to follow and advance.




[Names: Indraya, Indra, Vedha]
Vishnu, generous and divine lord of knowledge,
friend of all, brilliant hero of action, better and ever


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 157 683


more blissful doer, established in the threefold virtue
of knowledge, action and worship, goes forward to join
Indra, lord ruler of the world, who does good to all,
and, in the direction of truth and rectitude, protects and
promotes men of virtue, culture and creativity, and with
all help blesses the yajamana in the performance of his
acts of love and non-violence for peace and progress.


Mandala 1/Sukta 157






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Ashvin, Abodhyagnirjma, Ayuksatamasvina]
The fire of Agni awakes and stirs the world with
life afresh. The sun is on the rise over the earth. The
great and golden dawn wrapt in beauty waxes on the
horizon with the splendour of her glory. The Ashvins,
harbingers of new light and knowledge, harness their
chariot for the daily round. And the generous lord of
light and life, Savita, in his own gracious way, showers
and sanctifies the moving world with sunlight and new
inspiration for action.








[Names: Asmakam, Surasata]
Ashvins, harbingers of new light and life, chariot
leaders of the world, you harness and ride your chariot
of might and victory and sprinkle and inspire the Kshatra
order of our defence and governance with exciting spirit
of life and honey sweets of power and prosperity. In
our struggle for the joy of life, inspire and strengthen
our Brahma system of research and education with new
knowledge and self-confidence. We pray, may we
achieve the prize of success and victory in our battles
of the brave.






[Names: Arvan, Tribandhuro]
Here, may the three engined, three staged, honey
carrier, superfast chariot of the Ashvins come, the chariot
all-acclaimed, mighty, laden with wealth and splendours
of the world, and may that chariot, we pray, bring us
peace, prosperity and well-being for our humans and
for our animal world.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 157 685




[Names: Prayustaristam]
Ashvins, leaders of light, come, bring us food
and energy, accelerate the nation’s march with the spur
of ambition and action. Take the health and age of the
people over and across the heights. Rub off and wash
away the sins. Ward off hate and enmity. Be our friends
and helpers in every field.






[Names: Yuvam, Yuvamagnim]
Ashvins, leaders of humanity, harbingers of light
and life, generous and brave, life of nature astir, you
vest the moving spheres with living potentials for
growth, you enrich all the living worlds of the universe
with light and life. Come both of you, help and support,
excite the fire, agitate the waters and inspire the herbs
and trees of the nation with life anew, elevate, gear up
and bring showers of fire and waters of action and









[Names: Atho]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and life, teachers,
scholars and healers of the nation of humanity, be the
physicians for us all with curatives, tonics and sanatives,
be leaders and drivers with superfast chariots and
energies. Lords of blazing power, keep the social order
of defence bright and high for the ruler who, with all
his wealth and powers of yajnic action, offers you
homage sincerely with his heart and soul.


Mandala 1/Sukta 158






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Ashvin, Vasu, Rudra, Purumanti, Dasra]
Ashvins, generous lords of light and power,
loved and wanted, shelter and support of all, scourge of
evil and enmity, universally respected, ever on the rise,
give us, we pray, what we love and desire for our
success, since the admirable wealth that is yours you
bring us for sure with abundant protection, promotion
and welfare for all, brave saviours as you are from want
and suffering.






[Names: Jigrtamasme]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 158 687


Ashvins, lords of light and leadership, shelter,
support and protection for all, ever on the move with a
mind keen to fulfil the desire and ambition of all, who
hold and rule the human habitations in villages, towns
and rich cities with food and power on the face of the
earth and relentlessly keep awake, vigilant for us all
and for our protection. Who can give, and what, in
appreciation and return for this love and generosity of
your mind and consideration for us — what except
thanks and gratitude in homage?






[Names: Yukto, Suro]
Ashvins, harbingers of light, power and
protection, that stout, protective and irresistible chariot
of yours propelled by flying oars stationed in the midst
of the sea in full harness is ready for the valiant warrior
to take us across the waters. May I, a powerful navigator
in the battle of the sea, come and join the force under






[Names: Upastutiraucathyamurusyenma]
Ashvins, lords of light, power and holiness, may




my celebrative invocation and prayer protect my self-
confidence. May the day and night cycle never drain
me out. May your tenfold fire, concentrated and blazing,
never burn me off, which otherwise bound up in the
soul as the fire of grief and despair eats up the very
flesh of the body.






[Names: Siro]
Let the streams be most motherly and kind
saviours to me, simple, natural and unhurtful person as
I am. Let not the streams swallow me even if savages
were to throw me down into the water. If a thrice
torturous person were to try to cut the head of such a
person, then may the evil intentioned person cut his own
torso and his own shoulders.






[Names: Apamartham]
The person lost in darkness of the deep, having
fallen a victim to blind attachment, grows old and
decrepit in ten years. The one dedicated to sages in
pursuit of divine knowledge, yajnic action and
meditative prayer becomes a Brahma, scholar of the
Veda, and a master of the chariot of life.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 159 689


Mandala 1/Sukta 159






[Names: Dyava, Prthivi, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Devebhirye]
I study, serve and admire the earthly sphere and
the solar system, both great, born of the particles of
matter and energy in the course of natural evolution,
both suggestive of new and newer knowledge through
our yajnas of scientific programmes. Both of them,
creations of the Divine, highly generous and productive,
in cooperation with other natural elements, powers and
spheres, working by the immanent will and intelligence
of nature, produce and adorn manifold things of beauty
and value.






[Names: Suretasa]
And with holy invocations in yajna, I study,
investigate and meditate on the great and innate power
and intelligence of my father and mother the sun and
the earth, both free from hate and full of love for all.
Both father and mother of the world, overflowing with
life and virility, create and augment the great and
universal nectar wealth of humanity with their expansive


and abundant generosity.






[Names: Sthatusca]
They are the children, sons and daughters in
reality, heroic, noble and graceful of action, who for
the first, essential and absolute knowledge of prime
importance, collect the knowledge of the great parents
of the world of existence: Ishwar and Prakrti, sun and
earth, and father and mother of this human birth of ours.
O Parents, protect and bless the true and firm
establishment of the child, free from duplicity and
double dealing, in the Dharma of the static and dynamic






[Names: Navyam]
Those are poets and scientists of brilliance and
vision possessed of wondrous power and intelligence,
of equal knowledge and interest, loving together and
working together as a family team like brother and sister,
who study and measure the depths and interior of the
oceans of earth and the heavens of light, create the warp


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 160 691


and woof of ever expanding new knowledge and find
new paths over the seas and in the skies and space.




[Names: Asmabhyam, Satag]
vinam.


That gift of knowledge worthy of love and
choice in the creation of self-refulgent Lord Savita’s
cosmic yajna, we value and admire. May the heaven
and earth, universal father and mother, blest with
immanent will of Nature, bear, bring and reveal that
body of knowledge which is rich in wealth and power
and provides a hundred forms of prosperity with cows,
fertile lands and the word of knowledge and divinity.


Mandala 1/Sukta 160




[Names: Dyava, Prthivi, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Sujanmani, Suryah, Surya]
The two, heaven and earth, givers of universal


peace and comfort, abiding by the laws of universal
Truth, holding their spheres, vested with immanent will




and intelligence, nobly born of mother nature, stout and
forbearing, are brilliant and of divine quality. The sun,
pure and effulgent, goes on by the laws of its own
existence between heaven and earth.






[Names: Uruvyacasad, Sudhrstame]
The two, of mighty expanse, great and grand,
each separate with its own distinct identity, the sun as
father and the earth as mother, protect and sustain the
worlds and people around. Very strong and forbearing,
the heaven and earth are like two wondrous icons of
Beauty itself, which the father sun has fully vested with
form and colour.






[Names: Dhenum, Sukram]
That universal vital fire, carrier of light and life
and yajna, child of its causal parents, Lord Supreme
and Nature and then akasha and vayu, i.e., space and
energy, universal agent of holy action, constant and
resolute, purifies and sanctifies with its wonderful
powers, it energises, fertilises and purifies the cow, the


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 160 693


earth and the holy Word, enlightens the sun and skies,
gives vitality to the virile bull and pranic energy and
sustaining power to the life-giving sun, and it emanates
purity and vitality to the seed of life in existence day
and night. Men and women all, serve it and draw the
milk of life energy from the holy, universal and constant
energy of fire through the creative act of yajna.






[Names: Ayam]
Of all the lights of divinity and of all the acts of
divinities, the Lord Supreme is the prime efficient cause
of the acts of creation. Lord of bliss for the whole
universe in existence, He creates the heaven and earth.
With His divine omnipotence, He pervades and
transcends the spaces and, with His imperishable powers
of sustenance, stabilises the suns and the stars and the
worlds that move. Homage in prayer and celebration to
the Lord!






[Names: Yenabhi]
May they, the great heaven and earth, thus sung




and celebrated, bear and bring us abundant food and
energy and create a grand social order for us, and may
they infuse in us every day an admirable sense of honour
and valour so that we may build a great nation of
humanity across the globe.


Mandala 1/Sukta 161






[Names: Rbhus, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Rbhu, Kimu, Ssresthah, Yaducima]
What best, what youngest or latest comes to us,
or what message comes to us and from where, when do
we speak of such things? Agni, brother dear, the high
born who takes to the ladle of yajna or to the cloud, we
never malign. Who ever is fast and dynamic, we praise.
We speak of good fortune and of well-being only.






[Names: Ekam, Saudhanvana]
Create four ladles worth of yajnic materials out
of one put in. Let the nobles speak to you of this. Create
four clouds out of one, the scholars would speak to you.


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 161 695


And to that end I too would come to you. Men of the
mighty bow, if you would but do this, then with the
light of divinities and with the nobilities, you would be
the real men of yajna.






[Names: Agnim, Agni, Dhenuh]
Agni, scholar, scientist, technologist, if you were
to say about agni, the harbinger of fire and electric
power: the horse power has to be developed, the chariot
has to be designed and developed here and now, and
the language has to be found and developed, and youth
has to be developed and rejuvenated, and the horse and
the cow have to be groomed and developed, then dear
brother, we would follow you in action for both fire
and electric power.






[Names: Cakrvamsa, Yadavakhyaccamasancaturah]
O Rbhus, eminent scientists, technologists and
engineers of the top-most intellectual order of vision
and dynamic action, if that messenger of knowledge,
light and fire energy were to come to us, ask him where




the origin of that power is, and who the messenger is,
since when Tvashta, analyst and maker of fine things,
analysed one form of composite matter or compound
such as the cloud or a ladleful of sacrificial input of the
earth, water, heat and vayu, wind energy of electric
potential, then only was agni energy able to move things
over and into the moving spheres such as earth.






[Names: Hanamainan, Anya]
If Tvashta, master analyst and expert maker,
were to say: “Let us reject these,’ about those who mock
at the ladleful of yajnic input or the cloud, analysed,
synthesised and restructured, then let us reject the undue
criticism. And when the soma has been distilled, that is,
when the result has been obtained from the scientific
yajna, let us describe the achievement by other names,
and let the delighted beneficiary too call the new product
by other favourite names, the soma is worthy of the gods
to drink.





[Names: Indro, Rbhurvibhva]
MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 161 697


Let Indra, master of energy, power and sunlight,
use the knowledge of fire, electricity, radiation and
gravitation. Let the Ashvins, masters of the chariot,
prepare the car. Let Brhaspati, expert of the earth’s
variety of objects and scientific language, create the
formulae of analysis and structure. Let Rbhu, expert of
the science of universal energy, with Vibhu, brilliant
man of light and fire, and Vaja, expert of speed and
control, all noble powers of great action, reach the divine
sources of nature’s wealth and energy and enjoy their
share of the gifts of corporate programmes of yajnic
creation.






[Names: Niscarmano]
With dexterous use of your ideas, repair and
enrich the surface of the earth like nourishing the holy
cow emaciated to the skin, and rejuvenate those who
are breaking down under the weight of aging and
consumptive diseases. O warriors of the bow, create new
vehicles of wondrous velocity from materials of
magnetic energy and radiation. And then yoke your
motive power to the chariot and reach the wealth of








[Names: Idamudakam]
Master experts of pharmacy and distillation of
medicinal drinks, to the patients and admirers say: Taste
and drink this tonic, or drink this one which has been
purified and reinforced with munja grass, and if you
choose to drink neither, then take this one prepared in
the third distillation for purity and power and be happy.


MANU



[Names: Vadharyantim]
One of the experts says: waters are the best and
most efficacious. Another says: fire is the best and most
efficacious. Out of all, one speaks of earth as the most
powerful for life and against anti-life. Thus do you all
speak of the existent elements of truth and reality and
distinguish between one source of power and grandeur
and another for yourself and develop the same.






[Names: Srondmeka]
One takes water to the disabled cow, the other


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 161 699


dresses the wound suffered from accidental hurt, yet
another looks after the shed and removes the dirt the
whole day till sunset. What would the parents expect of
children to approve, more than this?






[Names: Udvatsvasma, Agohyasya]
All ye men and women, with all your desire and
good action on higher ground, grow fodder for cows
and other animals, and produce and store water in lower
places. Do not destroy anything in the open home of
even a carefree person and always follow wise and
intelligent persons of noble and expert performance.






[Names: Sammilya, Asapata, Prabravit]
Rbhus, experts of tempestuous action, join
together with concentrated action, go round the worlds
and know them, and take care where your progenitors
then abide. Accost and face whoever holds up your hand,
and thank and appreciate whoever approves your action
with praise.








[Names: Susupvamsa, Svanam]
Sleeping Rbhus, like potential scholars and rays
of the sun, ask that supreme lord of light such as sun
who it is who wakes them up into light and life. He, the
lord of light from whom nothing is hidden says: it is
vayu, waves of divine energy, which wakes them up
into life and light. The lord of light is the shelter home
of all. It is now a year (cycle) when you awaken us and
tell us of that to-day.


(It is life waking up to self-consciousness at the
dawn of creation after a ‘long year’ of sleep in Divinity
during the long night of annihilation.)






[Names: Diva, Maruto, Adbhiryati, Varunah, Varuna, Savaso]
Maruts, waves of universal energy of the winds,
go with the light of the sun. The fire energy goes with
the earth. Vata, the currents of wind go with the middle
region of the sky. Varuna, water energy, goes with the
vapours and the seas. You, indefatigable seekers of
knowledge, go with the Rbhus, imperishable children


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 162 701


of might and omnipotence.


Mandala 1/Sukta 162


Mitra, Ashva and others Devata, Dirghatama


[Names: Auchathya, Rshi]
(Ashva, the horse, here is a metaphor of the Nation)






[Names: Rbhuksa, Marutah, Maruta]
May Mitra, the friend, Varuna, lord supreme
worthy of universal choice and homage, Aryama, lord
of justice, Ayu, man of knowledge, Indra, lord of power
and honour, Rbhuksha, man of intelligence and wisdom,
and Maruts, dynamic men of creative action, never
ignore us since we too admire and celebrate powerful
acts of the mighty pioneer leader of war born of noble
qualities, 1.e., acts performed in our yajnic battle of life.






[Names: Yannirnija, Supranjo, Indrapusnoh, Indrapusno]
We are those who advance to the front the man
of honour and generosity, leader blest with wealth and
power earned by pure and sinless means, possessing
universal virtues, capable of versatile roles, going




forward leading and roaring, who achieves the cherished
gifts of the dignity and prosperity of Indra and Pushan,
lord of power and glory and the lord of light and plenty.






[Names: Abhipriyam]
This undaunted horse blest with all noble
quality, gift of nature’s generosity, is taken along with
the fast war horse by the driver in advance for the
training of the warrior’s favourite so that the expert
cavalry trainer may prepare the loved grooming for the
steed for his victory.






[Names: Yaddhavisyamrtuso, Atra]
When men take this horse out and around for
grooming thrice according to the seasons, then this
horse, prime gift of nature’s generosity, fit for the noblest
heroes to ride to the yajna of the battle of rectitude,
of advance in the battle for the noble warriors to hear,
here in the world.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 162 703




[Names: Hotadhvaryuravaya, Agnimindho, Tena]
The man of yajna, the high-priest of love and
non-violence, the faithful giver of oblations, the lighter
of the holy fire, the grinder of soma, the singer of the
hymns, and the noble scholar Brahmana, all ye yajakas
in unison, light up the fire, and with that yajna gracefully
completed with love, faith and expertise, fill the streams
of life and the land with waters and prosperity.






[Names: Yupavraska]
Those who cut the tree for the yajna flag post,
those who transport the post to the yajnic arena, he who
shapes the flag bearing part of the post, those who bear
and bring in the holy food for the consecrated horse,
symbol of the nation and its order of governance, and
among all these the master of ceremonies and the
coordination and cooperation of all these may, we wish
and pray, oblige us with success.







[Names: Anvenam]
Let the horse, symbol of the nation of humanity
and the order of governance, come forward for us. Let
it uphold the thoughts and values of the nation. Strong
of back and body, let it fulfil the hopes and dreams of
me and all the nobilities of humanity. In consequence,
the scholars and the visionaries would enjoy themselves
and celebrate its grandeur. Let us do our best in service
for this noble order of brotherhood for the development
and advancement of the noble people.






[Names: Ssirsanya]
The law that controls the onward movement of
this dynamic social order, symbolised by the foot-band
of the mighty and tempestuous horse, is the law of self-
restraint and Dharma. The reins and bridle which control
it over the head and shoulders symbolise thought,
wisdom and self-guidance. And the grass which is held
in the mouth symbolises the nourishment and health of
the nation. May all these be of holy nature and character
fit for the divinities among humanity, and let all these
be dedicated to the divinities that support life.







[Names: Yadasvasya, Yaddhastayoh]
MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 162 705


Whatever the fly eats of the sweat or ointment
of the horse of rhythmic motion, 1.e., the nation on the
march, or whatever smears the voice or sword of the
nation, and whatever soils the hands and nails of the
performers of national yajna, all these things should be
under control of the brilliant and generous leaders of
the nation for you, 1.e., the people and the nation.






[Names: Yaduvadhyam, Yaduvadhya, Sukrta]
Whatever the gaseous exudations or wastes from
consumption in the national economy, whatever
discharges from the bio-economic circulation of raw
materials towards the output of finished products, all
these wastes and by-products should be positively
recycled by the expert managers of the economy who
must also season whatever is ripe and ready for further
refinement and sophistication.





[Names: Agnina, Srisan]
O nation on the march on the highway of
progress, if from your personality-body subjected to the
fire of discipline and self sacrifice, a cry of pain escape




your lips or a tear flow down from the eye, let it not soil
the holy ground of the motherland, nor let it be lost in
the straw, but let it be a precious gift for the ambitious
creators and leaders of vision to turn it into a clarion
call or a beautiful pearl of divine grace.






Those who watch the nation’s food and
prosperity grow to ripeness and perfection, and those
who say: Ah yes! it is fragrant, harvest it, take it, export
it too! and those who contribute their share to the
nation’s prosperity and also wait for their share of the
food and fragrance of yajna, and in addition, their
coordination, cooperation and common voice of
exhortation may, we pray, be for the good and growth
of us all.




[Names: Yanniksanam, Usmanyapidhana]
Watchful stirring of the nation’s cauldron of


prosperity on fire and careful preservation and
enrichment of the earth’s fertility which gives fruits and


MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 162 707


other foods, all containers and reservoirs of juice and
waters for irrigation, methods of heat and steam control,
formations of clouds, known, controlled and created,
and beauty spots and tourist resorts, these are marks of
a nation’s march on top of beauty and culture.






[Names: Nikramanam, Yacca]
The horse’s forward march, the nation launching
on action on the highway, its halting and settling for
rest on the way, the U-turn and circulation in
progression, the fetter control of law and the centre-
hold of values for stability, what it drinks for pleasure
and excitement and what it eats for nourishment: all
these should be under control of the men of vision and
brilliance for you all.






[Names: Istam]
Let not the fire interfused with smoke and smell
enthusiasm for life. Nor let the aromatic pan on blazing
fire tip over and spill out the food. (Let the nation be




ripened in the cauldron of hard discipline and yajnic
action placed on the right degree of heat free of smoke
and blaze both). The dynamic nation which is loved,
happy and peaceful, active, and sanctified by yajna, is,
like a trained horse, loved, accepted and owned by the
most brilliant powers of the world.






[Names: Yadasvaya, Samdanamarvantam]
Those who provide the decorative cover for the
horse, i.e., the yajnic personality of the human nation
on the march, and provide the over-cover as the air cover
of fire for defence and onward march, and those who
create the golden beauties for it, and the control of law,
and the velocity of electric energy, and the brakes of
equal power: all these people, cherished powers and
beauties of the nation, raise the humans to the light of





[Names: Sruceva]
On your being exhausted by excessive urging
on, or by hurt with the spur or the whip, I relieve you of
the hurt and exhaustion and refresh you in the yajnas of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 162 709


love and non-violence by the fragrance of oblations
offered with the ladle and chant of hymns. (The nation,
after strain in a crisis, needs rest and repair.)






[Names: Catustrimsad, Acchidra, Vayuna, Sasta, Anughusya, Anughus]
The innate energy of fire, electric, magnetic and
of other forms, fastest form of energy co-existent with
the forms and powers of nature such as earth, moves in
waves in thirtyfour ways. Activate it part by part,
proclaim the nature and character of each and realise
the definite quality of its efficacy and application to
parts of the material body with safety.








[Names: Ekastvasturasvasya]
Of the dynamic energy of agni, two are the
carrier currents, of which one is the active, positive agent
that activates the connected objects. And I apply the
power to the material forms of objects according to the
needs of the seasons, and having done so I send it back
into agni, thereby completing the yajnic circuit.








Spirit and genius of the nation, while you are
on your path of progress to divinity, may your soul never
cause any sense of self-guilt, nor must your own power
and pride nor external force strain or terrorize your mind
and body. Nor must any greedy or malicious power or
person, unmindful of the hurt and cruelty, wound or






[Names: Hari]
Spirit of humanity, genius of the nation, soul of
the individual, this you are, and such as you are, you
shall not die, nor be hurt, nor hurt anyone, since you
move in the direction of divinity by paths which are
straight and sure. Two are the horses yoked to your
resounding chariot: love of the Lord that attracts you,
and Grace that holds you in stability. And the horse that
is yoked to the centre-pole is faster than light and instant
as the mind.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 163 711






[Names: Sugavyam, Anagastvam, Aditih, Aditi]
May this lightning power of agni, this nation,
this great order of governance give us rich wealth of
cows, fertility of land and generosity of spirit. May it
give us strong and powerful horses, speed of
transportation and the spirit to go ahead, manliness and
brave warriors, noble children and honest wealth for
universal nourishment. May the imperishable Mother
Nature inspire us to create holiness free from sinfulness
of thought, word and deed, and may omnipotent Agni,
lord of universal wealth, help us build a mighty social
order of governance.


Mandala 1/Sukta 163








[Names: Ashva, Agni, Devata, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Yadakrandah, Syenasya, Arvan, Agni]
born of Lord Omnipotent, rising from the oceans of
space, the sky and the sea, who roared with force at
your very birth, your wings are like the wings of the




celestial eagle that brings the showers of soma and the
warmth of fire, and your arms are like the arms of the
sun, the thunderbolt. Surely great is your birth from
nature, worthy of admiration and homage.






[Names: Yamena, Gandharvo]
This energy is the gift of the universal controller
Yama, a product of Vayu, the first elemental form of
energy born of akasha, ether, in the process of primal
evolution guided by the eternal law-giver, the creator.
Let Trita, master of the three modes of nature, sattva,
rajas and tamas, i.e., thought, energy and matter, plan
the use of it in various ways. Let Indra, the electrical
[Names: Gandharva]
of earth sciences, hold the control of it in gravitational,
magnetic and heat forms. And let the Vasus, graduate
researchers of life sciences, extract this energy from the
light of the sun.






Cosmic energy, Yama you are the mover, the
condition and control of all dynamics. You are the light
and the sun. You are the energy in use. You are Trita,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 163 713


vitality, strength and power by virtue of your unseen
and mysterious character. You are integrated with the
life and joy of existence and yet you are distinct and
exclusive. It is said that you are bonded with the regions
of light in three ways.






[Names: Trini, Ghurdivi, Uteva]
Three are your forms, they say, in the field of
light, they are causal, subtle and gross. Three are in the
sphere of the waters, and three are in the region of the
skies in the winds, the same three. Just as you have three
formal definitions so do I too, the causal body, the subtle
body and the gross body. Tell me, mysterious power,
where do they say your ultimate origin is. Mine too is






[Names: Atra]
O Vajin, tempestuous power-input of the yajna
of existence, these are the stages of your refinement,
contentive concentrations of the applicable values of
energy which are positive gifts of wealth and well-being
for humanity. I wish and pray I may see those positive
lines of natural and scientific developments of yours




which observe, preserve and advance the process of






[Names: Atmanam, Siro]
Agni, O flying horse, with pleasure of my heart
and soul and with the thrill of my knowledge, I see from
afar and know your body flying up towards heaven and
down like a bird. O flying bird of our creation, I see
your head striving and soaring higher and higher by
paths all straight and clear and wholly free from dust.






[Names: Jigisamanam, Yada, Anu]
Agni, O vital fire and creativity of life, I have
seen that higher form, spirit and character of yours which
is eager to conquer, consume and create the food and
energy on the floor of the earth since, when the mortal
humanity blest with food and enjoyment, and as a result
of your holy ambition, eats their fill, then, O consumer
and creator, you beget the herbs and juices for
rectification of the human faults and weaknesses.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 163 715




Agni, Arvan, energy and power of lightning
motion, the chariot, the car and the flying birds of human
creation depend on you and follow your laws. The
mortal humanity admires and follows you. The cows
and the maidens and their matrimony and joy depend
on you. The wealth and honour of admirers depends on
you. Devotees of sacred vows and yoga practices court
your love and friendship. And divine personalities of
nature and humanity both are keen to realise your energy,
virility and creativity.



[Names: Hiranyasrngo, Deva, Indra]
Golden headed and lustrous is this agni, energy
and power of nature, with the wheels of metals of desired
gravity for motion and speed. The noblest divinities love
to win and enjoy the cherished gifts of this agni. Indra,
constant, ancient and yet the latest lord of the speed of
mind is the exceptional master who first of all rides and
controls this dynamic energy of nature’s motive power.








[Names: Irmantasah, Hamsa]
Arvan, universal energy in motion, sleek and
sophisticated, vibrating with power, steadily
accelerating, celestial birds of flight, like rows of cranes
in formation, join, march and fly and rise over the
heavenly paths of skies and space. Agni, lord of light
and knowledge, Indra, lord of energy and power, such
are the horses of your creation, these are your birds of
power.






[Names: Tava, Sariram, Tava, Purutraranyesu]
O Arvan, tempestuous energy of the universe,
your body is ever eager and agitating to fly. Your mind
is restless, adventurous and vibrating as the waves of
winds. Your ambitions are high soaring, various,
pioneering and ever on the move. Inspiring the minds
of men, bright and blazing in the forests overtaken, your
thoughts, ambitions and operations spread around and
cover the worlds across the spaces.





[Names: Ajah]
MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 717


Agni, warlike courser, impetuous on the wing
goes forward. It goes by all, in advance of all, moving
the worlds on the march, inspiring, enlightening,
elevating the divinities, thinking, meditating, shining
by the light of its own intelligence. Unborn eternal is
the source and centre of its power by which it is ignited,
geared and steered on the way, and when it moves, poets
follow singing and celebrating the beauty of existence,
the glory of Divinity in action.






[Names: Adya, Ssaste]
The same horse, Agni, mighty carrier of the
universe, reaches the highest heaven and home of
existence, and there joins the ultimate original and eternal
mother, Prakrti, and father creator, the Lord Almighty.
O mighty harbinger of life and joy, loved and blest and
most admired, go and reach the divinities to-day upon
this instant and bring the cherished gifts of life for the
admirer and the generous giver performer of yajna.


Mandala 1/Sukta 164
Devata: Vishvedeva, Vak and Apah, Shaka-Dhuma and
Soma, Keshins, Vak and Surya, Samvatsara, Sarasvati,









[Names: Sadhyas, Surya, Parjanya, Agnis, Sarasvan, Agni, Parjan, Dirghatama, Auchathya, Rshi, Asya, Trtiyo]
Of this splendid and hoary yajaka, Sun, giver
of light and energy and receiver of the waters and
essences of the earth and the skies, the second, younger
and middling brother is vayu, wind and electricity
abiding in the middle region of the skies, the energy
being voracious and present everywhere. The third and
youngest brother is Agni, fire, which is sprinkled with
water and ghrta in yajna. It is the sustainer of living
beings and it is blest with seven children, i.e., seven
rays of light in the spectrum. I wish I could know this
ancient, brilliant and sustaining power and friend of life.






[Names: Sapta, Trinabhi]
Seven enjoin the one-wheel chariot, drawn by
one horse of seven names. The wheel, the wheel of time,
unaging and automotive, has three sub-wheels with three
naves and rims, and in the orbit of this time and space
abide all the worlds of the universe.






[Names: Imam]
MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 719


Seven are those who ride this chariot, seven
motive powers (horses or rays of light) which draw this
chariot of seven wheels, wheel within wheel. They are
seven sisters who exult, roar and thunder together in
reverence and worship of the father where in are hidden
in depth seven names of the rays of light, the seven
spheres and seven notes of language. (This is a highly
mystical, symbolic, and at the same time scientific
mantra. To understand the meaning and implication at
different levels of correspondence we need knowledge
of astronomy, cosmology, physics and astrophysics,
language and grammar, music and mechanics. And still
the meaning would remain open ended.)




[Names: Bhumya]
état.


Who saw the first material form of the universe
of flesh and bone being born, which the immaterial of
no flesh and bone bears? What and where was the breath
and blood and soul of the earth and cosmos? Who would
reach the visionary of knowledge to ask all this of the
first and last question about the mystery?








[Names: Pakah, Vatse]
Novice, ignorant but searching for knowledge
and passing through the crucibles of heat and light of
discipline, I ask with sincere mind and soul about these
seven divine stages of the evolution of nature and life
concealed in mystery, the seven-fold warp and woof of
which visionary poets have traced and described in detail
for the children of light to see and know and realise.






[Names: Acikitvan]
Not knowing what I would know here as a man
of knowledge should know, I ask of the men of
knowledge and poets of divine vision what that single
principle of power could be in the form and nature of
the one unborn and eternal Supreme which holds these
six higher and lower spheres and atmospheres of the






[Names: Sirsnah]
Dear friend, here may speak to me he who well


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 721


knows the power and presence of this glorious bird ever
on the wing and omnipresent, which is concealed in
mystery. The holy rays of it from above yield showers
of milk and water for life, and, covered in brilliant beauty
they drink up the waters as they come and touch the
earth with their feet.




of Mata pitaramrta a babhaja dhityagre manasa sam


The proud and amorous mother seeks the
company of father for the waters of life and joins him
with love and her innate power of motherhood. Then
she receives the rain showers of life and the children of
nature receive the food for the body and Word for the
mind with reverence and worship.






[Names: Yukta, Amimeda, Anu]
The mother, earth, is joined to the sun and held
in orbit in circumambulation of the sun on its own axis.
The productive power and the seed of life stays in the
clouds within its atmosphere along with it in its motion
in the three orbits, i.e., on its own axis, round the sun
and in the galaxy, and when it matures it roars and




showers, looking at mother earth of various colour and
form like a calf looking at the mother cow.






[Names: Tisro, Mantrayante]
The one Supreme lord of the universe who
abides over all sustains the three mothers, earth, sky
and the heavens of light, and He sustains the three
fathers, Agni, Vayu and Aditya, fire, wind and sun. These
three couples tire Him not, they smear Him not. On the
heights of the heaven of that lord Prajapati, they meditate
on this voice of omniscience and recreate and replenish
the life sustaining energy and the creative vitality and
fertility of motherhood.






[Names: Dvadasaram, Satani]
The twelve-spoked wheel of time in existence
that goes round and round the cosmic sun never ages.
O Agni, light of humanity, the seven hundred and
twenty-children of nature, i1.e., the three hundred and
sixty day-night pairs or seven hundred and twenty forms
of material composition remain till the end of


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 164 723






[Names: Pancapadam, Atheme]
Father time, they say, has five stages from the
initial moment onward and twelve divisions in the round
of the year of time extending over existence in the farther
half of the universe beyond the region of light. These
others speak of this other half visible this side above,
below the sun, which has six spokes of the seasons in
the yearly round and moves in seven rounds of wheels,
wheel within wheel of time.

(This concept of time space requires deep
research into the nature and passage of time including
the technique of measurement and calculation with
reference to the visible world and the world beyond on
the other side of the sun. Parardha, the other half, for
example, is equal to 50 years of Brahma, his one day
being equal to the age of the current world of existence.
It is a mind boggling concept in ordinary terms of
calculation.)









[Names: Pancare, Tasya, Siryate]
Five are the spokes in the wheel of time-cum-
prakrti, the temporal existence of physical world.


(These are the five elements of prakrti, akasha,
vayu, agni, apah and prthivi, and their internal changes).
This wheel of prakrti in time is ever on the move. In
that wheel of time and physical change abide all the
worlds of the universe. The axis of that carries the
immense weight of existence but it never gets heated.
With its centre-hold on this axis it has been going on
since eternity and it will go on till eternity, but it never
wears away. It is never destroyed. (The axis of the
physio-temporal wheel is the constant substratum,
original Prakrti, and the centre-hold is the Lord






[Names: Supreme, Sanemi, Suryasya, Suryas]
Existent with its centre and circumference, the
unaging wheel, the chariot, of the universe of physio-
temporal nature goes on and on, round and round. In
the expansive Prakrti, ten motive powers move it on
(those ten being the pranic energies). The light of the
sun suffused with rajas, energy of universal dynamics,
goes on with the worlds. Indeed, all the worlds of
existence abide in that light and energy.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 725




[Names: Sakanjanam, Tesamistani]
The seven simultaneously born of one-unborn,
they call a septet, that is, seven-in-one or one-in-seven.
Six of them are yamas, twin movers. They are rshis,
mixers, born of devas, light and energy. Their properties
and actions according to their place and character are
created and ordained, and they, each in its form and
character, move around for and in the unmoved mover.


(These seven are the seven lokas: Bhuh, Bhuvah,
Svah, Mahah, Janah, Tapah and Satyam. Sometimes the
lokas are associated with seven Rshis. Sometimes they
are described as seven senses and sometimes seven vital
energies. All these refer, in fact point, to a theory of
correspondences existing at the physical, mental and
spiritual levels, or at the levels of matter, energy, thought
and spirit. And this is a subject of high research and
deep meditation.)






[Names: Striyah, Kaviryah]
Female they are, intelligent and educated, and
though women, I am told rightly, they are male too. One
who has eyes can see this, but one who is blind, even
though he has eyes, doesn’t see this, doesn’t know. The
son who has the vision of a poet knows this well, and




one who knows this has an old head on young shoulders.
In other words, he has the vision and knowledge of the
father of fathers.






[Names: Avah]
Bearing and sustaining her child, as a cow bears
and sustains her calf, this earth by her own motion goes
down with reference to that farther side and goes up
with reference to this nearer side in relation to the sun,
and stays up stabilized in space in its own orbit. In what
direction and to which remote region of space does she
go? What does she impel and energise and how? Does
she receive consecration of the sun in the midst of a






[Names: Kaviyamanah]
Here who could be the man of poetic vision who
knows this lower side of the earth with reference to that
other higher side, and that higher side with reference to
this lower side, and who further knows the father sun,
lord sustainer of the earth, and who knows and who can
say where from this brilliant and divine mind is born?


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 727






[Names: Indrasca, Soma]
Whatever objects are near, they say, are far off,
and the objects far off, they say, are close at hand. (All
objects are on the move and whether they are far or
near is a matter of relativity. It is nothing absolute.) O
Soma, Vayu energy, whatever you and the lord
[Names: Indra]
of objects, ever such as stars and galaxies, carry on the
worlds of the universe as horses joined to the yoke and
the pole draw the chariot of existence.






[Names: Tayoranyah]
Two birds of beautiful wings, the individual
human soul and the Supreme Soul of the universe, both
friends and companions, together nest on the same one
tree of existence. Of the two, one, the individual human
soul, eats the fruit with relish and enjoys as well as
suffers the consequences. The other, the Supreme Soul,








[Names: Yatra]
Where the blessed souls of noble action sing
and celebrate their share of immortal joy in holy voice
incessantly, therein, may, I pray, the constant
imperishable sovereign Ruler, protector and sustainer
of the entire universe, inspire and bless me, the honest
soul in preparation for the consecration.






[Names: Yasmin, Tasyedahuh]
To that tree over and above the mortal world
whereon the super-souls of beautiful wings of blessed
action nestle in a state of consecration and taste the
nectar honey of divine joy, whose taste of the fruit the
ancients describe as super-sweet, to that tree of immortal
taste and bliss they do not attain who do not know the




MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 729


nasuh.


They attain to that immortal state of bliss who
know and experience the Spirit which is the lord
protector of the celebrants of Divinity immanent in the
gayatri verses in their recitations, who rejoice in the
divine presence above the trishbubh verses and actualise
that presence in life without break, who rise to the height
of Divinity and share the dynamic presence vibrating
in the universe and revealed in jagati verses, and
commune with that presence.


(In scientific terms, the earth is gayatri. The fire
of yajna is lit on the earth. Traishtubh is the sky. The
wind is vibrant and operative there. Dyu is jagati, most
dynamic. There aditya, the sun, reigns. Agni, fire is the
vitality of the earth, wind is the energy of the sky, and
the sun is the life of the heavens. Those who know these
regions, their life and vitality and realise their vitality
and the spirit of Divinity which informs them and their
vitality attain to the state of immortal bliss.)







[Names: Gayatrena, Vakena]
In gayatri metre the Rks are composed. With
Rks, the Samans are composed. With trishtubh metre




Vak, Yajus are composed. By Vak, Yajurveda, and further
Vak, Atharva Veda, is composed and formed. And with
two-pada and four-pada constituents of the eternal Word,
all the seven forms of Vedic compositions in metric
forms of verse, are composed.


(In scientific terms, gayatri is Parameshthi
Prana, universal energy at the highest level, from
universal energy, specific forms of energy are created.
One of these specific forms is Rk, rhythmic energy
operative in thought consciousness. When pranic energy
the reed or the larynx, sound is produced. When rhythm
is added to sound, music is produced. When elements
of sound are related to particular points of the speech
mechanism, then phonemes, elements of sound in
language forms, are produced. And when the elements
of sound are joined in correspondence with thought,
then language is produced. When feeling and emotion
is added to language and expressed, then song is created
and composed. Thus from Rks, thought energies of
consciousness composed in language, joined to
celebrative joy, Samans are created. When the music
and songs of joy are joined to practical situations in the
holy business of living, then Yajus are created as holy
formations of life’s values. And then from thought, song
and practical formulae in holy living the comprehensive
body of Atharva hymns is created. The classification of
Vedic knowledge is thus explained in terms of
[Names: Rgveda, Samveda, Yajurveda]
and comprehensive message, Atharva-veda, which is
also known as Brahma Veda. In this way, from the
elements of energy, sound, thought, feeling and emotion


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 731


in divine consciousness, specially love and joy, all
language and linguistic compositions both divine and
human, sacred and secular, are created.)






[Names: Jagata, Gayatrasya, Suryam]
The Lord establishes the ocean of energy in the
Dyu, the region of light, by cosmic dynamics of Jagati
hymns of omnipotence. In the Antariksha, He establishes
the sun, generative and radiating source of light and
energy. The blazing fire-woods of divine energy, they
say, are three: the sun in the highest sky, lightning, wind
and electricity in the atmosphere, and fire and magnetic
energy in the earth, and by His grand and adorable
omnipotence the Lord transcends all these. Of Gayatra,
the Samidhas are said to be three: light, lightning and
fire.






[Names: Srestham]
I invoke and call upon this generous mother cow,
Gayatri, Mother Nature, mother Sarasvati of knowledge,
directly at the closest. Only an intelligent and dexterous
person can distil the essence and power of her




generosity. May lord Savita, the creator, the sun, the
teacher, create the soma of milk, honey and the light of
knowledge for us and bless us. Lit up and blazing is the
fire in the yajna-vedi. The same I speak of and celebrate
in song.






[Names: Himkrnvati, Duhamasvibhyam]
Lowing and loving, this mother cow, sustainer
of the breath and supports of life, caressing her children
with her heart of tenderness, comes to bless us all round.
May she, never never to be killed or hurt, distil the milk
of life’s energy from the sun and wind and ever grow
for the great good fortune and prosperity of life on earth.






[Names: Gauramimedanu, Srkvanam]
The cow goes to the calf winking its eyes in
loving expectation, lowing with love, and licks its head
with caress. And lowing and loving more and more in
response to the yearning affection of the calf, she
overflows with milk. (The same is the response of
mother earth and mother Sarasvati to the children


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 164 733
yearning for love, nourishment and knowledge.)






[Names: Ayam, Sinke, Srita]
This is that cloud which roars and by which,
covered and surrounded in the vapours, the earth
reverberates in response. The earth, with her own
feelings of kindness and generosity sustains the mortal
children of hers, and her energy, being in the form of
lightning, reveals and realises her own form and
character.






[Names: Anacchaye, Jivo]
Living and breathing, moving at the speed of
infinity yet constant and omnipresent, the Spirit of the
Universe abides eternal, impelling the individual soul
to move among the variety of material forms. And thus,
the immortal spirit of mortal man moves around in love
and company with the mortal forms of material beauty
by virtue of its karma and self sacrifice.








[Names: Apasyam]
I pray I may see and realise that universal
protector of the world of nature and the mother powers
of life, who, ever infallible and immaculate, is immanent
and active over the nearest and the farthest paths of
existence, and, pervading the centripetal and centrifugal
waves of Prakrti, eternally rolls around in the worlds of
the universe.


Note: This mantra can be interpreted with
reference to the individual soul: I wish and pray I may
realise the essential nature of that presiding power over
the mind and senses which, though in association with
the mind and senses, never falls from its essence and
moves over the paths and forms of existence far and
near. The soul takes to the forms of Prakrti which, it
feels, go with it, as well as to those forms which are
various and disagreeable. And thus it goes round and
round in and across the worlds of the universe, integrated
with all living forms and yet essentially its own self.




32. Ya im cakara na so asya veda ya im dadarsa


That One that creates this universe, the other,
individual soul, knows not of. This other that sees this
world of existence goes off from the essence, and,
enveloped in the mothers womb, covered in the folds


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 735


of material form within, it is born and enters the world
of mortality for ages in birth after birth.






[Names: Dyaurme, Uttanayos]
The heaven above is my father and creator, my
centre-hold, my haven and home here, my brother
support to stand by. And this great earth, this universe,
this nature, is my mother. In the womb of these two
great generative powers, heaven and earth, the mother
of His own creation in here, the father of the universe
sows the seed of life.






[Names: Prcechami, Prcchami]
What is the ultimate end of the earth? I ask you.
Where is the centre and centre-hold of the universe? I
ask you. What is the life-seed of the mighty generative
force of infinitive power and speed? I ask you. What is
the ultimate sound source from where the first boom of
the Word arises? I ask.








[Names: Iyam]
This vedi, creativity and productivity of the
earth, is the ultimate end of the earth. This yajna, meeting
of solar vitality and earthly productivity, is the centre-
hold of life in the world. The vitality of the sun and the
shower of soma is the life seed of the generative energy
of the creator who is generous and infinite. And Brahma,
immanent consciousness of the Lord is the ultimate
home of the Word from where it incarnates in the world
as Veda.






[Names: Saptardhagarbha]
Seven evolutes of Prakrti, i.e., five subtle
elements, mind and senses (which evolve from
Ahankara), and the Mahat-tattva, represent half of the
divine process of creation (the other half being the
creative seed or thought-sankalpa of Parameshthi
Prajapati); they are half the womb of the universe the
other half is the divine will. By the will of Vishnu they
abide in Akasha, eternal space-and-time continuum with


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 737


their distinct properties and power and comprehend and
rule the entire worlds in existence.






[Names: Navijanami, Yada]
I just do not know what I am like for sure, or
what this world is. Self-imposed, self-bound, I move
around with limited mind and understanding. But when
the first evolutes of natural truth, 1.e., intelligence and
understanding of awareness come to me, and when the
revelations of this Divine Word of truth bless me, then
I realise my share of knowledge of the reality of
existence that it is.






[Names: Apan, Sasvanta]
The immortal soul coexistent with the mortal
body goes back and forth. Both, body and soul, are
eternal and imperishable, the body as Prakrti in the
essence and the soul as spirit. Both are different and
going apart. Those who know know one and the other,
some know one but not the other, and those who don’t










[Names: Yastanna]
The Rks, Vedas, exist in the omniscient supreme
Spirit of existence, infinite and imperishable as the
eternal and ultimate space-time continuum. In That, all
the divine powers of existence subsist. If one does not
know or acknowledge that, what would he or she
achieve with mere words of the Rks? Those who know
Him, reside with Him.






[Names: Suyavasad, Addhi]
Adorable lady of knowledge and wisdom, be
great and illustrious with holy food for mind and spirit,
and then, we pray, we too may have the honour and
prosperity of knowledge and well-being. Holy and
inviolable as the mother cow, living on pure food and
drinking pure water, and conducting yourself with
kindness and grace, bless us with the generous gift of
universal knowledge and joy of life.




MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 739




[Names: Gaurirmimaya, Astapadi]
The lady of light in spotless white of the Word
in the highest heaven of eternal Omniscience, ever keen
to reveal and grow, speaks loud and bold, stirring the
stillness of space in waves of consciousness in the
universal mind and in the pools of the seer’s minds,
and thus reveals the Word in forms and stages for
humanity: One Veda as the whole knowledge, two Vedas
for knowledge and action, three Vedas for knowledge,
action and prayer, four Vedas as one compendium of
discrete forms, eightfold knowledge of four Vedas and
four Upa-Vedas of practical knowledge such as health
science, military science, etc., and nine-stage
knowledge, the ninth being grammar, phonetics,
astronomy, etc. Indeed, this is knowledge contained in
countless thousand variations of the One Imperishable






[Names: Word, Tasyah, Tatah, Jivati]
The oceanic showers of that voice of eternal
omniscience rain in torrents. With these showers the
directions, all the four and their sub-directions, vibrate
with life. Then from there the actual words reveal
themselves to human vision and perception, and the
entire world of humanity lives by that revelation with
light, support and guidance.








[Names: Sakamayam, Uksanam]
I have seen from close quarters the clouds of
smoke and vapour laden with power. From this close
by, I perceive the powerful catalytic agents of nature
far off busy heating and creating the clouds of soma
replete with vitality. These processes are the first
operations of natural evolution and behaviour higher
up in space.






[Names: Trayah, Sactbhir]
Three powers of nature with their distinct
identities express themselves and operate according to
the cycle of the seasons in the year. One of these, fire, is
lit once in the year and generates and germinates the
seeds of life. Another the sun, with its action and
operations, illuminates the world. The third is wind, the
force of it can be perceived but not its shape and form.




MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 164 741




[Names: Guha]
Four are the constituent parts of speech which
the wise men of learning know. Three of them are hidden
in the cave of the mind, they are neither analysed, nor
defined, nor understood by ordinary speakers, only the
fourth part of speech, or parole, they use in


(The four constituents of the structure of speech
are: Nama or substantive, noun, Akhyata or roots of
verbs, Upasarga or affixes, and Nipata or irregular
accepted forms. These four are the subjects for
grammarians and linguists. For the ordinary person,
speech is the whole language, just what it is, and
accepted without the understanding of structure and
grammar. At a higher level, language is analysed in four
layers of existence and consciousness: Para or
transcendent language which is beyond thought and
understanding. It may be regarded as the language-
correspondence of the omniscience of God. The second
is Pashyanti, one step close to us from Para. This may
be understood to be the language existing in the
unconscious layers of the mind. The third is Madhyama,
another step closer to our consciousness. Let us say it
exists in our sub-conscious mind. And the fourth is
Vaikhari, existing at our conscious level of the mind.
This is the language in use. Further, this language is
[Names: Nama, Akhata]
Upasarga and Nipata. And of this language too the
ordinary speaker uses the accepted form without
knowing the structure and grammar. For the ordinary
speaker, the language in use is only behaviour purely at




the natural and social level. And in yet another way,
language may be understood in the way of the Veda:
Ila, the language of omniscience, Sarasvati, the language
of Veda and learning, Mahi, the spoken language at the
level of the earth, nation, region, family and the mother.
Another name for this speech is Bharati. And one thing
more at the end of this note: This analysis and study is
for the learned and for the seekers of learning. It has no
value for the ordinary speaker. He or she speaks what is
spoken for the only reason that he or she speaks thus,
and what is spoken is understood.)






[Names: Indram, Agnim, Varunam, Varuna, Mitram, Mitra, Ekam]
Reality is one, Truth is one, Ishvara is one and
only One, not more than one. The learned and the wise
speak of It in many ways. They say: It is Indra, glorious,
light of life, Divya, heavenly, Suparna, supreme
[Names: Garutman, They]
is Agni, life and leader of existence, Yama, supreme
controller, law and justice, and the judge, and
Matarishva, supreme energy of the universe.





[Names: Krsnam]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 164 743


The brilliant and beautiful rays of the sun
constantly touch the green earth held by the sun and,
covered by vapours of water, and rise back to the region
of the sun. They come down from the region of waters
and the earth is soaked with the water of rain showers.






[Names: Dvadasa, Tasmintsakam]
One full circle is the wheel going round. Twelve
are the segments of the felly of the wheel. Three are the
centres of the nave. Three hundred and sixty are the
spokes fixed and yet on the move with the wheel. Who






[Names: Rarely, Yaste, Sarasvati]
Sarasvati, divine mother of the wealth and
knowledge of the world, that abundant and inexhaustible
treasure of knowledge of yours which is blissful, with
which you fill and replenish the cherished resources of
the world, which holds the jewels of the earth and
reveals and provides the wealths of existence, and which
gives all the gifts and blessings of life: that treasure, O




mother, pray open for your darling child, the seeker of
nourishment for body, mind and soul.






[Names: Yajnena]
The divinities, first evolutes of nature with the
immanent will Divine, conducted the yajna of creation
by yajna, yajnic inputs of self-sacrifice. They were the
first sustainers, supporters of the divine laws, keepers
of the rules of Dharma and carriers of the yajna further.
They alone attain to grandeur and rise to the regions
where the divine souls of the ancients dwell, who carry
on the yajna and serve the Lord of Heaven.






[Names: Samanam, Bhumim]
Same is this water which goes up to the skies and
comes down to the earth by days and nights. The clouds
refresh and replenish the fertility of the earth, while the
fires of yajna, electrical energies of the winds and
sunrays serve the heavens with fragrance of the earth.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 145




[Names: Divyam, Abhipato]
For nourishment, protection and promotion of
life on earth, I invoke, adore and constantly offer
libations of homage and fragrant samits and havish to
the heavenly, bright and blazing angel of cosmic wings,
radiating centre of liquid energy and soothing ripener
of herbs and greens, ever exuberant flood of generosity,
which fills the thirsting earth with rain showers of
fertility from the clouds of space.


Mandala 1/Sukta 165
Indra and Maruts Devata, Agastya Maitravaruni Rshi






[Names: Kaya, Marutah, Maruta, Kaya, Susmam]
With what noble and equal action do the Maruts,
divine complementary energies, kindred powers of equal
age and home, join together, mix the yajna materials
for oblations and shower the earth with rain and
fragrance? With what thought and intelligence, and
coming from where do they, generous powers anxious
for the wealth of life, value and refine strength and
competence for the realisation of wealth?






[Names: Kasya, Syenan]
kena maha manasa riramama.


Whose wealth do they, ever young, love and
delight in? Who enjoins the Maruts to visit and join the
yajna of love and non-violence? The Maruts traverse
the spaces like eagles sweeping across the skies. With
what great mind shall we serve and please them?






[Names: Kutastvamindra]
Indra, lord of might and grandeur, protector of
truth and right, you are so great, unique, still you go all
alone by yourself, without attendant, assistant or
retinue? Wherefrom? Where to? This way? What does
it mean? We ask you, friend and comrade, lord of
sunbeams, whatever is in your mind for us, pray speak
in good words.






[Names: Brahmani, Susma]
May the wealth and power, the people and ideas
of the nation, and the noble achievements of peace and
joy be for our good. The strength, the cloud and the


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 747


thunderbolt deployed go forward for our good and
peace. The songs of praise arise and celebrate us. May
the horses of Indra, the energies of sunbeams and






[Names: Mahobhiretan]
Thus possessed of our most intimate powers and
the grandeur of our social order, raising the beauty and
grace of our body politic, we may use these powers and
energies of nature. Indra, lord of grace and power, be
favourable to us in consonance with our own essential
strength, power and virtue of character.






[Names: Aham, Satror]
O Maruts, tempestuous powers of knowledge,
speed and energy, where is that essential strength and
energy of yours which you placed in me to break the
clouds of rain showers by myself alone? Bright, blazing
and awful of power, I bow in homage to you with all
my fatal weapons of defence against the enemies of the
world and humanity. (The strength and energy is
everywhere in nature, in fire, water and electric and
magnetic force, and in the sunbeams. Let us exploit these


with knowledge and scientific technique.)






[Names: Bhuri, Bhurini, Savisthendra, Maruto]
Indra, lord of power and generosity, with
nature’s energy harnessed for acts of general, universal
and humane value, you have done us proud with many
useful, equal and valorous acts of nobility. Indra, lord
of highest valour and peace, and Maruts, heroes of
tempestuous speed and performance, let us too do a lot
of great things and achieve what we want with noble
yajnic acts of love and generosity.





[Names: Vadhim, Ahameta]
O Maruts, heroes of furious energy and power,
I break the clouds of darkness with my own might, being
powerful by my own passion for what is right, and,
holding the thunderbolt in hand, I do these acts of
universal wealth and beauty for the sake of humanity,
acts which clear the paths for future progress.






MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 749




[Names: Anuttama]
Lord of bounty, wealth and power, there is
nothing initiated, inspired and made to move except by
you. There is none like you who commands light,
knowledge and generosity in abundance. There is none
born or emerging into prominence who can attain to
your grandeur. Lord thriving and exalted, do whatever
things are to be done, for no one can rival you.






[Names: Ekasya]
I am one and independent, may my vigour and
splendour grow and spread all round since, bold and
daring, whatever I do and want to do, I do with all my
mind and soul. O Maruts, heroes of the winds and
tempests, I am bright and lustrous, I am Indra, master
of my own powers. I am knowledgeable, I know what I
[Names: Wherever]
rule and govern.









[Names: Amandanma, Indraya, Indra]
Friends, leaders, Maruts, may the hymns of Veda
and the song of praise which you have composed for
me and offered here give me joy. May the song with its
body of words and music be pleasing to me and my
body and mind and to Indra, generous friend of all and
performer of yajna.






[Names: Evedete, Samcaksya]
Thus may these friends, leaders and you, O
Maruts, golden glorious all, loving and kind toward me,
holding and commanding admirable foods, energies and
noble desires, wealth, honour and holy songs, holding
me in high esteem, happily disposed, overwhelm me
with honour and joy.






[Names: Manmani]
O Maruts, pioneers of knowledge and science,
who offers you tributes of praise and appreciation here
now? Friends, go forward to those friends who love
and honour you. Heroes of wonderful action, moving
on to the completion of your programmes of knowledge,


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 165 751


be aware of my projects of truth and natural laws and
waters of space to fight out want and suffering.






Just as honour and celebration moves on from
the honoured to the honourable in succession in the
advancement of knowledge, so let the intelligence and
expertise of the eminent scientist and technologist come
to benefit us. O Maruts, leaders and pioneers of
knowledge, turn in appreciation and recognition to the
scholar expert, since the celebrant offers these hymns
of praise, discovery and invention to you.






O Maruts, leaders, pioneers, heroes of speed and
power of progress, this song of celebration is for you. It
is the voice of the lyric of the honourable artist, scientist
and technologist. Come with desire and commitment to
advance the science and the scholar further. And let us
too achieve food and energy, strength and power, and




Mandala 1/Sukta 166






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Tannu, Aidheva, Maruta]
O Maruts, roaring heroes of the strength and
speed of the winds, for a full life of courage and
enthusiasm and the distinction of leadership and
overflowing generosity, we sing and celebrate your
ancient and original heroism. Blazing like fire,
advancing like warriors, do wondrous deeds of valour
worthy of admiration.






[Names: Nityam, Naksanti, Rudra]
They bear the honey sweets of life for all as
parents bring honey to their darling child. Heroes of
courage and valour but sportive as ripples of a stream,
they play their part in the battles of life. Ferocious and
terrible like jaws of retributive justice, yet dear as breath
of life, they come to the man of reverence and humility
with love and protection and, with all their innate
strength and power, they never hurt the man dedicated


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 166 753


to yajna and charity.






[Names: Yasma, Uksantyasmai, Maruto, Just]
and nourishment for the man who gives liberally in
charity alongwith offerings of fragrant materials into
the yajna fire, so do the Maruts, winds and other natural
energies, kind and beneficent, like favourable helpers
at the beck and call of a friend, overflow many regions
of earth and skies with milk and water for the sake of
the man of yajna.






[Names: Bhayante]
As you move on to reach the regions of your
choice with your power and force and while your
automotive and tempestuous rockets rush forth through
the skies and spaces, then all the worlds and their towers
shake with terror. Amazing is that mission of flight in
the programmed and guided projects of yours.








[Names: Yattvesayama, Visvo]
When the man-made meteors of rockets blazing
through sky and space roar through mountains of earth
and clouds of dust and vapour, making them reverberate,
and thus reach the top of heaven, then all the bio-world
on your way shakes in fear and celestial herbs like soma
shake off from the root like astronauts floating from
their seat in the control chamber.






[Names: Yuyam, Marutah, Yatra]
Maruts, powers young, dynamic and
passionately enthusiastic, bright blazing and well-
harnessed is your power of energy, held and controlled
like a tempered sword, cutting, lighting, digging and
driving. With this electric energy and your noble
intelligence, assure and augment our understanding and
development without damaging the country-life.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 166 755




[Names: Arcantyarkam]
Givers of settlement and sustenance, sure and
secure of their wealth and power of accomplishment,
victorious over their opponents, highly applauded in
the yajnic battles of life, honour and invite the brilliant
and the wise for a drink of inspiring soma. They know,
achieve and command the first, essential heroic powers
of the brave and virtuous.





[Names: Satabhujibhistamabhihruteraghat, Janam]
O Maruts, young leaders and heroes, bright,
powerful and generous, whoever you promote and
protect in city life with a hundred ways of comfort and
security, protect him from crime and damage, and in
matters of the promotion and advancement of his
children, save the man from sin and scandal.






[Names: Visvani, Amsesva]
O Maruts, heroic warriors like the winds, in your




chariots are collected materials for universal good of
the people, and on your shoulders and in the chariots
are blazing weapons in position competing, as if, in
effectiveness. In your paths are provided materials for
food and advancement, and the axles and wheels of the
chariots are well aligned and balanced for fast and






[Names: Bhurini, Amsesvetah, Sriyo]
In the arms of these heroes of the people there
is abundant power for general good. On their chest are
ornamented armours of strong and variegated design.
On their shoulders are bows and arrows of lightning
speed. On their thunderbolt is the sharpness of the
razor’s edge. And they wear the dignity and grace of
the wings of celestial birds.





[Names: Mahanto, Mandrah]
Great are the Maruts with their own innate
refulgent with brilliant stars which light the world,


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 166 757


joyous and loved of all, sweet of tongue, true of the
word of mouth, and they are sustainers of all in company
with Indra, universal energy and power.






[Names: Indrascana]
O Maruts, high-born and arisen you are, great
is your glory, abundant is your generosity, and deep and
inviolable is your discipline of vows as that of
imperishable Aditi. Whatever you grant and bestow on
the man of noble action, even Indra commanding the






[Names: Puru, Ssrustimavya]
O Maruts, immortal souls, that brotherhood of
yours, that joy and suffering of yours in the last age,
that high honour and reputation you earned and
preserved, the same honour and reputation, protect and
preserve with this intelligence and understanding of
yours for humanity and further extend and preserve with
your noble actions in company with men and leaders.








[Names: Yena]
O Maruts, heroes of instant action and
achievement, that abundance, expertise and heroism of
yours by virtue of which we achieve great things of
lasting significance, by which people expand in
knowledge and win victories in their battles of life, that
very cherished abundance, expertise and power of
action, I pray, I too may achieve by these yajnic






O Maruts, heroes of instant action, universal
knowledge and abundant generosity, this is the song of
celebration in honour of your action and achievement.
This is the spontaneous voice of the happy and honoured
poet artist. May it reach you for the manifestation of
your form and image in existence for our benefit so that
we may acquire food and energy for our body, mind
and spirit, clear our paths of advancement and achieve
abundance in life for a vibrant living.


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 167 759


Mandala 1/Sukta 167






[Names: Indra, Maruts, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Sahasram, Sahasram]
Lord of power and sustenance, Indra, thousands
are your protections and ways of protection for us. Lord
of sunbeams, thousand-fold are the foods and energies
of the most admirable order. Thousands are your gifts of
wealth for us to enjoy life. And thousands may be, we
pray, the forms of knowledge, valour and victory for us.






[Names: Adha]
May the Maruts, heroes of the winds, powers
of vision and wonder as they are, come well to us with
their modes of protection and senior-most scholars of
brilliance, and then may follow those of their most
efficient modes of transport which can cross the seas
and skies for the acquisition of wealth.








[Names: Mimyaksa, Guha]
Seeker of knowledge, go and mix with those
scholars and visionaries among whom exists that noble
and comprehensive language which is fit for scientific
yajnas of versatile purpose, which is fit for use in
councils of governance, which is peacefully held like
the dewy night by the sky, which is held like a golden
sword by the warrior, which is held like lightning by
the cloud, and which, like the youthful maiden of the
human lover, moves in covert allays in search of the
lover. (Such is living speech.)






[Names: Para, Maruto]
Distant but brilliant and powerful, moving at
moderate speed, the Maruts shower the earth and sky
with rain, but even when they are violent, roaring with
lightning, they are not repulsive, they are only impulsive,
not repelling the sky and the earth away but impelling
them with new life and energy, because the divines love
to mix and join in a spirit of commonalty for the sake of
friendship and love the growth and expansion of all in
power and potential.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 167 761




[Names: Josad]
If the earth, source of pranic vitality and loving
mother of mankind, were to serve the Maruts for the
sake of waters, then she, with flowing hair like the lights
of evening dawn, shining brilliant as child of the sun,
would ride the chariot of the Lord Ordainer and
sustainer, 1.e., the sun, and rise as if going to sky heights
of progress and abundance.




[Names: Asthapayanta, Arko]
When the worshipper, rich in yajnic offerings,
having distilled the soma, sings songs of praise zealously
in honour of you, then, O Maruts, youthful powers of
nature’s brilliance and force, you give him in marriage
a young maiden, smart and dynamic, dedicated to yajnas,
and a harbinger of happiness and bliss in life.






[Names: Marutam, Maruta, Saca]
That greatness and glory of the Maruts which is




worthy of celebration, I celebrate. It is real and true,
since he that is virile and proud of himself, Indra, in
unison with this firm earth, sustains the many happy
mothers and children of the world.






[Names: Panti]
Mitra and Varuna protect from sin and shame.
Surely Aryama, lord of justice, raises the despicable.
They shake off even the firm and fixed enemies of life.
O Maruts, the gift of your generosity ever grows and






[Names: Nahi, Savasa]
O Maruts, neither from near nor from afar do
they find the end of your power and force. Intrepidable
and rising with inviolable strength and courage, they,
i.e., the Maruts keep the enemies down and, vast as the
ocean, they stay and abide far higher than jealousy and
calumny of small minds.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 168 763




[Names: Vayamadyendrasya, Vayam, Anu, Rbhuksa]
We are the dearest children of Indra to-day. Let
us be able to say the same thing tomorrow in the battles
of life. And for the sake of this love and grace of Indra,
let us first maintain our own greatness of character and
performance day by day, and then, we pray, may Indra
be kind and favourable day by day among men. Lord of






O Maruts, this is your song of celebration, this

is the voice of the happy and honoured poet artist. May

it reach you for the manifestation of your image and


action for us. And may we, we pray, achieve food and
energy, advancement in action and the joy of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 168







[Names: Maruts, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Yajnayajna]
O Maruts, powers of enlightenment, generous
action and well-being of the world, in every act of yajna
one after another, let your will and performance be equal,
fast and victorious. In every act of thought, reflection
and planning, let your intelligence, understanding and
imagination, and even your calculation be divinely holy.
For the well-being of the earth and heaven, and for the
sake of great and inviolable protection of life and life’s
joy, with yajnic oblations and songs of praise and
thankfulness, we pray, turn your attention this way for
our good and well-being by straight and simple speed
of motion.






[Names: Vavraso, Sahasriyaso]
Come this way, Maruts! Powers ever on the
move for protection and progress of us all, self-creative,
self-strong, movers and shakers like a thousand waves
of the rolling seas, they are born to provide nourishment,
energy, light and happiness for others. Worthy of honour
and reverence they are like generous cows who provide
motherly milk for sustenance and growth, and like the
sacrificing bullocks who carry the burdens of humanity.
Admirable, worthy of thanks and praise with honest
word of the mouth they are.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 168 165




[Names: Somaso, Aisamamsesu]
Maruts, vibrant powers of enlightenment,
nourishment and protection, like soma, with off-shoots
spreading around, distilled and drunk to the last drop
of the essence assimilated into the heart, abide with us,
loved, honoured and admired as our own. I depend on
their shoulders for support as a housewife depends upon
the support of the head of family. And in their hands,
the Maruts hold action in one and wear the band of
victory on the other.






[Names: Arenavastuvijata]
Self-inspired, self-motivated and self-driven,
Maruts descend from the heights of heaven freely,
spontaneously and selflessly. Immortal are you, mighty
heroes, inspire and excite the will to live with your heart
and soul and use the will as a goal and an invitation to
life. Pure and unsullied, born of energy and impetuous
in motion, wielding weapons of light and lightning, O
Maruts, you stir and move even the fixed and immovable








[Names: Dhanvacyuta, Purupraisa]
O Maruts, wielders of arms blazing as light and
lightning, who or what in you shakes and shines in you
by itself like flames or waves of sound? Inspirers of
many, augmenters of food, energy and love of life, who
starts you on your mission of life like the cloud melting
in the sky or like a fast horse on its daily round?






[Names: Yaccyavayatha, Maruto]
O Maruts, what is the ultimate beyond this great
region of the skies, and what is the ultimate this side
wherein you move hither and shake the things
concentrated here like precarious objects of no value,
or fly down with the clouds to the shining seas?





[Names: Satirna, Marutah, Maruta, Bhadra]
Like your acquisition and distribution is your


generosity and benevolence, powerful, blissful, lustrous,
maturing and fruitful, abundant, auspicious, as the gift


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 168 767


of a philanthropist yajamana, expansive and victorious
like the breeze of life’s energy.


aed eu




[Names: Prati]
When the Maruts ride their chariots, the wheels
rumble with thunder of the clouds and oceans pant and
roll in awe, and when they shower torrents or rain on
the earth, flashes of lightning flaunt with pride and lights
of joy.






[Names: Asuta, Marutamanikam, Marutamanika]
Mother Nature creates the blazing force of the
tempestuous Maruts for the great battle of the elements
in the process of evolution, and they, moving and
working together with the waves of creative energy,
fashion forms earlier not in existence and watch the
achievements of their own powers all round in the midst
of the variety of creative materials.








This is the song of the Maruts in celebration of
their work and power in the world of nature and
humanity in evolution. This is the voice of the poet,
happy and honoured artist, maker of beautiful forms.
May this, with love and homage of the poet, reach the
Maruts for their manifestation in form and image, and
may we too achieve food and energy, vision and will to
move on clear and simple paths of progress, and may we
have the bliss of the breeze of freshness and light of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 169






[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Mahascit, Marutam, Maruta]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, destroyer
of suffering, you are great and glorious indeed, since
you accept and honour and protect these great saints
and scholars for the reason of their selflessness and
dynamic scholars and knowing what is dearest to you
and the Maruts, fastest leaders of society, pray give us
the peace and comfort of perfect well-being.




MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 169 769




[Names: Ayujranta]
Indra, lord of honour and glory, that dedicated
force of yours consisting of the Maruts, intelligent,
creative and war-like leaders among ordinary mortals,
smiling, happy and joyful, may, we pray, join and engage
entire humanity in the battle of creative production of
wealth and well-being for the lord creator of paradisal






[Names: Amyak, Agnisciddhi, Maruto]
May the fruits of that loving and generous
creativity of yours, by which the Maruts create perfect
joyous gifts of life from pre-existing causes, which gifts,
like the blazing fire in the wood and waters in the open-
ended flowing rivers and space, abide in nature, and
which gifts, then, the living beings enjoy as the dearest
gifts of life (by virtue of the creative dynamics of the







[Names: Maruts, Marut, Tvam]
Indra, glorious lord of wealth, give us that
wealth of life as a gift with the highest generosity of
heart and magnanimity of mind which is honoured by
the beneficiaries, that wealth and generosity of yours
and the Maruts’ which all people love, and which, like
the honey sweet milk of the mother’s breast, nourishes
the child with food, energy and intelligence.






Indra, in you and with you abide wealths and
virtues of the world which are most satisfying saviours
and redeemers, which help any lover of truth, piety and
yajna keen to cross the oceans of existence to liberation.
May the Maruts give us that peace and wealth. May the
ancient and eternal nobilities eager to rise to divinity
guide and bless us.







[Names: Prati, Adha]
Indra, lord of power, knowledge and action, go
forward to the great, virile and generous people, fast,
intelligent and vibrant as the winds, and try experiments
on the floor of this great earth. And then, just as the


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 169 771


powers and transports of the master stand ready at his
service, so would the mighty and spacious flying
machines like horses would stand ready for the heroes
of the skies.






I hear the echoes of the roar of awful and
impetuous Maruts reaching their target and returning—
Maruts which, with the creation and release of fresh
energy and modes of protection, exhort and accelerate
the speed of humanity on way to progress like an army
advancing to victory.






[Names: Stavanebhih]
Indra, lord of light and power, adored by
admirers of brilliance and generosity, for the sake of
honour and prestige and in honour of the venerables,
split and know the sun-light headed powers of nature
such as waters and herbs with the help of the Maruts,
catalytic, analytical and universally creative energy
waves of nature, and let us know and acquire wealth of
food, energy, onward progress and the breath and
freshness of life.




Mandala 1/Sukta 170






[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Nanunamasti, Anyasya]
Nothing that is present is permanent, nor what
shall be is constant. Who knows what, in truth, is
mysterious: serial yet constant, and constant yet elusive?
It is someone else’s mind and consciousness you should
be with, otherwise what you know or think you know,
that too would fade into the unknown.






[Names: Marutastava, Tebhih]
Indra, lord of earth and ocean, master of the
skies, why do you wish to forsake us? The Maruts are
your brethren, they are heroes of earth and ocean and
the skies. With them, plan and act with noble intentions.
Do not destroy us in the battle of life.






[Names: Vidma]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 170 773


Brother Agastya, pioneer of vision, insight and
foresight, you are our friend. Being a friend, why do
you disdain us? Don’t you want to give us the secret of






[Names: Aram, Tatramrtasya]
Indra, let the priests prepare and decorate the
vedi and light the holy fire as before. And there in the
vedi you and we all, teachers and disciples, would
conduct and expand your yajna of the immortal spirit,
knowledge and divine consciousness.






[Names: Tvamisise, Mitranam, Mitrana, Mitrapate, Mitrapat]
Indra, spirit of the universe, master of the
worlds, lord protector of the sustainers of life, highest
wielder of the wealth of the world, you rule, govern
and ordain the honour and grandeur of existence. Lord
protector of friends and friends of life, you rule, govern
and ordain all the powers and energies that protect,
preserve and promote the evolution and onward march
of life and humanity. Lord of knowledge and power,
speak to the Maruts, dynamic powers of nature and
humanity, accept our offers of oblations, consume them
in the yajna fire, and create the life-giving vapours of




energy and showers of rain according to the seasons.


Mandala 1/Sukta 171






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Prati, Raranata, Maruto]
O Maruts, dynamic powers of nature and
humanity, bearers of light, knowledge and power, with
this homage and song of celebration and reverence, I
come to you and pray for my share of noble thoughts
and intelligence from the excellent priests and
preceptors. O dynamic scholars of power and force, and
of the light of life, keep you anger and passion aside
and, exulting in the onward march of humanity, release
the powers of progress by the freedom and initiative
that comes with knowledge and conscious values of life
and love.


[Names: Upema]
O Maruts, vibrations of the divine in nature and
humanity, this song of celebration and reverence is risen


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 171 175


from the heart and crafted with love and beauty. O
visionaries of divinity, take it with the same equal love
with which it is offered. Take to the spirit of it with
your heart and mind, come close bearing your gifts of
life and energy, advance us onward, and stay with us,
because you are the veterans of eminence and progress
for the love of living with gifts of divinity.





[Names: Stutaso, Sambhavisthah, Urdhva]
O Maruts, veteran visionaries of life and
divinity, powers of knowledge for advancement,
admired and honoured as you are, pray give us peace
and well-being. Indra, lord of honour and glory, listen
to our prayer and worship, and bless us with peace and
prosperity. Maruts, heroes of tempestuous speed and
energy, let all our future days be distinguished by high
ambition, cherished goals and love of victory.





[Names: Asmadaham, Indrad, Yusmabhyam]
O Maruts, heroes of energy, power and speed,


shining with strength and power and, at the same time,
conscious and moved by the awe of this blazing lord




Indra and his law, I say, these holy materials of yajna
are dedicated to you, these weapons and armaments are
tempered and sharpened for you. We offer these right
here. Accept these, we pray, and make us happy and
comfortable with peace and well-being.






[Names: Yena, Savasa]
By the strength and courage by which the
veterans of knowledge and enlightenment instruct and
educate the ancient and constant citizens of the ancient
and constant republics in their ancestral habitations, by
the same strength and courage, O Indra, ruler of the
land, generous and valorous, bright and blazing, old
and venerable, giver of strength and constancy, give us
food, energy, power, and honour with the help of the
Maruts, mighty and formidable leaders and warriors of
the land.






[Names: Tvam, Supraketebhih]
Indra, lord of power, honour and glory, ruler of
the world, patient, constant and victorious, protect and
promote the men of strength, courage and endurance.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 172 777


With the help of the Maruts, lustrous guardians and
watchful protectors of the people, be free from anger
and disdain of impatience and despair. Wielder of power
and presiding power of the social order as you are, let
us have knowledge and enlightenment, strength and
courage of will and morals, and the light and vision of
the spirit of life and joy.


Mandala 1/Sukta 172






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Citro, Maruto]
O Maruts, lights of the dark, breakers of the
clouds, showers of soothing charities, may your progress
be fast and wonderful, may your protections and
promotions of society be wondrous, full of blessings.




2. Are sa vah sudanavo maruta rnjati Saruh.
Are asma yamasyatha.


O Maruts, courageous brothers of charity, givers
of bliss and protection like winds and lightning, may
that missile of yours, which you throw like thunderbolt
upon the destroyers, and the deadly double edged sword
you wield against the powers of darkness, be far away
from us for our protection against evil.








[Names: Trnaskandasya, Urdhvan]
Maruts, generous powers of charity and valour,
spare the and protect men of straw, take to the rural
settlements and raise us all to the heights of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 173






[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Gayat, Gavo]
Let the holy man sing spontaneous songs of
joyous Sama like the song of the bird soaring to the
clouds, and we shall join that resounding melody of
music overflowing with divine ecstasy, when the rays
of the dawn, generous like venerable holy cows, sacred
and inviolable, fill the vault of the sky and celebrate
the heavenly sun rising in splendour over the world and
the generous cows stir around the stalls and sit on the
holy grass around the yajnic area doing homage to Indra.






[Names: Arcad]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 173 7719


Let the brilliant man of yajna, virile and
generous, trying to reach his aim like a bounding deer
at the fastest speed, with virile and generous yajakas,
offer rich, fragrant yajnic offerings, to Indra. Let the
mortal man, happy at heart with his life partner dedicated
to yajna and social service, offer hymns of praise and
fragrant oblations to Indra, lord of life, honour and glory.






[Names: Naksaddhota, Krandadasvo]
Let the yajakas, Indra, fire and power, divine
energy, receiver and giver, receive the oblations and rise
by the vedi constructed in definite design and measure,
bearing the essences of the earth’s produce the year
round according to the seasons, and in return replenish
the earth with fertility. Let the power arise and go over
a bull, and moving on the rounds like a messenger
between heaven and earth, echoing the voice of divinity
raised from the seats of yajna.






[Names: Jujosadindro]
Those yajnic acts, cherished offerings, and
mantras vibrating with energy, which the yajakas eager




to please and empower the divinities of nature and
humanity offer into the fire for Indra, may Indra, blazing
catalytic power of Divinity, happily accessible, riding
the chariot of sun-beams, along vibrations of the winds
and waves of energy, receive with love and desire and,
like the Ashvins, sun and moon, recreate, augment and
return as blessings of Divinity for humanity.






[Names: Tamu, Praticascid]
Praise be to Indra, celebrate Him in gratefulness.
He alone is wholly pure and true. He is mighty and
omnipotent. His is the power and the glory. He rides
the chariot of the universe as the sole master. Right in
front, He is in and with everyone and everything, the
great fighter, shower of life and joy, and He is the Light,
dispeller of the darkness that hides the truth.


aris




Indra who, thus with His omnipotence, is all in
all self-sufficient for the sustenance of humanity, who
keeps the heaven and earth and the middle regions in
orbit but not for Himself, Indra who weaves the web


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 173 781


and wields the entire worlds of existence together, each
as on its own path, and then the mighty lord of His own
power and Prakrti holds the high heavens up above as
the pillar in the centre.






[Names: Samatsu, Sura, Sajosasa, Indram, Anumadanti]
To decorate and honour you as a mighty hero,
as a pioneer and leader in the battles of life, as the highest
of the best, O sagely wise Indra, lord omnipotent and
omniscient, the people of the world, friends, lovers,
admirers and worshippers in excitement and ecstasy
celebrate you and the worlds, and celebrate with you,
with all their might and main and the homage of love
and faith.




om Eva hi te Sam savana samudra apo yat ta asu

[Names: Visva, Anu]
O Indra, lord ruler of the world, all celebrations
in your honour and all your celebrations of life and
existence, thus, are for peace and well-being. Thus all
waters in the oceans and all celestial waters in space
and in these earths of the universe which celebrate you
and rejoice in you are for peace and well-being. And




when you inspire sagely people with conscious favours
and divine intelligence, then all voices of the world in
unison with you celebrate you and the joy of existence.






[Names: Asama, Asad]
Lord of knowledge, divine action and human
progress, guide us the way we may be blest with good
friends and allies, with noble aims and intentions as
with good wishes and approbations of the people
around, and the way that Indra, happy with our praise
and worship, be with us always, taking us forward in
action like a carrier rocket in the holy field of science
and technology.






[Names: Vispardhaso, Mitrayuvo, Siksanti]
As with the praise and prayers of people trying
to excel and rise in life, so with our praise and prayers
may Indra, lord of armaments and the thunderbolt, be
with us as a friend and guide. Like men with desire for
friends, and like people of experience at the middle of
age who serve Indra, lord of the city, with yajnas and sit
with him for the sake of auspicious learning, we too


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 173 783


serve the lord with yajnic offerings, meditate and pray
for learning in the field of science and administration.






[Names: Yajno, Tirthe]
Some yajna is good for success and glorifies
Indra, social order of governance and the ruler. A
tortuous path, though apparently yajnic and good, repels
the seeker mentally and emotionally. A good home close
by in a place of pilgrimage is good for the thirsty
traveller, but a long and tortuous path is no use, it does






[Names: Indratra, Mahascid, Maruto]
Indra, lord of power and prosperity, you are with
the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, never
with the ungenerous. Pray, do not forsake us in the
battles of life. Lord of light and grandeur, this praise
and prayer is for you surely, this voice of unifying love
and faith which celebrates the great, generous, creative,
philanthropic and dynamic powers of the divine and
human world is for you.








Indra, lord of power and glory, thus our song of
celebration and prayer is for you. Lord of lightning speed
and force, by this song know, recognise and accept us
and our ways of life and conduct. Lord of light, kind
and generous, come and bless us constantly for our good
and well-being so that we may be blest with food and
energy, the right way of living and the inspiring spirit
of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 174






[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Tvam, Tvam]
Indra, lord of light, you are the ruler, lord of life
and giver of energy. You and those powers and
personalities that are generous and brilliant in nature
and humanity protect us and the people. You are the
protector of truth. You are the lord of wealth and glory
of the world. You are our saviour, you are the truth of
existence. You are the shelter and support of all that is.
You are the strength and the giver of strength and


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 174 785






[Names: Dano, Sarma, Rnorapo, Purukutsaya, Purukutsa]
You subdue and bring under rule the people who
are violent in social discourse. You open the seven cities
and the homes therein locked in winter snow. Lord
adorable free from scandal, you break the cloud for rain
showers and let the river waters flow for the sunny world
of young humanity.






[Names: Puru, Rakso, Agnimasusam, Agnimasusa]
Immortal Indra, destroyer of suffering, elected
and invoked by all, surely you drive high up to the lights
of heaven with the Maruts, tempestuous powers of
nature and humanity. With the same powers, like a lion,
pray protect the brave women of the land. Preserve the
inextinguishable fire that moves high speed vehicles to
their destination. Keep the morning fires burning and
let the waters of the home flow on and on.








[Names: Sesan, Srjadarnamsyava]
Indra, lord of war for humanity, for your honour
and glory, let the enemies fall and go to sleep on the
battle-field by the awful roar of your thunderbolt, while
you ride the chariot and release the floods of attack with
the force of action, destroy the resistance of opposition
and then hold the lands in peace and security.






[Names: Vaha, Kutsamindra]
Indra, lord of world power, wielder of the force
of thunder, keen for the reins and thirsting for the heart’s
desire, take up the thunderbolt, ride the horses of the
winds shooting straight to the target, and go to the battle
you love to fight. So should the ruler, strong of arm and
will, blazing as the sun, meet the contending enemies
in battle and expand the wheel of the social order.






[Names: Jaghanvan, Surta]
Indra, lord of love and justice, inspired and self-
exalted, master of horses of the wind, is destroyer of
the betrayers of friends and selfish exploiters. Lord of
honour and glory, those who see you as lord of justice
and generosity and as friend of humanity are blest with
progeny and family and they are strengthened and


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 174 787
confirmed as brave and heroic by you.






[Names: Rapat, Karat, Sret]
In the distribution of food and land, let the man
of knowledge and insight speak fully and freely, and
then Indra, lord of land, should allot fertile land to the
servant class. The lord of wealth and power should fix
creative and productive duties and occupations for the
other three, and him who is evil of tongue, he should
take on in battle of arms or words in the open field.






[Names: Sana, Bhinat]
Indra, lord of power and glory, ruler of the
world, let the latest poets and citizens know and sing of
your famous acts of valour, justice and generosity with
universal courage. You have suppressed the old
established strongholds of violence for the elimination
of war and establishment of peace. You have broken
the dens of sin and crime like the citadels of ancient
demons, and you have destroyed the deadly weapons
of the terrorist enemies of humanity.








[Names: Sura, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu]
Indra, lord of life and energy, you are a mover
and shaker like the inspiration of soma and the speed of
winds, shaking people out of lethargy and complacency.
You set the waters aflow, shaking and overflowing the
banks. Reach the people like roaring streams or like
life-blood circulating through the veins of wealth and
work. And, O lord of might and knowledge, if you swell
the sea to the shores like the sun, then help the man of
endeavour and the man of self-controlled speed and
acceleration to cross the sea from shore to shore.






Indra, lord of power and force, honour and glory,
justice and generosity, be every way the most giving,
most protecting and least wolfish greedy ruler of us all.
And as such, be the giver of strength, courage and
constancy in all our endeavour for the good life and
joint competitive and cooperative living so that we are
blest with food, energy and prosperity, the right path of
living and the right spirit of life.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 175 789


Mandala 1/Sukta 175






[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Matsyapayi, Vrsa]
Indra, lord of energy and paradisal bliss, rejoice.
You have drunk of the great and exhilarating soma, the
divinity and ecstasy of life fresh from the very flask of
existence. Vibrant lord of the knights of horse, that joy
of the drink of life is exciting, the very thrill of being.
Lord virile and generous, you are the shower of bliss
and that soma is soothing like the moon, tempestuous
as waves of energy, yes, and a thousand-fold invitation
to live, the call of life, for you. (The call of life is the
call of existence for the human soul too to be born into
this wonderful world of beauty, joy and peace.)





[Names: Sahavan]
O for a draught of soma, that exciting, ener-
and immortal nectar of yours, Indra, which leads us on
to victory over all the antilife forces of the world! May
it come to us in plenty!








[Names: Tvam]
Indra, ruler and protector of the world, great you
are, valiant and generous, dispenser, disposer, giver and
unifier. Inspire and accelerate the chariot of humanity.
Heroic and courageous lord of challenges, burn the
lawless brute with your light and lustre of justice as the
blaze of fire burns an empty vessel on the hearth
(because there is nothing in it except its empty self).






[Names: Musaya, Suryam, Surya, Vaha, Kutsam, Kutsa]
Having taken over the wheel of earth’s
government with your lustre like the blazing sun, O Lord
of light, vision and wisdom, wield the thunderous
sceptre of power and justice with honour and hold the
system of law and punishment under your control,
moving on by horses flying on the wings of winds.






[Names: Susmintamo, Vrtraghna]
Highly strengthening and most reassuring is
your joy. Holiest and most blissful giver of wealth and
prosperity is your action and conduct of government
and administration. O destroyer of suffering and
darkness, lord of speediest movement and communi-
cation, giver of peace, freedom and security, think,


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 176 791


reflect and know the mind and working of others with
sympathy and self-confidence.






[Names: Yatha, Tamuna]
Indra, lord of honour, power and glory, be like
water to the thirsty. Be like peace and joy incarnate to
the admirers of eternal knowledge and worshippers of
the divine virtues of yours. In the tradition of ancient
knowledge, I honour and celebrate you with this song
of adoration by which, I hope and pray, we shall realise
the objects of our heart’s desire, the right path of living
and the spiritual light of being.


Mandala 1/Sukta 176






[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Matsi, Indramindo, Rghayamana, Satrumanti]
Indra, lord of justice and peace blissful as the
moon, rejoice and rise to honour and glory for our
advancement to higher and higher wealth and power.
Progressive lord, you advance upon the enemy and
overpower him and prevent him even from approaching
us.








[Names: Tasminna, Anu]
Send up your voices of praise and prayer with
reverence and homage to him who is powerful,
generous, and unique among men, in whom words bear
fruit as barley sowed in the field bears fruit, and who
mows down the enemies as corn is harvested from the





[Names: Yasya, Spasayasva]
Indra, lord of power and honour, in your hands
is the wealth of the entire world, wealth of all the five
classes of people, four of the regular classes, Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and the ancillary class and one
class of miscellaneous people and professions anywhere.
Lord of the world, whosoever is jealous of us and evil-
disposed toward us, take hold of him and, like the
flashing and blazing lightning, strike him down.






[Names: Asunvantam, Asmabhyamasya]
One who is uncreative, unproductive and selfish,
who is not a source and instrument of peace, comfort


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 176 793


and joy for you and the society, and one who, being
such, is difficult to change or eliminate, wipe out wholly
and finally. Assign him to us, we shall find him and
deal with him. Only the wise and generous carry the
burdens of society and the world.






[Names: Ajavindrasyendo]
Indra, lord of power, protection and progress,
protect and promote the man who accords with all the
praises and appreciations of the nation’s achievement
and creates and grows in geometric progression. Lord
of brilliance and bliss like the moon, in the plans and
projects of Indra, honour and glory, progress and
development, and in the battles for justice and freedom,
protect and promote the man of courage, dynamism
and dedication.






[Names: Yatha, Tamanu]
Indra, ruler of the world, be like water to the
thirsty, a source of inspiration, incentive and comfort
to the wise dedicated to the ancient and eternal
knowledge and to the glory of the nation of humanity
and divinity. In keeping with that tradition of knowledge




and the glory of humanity and divinity, I offer my songs
and prayers to you so that we may be blest with food
and energy for body and mind, the right path of living
and the light of life and spirit divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 177





[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Stutah, Indrah, Indra, Puruhuta]
First and foremost power among the people,
virile and valorous, brilliant ruler of the living world,
invoked, invited, honoured and worshipped by all, such
is Indra, lord of honour, power and glory. O generous,
strong and leading light of life, invoked, invited and
celebrated as you are by us with song, reverence and
worship, yoke the horses and come right here for the
sake of our protection and your own self-fulfilment and
covenant of Divinity.








Indra, lord of light, energy and the honour of


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 177 795


action and success, universal ruler and dispenser, come
in response to our invocation. Ride what are your potent
and excellent chariots responsive to the mantric word
of command and control at the remotest distance, come
with and come by the powers that move faster than even
light and come here where we pray. The time is ripe,
the soma is distilled and ready for celebration of the
success and divine visit.






[Names: Somah, Soma, Yuktva]
Indra, potent lord of fertility and universal
generosity, ride your celestial chariot and come. Distilled
is soma, seasoned and sprinkled with the sweetest honey
around the vedi, ready for the celebration. O potent and
generous lord of the people, yoke the two most energetic
powers of motion to the chariot and come right here to
us by the shortest route at the fastest speed.




[Names: Ayam, Stirnam, Sakra]
Indra, generous and powerful lord ruler of the
world, this is the yajna that leads to divine heights of




existential success. This is the yajna that grows by holy
inputs of fragrant materials. These are the materials and
mantric formulas of libation. And this is the soma of
the celebration of success. The vedi is covered round
with holy grass for seats. Lord of potency and generosity,
come, release the horses, sit and drink of the soma of
celebration and success.






[Names: Vidyama]
Indra, lord of light and life, ruler of the world,
thus happily invoked and celebrated, come here and
appreciate the mantric secret and revelations of the artist
and value the holy materials produced by him so that
we too, singing songs of thanks and celebration, may
progress with due protection day by day and be blest
with food and energy, the right path of living and the
breath and spirit of life and light divine.


Mandala 1/Sukta 178




[Names: Indra, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Yaddha, Srustirasti, Indra, Jaritrbhya]
MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 178 797


Indra, lord of power and protection, all that
reputable knowledge and wealth of yours by which you
become the protector and promoter of the celebrants
may not, we pray, scorch and burn our exalting ambition
in life. May we, instead, achieve all your blessings of
life and energy for our existence and progress.






[Names: Apascidasmai, Indrah]
May Indra, lord of life, action and success, we
pray, suppress us not any way, nor negate what our
sisters achieve in the home or in the yajna on the vedi.
Instead, let the lord of the world, we pray, make the
waters of life flow free for us, and let our achievements
rise high for his sake. May Indra, we pray, bless us with
health and the good life and grant us the favour of divine






[Names: Jeta, Prabharta]
Great is Indra, mighty brave, victor in battles of
life for progress, listener to the artists and scientists,
demands and requests for grants and success, mover of
the generous giver’s chariot loaded with gifts and




replenishments, and high fructifier of the devotee’s
prayers provided that everything is prayed for and
pursued with sincerity of mind and soul.






[Names: Samsah]
Thus Indra is great with human resources, lord
of wealth, honour and high reputation, great consumer
of materials and thereby producer of high energy, and
he is always surrounded and assisted by friends and
associates. In debates and discussions of variety he
values food and energy as the basic wealth. He is a great
organiser of sessions of yajnic conferences and
appreciates and applauds the host of such sessions and






[Names: Tvaya, Satriu, Tvam]
Indra, lord of honour, wealth and power, with
you let us face and overcome our enemies, great and
highly proud though they believe they are. You are our
saviour and promoter. You alone, we pray, be here and
everywhere for our growth and advancement. And with
you alone, we pray, may we achieve food and energy,


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 179 799


the right path of living and the breath and spirit of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 179
[Names: Dampati, Devata, Lopamudra, Agastya]
Maitravaruni (3-4), and Agastya disciple Brahmachari






[Names: Rshis, Purviraham, Minati, Sriyam]
Working for the last many many years from
dawn through the day until the dark late at night, tired
and worn out, growing old and older, now old age
destroys the health and beauty of the body of women.
Therefore the young and virile husband should meet
the wife only earlier when she is young and charming.






Those ancients who were masters and devout
followers of truth spoke of the laws and truth of nature
with men of divinity. They did procreate, but they too
did not find the end of the mystery. Let the women go
and meet their youthful and virile husbands.








[Names: Jaydvedatra]
The vexations of the household are not vain
since nature and the divines protect and bless it. Let us
together face the problems and win the battles of the
world. We shall win the hundredfold battles if we, the
wedded couple, were to beget progeny and fulfil our
duties of the household.






[Names: Nadasya]
Passion and desire arises in me like the waters
of a river held up but rising in flood from here, there,
anywhere, who knows? Hiding but not suppressing the
passion, the amorous wife betakes to the husband
breathing deep and calm and smothers him in embrace.






[Names: Imam, Somamantito]
I have closely spoken of this soma of ecstatic
passion from the inner reality of it, drunk and felt as it
is in the depths of the heart. If I have committed a sin,
please forbear and forgive. Man after all is subject to


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 180 801


various passion, and desire (for self-fulfilment), mortal
as he is.






[Names: Agastyah, Ubhau]
Agastya, the sagely man of vision, brilliance and
resolution never goes astray. Digging into the mysteries
of life with the instruments of intelligence and insight
he longs for strength and children and a controlled
family and community. He marries by choice and looks
after and promotes the duad, both sexes in the
community, and thus attains complete self-fulfilment
among noble people dedicated to truth and Divinity.


Mandala 1/Sukta 180






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Yuvo, Hiranyayad, Usasah, Usasa]
Men and women all, wedded couples, Ashwins,
when your well controlled and guided horses soar into
the skies and the chariot shoots over oceans of earth
and space, your golden wheels cut through the air and
drip with vapour, then both of you enjoy the honey drink


of the lights of dawn.






[Names: Yuvamatyasava, Svasa]
Ashvins, men and women, universally
admirable, enjoying the honey sweets of life and nature,
when you take on to your horse flying over oceans of
earth and space, so useful for humanity, then the sister
community applauds you and the world adores you for
energy, victory and success at the fastest speed.






[Names: Yuvam, Antaryad, Suciryajate]
and law of nature, you create the milk in the cow’s
udders, you create the milk potential in the maturing
cow. The sylvan sage, pure at heart, bearing fragrant
and longs for your company.






MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 180 803


Ashvins, leaders of men and women, you
brighten up the day and create the flow of water
invigorating as the breath of life, all sweet as honey for
the man who longs for freedom from three-fold suffering
of body, mind and soul. And thus the fruits of animal
husbandry and sericulture, animal wealth and honey
sweets of nature move on to you as freely as the wheels
of your chariot.






[Names: Apah]
Ashvins, adorable friends of all, like an old and
worn out person, like a strong man among the strong,
by virtue of the gifts of mother earth I come to you for
the gift of strength and sustenance. By virtue of your
greatness and generosity the earth has the rain showers.
Friends and benefactors, let me be free from sin and
suffering even when I am old and tired and be with you
for long.






[Names: Presad]
Ashvins, generous givers, when you join the
materials which ought to be compounded, you create
new knowledge with inputs into the fire. Let the bold




scholar dedicated to the laws of nature and his own vows
be happy. Let him go round like the winds, and I would
receive the gift of knowledge, energy and speed for
advancement and greatness.






[Names: Vayam, Adha]
and generous, we are your admirers, in fact worshippers.
who does good to all. And just as you protect and honour
a scholar among scholars and worship God among
divines, so may we too serve you and the divinities of
nature and humanity.






[Names: Agastyo]
O Ashvins, men and women brilliant as sun and
moon, Agastya, excellent man on the path of virtue,
highest of the best among people and leaders, every day
celebrates you exclusively, in matters of the attainment
of dynamic pranic energies of life in a hundred ways in
resounding words of universal significance.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 181 805






[Names: Dhattam]
Ashvins, dynamic powers of light, honour and
prosperity, ever true and vibrating with energy, who
advance by the might and majesty of your chariot and
bear and bring, we pray, noble wealth and power of horse
for the brave so that we too may be happy and


[Names: Aristanemim]
For the sake of peace and well-being and the
beauty of life, O Ashvins, powers of progress and
majesty, today we invoke and call for that latest chariot
of yours which takes us far above the pain and suffering
of the world and reaches the heights of heavenly light,
and we pray we may attain food and energy, the right
path of living and the light and peace of the soul.


Mandala 1/Sukta 181







[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Kadu, Ayam, Yadunninitho]
Dearest Ashvins, source and wielders of the
treasures of wealth, saviours and protectors of humanity,
ever keen to organise and conduct the yajnic
development of water, energy and wealth, when you
advance to the non-violent projects of development, you
take the results to the heights of success. This yajna
does honour to you both.





[Names: Manojuvo]
Ashvins, powers of might and majesty, may your
horses, pure unsullied, living on drink of milk and water,
moving as winds, brilliant and divine, fast as the speed
of mind, strong and virile, carriers like the back of the
earth, brilliant with their own lustre bear you here.
SIU Bu


[Names: Vrsnah]
Ashvins, benevolent powers of high standing,
may your chariot firmly rushing on like the earth,


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 181 807


strongly structured and beautifully adorned, faster than
mind, fully programmed and self-directed, cooperative
and inviolably un-interceptible reach us for our good.






[Names: Theha, Jisnur]
Ashvins, pure geniuses unsullied by sin and evil,
risen to universal recognition here, there, everywhere,
be ambitious in accordance with your body and your
own name and character. One of you is ambitious for
victory and advancement. Another is a mighty scholar,
a very child of the benevolent light of heaven. And yet
another is an auspicious favourite of fortune, a saviour
just like a son. I think and deliberate upon this variety
and mystery.






[Names: Anu, Hari]
Ashvins, tempestuous powers like sun-rays and
winds, one chariot of yours, golden of form, goes round
conquering the directions of space and reaching the places
of your choice. The horses of the other shear through
space churning the air with the force of their speed and


fill the world with reverberations of their motion.






[Names: Evairanyasya]
Ashvins, one of you, mighty like the sun, lord
of the seasons and the year or like the autumn cloud,
challenging the winds and vapours and loving the all-
time sweets of earth, travels down with the rays of light
and plays with the fruits and flowers. The other,
consuming and growing by the motions and energies
of another moving like upward streams of fire, brings
us peace and comfort.






[Names: Asarji, Upastutavavatam]
Ashvins, most venerable lords of knowledge and
wisdom, this ancient and expansive song of celebration
flowing three ways over time for the sake of growth,
physical, mental and spiritual, has been created in your
honour. Sung and celebrated sincerely, listen to the voice
of the celebrant while on the move or not on the move
and redeem and protect the devotee.




MANDAL - 1 /SUKTA - 182 809


of Uta sya vam rusato vapsaso gistribarhisi sadasi


[Names: Vrsa]
And that voice celebrating the brilliant and
charming form of your personality strengthens and
energises the people performing yajna in the ceremonial
hall of three sages seated on holy grass. And the same
voice, holy and generous lords, while it blesses the
people, may shower you with joy as showers of rain
from the heavy clouds overflow the surface of the earth
in the rainy season.






[Names: Yuvam, Agnim, Agni, Jarate, Huve]
Ashvins, powers of light, energy and generosity,
just as the sun which sustains the world nourishes the
earth and her children and the yajamana bearing
oblations does homage to Agni and the Dawn, so does
the poet bearing the gift of homage serve and celebrate
you in song. And I, dedicated to you and celebrating
you, pray that we may be blest with knowledge strength
and energy and a long and happy life, bountiful and
generous as you are.


Mandala 1/Sukta 182






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Abhiudidam, Vayunamo, Dhiyanjinva]
Men of knowledge and wisdom, honour and
adore those teachers and scholars and rejoice with them
who give us this knowledge and create this mighty and
versatile chariot of ours which is fit for the Ashvins to
move at the speed of winds and light. They are the agents
of intellectual and scientific evolution, strong and
inviolable treasure-givers of health and wealth and
home, keepers of the light of heaven on earth, and firmly
committed to the paths of knowledge, action and
progress along the lines of purity and rectitude.






[Names: Indratama, Maruttama, Purnam]
Ashvins, noble scholars, teachers and scientists,
you are the most honourable heroes, most powerful,
most dynamic and energetic, destroyers of poverty and
suffering, masters of will and action, creators of chariots
and the most daring pioneers of progress. You design,
create and drive the chariot that is perfect and laden
with the collection of the richest honey sweets of life.
And with that you come to the man of the chariot and
say: Take this, go round the worlds, and enjoy.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 182 811




[Names: Kimatra]
Marvellous Ashvins, brilliant powers of light
and wisdom, generous preservers of life and destroyers
of suffering, what are you doing here? Why stay here
where anyone like nobody, miserly and selfish, non-
giving, non-sacrificing is honoured and flaunts as great?
Bypass the bargainer whose vision, judgement and
pranic vitality is draining. Give light to the noble holy
man in search of the holy Word and spiritual approval.




[Names: Jambhayatam, Vacam, Samsam]
mama.


Ashvins, crush all round those who bark like
dogs. Eliminate the wars and war mongers. You know
them. Richly fructify and reward every word of the
devotees’ song of praise with the gift of jewels. Lords
of truth, protect and promote my honour and my song
of celebration.






[Names: Yuvametam, Yena]
mahah.


Ashvins, scholar of science and technologist of
marine engineering and aeronautics, both create the safe
and comfortable winged boat, self-powered and self-
propelled, moving through and over the seas for the
strongest man among the strong by which you, noblest
among the noble people, with your science and skill,
fly like birds and cross the wide seas.






[Names: Avaviddham, Catasro]
Confined, surrounded and plunged in
impenetrable darkness is the team of the mighty marine
force. Four boats powered and driven by the Ashvins
assigned for the mid-ocean operation rescue the team
and safely bring it ashore.




[Names: Parna]
kam.


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 183 813


Ashvins, pilots of the sea and sky, what sort of
tree, post, is that standing in the midst of the deep sea
to which the powerful but afflicted marine team holds
on? What sailing and flying machine is that which like
the wings of a soaring bird you work up and down for
your honour and glory?






[Names: Asmadadya]
Ashvins, leaders of light ever committed to truth
and shunning untruth, whatever words of appreciation
and celebration venerable people have said in your
honour, may all that be auspicious to you, being true to
your character and performance. And may we today
from this yajnic hall of joy and bliss receive and carry
away food and energy to our heart’s desire, knowledge
and strength to live along the right path, and the breath
and life of the mind and spirit.


Mandala 1/Sukta 183






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Yenopayathah]
Ashvins, mighty generous visionaries of
science, technology and psychology, take to three-metal,
three-turbine and three-stage chariot faster than the
speed of mind by which you reach the house of sukrit
Tvashta, holy designer and maker of chariots,
armaments, implements and instruments, flying with


(This is a mantra of various possibilities of
interpretation in the context of Physics, Astrophysics,
Aeronautics, Medicine and Meditation. The meaning,
can be ‘seen’ and realised by an expert who would be
of the order of a Rshi, a visionary of the dynamics of
Nature in his own field, and better in the unified field
of comprehensive reality.)






[Names: Suvrd, Vapurvapusya]
Ashvins, committed explorers in search of
fragrance for your yajnic inputs, the chariot you ride is
firmly wheeled and revolves round and round
approaching the earth. Believe this message of mine,
an exact description of your form in words: you look
like the dawn, child of the sun on the rise descending
over the earth.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 183 815




[Names: Yena]
Ashvins, leaders of humanity, committed to truth
and exploration, well-structured, loved and accepted is
the chariot you ride in pursuance of your vows of
commitment and discipline which is richly loaded with
wealth for the good life and by which go you over your
path of exploration and come back home to inspire and
fulfil the ambitions of humanity for themselves and for





[Names: Ayam]
woman, dare to challenge you or terrorise you off from
your course. Destroyers of suffering and generous
preservers of life, forsake us not, nor destroy us. This is
your share set apart in reserve in homage. This is the
voice of celebration in homage and gratitude. These are
your treasures of honey sweets of honour and glory.







[Names: Yuvam, Purumilho, Atrirdasra, Disam]
Ashvins, destroyers of want and suffering,
preservers of health and happiness, lovers of truth and
science, teachers, guides and philosophers, Gotama, the
man of knowledge and wisdom, Purumeedha, the man
blest with prosperity, and Atri, the progressive man free
from threefold pain, invokes you with offerings of
homage and oblations for the sake of protection and
progress. Come and accept my homage too like leaders
going and leading in the direction of truth marked as
destination of nature and law.






[Names: Atarisma]
Ashvins, let us swim across this darkness of
ignorance and suffering of the world. So we bear and
offer this song of celebration and gratitude to you in
homage. Come to us here by the paths of divinity so
that by your guidance and leadership we may be blest
with food and energy, path of rectitude and breeze of
health and the good life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 184




[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Nasatya, Sudastaraya, Sudastara]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 184 817


Ashvins, infallible children of the light of
heaven, committed to the law of truth and right, today
and also later we invoke and invite you both at the rise
of the glorious dawn with songs of adoration. The fire
is lit, the songs are sung. Wherever you be, come like
the waves of light-rays to bless the man of masterly
business and noble charity.






[Names: Asme, Srutam]
Ashvins, mighty generous, leading lights of
humanity, unfailing givers of knowledge, enjoy with
rest and peace of the night in the revolving wheel of
time with the fluctuations of existence. Rejoice with
the celebrant for our sake and eliminate the miserliness
of the petty trader. Loved and adored by people with
noble words of adoration, listen to my prayers with
attentive and sympathetic ears.






[Names: Sriye, Pusannisukrteva, Vacyante, Suryayah, Suryaya, Varunasya, Varunas]
Ashvins, brilliant and generous givers of light
and knowledge, strength and energy, dedicated to truth,
in order to carry the light of the dawn, daughter of the
sun, for the beauty and grace of the earth, your eminent




carriers born of the waves and vapours of space, flying
like arrows of light, are admired like the great and
ancient horses of Varuna, born of the ocean of eternity.




[Names: Sravasya, Anu]
Ashvins, givers of light and knowledge, may
that generosity with all its gifts be sweet as honey to us.
Receive and accept the song of celebration created by
the venerable poet, O lords of generosity, since all people
in search of honour and valour enjoy and celebrate life
in accordance and harmony with your life and culture.






[Names: Yatam]
Ashvins, lords of honour, valour and generosity,
this is the worshipful song of homage and celebration
created and presented by the dedicated devotees revered
in society. Committed to the law of truth and rectitude,
go on by the inviolable path of truth and right for
yourself and the children, enjoying the beauty and
ecstasy of life.




MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 185 819




[Names: Atarisma]
Ashvins, lords of light and love, let us swim
across this darkness and ignorance to light and
knowledge. Hence this song of adoration is sung in
homage to you. Come to us here by the paths of divinity
and we would be blest with food for life, the right path
and the light of Divinity to swim across to Eternity.


Mandala 1/Sukta 185






[Names: Dyavaprthivi, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Katara, Visvam]
Of the two, heaven and earth, which comes first?
Which follows later? How were they born? O men wise
and bold, who knows all this? Verily they hold this entire
universe as it is by themselves and go round and round
like days and nights as parts of a wheel. Answer: Ka,
He the Lord Supreme, knows.








[Names: Bhurim, Nityam]
The two, heaven and earth, undeviating from
their nature, character, law and action, and keeping to
their course without moving on legs, bear, nourish and
sustain like a foetus this great, moving world of humans
and animals. May the heaven and earth always protect
us from sin and evil like a child in the lap of parents.






[Names: Aneho, Mother, Nature]
and pray for her pure and sinless gift of inviolable,
brilliant and blissful, indestructible and reverential
abundance of wealth of mind and material which, I
crave, may heaven and earth create for the mother’s
adoring child. And, I pray, may the heaven and earth
save us from the violence and monstrosity of a life of
materialism and sinful opulence.






[Names: Atapyamane, Anu, Ubhe]
Free from sufferance, causing no pain,
protective by inbuilt safeguards, both heaven and earth,
children of Divinity and mothers of divinities, may, we
pray, protect the noble powers of nature and humanity
day and night along with all that is moving and non-


MANDAL - 1 / SUKTA - 185 821


moving in existence. Let us be in harmony with them
and may they be good to us. May heaven and earth, we
pray, protect us from the ravages of nature and worldly






[Names: Samgacchamane, Abhijighranti]
Heaven and earth, going together, ever youthful,
contiguous and simultaneous like twin sisters, coexistent
and cooperative, nestled in the lap of mother Nature
and Father Supreme of existence, taste the fragrance of
the omnipresent contrehold of the universe. May the
heaven and earth protect us from the sin of falling off
from that all-pervasive fragrance of the Divine Presence.






[Names: Urvi, Dadhate]
I invoke and celebrate in song the grand and
vast heaven and earth, mother sustainers and shelter
homes of the brilliant and generous divinities of nature
and humanity with protection and the truth of universal
law. Beautiful of form, they bear the nectar sweets of
water and energy for life. May the heaven and earth
save us from the sin of filial ingratitude.








[Names: Dadhdate]
I invoke and adore the mighty heaven and earth,
abundant and boundless far and wide, and sing in praise
of them in this yajna of life with humility and offerings
of fragrant oblations. Generous and overflowing with
wealth and good fortune, bright and beatific in form
and progress, they nourish and sustain the entire world
of living beings. May the heaven and earth save me
from the sin of sloth, greed and selfishness.






[Names: Devan, Iyam]
If we commit a sin to the generosities of nature
by violence to the environment, or do an insult to the
wise and brilliant people, or offend a friend, or ever
violate the sanctity of a woman or dishonour her
husband, then may this mind and intelligence of ours
be the corrective and preventive antidote to such evil
conduct. May heaven and earth give us good sense and
save us from sin against nature and humanity.


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 185 823






[Names: Ubha, Bhuri, Sudastarayesa]
Both heaven and earth as father and mother, both
adorable and kind to humanity, save me. Both, protective
and preventive, be with me with all protections and
security. O divinities of nature and humanity noble men
and women who command the business of life and
living, be amply generous to the man of charity and
broad-mindedness, and may we all, rejoicing with food
and energy in abundance, be blest with self-fulfilment.






[Names: Rtam, Patamavadyad]
Blest with noble intelligence by heaven and
earth, I pray I may speak the original Word of Truth and
Divinity in honour of heaven and earth for the noble
listener. May the heaven and earth, and father and
mother, both loving and kind, both ever close-by, save
me from calumny sin and evil and protect and promote
me with their care, favour and kindness.








[Names: Idam, Bhutam]
May this word and voice of mine, O heaven and
earth, be true. O father and mother, may this word that
I speak in this yajna of celebration be true and fruitful.
O divinities, be ever close to the nobilities of humanity
in their business of life with favours and protections.
And may we, we pray, be blest with food and energy of
body, mind and soul, move ahead on the right path, and
enjoy the breeze of life and the bliss of Divinity.


Mandala 1/Sukta 186






[Names: Visavedeva, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
May Savita, self-refulgent lord giver of life and
light, universal guide, ever adorable and adored, come
and bless us in our yajnic performance of life with all
the gifts of food, energy and vision of the eternal Word
of knowledge and Divinity, so that, O youth of the world
and youthful energies of Nature, you too may join us in
our open-door yajna, rejoice with us and, with your
conscious intelligence and wisdom, make the whole


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 186 825






[Names: Bhuvan, Varunah, Varuna, Ssavah]
Let all the divine powers of brilliance and
generosity in the world, preservers of life against
destruction, come to us. May Mitra, lord and friend of
life and humanity, Aryama, lord and spirit of justice,
and Varuna, lord supreme cherished of all, with love in
unison for all come together so that they may be our
preservers and promoters and, enduring and
unchallengeable as they are, our courage and power no
one may be able to destroy.






[Names: Prestham, Sastibhistur, Asad]
With songs of adoration I invoke and celebrate
Agni, universal and dynamic lord of power, heat, light
and knowledge, dearest of all, loving and friendly,
honourably welcome like a distinguished visitor and
guest, so that Varuna, lord supreme of universal choice,
bright and brave, destroyer of hate and enmity, be
celebrated in action with honour and glory and bring us
showers of wealth and food and energy for our body,
mind and soul.








[Names: Samane]
O divinities of earth and humanity, generous
powers of nature, I come to you with homage and
offerings of food and with the desire for victory day
and night as the generous earth does homage to the sun
every day constantly, praying for light and seeing in the
multiform and multicolour waters of the sky various
kinds of wealth like all kinds of wealth and nourishment
in the milk contained in the cow’s udders.






[Names: Ssisum, Yena]
And let the cloud of the sky do us good. The
river flows for us like the mother’s milk for the baby.
Let us then control and bind the rain storm and the river
flow, grand child of the spatial waters, which the
lightning energies fast as mind bring to us, by which
then we may produce and use heat and electric energy,
child of earthly waters.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 186 827






May Twashta, divine creator of forms and maker
of instruments, tools and implements, and chariots, dams
and controls come well and enthusiastically with other
sages and scholars, loving and kind, and bring us waters
of various forms. Let Indra, breaker of the clouds, leader
of men and fastest power of action come and bless this
noble and joint yajnic project of all together among the
people of the world.






[Names: Tamim]
All our people, masters of thought at high speed
and knights of horse, all our love and understanding,
honour and esteem, devotion and prayers, determination
and resolutions centre round this youthful ruler, Indra,
most fragrantly lovable among men, as cows love and
caress a tender calf, and all our words of praise and
appreciation concentrate or him in the hope of progress
as husbands concentrate on the love of the wives
yearning for progeny.








[Names: Maruto, Prsadasvaso, Mitrayujo]
Just as winds carry waters of the skies, so may
the Maruts, tempestuous young warriors of a high united
mind, equipped with mighty fighting forces, be ours
and enthusiastically reach over earth and heaven for
us. And let these warriors of strong and varied horse,
riding chariots like commanders of the defence of the
earths, destroyers of hate and enmity, brilliant friends
of friends and the loving, be noble and generous to us






[Names: Adha, Sarurvisvamerinam]
When with their greatness and grandeur and
dexterity they focus on the target and concentrate and
use their forces, then their forces like a missile at the
most strategic time burn off the entire tyranny of the
world and shower the rain of bliss on the desert lands.







[Names: Pusanam, Pusana, Adveso, Rbhuksa, Accha]
All ye men and women of the world, for the


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 186 829


sake of all round protection and advancement, take to,
serve and honour the Ashvins, powers that give and take,
teach and test. Take to, honour and value, and worship
Pusha, agents of nourishment and growth. Self-potent
are the divinities of nature and humanity, all free from
hate and enmity, Vishnu, all-pervasive spirit of the
universe, Vayu, universal breath of the living world,
Rbhuksha, Indra, universal ruling lord of power,
intelligence and expertise, and knowledge. Let us all,
you and I, elect, select, choose, appoint, honour and
consecrate our powers of humanity and divinity well
for the sake of common good.






O divinities and devotees of yajna and yajnic
action, that brilliance and generosity of yours which is
the treasure source of wealth for the world, which shines
in and among the powers of divinity and which inspires
the breath and power of life and living and creates the
peace and prosperity of the home and family may, we
pray, be ours too so that we may be happy, blest with
food and energy for life, the path of rectitude and the
gift of a long, healthy and dedicated life.




Mandala 1/Sukta 187






[Names: Oshadhis, Annam, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Pitum, Yasya]
Constantly do I honour and adore food and
energy, fuel of life and instruments of the observance
of Dharma, and the source of strength, power and
courage, by the force and splendour of which Indra,
mighty energy of sun and electricity, breaks the cloud
to the last drop of condensed vapour, and by which the
man of power and courage too, with the exercise of
thought, word and deed, acquires cherished wealth
complete in every aspect of value.






[Names: Svado, Asmakamavita]
O the food of life! O the drink for life! Delicious
are you! Honey sweet are you! We love and cherish
you with thanks and gratitude to the Lord of life and
giver of food and nourishment. Be our saviour,
preserver, sustainer, protector and promoter.






[Names: Sivah, Mayobhuradvisenyah]
MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 187 831


O Lord pervasive of food and nourishment,
come and bless us. Kind and gracious as you are, bless
us with the protections of your benign favours. Giver
of peace and comfort, free from hate and anger, friendly,
lover of lovers and devotees, free from duality, conflict
or contradiction, come and be with us, forsake us not.





[Names: Tava, Divi, Sritah]
O Lord pervasive of food and nourishment of
life, the taste, the pleasure, and the ecstasy of the
experience of your presence is replete in the living
worlds like the waves of energy and the winds and the
air in the sky and the heavens.






O spirit of life pervasive in food and drink and
all other nutriments, you are the giver, you are the most
delicious and inspiring. All those who taste of the
pleasure and inspiration of your gifts of juices and vital
essences move around with rightful pride, holding their
head high and proclaiming their existence with self-








[Names: Akari]
O spirit and power of existence, food of life, in
you and with you abides the mind of great nobilities
and divinities. By virtue of your power and presence
great works are done. By your energy and rays of light
the sun breaks the cloud and pours forth the rains.




[Names: Yadado, Atra]
O spirit pervasive and food of energy in the
process of nature’s metabolism, when the clouds move,
be there in them, enrich and energise them and, then, O
honey sweet food of life, come here down from the
clouds and be with us for us to our heart’s desire.




[Names: Yadapam, Vatape]
When to our heart’s content we have eaten of
the gift of herbs and waters, then, O universal energy
pervasive of food, be with us, kind and gracious, for
our growth and advancement (not for corpulence).






[Names: Soma]
MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 187 833


O Soma, lord and spirit of nourishment, health
and peace, whatever we eat and drink of what is prepared
with cow’s milk and barley, let us enjoy and, O universal
lord pervasive in food and energy, let that be for our
growth and advancement.






[Names: Karambha]
Lord creator of herbs, nourishment and energy,
let the herbs be delicious food, destroyer of ailment and
disease, a sharpener of appetite and digestion and a tonic
for mind and senses. Lord universal of health and life
breath, let it be for our growth and advancement in health
and intelligence for a long long age of joy and bliss.






[Names: Devebhyastva]
Lord giver of food and nourishment, spirit
pervasive of health and energy, you are the giver of
divine joy to the generous powers of nature and the
generous nobilities of humanity. You are the giver of
health and joy to us all. We praise you with words of
gratitude for your gifts, and just as cows distil the
essence of herbs and bless us with milky nutriments, so
do we distil the essence of nourishment from the divine
gifts of herbs and food, and express our gratitude in




words and songs of celebration and service.


Mandala 1/Sukta 188








[Names: Apris, Hymn, Mantrawise, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Samiddho, Duto]
Agni, lord of light, power and generosity,
lighted, consecrated, bright and blazing, today rules and
shines glorious with the brilliant powers of nature and
humanity, having won a thousand foes. O lord of
knowledge and wisdom, creative visionary and poetic
maker of past, present and future as you are, receiver,
mover and harbinger of the fragrances of life in the
yajnic evolution of nature and humanity, accept our
homage and lead us on the march of life.






[Names: Tanunapad, Dadhat]
Preserving and promoting the body politic, not
allowing the system to slacken, the yajna of social and
natural evolution goes forward on the path of truth and
divine law for the man of action and endeavour with
sweets of honey and wealth of soma joy, bearing and
bringing a thousand gifts of food, energy and vitality.


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 188 835






[Names: Ajuhvano, Agne]
Agni, adorable lord of light and knowledge,
ruler of the world, invoked and invited to our creative
endeavours, bring and proclaim the arrival of the
brilliancies of humanity and gems of nature worthy of
celebration and advancement by yajnic research and
development. You are the creator, harbinger and giver
of a thousand gifts of wealth and knowledge.






[Names: Pracinam, Yatraditya]
That ancient and eternal seat of existence and
knowledge wherein abide a thousand brave and
mysterious divinities and where the suns with their
blazing refulgence cover as well as reveal the face of
Divinity, there, all ye men and women of the world,
arise, reach and dwell.





[Names: Virat, Duro]
Infinite and various is the light and power of
Divinity, yet unique, one whole together and indivisible
is the rule and glory of the universal power and presence.




Mightily wide and various, excellent and deep are the
doors and paths to Divinity which reveal and release
the flood gates of vision and the bliss of Eternity.



[Names: Surukme, Sriya, Usasaveha]
The dawn and dusk, the day and night, bright
and beautiful of form and glory, shine with the splendour
of Divinity. Let them come and grace our yajna of
fragrance and vision of the Light Divine.



[Names: Prathama, Yajnam]
May two Yajakas, old and ancient, first and best,
masters of noble speech, divine of nature, scholars of
poetic visionaries such as the Ashvins or the teacher
and preacher, come and grace this yajna of ours unto a





[Names: Bharatile, Sarasvati, Sriye]
Bharati, mother of scientific speech and
knowledge, Ila, mother of eternal speech and
knowledge, and Sarasvati, mother of the existential flow


MANDAL - 1 / ऽ <^ - 188 837


of universal speech and knowledge, may you all whom
I invoke to grace our yajna of learning and education,
inspire us, I pray , to rise to the heights of glory and the
beauty and grace of life and culture.



[Names: Tvasta, Tesam]
Tvashta, lord creator, is the master maker of all
the forms of existence. He has created all the living
species of the universe. May the lord augment their
growth and welfare and ours too.



[Names: Agnirhavyani]
O Vanaspati, lord of herbs and trees and forests,
create, produce and give the best of food and
nourishments to the noble and virtuous people of virtue
with the sincerity of your mind and soul, as fire helps to
prepare the sweetest delicacies for entertainment of the
divines.






[Names: Puroga, Agnirdevanam, Agnirdevana, Svahakrtisu]
Agni, fire, is the leading power among the




divinities of nature such as earth and sky, and it is lighted
with the chant of Gayatri verses of the Veda to rise and
shine in the holiest acts of human life.


(So should the noble people rise and shine in
life with the chant of holy verses and live for the service
of Divinity and humanity for the sake of all life.)


Mandala 1/Sukta 189






[Names: Agni, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Agne, Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno, Vayunani]
Agni, light of life and lord giver of bliss to
humanity, lead us to the wealth and joy of the world by
the simple and straight path of rectitude. Brilliant and
generous lord of power, you are the master of the
knowledge of all the ways and laws of life and the world.
Ward off all the sin and evil and crookedness from us.
Bless us that we may always sing songs of homage and
worship to you more and ever more.





[Names: Pusca]
tokaya tanayaya $am yoh.


Agni, light of life, lord of knowledge, ever


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 189 839


young and new, lead us far across the challenging
problems of the world with success and victories of
prosperity. Let our lands and cities be wide and abundant
as earth and be the harbinger of peace and joy for our
children and grand children.






[Names: Punarasmabhyam]
Agni, lord of light and life, reduce and remove
from us suffering and disease through yajna, since, O
leading power of yajna fire, those who neglect the sacred
fire suffer from ailments all round. And then, O lord of
love and creative generosity, for our welfare, peace and
prosperity, come with the sacred flames of holy fire and
bless the earth with universal nectar sweets of good
health and gifts of imperishable joy.






[Names: Pahi, Susukvan]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, protect and
promote us with inviolable safeguards and relentless
modes of protection, shining in our dear home with the
glow of health and blaze of power. Most youthful and
powerful lord of endurance and challenges, may fear
never touch your admirer and worshipper or any other,


840
for sure.




ma risate sahasavan para dah.


Agni, lord of power and endurance, abandon us
not, throw us not to the sinner, the irreligious, the enemy,
the mischievous, the biter, the tearer, and the destroyer.
Leave us not, put us not off from you.






[Names: Visvad]
Agni, lord manifest in truth and Dharma, let your
admirer and worshipper, sharing brilliance like yours,
singing in praise and homage to you, give unto himself
due protection for his body and mind. And then, O lord
of light and power, you are the ultimate protector against
all violent and hostile maligners since you break them
down or teach them a lesson to correction.





[Names: Tvam, Abhipitve]
MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 190 841


Agni, lord adorable of light, protection and
correction, you know them both, men good and evil,
admirers as well as maligners, and reach them just at
the right time to protect and to correct as well. Lord of
law and discipline, be the teacher and ruler for the man
approaching in faith or even turning away in hostility,
adored or remembered by all, lovers or haters, with love
or in fear, like a ruling power.






[Names: Avocama, Vayam]
In homage and worship to this Agni, mighty lord
creator of honour and self-esteem and inspirer of the
idea and sense of purpose in life, we speak and sing
these words of adoration with reflection and holy
thought in composition, and thereby we share with a
thousand sages of vision and insight of knowledge food
and energy for body, mind and soul, the path of Dharma
and the spirit and joy of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 190






[Names: Brhaspati, Devata, Agastya, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Anarvanam, Gathanyah]
Welcome, entertain and exalt with offerings of
respectful good cheer and hospitality Brhaspati, a very
embodiment of piety, knowledge, wisdom and virtue,
an adorable scholar, irresistible, generous and sweet-
tongued, a master of ancient as well as modern versions
of universal knowledge, whose delightful tales of
heroism old and new and virtue sacred and secular,
noble, intelligent and brilliant people love to hear for
reflection and meditation. Welcome and entertain such
a holy visitor on the rounds, an atithi, chance guest like
the holy fire of yajna, fragrant and blissful.






[Names: Tamrtviya, Brhaspatih]
Words of meaning and power come to him at
his command and serve him according to the season of
time, place and the subject of discourse, Brhaspati as
he is, high-priest of the Divine Word. Like an extension
of the Lord’s creation, he makes divinities out of
dedicated humanity and brings them gifts of their choice.
Thus loved, graceful and powerful like the breeze of
life, he rises in the affairs of life and Dharma by the
grace of the Infinite Lord of the universe.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 190 843




[Names: Upastutim, Asya]
Let this Brhaspati, man of piety, knowledge. and
wisdom, acknowledge and reciprocate the respectful
host’s salutation, obeisance and words of adoration with
hands upraised in benediction like the rays of the
inspiring sun. Loving and non-violent, surrounded by
many admirers by virtue of his holy actions, he walks





[Names: Sloko, Mrganam]
The voice of this Brhaspati and his fame goes
over earth and heaven like the waves of energy.
Supporter of the man of yajna, master of exceptional
knowledge and intelligence, let him continue to give
knowledge. And then, these voices of Brhaspati, like
the bounces of the deer, every day reach men of
generosity such as clouds of rain.






[Names: Anu]
There are those rigid and sinful people who




accept the wise man as brilliant and good, but in reality
they exploit him to live by him for self-support as
parasites do. O Brhaspati, you yield not to the man of
crooked intelligence but choose the man of honest desire
for the gift of knowledge.






[Names: Supraituh, Anarvano, Mitrah, Mitra]
Brhaspati is like the guiding path of one who is
well-provided with food and energy and one who wants
to follow the simple and straight path of knowledge.
He is like the all round loving friend of one caught up
on a difficult highway. Men who are free from sin and
every way look after us and who, with light and
knowledge, uncover the ignorance of those covered in






Just as the satellites go round Brhaspati, the
planet Jupiter, or as the flowing streams with whirlpools
reach the sea, so that scholar whom all the praises of
devoted admirers reach is Brhaspati, the divine teacher
who knows both the inner reality of the spirit and the


MANDAL - 1/SUKTA - 191 845


outer reality of nature and who, keen to save his pupils,
calmly watches both the waters of existence and the
saving ark of knowledge.






[Names: Evamahas]
Thus is Brhaspati, the great scholar, highly
revered among the learned, commanding courage and
strength of body and mind, generous and brilliant master
of learning and pious sage honoured and acclaimed. May
he, for us, be the teacher, maker of the brave and giver
of the knowledge of science and Divinity so that we
may be blest with food and energy, knowledge and
power and the breath and joy of life.


Mandala 1/Sukta 191






[Names: Oshadhi, Surya, Devata, Maitravaruni, Agastya, Rshi, Kankato, Dvaviti]
The poisonous as well as the slithering, and the
essentially poisonous as well as the slightly poisonous,
both bite and burn, and yet they both sprinkle and anoint
as antidotes too, and both smear, bite and burn unseen,
and they harbour the unseen.








[Names: Adrstan, Atho]
One medicine immediately starts destroying the
poison as it is taken. Another destroys the poison while
its activity seems to be subsiding. Yet another destroys
it when its effect is extremely strong. And yet another
reduces and destroys it when it is completely






[Names: Saradsah, Maunja]
The parasitic seeds of poison lurk in the hollow
of bamboos and in inferior reeds, in the darbha grass
and in reeds and grasses round tanks, lakes and streams.
Unseen they lurk in the munja roots and leaves and
virina plants. Together they all stick to anything as
parasites.


Where the cows sit in the stalls or the forest
beasts sit or hide in their habitat or humans live in the


homes, and even in the brain and sense organs, the seeds
of poison lurk and cluster unseen.


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 191 847






[Names: Adrsta]
unseen as they are and yet seen by all and known to all.
Therefore, all ye men and women, beware of them.






[Names: Dyaurvah]
O seeds, parasites, insects and other carriers of
poison such as bacteria and viruses, the heaven of light
is your father, creator, the earth is your mother, feeder,
soma is your brother and nature’s fertility is your sister
(since both nectar and poison are born of the creative
power of nature). Unseen and yet universally seen and
known are you all. Why move, better be still for the
sake of good and comfort?






[Names: Adrstah]
Those which creep or affect the shoulders, those
which move or fly and affect all parts of the body, those
which bite and burn, and those which are highly
poisonous and painful, all those which are unseen or
whatever, all together retire and exhaust yourselves of


the bite and the poison, be eliminated all.






[Names: Utpurastatsurya]
There upfront rises the sun from the east,
universally seen and showing the world, and destroying
all that is unseen poisonous, eliminating all the
negativities and all that is evil and invisible to the naked
eye.





[Names: Udapaptadasau, Suryah, Puru, Adityah, Aditya]
The sun rises there, lord of light, from behind

the mountains and the clouds, showing to the entire


world and destroying all the poisons on a large scale,
invisible evils which thrive in the dark.




[Names: Surye]
Just as liquor is contained in the cask in the
house of a liquor maker, so do I collect the earth’s poison
and evaporate it to join the sun so that neither the sun


MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 191 849


would die nor would we, since the poison would join
the far away sun which would drink it up. O poison,
then the honey sweet chemistry of nature may turn you
to nectar honey.






O man infested with poison, this little
[Names: Shakuntika]
consume your poison. That bird would not die, nor
would we. The one that drinks up the poison unharmed
would keep it far off. O poison, the life’s chemistry of
nectar would turn you too to honey.





[Names: Trih, Tascinnu]
Twenty one little birds eat up and consume the
flowers of poison. But they do not die for sure, nor
would we. The one who would consume poison
undisturbed would keep it far off. The honey-science
of nature would turn the poison to honey.








[Names: Navanam, Sarva]
Let me have the names of all the ninetynine
lacerations of poison and of all the ninetynine antidotes.
The man who can counter poison and calmly render it
or fear. O poison, the science of honey nectar would
turn you to honey and nectar.






[Names: Taste, Jjabhrira]
May the twentyone peahens and seven sisterly
streams and rivers flowing on and on collect and carry
off the poison as female water carriers carry water in





[Names: Lyattakah, Tato]
This little poisonous insect that comes to me,
this little mongoose, that holds the poison, I strike with
a gem stone. The poison flows, and I collect and isolate
the poison from the area as an antidote.




MANDAL - 1 / <^ - 191 851


[Names: Kusumbhakas, Vrscikasyarasam]
te visam.


The little mongoose coming down from the
mountains tells me that the taste of the scorpion’s poison
is dull. For this reason, on this expansive and practical
basis I say, the poison of the scorpion is tasteless.


Note: The mantras in this Sukta point to the
possibilities of isolating all poisons, bacteria and viruses
that cause disease. They also suggest the preparation of
antidotes from those very poisons, bacteria and viruses.
They also point out to the fact that in natural evolution
poison and nectar are coexistent carriers of death and
life. They are contradictory effects of the same one
since all contradictions in nature are apparent, but
essentially they are all complementary.


The term ‘Madhula’ is suggestive of this
chemical process in nature itself. Swami Dayanand
interprets it as the science of converting poison into
nectar for our purposes. Elsewhere as in Sayana or in
Kaushika Sutra or by Satavalekara it is interpreted as a
herb, which too is true. There is a herb on the hills, for
example, the touch of which bites as scorpion, giving a
burning poisonous sensation all over the body, for which
reason it is called the scorpion herb. And immediately
close to it is another herb the juice of which turns the


In fact every poison, it seems, carries its own
antidote which has to be isolated, analysed and




developed like all the vaccines in modern medicine and
all the drugs in homeopathic medicine. The dose of the
poison would depend upon the effect desired as in the
case of all stimulants, intoxicants and painkillers.


The myth of churning of the ocean by the Devas
and Asuras (gods and demons) is an all-time symbol of
the contradictions alias complementarities of nature,
whichever way you want to put it. It shows that both
nectar and poison are born of the ocean of nature and
the power that consumes and assimilates the poison for
the sake of the continuance of life and existence is Shiva,
lord of nature’s justice and ferocity on the one hand,
and lord of the saving grace of Divinity on the other.
The word for this power of turning contradiction into
complementarity, and turning the poison into honey-
sweet nectar in this Sukta is ‘Harishtha’. For references
to Madhu Vidya or the honey science of nectar we may
turn to Yajurveda and the Upanishads specially
Chhandogya Upanishad 3, 1-5, and Brhadaranyaka




[Names: Upanishad]
853


MANDALA 2


Mandala 2/Sukta 1







[Names: Agni, Devata, Angirasa, Shaunahotra, Bhargava, Shaunaka, Grtsamada, Rshi, Tvamagne, Tvam, Sucih]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, bright and
blazing and ever enlightening, ruler and leader and
sustainer of humanity, power of crystalline purity
shining with splendour, you rise like vapours from the
oceans and rain like showers from the skies. You ignite
like sparks from stones and burn like fire from the
forests. You thunder like lightning from clouds and
overwhelm like lava from volcanoes. And you refresh
like fragrance of flowers and rejuvenate like honey
drinks of herbs as soma.



[Names: Tavagne, Tava]
dame.




Agni, light of life and leader of humanity, yours
is yajna and the spirit of charity, yours is piety and purity,
yours is the conduct and the organisation of holy plans
and projects in time and seasons, yours is the message
and the mission, yours is the truth and fiery knowledge
of life and advancement, yours is the teaching, law,
governance and administration, yours is love and the
gift of charity for the growth of all, you are the high-
priest and presiding presence of nature and humanity,
and you are the life within and brightness of the happy
family. Lord of light and life, we pray be the light within
of the individual and protector and preserver of peace
and joy of the family in the home for all.






[Names: Tvamagna]
Agni, self-refulgent lord of light and life, you
are Indra, lord of power and glory. You are Vrshabha,
mighty and generous among the good and great. You
are Vishnu, omnipresent spirit, adorable, worthy of
homage by all. You are Brahma, high-priest of the
universe who knows the wealth and value of existence.
O Brahmanaspati, lord protector, preserver and promoter
of knowledge of the Spirit and Nature, you are the
treasure-hold of all that exists in the universe, and you
abide by all humans and others with your knowledge,
power and glory.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 855






[Names: Tvamaryama]
Agni, lord of life and light of existence, you are
the glorious ruler. You are Varuna, greatest and best lord
of nature and humanity, upholder of natural truth and
law of life. You are Mitra, the master, dear as friend and
the very breath of life, adorable and worthy of homage
and worship. You are Aryama, lord giver of love and
justice, preserver and promoter of truth and sustainer
of the lovers of truth and justice. Lord of light blazing
as the sun, generous and blissful, in the grand yajnic
system of life and living, you are the giver of every
one’s rights and duties, actions and rewards, according
to the law of Dharma and the Karmic dispensation.






[Names: Tvamasuhema, Mitramahah, Mitramaha, Puruvasuh, Puruvasu]
Agni, heat and light of life, universal presence,
you are Tvashta, breaker, maker and preserver of the
forms of life. You bestow noble strength and courage
upon the man of love and service. Lord of universal
speech of love and truth, you are the greatest friend.
Yours 1s real equality and brotherhood. You are the giver




of instant inspiration calling men of action to duty and
you give the noble speed of motion and advancement
to the pioneers. You are the strength and power of the
people, and you are the haven and home of all.






[Names: Marutam, Maruta, Sangayastavam]
Agni, vital heat and light and fire of life, you
are Rudra, shatterer of evil and terror for the wicked.
You are vital as breath and generous as the cloud. You
are the mighty blaze of the sun in heaven and essential
force of the winds. You blow with the fiery waves of
energy and bring peace and joy to the living. You are
Pusha, food and sustenance of life, and with your heart
and soul you protect and promote those who dedicate
themselves to your service.






Agni, lord of light and creator of new life, you
are the giver of wealth to the person who acts in faith
and homage to you for the beauty and grace of life and
culture. Self-refulgent lord of life, you are Savita, light
and inspiration, the spirit of universal creation,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 857


fertilisation, refreshment and rejuvenation. You hold the
entire treasure jewels of the world of existence. Ruler
and sustainer of all, you are Bhaga, power and glory of
humanity. You rule and command and advance the
wealth and beauty and splendour of the life-sustaining
abodes of nature and humanity. You are the father,
mother and sustainer of the person whoever observes
the law of Dharma in the family and the home.





[Names: Sata]
Agni, lord of life, light and power of the world,
the people in their home, in individual, familial and
social discipline, do honour to you, ruler, sustainer and
protector of humanity and generous giver of the wealth
of life for all. Gracious lord of power and fighting force
for the protection and advancement of humanity, you
rule and sustain all alike with love and favour to tens
and hundreds and thousands of the units of life and






[Names: Samya]
Agni, lord of light and glory, ruler of the world,




people come to you as father, sustainer and protector,
and they do honour and homage to you with yajnic acts
of creation and development. They come to you as
brother with love and peace at heart for the sake of
friendship and fraternity as they see in you the glow of
health and grace of the body politic. You act as son of
the mother earth and her people as saviour from want
and suffering and protector against lawless bullies and
destructive terrorists. O lord of law and power, friend
of humanity, noble giver of peace and prosperity,
whoever honours and obeys you and the law, you save,
protect and advance in freedom, peace and prosperity
against all fear and evil.






[Names: Rbhurake, Rbhurak]
Agni, lord of light and ruler of the world, you
are the master of knowledge and expertise close at hand,
worthy of honour and homage. You are the ruler of
knowledge, power and prosperity and all round wealth
and glory of the world. You shine all that is good, and
consequently, you burn all that is evil and destructive.
You are the teacher and guide for the generous giver
and the presiding power of expansive yajna in life and




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 859




[Names: Aditirdeva, Tvamila, Sarasvati]
Agni, light of life and inspiration for the world,
you are the light of heaven for the generous giver of
knowledge and wisdom. You are Bharati, speech of
communication, a clarion call to action and invitation
to knowledge, which grows with inspiration from the
voice of Divinity. You are Ila, omniscient vision of
Divinity which reflects in the hundred years of the
scholar’s awareness. O lord of the world’s wealth of
knowledge and vision and wisdom, you are the
everflowing stream of knowledge, mother Sarasvati,
who dispels all darkness and destroys ignorance.






[Names: Sriyah]
Agni, lord of glory and magnanimity, you are
the highest wielder and upholder of great action. Highest
are your lives and roles in performance. Lovely and
wondrous are your graces in form and view. Mighty
great are you, high your vision and knowledge, a saving
ark across the seas of sin and suffering. High and
plentiful are you in wealth and knowledge, all round
great and greater, in measure immeasurable of all.







[Names: Scakrire]
Agni, lord of the fire of life, knowledge and
vision, poet of nature, humanity and divinity, the
Adityas, devotees of light and learning brilliant as the
sun in the zodiacs, listen to you as the mouthpiece of
omniscience. Pure and innocent souls in search of truth
regard you as the very tongue of divine will and vision.
Liberal powers of fragrant favours and generosity seek
and follow you in yajnas of love and non-violence. And
while you are there, bright and blazing, the brilliancies
of nature and humanity receive and enjoy the gifts of
oblations offered into the fire.






[Names: Tvaya]
Agni, immortal spirit and vital power of life, by
virtue of your presence and action, all the immortal souls
and brilliancies of nature, full of love, free from hate
and enmity, with their receptive organs receive their
share of food through the oblations offered into the fire.
By you only, the mortals among humanity receive their
drink of soma for immortality. You are the essence and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 1 861


vitality of the herbs and trees, and in them and through
them, you manifest and rise ever pure and brilliant.


SATU VEU




[Names: Prkso]
Agni, spirit of life in existence, light of the
world, brilliant, generous and universally manifestive,
by virtue of your power and grandeur, you are immanent
and yet transcendent. You are with all forms of existence
together and with each one of them separately, and yet
you are distinct and superior and rise above them all.
Whatever abundance of life and wealth is there, exists
here and prospers by virtue of your power and grandeur.
Even the heaven and earth and the intermediate regions
of the skies are great and generous by virtue of your
power and splendour.






[Names: Asmanca]
Agni, lord of light and life, to the brave and
brilliant people who are keen for knowledge and come
with receptive organs of perception and dynamic,
responsive and brilliant intelligence with gifts of cows




and leading horses to the masters of knowledge and
singers of hymns, to these seekers, teachers and to us
all, we pray, bring a peaceful and happy home for
settlement so that we all, blest with the courage and
knowledge of truth, sing in praise of your great gifts of
light and generosity in our yajnic programmes.


Mandala 2/Sukta 2




[Names: Agni, Devata, Gritsamada, Rshi, Yajnena, Samidhanam]
dam.


By yajna, research and development, expand the
power and gifts of Agni, treasure of knowledge and
power. Ignited and shining, rich and beautiful, harbinger
of wealth and comfort, brilliant, generous giver of gifts,
energy and power, it moves the wheels of action on the
paths of progress. Develop it with holy inputs offered
with elaborate voices of vast and far-reaching meaning.






[Names: Diva, Puruvara]
Agni, lord of light and power, master of
knowledge and fire, as cows in the stalls eagerly call
for their calves, so do the days and nights call upon you


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 2 863


for action and success. Selected by many, disciplined
and committed to programmes of work, you passionately
shine day and night for ages of humanity, creating and
giving wealth and power for progress.






[Names: Rathamiva, Socisamagnim, Mitram, Mitra]
That fire power of Agni, admirable among
humanity, worthy to be discovered and known as a
friend, mighty rich in quantity and quality of power,
bright and blazing with flames of light and waves of
energy, brilliant and generous scholars find abundantly
present in the depths of the earth and between earth and
heaven in the midst of clouds and in the lower
atmosphere, and they develop it and exploit it as a
chariot of speed and success for progress.




[Names: Tamuksamanam, Prsnyah]
anu.


That energy of Agni, generous, creative and
abundant, falling from space profusely in particles in
waves of motion, concentrating in both heaven and earth
through the skies, the scholars with their organs of
perception, volition and intelligence collect like food




for the journey of progress and store it, dear and lovely
as gold, in the power homes of their own making and
use it in circular and wavy motion for the production of
power and vitality in simulation of both creative earth
and heaven.






[Names: Hirisipro, Anu]
That Agni, self-refulgent lord of light and life,
is the chief yajamana of universal yajna which He
conducts, governs and transcends. Him too the whole
humanity celebrates with songs of praise and they
augment His yajna with holy offerings in the vedi. And
He, voracious Agni, with a golden face and fiery mouth,
receives, devours, burns and blazes, radiating and
vibrating among the people advancing on their path of
progress. May the Lord collect and radiate the light and
vitality of life for us and spread it around by the shining
stars, and let us too simulate and conduct the yajna in
pursuance of heaven and earth.


So also let the performer of scientific yajna
conduct the holy project of research and development
of light, energy and vitality on a universal scale. Him
the people recognise, appreciate and applaud in words
of praise and gratitude with holy offerings of support.
Let this yajaka with a golden face radiate the light of
knowledge, and, as an illuminating power among the


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 2 865


people moving forward on the path of progress, let him
shine as stars, collecting, developing and creating new
light in pursuance of the generosity of heaven and earth
at our level.






Agni, such you are, shining bright, wealthy and
abundant, generous and giving, create and bestow the
light of knowledge and wealth of the world on us for
our good. Just as heaven and earth create light and
wealth and with it bless humanity, so you too create the
wealth of existence for the grace and glory of life on
earth and let the earth become a happy place fit for the
divinities to come and dwell.


(The mantra, according to Swami Dayanand, 1s
applicable to the brilliant saintly and generous scholars
and scientists.)





[Names: Dano, Srutya, Pract]
Agni, give us liberally. Give us the grace and
the glory a thousandfold. Reveal the light and, likewise,




open the flood-gates of knowledge, wealth and power,
and the velocity of light for the speed of progress. Let
the heaven and earth be the eastern horizon of a new
dawn and the dawns bring in brilliant days of holy light
and creative vitality of life’s purity.


Tadic ॥



[Names: Usaso, Hotrabhiragnirmanusah]
May the same Agni, bright and burning, radiate
and illuminate us day and night with holy light. And
may he, ruler of humanity, lovely and charming, high-
priest of life’s yajna of love and non-violence, ever on
the round like a beneficent visitor, with the rise of the
morning sun, with holy offerings as well as gifts of food,
energy and joy, add to the health, happiness and
longevity of the people.






[Names: Duhana, Satinam, Pururupamisani]
Thus, Agni, ancient light of eternal vision,
knowledge and wisdom, we pray, increase and advance
for us among our people, immortal lovers and seekers
of universal knowledge, versatile intelligence for our
human purposes, and, with your sincere mind and soul,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 2 867


impart a hundred fold specialist knowledge and
expertise of various forms in various fields to the expert
inventor, designer and worker according to the need
and requirement of the situation among our dynamic
people, knowledge and expertise from which may flow
the wealth of food and honeyed prosperity like abundant
milk of generous cow.






[Names: Vayamagne, Asmakam]
Agni, leading light of life and humanity, let us
acquire noble strength and power with speed and
transport. Let us enlighten our people with knowledge
to a higher than usual degree. May our honour and
splendour be high over and among all the five classes
of people. Lord of light, purify, sanctify and brighten
our holy joy so that our strength, honour and happiness
becomes difficult to challenge and grows inviolable.





[Names: Sano, Yamagne]
Agni, adorable lord of life and majesty, leading
light of humanity, mighty commander of challenge and




victory, instruct and enlighten us in that struggle and
endeavour for life, living in which the bright and brave
aspire for success and arise nobly reborn and seasoned
leaders. Temper us in that yajnic ordeal of fire, eternal
and subtle, shining and burning in everyone’s own heart
and home, which the warlike heroes enter and attain
the life eternal.






[Names: Ubhaydso, Vasvo, Puruscandrasya, Puruscandras, Sagdhi]
Agni, Jataveda who know and govern all that is
born in the world of existence, bless us that we may be
both your admirers and worshippers and also shine
bright and brave in the household. Help us Lord, and
give us the competence to have a liberal share of your
gifts of happy home, health and wealth, all round peace
and divine grace, plenty and prosperity, a happy family
and bright children.





[Names: Asmanca]
Those learned, bright and brave people who
create and offer gifts in homage specially of quality cows


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 869


and lands and handsome horses for the worshippers of
Agni and developers of the science of fire, O lord of
light and life, giver of peace and happy home, you
advance all these and us in life, and bless us that we
may, wise and brave, sing songs of praise to celebrate
you in yajnic acts of life.


Mandala 2/Sukta 3






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gritsamada, Rshi, Samiddho, Agnirnihitah, Agnirnihita, Hota]
Agni, light and fire of life and all existence, is
established in action on and in the earth. It abides in
and by all regions of the universe, each one of them,
directly, immediately and positively. It is the sacred fire
that carries on the yajna of the universe, giving,
receiving and giving again in the cycle of cosmic
dynamics. It is ‘pavaka’, refiner, purifier and sanctifier.
It is bright and blazing, innately intelligent, guiding and
directing the onward march of life.


May Agni, in its own right of its nature and
Dharma, bright and ever giving as the Divinity, abide
by all the divinities of nature and humanity, holy powers
all, and, together with them, carry on the cycle of life in






[Names: Swami, Dayananda]
cally, in an open-ended applied manner in the human
context: Agni is the scholar, teacher, researcher, ruler,
producer, worker, in fact any power human or natural,
creatively working for life and helping humanity and
the environment for the progress of all living beings in
the service of God.)






[Names: Narasamsah, Ghrtaprusa]
Agni, lord of life and light of the world, adored
by many people, self-refulgent with the light of his own
flames, revealing the regions of the universe with his
own knowledge and power and lighting the threefold
fires of the sun in heaven, lightning in the sky and fire
on the earth, including the three fires of the home, i.e.,
garhapatya, ahavaniya and daksinagni, replete with ghrta
and brilliant with his own inner light of mind, receiving
the offerings into the vedi and augmenting and returning
them manifold in showers of bliss, may, we pray, bless
and beatify the brilliant and generous yajakas of divine
order seated at the head of yajna.



of Ilito agne manasa no arhan devan yaksi manusat




[Names: Marutam, Maruta]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 871


Agni, praised, adored and celebrated lord of
light and power of knowledge, first and foremost friend
of humanity, worthy of honour and pleased to listen and
bless, we pray join the brilliant divinities and reward
them with science and sacred knowledge now as ever.
Lord, such as you are, bring us the speed and force of
the Maruts, mighty winds, and the imperishable power
and glory of Indra, showers of electric energy from the
clouds. Come ye all members of humanity, join and
honour Agni seated on the grass upfront on the holy
vedi of your yajna of life.





[Names: Deva, Ghrtenaktam, Aditya, Adit]
Deva Agni, brilliant and generous lord of light
and life, knowledge and bliss, come and grace this holy
grass spread around the vedi manned by bright and brave
young people and, with ghrta in the vedi, refine and
reinforce the waters full of virility, holding power and
prosperity and further expanding for the growth of life’s
wealth and joy. And let the Vasu order of researchers,
Aditya order of eminent scholars, all nobilities of the
world and holy yajakas, the vitality of the Vasu sources
and supports of life and the light of the sun on yearly
rounds, too, join the programme and vitalise the waters.








[Names: Srayantamurviya, Vyacasvatirvi]
Let the sacred doors of yajnic progress, wide,
expansive and easy of access, open and welcome the
performers. And let the performers, youthful and
unaging, take recourse to these at the call of the wide
wide earth and spread around with acts of humility and
gratitude, purifying and sanctifying the integrity of their
form and character, honour and grace, and the heroism
of their young generation.






[Names: Sadhvapamsi, Usasanakta, Tantum]
May the night and day going together in orbit,
singing in unison, replete with the waters of peace and
bliss, abundant in the milk of life and profusely giving,
harmoniously shaping and advancing the beauteous
form of nature’s vast yajnic evolution, like two
companion women weaving the warp and woof of cloth,
bless us with noble competence for holy yajnic actions
performed with humility and gratitude to Agni, lord of
light, yajna and advancement.


(Like the night and day the husband and wife
should act in unison and carry on the holy yajna of the
family and the household as part of the vast yajna of
life in existence.)


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 873






[Names: Daivya, Devan]
The two divine yajakas, day and night, husband
and wife, of prime nature and character, blest with innate
intelligence, and handsome in form and stature, carry
on the creative yajna sincerely and naturally with hymns
of praise for the lord of existence. Carrying on the yajna
in honour of the divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity according to the seasons on the vedi of the
earth and over the three peaks of space, 1.e., the earth’s
atmosphere, the middle region and the region of
heavenly light, or doing their best in the first, second
and third quarter of life for Dharma, artha and kama,
they live and act together.






[Names: Sarasvati, Tisro, Saranam]
Ila, the transcendent Infinity of Divine
[Names: Omniscience]
revealed, recorded and envisioned in meditation, and
Bharati, living human speech which holds the treasure
of secular knowledge ever on the move in life onward




intelligence and, with their innate and essential power,
come and grace our holy seat of yajna and bless it as
our perfect haven and faultless home under protection
of the divinities.






[Names: Pisangarupah, Prajam]
The person who loves God and serves the
divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity soon and
sure grows handsome in form and personal splendour,
generous and abundant in nature and habit, strong in
health, virility and longevity, and bright and brave in
performance. May Tvashta, lord creator and maker of
life-forms, give us progeny, our sustenance and security
for life, and then bless us with food and maintenance
for the learned and the divines on way to the holy
destination of life.






[Names: Vanaspatiravasrjannupa, Tridha]
May Agni, ruler and life-giver, Vanaspati, giver
of vitality to vegetation, stand by us. May Vanaspati,
trees and all vegetation, giving fruits, flowers and life-
breath, stand by us. Agni, sun and fire, prepares for us


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 3 875


the food for life and yajna. So also may Agni, the scholar
specialist of the science of yajna, knowing his subject
and aware of his duty, rising high in the light of holiness,
divine of nature, creator and harbinger of peace, bring
in for us yajnic materials mixed, refined and sanctified
three ways by thought, word and deed for threefold
purpose of the health of body, mind and soul for the
divinities of nature and humanity.






[Names: Ghrtam, Anusvadhama]
I mix, prepare and offer ghrta into the fire. Ghrta,
vitality, is the womb of fire energy. It (fire energy and
vitality) exists in fertility, ghrta, which is its medium.
And this ghrta, fertility, too abides in Ghrta, eternal
creativity, Agni, Life Supreme, which is the ultimate
abode of all existential energy, vitality, fertility,
production and procreation. O Vrsabha, youthful and
generous yajaka overflowing with the lustre and
splendour of vitality, bring in the sanctified and
dedicated materials committed to Svaha, the word of
truth and sincerity of the oblation in yajna. Collect,
prepare, commit, offer with faith and dedication, and
rejoice in your act of creation.




Mandala 2/Sukta 4




[Names: Agni, Devata, Somahuti, Bhargava, Rshi, Huve, Mitra]
deva adeve jane jatavedah.


For you all, I invoke, adore and worship Agni,
lord of light and giver of life and energy, blissfully
shining, selflessly generous and abundant in food and
wealth of the world, ever on the round among the people
like a cherished guest of honour, who may, I pray, be
the sustainer and protector of all like a friend, brilliant
light giver for all the people who know and understand,
omnipotent as he is in the world of existence, lord
omniscient as he is of all that is born.






[Names: Imamam]
This fire energy, uniformly present in the midst
of waters in the womb of space, the Bhrgus, specialists
of heat energy, collect, bring down, reproduce, and place
the part available among the people for their use in two
forms, one that gives heat and light and the other that is
motive energy. May this agni, fire energy, dynamic and
strong, fastest in motion, be vastly and universally
available to all as gift of the divinities of nature’s power


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 4 877
and the brilliant scholars of the earth.






[Names: Agnim, Mitram]
Agni, heat and light energy, brilliant scientists
living among human communities in the world produce
and establish like a dear favourite friend in power
homes. And that power, developed and exploited by
experts, as a catalytic force burning in waves of light,
brightens up the nights all round with love and joy for
the man of generosity.






[Names: Asya]
Joyous and beautiful is the growth of this fire,
satisfying as one’s own. Delightful is the holy form of
it as it rises to a bright and blazing stature. Brilliant and
inspiring is it while it shines in herbs and trees, and
awful is its form while it raises its flames of fire like the
tongues of a voracious demon or shakes them like the
mane and tail of a chariot horse.








That immensity and golden glory of Agni which
the scholars and admirers fail to measure, comprehend
and express for me and the worshippers, He himself,
joyous and blissful, reveals directly by his glorious light
in meditation and through its majesty in blaze, the same
and again every moment of time.






[Names: Krsnadhva]
Agni, bright as sun rays, flaming with light and
love, shines, radiates and roars like a flood rushing on
its way, or like a war horse on the highway. Bright and
burning, it goes on dispelling darkness and leaving a
trail of light on its path, blazing like the light of heaven
and thundering like lightning. It can be known and
realised with homage of service in humility and inputs
of fine foods in yajna.





[Names: Agnih, Socisman]
That is Agni which stands by us all round, heats


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 4 879


and lights the earth, and freely at will goes forward like
the light of the eye or like a cow without the shepherd
— Agni, shining, blazing and cleansing, heating and
moving the particles of matter and energy, attracting,
propelling and dispelling, breaking up, universal
presence all knowing, as if tasting everything that exists.






[Names: Samsi, Asme]
in studies and in our third and highest order of yajnic
ways of living you teach us the eternal science of all
round protection and progress. Bless us, O lord, with
bright and brave dedicated youth, immensely growing
prosperity of food, knowledge and speed of
advancement, noble progeny, and wealth, power and
honour.






[Names: Tvaya, Suviradso]
Agni, lord of light and life, for the wise and the
brave and for the teacher and the celebrant, bring that
health and age by which the people, happy and
enlightened, shining within with discriminative




intelligence, blest with noble youth and fighting force,
challenging hate and enmity, may, by your grace, rise
high and ever higher.


Mandala 2/Sukta 5






[Names: Agni, Devata, Somahuti, Bhargava, Rshi, Hotajanista, Prayaksanjeyam]
The yajaka, man of self, man of intelligence and
self-awareness performing yajna, giving and
cooperating with creative people, grows and is reborn
as father, supporter, sustainer and protector for the elder
generation and sustaining powers for the protection and
advancement of life and society in general as part of
the social and historical cycle, creating wealth, power
and services worthy to be attained. Let us too, intelligent
and progressive, be able to create an environment which
may take us forward as a disciplined and organised




[Names: Manusvad]
vati.


In the cosmic conduct of the universal yajna,
the sun is the performer, and there are seven rays in the
spectrum of light acting like seven priests. There is one


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 5 881


more, eighth, just like the human agent in the socio-
natural yajnic life of the world, and that is the divine
sanctifier and sustainer who pervades and sustains the
entire world of existence.






[Names: Dadhanve, Pari]
He holds and controls the waters of life, and He
reveals the universal knowledge of existence, the Veda.
And He knows that world of existence and comprehends
the cosmic system and its working. Thus He holds and
controls its working just as the centre-hold of the wheel
and the rim hold the structure and control the movement
of the wheel.





[Names: Sakam, Sucind, Suci, Vidvan]
Surely he who, by the grace of the Divine Spirit

of universal purity, grows pure, and, by the divine
control and universal action of the Spirit of the universe,
rises to a state of self-control and right action, he is
reborn as the real man of knowledge, and, abiding by
the immutable law and discipline of Divinity and nature,
grows high and great in life like the branches of a tree
(drawing and receiving the spirit and breath of life from
the root at the centre of existence).








[Names: Kuvit]
And those girls and women who abide by the
nature, law and self-willed action of the Omniscient
Controller of existence, and, like sister streams flowing
from the same source, receive abundant and cherished
showers of life and light energy from the three worlds
of earth, heaven and the middle regions of the skies,
rise to the beauty, grace and generosity of the divine
fire and waters and bless the world around like mother
cows by virtue of their knowledge, performance and
devotion.






[Names: Yadi, Tasamadhvaryuragatau]
If the mother and the sister bearing ghrta and
water come and sit close around the vedi in yajna, then
on their arrival the high-priest and the yajakas rejoice
like herbs and grass and barley on the arrival of rain






[Names: Svah, Stomam]
Let the priests and yajakas do their priest-like


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 6 883


tasks for the sake of heavenly light and the self in the
service of Agni, lord sustainer and controller of life and
the universe. Let them offer songs of praise and yajnic
action to the Lord. May we too, we pray, as participants
of yajna, rejoice in the holiness and divinity of life and,
with dedicated performance, attain the abundant wealth
and waters of life and the spirit divine.






[Names: Yatha, Ayamagne]
O lord giver of light and life, Agni, what this
man of knowledge and wisdom does holily and
gracefully for all the saints and sagely performers of
yajna, the same he does for you too in dedication. And
so also whatever yajnic acts of life we perform, we
dedicate to you.


Mandala 2/Sukta 6






[Names: Agni, Devata, Somahuti, Bhargava, Rshi, Imam, Srudhi]
Agni, lord giver of light and knowledge, pray
accept this holy fuel of mine offered with folded hands,
accept this homage and allow the supplicants entry to
the yajna of enlightenment, and listen graciously to these
prayers of mine.








Agni, child as well as creator and preserver of
energy and power, lover of speed and acceleration,
brilliantly risen to eminence, with this offer and homage
and by this song and celebration of light and fire, let us
serve you and advance the yajnic development of
knowledge and energy.






[Names: Saparyema]
Agni, lord of wealth and power of existence,
lover and creator of energy, power and wealth, giver of
wealth and honour, with songs of love and praise, we,
your lovers and devotees, are at your service with our
homage and holy offerings — seekers and supplicants
as we are.





[Names: Yuyodhyasmad]
Agni, lord of light, give us knowledge and
enlightenment. Lord bright and brave of knowledge,
power and honour, lord of wealth and grandeur, giver
of wealth, power, honour and glory of the world, ward


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 6 885


off all hate and jealousy of existence and cleanse us
from within.






Agni gives us the rain showers from the regions
of the sun and sky. Agni gives us the power and
automotive speed of movement without the horse. Agni
gives us a thousand forms of food and energy.






[Names: Ilanayavasyave, Yajistha]
Agni, lord of light and power, youngest and
unaging, harbinger of safety and destroyer of evil, power
adorable and generous giver, for the supplicant and the
worshipper in need seeking protection and progress,
come and listen to our prayers.





[Names: Antarhyagna, Dito]
Agni, omnipresent lord of light, you are ever
present in the heart within. Lord of knowledge, poetic
visionary of the universe, you know the birth and death
of things past, present and future. Harbinger and giver




of knowledge of life in existence, you are the friend of
all living beings for the sake of entire humanity.






[Names: Anusak]
Agni, lord of knowledge, loving and kind, you
give whatever we need since you know and command
the wealth of the world. And, omnipresent in the quarters
of the universe, you come, manifest and bless our home,
sit on our vedi of yajna, this same one where we pray.


Mandala 2/Sukta 7






[Names: Agni, Devata, Somahuti, Bhargava, Rshi, Srestham, Bharata, Vaso, Purusprham, Purusprha]
Agni, most youthful spirit and ruling power of
the world, Bharata, lord commander of abundance and
prosperity, home of life’s joy and comfort and giver of
whatever wealth whoever loves to have, come bearing
that best and highest and most shining wealth which
entire humanity loves and aspires to create and possess.
Come and bless all.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 7 887




[Names: Parsi]
Agni, generous and brilliant lord ruler of the
world of life, let no one who is selfish, ungenerous,
uncreative and graceless rule over us, whether we are
learned and bright or just simple ordinary folk living as
children of nature. Liberate us from him, purge us of
the hateful and the envious within and without, and
purge him too of hate and enmity.






[Names: Visva]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, brilliant
ruling power of the world, let us all, with you and by
your divine grace, plunge and penetrate into all forces
of hate and enmity, explore and fight and cross over the
evils as navigators cross over the turbulent waves of
the sea.






[Names: Sucih, Tvam]
Agni, pure and brilliant, burning, cleansing and
creating, you are the power adorable, refulgent, shining
bright, vast and mighty. And among us you are invoked,
kindled, raised and fed and raised into flames of light
and fire with profuse libations of ghrta in joint yajna.







[Names: Astapadtbhirahutah]
Agni, brilliant ruling lord of light and life, you
are the holder and wielder of wealth and power for us
by virtue of generous cows and virile bulls and with the
generosity of our noble women and the industry of our
brave and creative men. And you are invoked and adored
with eightfold voices of holy chants in yajna.






[Names: Dravannah, Sahasasputro]
Marvellous is Agni, child of courage and power,
ancient and eternal. Fuel wood is its food and ghrta its
drink. Creator, giver and receiver, it calls up everything
to life and shines with light and heat, adorable, a darling
of our choice.


Mandala 2/Sukta 8




[Names: Agni, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Vajayanniva, Yasastamasya]
Scientist of eminence, would you like to drive
your chariots fast and far? Then tap, appraise and exploit


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 8 889


agni, fire, in various uses and experiments. It is
immensely powerful, replete with wealth and liquid
energy and a blessing for humanity. So is water.






[Names: Carupratika]
Agni, brilliant and leading power of the world,
is generous for the liberal investor. Inexhaustible itself,
it destroys the negative forces inimical to life. Beautiful
and blissful in nature and character, it is invoked and
lighted for power and comfort in life.






[Names: Sriya, Yasya]
Agni, power of heat and life of the world, is
honoured and valued in the homes day and night, and
its potential and function is never measured out.






[Names: Anjano]
Agni which gloriously shines and blazes for us
with the light of the sun is wonderful and awe-inspiring
with its beauty and splendour, manifesting itself through
unaging forms, revealing them to our sight and
experience.








[Names: Atrimanu, Visva, Sriyo]
Holy words of praise and appreciation advance
and celebrate Agni, light and power of the world, self-
refulgent, free and self-governing, which devours the
offerings of yajna and yields the beauty and fragrance
of life beyond all three kinds of physical, mental and
spiritual ailments and discomfort. For that reason I bear
and abide by it above all other wealth and beauty of the






[Names: Agnerindrasya, Somasya, Somas, Arisyantah]
Agni, light and life of existence, prime power
and energy of the world, may we ever abide and benefit
by you by virtue of the light and protection of Indra,
the sun, Soma, the moon, and the divinities of nature
such as earth, and the brilliant geniuses of humanity
who give us the knowledge of Agni, fire, energy and
electric power. And may we, unhurt and inviolable, rise
in life, building our defences and fighting the battles of
our growth and progress.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 9 891


Mandala 2/Sukta 9






[Names: Agni, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Adabdha, Sahasrambharah, Agnih, Agni]
Agni, lord of light, life and knowledge, ever sits
and abides as the chief of life’s evolution, invoking the
divine powers, receiving, consuming and creating, and
giving the wherewithal for life’s evolution. Let him sit
in the home of the host of yajna, in and around the vedi,
in the chariot, in the car, in the house of science and
industry, wherever the yajna is carried on in nature and
human society. He is fully knowledgeable and ever
present, shining, radiating and illuminating the people
around with knowledge, best creator of haven and home
for peace and comfort, bearing a thousand forms of
wealth and power, crystalline pure and bright of the rays
of light and tongues of fire for the Word of knowledge
and passion for action. Such is Agni, radiant and
flaming, burning and blazing, devouring, creating, ever






[Names: Tvam, Agne]
Agni, lord creator and giver of light and life,




high-priest of the yajna of knowledge and creative action
for advancement, you are the messenger of inspiration
and enlightenment, you are the saviour protector and
pilot to guide us across the seas, you are our haven and
home, leader and guide most generous and brave in the
forward march, relentless in the continuation of the race,
community, family and progeny and the expansion and
advancement of our body and body-politic. Lord
omniscient, you know. Giver of knowledge, enlighten
us. Protector, preserver and advancer of our animal
wealth and health of body, mind and senses, saviour
and preserver of mother earth and her environment and
animal world, help us to protect, preserve and advance
ourselves and save the earth and her environment.






[Names: Vidhema, Yasmad]
Agni, lord of light, giver of life and leader of
our yajnic progress and advancement, let us roam around
in meditation in that highest heaven of freedom where
you reveal your presence in living experience. Let us
send up our holy chants of Vedic hymns to celebrate
you in the regions of the skies this side of the heavens
of light. Let us adore you with havan and homage here
on earth where the learned and the wise offer oblations
of ghrta into the vedi wherefrom you rise and manifest
in fire and fragrance to bless the world around.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 9 893






[Names: Sukrasya]
Agni, high-priest of cosmic yajna, perform the
yajna of creation and evolution with the holiest materials
in existence, go on with the performance, instantly as
ever, receiving, offering, consuming and creating the
wealth worthy and valuable as holy gift, and loudly
proclaim the wealth you have created and the success
you have achieved. Surely you alone are the lord of
riches, creator as well as dispenser of the jewels of the
earth. And you are the inspirer and proclaimer of the
eternal Word of power, purity and truth.






[Names: Ubhayam, Krdhi]
Both your creation and dispensation of wealth
never end, never diminish. Day by day your creation
grows and your gifting prospers, lord of charity and
destroyer of suffering as you are. Agni, lord of universal
yajna, promote the worshipper of Divinity dedicated to
holy work, promote the man of wealth and charity,
promote the father of noble children and the defender
of holy tradition, and raise the potential of the master
creator of yajnic wealth.








[Names: Sainanikena, Adabdho]
Agni, lord of light, creator and commander of
wealth, shine with this glory of yours, generous
benefactor of ours, high-priest of cosmic yajna with the
bounties of nature to the maximum for the good of
humanity. Shine on, high-priest of yajna, fearless and
inviolable, protector of the cow, mother earth and her
children, our saviour and ultimate protector.


Mandala 2/Sukta 10






[Names: Agni, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Johutro, Agnih, Agni, Sriyam, Sravasyah]
Agni, heat and light of existence, first and
primary power of yajnic applications, kindled and raised
on earth in the vedi, both spiritual and material, is a
source of comfort and protection as a paternal power.
Wearing the spectral beauty of colour, indestructible,
pure and purifying, it is a splendid power that can be
used as fuel food for the production of energy, motion
and speed like a horse.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 10 895






[Names: Sriya, Syava]
Listen ye all to my call, proclamation and
invitation to power made in universal words of science:
Agni is a wonderful power that shines with the sun,
indestructible, and a source of manifold knowledge,
riding a chariot drawn by wave-like horses of rain-bow
colours—dark brown, bay, reddish, dark red and violet,
the horses bearing the two wheels forward in circuit.






[Names: Uttanayamajanayantsusutam, Puru, Sirinayam]
Conceived and nestled like an embryo in the
many coloured herbs over the wide wide earth in the
womb of night but, with its splendour not suppressed
even by darkness of the night, it remains awake until it
comes back to light again in the morning waking up all








[Names: Jigharmyagnim, Prthum]
I light and sprinkle the fire with ghrta and
fragrant oblations, fire, pervading all regions of the
universe, vast, radiating in waves, expanding with life
energy and splendour, extending and comprehending,
mighty and impetuous with energy in velocity, beautiful
and gracious with light and illumination.






[Names: Maryasrih, Agnirnabhi]
I light the fire and sprinkle it with ghrta all round
with specific knowledge and with a loving mind without
with it, the same way. Agni is the wealth, beauty and
grace of mortal humanity, lovely and splendid of form
as it loves to be. Flaming, flickering and awfully
vibrating, it brooks no touch by anyone.






[Names: Jneya, Anunamagnim, Anunamagni]
Know and abide by your share of the beauty,
power and prosperity of life by the grace of Agni. Be
patient, challenging and victorious at the peak of your
conduct and performance. Let us all, your messengers,
eloquent and rich in wealth and fire-power, speak and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 897


celebrate Agni as human power, preserver, protector and
promoter of life. I invoke, enkindle, praise, serve and
worship Agni, perfect power without a fault, replete with
showers of honey-sweets.


Mandala 2/Sukta 11






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Srudhi]
Indra, ruler and commander of wealth, power
and honour, listen to our prayer: May we, unhurt, well
cared and confident seekers of wealth and honour in
the world, ever be sure of the gift of your generosity
and gracious favours. All these powers and energies of
the world streaming forth your favours like the seas sing
of your power and celebrate your grace.






[Names: Srjo, Sura, Amartyam]
Indra, lord of wealth and power, bright and brave
hero of light, knowledge and freedom, release the
ancient lands held up by the demon destroyer of
freedom. Release the prime voices of truth suppressed
under the dark clouds of ignorance. Release the lands




and voices like the showers of rain released by the sun
by breaking the cloud. Lord of truth, light and power,
rising by songs of homage and applause, break down
the demonic fiend who believes that he is not subject to






[Names: Ukthesvinnu, Tubhyedeta]
Indra, bright and brave, heroic lord of light,
action and generosity, all the citations of praise and
appreciation of achievement and victory in which you
delight, all these holy songs of gratitude to Divinity,
Rudra, for the gifts of pranic vitality, power and majesty
in which you rejoice, and all these brilliant acts of glory
which shine and vibrate among people like waves of
light energy : all these flow from us in thanks and
gratitude to you who, in human words, are like the wind,
tempestuous, ferocious, kind and creative, all in one,
divine.

[Names: Subhram, Subhrastvamindra]
Indra, ruling lord of humanity, exalting your


brilliant power and prosperity, holding radiant
thunderbolts in their hands, our people, workers,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 899


producers, administrators, warriors and teachers deserve
your bounty. Lord of spotless and incorruptible virtue
ever rising in power and majesty, raise their courage,
valour and lustre by the light and splendour of the sun.






[Names: Guha]
Indra, brilliant and fearless ruling power of the
world, just as the sun breaks up the demoniac cloud which
holds up the vapours of water and overcasts the light of
heaven, so with your valour and blazing splendour break
up and destroy the covert, mysterious, artful and
manipulative social enemies living in the midst of the
people but hidden deep in the recesses of society under
the surface of national waters, paralysing the flow of
national dynamics of development and progress.






[Names: Stava, Stava, Suryasya, Suryas]
Indra, lord of power, majesty and glory, we
praise your grand achievements of old. We celebrate
your new acts of splendour and victory. We admire the
thunderbolt of defence blazing in your hands. And we
sing the glories of your majesty like rays of the sun
doing homage to the sun’s power of sustenance of the










[Names: Hari]
Indra, lord of light and power, ruler of the world,
the circuitous rays of your glory like two horses of the
fertilising, giving and receiving, proclaim your grace
and majesty replete with the waters of life. Let the earth
expand and grow and prosper. Let the battles of life be
fought and won in unison. Arise and rejoice flowing
like streams from the mountain, showering like clouds
of rain, from the heavens.






[Names: Dure]
Let Indra, ruler of the world, sit and reign settled
as a mountain, showering as a cloud, shining with
heaven and earth, revered and loved by mothers of the
and assessed by intelligent experts who, raising the holy
voice higher and farther beyond the seas may
universalise the divine voice of omniscience revealed
by Indra, lord omnipotent ruler of the universe.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 901






[Names: Indro, Arejetam]
Indra is great, mighty heroic, creates, thickens
and chases the wondrous cloud overcasting the wide
and bottomless skies, so that when the cloud, falling in
heavy showers, roars and thunders, the heaven and earth,
stricken with fear by thunder and lightning, shake and
rave under terror. (So should be the ruler and the law.)






[Names: Aroravid]
Awfully roars and resounds the thunderbolt of
this mighty Indra, beyond human imagination. It is the
tempestuous shower of solar energy which humanity
should exploit. So does the ruler with the blaze of his
power and justice crush the mischief and malevolent
force of the underworld and enjoy the peace and pleasure
of a noble social order, creating it for himself and the








[Names: Pibapibedindra, Mandantu, Somam, Soma, Prnantaste, Indramava]
Indra, mighty brave and resplendent lord of
power and knowledge, ruler, scholar, physician,
destroyer of evil and ill-health, drink and drink on the
soma of peace, health and life’s joy. May the exhilarating
essences distilled from life and nature transport you to
ecstasy. May the invigorating spirits of life and nature
like the drink of soma increase your creative power and
the fertility of the land. O distinguished citizen and ruler
of the land, thus regaled with peace, power and pleasure,
preserve and promote the prosperity and honour of the
earth and her children.






[Names: Indrapyabhuma, Avasyavo]
Indra, lord of light and power, mighty and
gracious ruler of the world, may we too abide by you,
cultivate our intellect and intelligence, dedicating our
mind to truth and the laws of truth, nature and humanity,
and thereby become noble scholars and learned
professionals. Thus searching for self-protection and
working for social progress, may we earn appreciation
and praise for ourselves and our work, and may we
speedily contribute to the honour, prosperity and glory
of a generous ruler like you.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 903




[Names: Syama, Susmintamam]
Indra, generous and self-refulgent lord of light,
power and honour, may we be yours, dedicated to you
only, working for self-development and social progress
under your kind protection and contributing to the
energy and prosperity of the nation. Generous and
gracious lord, you bless us with the wealth and honour
which we love and cherish and which is distinguished
by richest prosperity, fieriest energy and mightiest
heroes of the world on the field.






[Names: Rasi, Sardha, Mitramasme, Mitramasm, Sajosaso, Marutam, Maruta]
Indra, gracious ruler of the world, giver of power
and prosperity, you give us a home, friends, and strength
and force as that of the winds. And you give us also
those who, united and acting in harmony, joyous and
inspired, full of vigour and enthusiasm, follow the ways
and values of policy, conduct and action far in advance
of their time.








[Names: Vyantvinnu, Asmantsu]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, ruler of
the world, ruler of the self, the things and values in which
wise and learned visionaries rejoice and find the very
breath of life are those in which you too, settled,
satisfied and rejoicing, find your haven and home for
the joy of life for yourself and others. Therein protect
and promote the beauty and joy of the soma-value of
life. Promote us, we pray, help us advance in the battles
of life, protector and saviour as you are, and extend the
possibilities of life and life’s heavenly joy on earth as
the sun illuminates the glories of heaven and augments
them with its mighty rays and atomic fuel.






[Names: Brhanta, Strnanaso]
Indra, gracious lord of power and ruler of the
world, saviour from suffering and helping us all to cross
the seas of existence, those who celebrate your glories
with holy chants of the Veda, rising high, enjoy your
favour and grace and, under your protection, achieve
food, energy, speed and prosperity and, traversing the
skies like their own home, rise to space heights.







[Names: Ugresvinnu, Pradodhuvacchmasrusu, Somamindra]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 11 905


Indra, lord of light and life of life, destroyer of
pain and suffering, harbinger of the soma-joy of living,
bright, blazing and rejoicing among the brilliant
geniuses of the world, collect, create and fill soma in
the three-fold vessels of our body, mind and soul. Move
by the circuitous rays of the sun for a drink of the
spirituous ecstasy of life and, happy at heart, vibrate in
every cell through every pore of the body.






[Names: Dhisva, Savah, Apdavrnor]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, hold on
that strength by which you break the dark cloud pregnant
with waters covered as under the web of a spider. Reveal
and release the light and power of the sun for the noble
seekers of wisdom and virtuous life so that the wicked
exploiter and demon of darkness is kept and crushed by
the left wing of your law.






[Names: Sanema, Asmabhyam]
Indra, lord of light, power and love, let us abide
by those who, by your modes of protection and
advancement, surpass and subdue all the dark and
exploitative forces of hate, jealousy, enmity and wicked




opposition with their strength of justice and virtue, and
who form and structure for us that universal character
and constitution of one world order of love and
friendship which is inspired by Divinity for humanity
free from physical, mental and spiritual want and






[Names: Asya, Avartayat, Angirasvan, Angirasva]
Let Indra, lord ruler of the world, settled and
inspired, vibrating with energy, wind and power,
developing and growing to splendour with the billion-
fold nation of this mighty, joyous and free humanity,
move like the sun his wheel of governance and dispel
the dark and demoniac forces of evil and wickedness.






[Names: Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, glorious lord ruler of light and life, mighty
powerful, may that generous power and liberality of
yours ever flow with the highest good for the admirer
and worshipper of Divinity. Give knowledge and
enlightenment to the singers and celebrants. Pray do
not strain them, hurt them not, nor burn them to naught.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 907


Bless us with unbounded wealth and honour. Bless us
with brave and noble heroes. Inspire us to sing and
celebrate the divine glory in our battles of life.


Mandala 2/Sukta 12






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Yasya, Indrah, Indra]
Ye men and women of the world, Indra is the
generous self-refulgent lord omnipotent and omniscient
who, first manifested, creates and adorns the generous
earth and brilliant stars. It is by the grandeur of his
mighty wealth and power of action that the heaven and
earth and the middle regions of the skies move around
in orbit.






O people of the world, it is Indra, lord
omnipotent, who establishes the moving earth in balance
in orbit and silences the angry volcanoes and roaring
clouds, who encompasses the vast skies and holds up




the high heavens of light.(Such is Indra, universal






People of the world, it is Indra who breaks the
cloud into showers and makes the seven rivers and seven
seas flow, who makes the moving stars and planets such
as earth and satellites such as moon dance around in
order, who wields and controls the entire energy of the
universe, who creates the fire at the centre of the stone
and the cloud and controls the making and breaking of
the elements in the cosmic dynamics.






[Names: Yanema, Svaghniva]
Who makes all these moving objects of the
moving world of existence, who conceives and fixes
the emergent form deep in the cavern of the mind, who
takes on the target like an unfailing hunter, all those in
course of time which are created and nurtured by him:
Such is Indra, O people of the world.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 909






[Names: Sradasmai]
Of whom they often ask: Where is he? He is
terrible, say they. He is everywhere, say some. He is
nowhere, say others. He is the master and lord of all,
creates, evolves and devolves, elevates with a heave
and, “like a victor” he shoots down the thriving ones:
Such, O people, is Indra. Know him well in truth, and






[Names: Yuktagravno]
He is inspirer of the obedient worshipper,
support of the weak and emaciated, promoter of
knowledge and Veda, saviour of the poor and destitute,
and strength of the celebrant; he is protector of the
person who is dedicated to learning and soma-yajna,
commands knowledge and creates the joy of soma in
society: Such is Indra O people of the world.








[Names: Yasyasvasah, Suryam, Surya, Usasam, Usasa]
His are the waves of energy pervading in the
directions and sub-directions of space. His are the horses
and the cows, his the earths and the rays of light. His are
the habitations and all the starry chariots of the world.
He creates the sun and the dawn, revealing them every
day anew. He is the mover and guide of the waters and
spatial energy. Such, O people, is Indra, universal energy.






[Names: Samanam]
Whom the heaven and earth wheeling, whirling,
humming the celestial music of the spheres together and
vying each other in homage, invoke, whom the highest
and farthest as well as lowest and nearest, all, friends
and non-friends, worship alike as riding the same
chariot, invoke and worship in various ways: that, O
people of the world, is Indra, lord of power over all.






[Names: Yasmanna]
Without whom the people win no victories, on


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 911


whom the warriors depend for protection, who is the
comprehending measure of the universe and the
unmoved mover of the cosmic dynamics: he, O people
of the world, is Indra.






[Names: Sasvato]
He who holds and governs the eternal
constituents of existence, who with his power of justice
and punishment destroys the disreputables taking
recourse to great sins and crimes, who disapproves,
scotches and silences the evil tongue of the maligner,
and who eliminates the wicked exploiter: such, O
people, is Indra.






[Names: Saradyanvavindat, Ojayamanam, Jaghana]
He who finds the vapours of water hidden in
the cloud on the fortieth day of autumn (or in the fortieth
autumn) and breaks the cloud, heavy with water for
showers yet sleeping like a giant, thus releasing the rain-
showers: such, O people, is Indra, the mighty Sun.








Who shines bright with seven-colour rays of
light, mightily generous, immensely full of energy and
power, and, breaking the clouds to rain showers, releases
the seven floods of water, rivers and seas rolling and
flowing, and who energises the moon and the cloud
ascending towards the sun under the Rohini asterism,
that, dear people, is Indra, the Sun, mighty with his arms
of thunder and adamant.






[Names: Dyava, Susmaccidasya, Somapa]
Heaven and earth bow to him in homage. Clouds
cower and mountains quake for fear of his power. He is
the creator, preserver and promoter of the soma nectar
and ecstasy of life, knowledge concentrate and power
both, thunder-armed for punishment and protection,
flower-handed with kusha grass for blessing and
benediction. Such is Indra, lord of light and might and
life of life, O children of the earth.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 12 913




He who protects the creative man of yajnic
action, who promotes the man struggling for perfection,
and who, with all his modes of protection and progress,
advances the prayerful celebrant pilgrim on way to
Dharma, piety and charity, He is Indra, know ye all
children of the earth. The Veda glorifies him, the soma-
joy of the world celebrates him, the beauty and
perfection of this creation proclaims his art and presence.
Such is Indra, dear children of Divinity.






[Names: Vayam]
Indra, lord of light and life, potent and
inviolable, you provide all power and protection with
speed of advancement for the creative and struggling
perfectionist, and you ward off all force of opposition
from him. Lord of existence, surely you are the ultimate
Truth, you are eternal. Lord giver of life and potency,
we love you, we are your dear darlings. We pray that
confident and brave, blest with noble progeny, we may
always honour you with holy songs of celebration and
creative action in yajna.




Mandala 2/Sukta 13




[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi]
in Rturjanitri tasya apaspari maksu jata avisad yasu


[Names: Tadahana]
(There is a season for the birth of life, for
everything.) The season is the mother’s womb. Whatever
is born, the seed enters the waters of the womb, the
season, and therein it grows. The receiving mother
becomes the first recipient, taster and giver of the nectar
of life to the seed, which nectar is the life-nursing energy
of the sun. That nectar, that original essence of living
energy, 1s worth knowing and celebration.




[Names: Sadhrima, Samano]
yah.


To the same one end flow the streams of life all
round, holding the nectar of life for nourishment of the
world, carrying food for everything living and growing.
Similar and equal is the path of the streams so that they
may flow for the same purpose. The one, the first
original creator who created these streams of life, is
worth knowing and celebration.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 13 915






[Names: Anveko, Visva]
Whatever that one lord of power, Indra, creates
and gives solely by himself, the same he reveals by
himself. He creates all the forms and he destroys them
all. That’s the lord’s power and karma in which he is
solely manifested. All these universal karmas of the one,
the one manages by himself. That one sole lord, the
first and original doer who does all these is he, Indra,
and he is worth knowing and celebration.






[Names: Prajabhyah, Asinvan]
The house holders sit at the yajna working,
serving and giving for the health, growth and
advancement of the people, and while their wealth,
property and possessions are rising in assets, they sit
and abide by the yajna, sealing and securing the back
bone of the nation, a firm foundation and a launching
pad for the coming generations of humanity for further
progress. And all the while the sagely scholar scientist




of it with his teeth. Indra, it is you who plan, ordain and
execute all these dispensations, you are adorable in
words of celebration.






[Names: Adhakrnoh]
And you develop the earth to a festival of lights
for all to see and celebrate, O breaker of the cloud of
rain showers of wealth, and you open the various
channels of wealth for the streams to flow. Such as you
are, Indra, lord of light, wealth and power, brilliant and
generous, dynamic and tempestuous as wind and energy,
brilliant scholars of the world anoint you with holy
waters, and celebrate you with citations and
presentations, and raise you to eminence. Adorable you




Indra, lord of light, wealth and power, you are


the one who organise and control consumption and
production, growth and allotment and, with your liquid


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 13 917


creativity and energising waters, convert the deserts into
honeyed gardens to milk the wealth from the holy earth.
O people of the earth, he holds the wealth of the world
in the sun and rules the universe solely by himself, alone.
Such as you are, O lord of creation and sustenance, you
are worthy of celebration in song and yajnic action.






[Names: Yascasama]
Who, with his law and power, in his profuse
generosity, holds and sustains the various lands of
flowers and fertility, who is vast and potent and creates
the infinite variety of lights and blazing energies in their
entirety, he, lord worthy of homage and celebration, is






[Names: Urjayantya, Purukrt]
Who for the elimination of antihuman forces,
even though they might command wealth and power,
and for the expansion of the powers of generosity and
creativity and for the working forces, rules and provides
the unbounded face of the fertile and energising mother
earth, he is Indra, lord of manifold action and he is


worthy of adoration today.





[Names: Satarn, Srustau, Arajjau]
Ten, hundred or thousands are with Indra, sole
lord of the world, ready for service at his bidding,
unbounded his favours and incentives, a thousand-ways
his inspirations and exhortations, he knows. He binds
the wicked exploiters, criminals and sinners with
unfettered chains to break them down. Supreme
protector is he just at hand everywhere. So is he adorable
in holy chant.






[Names: Visvedanu, Salastabhna]
All according to his will and law carry out the
acts of his omnipotence for him. They hold the wealth
and power of the universe for him, lord of action as he
is. Lord of wide extensive power and presence, he
commands the six seasons of the year and energises the
five senses of perception. He encompasses all, he
transcends all. The lord is worthy of homage and
adoration in words of faith and piety.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 13 919






[Names: Supravacanam, Jatusthirasya]
Indra, mighty lord of light and life, noble and
powerful is your eloquence, since with a single act of
will and divinity you win and command the wealth of
the world. Eternal and inviolable, ancient and ever
youthful, patient yet potent and victorious, for all the
acts of existence and creation you do, you are divine,
supremely holy, and adorable in acts and words of piety.






[Names: Aramayah, Nica]
Indra, you change the dire discipline of holiness
to a pleasure path for the sinners to cross the seas and
leap to the freedom of Moksha. You accelerate the speed
and success of the parent and teacher to continue the
family line and the tradition of knowledge. You raise
the fallen from the depth, you own and console the
rejected and destitute, you give eyes to the blind and
ears to the deaf with knowledge to the ignorant. As such,
the celebrants adore you in songs of faith and joy.








[Names: Asmabhyam, Sravasya, Anu]
Indra, lord of light, power, honour and
generosity, giver of peace, progress and prosperity, great
and manifold is that wealth of yours which is your
parental gift to us as a home and haven to live in joy.
Give us the strength and capacity for charity and
[Names: Listening]
that brave and blest with brave heroic progeny, honoured
and glorious, we may profusely praise and
spontaneously celebrate your wondrous and heavenly
gifts and glory day by day in song and yajna and justify
your gifts of life and honour to humanity.


Mandala 2/Sukta 14






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Adhvaryavo, Kami]
High priest of the yajna of love and non-violent
creation, bear potfuls of soma juice for Indra, brave and
youthful hero of the world. Collect and serve exciting
food and drink for him in celebration. Eminent, valiant
and victorious is he and loves a drink of this soma.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 14 921


Always call for and prepare the drink for the mighty
hero. He loves to live the vigour and ecstasy of life,
create the strength and rise in joy.






[Names: Adhvaryo, Sanyeva, Tasma, Bharata]
High priests of the yajna of life, just as a stroke
of lightning breaks and shatters a tree into bits, so does
Indra, solar hero of the world, break the dark cloud
concealing and hoarding the waters of life and thereby
releases the showers of rain and joy of life. For him,
bear and bring this soma of joy and celebration. He loves
it intensely, and this Indra deserves to drink of it to his






[Names: Adhvaryayo, Somairornuta]
Yajnic leaders of the people, Indra, lord ruler of
humanity and the world, is he who, like the brilliant
sun, dispels the forces of fear and darkness, develops
the cows and animal wealth, preserves and replenishes
the earth and her environment, opens up flood-gates of
power and energy for you and, like the wind in the sky,
drives life onward. Carry on this yajna and the creation
of soma-joy and vigour for him, celebrate him like the




wind in the sky, felicitate him with drinks of soma and
honour him with robes of distinction as you would
honour a veteran hero and senior scholar of eminence.






[Names: Somasya, Somas]
High priests and participants of the progressive
yajna of love and creative advancement, invoke, applaud
and advance Indra, leader and commander of humanity,
who exposes and punishes the hoarder, eliminates the
saboteur, overthrows nine and ninety handed demons,
and binds and chains down hundred millions of enemy
forces. Honour him and celebrate with oblations of love
and offer of soma for the creation of vigour and life’s






[Names: Susam, Indrayandhaso]
High priests of yajna, invoke, invite, honour and
offer homage with food and love to Indra who breaks
through the clouds of ignorance, who prevents the
thriving social suckers and converts deserts into fertile
fields, who breaks the shoulders of lawless powers, who
fights and defeats the self-server and the persistent evil


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 14 923


doer, and who brings to book those who cross the bounds
of preventive law. Do him honour in the yajna of love
and dedication.






[Names: Sambarasya, Somamas, Somama]
High priests of yajna, offer soma yajna to Indra
who shatters with a lightning stone blow a hundred well-
established strongholds of the demon of darkness who
arrests and prevents the joyous waters of life from their
natural flow, Indra who digs out and uproots a hundred
thousand sins and crimes of the blazing powers of evil
and buries them for ever. Regale him with a drink of
soma, the universal joy of life.






[Names: Kutsasyayoratithigva, Somamasmai]
High priests of yajna, bring soma drinks
in honour of Indra who sows the seeds and creates a
hundred thousand heroes of yajna on the face of the
earth, while on the other hand he destroys another
hundred thousand warriors of evil and wards off the
forces of the opponents of generosity and hospitality.








[Names: Gabhastiputam, Srutayendraya, Somam, Soma]
High priests of yajna, faithful performers,
leaders of humanity, whatever you love and desire,
whatever you achieve and attain, always with a will in
obedience to Divinity carry that forward and hold it in
the service of Indra, lord ruler of the world, and bear
and bring it up soma, purified and sanctified by the rays
of the sun, as an offering in homage to him who is
universally heard, praised and celebrated. Enjoy the bliss
and ecstasy of soma with him.






[Names: Adhvaryavah, Jusano, Indraya]
Leaders and participants of the yajnic
developments of humanity, do your best willingly and
spontaneously for this mighty and brilliant Indra. Do
that and let it be sanctified and consecrated in the light
and purity of the sun and raise the social order in the
holy light. Join Indra and do his will, whatever he loves
and desires of your art and industry. And when you have
accomplished that with the expertise of your hand and
imagination, then invoke, invite and honour him and
celebrate the exciting pleasure and ecstasy of the soma


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 14 925


of success.






[Names: Vedahamasya]
High priests of the yajna of white revolution
and herbal essences, let the streams of soma flow for
health and joy and surfeit Indra, the mighty order of
humanity. Let the order overflow with food and drink
like the cow’s udders with milk. I know him and the
wealth he holds for me. Join him, let everyone know
and serve him for his creation and generosity, and let
all carry on the effort in unison.






[Names: Tamurdaram]
High priests of yajnic action and advancement,
citizens of the world, serve Indra who is ruler of the
light of heaven, the wealth of earth and the sweets of
love and tolerance. Fill his kingdom to overflowing as
farmers fill the stores with food and drink. Let the life
on earth sparkle with streams of soma and shine with
the glow of health and joy. Let that be your karma of
divine dedication. Let that be the dynamics of human








[Names: Asmabhyam, Anu]
Indra, lord ruler and master of the wealth of the
universe, bless us with that wealth and honour, light
and power, and strengthen us that we may be generous,
tolerant and forgiving. Great and infinite is your power
and glory of the worlds in existence. Wondrous and
various is your wealth of life. May we, O lord, blest
with that honour, power and splendour, brave and rising
with the brave, every day and night sing of your glory
and justify your gifts of yajna in our actions and


Mandala 2/Sukta 15






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Trikadrukesvapibat]
I would set forth and sing in celebration of the
great and true actions and achievements of this great
and eternal lord Indra, ruler of the world, brilliant and
blazing as the sun who drinks up the distilled essences
of earth, heaven and the middle regions in three ways
and radiates and matures exhilarating soma in three
orders of nature, herbs of the earth, waters of the sky


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 15 927


and light of the solar regions, and who, in the power
and ecstasy of this soma process, strikes and breaks the
dark cloud of showers for rain on the earth.






[Names: Avamse, Indrascakara, Somasya, Somas]
Indra, lord of existence, sustains the mighty
heaven of light in space without a supporting column.
He fills the heaven and earth and the skies of the middle
regions with light and fertility for life and holds the
earth in orbit. And thus the lord manifests his power
and glory in the expansive universe across the spaces.
In the ecstasy and Ananda of the soma of creation, the
lord performs all these actions for life and humanity.






[Names: Sadmeva, Vrthasrjat]
Like a sacred house of prayer, Indra, lord creator,
makes the worlds of existence since eternity with exact
measures and perfect knowledge of their form, function
and purpose. He splits open the upsurge of waters from
river sources, digs the beds of flow with a natural and
spontaneous stroke of the thunderbolt and releases the
floods by paths deep and wide for us to move and




navigate. Indra does all these in joy and ecstasy for his
love of creation and for the soma pleasure of his






Having overcome all the weapons of violence,
fear and terror, he burns them in the blazing fire of his
cosmic yajna and creates modes of transport and
communication with bullocks, horses, chariots and
waves of energy and motive power. He does all these in
his ecstasy of creativity for the joy of his creation. This
is the glory of Indra.


CHITIN




He gives motion to the waters, and the earth, in
fact to all things on the move, and he controls, stabilizes,
arrests and ultimately stills that movement to rest. He
helps the uninitiates to move and cross the seas for their
good, and they rise and, having bathed in the waters,
abide in the wealth of divine bliss. Indra does all these
in the ecstasy of creation for the joy of his creation.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 15 929






[Names: Sodancam, Ajavaso, Usasah, Usasa]
With his blazing might he reaches and raises
the rising sea. With his light he adorns the chariot of
the dawn. Moving and shaking the motionless with his
own forces of velocity, Indra goes on with his actions
in the joy of his creation for the joy of his children.






[Names: Prati, Sronah]
He, self-refulgent lord of knowledge, removing
the veil of darkness from the lights, manifests himself
and stays high and above all. Listening to the prayerful,
he abides by all, reveals himself and speaks to the
faithful. Thus does Indra perform his actions of divinity
in his own ecstasy of creation and for the created.






[Names: Bhinad, Rinagrodhamsi]
Indra, blazing ruler of the world, proclaiming




his power and presence, dispels the dark and distressive
forces of life with the rays of his light and knowledge.
He breaks open the deep caverns of mountains and the
clouds and opens their gates for sun and shower. He
shatters the artificial walls of division in humanity for
their progress. These are the acts of Indra done in his
ecstasy of soma for his people.






[Names: Svapnenabhyupya, Rambhi]
He alerts the man yawning with sleepy sloth,
silences the agitator, destroys the robber, suppresses the
fearful devil, and, under his rule, the honest worker gets
his wages in gold. Such are the acts of performance
which Indra accomplishes in the ecstasy of soma for
the joy of the people.



[Names: Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of light and
joy, may that magnificent generosity of yours award the
highest fulfilment to the celebrant, and cherished
knowledge to the worshipper. Lord of power and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 16 931


splendour, may your glory shine and blaze for us but
not burn our gifts of your magnanimity. And may we,
brave and blest with the brave, celebrate your glory in
our yajnic acts of piety and obedience to your will.


Mandala 2/Sukta 16






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Indramajuryam, Indramajurya]
O worshippers and dedicated devotees of Indra,
for your sake I offer the sweetest song of celebration in
honour of the highest lord of life and energy as _ I bear
and offer oblations of holy fragrant havish into the
lighted fire of yajna. We invoke and serve Indra, unaging
lord of imperishable energy, full of inexhaustible power
and eternally youthful, consuming and converting matter
into energy. We develop the lord’s energy for our
protection and advancement.






[Names: Yasmadindrad, Jathatre, Somam, Soma, Sirsani]
Without this great lord Indra, eternal power and
energy, there is nothing that is great, indeed anything at




all. In this supreme presence are held all the courage,
valour and virility. In his oceanic potential lies all the
power, peace and pleasure. In his body, he holds
challenge, patience and fortitude, grandeur and
splendour, in his hand, thunder and lightning, in his
head, vision, intelligence and noblest yajnic action.






[Names: Puru]
Not by heaven and earth is your wealth and
chariot be exhausted and out-distanced by the expansive
seas and high mountains or even by the spatial clouds.
Nor can any weapon even remotely approach the
invincible terror of your thunderbolt. All this because
you shoot like an arrow with the tempestuous rays of
light and waves of energy and currents of winds many
many miles and yojans distance instantly.





[Names: Visve, Vrsa]
All bear noble thoughts and perform holy acts
of yajna in honour of this lord Indra, cosmic yajamana,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 16 933


bold and daring, overwhelming and generous, and
universal friend and constant companion. Generous
yajaka, you are very wise and highly knowledgeable.
Offer yajna with homage and fragrant havis. O lord
Indra, participate in our yajna alongwith the generous
sun and like the sun, drink the soma of joy and grant us
the bliss.






[Names: Vrsnah, Vrsanadhvaryu]
Treasure clouds of liquid energy explode from
the sun and radiate all round, honey streams of light
and power flow from the sun, in waves, for the
nourishment and maturation of the vibrant life in
existence as food and drink for the mighty humanity
and other living beings. Roaring clouds rain down living
waters for the health and joy of the children of earth.
Generous high-priests of the yajna of love and non-
violence press out soma and distil the exciting drink of
life and ecstasy from the herbs and raise it in flaming
waves of fragrance.






6. Vrsa te vajra uta te vrsa ratho vrsana hari vrsa-


[Names: Vrsno, Somasya, Somas]
Indra, generous and potent lord of life and joy,
mighty is your thunderbolt, tempestuous your chariot,
fast as winds are your horses, and blazing are your arms
and weapons of justice, reward and punishment.
Generous and mighty lord, you create and govern the
infinite treasures of life, vigour and joy. O lord of power
and energy, drink of this invigorating soma of joy and
give us too the drink of it to the depth of surfeit and
heights of sobriety.






[Names: Kuvinno]
Loud and bold in inspiration for the challenges
of the business of living, with all my wealth of power
and prayer I come to you, lord of light and knowledge,
and take on to you as to a boat in the struggle for survival
and success across the seas, eloquent as you are with
the Word of the Veda and light of Divinity. Indra, lord
of knowledge, listen to this word of prayer, know what
we need and desire. We come to you, associate with
you, serve you, and study and develop divine energy
and power with you as a treasure-house of the wealth
of the world.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 16 935






[Names: Pura, Sakrtsu, Satakrato]
Indra, lord of a hundred noble acts of yajna, by
virtue of our ancient and eternal relation as father and
son, mother and child, creator and creature, pervader
and pervaded, teacher and disciple, come to us like the
abundant mother cow overflowing with the milk of life
for her darling calf on the pasture, and be with us always,
never forsake us, lord, so that we too, with all noble
thoughts and intentions, reach you and ever be with you
like generous, loving and prayerful men abiding in the
company of intelligent and life-sustaining wives and






[Names: Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, lord giver of light and the wealth of life,
may that magnificent bounty of yours flow and shower
the desired excellence upon your singer and celebrant,
sure, instantly and incessantly. May the light of
knowledge and wealth of power given to the devotee
ever shine for us but never blaze to excess, never burn,
so that, bright and brave, blest with the brave, we may




sing in praise and homage to you in our yajnic acts of
life and the music may rise and ring across the spaces.


Mandala 2/Sukta 17






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Tadasmai, Susma, Angirasvad, Visva, Somasya, Somas]
Offer homage of praise in worship to this
adorable lord Indra, light of the world, like the breath
of life, since his powers operate in life as of old and
eternally and who in his ecstasy of soma-yaga of
creation, with a stroke of his omnipotence, opened forth
and activated all the clouds of dark energies which lay
asleep all round during the night of the universe.






[Names: Suro, Sirsani]
May that Indra, lord creator, be good and kind
to us, Indra who first for the creation and sustenance of
the universe manifests his creative energy in Prakrti and
then expands his own power and potential across the


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 17 937


world of nature. Mighty is he who in the battlesome-
interaction of the elements creates the grand structure
of the universe and then, as the pervasive spirit of life,
veils himself in the body of the universe. It is he who,
by his own essential might raised the heaven of light on
high and stayed it there.






[Names: Adhakrnoh, Rathesthena]
And thereafter, first of all, he creates the prime
universal fertility and creative vitality, mighty energy
forces, which he with his omnipotence and omniscience,
sets in motion. They, great lokas and regions of the
universe, released and accelerated by Indra, master of
the chariot as well as of the horses, roll and revolve and
rotate youthfully, all together and separately too, each
by itself.



[Names: Adha]
Indra, lord creator, who is master controller and
ruler of the worlds of the universe by his omnipotence,




pervades the expansive universe, and, wielding and
sustaining the creation, fills the heaven and earth with
light and, binding and integrating the far off regions
togehter, dispels the darkness from the regions and
covers them with the light of divinity.






[Names: Adharayat]
He strengthens and firms up the ancient high
clouds with his might and splendour and creates the
lower ones this side of time and also creates the waters
of the middle regions of the skies. He wields and sustains
the earth mother of all the living life and holds and
sustains with his marvellous power the heaven of light
above, steady, secure, and extensive.






[Names: Sasma, Yena, Sayadhyai]
That is for this: The sun which the father creator
has created and fashioned forth in beauty with his own
hands over all that is born and all that know, that mighty
catalytic power by which he breaks and burns the atoms
and, with a stroke of thunder and lightning, melts the


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 17 939


cloud in rain showers to flow on earth and rest in the
oceans. That sun is for this lord Indra and his pleasure.
And the sun is for this darling Indra of the world of
creation, the human soul which the father creator has
fashioned forth in body and adorned with his own hands
and which is over and above all that is born, by virtue
of its knowledge and intelligence. And this darling child
too, this humanity, is for the sun and earth and for the
father creator to be ever in service for preservation of
the earth and environment and for dedication to Divinity.






[Names: Amajuriva, Krdhi]
Like a dedicated maiden abiding in the father’s
home I pray: Le me rise from this physical house of life
to the glory of divinity. Indra, lord of light and
knowledge, raise me to knowledge. O Sun, bring me to
light and lustre month by month. Bless me with the best
that is mine, my share of life, by which I may rise to the
highest that I can be, my own real self.






[Names: Bhojam, Aviddhindra]
Indra, bountiful lord of the beauty and joy of




life, we invoke you and pray: Lord of wealth, honour
and power, give us the strength and courage to do our
karma. Give us the light of your knowledge and vision.
Lord destroyer of hate, jealousy and enmity, save us,
protect us with your wondrous ways of protection. Lord
of generosity, make us profusely rich and generous with
the gifts of life.







[Names: Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, lord of light and knowledge, power and
glory, may that munificent generosity of yours, and may
that knowledge and divine teaching of yours bring unto
the singer celebrant and the disciples holy gifts of their
heart’s desire for sure and at the earliest. Give us the
strength and vision that we, brave and blest with the
brave, be great celebrants of your glory in our holy and
yajnic acts of life in your service. Let the light shine, let
the fire blaze, but not burn any of the gifts of Divinity.


Mandala 2/Sukta 18




[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Prataratho, Dasaritro]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 18 941


Let the latest new chariot be harnessed this
morning, winsome, bountiful and strongly structured,
four powered, three geared, seven steered, with ten
propellers, manmade chariot for humanity, self-
generative for power which may be navigable with
inbuilt intelligence, controlled and monitored by men.


aati




[Names: Sasma, Anyasya]
That chariot is perfectly suitable and
comfortable for this lord Indra, creator and ruler of
power. Harbinger of knowledge, comfort and power for
humanity, it covers the first stage of the earth, second
stage of the sky, and the third stage of space. The product
of one is taken over by others who move it further so
that, victorious and highly productive, it joins with the






[Names: Hari, Indrasya, Indras]
In this versatile chariot of Indra, lord of power
and humanity, I use twofold power of electric energy in
a circuit to move it according to the latest word of the
formula of automotion. The many scholars and




participants in the yajnic programme of research and
science please and celebrate you, O creator, not the






[Names: Astabhirdasabhih, Soma]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, come
conducted by two, four, and six powers of motion, even
by eight or ten for a drink of soma of success which, O
high priest of noble yajna, is ready right here. Pray do
not engage in any programme of violence and war.






[Names: Somapeyam, Somapeya]
Indra, come hither equipped with twenty, thirty,


forty, fifty, sixty, seventy excellent horse powers of
chariot for a drink of soma.





[Names: Asitya, Ayam, Sunahotresu]
Indra, come hither conducted by a chariot of
eighty, ninety and a hundred horse power. Here is this


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 18 943


soma distilled and sanctified for your pleasure in the
auspicious programmes of yajna of your choice.






[Names: Mama, Purutra]
Indra, lord of power and honour, listen well to
our song of praise and prayer. Take to the chariot, yoke
the circuitous motive energies to the chariot pole and
come post haste to receive our homage and yajna
fragrance. Be responsive to the invocation and invitation
of many, O generous lord, join in this auspicious
celebration and rejoice with us.





[Names: Stau]
Never may my love and friendship with Indra
be snapped, and may his kindness and generosity ever
keep it flowing for us abundantly. And may we, closely
under his high protection and divine light, be inspired
for victory in every project of life at the very start of the
expedition.








[Names: Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, generous lord of wealth and power,
honour and victory, may that magnificent generosity and
kindness of your grace ever flow abundantly for us and
bestow upon the singer celebrant and the disciples sure
gifts of their favourite choice. And may your teaching
and knowledge and your grandeur ever shine for the
admirers but never burn the love, desire and self-
confidence of the devotees. And may we, brave and blest
with the brave, ever celebrate your heavenly glory in
our noblest yajnic projects of life.


Mandala 2/Sukta 19






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Apayyasyandhaso, Yasminnindrah]
Ye saints and sages all, masters of mind and
thought, lovers of Divinity and leaders of humanity, you
have tasted of the food and drunk deep of the honey
sweets of nectar for the beauty and ecstasy of life at
that fount of light divine where Indra, the Sun, ever
abiding, rising and waxing, holds his place in the light
of heaven! O for a draught of that nectar, a morsel of
that food, a glimpse of that light!


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 19 945






[Names: Asya]
Tasting of the nectar sweets of this divinity in
ecstasy, Indra, the Sun, armed with light and thunder,
breaks open the clouds of darkness holding floods and
oceans of water, and thence flow, flying like birds of
life, bright days of light and sparkling streams of water.





[Names: Ajanayat, Suryam, Surya, Vayunani]
That great Indra, lord omnipotent, activates the
waters in the midst of space and he, breaker of darkness
into light and life, then creates the oceans. He creates
the solar system, reveals the stars, planets and satellites,
shows the days by nights and directs the daily round of









[Names: Purunindro, Sadyo, Suryasya, Suryas]
The same omnipotent lord Indra who breaks the
clouds of darkness bestows on the generous man of
noble thought and meditation many gifts of
immeasurable value. May the lord ever be friends with
people who struggle forward in life for sun and shower
of the light and peace of Divinity.






[Names: Indrah, Suryama]
That Indra, lord of universal energy, light and
wealth, brilliant and generous, releases for the creative
man of research and development the light and power
of the sun in addition to songs of praise and appreciation
and, bringing unknown and indescribable wealth for
this man, never destroys the share that is his due.






[Names: Susnam, Divodasaya, Kutsaya, Kutsa, Divodasa]
Indra, lord of light and energy of the sun in
heaven, for the good of the guide and leader of humanity
and for the man of piety, charity and dedication to
Divinity, breaks the intensity of drought and the
pestilence of good harvest, overcomes ninety and nine
defensive walls of the dark cloud for rain and converts
drought into showers and famine into plenty and fertility.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 19 947


Thus the lord accomplishes the purposes of Divinity
for humanity.






Thus we, O lord Indra, on our way to Divinity
by our mind and soul with speed and sincerity, may, we
pray, hear the word of your glory and have a glimpse of
your admirable action. And may we, acting and thus
struggling, cross that seven stage path to Divinity
whereby we may eliminate from within and without the
words and weapons of the impious reviler and destroyer
of faith and reach our destination.






[Names: Brahmanyanta]
O lord of light and divine action, thus do your
admirers and celebrants in ecstasy, like children seeking
protection of the parent, sing in praise of your thought
and marvellous actions. And thus may they, praying and
working for the gifts of Divinity, attain the blessings of
your eternal and ever new food and energy, peaceable
haven and home, and joy and comfort in the shade of








[Names: Divinity, Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, lord of universal generosity, may that
munificent hand of your liberality and grace deliver unto
the celebrant the gift of his heart’s desire. O lord of
glory, may your word of knowledge ever ring and shine
for the disciples but never burn off their love and desire
and the prosperity of us all. And may we, brave and
blest with the brave, celebrate your glory in our holy


Mandala 2/Sukta 20






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Vayam, Indra, Vipanyavo]
Indra, lord of life and ruler of the world, please
to know us well. Like a fast driver, accelerating his car
to the destination, we bear our homage of yajnic food
and songs of praise to you. We come, lord, admirers,
shining, with sincerity of mind and heart, joining and
praying to powers human and divine as to you we come


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 20 ०49


for peace of mind and all round comfort.






[Names: Tvam, Tvamino]
Indra, lord of love, power and protection, you
are our own, protector of the life and interests of our
people who are yours, you are committed to us with all
your means of protection and advancement. You are the
mighty lord and master, saviour and promoter of the
man of charity and of anyone who approaches you
sincerely in faith that you are the real and ultimate master
and saviour.






[Names: Sivo]
Indra, lord of life, ever young, generous giver
invoked and invited, our friend, giver of peace and bliss,
may he be the guardian and protector of the people.
May he guide and enlighten the admirer, zealous
worshipper, self-developing devotee and the singer








[Names: Tamu, Indram]
O man, I worship that lord Indra, celebrate, in
song, him in whose protective shade humanity has
grown and advanced since eternity and fought out the
evil and the wicked. He, reaching out to the lover of
wealth, fulfils his desire and blesses the new initiate in
search of Vedic knowledge and spiritual enlightenment.






[Names: Angirasamucatha, Musnannusasah, Snasya]
That same Indra, lord of light and power,
delighting in the admirable wealth and knowledge of
the people, watching and loving the wide earth, taking
over the beauty of the dawn with the splendour of the
sun, and silencing the roar of clouds, augments and
advances the songs of the celebrants since eternity and
releases them from their bonds.






Indra, omnipotent lord of light and generosity,
is surely the supreme power heard and celebrated in the
Revelation, self-refulgent giver, highest above all, who


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 20 951


is the ultimate saviour and destroyer of suffering for
humanity. Dear and loving to anyone who approaches
him, bold and patient and tolerant, highest on top of the
world of existence, commanding absolute power and
sustenance, he brings total joy and fulfilment to his
servant and supplicant.






[Names: Ajanayan, Samsam]
Such is Indra, breaker of the clouds of rain
showers. He opens up the wombs of energies, dark and
deep, to let out the floods of existence into positive paths
of generation, creating the earth mother and the waters
of life for humanity. He is breaker of the walls of
hoarders’ cities to release the flow of wealth in human
history. May the lord raise the honour and wealth of the
host of yajna by virtue, truth and creative generosity.






[Names: Tasmai, Prati]
To that omnipotent Indra, in the battles of
creation for the waters of life and generation of the
wealth of existence, mighty offerings are made into the
fire of yajna in truth and sequence by the divine powers
of nature and the noblest of humanity who hold on to




their part in obedience and response to this wielder of
the thunderbolt in arms who destroys the evil and the
negatives to overcome the cities of gold and steel in






[Names: Nunam, Siksa]
Indra, lord of the universe and wealth of
existence, may that oceanic generosity of your love bless
the singer celebrant with the choicest gifts of his desire,
and may your light of knowledge ever shine on the
disciples but never burn our greatness and grandeur so
that we and our children may boldly celebrate you in


Mandala 2/Sukta 21




[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Visvajite, Jite, Somam, Soma]
Ye men and women of the world, bear and bring


the sweetest soma in honour of Indra, conquerer, ruler
and controller of the universe, wealth and power of


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 21 953


existence, joy beyond suffering, truth of life, humanity,
earth and her fertility, horses, cows, and waters of the
universe—Indra who carries on the yajna of the universe
and, for his sake, bear the soma of joy in your lives too.






[Names: Abhibhuve, Tuvigraye, Indraya]
Say, ‘Hail your worship’, bow and surrender in
homage to Indra, all creator and conqueror, all destroyer,
all lover and dispenser, unchallengeable, inviolable, all
knower, universal teacher, sole bearer of the burdens of
existence, unconquerable, upholder of truth and univer-
sal law, the be-all and end-all of creation and existence.






[Names: Satrasaho, Vrtamcayah, Anu, Indrasya, Indras]
Let us celebrate the mighty actions and
achievements of Indra, lord upholder of truth, adorable
to people, patient lover of humanity, mover and
promoter, warrior, giver of showers in response to
prayer, integrative creator and organiser, tolerant and
merciful, accessible to all people.








[Names: Ananudo, Radhracodah, Usasah, Usasa]
Unmoved mover, mighty generous, destroyer of
destroyers, deep and grave, instant inspirer to the
sublime, beyond definition in poetry and himself the
poet of Infinity, inspirer of the diffident and depressed,
breaker of the stumbling blocks and the violent, versatile
in virtue, vast in presence and performance, Indra is the
highest high-priest of cosmic yajna who lights the daily
fire with the heavenly light of the dawn.






[Names: Yajnena, Abhisvara]
Inspired pioneers, aspiring warriors and wise
visionaries applying their thought, imagination and will
in association, working with cooperation and united
action in sustained yajna carve new paths of progress
across the earth. Speaking together with a united voice,
sitting together in assembly, acting together on the field
for preservation and progress, exploiting natural energy
and invoking the blessings of Indra in yajna, they
reclaim lands of the earth and win wealths of the world.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 22 955






[Names: Posam]
Indra, lord of the world, bless us with the best
of strength and power, high intelligence and awareness,
beauty and delicacy of art and expertise, abundance of
wealth and prosperity, health and security of senses and
body, sweetness of speech and style, and peace and
brightness of days and nights.


Mandala 2/Sukta 22






[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Trikadrukesu, Somamapibad, Sainam, Indram, Indra]
The great and powerful sun drinks up the soma,
essence of vital juices reinforced with herbal elixir,
matured in three containers, 1.e., the earth, the sky and
the heaven of light, and distilled by light and wind while
it shines and energises the essences.


He who delights in energising this sun, greatest
of the great in nature, to do great things, who blesses
and continues to bless this blazing power of light is the




[Names: Lord, Supreme]
as the moon.


And he who would love to do great things vast
and worthy of the great, he, true and bright as the moon,
should serve and meditate on this lord of unbounded
light and energy.






[Names: Adha, Adhattanyam]
The mighty universal energy with its own
electric force and its action fills up the heaven and earth
with universal water vapours full like a reservoir, and it
continues to grow by the omnipotence of the
omnipresent lord Indra, the self-refulgent Indra. It holds
within its womb the other, wealth of waters, releases
the waters and stays larger and mightier. The lord self-
refulgent who creates and blesses this mighty bright
universal yajnic energy of electricity is Indra, eternal
and ever blissful as the moon.





[Names: Sakam, Data]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 22 957


The jiva, individual soul, born in human form
with the potential to know and act, courage and
splendour, carries on the business of life and grows with
vigour and valour, challenging, victorious and brilliant
with vision and judgement. Indra, lord of life, all giver,
provides whatever wealth and power is loved and valued
by the pious and worshipful soul. May the soul of man,
blessed and true as the moon, join and serve this supreme
lord Indra, self-refulgent, eternal and true, in prayer,
worship and meditation.








[Names: Tava, Savasa, Ssatakra]
Indra, lord of light, life and generosity, director
of the cosmic dance of creation, that original, ancient
act of yours admirable in the light and language of
heaven performed for the sake of humanity which, by
the omnipotence of Divinity, moves the pranic energies
and causes the waters of life to flow may, we pray, with
the power and splendour of Divinity, inspire the entire
world of matter and energy, conquer impiety and bring
us, O lord of a hundred yajnic gifts and actions, food
and energy for body, mind and soul.




Mandala 2/Sukta 23






[Names: Brahmanaspati, Brhaspati, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Gandnam, Jyestharajam]
We invoke, invite and honour you Brahmana-
spati, as lord president of all classes, nations and
republics of the peoples of the world, as highest
visionary of the men of supreme vision, most renowned
of all beyond comparison and imagination, highest of
the brilliant rulers, lord of the knowledge and
commonwealth of the world in existence. Listen to our
prayer, come with all powers of protection, preservation
and promotion of the peace and prosperity of the world
and grace the presidential seat in the hall of nations.






[Names: Devascit, Usra]
Lord of spirit and prana, ruler of the grand
universal order, master of supreme knowledge, the
divinities too of the world in your honour receive their
share of the yajnic fragrance of life. As sun is the


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 959


progenitor of sun-rays, so you are the great creator of
all knowledge, wealth and grandeur of the universe with
your light of omniscience.






[Names: Brhaspate]
Brhaspati, lord of the grand universe and light
of the world, having chained all sin and darkness by
the rule of light and law, you ride the chariot of the
dynamics of nature and rectitude, blazing with light and
fire, awful to the lawless, shatterer of the enemies,
destroyer of the wicked, breaker of the clouds and
bringer of the showers of rain and bliss.






[Names: Sunitibhir, Brahmadvisa]
You lead us by the right path and policy. You
protect and save humanity. Whoever surrenders himself
to you and gives in charity in your service is safe, sin
and crime touch him not, nor hurt him ever. You are the
scorcher of the haters of humanity, divinity and
knowledge. You are the destroyer of hostile passion.




Brhaspati, lord of this grand universe, great is that
grandeur of yours, blazing with majesty.






[Names: Visva]
Brahamanaspati, ruler of the mighty universe,
saviour of the good and great, neither sin nor evil
conduct from anywhere, nor enemies nor those who try
to tread the parallel paths of good and evil at the same
prevent and rule out all violence from him whosoever,
O noble protector and saviour, you guide, guard and






[Names: Tvam]
You are our protector and saviour. You are our
guide along the paths of right. You are the wise visionary,
judge and teacher. We worship you with all our mind
and intelligence so that we may abide by your divine
rule of conduct. O lord of the great universe, whoever
entertains and bears hate and enmity, anger and jealousy
toward us may face the self-defeating forces of his own


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 961


corrosive mind from within himself.






And whoever seize us and injure us, innocent
and sinless as we move on, whoever the man-wolf with
a train of allies, enemies in the garb of fellow travellers,
O Brhaspati, lord saviour of the great and protector from
the awesome, remove all such from the path so that it is
easy to follow for the attainment of our divine






[Names: Trataram]
Brhaspati, lord of the universe, master of
supreme knowledge, ruler and defender of the world,
we invoke you, protector and preserver of our bodies,
senses and minds, saviour and protector from sin and
evil acts, our pilot across suffering, lord supreme of our
own, teacher and supreme commander. Brhaspati,
uproot the revilers of divinity, nobility, brilliance and
generosity of people. Let not the evil doers destroy the
future peace and well-being of humanity.








[Names: Tvaya]
Brahmanaspati, lord of the universe, promoter
of life and knowledge, supreme power worthy of love
and homage, may we, people of the world, with your
care and protection, develop and promote the wealth of
the world, and we pray, crush whatever forms of
violence, adversity, frustration, malignity, meanness and






Brhaspati, lord of the universe, ruler of the
world, master of supreme knowledge, giver of
fulfilment, purifier and sanctifier, ever helpful, may we,
we pray, develop and promote the best life on earth.
destroyer rule over us. And may we, we pray, be
righteous, faithful and honourable, and with our
intelligent people swim across our problems of life.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 963




[Names: Ananudo, Satrum]
Brahmanaspati, lord of universal knowledge and
ruler of the grand social order, uncompromising, mighty
generous, responsive to the call for action, subduer of
the enemy, unyielding and victorious in battles, ever
true, insistent on obligation and fulfilment, you are
controller of the fierce and restrainer of the passionate
carouser.






[Names: Adevena, Sasamugro, Sardhatah]
Whoever with a sinful mind injures or sabotages
or wants to destroy the rulers, commanders,
administrators, teachers and the devotees of Divinity
and admirers of the human nation, fierce and proud
though he be, O Brhaspati, lord of the realm, we pray
and hereby determine, his weapon of attack must not
reach us, nor shall the mean action of the evil minded
ever bully and weaken our morale.








[Names: Bharesu]
In the battles of production, defence and
progress, O lord, worthy of access, invocation and
invitation with gifts of homage for participation, leader
in the battles of advancement, and dispenser of wealth
and reward in every field of activity, Brhaspati, lord of
the realm, father of all, we pray, take on all the
strongholds of the proud intimidators and rout them all






[Names: Tajisthaya, Avistat]
Brhaspati, lord of the great realm, with the
splendour of your blazing power, scorch those who take
you on with malignant criticism and columny, although
your honour and courage is proven. Proclaim openly
what your commendable policy is and heat up, shake
off and evaporate all those who are steeped in sin and
crime.






Brhaspati, lord of the great realm of life and
nature, ruler and sustainer of the great, omnipotent
master, lord of light by your own innate virtue, who
shine among people while you do your acts of holiness


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 23 965


and make others shine with your power and grandeur,
lord manifested and manifesting in truth, rectitude and
law, bless us too with that wondrous wealth of divinity
by which you enlighten others.






[Names: Manah]
Save us, lord of the great world, right and
universal law, from the thieves and enemies who hate
all and delight in positions of power, who covet nothing
but food and luxury, who hold nothing in their heart
but disdainful superiority complex toward the learned,
wise and virtuous and who know nothing of value
beyond money and property.






[Names: Visvebhyo]
Lord of the great world, master of the Veda, the
[Names: Tvashta]
and visionary as a poet for the sake of the entire world
of humanity across divinity and the world of materiality.
You are consolidator of the public debt and the debt of
gratitude to Divinity and the wise, and you fulfil the
obligations of the debt. Established in the presence of




the Lord Omnipotent, father sustainer of the great Law
of social order, be the destroyer of hate, jealousy and






[Names: Tava, Sriye, Indrena]
For your grace and glory, O lord and sustainer
of the great world, does the cloud collect the flood of
sun-rays which you, dear as breath of life, release. In
association with Indra, the sun, O lord of the wide realm,
open and release the oceanic flood of the waters of life
suppressed and enveloped in darkness and let it flow





[Names: Brahmanaspate, Visvam]
Brahmanaspati, lord protector and sustainer of
the universe, you are the hero as well as creator of this
song of Divinity which you graciously know and accept
as your very child, and bless your creation with life and
joy, all that good of entire humanity and the world which
the divinities protect and promote, so that we, brave
and blest with the brave, in our acts of yajnic piety, may
celebrate your gifts highly and ecstatically.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 967


Mandala 2/Sukta 24








[Names: Indra, Brahmanaspati, Brhspati, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Semamaviddhi, Yatha]
Brhaspati, lord and master of knowledge and
the great realm of the earth which you rule and
command, please to accept this offer of celebration
which we dedicate with this great new voice of homage
in honour of Indra so that he, our lord, generous as the
sun and cloud, your friend, may enlighten our mind and






[Names: Pracyavayadacyuta]
Indra, lord ruler and sustainer of the mighty
human race, is he who with his might and majesty bends
those who deserve to be bent, who with his thunder and
terror breaks and scatters the clouds into showers, who
shakes the apparently unshakables, and who breaks open
the mountain ranges of the treasure jewels of the earth.








That exceptional wonder of Karma is worthy of
the most brilliant of the divinities of the universe, Indra,
refulgent as the sun. He disarms the most obstinate,
softens the hardest, releases the rays of light, breaks the
cloud with his divine might, dispels the darkness, and
reveals the light of heaven.






[Names: Asmasyamavatam, Tameva]
The lord of the universe and master of the
universal Word breaks open the flood gates of the
hanging cloud and the dark caverns of the mountain
holding showers and streams of honey sweet waters.
The same showers and streams all those who see the
light and joy of heaven in the sun and water drink to
their heart’s content with all living beings as a gift of
the ocean, and the same they sprinkle around for the
gift and growth of life in abundance.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 969




[Names: Sana, Ayatanta, Vayuna]
The acts which Brahmanaspati, lord of the wide
world, has performed and the knowledge which he has
revealed open by months and years the doors of eternal
light and the past and future worlds for you from which
the people naturally benefit and spontaneously enjoy
without any effort, all in their own ways.






[Names: Abhinaksanto]
Those saints and scholars who go forward all
round in search of the treasures of admirable humanity
hidden in the cavern of time find the jewel treasures of
wealth and knowledge. But having seen the falsehood
and untruth discovered there in the cave go back by the
same door by which they came and then come again to
propagate the truth and contradict and expose the









[Names: Rtavanah, Agnimasmani]
Men of truth and rectitude, poets and visionaries,
pioneers of action, having perceived, challenged and
fought out untruth and evil, come and stand firm by the
great paths of right and universal law. By force of arms
they keep the fire burning on the rock, in the cave, over
the cloud and in the sky. None is a man of truth and
knowledge, nor brave, none of them who abandon the
fire and desert the truth of life and rectitude.






[Names: Rtajyena, Tasya]
By the stretch of natural truth and justice and
by instant action, the mighty lord of the realm wielding
the bow and arrow of law and rectitude reaches wherever
he wants and achieves whatever he targets. Accurate
and unfailing are the arrows of this watchful ruler and
guide of humanity, stretched unto the ear, reaching to
the ear and taking the aim even by a whisper and
vibration, which the lord shoots and by which he uproots
the plants and plans of evil and crime, having seen what
is right and what is wrong.





[Names: Caksmo]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 971


Right and true are his policies, unassailable.
Correct and firm are his paths of planning and
leadership. Front leader is he, ever commanding, and
elected first and foremost. Admired is he and admirable,
adorable ruler, protector and promoter of the wealth of
nations. Clear is his sight and vision, bold his voice
and speech, by virtue of which he holds and rules energy
and the speed of progress, intelligence and education,
and the power and prosperity of the social order through
the battles of life. He blazes as the sun and would
naturally and without effort heat and season and temper
the wastours and wrong-doers.






[Names: Vibhu]
Infinite, omnipotent and eternal, first and
original is Brhaspati, lord of existence and knowledge.
Noble and blissful are the gifts of this generous and
powerful lord, givers of knowledge, competence and
success, all. It is the gifts and blessings of this pervasive
and warlike lord adorable by which all people of the
or illiterate enjoy life and its wealth.








[Names: Savasa]
Brahmanaspati, lord ruler and sustainer of this
mighty universe, is immanent and transcendent, who
by virtue of his own omnipotence pervades this world
of creation, every particle of it, and is the most joyous
and blissful over all the worlds of existence. By him
only, try to abide and live. He, self-refulgent generous
lord, vast and great, rules and expands all the divine
abodes of life, pervades them and reveals his presence






[Names: Visvam, Acchendrabrahmanas]
Indra and Brahmanaspati, lord ruler of majesty
and lord ruler of the wealth of the nation, yours is the
truth of the world and yours is the law. Not the actions
of anyone, not even the flowing waters, can violate your
law and discipline. Both ruler and the teacher of divinity
may kindly grace our seat of yajna and, like the motive
forces of the chariot of the nation, may accept our




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 24 973




[Names: Utasistha, Anu, Viludvesa, Anu]
Fast driving forces of the nation listen carefully
to the ruler and the people. The sagely scholar member
of the council intelligently holds and manages the wealth
and assets of the nation. A match for the strong and
unruly, the collector collects the taxes according to law
and discretion. Such is the dispensation of
Brahmanaspati, lord ruler of the common wealth of
humanity, fast, sensitive and instant of movement in
the business of governance.






[Names: Brahmanaspaterabhavad, Savasasarat]
Let the righteous passion, even anger, of
Brahmanaspati, lord of great action in governance, be
true to the purpose of Dharma, and controlled according
to the state of affairs, as it is he who directs the vibrations
of the nation up and down in the light of heaven and,
with his own strength and power, moves forward by
himself and abides by custom, tradition and law like
the earth in orbit.








[Names: Brahmanaspate, Viresu]
Brahmanaspati, lord protector of the wealth of
the nation of humanity, master of the universal
knowledge of existence, you are the hero of the chariot,
knower and friend of the whole world. Ruler supreme
as you are of the entire existence, come to us in response
to my Vedic invocation and join the brave with the brave
and eminent with the eminent so that we may be masters
and protectors of well-begotten and life-giving wealth
and develop it further by noble conduct and






Brahmanaspati, lord of the great world of
humanity, you are the inspiration, guide, leader and hero
of this holy song of celebration. Please to know its
meaning, intention and purpose, and give life and joy
to the child and the devotee. Give us all that good which
the poets and divines preserve, protect and promote so
that we, brave and blest with the brave, sing and
celebrate you highly in our yajnic projects of life.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 25 975


Mandala 2/Sukta 25






[Names: Brahmanaspati, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Indhano, Agnim, Agni, Jatena]
Brahmanaspati, lord ruler, protector, and
promoter of wealth and nature, maker of forms of food,
energy and power, giver of yajnic materials and
fragrances for natural and human activities of creation
and production, lighting the fire and burning the
with what it has already created and thus moves on in
as its friendly associate for the progress of humanity.






[Names: Virebhirviran, Tokam, Spending]
forest wood and creating another like forest greenery,
extending the community of the brave from the brave
seeking immortality, expanding the community wealth
with cows, lands and the light and power of energy,




Brahmanaspati, lord of the evolution of existence,
advances the race of humanity from father to son and
from son to grandson. Who ever or whatever the lord
takes up as his instrument and creative associate, he
knows at heart with his very soul.






[Names: Sindhurna, Ssimivan, Agneriva]
Just as the deep sea receives and stills the
impetuous river in flood, as the mighty man of action
subdues the forces of violence, and as the strong and
virile bull overthrows the old broken bullock with its
strength, so does the man whom Brahmanaspati chooses
as his friend and associate for his purpose overcome
opposition with his valour and lustre. Like the rising
flames of fire there is no looking back for him, no







[Names: Tasma, Anibhrstatavisirhan]
To him and for him flow celestial powers and
virtues pure and free. First and foremost, front leader,
with his powers and intelligence he develops the cows,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 26 977


goes over the lands and rises into the lights in the skies.
With the irresistible blaze of his lustre and valour he
smashes all opposition of the negatives. Such is the man
whom Brahmanaspati chooses as his friend and
instrument for the divine purpose.




[Names: Devanam, Puruni]
patih .


For him the oceans roll, for him the rivers flow,
boundless, incessant and universal across the world,
bearing grace divine, cosmic energy and infinite joy of
the heart. And he, happy and blest with fortune, grows
on and on in peace and favour of the divinities of nature
and humanity. Such is the man whom Brahmanaspati
chooses for a friend and instrument for fulfilment and
the divine purpose.


Mandala 2/Sukta 26






[Names: Brahmanaspati, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Rjuricchamso]
Brahmanaspati, lord of the wide world and the
wealth of life, let the man of simple, natural and faithful
character, like the rays of the sun, be superior to the
forces of violence. Let the man rising to piety and
divinity face the powers that oppose the divine purpose.
Let the brave warrior who protects and promotes light
and life like the rays of the sun fight out formidable
evil in the battles of life, because, ultimately, it is the
man of yajna, dedicated to humanity, environment and
Divinity who is the dispenser of the share of the selfish
and uncreative.






[Names: Yajasva, Haviskrnusva]
Brave young man, do yajnic acts of creation and
service, meet men of thought and wisdom, elevate your
mind to goodness and virtue to fight out the forces of
darkness and evil, prepare the fragrant oblations for
yajna, be great and gracious as you should be. Let us all
choose and pray for the protection of Brahmanaspati,
lord of the world’s glory and wisdom.







[Names: Devanam]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 979


He for sure bears and wields power, progress
and prosperity of life with the people, with settlements
of working communities, by birth and with children,
and he creates and enjoys the wealth of life with his
men who serves and lives with the maker of noble
scholars and sages and who, faithful at heart, offers
worship and sacrifice with fragrant oblations to
Brahmanaspati, lord creator and sustainer of the world
and its wealth of humanity.




[Names: Urusyatim]
Who ever worships and honours the lord with
oblations of fragrant materials seasoned with ghrta,

Brahmanaspati advances him far ahead and high. He

saves him from sin, protects him from the violent and

safeguards him against the perpetrators of evil.

Wondrous are the ways of Brahmanaspati, mighty and

awful are his deeds on earth.


Mandala 2/Sukta 27






[Names: Aditya, Devata, Kurma, Gartsamada, Grtsamada, Rshi, Adit, Srnotu]
I offer these words of worship and prayer,
adoration and admiration, sprinkled with the showers
of ghrta from above dedicated to the Adityas, cosmic
stars and children of Mother Infinity, self-refulgent like
the sun in the zodiacs of his galactic round. I offer these
words as ever with the ladle of love and whispers of
faith into the fire of light and life. May the Adityas listen:
Mitra, friend and darling companion of life, Aryama,
lord of justice and dispensation, Bhaga, lord of glory
and majesty, Tuvijata, lord manifest in power and
splendour, Varuna, lord of light supreme of our choice,
Daksha, lord of dexterity in the art of creation, and
Ansha, divine reflection of Infinity in the world of
existence, all for us all our own.






[Names: Imam, Adityasah, Sucayo, Adityasa]
This song of adoration may the lords of vision
and holy action hear, accept and bless with love and
favour: friendly Mitra, just Aryama, and Varuna, lord
supreme of universal choice, Adityas all, reflections of
the lights of omniscience, purifying and sanctifying
showers of the holy voice of Divinity, free from the
sins of negativities, irreproachable and inviolable all.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 981




[Names: Antah]
The Adityas, children of light, are brilliant,
[Names: They]
violence, no bullying or black-mail. With many many
eyes all round they see within and without all that is
good, or evil that must be rejected. Supremely good are
they and their actions for the shining rulers for whom
they stand ever at the closest.





[Names: Dharayanta, Adityaso, Dirghadhiyo]
Brilliant Adityas sustain the moving and the
stable world of existence. Generously giving, they are
preservers of the entire world of existence. Far-reaching
is their intelligence, they love truth and rectitude, they
protect the breath of life and they augment whatever or
whoever extends the vision and knowledge of life for
others. (Aditya-like should the teachers be.)









[Names: Vidyamaditya, Yusmakam, Mitravaruna, Svabhreva]
Adityas, powers of light and knowledge,
Aryaman, lord of justice and dispensation, if ever I face
a State of insecurity, then, in that state of fear, I pray, I
may have the gift of this divine protection of yours, of
this divine peace and comfort. O Mitra and Varuna,
friends of humanity, dear and just, I pray, that under the
protection of your ethics and guidance I may give up
all evils and avoid them as dangerous pitfalls on the
paths of life.






[Names: Sugo, Mitra, Tenaditya, Varuna, Sarma]
Aryaman, lord of noble action, Mitra, friend and
companion, simple and straight is your path, easy to
tread. O Varuna, lord of our choice and best teacher,
thornless and good is the path you show. Adityas, lords
of enlightenment, teach us to follow and go forward by
that path. And give us a home which is difficult to





[Names: Pipartu, Brhanmitrasya, Sarmopa, Varunasya, Varunas, Puruvira]
May Aditi, mother queen of inviolable unity and
abundance with her brilliant children of regal character


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 983


give us total fulfilment of life. May Aryama, just and
judicious ruler, friend of the intelligent and the wise,
lead us across and beyond the jealous and the hostile
by simple and clear paths of action. May we all, mighty
brave blest with vibrant progeny, ever live unhurt and
happy by the great household of peace and well-being,
a perpetual gift of Mitra, lord of friend-ship and
fraternity, and Varuna, lord of freedom and justice.






[Names: Tisro, Rtenaditya]
Adityas, brilliant children of Aditi, radiant
concentrations of indestructible energy, by the universal
Law of Rtam, hold and sustain three terrestrial regions
and three heavenly regions in the midst of which they
observe threefold dynamics of existential energy in the
field of karmic order. Aryaman, lord of action and
justice, Varuna, lord of love and peace, and Mitra, friend
of fraternity, that too is your holy grandeur and greatness
in the mighty social order, threefold, three-level, for the
body, mind and spirit of the human nation.






[Names: Asvapnajo]
Three charming gifts of Divinity the Adityas,




scholar celibates, hold for humanity. Golden great are
they, blazing brilliant, sanctified in the showers of
knowledge and piety. Ever wakeful, they never sleep,
nor dream, nor even wink their eye for a moment. Firm
and inviolable are they, adorable, for the simple, honest
and pious order of humanity, holding and preserving
the knowledge of Divinity, karmic dexterity and
sincerity of worship for survival and fulfilment in the
world of mortality.




[Names: Tvam, Varunasi, Satam, Syamayumsi]
Varuna, spirit of life and breath of energy, first
of love, choice and justice, you are the ruler of all,
whether they are divine or ordinary mortals by nature.
Give us a full hundred years of life for the vision and
realisation of the light of Divinity and our own
immortality. May we, we pray, enjoy a full and perfect
span of life and age, sweet and satisfying as ever.





[Names: Pakya]
Ye Adityas, stars of the highest order of light, O


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 985


Vasus, planets of the first order of life, I know not wholly
what is on the right, or on the left, or in front, or behind,
as the man of ripe intelligence and settled mind among
scholars does. However, with his guidance and led by
your light, leadership and generosity, I pray, may I attain
freedom from fear and the light of knowledge.






The ruler who liberally gives for the illustrious
men of justice and for the leading lights of truth and
righteousness, and whom strength and nourishment of
body, mind and character constantly advance towards
perfection, grows first in power and prestige and, well-
provided with wealth and the spirit of generosity,
admired and exhorted universally, moves forward in his
chariot of fame as a leader in yajnic projects of humanity.






[Names: Sucirapah, Nakistam, Adityanam, Adityana]
The ruler, pure at heart, courageous and
indomitable, who abides by the values, policies and
guidance of Adityas, men of light, truth and justice, rules
a long age, blest with noble children and followed by




brave warriors, well-provided with plenty of food and
water and doing noble acts of fame. None can hurt or
damage or destroy him or his dominion either from far






[Names: Adite, Urvasyamabhayam]
Aditi, Nature, mother earth and spirit of the
human nation, Mitra, lord of love and friendship,
Varuna, lord of justice, relent, be kind and gracious to
us even if we happen to transgress and commit a sin of
error. Indra, lord of power and ruler over the nation,
grant us ample freedom from fear and lots of light and
knowledge so that long nights of darkness, sin and






[Names: Ubhe, Ubha]
Both the enlightened woman and the noble
husband, the people and the noble ruler, conjoined in
unison grow together for the sake of this Rashtra, the
great social order of humanity, augmenting through
yajna the showers of rain from heaven. Both live


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 27 987


together and move forward, winning victories in the
battles of life. Both are indispensable for the social order,
complementing each other like two halves of a sphere
in the interest of progress and prosperity for the sake of
the family and the nation.






[Names: Sarmantsyama]
Adityas, powers of light and law, dedicated to
yajnic advancement of life and nature, whatever your
bonds of power and law, sinless and inviolable, spread
across the earth, which are like chains of arrest and
prisons of punishment for the lawless and the enemies
of humanity, let me, I pray, cross them over with ease
and pleasure by the chariot of knowledge and action
like a knight of horse, so that we may live at peace in
bliss on this vast earth, common home of the human



[Names: Maham, Ssunamapeh]
Varuna, lord of justice, highest and best of our


choice, I pray I may attain to the progress and prosperity
of a dear and generous man of wealth and dignity, but




not to the swelling pride of a man of easy money.
Brilliant lord ruler of the nation, may I never be deprived
of wealth well-earned with honesty. And let us all, blest
with noble progeny, speak well and highly in thanks
and praise of the lord ruler of the world in all our yajnic


Mandala 2/Sukta 28






[Names: Varuna, Devata, Grtsamada, Kurma, Gartsamada, Rshi, Idam, Varunasya, Varunas]
This is the song of honour for Aditya, self-
refulgent lord of light eternal and poetic vision of
omniscience who, with his might, rules over and
transcends all forms of existence and karma. Lord of
brilliance and generosity is he, extremely kind and
pleased with the liberal man of yajna. I pray for a vision
of the glory of Varuna, magnificent lord of abundance,
love and justice and crave for his mercy and pleasure.






[Names: Tava, Upayana, Usasam, Usasa, Anu]
Varuna, lord of knowledge and wisdom, law and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 28 989


blest with good fortune and all round prosperity and,
singing in praise and admiration of Divinity, be rewarded
with noble intelligence and scientific knowledge of
existence. And when the dawns arise with their wealth
of light rays and the cows stir in their stalls, let us, like
holy fires of yajna, celebrate the glory of the morning






[Names: Sarmannurusamsasya, Puruvirasya, Puruviras, Yuyam]
Varuna, great leader of humanity, universally
admired and followed by hosts of brave warriors, let us
live in peace and bliss under your protection as in our
heaven and home. And ye, all our children, be brilliant
and generous, inviolable and indomitable, be strong and
brilliant as children of eternity and prepare yourselves
for action and cooperation in the service of the Lord.






[Names: Sramyanti]
Aditya, the sun, sustainer of the regions of the
world, creates the waters all round and then the streams
of Varuna, the cloud, shower down and flow. They tire
not, nor ever stop. Like flying birds they flow all round
on the earth at their top speed.








Like the chain of slavery, loosen the hold of sin
and evil from me. O Varuna, lord of law and justice, let
us prosper and promote the stream of virtuous living in
your service. While I weave the web of my life, snap
not the bond of nature and intelligence with my mother.
Snap not my bond of karma before the time is ripe.






[Names: Dameva]
Varuna, lord of love and justice, keep off fear
from me. Illustrious ruler and defender of truth and
rectitude, take me as your own for protection, and, as a
calf is freed from the rope, release me from sin. Other
than you no one far or near can rule over me even for a







[Names: Sisratho]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 28 991


Varuna, lord of life and giver of pranic energy,
save us from the blows which strike to punish those
who commit sin against your yajnic law. Let us not go
astray from light to the dens of darkness. For our life
and holy living reduce and eliminate the forces of hate
and violence.




8. Namah pura te varunota nunamutaparam tuvijata


Lord unassailable and ever powerful of all, we
raise our voice of homage and offer words of salutation
to you in the past, at present and in the future. O Varuna,
as herbs grow on the mountain and vapours rest in the
cloud, so peace and comfort rest in you, and in you abide
the imperishable laws of existence and inviolable rules
of life’s discipline and conduct.





[Names: Para, Avyusta, Sadhi]
Varuna, lord of light and law, acquit me of the
highest liabilities, and obligations undertaken by me.
Never let me live on the fruits of others’ labour. And in
the many days of light not yet come, in which you would
be there to protect us, teach us, all the living souls, to


live the way we should.






[Names: Steno]
Varuna, lord of light and law, brilliant ruler, if a
friend or companion threatens me with fear and I feel
afraid in a state of sleep or wakefulness, or if a thief or
a wolfish robber terrorizes us, save us from such fear
and terror.






[Names: Maham]
Varuna, refulgent lord ruler of the world, I pray,
I may never suffer the empty pride and morbid swelling
from the wealth of a dear, prosperous, generous man of
power and honour. Nor may I suffer the want of wealth
well earned with honest labour. And, blest with noble
progeny and brave warrior heroes, may we ever sing
songs of thanks and praise for the Lord in all our yajnic


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 29 993


Mandala 2/Sukta 29








[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Kurma, Gartsamada, Grtsamada, Rshi, Srnvato, Varuna, Mitra]
Ye lights of the world of life and spirit, brilliant
as the suns, upholders of law and pious vows of
discipline, dynamic masters of refreshing knowledge
and wisdom, remove from me far and near sin and
pollution like a fallen woman’s. Ye divine souls of the
world, Varuna, lord supreme, Mitra, friend of life and
humanity, brilliant scholar and teacher, all you who
listen, I invoke and call upon you for the protection of
truth and goodness in life.






[Names: Yuyam, Abhiksattaro]
Ye divine spirits and noble personalities of the
world, you uphold, protect and promote wisdom. You
constantly advance the light and splendour of life. You
quietly challenge and fight out hate and jealousy. All
round shelters and protectors of the good, destroyers of
evil, be kind and gracious, relent now, strengthen us
and save us ever after.








[Names: Kimi]
O Vasus, shelter homes of life and humanity,
teachers and scholars generous as mother earth, what
shall we do for you with our share of karma and
competence now and whatever potential we might have
later? O Mitra and Varuna, friends and lovers of
humanity dear as the breath of life, Aditi, generous
mother sustainer like earth and nature, Indra and Maruts,
winds and vital energies of life, bear and bring us the
good and best of life, intelligence and knowledge of






[Names: Haye, Sramisma]
Ye Devas, teachers and scholars, noble powers
of the world and nature, you are our own, friends and
kinsmen, the very soul of our virtues. Be kind and
gracious to me, the seeker and the supplicant. May your
chariot never move at slow or medium speed in yajnic
projects on earth or in water. Nor must we tire or slacken
in our service to you in virtuous and scholarly projects.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 29 995




kitavam Sasasa. Are pasa are aghani deva

[Names: Devas]
am one, alone and helpless, but let me throw off all sin
and evil since you teach and enlighten me as a father
teaches and corrects a prodigal son. Let all snares of
bondage be off! Let all sin and trespasses be off! A child
as Iam of yours, seize me not as a hunter catches a bird.






[Names: Arvanco, Tradhvam]
Devas, noble and generous powers of the world,
yajnic teachers and enlightened seniors, advance in
knowledge and generosity, come, be kind and gracious
right front. Obedient with awe and reverence, let me do
what is dear to you at heart. Protect us against the violent
wolf and the greedy robber. Worshipful and dedicated
to yajna as you are, save us from evil time and violence.








[Names: Maham]
Varuna, lord of light, law and justice, let me
never come to that state of sufferance when a dear,
mighty generous man of honour and power either suffers
from empty pride of easy achievement or suffers want
and penury. O brilliant ruler and law-giver of the world,
let me never suffer the want of well earned wealth of
money and materials. And let us all, blest with noble
children and followers, sing in praise of the Lord for
his gracious gifts of righteous prosperity.


Mandala 2/Sukta 30








[Names: Indra, Soma, Sarasvati, Brhaspati, Maruts, Marut, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Rtam, Aharaharyatyakturapam]
The streams of the existential flow of divine
action stop not, nor do they play for fun, for the creator
of waters and the executor of laws, self-refulgent Savita,
the sun who inspires Prakrti with life, nor for Indra who
breaks the clouds for rain. The light of his actions
radiates continuously day by day. When did the first
flow of these actions of creation originate? (Let us


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 30 997






[Names: Patho]
The one (sun) who for the cloud of darkness
bears the food (of vapours) as well as the bond (of
structure and formation), of him the mother Nature
speaks to the man of knowledge. And in accordance
with the will divine the streams of light and action flow
to their destined goal carving out their paths of motion
day by day.






[Names: Urdhvo, Miham]
The sun abides high up in heaven far above the
middle region of the sky. And then it bears, raises and
strikes the deadly weapon of the thunderbolt upon the
cloud and, taking the vapours on all round, it melts the
waters to rain. Thus it is that Indra, sunny wielder of
the lightning weapon, who conquers the adversary, the
dark and deep cloud of rain.








[Names: Brhaspate, Yatha, Satrumasmakamindra]
Indra, destroyer of enemies, Brhaspati, lord
sustainer of the vast world, just as with your mighty
blazing thunderous weapon you broke through the front
gates of the stronghold of the cloud and destroyed the
forces of the demon of darkness and drought earlier, so
now destroy our enemy (and throw open the gates of
light and prosperity).






[Names: Tokasya]
Indra, lord of light and power, ruler of the world,
admirable, joyous and fiery, hurl the thunderbolt from
high up regions of light and destroy the enemy, the same
thunderbolt by which you struck and broke the cloud,
and for the progress and prosperity of our children and
grand children and for the growth and development of
our land and cows, grant us plenty of means and








[Names: Indrasoma]
Indra, lord of power, and Soma, lord of peace,
expand the yajna of development and progress which


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 30 999


you love. Abide as inspirers and promoters of the
obedient worshipful yajamana. Favour us, protect and
promote us, and in this land which is stricken with fear,
create a social order free and fearless, full of joy.






[Names: Somam]
Indra, who gives me fulfilment, who gives me
wealth and happiness, who gives me enlightenment, and
who blesses me with the gift of cows and health of mind
and senses, while I offer homage to the lord, may, I
pray, never vex me, nor tire me, nor make me feel
languid with lassitude. And may we never (with
ingratitude) say: “Do not offer homage of soma to the






[Names: Marutvati, Satrun, Tyam]
Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and divine
speech, inspire and protect us. Loud and bold with a
troop of stormy commandos you overthrow the enemies.
Indra, ruling lord of light and power, too, destroys the
defiant and violent intrepidable leader of the forces of




damage and darkness.






[Names: Brhaspata]
Brhaspati, lord of knowledge and sustainer of
the grand social order, expose and fix with pointed steel
the surreptitious foe in hiding and the saboteur who
plans to destroy us. O brilliant ruler, conquer the enemies
with weapons of offence and defence, and surround and
seal the force of the jealous and the destructive along
with their counterparts.






[Names: Asmakebhih, Sura, Jyogabhuvannanudhupitaso]
O Indra, valiant hero and ruler of the world, with
our resolute heroes of real mettle, do the deeds worthy
of your character and majesty. And if there be
adversaries long puffed up with pride and arrogance,
break them down to their reality and hold and manage
their assets and ours for the nation.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 31 1001


[Names: Marutam, Maruta, Srutyam]
divedive .


That mighty manpower of yours, divine and
stormy, I, seeker of peace and well-being, sing and
celebrate in words of humility and reverence and address
the song to you so that day by day we may attain wealth
and honour which may be worthy of the valiance of all
our heroes, the pride of our children, and worthy of
celebration in song for the future generations.


Mandala 2/Sukta 31






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Asmakam, Rudrairvasubhih, Rudrairvasubhi, Sravasyavo]
O Mitra and Varuna, brilliant light and life breath
of the universe, friendly ruler and vibrant people of the
world, vested with innate virtues, working with Adityas,
scholars brilliant as yearly phases of the sun, Rudras,
forces of strength vital as life breath, and Vasus, people
generous as mother earth, come with all these,
programme, protect, impel, drive and guide our chariot
by which we, in search of food for knowledge and fame,
joyous and inspired, rested in our sylvan home, may fly
like birds flying freely from their nest.







[Names: Adha, Yadasavah]
And now you, brilliant Devas, scholars and
and victorious chariot towards the people since the
motive forces fast traversing the spaces by their paths
are heading with their wings to the surface of the earth.






[Names: Marutena, Marut, Anu]
And may that Indra, lord of power and the
people, who watches the world and does noble acts of
yajna with stormy powers of the winds for great wealth
and victory across the skies, descend from the regions
of space and, with safe and simple protective operations
land and abide by our chariot.





MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 31 1003


And that refulgent generous Deva Tvashta,
universal designer and maker of forms, co-existent and
co-operative associate of all, may, we wish and pray,
accelerate our chariot with divine voice of exhortation.
And so may Ila, divine speech, Bhaga, lord of power
and prosperity, Brhat, vast space, earth and heaven,
Pusha, lord of vitality and sustenance, Purandhi, wielder
of the ancient stars, and both the Ashvins, lord sustainers
of health and vital energy, energise, sustain and
accelerate our project of the chariot.






[Names: Stuse]
And those two refulgent and generous divinities,
dawn and night, twins in mutual sight, which inspire
the moving and non-moving worlds of being, I praise,
with new words of adoration when, O earth and heaven,
I cover the vedi with three orders of holy grass and offer
three orders of holy fragrance, praise, prayer and
meditation.







[Names: Samsamusijamiva, Trita, Rbhuksah, Rbhuksa]
We love to adore you, O divine powers of nature
and humanity, as those who love and are inspired.
Ahirbudhnya, cloud of waters in the skies, Aja, unborn
nature and the soul, Ekapat, constant powers of bliss,
Ribhuksha, lord of universal art and artists, Savita,
refulgent lord of creation and inspiration, and Apam
Napat, infallible energy born of waters, bear the food
of life for us. And I, Ribhuksha, in search of intelligence,
strength and knowledge, with all effort of intellect and
passion in holy action, growing fast and faster, receive
the food for body, mind and soul.






These acts and higher gifts of yours, O powers
and performers of yajnic creation in love and
association, I crave and pray for, which men of desire
in search of knowledge and fame, progress and
prosperity, beautifully refine and advance, and which
progress in knowledge, power and piety, O man of
devotion and endeavour, you too, like a pioneer of the
chariot caravan of humanity, may attain.


Mandala 2/Sukta 32


[Names: Dyava, Indra, Tvashta, Raka, Sinivali, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 32 1005




[Names: Asya, Yayorayuh]
May the heaven and earth be saviours and
protectors of this voice of mine, who follow the
universal law of Dharma and crave their love in unison.
Excellent and elevating is their power and action. Hence
in search of food for body, mind and soul, I present this
powers of Divinity.






[Names: Mano]
May the secret intrigues of hostile men never
hurt us in the day or night, nor may the earth hurt the
joy of humanity with calamities. Nor must anyone
alienate us from our friends. Indra, know our friends
and our friendships with a gracious mind. For this reason
of peace, friendship, and well-being, we offer our
worship and prayers to you, O lord of earth and heaven.









[Names: Ahelata, Srustima, Padyabhirasum, Puruhuta]
Indra, lord of light and power, with a kind and
gracious mind bring us instantly a gift of that
comprehensive speech of Divinity which, like the
mother earth and generous cow and an imaginative mind
and sense, gives us the milk of mental and spiritual
nourishment. Every day, O lord universally invoked and
adored, ruler of the dynamics of existence, with the holy
Word and successive steps of meditation, I knock at
your door.






[Names: Rakamaham, Sivyatvapah]
I call upon the beauteous moon-lit night,
soothing and generous, with words of adoration. May
she, luxuriously gracious, listen to us and, with her mind
and soul, acknowledge and yield to our wish and desire.
May she, with an uninterruptible needle, sew on our
garments of action. May she bless us with praise-worthy
progeny who may produce a hundredfold wealth of life
for us.






[Names: Yaste, Tabhirno]
O Lady of the Moon, those visions of yours, of


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 32 1007


wisdom and beauty, with which you bless the generous
giver with the wealths of conjugal life, with all those
today, O mistress of noble and lovely mind, harbinger
of good fortune, overflowing with a thousand blessings,
come close to us and bless.





[Names: Jusasva]
O Sinivali, lady of love and beauty, you are the
sister of the gods of nature’s bounty. Accept and cherish
the fragrance offered into the fire and, O lady of light
and bliss, give us lovely progeny.





[Names: Tasyai]
Her arms are beautiful, delicate, and lovely her
fingers. Fertile and passionate is she and generous nurse
of life. Mother of many and lovely lady of love and
beauty, offer her the oblations of life into the fire.






[Names: Sarasvati, Indranimahva, Varunanim, Varunani]
She is the first night of the new moon, cooing
with amour, she is lovely and passionate, she is night of




the full moon, she is the mistress of exuberant speech
and noble knowledge, she is the lady of power and
prosperity, and she is the love of my first choice. I invoke
her, I solicit her, I love her for safety, security and all


Mandala 2/Sukta 33






[Names: Rudra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Suryasya, Suryas, Rudra]
Rudra, lord of the laws of nature for universal
health, justice and punishment, father sustainer of the
people, may your blessings of well-being ever come to
us. Deprive us not of the light and benign eye of the
sun. May our brave children be strong on horse back to
challenge the enemies. May we rise and advance with






[Names: Tvadattebhi, Samtamebhih, Vyasmad]
O Rudra, lord of health and well-being, with

your soothing and invigorating herbs given by you, may


we live a full hundred years. May hate and jealousy and
sinful actions be off from us so that we may be free


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 33 1009
from all chronic diseases.






[Names: Srestho, Sriyasi, Parsi]
Rudra, lord of adamantine arms by virtue of your
own knowledge and power, you are the best of the world
of humanity and strongest of the strong. Take us across
the seas of sin and disease to our good and well being.
Fight out all the roads to infirmity and block them






[Names: Unno]
Rudra, O physician, mighty brave and generous,
may we never irritate or provoke you by neglect or
turning away, or by disappraisal, or by pestering you.
With herbs and tonics raise a generation of brave, heroic
young people. I hear that you are the most eminent








[Names: Havimabhirhavate, Rdudarah, Rudram]
The physician who helps, inspires and advances
us with exhortations, herbs and tonics, him I serve and
please with offers of presents and appreciation. And he
too, soft and kind at heart, invited with reverence,
benevolent and pleasant of manners, should not, in the
interest of the patient’s mind and morale, hurt us.







[Names: Unma, Marutvan, Marutva, Ghrnivacchayamarapa, Rudrasya, Rudras]
And the divine physician, Rudra, bold and
generous, commanding the energies of the elements,
restores me, poor patient in need of strength, to glowing
health and energy and I, like one taking shelter in the
shade from the scorching heat, feel relieved, and I pray
that I may continue to enjoy Rudra’s gift of comfort
and joy free from sin and disease.






[Names: Apabharta]
O Rudra, divine physician, where is that
merciful hand of yours which is the healing balm (for
the restoration of health), which is an antidote to the
ravages of the elements of nature? O lord, potent and
generous, save me, spare me, and bless me with


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 33 1011






[Names: Svitice, Namasya]
I offer the highest of the high songs of praise in
honour of Rudra, potent, generous and brilliant sustainer
of health and life. Celebrate and serve this illustrious
Rudra with salutations and presentations. We invoke
and praise the name and splendour of Rudra with honour
and reverence.


[Names: Sthirebhir, Pururupa, Sukrebhih, Isanadasya, Rudradasuryam, Rudradasurya]
Rudra, divine physician, brilliant sustainer of
versatile form and character, shines forth with his sturdy
constitution and purest golden virtues. May his essential
vitality and life-giving power never part from this Rudra,
universal and versatile ruler of this world.









[Names: Arhan, Arhannidam]
Rudra, potent and illustrious lord of the world,
scourage of the evil and the wicked, in your own right
with your own essential power, you wield the bow and
arrows. Rightfully you bear and hold the adorable gold
of universal form and lustre. With your essential strength
and power, you protect this grand and mighty universe.
O Rudra, never and none is greater than you in might
and majesty.






[Names: Stuhi, Srutam, Mrla]
O Rudra, scourge of the evil and the wicked,
praise and cherish the eminent young man of action
seated in the war chariot, fearful as a tiger, destroyer of
enemies and illustrious of merit. Be kind and gracious
to the admirer and worshipper who sings in praise of
you. And let your forces throw off from us the others
who are ungrateful and negative.






[Names: Kumarascit, Bhurerdataram]
Rudra, lord giver of good health and joy, just as
the son bows to the father worthy of reverence and
adoration while the father approaches, so do I praise
and offer obeisance to you, generous giver and leader


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 33 1013


and sustainer of the good and the truthful, and as we
offer reverence and obeisance, you bless us with healing
cures for health and joy.






[Names: Yavo, Samtama, Marutah, Maruta, Yani]
O Maruts, energies of the winds and vital breath
of prana, whatever your healing powers, pure, purifying
and without adverse effects, O powers of rain and water,
whatever your cures most sanative and tranquillising,
which Manu, the wise and imaginative scholar, father
figure, collects, selects and refines for us, all those
sanative cures and restoratives of benevolent Rudra’s I
love and desire.






[Names: Parino]
May the stroke of fatal illness stay far from us.
May the serious error of judgement of the brilliant
specialist be far from us. Ward off and remove the
chronic diseases from the people of wealth and power.
O potent and generous lord of health and power, be kind
and gracious to our children and our grand children.








[Names: Havanasrunno]
Rudra, lord sustainer of the world with health
and life, mighty potent and generous, lord of knowledge
and enlightenment, brilliant and illustrious, be kind and
gracious so as not to deprive us of our comfort and joy
nor to strike us with illness or untimely death. O lord
listener to our invocation and prayer, enlighten us here
and now, enlighten us so that, blest with brave and noble
children, we sing and celebrate your mighty
magnificence in our battles of yajnic life.


Mandala 2/Sukta 34






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Marut, Dharavara, Maruto, Agnayo]
Maruts, pioneers of humanity on top of the
wave, sharp as razor’s edge and vibrant as the winds,
irresistible with might and majesty, terrible as the tiger,
bright with light and culture, blazing as flames of fire,
soft and sophisticated at heart and fond of soma to the
last drop, blow off the whirlwinds of time and
circumstance and open out the light and language of


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1015
Divinity for the progress of humanity.






[Names: Dyavo, Rudro]
Ye Maruts, tempestuous pioneers of the world,
blest with a heart of gold with light and love, be bright
like the heavens with stars and, with the blaze of honour
and distinction on your person, shine and roar like
thunder and lightning of the clouds, since Rudra, bold
and generous lord of justice, generous as showers of
rain, generated you from the holiest womb of earth and
the rays of heaven’s light.






[Names: Uksante, Hiranyasipra]
Maruts, passionate heroes of action, shining in
golden helmets, ride and goad their horses in battles
like rockets in constant motion and shoot forward like
sailors conquering the waves of the sea with instant oars.
O Maruts, commanders of the winds, shaking and
storming the adversaries in battle contests, go forward
and achieve your cherished goal, fast like wind shears
shaking, ripping and scattering the clouds.








[Names: Prkse, Mitraya, Mitra, Prsadasvaso, Vayunesu]
As the battles of action are won and the earth is
sprinkled with showers of peace, all the regions of the
world grow strong and powerful as one restful home
for a friendly humanity. And Maruts, brilliant and
generous heroes of victory and givers of nourishment
and the breath of fresh life, possessed of mighty means
of advancement, without diminishing the wealth of
nations, shooting up straight to their goals and values,
sit steadfast on the helm of affairs along the simple paths
of peace and progress.






[Names: Indhanvabhir, Marutah, Maruta]
The Maruts, leaders and pioneers, impassioned
with enthusiasm and love of life, bright and blazing with
arms and words pregnant with meaning, advance on
inviolable paths of peace and progress, like swans flying
to their own resorts of water, for celebration of the
boundless ecstasy of the honey sweets of success and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1017






[Names: Samsah, Sasam]
O Maruts, heroes of mankind, impassioned with
the will to act and equanimity of mind to think, come
and grace our sessions of yajnic celebrations, admired
universally as you are among people. Come for the
development of wealth and prosperity. Develop the mare
for speed as well as the cow for plenty of milk. And for
the admirer and celebrant, create and award ample
wealth of intelligence and knowledge with noble
language and competence for karma with precious gifts.






[Names: Isam]
O Maruts, heroes dear as breath of life, give us
that power and speed for our nation’s chariot, that wealth
and vitality of life and that universal knowledge which
may awaken and enlighten us day by day. Give us that
food and energy for the admirers and celebrants in the
yajnic programmes of development which is




inexhaustible, and, for the poet, singer, scientist,
technologist and the architect of the human nation, bring
ample reward of fulfilment, high intelligence, freedom
from sin and ill-health and inviolable courage, patience,
and fortitude.






[Names: Dhenurna, Sisve]
Maruts, leaders with heart of gold and brilliant
person, generous givers of knowledge and advancement,
as they yoke the power and horses to the chariots of the
nation, and as success in progress and prosperity is
achieved, then, every day for every home, like the
mother cow overflowing with milk for the calf, they
provide and augment ample food and freshness for high
fulfilment of the people who give and have given their
share of service and self-sacrifice in the national yajna.


aa: eu




[Names: Vartayata, Rudra]
Whoever be the person who, like a wolfish thief
or robber or deadly enemy, targets us with anger and
torture, O Maruts, shelter home for all and universal


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1019


saviours, protect us against the violence of the enemy.
Whosoever raises the fatal weapon upon us, bind and
seal him with punishment and circle him round with
vigilance. O Rudras, scholars of the middle order,
defenders of law and scourage of the lawless, hurt not,
destroy not, those who are non-violent, peace loving
and law abiding.






[Names: Citram, Yadu]
Maruts, defenders and pioneers of the social
order, friends of humanity, wondrous is that yajnic
exploit of yours so well known, when from heights of
the skies and depths of the earth you churn out and distil
the nectar of life which again, O friends of Rudra, lord
of light and justice, and indomitable warriors, becomes
a fatal antidote against the maligners of your celebrants
and the weary weakness of the aging.






[Names: Hiranyavarnan]
Such as you are, O great Maruts, who thus
venture out to exploit the earth and the skies in search




of knowledge and life’s energy, we invoke and exhort
you for the fulfilment of the omnipresent lord Vishnu’s
love and desire for the progress and prosperity for his
children. And thus do we, having raised our ladles of
yajna as our share in our effort for piety, honour and
prosperity, pray for the gifts of the Maruts, heroes of
the golden hue great and, marvellous in their own right.






[Names: Sucata]
They, the Maruts, masters of their mind and ten
senses of perception and action, first in intelligence and
imagination, organise the yajna and take it to success.
May they, we pray, give us the clarion call with the light
of the dawn, and, like the lady of light which removes
the veil of darkness from over the restful night with
radiant rays of the sun, may they, we pray, remove our
veil of darkness and ignorance with the great and sacred
light of the rising sun of divine knowledge.





[Names: Nimeghamana]
Those Rudras, stormy winds and roaring clouds,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 34 1021


tempestuous pioneers of humanity, leaders of science
and knowledge, act and grow within the dynamics of
the laws of nature alongwith the earths, planets and the
atmosphere, with the golden light of dawn and the
various beauties of nature, and, showering gifts of living
energy and wearing the grace of the full moon and
majesty of form, they grow and advance with the
strength and speed of the brilliance of light.






[Names: Trito]
Wanting a great home for the sake of safety,
security and advancement, we praise and, with humble
salutations, do homage to those great and noblest
yajakas, 1.e., five pranic energies, which Trita, the man
commander of those five yajakas, deploys for his safety,
security and good fortune, since they are ever fresh,
dynamic and ever on the move like a wheel in constant
motion.






[Names: Yaya, Arvaci]
O Maruts, pioneering guides of humanity, divine




powers of knowledge and holy intelligence, that virtuous
mind and power of protection by which you save the
devotee from the taint of sin and let him cross the ocean,
by which you save the celebrant from the calumny of
maligners, may that power of protection, that noble
intelligence, like a loving mother, come hither to me
and bring me divine grace.


Mandala 2/Sukta 35






[Names: Apam, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Upemasrksi, Apam]
Close to the waters in search of food, energy,
vitality and fast speed of action, I create this song related
to water energy and subsequent water wealth. May these
holy words of mine, loud and bold, flowing like a stream,
be delightful and bear fruit and fulfilment. May that
divine energy born of waters, instant and imperishable,
be in accord with the holy voice and help us create many
beautiful forms of life and various wealth for us.






[Names: Imam]
Let us chant this mantra conscientiously created


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 35 1023


and composed from depths of the heart in honour and
celebration of this magnificent power. May the great
lord of the wide world know of it. Indeed this mighty
energy born of the waters, replete with wealth and
power, with the great omnipotence of divine nature,
creates the entire worlds of existence.






[Names: Samanya, Tamu, Sucayo]
Some of these streams of water and currents of
energy flow together. Some others flow close by them,
and all of them together join and flow into the ocean to
fullness. And these clear and purest streams of water
and water energy all round abide by that pure, bright
and blazing child of the waters, imperishable agni, fire
and electric energy of the water power. (This mantra
describes the dynamic circuit flow of energy and its
imperishable form in the state of conservation.)


[Names: Tamasmera]
Just as young maidens in crystalline purity of


body and mind and fragrant modesty anxiously yet
bashfully approach the youthful man, feeding his fire




and receiving the shower of life and love, so do
crystalline streams of water murmuring with exciting
energy approach from all round that Apam-napat, fiery
energy of the essence of waters, and he, overflowing
with vitalising energy, fertilises their thirst for life and
creativity. May that, the eternal elan vital distilled from
waters by nature, bright and blazing like flames of fire
fed with ghrta in yajna, shine on by itself in the waters
of life for us.






[Names: Asmai, Krta]
For this Apam-napat, liquid and fiery energy of
waters, brilliant, generous and inviolable divinity, three
brilliant and generous streams of dynamic energy, Ila,
Sarasvati, Mahi, eternal, universal and specific forms
of divine energy, flow and bear food for his sustenance
and growth. They move like young maidens
approaching their man for the continuance of life and
vital energy. They move on and on like three divinities,
reflections of the divine will in the cosmic oceans of
time and space, and he, the fiery creative energy, drinks
the milk of life from the three motherly powers.





[Names: Asvasyatra, Amasu]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 35 1025


In the dynamics of water, fire and vital energy
lies the source of virility, fertility and generation of the
species. Herein lies the source of pleasure and happiness.
O brilliant lord of generosity, protect the good and the
pious people from the hateful, violent and destructive
associates and encounters. It is perfect, beyond all stages
short of ripeness in nature. Nothing false, opposed or






He whose home is blest with a fertile cow,
abundant holy speech in communication, and noble
knowledge, drinks holy water and eats consecrated food.
He, inviolable in pranic energies, enveloped in the folds
of nature’s vitalities is ‘apam-napat’, as such he grows
for the sake of the generous man of charity, wields power
and prosperity, and shines with might and majesty.






[Names: Sucina, Vaya]
Abiding in the holy waters of nature’s liquid


bounty, dedicated to nature’s law and blest with her
consecrating power, vast and constant with the earth,




he shines with immaculate purity of character and the
majesty of light divine. The other regions of the world
are like the branches of his family tree where, too,
further, grow the trees with their own farther branches.






[Names: Tasya]
Apam-napat, essential energy born of the waters
of space, wearing the mantle of lightning power,
electricity, abides close above the wavy and curvy
motions of the clouds. And streams of energy, wearing
the lustre of gold, carrying its highest power, flow all





[Names: Hiranyarupah, Hiranyayat]
Golden of form, Apam-napat, the child of
abides higher than the golden seat of its origin, and the
golden feeder energies of physical existence provide
the food for its growth.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 35 1027




[Names: Yamindhate]
That lustrous power of this child of the waters
and its essential name arising from its innate properties
is beautiful, and it grows while the youthful maidens
raise it in its golden glory like the flames of fire with






We serve this Apam-napat, golden energy, with
yajnas and feed it with food and sacrifices in the midst
of many powers of nature for the good of our closest
friends. I refine it in the vedi, sustain it by degrees with
fuel, feed it with food and sacrifices and celebrate it
with exalting songs of Rks.





[Names: Saimvrsdajanayat, Sisurdha]
That potent and generous Apam-napat, vital heat
of life, creates the fetus in the waters. The same baby




sucks the same vitality of the waters. The same water
energies then kiss and caress the baby. The same, then,
in bright, unfaded effulgence shines in the youthful body
as it shines in other body forms too.






Mighty streams of cosmic energy, with their own
imperishable velocity, flow all round bearing ghrta and
anna-food for their grand child, Apam-napat, abiding
all-time effulgent in this highest state of existence.






[Names: Visvam]
Agni, vital spirit of life in existence, I pray, may
I attain a blessed home for the people. May I receive a
glorious hymn of divine worship for our people of power
and honour from our poets of power and imagination.
May we attain all that good and glory which Devas
protect and promote. And may we, blest with the brave,
sing songs of Divinity in our yajnic projects.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 36 1029


Mandala 2/Sukta 36










[Names: Indra, Maruts, Tvashta, Agni, Marut, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Devatah, Grtsamada, Rshi, Tubhyam, Pibendra, Somam, Soma]
Indra, yajnapati, first and prime power who rule
the world, let the person invoking you and rising in life
settle down in peace and security for your sake. May
the people like children of Aditi, mother Earth, receive
the best of cows, lands and the holy Word and the best
of water and energy with protective showers of the
clouds. Indra, drink up the libations of soma, offered
with dedication with the words ‘Svaha’ and ‘vashat’
from our yajna.




[Names: Yajnaih, Asadya, Bharatasya, Bharatas]
narah .


Maruts, children of the Lord sustainer of the
world, powers natural and divine, leaders of humanity
united by yajna, moving by the right path at the right




time by speed of the winds, creating and achieving the
objects of desire, crystalline pure and lovely in colours of
beauty, seating yourselves on the holy grass of the vedi,
drink the soma distilled from the purest light of heaven.






[Names: Ameva]
Maruts, invoked and invited with love and
respect, come to us as to your own home, ride the skies
and raise the voice of victory. Tvashta, lord maker of
forms and institutions, leader of the republics,
commanding high intelligence and wisdom, come with
the brilliant creators and experts of production, taste
the sweets of our yajnic food and celebrate the victory
with us.






[Names: Prati]
Agni, ‘vipra’, brilliant lord of the dynamics of
nature and human society, speak of the laws of nature
and psycho-social dynamics and inaugurate and direct
the yajna of creation and production here. Inspired and
passionate for holy action, be seated on the vedi,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 36 1031


establish yourself in the three fields of earth, sky and
space and be sure and specific on description,
application and valuation of knowledge human and
divine with prayer and gratitude to the Lord Omniscient.
Achieve the planned targets of blissful creativity and
development, taste the sweets of yajnic success and be
happy that you have played your part of life’s action for




piba.


Indra, lord of wealth and power, ruler of the
world, this soma is such that it would strengthen and
augment the wealth and power of your body and soul.
It is the very patience and fortitude and the lustre of
your personality, as broad and clear as daylight, collected
and consecrated in your very arms. It is distilled,
seasoned, preserved and served for you only. Drink of
it as a gift from the Brahmana, expert of science and
bio-technology, and be happy.


meg ॥







[Names: Jusetham, Accha, Anu]
O brilliant Mitra and Varuna, friendly lord of
the rule of law, administrators and people of the earth,
join and participate in my yajna for the nation in honour
of the Lord. Listen and appreciate the revealing voices
of knowledge gifted by the saints and scholars old and
new. Just as the yajaka seated and established in yajnic
acts of creation and development receives the gifts of
food and sustenance from yajna well-preserved, so you
too receive the gifts of peace and prosperity from the
scholars of Shastras and enjoy the honey sweets of the
good life.


Mandala 2/Sukta 37






[Names: Dravinoda, Ashvins, Agni, Devatah, Grtsamada, Rshi, Ashvin, Mandasva, Tasma, Bharata, Somam, Soma]
O lord giver beatific, rejoice and thrive on the
food of libations to your heart’s desire. O yajakas, he
loves the libations, full and profuse, offered with love
in faith. Bear this sacred ‘havi’ and offer it liberally to
him. He is loving and kind, eagerly awaiting the offering,
and he is the abundant giver. O lord giver of the wealth
of existence, drink up the fragrant soma from the fire of
yajna in accordance with the seasons.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 37 1033






[Names: Yamu, Adhvaryubhih]
Whom I ever invoke and worship, him alone I
invoke and serve and worship now. He alone is the giver,
he alone is the master, he alone is the ruler, he alone for
sure is the lord worthy of invocation, invitation, service,
yajna and worship. O lord giver of the wealth of life,
abundant and infinite, receive and drink this honey sweet
of soma prepared and refined by the loving, faithful
and non-violent priests according to the seasons. Take
it from the sacred cup and drink to your heart’s desire.






[Names: Medyantu, Ayuya]
May they be happy and may they prosper with
whom you go, whom you support, who bear your
burdens and carry forward your programmes for you.
O lord controller of light and growth, wanting nothing
for yourself and hurting none, be strong and firm, make
your devotees strong and firm. Joining all, acting all
round, lustrous, intrepidable and inviolable, please to




accept the soma yajna of all seasons from the hand of
the yajakas, drink and rejoice with love and for
beneficence.






[Names: Apaddhotraduta, Turtyam]
May the lord giver receive the food brought by
the yajaka and offered from the ladle and the vedi and
may the lord relish and rejoice and shower the yajaka
with love. And may the lord giver of wealth and bliss
bless the yajaka’s fourth estate of existence and protect
his bowl of bliss unhurt and immortal.




[Names: Arvancam, Prnktam]
vajinivasu .

Ashvins, agents of nature for the lord of
omnipotence, leaders of humanity and pioneers of peace
and prosperity for the people, start your chariot and
direct it hitherward to us, the chariot which transports
you to our yajna and takes us to the land of freedom
and bliss. Come to the land of joy, season our havi with
honey, and drink the soma of immortal bliss.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 38 1035






[Names: Josyagne, Visvebhir]
Agni, lord of light, leader of humanity, giver of
life’s vitality, accept the fuel offered, receive the havi
offered in oblations, accept the creative chant of holy
mantras, accept the praise and prayer. With all the
powers of nature, serve the generous divinities. Lord
giver of haven and home and the wealth of life, great,
happy and rejoicing, yourself eager for the food of yajna
and excitement, let all other great divinities, eager for
food and fulfilment, receive and enjoy the offerings
according to the seasons.


Mandala 2/Sukta 38






[Names: Savita, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Nunam]
That self-refulgent lord Savita, creator and
inspirer of the universe, omnipotent lord of action, holds,
rules and sustains the universe and abides supreme over
the eternal Prakrti. Indeed, he alone wields, orders and
sustains the magnificent universe for the sake of living
beings and carries on the sacred yajna of creation for


the well-being of all.






[Names: Visvasya, Srustaye, Apascidasya]
For the good of the world alone the generous
and self-refulgent lord Savita of long and mighty arms
abides over all and extends his rays of light across the
spaces. The waters too, pure and purifying, flow within
his rule of law, and so do the winds play around every
where under the same law.






[Names: Ahyarsunam]
Savita, lord of light, the Sun, with its radiant
rays releases the moving planets from the shadow of
another planet as it removes the shadow of darkness
and causes the planet to shine. And for the sake of
protection it also controls the movement of the winds
coming to the clouds as also other serpentine movements
either freakish or destructive. Thus the night and release
from darkness comes according to the rule and
movement of the Sun’s light, and that is the divine law.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 38 1037






[Names: Punah]
The earth, traversing the wide wide space,
revolves again and again in orbit in the solar region
wielding her force and power to do the rounds assigned
to her, and, leaving one place, moving on, comes back
to the same and remains stable in the orbit. The constant
and sleepless lord Savita, the Sun, self-refulgent and
divine, creates the seasons of the year in the distinct






[Names: Nanaukamsi, Jyestham]
Many are the forms and abodes of life, many
doors, exits and entrances, where universal life abides,
the light and life of Agni, the birth and death of the
flame, the lustre, the desire and passion of the will divine
to live and to be. The mother bears the highest share of
it for the son, the flower in bloom inspired by Savita,
father creator in accordance with his law of existence.








[Names: Samavavarti, Sasvan]
Happy is the man who is well settled in the
home, prays for the well-being of all living beings and
is fast and eager to win the battles of life. Such a man
shuns all crooked ways of living and keeps to the pious
ways of living in accordance with the laws and discipline
of the brilliant and generous lord Savita, creator and
ruler of the world.






[Names: Tvaya, Vanani]
O lord creator and ruler of existence, by you is
created and provided life-giving energy in the waters.
By you is created the sky, by you the forests, for the
birds and the deer to fly, to roam and play. Those rules
and laws of divine Savita they never violate, who can?





[Names: Yadradhyam, Visvo]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 38 1039


Savita, lord creator of the universe, sustaining
it in the succession of moments in the time continuum,
creates various forms for various births of the souls
according to their state of karma, and the same lord as
Varuna, lord of love and justice, assigns the form desired
and deserved by the soul the moment its eye is closed
on death. Thus do all living beings under the sun come
back to their ultimate home from where they had gone






[Names: Nardatayas, Rudrah, Rudra]
None can violate, nor circumvent the law and
justice of Savita, Supreme Lord Creator: Neither Indra,
the sun and cosmic electric force, nor Varuna, the waters,
nor Mitra, the winds, nor Aryama, life breath of air, nor
even Rudra, the soul by itself or in alliance with any
power of nature, no enemies, that is, any imaginable
counter forces can violate the divine law. This Lord
Savita, for well-being and salvation, do I invoke with
homage and salutations. Self-refulgent is He, generous
and gracious.







[Names: Bhagam, Samso]
Glorious is Savita, worthy of thought and
meditation, sustainer of the universe, celebrated by
humanity, lord protector of all. We know the lord and
do homage to Him with prayer, submission and yajna,
and we earnestly wish that in our battles of life and in
our success in the achievement of the wealth of life we
may ever be blest with His love and grace.





[Names: Asmabhyam]
O Lord, whatever wealth has been given to us
by you from the regions of light and the enlightened
people, from the waters and the generous people, from
the earth and motherly figures, whatever desired be
achieved, may all that be good and blissful for the
celebrants, the learned, the praiseworthy and, O Lord
Savita, for the worshipful.


Mandala 2/Sukta 39




[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Gravaneva, Brahmaneva, Sasa, Purutra]
Ashvins, harbingers of life’s heat and light,


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 39 1041


breath of being and energy, spirit of passion and action,
complementary currents of the circuit of existence, you
approach the earth like two clouds of rain to augment
her wealth. You come like two eager birds and sit on
the tree of life laden with fruit to enjoy yourselves to
the full. In the yajna of development, you are two priests
who chant the hymns of celebration and prayer. And in
life in general, you are like two welcome harbingers
who create and help us create the abundance of earth.






[Names: Prataryavana, Mene, Sumbhamane]
You come like two heroic warriors of the chariot
in the morning. You join us like two leaders of the flock
to lead us on in the right direction. You descend like
two fairies of celestial form full of bliss. And you are
like a wedded couple who know their sacred obligations
among the people.







[Names: Srngeva, Cakravakeva]
You come first and foremost for us like horns
of defence, like bright war horses panting for action,




with strength and patience for victory, like the
chakravaka bird couple which are harbingers of light
and love every morning. Thus mighty and powerful,
you move and lead us forward like the pioneers of battle.






[Names: Naveva, Svaneva, Take]
horses; hold us strong and stable like the nave, the axle
and the chassis of the chariot; keep us wide awake like
watch dogs for the safety of our body and society and,
like the coat of mail, save us from falling down battered
and broken.





[Names: Vatevajurya, Hastaviva, Unaging]
waters, watchful as with open eyes, come upfront and,
like the hands giving protection and security to the body,
and like the feet, take us forward to the holy wealth of
life.



MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 39 1043




[Names: Osthaviva, Naseva]
Like the lips, speaking honey sweet for the
mouth, help us to be sweet. Like the mother’s breast,
nourish and sustain us to live. Like the nostrils, sustain
our body with the breath of life. And like the ears, be
listeners for us to give us the voice divine.






[Names: Hasteva, Sisitam]
Like the arms, give us noble strength. Like the
earth, give us wide spaces for expansion. These words,
O Ashvins, addressed to you, may, like a whetstone,
energise and sharpen our communication and raise it to
the voice of thunder.






[Names: Etani, Tani]
These words of homage, this holy song of
celebration, the seekers of life’s joy and excitement offer
to you. Ashvins, O leaders of humanity, accept these
with love and grace, and come to bless us so that, blest
with the brave, we speak and celebrate you highly and




advance far ahead in our projects of life.


Mandala 2/Sukta 40
Soma, Pusha and Aditi Devatah, Grtsamada Rshi




1. Somapusana janana rayinam janana divo janana


[Names: Jatau]
Soma and Pusha, universal energies of peace
and stability and nourishment and growth, are creators
of all forms of wealth, creators of light and creators of
earth. Born as complementary powers, they are
protectors of the entire universe. O Devas, divinities of
nature, scholars and leaders, feed, know and reveal this
creative centre and power of immortality.






[Names: Imau, Abhyamindrah, Somapusabhyam, Somapusabhya]
All divinities of nature serve and feed these two
[Names: Together]
these two, Soma and Pusha, like the moon and the herbs,
dispel the disagreeable forces of darkness and ignorance.
With the same two, Indra, the Sun, nature’s power of
light and energy, creates the generative maturity and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 40 1045


ripeness in the developing fields of generation such as
earth, cows and women.






[Names: Somapusana, Visuvrtam]
Soma and Pusha, fire and air, all-invigorating
powers, create, animate and refresh that aerial chariot
with seven chakras (circles and centres of energy) and
five controls for the people it traverses the spaces and
goes all over in all directions but is not perceived
everywhere and it can be controlled with the mind.






[Names: Divyanyah, Tavasmabyam, Puruvaram, Puruvara, Puruksum, Puruksu]
One of them as sun has made his home high up
in heaven, the other on the earth and over in the sky as
generative heat and electric energy. May the two create
for us wealth and growth loved and admired universally,
and may they strengthen the natural bond between
themselves and us like the natal cord between mother
and child.








[Names: Visvanyanyo, Somapusanavavatam]
One of them creates the entire worlds of
existence, and the other goes on and on watching the
world and watched and admired by the world. O Soma
and Pusha, I pray, protect and promote my intelligence.
We pray that with the help and kindness of both of you
we may help and promote the entire humanity and win
the battles of life.






[Names: Dhiyam, Avatu]
May Pusha, all-pervading spirit of growth and
refinement, inspire our will and intelligence. May Soma,
lord of wealth, bless us with wealth. May mother Aditi,
divine intelligence, moving in unseen currents, inspire
our intelligence. And may we, blest with brave warriors
and noble children, sing ecstatic songs of thanks and
praise in celebration of Soma and Pusha.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1047


Mandala 2/Sukta 41






[Names: Vayu, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Ashvins, Ashvin, Vishvedeva, Sarasvati, Dyava, Prthivi, Havirdhane, Devatah, Grtsamada, Rshi, Vayo, Niyutvantsomapitaye]
Vayu, tempestuous power of divine nature,
intelligence of the learned, commanding a thousand
chariots and laws of motion, come with all those powers
and laws to drink of the soma of life’s joy.






[Names: Niyutvan, Gantasi]
Vayu, scholar of the dynamics of the winds, self-
controlled with your disciplined mind and senses, drying
up the mists of ignorance and confusion with the brilliant
light of knowledge, come to the brilliant light of
knowledge, come to the house of the yajamana who
has distilled the soma. Universally moving you are, I
invite you come in person. This soma is for you.








[Names: Sukrasyadya, Indravayu]
energy, scholar vibrant as wind, sages dedicated to love
and Dharma, come to the yajamana, pure, brilliant,
disciplined and dedicated, and drink of the soma distilled
and prepared.




[Names: Ayam, Soma, Mitravaruna, Mamediha]
O Mitra and Varuna, dear as breath of life and
soothing as morning mist, eminent in dedication to truth
and law, the soma of life is distilled and prepared for
you. Listen to this call and invitation of mine and come
here and now.





[Names: Rajanavanabhidruha, Sahasrasthuna]
Indra and Vayu, power and progress, Mitra and
Varuna, love and justice in freedom of choice, all
embracing and hating none, abide in the house of
inviolable peace and stability firmly resting on a






[Names: Aditya, Adit, Sacete]
MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1049


The brilliant Adityas, inviolable ruling lords of
light and peace, the sun and moon of the world, who
distil the very essence of life like ghrta and aqua pura,
protect and promote the generous charitable people who
follow the simple, straight and natural paths of life free
from crookedness.






[Names: Gomadu, Varti, Rudra]
Ashvins, complementarities of nature and
humanity, spirits of love and justice, dedicated to truth
and Dharma, rich and prosperous with cows and horses,
that is, plenty of wealth and enlightenment and speed
of progress, you are Rudras, wielding the sceptre of law
and power and the rod of punishment, come to bless all
by simple and straight paths of naturalness which are
protective and promotive for all people.






[Names: Duhsamso]
Generous are the Ashvins’ showers of wealth,
joy and protection, so strong that no mortal man, no
much less hurt, violate or surpass and overcome them.
(Let us all abide by them.)




[Names: Dhisnya]
Ashvins, pious and resolute lords of generosity,
fire and air of life in existence, bring us that wealth of


golden hue which creates further wealth and gives us
freedom and space for progress and expansion.






[Names: Indro]
Indra, light of life, dear as breath of vitality,
mighty great, blazing as the sun which is stable in its
orbit and enlightens and watches us all as it moves, may,
we pray, remove all fear and give us freedom.






[Names: Indrasca, Bhadram]
May Indra, lord omnipotent, and the sun bless
us with peace and comfort, and may sin and evil, we
pray, never touch us either before or after, and may good
alone be our share and fortune for all time.






[Names: Jeta, Satrun]
May Indra, lord omnipotent beyond all fear and


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1051


violence, grant us freedom from all quarters of space.
He watches all and he is the supreme victor over all
enemies and contrarieties.






[Names: Visve, Srnuta, Edam]
All brilliant greats of the world, divinities of
nature and humanity, sages and scholars, listen to this
voice and prayer of mine: come and grace the holy seats
of our yajna.






[Names: Tivro, Etam]
Intense, honey sweet and exhilarating is the
pleasure gifted by saints and scholars in our soma-yajna
for the promotion of science. It is for you, divinities of
the world. Come and drink of this pleasure to your





[Names: Ssruta]
Indra supreme, ruling light and power of the
world, and all those divinities whose presiding priest is
he, republics of the people, saints and sages, and all
those people and organisations who generously




contribute to and for the advancement of science and
culture, listen to this call and prayer of mine and come.






[Names: Ambitame]
Sarasvati, mother dearest, most fluent and
eloquent giver of vision and wisdom, liberal and most
brilliant, eternal fount of knowledge and speech, we
are just like simple, natural, innocent, unknown children.
Mother spirit of nature and humanity, give us the light
of knowledge and culture with the grace of Divinity
and make us worthy of acceptance, appreciation and


[Names: Sunahotresu]
In you, O generous mother giver of vision and
wisdom, lie all the health and age and wealth of
knowledge for the world. Come brilliant mother
Sarasvati, grace our yajna of education and science,


rejoice and create for us a new generation of healthy,
educated and refined children.






MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 41 1053


Sarasvati, mother of universal knowledge and
speech, commanding the food, energy and speed of the
advancement of humanity moving on the paths of truth
and rectitude, listen to these chants of homage and
accept with delight and homage these your favourite
oblations of scientific knowledge which the ecstatic
performers in the yajna of education offer to you in
honour of the bounties of nature, divinity and humanity
for the benefit of the faithful seekers.






[Names: Pretam, Agnim, Agni]
Dyavaprthivi, heaven and earth, generative
treasures of yajnic wealth, creators and givers of peace,
prosperity and well-being, come and grace our yajna.
We opt for you and invoke and invite you. And we
invoke and invite Agni who carries the fragrance of the
holy yajna offered into the fire.






[Names: Dyavanah, Yajnam]
Heaven and earth, teachers enlightened as the
sun and generous as mother earth, let this perfect yajna
of ours, this planned yajnic programme of education
and enlightenment, which touches the skies and the
regions of light now rise high to the divinities and reach
the saints and scholars of brilliance across the earth.








[Names: Ihadya, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Dyava-prthivi, heaven and earth, enlightened
and generous teachers and scholars of eminence, who
love all and hate none and who are easily accessible
and blissfully companionable, may the noble and
brilliant seekers of knowledge dedicated to creative and
yajnic programmes of learning and education come to
you and sit with you for the attainment of the pleasures
of knowledge, power and prosperity, and honour and
dignity of life here and now.


Mandala 2/Sukta 42





[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Kanikradajjanusam, Sumangalasca]
Speaking loud and bold, addressing humanity,
you take the Word forward like a mariner who takes his
vessel forward on the waters. O master of the Word,
flying like the eagle, you are the harbinger of good
fortune. No superior force from any quarter whatsoever
would approach you to disturb your mission.


MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 43 1055


aes




[Names: Ssyena, Pitryamanu]
May none like the hawk smite you, nor like the
vulture violate you. Nor must the hunter with the bow
shoot you down with the arrow. Reverberating with your
voice loud and bold across the lands of your forefathers,
harbinger of good fortune, speak to us here of the good
things to come.






[Names: Sakunte]
Speak aloud, proclaim from the house tops on
the right the good things to come. Speak of good fortune,
man of power and the Word as you are. May no thief
rule over us, no sinner, no maligner boss over us. And
we would all, blest with the brave, sing aloud in praise
of you and celebrant.


Mandala 2/Sukta 43








[Names: Indra, Devata, Grtsamada, Rshi, Pradaksinidabhi, Ubhe]
Going round clockwise from left to right in
obeisance, poets and artists sing in homage to Indra,
lord of light and power. So do birds of beauty and
majesty sing in praise of the lord according to the
seasons. So does Indra, poet of power, like a Soma-
singer chant the Word of both material and spiritual
significance as he chants and reveals the significance
of other mantras in Gayatri, Tristubh and other metres.





[Names: Udgateva, Samsasi, Vrseva, Sisumatirapitya, Sakune]
Shakuni, poet of power and homage to Indra,
like the Sama-singer in yajna, you sing the songs of
ecstasy. Like the disciple of a Vedic scholar Brahamana,
you sing in homage to the lord in holy rites. Like a virile
and passionate bull approaching youthful females, speak
to us with enthusiasm of all round good things. All
round, speak to us of noble and blissful things.




MANDAL - 2 / SUKTA - 43 1057




[Names: Avadanstvam, Yadutpatan, Yadutpata]
Shakuni, poet of power and imagination, while
speaking, speak to us of good. Silent and sitting,
enlighten our mind with noble thoughts. While flying
on the wings of imagination, you speak of the way you
do good. Let us then, blest with good and brave children,
sing songs of high praise for the lord.




1058


MANDALA 3


Mandala 3/Sukta 1






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gathina, Vishvamitra, Rshi, Somasya, Somas, Devan]
Agni, brilliant scholar and fiery leader, you
speak to me of the strength and power of soma, the elixir
of life. You have prepared me, like the fire that carries
the fragrance of yajna from the vedi over earth and skies,
to join and conduct the yajnic business of life and play
my part in the battles of progress. Shining forth, I join
the brilliant best of generous humanity and, as fire
moves the cloud to break into showers, we move the
nation to release its potential into showers of peace and
prosperity. O leading spirit of life and humanity, Agni,
protect, promote and sustain the body politic of the
world community and move it forward.






[Names: Prancam, Divah]
Joining all together, we carry the yajna forward.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1059


Let the voices of celebration and joy of the people rise
to the skies. Feeding the fire with fuel and fragrance,
doing homage to the lord of light with salutations in
dedication they conduct and control the yajna of social
order by virtue of the vision and wisdom of the sages
and the grace of Divinity. And they seek the highways
of further advancement for the sake of safety, security
and the joy of peace and enlightenment.






[Names: Mayo, Agnimapasi]
Agni, the yajnic power, as also the man of clear
vision, essentially pure and dedicated to yajna, by nature
a friend and brother of heaven and earth, holds the
treasure of comfort and joy. Brilliant and generous souls
and the divine powers of nature discover this golden
power, Agni, at the heart of currents of waters and
vapours, in the flow of pranic energies, and in the sister
streams of sparkling water flowing free, and the yajnics
find it in their own karma and in the waters.




[Names: Avardhayantsubhagam, Sisum, Agnim]
Seven flames of fire as seven streams of water
with power and grandeur raise and elevate this glorious




effulgence emerging red and white in majesty. While
this Agni arises assuming a wondrous form, high-priests
of brilliance and generous ambition rush to develop and






[Names: Sukrebhirangai, Gtatanvan, Socirvasanah, Sriyo]
Overspreading the vast spaces with beams of
blazing heat and light, raising and sanctifying the holy
programmes of yajnic development by poets and priests
and visionary experts of purest mind and heart, clothed
in purity and majesty, Agni as the brilliant yajaka goes
round and round creating and showering great
unbounded gifts of health, age and prosperity on all
across the flow of life in the world of nature.






[Names: Vavraja, Sana]
Agni, light of the universe, takes to and abides
in the subtle unconsuming, pure unhurt streams, close
together, open yet not exposed, flowing unbroken from
the Light Divine. These seven streams of light and
speech flow here, constant, ever young, together and
they hold but one eternal meaning like a fetus in their


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1061


(The mantra applies to light and Vak, Speech,
flowing in seven streams of the spectrum.)






[Names: Stirna, Asthuratra]
Expansive yet covered, united yet universal and
various are the gifts of this Agni abiding in the womb
of the waters of life and abounding in the flow of the
honey sweets of existence. The heaven and earth both
one and together are the manifestive mothers of this
lord of bliss and power.






[Names: Babhranah, Scotanti]
Agni, child of omnipotence, growing in power
and generosity, bearing and wearing beautiful forms of
versatility by virtue of passion and purity and the zeal
of light and lustre you are ever expanding and advancing
with equipoise. Wherever the honey streams of light
and waters of life shower and flow, there the potent man
of generosity grows in might and moves forward by the
poetry of divinity created by poets of vision and
imagination.


O Man, child of Manu, you too watch, follow




and grow by the poetry of power and purity created by
the poets of vision and imagination in honour of Agni.






[Names: Pituscidudharjanusa, Guha, Sivebhir]
Agni, light and vitality of life, knows the
creator’s gift of life and life’s home by its very nature
from the very birth, and that home is the cloud, the
mother’s womb, the night’s darkness and the mother’s
breast from where the streams of water, milk, speech
and intelligence immediately flow. This Agni, living and
growing in the cave of life, the mother’s womb, moving
with its blessed companions and with the streams of
energy flowing from heaven, doesn’t remain hidden in
the cave. One who knows life moving as such knows
the secret of life. One who doesn’t doesn’t.




[Names: Pitusca, Vrsne, Sucaye]
Agni, spirit and vitality of life, nurses the one
life-embryo of both father and mother, and the one


receives nourishment from the mother as well as from
other universal sources of nature, abundant and swelling


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1063


all since time immemorial. Heaven and earth, father and
mother, both bound by nature to life in the embryo, bear,
nurse and support it to continue. O Agni, lord of life,
light of the world, protect and support both, father and
mother, heaven and earth, for the sake of this virile and
sacred humanity, for the continuance of this holy life,
this sacred humanity in the embryo.






[Names: Uraumahan, Rtasya]
Agni, mighty spirit and vitality of life, grows in
the lap of nature, vast and irresistible creative power of
Divinity, where the streams of ancient waters flowing
together feed it to bloom, expand and continue. Agni,
the fire of life, lies in the womb of nature and her cosmic
laws of evolution, assertive and inviolable yet subject
to the laws, a darling of the karmic flow of the twin
powers of heaven and earth, father and mother of the
baby in the process of procreation.





[Names: Akro, Udusriya, Agnih]
Agni, like an unbreakable wall of a fort is the




commander and defender of his mighty forces in the
battles of life. Auspicious and blissful of sight he is self-
refulgent and a simple and natural source of light for
his children. Creator of the rays of light and knowledge,
born of the womb of the currents of primordial energy,
it manifests as the great sun and most human leader of






[Names: Apam, Devasascinmanasa]
The vital fire and light energy abiding in the
waters and pranic vitality creates the woods of herbs
and trees, and the clusters of wood such as arani generate
this fire which is beautiful to see, full of wealth and
power and versatile in form. Scholars of heat and light
energy, conscientiously with their heart and soul, study
it practically and comprehensively. It is highly valuable,
manifest everywhere and a tremendous source of power.






[Names: Brhanta, Guheva]
Resplendent rays of light as dazzling flashes of
lightning serve and derive their power from Agni, simple
and natural refulgent power. They milk the nectar of


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1065


immortal light energy in the midst of vast spaces of earth
and heaven in the same way in which the individual
soul draws its light and joy from the Supreme Soul
immanent in the cave of the heart in the individual body






[Names: Devairavo]
praise, worship and pray to you, Agni, light of life, with
the offer of fragrant materials. With honest mind and
sincere desire, I worship you and pray for friendship
and comradeship and for holy understanding and vision.
Lord of light and power, bring shelter and protection
for the celebrant alongwith devas, brilliancies of nature
and humanity. Save us all with the inviolable glory of
your light and lustre.






[Names: Upaksetarastava, Suretasa]
Agni, lord of light and life, noble leader pursuing
right values in society, we are your devotees abiding by
you, residing close to you. We hold and command all
the wealth of food for sustenance and other materials.
Virile we are and strong. We pray that in our battles of




life we may defeat and win over our impious adversaries
and enjoy a happy and pious life.






[Names: Prati, Anu]
Agni, lord of the light of knowledge, noble
scholar, you are brilliant among the leading lights, happy
and rejoicing, master of all the poetry of divinity and
humanity. Be like a restful shelter for common humanity.
Self-confident and self-controlled, master of your
chariot and freedom of movement, you go forward to
your goal in association with noble scholars and in
conformity with the powers of nature and the




[Names: Ghrtapratika, Agnirvisvani]
Immortal Agni, lord of light and ruler of the
world, abides in the home of immortal humanity, guiding
and directing their yajnic programmes to success. Fed
with ghrta and rising high, he shines bright as far and
wide as the earth. Agni, leader of the people, is lord of
knowledge who knows the entire poetry of existence.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 1 1067






[Names: Asme]
Agni, lord of knowledge and power, come to us
with friendly acts of grace and benevolence. Lord of
universal movement and freedom, mighty great, come
with grand provisions of protection and promotion. Lead
us to honour and success and render us our share of
abundant wealth and power, mutual and ultimate peace
and saving grace worthy of poetic celebration.






[Names: Etate, Mahanti]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and creative
power, these are your various and universal
manifestations in action old and new. Great are these
acts of power and grace for the bold and generous
humanity in every manifestation of yours which, O
power immanent and omnipresent, I sing and celebrate
in honour of your excellence and which, O lord, be
gracious to hear.








[Names: Janman, Tasya]
Jataveda, Agni, immanent and omnipresent in
every particle of creation, is constantly and eternally
lighted, served and celebrated by the sagely friends of
the world. We pray that we too may ever abide in the
kind and gracious heart and mind of the venerable lord
worshipped in yajna and social gatherings and ever
enjoy the benefit of his benevolence.






[Names: Imam]
This yajna of ours, of celebration and worship,
O lord of power and grandeur, send up unto nature’s
powers of Divinity, and establish among the generous
and brilliant celebrities of humanity, wise lord of holy
acts of creation and development as you are, generous
and rejoicing in the holy yajnic performances of ours.
Agni, lord yajaka of the universe yourself, you give
abundantly to the devotees. Give us generously of great
food and energy and of extensive wealth and knowledge
of life.






[Names: Ilamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1069


Agni, lord of light and life and knowledge, bless
the yajnic worshipper with a generous gift of Ila, that
eternal and infinite speech of Divinity which reveals
the knowledge of universal action and confirms him in
the practice of it in universal action. Bless us with
intelligent sons and grandsons specially to continue the
family line. Agni, may your gifts of love and holy


Mandala 3/Sukta 2






[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Gathina, Vishvamitra, Rshi, Vaisvanaraya, Dvita]
Like refined and fortified ghrta offered in yajna
to the fire of the vedi, we generate, refine and sharpen
our courage and intelligence and compose hymns of
praise in honour of Vaishvanara Agni, fiery ruler of the
world and protector and promoter of the universal yajna
of Truth and Law. And the people as well as the leading
priest both join in developmental yajna and, with the
application of intelligence and action, produce a refined
version of the chariot and the thunderbolt and surrender
it to Agni, divine high priest of the universal yajna of
creation as a hymn of tribute and celebration.








[Names: Havyavalagnirajarascanohito]
That Agni, Vaishvanara, fiery life of the world,
by nature, illuminates both earth and heaven and rises
as the darling admirable favourite of his motherly
generators. He is the carrier of the fragrances of yajna,
unaging treasure of food, energy and universal wealth,
indomitable, brilliant sun and most welcome visiting
guest of the people.






[Names: Kratva, Agnim, Rurucanam]
With yajna, holy application of mind and will,
and contribution with the spirit of yajna to the various
dharmic programmes of the man of power and expertise,
who is dedicated to the service of the divine saviour
father, the creative pioneers of brilliance and generosity
generate and develop Agni, heat and light energy, with
organised planning and corporate action. And desiring
to join this programme and have the benefit, I whisper
and discuss, and invoke this Agni power shining with
the light of the sun, great with its own light, and fast as
the energy of nature itself.




on




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1071



[Names: Ratim, Socisa]
To share and enjoy the beauty, ecstasy and
magnificence of life, we choose what is worthy of
choice: Agni, lord and power of light, boldly free and
abundant, tempestuous power revealed by the Rks,
excellent gift of the Bhrgus, generous and celestial artists
and scientists far reaching in poetic imagination, wisdom
and creation, loving, and radiant with the light of heaven.




[Names: Yatasrucah, Rudram, Rudra]
apasam.


For the attainment of peace and prosperity,
people here since eternity have lighted the fire of Agni,
rich in matter, mind and motion, lovely brilliant, radiant
divine across the worlds, mighty just and corrective,
leader of yajnic programmes to success and giver of
karmic joy and satisfaction. Having collected the holy
grass for the vedi and lighted the fire, they raise the
ladle to feed the fire and open the secrets of the skies.








[Names: Pavakasoce, Agne]
Agni, lord of light and fire, infinite giver, having
collected the grass and sitting around the vedi in yajnas,
the performers are but seekers of service and lasting
peace and they pray for a haven under your dominion
only. O lord and presiding power of yajna, bless them
with the wealth and well-being of their heart’s desire.






When people of yajnic karma take to this Agni
for service, light up the fire, raise it and feed the rising
power, then it fills the earth and skies and the vast and
high heavens with light and fragrance of bliss. And thus
this power and presence of Agni, lord of power and
bliss, poetic omniscient, treasure home of food, energy
and light, is extended far and wide across the universe
for the speed and success of yajna, human acts of love,
non-violence and creative self-sacrifice.






[Names: Namasyata, Rathir, Agnir]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1073


Offer salutations and service in homage to Agni.
Creator of food for yajna and enjoyment, leader of yajna
to success, supreme giver, knower of all that is born,
omnipresent lord ever on the move, watching and
superintending the universal operation of law and yajna,
Agni is the foremost high-priest of the dynamics of
Divinity working through the forces of nature.






[Names: Tisro, Tasam]
Three are the flames of mighty Agni shining
everywhere, beautiful are they and immortal, purging,
purifying and sanctifying everything. One of these they,
the immortal powers of Divinity, place in the world of
the mortals for their sustenance: this one is the fire and
magnetic energy. The other two, electric energy and
light, they carry up above to the heights of the twins,
sky and the region of light and place them there.





[Names: Visam]
The oblations of fragrant food offered by yajnic
people into the fire intensify and sharpen like razor’s
edge the catalytic and creative power of Agni, protector


1074


and promoter of the people and the imaginative
visionary among them, for the refinement of their valour
and brilliance. The same Agni as the fire and passion of
virility goes up and down everywhere, inspires every
heart and, in these worlds, bears the fetus in the womb
of existence for continuance.






[Names: Vaisvanarah]
That Agni grows in the vital fire of living beings,
germinating, evolving, mighty virile in various
wonderful forms, roaring for expression like the
irrepressible lion as Vaishvanara, immanent as the vital
heat of living energy, fiery leader, illustrious, immortal,
treasure home of life’s wealth and will to live, all round
giving the jewels of existence to the generous person
of yajnic performance.




Vaishvanara, vital fire of life and immanent will,
ancient and eternal, rises to paradisal bliss over the


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 2 1075


heights of heaven sung and celebrated by poets of faith
and imagination. Creating as ever the wealth of life for
living beings, the illustrious leader goes all round by
the highways of existence ever awake, without a wink
of sleep.






[Names: Rtavanam]
That Agni, Vaishvanara, universal fire of life,
going by the ways of Truth and universal Law,
venerable, intelligent, admirable, existing and operating
in the lights of spaces, which is held and sustained by
the universal Vayu energy, that same Agni, wonderful
in movement and achievement, bright in flames, radiant
with holy light, we love, admire and worship for the
sake of latest success and well-being.







[Names: Sucir]
We invoke, admire, worship and pray with
homage and oblations to that Agni which is pure and
purifying, vigorous and lovely, brilliant as light of the




sun, banner of heaven, established in beauty, rising as
the dawn, shining on top of heaven, irresistible and
impetuous lord of majesty. We follow this lord as a torch
bearer over untrodden paths of infinity to the Sublime
and the Divine.




[Names: Mandram, Ratham]
imahe.


Emanating the ecstasy of Ananda, universal
yajna, purest power, clarion call to life unambiguous,
self-controlled and all-controlling, adorable, all
watching eye, infinitely various in colour and motion
yet constant as light and steady as a chariot, beauty
crystallized in form, inexhaustible fount of bliss for
humanity, the ultimate haven of peace, the real treasure
of existence: that is Agni, that we worship with homage
and yajnic offerings.


Mandala 3/Sukta 3




[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Vaisvanaraya, Agnirhi]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 3 1077


To move forward on heavenly paths of progress
on firm ground, the wise offer the best of jewels as
offering in the service of Vaishvanara Agni, brilliant
light and blazing fire pioneer of the world and leader of
the most potent order. It is Agni alone, constant and
immortal power, which honours and inspires the
excellencies of nature and humanity so that the eternal
order and laws of existence may not be vitiated.


aa: neu




[Names: Antarduto, Ksayam, Agnirisito]
Agni, magnificent and powerful, moves around
as a messenger of energy in heaven and earth. Creative
performer and consecrated leader of humanity, it
beautifies and beatifies the wide world with rays of light.
It is loved and honoured by the brilliancies of nature
and humanity as the very treasure home of light and



[Names: Ketum, Apamsi, Agnim]
cake.


Pious scholars and wise yajakas praise and




celebrate Agni as the symbol of yajnas and yajnic
success of all creative and constructive programmes of
life with their thoughts, devotion and acts of worship.
They dedicate their holy chants and their holy acts to
Agni and the yajamana realises his ambitions of success
and well-being in it and through it.






[Names: Pita, Vayunam, Vayuna, Purupriyo]
Agni is the father, generator and promoter of
yajnas. It is life breath of the wise and motive power of
the stars and planets. It is the aerial car of the scholars
and path to bliss for the celebrants. It pervades and
energises heaven and earth in many forms and, as
universal favourite and illuminative light of the
imagination, it is sung and celebrated in worship by
virtue of its own might and majesty.






[Names: Candramagnim, Vigaham]
Devas, mighty powers of nature, bear Agni, and
holy yajakas light and establish it here: Agni that is


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 3 1079


beautiful as the golden orb of the moon, majestic in
bearing, splendid in its own law and function,
omnipresent in the world, abiding in the waters and
breath of air, all penetrative, instantly and constantly
moving, covered in its own rays of light and lustre, all
sustaining, pure crystalline concentration of beauty and
wealth of existence.






[Names: Agnir, Rathir, Purupesamam, Purupesama]
Agni goes on and ever in the world on the chariot
of time conducting and expanding the yajna of existence
by the powers of nature and pious human beings with
their karma and intelligence executing its auspicious
commands. It is tempestuous, self-controlled and all-
controlling, driving off opposition, calumny and


[Names: Agne, Vayamsi]
Agni, lord giver of light, life and energy, come
and bless our young progeny with full age and let them
abound in strength and overflow with vigour and energy.




Let us all shine with plenty to our heart’s desires. Inspire
our life and age to fullness and grandeur. O lord ever
wakeful and watchful, you are the darling of the brilliant
and the wise for veneration and worship and the lord of
yajnic good works for the scholars.






[Names: Vispatim, Adhvaranam, Samsanti]
For the sake of elevation and exaltation, with
food and homage, abandon and ecstasy, people praise,
admire and worship Agni, lord of the common wealth
of humanity, great, honourable and welcome like a
learned visitor, guide and leader, inspirer of the wise
and worshipful performers of the yajna of love and non-
violence, eminent among the learned and the lord who
knows all that is born and exists.






[Names: Vibhava, Savasa, Tasya]
Agni, lord refulgent and generous, happy-
and people by virtue of his might and majesty. We wish


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 3 1081


and pray that with our acts and conduct in the home,
sustained by him, we may honour and obey the rules
and laws of his making in the land ruled and sustained
by him in every way.






[Names: Vaisvanara, Jata]
Vaishvanara Agni, lord of light omnipresent, I
love and pray for your light and splendour by which, O
lord of omniscient vision, you rise to be the lord of bliss
and freedom. As you rise to manifestation, you fill up
and pervade the regions of earth and heaven. Agni, by
virtue of your own power and presence, you are the
lord supreme of all the worlds.






[Names: Vaisvanarasya, Ubha]
By one’s earnest desire to act and rise freely,
anyone of poetic vision and creative imagination attains
the infinite light of heaven by virtue of the gracious
power and actions of Vaishvanara, light and life of the
world, anyone by the self alone, independent. Agni, lord
of light and power, doing honour to both his parents
and generators, rises and manifests, radiating and filling




both earth and heaven with abundant light and expansive


Mandala 3/Sukta 4






[Names: Apris, Graces, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Samitsamit, Sucasuca]
Agni, fire of life, lord of light, master of
knowledge, guide and leader, kind and benevolent at
heart, rise for us with every piece of sacred fuel offered,
rise with every libation from the ladle, shine with every
flame of fire and purity, and bless us with life’s wealth
and generous disposition of mind and heart. Lord of
brilliance and benevolence, you call the divine powers
of nature and brilliant people to the yajna to meet and
cooperate in creative and constructive action. You are a
friend, we are friends, come with your heart and soul,
join us in the yajna, and raise us to the light divine.






[Names: Semam, Agnih, Agni]
That yajna of ours, performed with reverence


in faith and rising with the libations of ghrta, which the
best of humanity and divinities of nature join thrice in


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 4 1083


the day and which Varuna the moon, Mitra the wind,
and Agni the fire of life bless every day with peace,
power and light, that same yajna, O Tanunapat, lord
protector of physical and material world, raise to the
honey sweetness and fragrance of love and kindness in






[Names: Accha]
That universal Agni, inspiration of awareness
and reflection for action, first arises in the cosmic yajaka,
lord creator, and then flows in streams of awareness,
universal intelligence and divine speech, to the first
yajakas on earth to join in holy yajna and to worship
the generous omnipotent creator with homage and yajna
in faith. May that Agni, light of universal awareness,
intelligence and the holy Word, conducting the cosmic
yajna, loved and prayed for, flow and bless the noble





[Names: Urdhvo, Socimsi, Divo]
The singer is appointed in your creative yajna




of love and non-violence, and the path upward is
selected and taken. The flames of fire rise and touch
the skies. The yajaka is seated in the centre of the vedi
by the life string of heaven clothed in light and fragrance.
The light and fragrance spread over the spaces and fill
the divine planes of nature.






[Names: Sapta, Nrpesaso]
Seven rituals of yajna consciously and
judiciously selected spread out, go round and round and
fill up the world with the light of truth and cool of
vapours. Born of nature in yajnas with human vitality,
ancient as ever, they emanate from the vedi and roam
around at their own freedom giving fresh life to yajna.






[Names: Usasa, Yatha]
Loved and greeted by all, the twins, night and
day, though different in form, come and manifest in their
smiling beauty, so that Mitra, vibrations of air, Varuna,
waves of water, and the mighty Indra, currents of energy,
with their acts and qualities of nature, give us the


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 4 1085


pleasure of experience, (soothing, energising and






[Names: Daivya, Rtam]
I celebrate the first and foremost divine
highpriests of nature in the universe, the sun and the
fire. The seven ministering priests of yajna, too, together,
with offers of ghrta and fragrant materials, feed and
propitiate the same two. Praising and celebrating the
universal Law of Nature and the waters of life, they
proclaim the Law and the joy of life and, observing the
rules of the Law and shining in accordance with the
Law and the Truth, they exult with heavenly joy.






[Names: Sarasvati]
Come Bharati, speech bearing knowledge and
education, loving and kind, with all forms of living
languages and lessons for learning; come Ila, Eternal
Speech Divine, the inner Light Divine, with potential
knowledge of all attributes of divine and human
existence; come Sarasvati, universal stream of the
existential flow of eternal awareness with all the
knowledge of existence. Come all three divine modes




of Word and Knowledge and grace the sacred vedi of
our yajna. Come here and now, threefold mother of
human knowledge and speech.






[Names: Tannasturipamadha, Yato]
O Tvashta, lord maker and refiner of forms in
existence, brilliant and generous divinity, rejoicing in
acts of creation and development, give us and internalise
in us instant and developmental forms of that yajna
which gives us the vitality of life and the science of
development and sustenance through which is born a
generation of youth, brave men of practical action,
creative and generous, dedicated to yajnic programmes
and the love of Divinity.




[Names: Vanaspate, Sedu]
devanam janimani veda.


O Vanaspati, O sun, lord of light and preserver
of forests, release the lights of brilliance, let the showers
of light, energy and freshness come close to us and the
powers of nature. Agni is the giver of peace and ripeness.
It matures to fullness the sacred materials of yajna. It
truly is the yajaka and the clarion call. It is true and
truer to the divine law and integrates with all objects of


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 5 1087


creation since it knows the origin and character of all
the bountiful powers of nature and humanity.






[Names: Barhirna]
Agni, lord of light and fire and knowledge, guide
and leader, come to us bright and blazing at the speed
of energy with Indra, lord of might, and the devas, divine
virtues of spirit and character on the chariot powered
by sun-rays. Stay firm on our holy seats unshaken like
space. Let mother earth be blest with noble children of
noble action. Let the bright scholars of immortal spirit,
knowledge and action rejoice with holy chant of divine


Mandala 3/Sukta 5





[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Pratyagnirusasascekitano, Prthupaja]
Just as Agni, fire divine, light of the dawn,
awakes, arises and awakens every morning, so does the
man of knowledge, dynamic scholar, attaining to the
positions of the men of light and vision, rise high and
higher day by day and awaken the sleeping humanity.




Agni, mighty powerful, lighted and raised in the
vedi by lovers of divinity, throws open the doors of light
against darkness. So does the scholar, bearer and
harbinger of the light of knowledge, dispel the darkness
of ignorance and reveal the light of knowledge to a
nation in slumber.






[Names: Predvagnirvavrdhe, Purvirrtasya]
Just as the adorable Agni grows in heat, light
and power by the chant of songs and celebration of the
devotees and then this harbinger of light adorns the
morning with the bright and beautiful light of the dawn,
so does the sagely scholar, dedicated to the light of
eternal truth, shine in the lovely light of Revelation as
the messenger of light and life divine for the people.





[Names: Adhayyagnirmanusisu, Mitra]
Agni, heat and light of life, concentration of the
power of action, born of the waters of space and currents
of cosmic energy, friendly saviour, leader and guide to
success by the laws of Truth and flow of the will to
live, is established in the heart of human communities.
Bright and beautiful, loved and adored, it abides on top


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 5 1089


of values in human history. It is the sagely scholar and
the dynamic leader worthy of homage and reverence
for all intelligent people.






[Names: Mitro, Agnirbhavati, Mitro, Mitrah]
Agni rises as a friend when it is lighted and
raised. As a yajaka conducting the yajna of evolution
and development it is a friend. As the omniscient lord
of existence and as presiding power of justice it is a
friend. As the highpriest of the yajna of love and non-
violence it is a friend, and as the power of inspiration
and self-control it is a friend. And it is a friend as it
flows with the rivers and rolls with the oceans. And
finally it is a friend as it sits on top of mountains and




[Names: Pati, Pati, Suryasya, Suryas]
Agni protects the friend and favourite, it protects
the amplitude of the earth in orbit, and the flight of birds.


Mighty powerful, it protects the rainbow colours of light
in space and the orbit of the sun in the galaxy. Noble,




elevated and sublime, it protects the pleasure and
amusement of the noble people who are brilliant and
generous.






[Names: Rbhuscakra, Sasasya, Vayunani]
Mighty and versatile lord of light, omnipresent
in all facts, motions and laws of the universe, Agni
creates the soothing and adorable fluents such as speech
and waters, and guards them all wholly, without
reservation, and without let up. And whether it is
manifest or latent it shines charming in form like the
liquid flow of water or the rising flames of ghrta from the
vedi.






[Names: Didyanah, Ssucirrsvah]
Loving and brilliant Agni, as the eminent
scholar, blazing pure and radiating fire, abides in the
seat since birth itself, overflowing with ghrta and
celestial waters, worthy of extensive songs of praise
and celebration, loving and glorious, and constantly,
again and again, renews, refreshes and reinforces its
generators, loving parents, earth and sky.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 5 1091






[Names: Sadyo]
As soon as Agni is born, it is borne and grows,
in, with, and by, the herbs which, like nursing mothers,
increase it and themselves grow bright and green with
the waters and sunrays flowing down. Thus does Agni,
flowing like streams of life’s vitality, grow and evolve
in the lap of its parents, earth and sky, the mother and
the father, and thus does it preserve, protect and continue
the onward flow of life.






[Names: Agniridyo]
Agni, mighty spirit of life, raised, praised and
worshipped with holy food shines over heaven and earth
raining in showers from heaven on the vedi of mother
earth. Friend and saviour, adorable Agni breathes in and
collects the vitality of life from nature’s currents of
energy and, as the very messenger of Divinity, brings
the light and virtues of nature’s bounties for the lover
and performer of yajna.








[Names: Udastambhit, Yadi]
Mighty Agni being the highest of luminaries,
living, breathing, shining and abiding as the very breath
of life in the middle regions of space, holds and sustains
the heavenly regions of light and bliss with its blazing
light and power, for the sake of the wise and brilliant
scholars of science, art and technology. It abides in the
heart of every soul and in the centre of every particle of
matter and every wave of energy. I pray I may also light
this power that brings all the fragrant bounties of life to






[Names: Jlamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
Agni, refulgent lord of light and universal breath
of life, give us that transcendent vision and wisdom,
that divine speech and power of action which makes
everything possible in life. Give us ample land,
knowledge and earthly speech of the Divine Word, most
blissful which brings success to the devotee dedicated
to yajna so that an exceptional generation of children
and grand children may rise in the community. Agni,
lord of light, we pray, such may be your favour, such
may be your benign eye and goodwill toward us.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 6 1093


Mandala 3/Sukta 6






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Daksinavad]
Artists, scientists, workers and experts of yajnic
work of creation and development, inspired by the voice
of thought and deep reflection, dedicated to the bounties
of nature and Divinity, take up the yajnic activity that
would lead to the divine goal of your imagination. Take
up the ghrtachi, the ladle of yajnic offering full of ghrta
bearing the fragrant materials to be offered into the fire
of yajna as inputs, let it be potent and procreative, the
abundant giver of holy reward moving in full gear and
take the project forward.






[Names: Divascidagne]
O fire of cosmic yajna rising from the vedi, fill
the heaven and earth with fragrance, fertility and
prosperity. O yajaka, eliminate the weaknesses, exhaust
the possibilities of excellence, and then retire and call
it a day. And with the glory of heaven and majesty of
the earth, the seven flames of fire with tongues of gold




would speak for you in words loud and bold ringing
across the spaces.






[Names: Dyausca, Yadi]
When the human communities in pursuit of the
service and bounties of nature and the divinities of
heaven and earth, worship Agni, pure, powerful and
radiant in their state of abundance, prosperity and
generosity, then heaven and earth, and the divinities and
the yajakas consecrate and dedicate the high-priest of
the yajnic commonwealth to the law of peace and self-
sacrifice.





[Names: Mahantsadhasthe, Askre]
Agni, the high-priest of cosmic yajna, great and
gracious, is happily and firmly established in his seat in
the vast and joyous dominion between heaven and earth,
which both, united and cooperative rivals, unaging and
uninjured, yielding the nectar-milk of the world are his




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 6 1095




[Names: Vrata, Tvam]
Agni, lord great and gracious, your laws and
ordinances, your acts and self-discipline are greater than
the greatest. By virtue of your creative and yajnic action
the heaven and earth expand in glory and prosperity.
Instantly on your rise you become the harbinger of
peace, progress and happiness, messenger of bliss. Lord
generous and potent, you are the guide and leader of
the people of the world.






[Names: Rtasya]
And to the steer of your chariot of the flow of
existence and the Law, yoke the flaming currents of
energy with the operative reins of centrifugal and
centripetal forces of nature, blazing with light, and thus,
O Jataveda, lord of light, knowing as you do all that is
born and exists, bring in all the devas, divinities of nature
and nobilities of humanity together and make them
participate in the yajnic programme of the world.








[Names: Divascida]
Bright and blissful are your lights of heaven.
You shine in the radiance of the eternal dawns of the
morning. And as you blaze upon the forests with might
and splendour and the vapours arise in steamy fragrance,
divinities burst into song in praise of the cosmic
sacrificer beaming with joy.






[Names: Urau]
And those who rejoice in the wide wide skies,
or the shining ones who exult in the glory of the highest
heavens of light, or those friendly, protective, adorable
companions whose culture is cooperation and self-
sacrifice, may they all, O lord of light and joy, Agni,
direct their beams of light and chariot horses, like senses
and intelligence, hitherward under full control.






[Names: Aibhiragne, Patnivatastrimsatam]
With these devas, come hither to us, Agni, Spirit
of light and fire, knowledge and power and the ecstasy
of life, come by one chariot or many. Exalted and
omnipresent and expansive are your beams of light
which transport your chariot over the quarters of space.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 6 1097


Bring along the thirty-three devas, divinities of nature
and spirit, all bountiful, with all their virtues and
attributes and rejoice in the beauty of life with us.






[Names: Sahota, Praci]
He is Agni, the cosmic sacrificer in whose
honour and for whose exaltation the vast earth and high
heaven sing in celebration and prayer at every yajnic
programme of evolution and progress. Prime powers
of the universe, both of them, like two yajna-vedis of
the yajna of love and non-violence, stay and abide
beautifully established in the cosmic order dedicated to
truth and overflowing with vitality in the universal law
of the lord himself manifested in the truth and law of






[Names: Prakrti, Jlamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
Agni, lord of heaven and earth, give us, we pray,
the abundance of mother earth which overflows with
possibilities of action and achievement. Give us liberal
gifts of cows and the universal form of speech and
knowledge and lasting wealth. Make it possible for the




performer of yajna. Bless us with brave and heroic
children and grand children. Bless us with the favour of
your kindness and benevolence under your benign eye.


Mandala 3/Sukta 7






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Sitiprsthasya, Pariksita]
Seven penetrative currents of the golden fire of
divine energy radiate carrying the seven streams of
sound waves and fill their generative parents, all
pervasive heaven and earth. Pervaded, the generators,
heaven and earth, cooperate and, to keep on the fire
and flow of the voice of cosmic yajna, they sustain the
life and energy of the currents a long age without end
for the devotee.






[Names: Divaksaso, Rtasya]
The waves of sound, eternal Vak, voice of
omniscience, pervade the spaces. The currents of energy
of the generous and omnipotent lord, Agni, are
omnipresent. The lord alone pervades the celestial
streams of energy and speech carrying the honey sweets


MANDAL - 3 / ऽ <^ -7 1099


of meaning and life’s wealth. In this world of truth and
eternal law, O lord protector of all life and light, Agni,
one energy, like a cow or the earth, goes round and round
in orbit doing homage to you.






Agni, sustainer of life, lord of light and
knowledge of the physical world, wielder of universal
wealth, the sun, ruler of the day, rides the waves of light
and energy well directed and controlled in the world of
existence. And he of the blue back, the corona,
multifarious of form and colour, sustains the various
species of life and helps them to settle and enjoy






[Names: Mahi, Vyangebhirdidyutanah]
Strengthening and refreshing the great, creative,
shaping, unaging and sustaining power of the sun,
lustrous bearer of the solar system, the currents of Agni’s
energy flow. Radiant in the regions of light, illuminating
and invigorating with its various powers, the sun
operates in heaven and earth as in one united, integrated




organismic system in the cosmic body of the Lord






[Names: Supreme, Jananti, Sasane, Divorucah]
They know the peace, comfort and joy of living
under the rule and order of the generous, radiant and
mighty ruler of the world, and they rejoice and sing in
ecstasy, whose songs of Divinity are great and
worshipful, radiant and illuminative as the light of
heaven, and sublime and deep as eternity.






[Names: Uksa]
And young people from adorable parents,
teachers, heaven and earth receive the great wealth of
light and joy of life and the Divine Word in response to
their holy voice of knowledge and piety, when the
generous lord of light bestows upon the celebrant his
own vestment of light and glory when the veil of
darkness is removed at the end of the night.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 7 1101




[Names: Adhvaryubhih, Pranco]
Along with five highpriests, seven sages,
divinely inspired scholars secure and maintain Agni’s
dear and favourite place of worship on the vedi. The
generous and powerful sagely performers, confident and
untiring, facing the east, rejoice in the ritual and act in
accordance with the laws and ordinances of the
divinities of nature and humanity and the will of the
lord of cosmic law.






[Names: Daivya, Rtam]
I honour and reverence the two pioneer priests
of divinity. Seven priests, sprinkling the vedi with water
and ghrta, rejoice with the holy freedom and fragrance
and their own ecstasy. Celebrating and speaking of the
divine law of truth and nature, they say that the real
version of law and truth is: know it, act it, this is It. And
observing the law strictly in accordance with the dictates
of law, rejoicing in the law, they shine in life,








[Names: Vrsayante, Deva]
Eternal rays of light and bliss, controlled and
well directed, rain in showers rising in power and
generosity in homage to the lord sublime, transcendent,
potent and most wonderful. O lord of light and wealth,
high-priest of cosmic yajna, joyous and blissful, all
aware and ever wakeful, bring us the light and glory
and the bounties of heaven and earth here and now.






[Names: Prksaprayajo, Usaso]
Munificent yajakas, blest with wealth of energy,
blissfully vocal and highly expressive, refulgent with
holy light, the dawns of divinity, rise and shine bearing
the wealth of nature. And you, O lord of cosmic yajna,
Agni, for the sake of the great earth and her children,
with the mighty blaze of majesty, eliminate from the






[Names: Jlamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
The holy Word and vision of Eternity, all-giving,
abundance of the earth, everlasting of value, O lord of
light and might of the universe, Agni, create and bless
upon the supplicant yajaka. May there arise for us a


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 8 1103


generation of youth and children, dynamic and potent,
and may we ever enjoy, we pray, the favours of your
love and benevolence, living under your benign eye.


Mandala 3/Sukta 8






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Anjanti, Yadurdhvastistha]
Vanaspati, lord of sunbeams and earth’s
greenery, aspiring lovers of divinity celebrate you in
their yajnic programmes of education, governance and
administration, and economic management and
production, and they honour you with the celestial
presentation of honeyed words in faith. Whether you
abide higher up in the heavens or lie here nestled in the
folds of this mother earth’s bosom, bear and bring, we
pray, the riches of existence for the supplicants.




[Names: Samiddhasya]
vanvano ajaram suviram. Are asmadamatim


Vanaspati, lord of light and wealth of greenery
and earth’s fertility, staying firm forward and sharing
the refreshing fragrance of the lighted fire, loving food




and energy growth and exaltation of the spirit, keeping
off vitiation of mind and intelligence far away from us,
abide by us, we pray, constantly for the bliss of great
good fortune and all round prosperity.






[Names: Ucchrayasva, Sumiti]
Guardian and protector of all round wealth of
life, Vanaspati, generous giver of showers of rain and
wealth of the world, abide by us, we pray, and stand
guard high and firm on the earth, mapping, measuring,
valuing noble intelligence, and bear and bring the light
and lustre of life for the guardian and promoter of yajna.






[Names: Yuva, Ssreyan]
Let the young graduate come back home,
decently robed, graceful, brilliant as the rising sun,
Eminent and sagely scholars, creative minds of sublime
imagination, highly learned, seekers of divinity with
sincere mind and soul may continue to guide and lead
the scholar onward.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 8 1105




[Names: Jato, Punanti]
The one who is born and then reborn in the holy
light of auspicious days rises to eminence in the yajnic
programmes and conscientious battles of practical life
in action. Noble leading lights, wise and grave, veterans
of action, with thought, reflection and meditation, purify
and sanctify the vibrant scholar, and he rises and attains
to the life and meaning of the holy Word with dedication
to the pursuit of divinity among humanity.






O leading lights of society, those pious people
in pursuit of divine virtue who love you, honour and
value you, and O Vanaspati, lord of light, those whom
the shaping power of Divinity has refined with
knowledge and culture, may all those magnificent
scholars, self-luminous in their own words, balanced
and firm in judgement and wisdom, blest with people
and progeny, bear and bring the jewels of life for us.








Those who are exceptionally distinguished on
the earth, masters of eternal and measured knowledge,
devoted yajnics with the holy ladle upraised and
successful in any field of knowledge and action — may
those lovers of Divinity achieve and bring the most
cherished wealth and values of life for us.






[Names: Aditya, Adit, Rudra, Sajosaso]
May the twelve Adityas, sun in the zodiacs,
Rudras, ten pranic energies and the individual soul, and
the eight Vasus, abodes and supports of life, heaven and
earth, and the regions of the middle space, all wide and
generous as earth, all divine powers of mother nature
and agents of Divinity, protect and promote the yajna
of life and raise our knowledge, practice and awareness
of Dharma, love and non-violence.




[Names: Hamsa, Unniyamanah]
Just as hansa birds, pure white in beautiful
plume, flying in line formation, singing and rejoicing,
traverse the skies, so do the Devas, brilliant scholars


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 8 1107


and generous yajna performers raised and guided by
and rejoicing together, bless us and go forward by the
paths of divines.






[Names: Srmganivecchrnginam, Vaghadbhirva, Srosa]
Like the horns of animals they look good and
beautiful, protective. Enjoying many good things of life,
hearing hymns of adoration, performing yajna with
singing priests in the assembly, may holy men and
distinguished scholars protect us in the battles of life
on the earth.






[Names: Vanaspate]
Vanaspati, lord of sunbeams and greenery of the
into a hundred shoots and branches and then to a
thousand, so may you grow a hundred-fold, and let us
grow too into a thousand shoots and branches. And may
this divine thunderbolt of fire and lightning power help
you to rise and grow manifold in grandeur and all round




Mandala 3/Sukta 9




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Sakhayastva, Uutaye, Apam]
timanehasam.


Agni, lord of brilliance, friends we are, human,
mortals all. We choose you as our guide and leader for
the sake of protection and victory. You are immortal,
imperishable in the flow of existence and the flux of
karma, treasure home of good fortune, auspicious flame
of inspiration, faster than light and free from sin and
violence.






[Names: Kayamano]
Agni, lord and lover of light and knowledge,
giver of light and knowledge, when you go to the waters,
vibrant mother sources of light and energy, that going
away is not to be endured, nor to be forgotten or
neglected, because while you are away, you are still near
at hand with your light. Hence I have the best that is
worthy of love and value from you.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 9 1109




[Names: Sritah]
The one who is very keen, thirsting for
knowledge and other things of value, you speak to and
bear across. Hence you are good at heart, happy and
cheerful. Of those you sit with in a spirit of friendship,
some go forward, others sit at peace and meditate. Yet
others just sit still with you and do nothing else.






[Names: Ssasvatirati, Anvimavindan, Sritam]
Extremely patient, deeply dedicated to eternal
of jealousy, find the fire and electric energy existing
vibrantly in the currents of waters and winds and
vapours in space hidden like a lion in the forest.




[Names: Sasrvamsamiva, Enam]
pari.


Active by its very nature but hidden, this Agni-
energy is thus present in space. Matarishva, mighty
currents of celestial and terrestrial wind from far around
churn and bring this fire and electric energy to the
brilliant and dedicated scholars for noble humanity.








[Names: Visvan]
Such as you are, Agni, carrier and harbinger of
holy materials for the good life, the mortals thus receive
the power through yajnic scholars for yajnic humanity,
and thus do you, O youthful energy, feed and promote
all creative and productive yajnic programmes of
humanity with your power and operation.






[Names: Tvam]
That is your holy action, precious gift, O power
of fire, which gratifies and advances humanity to
maturity and the good life, and as even the animals in
winter nights come and sit round the burning fire for
relief from the cold, so do humans, O brilliant and fiery
scholar, come to you and receive the light of knowledge
and warmth of life against the cold and dark winter
nights of ignorance.




[Names: Siram, Asum]
yata.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 10 1111


Invoke, enlight, adore and enthusiastically
serve, and immediately receive the gifts of Agni, light,
energy and power of nature and Divinity: loving,
nonviolent and giving, latent and omnipresent energy,
pure and purifying light and fire, instantly operative,
universal carrier and messenger, fast as lightning,
eternal, adorable and divine.






[Names: Trini, Sata, Auksan]
Three hundred, three thousand, thirty, and nine
Devas, principles of nature, serve this Agni. They
sprinkle it with ghrta, cover the vedi with holy grass and
then afterward consecrate this high-priest of cosmic yajna
on the seat for the conduct and completion of the yajna.


Mandala 3/Sukta 10






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Tvamagne, Devam]
Agni, lord self-refulgent, benign and majestic
ruler supreme of the world and her children, thoughtful,
reflective and meditative people light, raise and worship
you in their yajnic programmes of love and non-violence
in the service of humanity and the environment.








[Names: Tvam, Gopa]
Agni, holy men, observers and guardians of
Rtam, the cosmic law of truth, worship you in their yajna
and celebrate you as the high-priest and performer of
the universal yajna of creation. O lord, bless them to
shine with the light of knowledge in the world which is
the very home of the law of truth and rectitude.






Agni, lord omnificent, that person alone for sure
is blest with vital energy and lustrous power and rises
all round in life who gives in yajnic acts in the service
of lord omniscient of existence, with fuel kindled with
knowledge and rising faith.






[Names: Anjanah]
Agni, that rising fire of the yajnas of love and
non-violent creation, raised by seven divine performers,
1.e., five pranas, one mind and one intellect, or, five
priests and the yajamana couple, comes as a flaming
messenger proclaiming the liberal gifts of yajna for the
person who offers fragrant libations of holy materials


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 10 1113


into the fire. Agni comes with gifts and the devas,
divinities of nature and humanity.






[Names: Bharata, Vipam]
O wise saints and scholars, just as you offer
fragrant oblations to Agni, lord ordainer of the world
who wields the wide spaces and bears the lights of
brilliant stars inspired with the spirit of divinity, so offer
the gift of the supreme eternal voice of Divinity to the
yajamana performer who bears in faith the lights of





[Names: Agnim, Mahe]
For the sake of great energy and wealth of life,
let our voices rise, and exalt and celebrate Agni, lord of
light and omniscience, blissful vision of Eternity,
whence arises the sagely scholar, admirable gift of
Agni’s, whose very sight is holy and auspicious for the
attainment of strength and real wealth of life.






[Names: Agne, Hota]
Agni, in the yajna, creative programme of love




and non-violence, you are the most adorable. Bring the
devas, holy divinities, for the yajamana who loves to
be with the divinities. You are the giver and performer,
happy giver of happiness, over-shining and over-
winning the stingy and selfish uncreators.






[Names: Bhava]
Agni, fire of yajna, such as you are, give us the
light and make us shine. Bring us valour and lustrous
energy with the light of wisdom and knowledge. For
the celebrants, be at the closest for the sake of well-
being and the bliss of life.


[Names: Havyavahamamartyam]
Thus do the sagely scholars, holy celebrants,
ever wide awake, light, raise and exalt Agni, carrier and
harbinger of holy fragrances of life and yajna, immortal


power, creator and giver of greater and ever higher
strength and courage and patience.


Mandala 3/Sukta 11




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 11 1115




[Names: Agnirhota]
One who invokes, lights and raises the fire of
yajna, leads the yajna with love for the welfare of all,
closely watches the yajna free from violence, jealousy
and ill-will, conducts the yajna continuously, and
persistently, he knows the secret, mystery and benefits
of yajna. He is Agni, brilliant, fiery, and a pioneer.





[Names: Agnirdhiya, Agnirdhi]
He, carrier of holy yajnic offerings, immortal,
charming, messenger of fragrance, lover of the food of
yajna for all, Agni, moves forward by virtue of his own
light and intelligence.




[Names: Artham]
That Agni knows and is known by his own
intelligence and action. He is the most ancient banner
of yajna. His sole aim and purpose is to be a saviour, a
redeemer.







[Names: Agnim, Vahnim]
All ye noble and brilliant sages and scholars,
Agni is potent, child of courage and patience, famous
of old, and he knows all that is born. Elect him as the
leader, bearer of the yajnic business of the world to carry
the fragrance of yajna all round.





[Names: Adabhyah, Turni]
Irrepressible and indestructible, going forward
in front of the people, fiery leader of the nation, instant
starter, torch bearer of humanity and warrior, ever new:
such is Agni, pioneer and leader.




[Names: Sahvan, Agnistuvisravastamah]
Patient yet most irresistible of all the front rank
people, most enlightened of the noble and generous,
inviolable, Agni is well read and most renowned leading

[Names: Ksayam]
By virtue of the leading light of Agni, the


generous man who gives in yajnic action gets his objects
of desire, and from the rising flames of holy fire as by


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 12 1117


virtue of the scholar’s brilliance of knowledge, he gets
a haven of peace.
[Names: Pari, Vipraso]
May we, inspired and enlightened yajakas, with
sincere prayers, worship and do yajna to get all the
benevolent and gracious gifts of Agni, lord omniscient
of existence.


[Names: Agne]
Agni, lord of light and yajna fire, may we receive
and share, we pray, all the chosen objects of desire and
wealth of the world in our battles of life. Holy men of
knowledge and dedication inspire us to pray and worship
you.


Mandala 3/Sukta 12




[Names: Indragni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indragni, Asya]
Indra and Agni, lord of might and lord of light,
brilliant and blazing like thunder and lightning, come




to this child worthy of love and choice, come with voices
from the heavens and inspire the darling with
intelligence and passion for action.




Indra, lord of wealth and power, Agni, lord of
light and knowledge, friends of the supplicant celebrant,
the child is yajna, worthy of love, dedication and
consecration, sensitive and intelligent, and moves


forward to learn. Nurture him with the holy voice and
the Word.




[Names: Indramagnim, Indramagni, Somasyeha]
I choose Indra and Agni, both patrons and
promoters of poets, with holy enthusiasm such as the
fire of yajna. May they both come here, have a drink of
soma, and bless the child.

[Names: Tosa]
I invoke and invite Indra, commander of the


forces, and Agni, leader of the enlightened, both
promoters of knowledge, destroyers of evil, victorious,


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 12 1119
unconquered, winners of the highest order of prizes.






Indra and Agni, the singers of hymns, pioneers
of highways and celebrants honour and worship you. I
choose to celebrate you for the sake of sustenance,
support and energy.






[Names: Sakamekena]
Indra and Agni, shake up, inspire and arouse
with a single clarion call the ninety fortresses yonder of
the allied and supporting forces of the benevolent ruler
of the republics.






[Names: Rtasya, Anu]
Indra and Agni, lord of power and lord of light
and law, the pioneer forces of action and reflection go
forward, all round, and close to the target, following
the paths of truth and law of rectitude. (Swami Dayanand
interprets Indra and Agni as wind and electric energy
of space, and the movements of this energy in waves
directed to the targets of purpose).




[Names: Yuvorapturyam]
Indra and Agni, your forces, strategic
concentrations of the forces deployed and collective
resources, are well disposed, and integrated, and your


zeal for making a move is instantaneous, everything





Indra and Agni, you are the light and fire of
heaven and you shine all round in the battles of life.
And that brilliance proclaims your power and splendour.


Mandala 3/Sukta 13


[Names: Agni, Devata, Rshabha, Vaishvamitra, Rshi]
yal cara af suai ।


in Pra vo devayagnaye barhisthamarcasmai.


[Names: Gamad]
Offer honour and yajnic oblations in worship
to Agni, this lord of light and knowledge, who pervades
the spaces of the universe, so that he, the lord most
adorable, may come with the bounties of nature for you
and us all, and he may grace the seats of our yajna and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 13 1121
help us rise to the heights of heavenly virtue.






[Names: Rtava, Havismantas]
Devotees human and divine dedicated to the law
of the universe, Rtam, and even the heaven and earth
and protective forces of nature, obey and participate in
the expertise and perfection of systemic existence.
Hence the devotees bearing fragrant offerings for yajna
and seekers of protection, all these, worship him, i.e.,
Agni, for favour of joy and fulfilment.


[Names: Agnim]
All wise, Agni is the guide of all these seekers
and devotees. And he alone is the guide of the yajnas
and yajnic programmes of humanity, he is the giver of
fulfilment. That Agni, all of you serve and worship. He
only is the giver: his is the wealth of the universe, he
gives the wealth of honour, prosperity and fulfilment.


[Names: Yato]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, peace and




bliss, may, we pray, lead us all to havens of peace for
well being and the joy of life, to homes wherein and
where from may flow for the people of the world
showers of wealth all round abounding in the light of
the sun, streams of waters, currents of energy in space
and the vibrations of pranas.






[Names: Didivamsam, Rkvano]
Devotees of the Rks, divine revelations and
human reflections of light and knowledge, with creative
imagination and productive efforts in action, research
into the gifts of Agni and light the fire, radiant energy,
inexhaustible and ever new, master performer of cosmic
yajna and sustainer of the people of the world.






[Names: Soca]
Agni, lord and light of infinity, let us flow with
infinity. Lord most invoked by brilliant people and
adored by divine powers of nature, let us advance into
celebrations and service of Divinity. Lord adored and
exalted by the Maruts, dynamic people and the winds,
let peace shine on us and let us shine in peace. Agni,
you are the giver of a thousand blessings.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 14 1123




[Names: Dyumadagne]
Agni, lord of a thousandfold energy, power,
progeny, growth and wealth, and light of knowledge,
give us manly vigour, valour and honour in showers of


Mandala 3/Sukta 14




[Names: Agni, Devata, Rshabha, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Vidyudrathah, Sociskesah, Agnih, Agni]
Versatile leader, messenger of joy, Agni sustains
the projects of creation and production. Truest of the
true, master of unifying applications, he is an
imaginative thinker and a skillful creator. Child of
energy itself, he travels by chariots run by electricity.
His hair radiate fire and he brings the light of heaven to
illuminate the planes of earth.






[Names: Ayami, Vidvan]
O scholar of the laws of nature and natural




energy, lord of knowledge, power, courage and patience,
I come to you, accept my homage and salutations.
Venerable yajaka, you speak to the scholars, and you
reach and stay in the midst of the skies for the sake of
protection and progress.






[Names: Dravatam, Usasa]
Agni, brilliant scholar, the lights of the dawn
bearing fresh energy and power radiate to you by
beautiful paths of the winds and shine in the house
where, like experts of design and structure, with new
materials, they refine the earlier model of the chariot
for you.






[Names: Mitrasca, Varunah, Varuna, Yacchocisa, Marutah, Maruta]
Agni, lord of might, child of energy, valour and
patience, friends, best people of judgement and leading
lights and powers of the world offer homage to you and
raising regions of the earth to the heights and promoting
the nations’ joy and welfare, you shine with your
brilliance and abide with them, radiating light.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 14 1125






[Names: Vayam, Yajisthena]
Agni, vibrant master of knowledge, with hands
raised in respect and bearing cherished gifts of homage,
we come and offer our reverence and adorations to you
since you join the brilliant leaders and scholars of
humanity with your reverential mind and share your
unerring knowledge of arts and sciences with pleasure
with all of them.






[Names: Tvaddhi, Tvam]
From you alone, O lord sanctifier of the power
of knowledge, flow all round eternal sciences, forces
and ways of protection revealed by the Lord Omniscient
and Omnipotent. And you give us, we pray, the real
knowledge, sure and true, of a thousand things and
values with words and a disposition of mind full of love,
untouched by jealousy.








[Names: Tubhyam, Immortal]
imaginative creator and master of pious action, whatever
we mortal do and offer you in this holy yajnic
programme of creation, construction and development,
taste the pleasure of all that here and now. Awake, arise
and know this entire world riding the beautiful chariot,
and let all that be known to the entire world on the
wheels of progress.


Mandala 3/Sukta 15






[Names: Agni, Devata, Utkeela, Katya, Rshi, Susarmano]
Agni, lord of light and fire, radiant purifier with
intense expansive heat and light of lustre, resist, repel
and keep off all infections and cancerous evils of
jealousy and destructive force of enmity, so that I may
live at ease in comfort in a happy home under the blessed
rule and order of the great lord of peace, protection and
yajnic progress across the wide world.






[Names: Tvam, Usaso, Janmeva]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 15 1127


At the break of dawn and sun rise, let me awake
into light and life anew, O lord protector and sustainer.
Like a father and sustainer, ever love and protect the
child as a baby at birth. Agni, blest of body-form, and
nobly risen as you are, listen to my prayer and accept
my song of praise and worship.






[Names: Vaso]
Agni, bright and benevolent in flames of fire,
all watchful over humanity and their performance,
radiant, virile and generous, shine in the darkest of the
dark and enlighten even the most primitive children of
nature. Lord most youthful in command of light and
virtue who lead and purge us of sin and impurity, take
the aspirants to the noblest wealth they love.






[Names: Asalho, Yajnasya]
Invincible Agni, generous and brave, shine and
be victorious, and let all the cities of good fortune and
prosperity shine and proclaim your acts of glory, being,
as you are, leader, conductor and guardian of the first




great, protective and promotive yajna of the
Brahmacharya period of education and preparation for
life, master of the knowledge of existence, teacher and
pioneer of the noblest ways of living.






[Names: Acchidra, Sarma, Puruni, Ratho]
Agni, lover, admirer and worshipper of Truth,
Divinity and virtues and divinities of existence, wise
and shining with knowledge, just as the sun illuminates
the earth and regions of space, so, like a well-built
chariot, bring us the knowledge of science and speed
and bless us with brilliant scholars and faultless homes
of peace and prosperity.






[Names: Devebhirdeva]
Agni, generous lord of science and power, fill
our life to the full, inspire our strength and vigour, speed
and energy to overflowing just as the sun fills the heaven
and earth with light. O lord of light resplendent with
the stars, bless us with light so that no ill-will of the
mortals, no dark intention and motive may ever touch
us, much less abide with us.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 16 1129






[Names: Ilamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa]
Agni, lord of light and power, wealth and vitality
of existence, master of science and divinity, bless the
celebrant yajaka with that divine speech and vision, and
that abundant share of earthly prosperity which is
versatile and of eternal value. Make that possible for us
so that we may be blest with youthful and victorious
generations of children and grand children and we may
ever enjoy the favour of your benign eye and gracious


Mandala 3/Sukta 16






[Names: Agni, Devata, Utkeela, Katya, Rshi, Ayamagnih, Raya]
Agni, the ruler, rules strength and power, heroes
and warriors of the world, rules the greatness and
grandeur of good fortune, rules the wealth of nations,
rules the families blest with children of noble character,
rules the master of cows, land, and knowledge and
language, and rules and controls those who destroy the
darkness of ignorance and hoarders of wealth.








[Names: Imam, Marutah, Maruta]
Ye leaders of the good and noble citizens, heroes
vibrant as winds and people of the land, join, serve and
cooperate with this eminent and exalted ruler and
support his order in which exist abounding wealths of
the nation, and in which warriors unchallengeable in
battle who rout and humiliate the enemies are ever





[Names: Tuvidyumna, Susminah]
Agni, generous ruler, blessed lord of power and
glory, increase, refine and govern the wealth and power
of the virile, generous, powerfully manned, healthy and






[Names: Cakriryo, Samsa]
The lord of action wields and governs all regions
of the world, he is the adorable sustainer among all the
divine powers, he inspires life and passion among the


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 16 1131


noblest of humanity, and he is the object of admiration
and the very life of the courage and valour of the people.






[Names: Magotayai]
Agni, lord of light and power, abandon us not
to poverty and intellectual disability, leave us not to
cowardice, let us not suffer from debility of the senses,
and subject us not to insult and calumny. Ward off all
jealousy and enmity from us.






[Names: Sagdhi]
Agni, lord of knowledge, wealth and power,
gracious and prosperous, rise high in extensive
programmes for the growth of food and energy, and
human and social development, and enable us too to
rise and be strong. O lord of prosperity and honour, grace
us with plentiful, honourable and blissful wealth and
help us rise on and on.




Mandala 3/Sukta 17






[Names: Agni, Devata, Kata, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Samidhyamanah, Sociskeso, Agniryajathaya, Agniryajatha]
Agni, the holy fire that purifies and sanctifies,
lighted and raised in accordance with ancient original
Dharma, served in conjunction with morning and
evening, becomes universally adorable. And radiant in
flames in shining robes of ghrta-light, splendid metaphor
of yajna, it rises as a clarion call to the divine bounties
of Nature.






[Names: Yathayajo, Evanena]
O universal fire of life, living light of cosmic
intelligence, Agni, coexistent with everything that is
born, O high-priest of yajna, as you enact the yajna and
offer the havi to call and invite the bounties of earth
and heaven, similarly by this offer of oblations call the
bounties of heaven and earth and invite the brilliancies
of humanity, and let this yajna of ours be accomplished
as the yajna of a thoughtful and conscientious person.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 17 1133






[Names: Trinyayumsi, Tabhir]
Agni, omnipresent lord of knowledge and life’s
vitality, co-eval with existence, three are your lives:
magnetic energy and fire on earth, electric energy and
wind in the skies, and light in the solar region. You are
the vital heat of the body, will, passion and thought of
the mind, and vision and imagination of the soul. Three
are your motherly seats of existence and operation: earth,
sky and heaven of the cosmos, and the body, mind and
soul of the individual. And three are the times of your
operation: day and light, night and cold, and twilights
of the morning and evening. With these orders of three,
O master of knowledge, bring life and protection to the
noble and generous people, and then be the harbinger
of peace and joy to the yajamana.






[Names: Agnim, Tvam]
We celebrants and devotees of the lord of light
and refulgence offer our homage and salutations to you,
Agni, fire of cosmic yajna, splendid light, beautiful of
form, adorable and coeval of all that is born 11 existence.




Noble, generous and brilliant sages and scholars reveal
you, Agni, as the messenger of good news, harbinger
of good fortune, carrier of the fragrance of life, and the
very generative seat and sustaining column of the nectar
of life and the freedom of Moksha. And the creative
scholars and scientists recreate you as the power and
energy source of wealth and the comfort and welfare of
life.







[Names: Yastvaddhota, Tasyanu]
O primeval fire, Agni, creative vitality of Prakrti,
as the first Lord of bliss and well being, original and
eternal Creator, performing the yajna of creation,
manifesting as consort with you, at the cosmic vedi
conducts the yajna, similarly, O intelligent sacrificer,
in pursuance of the same creator’s law of Dharma, carry
on the yajna and take it high to the state of divine beauty
and joy of life for us.


Mandala 3/Sukta 18




[Names: Agni, Devata, Kata, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Bhava, Purudruho]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 18 1135


Agni, master of yajna, sagely scholar, high-priest
of social dynamics, be kind at heart to come to us, like
a friend in company, good as a father and mother, and
with the heat of love and creativity, burn off the
negativities, contradictions and adversities of humanity,
the various forces of jealousy and enmity acting against
the people.






[Names: Tapo, Samsam, Tapo]
Agni, bright and blazing lord of discipline and
austerity, burn off the enemies within, season and purify
the praise and appreciation of the non-violent devotee
of higher order. O scorcher of evil and shelter of the
good, lord of light and knowledge, arouse the unaware
and ignorant, and may your dynamic yajakas live a long
age strong and youthful.


[Names: Idhmenagna, Yavadise, Sataseyaya]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, desirous of
having superlative strength of body, mind and soul, I
offer libations of yajna with holy fuel and ghrta, singing
in praise of the lord with holy mantras and praying, as




far as I can, for this divine light of intelligence for the
attainment of a hundredfold good fortune.






[Names: Ucchocisa, Revadagne]
Agni, spirit of power and courage, holding
immense wealth of life, rising with light and lustre and
served and worshipped with divine verses, bear, bring
and in-vest good health, long age and ample wealth,
peace and freedom among the zealous celebrants and
lovers and favourites of entire humanity. Lord of great
action, we refine and brighten your form and potential
more and ever more.






[Names: Krdhi, Stoturdurone]
Agni, lord of wealth, give us the jewel of wealth,
generous giver as you are specially when lighted up in
yajna. O lord of the wealth of existence, bearing a
brilliant form in the house of the prosperous worshipper,
you extend your generous hand to the supplicants.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 19 1137


Mandala 3/Sukta 19






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gathi, Kaushika, Rshi, Agnim, Agni]
In this yajna of creation and development I chose
to elect Agni as the highpriest and guide yajaka, adoring
worshipper, revolutionary thinker, eminent scholar, and
wise, who, while organising the yajna, would invoke
the brilliancies of humanity and bounties of nature and,
for the seeker of wealth and knowledge, create and
provide the wealth and prosperity desired.






[Names: Pradaksinid]
Agni, lord and highpriest of yajna, I come
forward to you in peace and faith and raise the holy
ladle full of fragrant havi, rich and splendid, overflowing
with ghrta, just as a faithful performer, extending divine
service to expand nature’s bounties, takes to yajna going
round the fire with excellent liberal offerings.








[Names: Agne]
Lord of light, Agni, happy is the person that
loves you, comes to you with a brilliant mind thirsting
for knowledge and protection. Master of knowledge,
impart the knowledge as to your own dear child. Lord
of wealth, leader of the best people, may we live happy
and prosperous, worshipfully under your kind






[Names: Bhurini]
Agni, lord of light, many are the flames of fire
which devout celebrants have raised in the vedi, many
the fighting forces which dedicated followers have
youthful, bear and bring that divine beneficence of
protection and security for which today you call and
conduct a yajnic team of scholars in pursuit of a noble
force and power of defence.





[Names: Sravamsi]
Devas, noble people, consecrate you in your


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 20 1139


rightful seat for the conduct of yajna and celebrate you
as the highpriest and chief performer. So you, Agni, lord
of light and knowledge, leader of the people, guide and
protector, lead us to light and awakening, and bless us
and our descendants with food, energy and channels of
progress for our body, mind and soul.


Mandala 3/Sukta 20






[Names: Agni, Vishvedeva, Devata, Gathi, Kaushika, Rshi, Agnimusasamasvina, Sujyotiso]
In the lights of the morning, Vayu, cosmic
energy that holds the universe, calls up and awakens
the fire of Agni, light of the dawn, the Ashvins,
complementary currents of solar and lunar energy, and
the gravitational force with songs of the morning hymns
vibrating in spaces. So does the highpriest, conductor
of morning yajna, invoke and serve Agni, divine fire,
the lights of the dawn, pranic energies and the earth’s
gravitation with hymns of the Veda. May the Devas,
bounties of nature and brilliancies of humanity, all of
holy light and knowledge, loving and shining the yajna,
listen to our prayers.








[Names: Agne, Tisra]
Agni, divine energy of the cosmos, three are
your media: radiation, conduction and gravitation; three
your seats: solar region, middle region and the earthly
region (dyu loka, antariksha loka and prthivi loka); three
your tongues: light, thunder and greenery; O power
eternal, risen from the cosmic law of Rtam. Three are
your forms: day, lightning and night, energised by
nature; and three your sacred fuels: solar particles of
energy, vapours and fertility of the earth. Agni, divine
fire, protect and nourish our tongue and speech seriously


Note: The allegory of cosmic fire energy is
beautifully explained in Chhandogya Upanishad 5, 4-
8, and in Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 6, 9-13.


Swami Dayananda also interprets Agni as the
sagely scholar whose three media of existence are jnana,
gamana and prapti, i.e., knowledge, expression and
movement, and attainment and acquisition. We might
add in the same vein that his three seats of origin are
the parental home of natural birth, the teacher’s home
of educational and cultural birth and the family home
of professional birth. Of course, after retirement his life
is lived in an open social and universal home of no
dimensions and no boundaries.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 20 1141




Agni, lord immanent manifest in all that is born
in existence, generous and divine power, brilliant spirit
of knowledge and enlightenment, possessing nectar
foods and energies of life, immortal soul, countless are
your names and attributes. O lord omnipresent in the
universe, giver of the karmic dispensation of jivatmas,
whatever the generations of living beings old or new,
whatever the power and potential of these generations,
all that is vested and neatly nestled in you.






[Names: Agnirneta]
Agni is the leader and mover, like the sun, of
the living beings and the planets such as the earth and
other regions of the universe. He is the lord of all divine
powers and forms of existence. He is the ordainer and
sustainer of the cycle of the seasons, and the creator,
controller and sustainer of the laws of nature, truth and
rectitude. He is the destroyer of darkness, ignorance and
evil and eternal omniscient lord of existence. May the
lord purge the celebrant worshipper of all the dirt of
thought and action of the material world.








[Names: Dadhikram, Agnim, Usasam, Usasa, Mitravaruna, Adityan, Aditya, Rudran, Rudra]
I invoke, celebrate and pray to Agni, divine spirit
and energy which, like Time, transcends all stars and
planets of the universe, brilliant dawn, Brhaspati,
sustaining wind energy, Savita, creator and light giver
of the universe, Deva, self-refulgent lord of love and
might, Ashvins, complementary currents of life’s energy,
Mitra and Varuna, prana and udana energy, Bhaga, lord
of wealth and honour, Vasus, abodes of life such as earth,
Rudras, vital energies of life, Adityas, moving stars of
light in orbit. I invoke, celebrate and pray to the Lord
for the light, wealth and honour of the world.


Mandala 3/Sukta 21






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gathi, Kaushika, Rshi, Imam, Stokanamagne]
Agni, lord of light, accept this yajnic
performance of our knowledge, action and meditation,
charity and social action, take it high up and establish it
among the immortals. O lord omniscient of all in
existence, take and taste these offerings of ours and bless
us. First, foremost and most excellent lord of knowledge,
Agni, seated on the vedi, chief yajaka and generous
giver, taste of the fragrance of the delicacies, ghrta and
oils offered into the fire.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 21 1143






[Names: Ghrtavantah, Svadharman]
Pavaka, purifying fire of yajna, the finest
delicacies soaked in ghrta, tender and unctuous, stream
forth and rise in fragrance. Taste these, bring us the
loveliest gifts of our choice and let us be established in
our universal Dharma for the company of the divinities
of nature and humanity.






[Names: Tubhyam, Rsih, Sresthah]
Agni, intelligent and vibrant scholar of
distinction between truth and untruth, right and wrong,
Dharma and adharma, Shraddha and ashraddha, yajnic
delicacies sprinkled with ghrta trickle and stream forth
for you. Seer, visionary diviner into the truth of Veda,
best of scholars, you light the fire and are inspired by
the fire. Be the saviour of yajna, take it to success for
us.








[Names: Sacivah, Kavisasto]
Agni, seer of mantras, genius scholar of divine
vision, for you stream forth the juices and fragrances of
yajnic delicacies of ghrta and creams. Celebrated by
poets, going by the sublimity of the sun, adorable in
yajna, accept and taste the honey sweets of our yajna.






[Names: Ojistham, Scotanti]
Agni, vital heat and support of life, we offer
you in the centre of the vedi the most lustrous delicacies
held high in care and esteem. The finest delicacies trickle
and stream on your flames. Take these and raise them
to the divine powers of nature wherever each should
rise.


Mandala 3/Sukta 22






[Names: Purishya, Agni, Devata, Gathi, Kaushika, Rshi, Ayam, Sahasrinam]
This is that Agni, vital electric energy, in which
Indra, lord of power and passion, thirsting for the joy
of living, concentrates soma, essence of peace, power
and joy, distilled and placed in the heat of the stomach,


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 22 1145


navel of the body system. O Jataveda, vital fire of energy
present in everything that is born in the world of
existence, holding and sharing a thousandfold power,
moving and reaching anywhere like a tempestuous
horse, you are loved and adored everywhere.






[Names: Agne, Yanantariksamurvatatantha]
Agni, lord of light and power, loving, emanating
and sharing the life of everything in existence, your
splendour that shines in the light of heaven, breathes
on the earth, reflects in the greenery of the herbs, and
rolls in the waters of space and oceans, and by which
the skies and spaces grow far and farther, that splendour
and glory is the blazing sun, the deep ocean and the
light of the eye for humanity.






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas]
Agni, you move and magnificently pervade the
particles of the light of heaven. You rise and do honour
to the divinely pious and benevolent people and the
generous powers of nature. And you pervade and
energise the oceans of vapour in the light beyond the


sun and those oceans which are below in the sky.


[Names: Purisyaso, Jusantam]
May the vital fires of fertility come together to
the earth by straight paths, free from negativities and


disease, and participate in the yajna and bless us with
invigorating foods and energies of high order.






[Names: Tlamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
Agni, bless the supplicant yajaka with gifts of
the holy Word, extensive lands and cows, and a noble
tongue. Bless us with children and grand children,
active, intelligent and discriminative, and may we ever
remain in your good books under your benign eye in a
state of prosperity and divine bliss.


Mandala 3/Sukta 23
Agni Devata, Devashrava Bharata and Devavata




[Names: Bharata, Rshis, Nirmathitah, Juryatsvagnirajaro]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 23 1147


Well produced by friction, well kindled and well
managed in the home of yajna, Agni, jataveda, treasure
house of wealth, youthful and unaging, catalytic creative
light, leader of yajna, visionary maker, may, we pray,
on the velocity of light rays, bear and bring nectar-like
vitality and energy and sustain our yajnic programme
of love and creative production.






[Names: Amanthistam, Agne]
May the Bharatas, the producer and the manager
of mighty generous Agni, fire and electric power,
treasure giver of wealth, inspired by vibrations of the
imagination and listening to the noble senior scholars,
produce, develop and manage the light, power and gifts
of Agni. O lord of light, power and fire, Agni, look after
us with a benign eye and with vast and abundant wealth
and values of life, and be our guide and leader of the
productive yajnas for food and energy every day as we
advance in research and endeavour.




[Names: Dasa, Agnim, Agni]
5774170 yo jananamasad vasi.


Devashrava, scholar in conference with eminent
pioneers of research, honour and advance the eternal




energy, agni, which ten rapidly successive movements
of action, like the nimble fingers, ever generate. It is
lovely and nobly born, latent in motherly sources such
as wood and streams of water, produced and developed
by sagely scholars, and under the management and
control of the people.






[Names: Drsadvatyam]
Agni, divine fire and holy light, I place you on
the best altar of the earth in the best words of holy speech
in the holy light of the days. O brilliant power, treasure
home of abundant wealth, shine in the rocky streams of
mountains, smooth flowing rivers of the plains and in
the minds of reflective people.






[Names: Ilamagne, Sasvattamam, Purudamsam, Purudamsa, Syannah]
Agni, brilliant lord of knowledge and fire power,
provide for the dedicated man of yajna the eternal Word
of divine knowledge, abundant power of versatile
action, and abundant gifts of science and lasting
economic wealth, so that, O lord of light, we may be
blest with dynamic children and grand children under
your benign eye and enjoy the favour of your love and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 24 1149


Mandala 3/Sukta 24






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Agne, Dustaras]
Agni, fiery hero of the light of life, defeat the
enemy force, throw off the insidious opponents.
Unconquerable you are, cross over depression and
adversities, rise and bring light and lustre to the sustainer
and promoter of yajnic well-being.




[Names: Agna, Jusasva]
Agni, light of life, you shine by flames of fire,
and flow with streams of the holy Word. Immortal you
are, harbinger of peace, prosperity and joy. Join, enjoy
to your heart’s content and bless our yajna of love, non-
violence and good fellowship.






[Names: Edam]
Agni, lord of light and lustre, ever awake and
alert, child of omnipotence and destroyer of evil and




adversity, invoked and invited, come with wealth and
honours of life and seat yourself on this holy grass of




[Names: Agnibhir, Yajnesu]
Agni, lover of light and master of knowledge,

alongwith all the brilliant saints and sages of the world,
love, respect and exalt the voices of Divine Revelation


and honour those who abide by these with reverence
and faith in yajnic acts of creation and self-sacrifice.


[Names: Sisthi]
Agni, lord of light and life of life, give to the
man of charity and yajna wealth of the world in
abundance and bless him with brave children. And, we


pray, blest with children as we are, strengthen, sharpen
and brighten us in our life.


Mandala 3/Sukta 25






[Names: Agni, Indragni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Agne, Rdhag]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 25 1151


Agni, brilliant lord of knowledge, you are a child
of the light of heaven, wide awake and universally
aware, future of the extensive earth, scholar of world
knowledge. Master of encyclopaedic learning, bring
together the eminent and generous scholars of the world
and distinctively serve and develop each one of the gifts
of nature.






[Names: Agnih, Purukso]
O generous and versatile lord of light and
knowledge, just as Agni provides valour and honour
for creativity and, enlightening the world, provides the
spirit and energy for the attainment of immortality, may
you, we pray, bring us here the company and gifts of
the brilliant, generous and wise sagely scholars.





[Names: Agnirdyavaprthivi, Ksayan, Puruscandro]
Agni, lord all wise, free from darkness and

ignorance, giver of immense bliss, illuminates the

heaven and earth, mother sustainers of the world, divine


and immortal, providing food and sustenance, spirit and
energy, and living space for the children of the earth.








[Names: Agna, Indrasca, Amardhanta, Somapeyaya, Somapeya]
Agni, lord and light of knowledge, you and
Indra, lord of vigour and energy, noble and generous,
both, guarding and promoting the yajnic human
endeavours for creation and production, may, we pray,
come to the house of the generous yajaka, creating the
soma of joy and prosperity and sit at the yajna to enjoy
the fragrance and flavour of the soma. Come, lords,






[Names: Sadhasthani]
Agni, lord of light, fire and power, child of
omnipotence, destroyer of darkness, all wise and knower
of things in existence, immortal immanent spirit, you
shine and blaze in the midst of the oceans of space and
currents of pranic energies adding light and grandeur
to the homes of earth’s children.


Mandala 3/Sukta 26




[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Maruts, Atma, Vishvamitra, Marut, Upadhayaya, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Vaisvanaram, Sudanum, Anusatyam, Anusatya]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 26 1153


We Kushikas, 1.e., teachers and researchers in
search of the wealth and values of nature and life,
bearing fragrant offerings for yajna and inputs for the
programme, having analysed and determined the
specific nature, character and action of Vaishvanara
Agni, with our mind and reason, invoke, invite, enkindle
and raise this global power, divine fire and life’s vitality
of the earth and her children, universally operative in
accordance with the laws of cosmic truth, source of
infinite happiness and comfort, generous giver, brilliant
light, fast as the bright-rays of energy, loud and bold,
and delightful for any seeker to perceive, and we
celebrate this Agni with our holiest voices of faith and


joy.


[Names: Brhaspatim]
dam.


We, people dedicated to research and yajnic
meditation, invoke, enkindle, raise and develop Agni
for the sake of divine virtues for noble humanity, Agni
which is bright and blazing, vitality of the world, breath
of the winds, worthy of celebration. It is Brhaspati, lord
of mighty stars and planets. It is Vipra, vibrant voice of
the universe: It is intelligent and omniscient, listening
to prayers, worthy as a learned visitor, and it is ever in
motion faster than the fastest.








[Names: Asvo, Agnih]
Valuable and self-proclaiming radiant
Vaishvanara Agni, vital fire of the world, ever awake in
the immortal brilliancies of the world of existence,
roused like a horse by the mates, is kindled and raised
by holy celebrants from age to age, year by year. May
this radiant energy bear and bring for us the jewels of
heroic vigour and tempestuous speed of the winds.





[Names: Brahadukso, Maruto]
Let the tempestuous fires go up with blazing
flames, join and integrate with the rich vapours of water
in the oceans of the skies, and then the indomitable
winds blowing across in spaces, deeply rich in showers
of fertility, shake up and drive the clouds for rain.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 26 1155




[Names: Agnissriyo]
Maruts, the winds, are blest with the beauty and
vitality of fire. They are friends of humanity, turbulent,
impetuous, laden with clouds of rain, roaring like lions
and highly generous. We beseech them for light, lustre
and our protection.






[Names: Vratamvratam, Prsadasvaso, Marutamoja]
From time to time and stage to stage, from place
to place and from one group to another of themes and
programmes, we invoke and investigate with best of
efforts and appraisals the nature of Agni and Vayu and
realise the heat and light of Agni and the force and
vitality of Vayu, the winds and air. Laden with clouds
of rain, and rainbow coloured, are they, riding the cosmic
waves of energy and yielding inexhaustible wealth. And
patient and persistent are we, moving to the yajna and
committed to the sacred programmes of life’s








[Names: Agnirasmi, Arkastridhatu]
I am Agni, by birth present in all that is born in
existence. My eye is the light of yajna fed on ghrta, and
my mouth is nectar as I speak the Word. I am the
refulgence of the sun. I hold the earth and skies and the
heavens and three principles of nature, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas of Prakrti. I pervade and transcend the spaces.
I am eternal, I am the heat and vitality of life, and I am
the fragrant havi of the cosmic yajna (since I am in nature
and nature is in me).


Wade ॥




[Names: Tribhih, Jyotiranu, Varsistham]
With threefold cleansing of body, mind and soul,
through the purity of thought, word and deed, by
inculcation of right knowledge (jnana), right conduct
(karma) and right prayer and meditation (upasana), I
purify the holy light of the self, thereby lighting the
flame of the spirit in the intelligence with honesty and
sincerity of the heart, and with these foods and
fortifications of the spirit, I redeem the diamond purity
and generosity of the soul, and then watch the immensity
of heaven and earth participating in the Infinity of the


[Names: Supreme, Self]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 27 1157






[Names: Satadharam, Melim]
O heaven and earth, fulfil the aspirations of that
sagely person to perfection who is generous and
inexhaustible in giving like a fountain of hundred
streams, who is wise, protects and promotes the holy
words, speaks loud and bold only what is true, and
rejoices in the bosom of his parents.


Mandala 3/Sukta 27



[Names: Agni, Rtava, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Devanjigati]
Ye devout yajakas, your foods, energies, and
excellencies are brilliant and overflowing with
abundance of havi and ready with the ladle poised for
the offer. And with these the yajakas eager for heavenly
bliss goes to the divinities and celebrates.



[Names: Agnim, Srustivanam]
With holy voice and song I celebrate Agni, lord




of light and knowledge, vision and wisdom and
abundant giver of happiness and prosperity who leads
the yajna to instant success.






[Names: Agne, Sakema]
Agni, lord of light and law, we pray, may we be
able to go by the laws and discipline of rectitude of the
brilliant, dynamic and scholarly leader of the nation so
that we may swim across the seas of jealousy and




[Names: Samidhyamano, Sociskesastamimahe]
Kindled, raised and rising in flames in the yajna
of love and non-violence, Agni is lord of light and fire,


adorable. Mighty and flaming are his locks of fire, and
we praise and pray to him in words of homage.





[Names: Prthupaja, Agniryajnasya, Agniryajnas]
Vastly powerful, immortal, adorned in flames
of ghrta and vapours of water, invoked and celebrated,
is Agni, carrier of the fragrances of oblations to their


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 27 1159
destinations far and wide.






Those who ward off the impediments of yajna,
raise the ladle of offering and hands in action truly with
will and intelligence and dedicate themselves to yajna
for the sake of protection and promotion, light the fire
and raise it for well being and prosperity.






[Names: Hota, Vidathani]
The brilliant performers of yajna, immortal and
indestructible, goes forward with his innate power and
intelligence, inspiring, advancing and accelerating
yajnic programmes of creative and productive corporate
action.


[Names: Vajt, Vipro]
Agni, tempestuous power and vibrant
accomplisher of yajnic creation, is adopted, lighted and


accelerated in top gear in scientific and technological
programmes of friendly and cooperative nature.








[Names: Dhiya, Daksasya]
Agni, lord of our love and choice, as parent and
teacher, bears the natural child, seed of evolving
humanity, in protective and educational custody and,
with expansive intelligence, completes the growth and
accomplishment of the child to the future protector and
promoter of human expertise and perfection through
educational rebirth, into the full man as a ‘dvija’.






Agni, child of omnipotence, brilliant with
intelligence, and passionate for action, home-coming
graduate, darling of our love and choice, just as the
Lord’s earth holds the divine heat of life, just as the
vedi holds the sacred fire for growth to blazing heights
of flame, so does Ila, divine word of the Lord, expertise
of the fatherly teacher, mother earth, the cow, and the
mother teacher of the school, these bear you upto your
accomplishment and perfection to full humanity.






MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 27 1161


Intelligent and dynamic people with the desire
to accomplish their objects of life light and raise Agni,
instant and inspiring moving power, in their yajnic
applications, in order to achieve their practical
programmes in the pursuit of science and Truth with
the best offerings of food and fuels for energy.



[Names: Urjo, Agnimile, Agnimil]
In yajna, I worship indestructible Agni, child of
cosmic energy shining upto the light of heaven, poetic
power of refulgent vision and creativity.



[Names: Ilenyo, Samagniridhyate]
Agni, worthy of worship, worthy of reverence
and salutations, virile and generous, is beautiful, it
conquers the darkness of the world and is lighted and
raised in yajnas.





[Names: Vrso, Agnih]
Virile and generous, Agni is lighted and raised,
it shines and blazes. It is the carrier of fragrance to the


divinities of heaven and earth. Devotees bearing sacred
offerings worship it in yajna.




[Names: Vrsanam]
Agni, virile and generous as showers of rain,

refulgent lord of light and yajna, we, overflowing at


heart with faith and generosity, light the fire of yajna
rising and shining across the vast spaces.


Mandala 3/Sukta 28





[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Agne]
Agni, lord of universal knowledge, wisdom and
vision, inspiration for the refinement, expansion and
elevation of intelligence, pray accept our homage of
delicious food and fragrance in the morning session of






[Names: Purola]
Agni, most youthful creative power of universal


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 28 1163


energy and intelligence, purified, refined and matured
is this offering of love and faith for you. Accept it, enjoy
it, and let the fragrance rise and pervade the spaces.






Agni, light and power of life, accept this food
of homage, prepared, seasoned, amply matured and
offered in the first session of the day’s yajna. Spirit of
omnipotence you are, invoked, invited, lover and
diversifier of yajna.






[Names: Madhyamdine]
Agni, lord of vision and imagination, omniscient
and omnipotent, ever vigilant on the move, come and
share your part of the delicacies in the middle session
of the day’s yajna. Yajakas of constant devotion never
transgress their dedication and commitment to you, they
never fail to make the offering.








Agni, lover, inspirer and source of strength and
vigour, please to accept this sacred offering of purodash
in the third session of yajna and, with our sacred hymns
of praise and prayer, carry this stimulating and exciting
oblation and the whole yajna of love and non-violence
overflowing with jewels of life, and reach it among the
immortal divinities of nature and humanity.


[Names: Jusasva]
Agni, ever growing, rising and expanding
creative power, intelligent, awake and pervading in all
that manifests in existence, accept and enjoy this


delicious purodash oblation, soma and prayer offered
by the end of the day.


Mandala 3/Sukta 29
[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi]
in Astidamadhimanthanamasti prajananam krtam.


[Names: Etam]
This is the arani-wood, churner of fire. This is
the act of churning. And this is the fire generated. Hold
on this apparatus of fire generation, sustainer of
humanity, so that we may produce the fire as ever before.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 29 1165




[Names: Aranyornihito, Divediva]
Agni, immanent in everything in existence, it is
hidden in the two arani woods (the lower base and the
upper churner), like the embryo neatly nestled in the
womb of pregnant mothers. Agni is worthy of love and
reverence, and it ought to be generated by people who
are alert and awake and possess the right inputs and
apparatuses in plenty.






[Names: Uttanayamava, Arusastupo, Vayune, Vayun]
O man of knowledge, specialist of fire and
energy, put the upper arani on the lower properly
positioned, churn, and, through friction, the lower one
would produce the bright flame, current of energy, like
a column of light. Mighty is its force and speed, which,
like the child of earth and knowledge, takes birth and
comes to life in the dark recesses of the earth mother’s
womb and rises in the knowledge of man and human





[Names: Ilayastva, Jatavedo]
Agni, immanent fire energy, we place you and




light you in the vedi on the floor of the earth in order
that our oblations into the fire of yajna be carried across
the globe and into the midst of the sky.






[Names: Manthata, Yajnasya]
All ye leaders of humanity, explore and research
into Agni full of latent possibilities of life, unique power,
profusely revealing, indestructible, beautiful of form,
lighthouse of yajnic production and immensely useful.
O pioneers of science and fire power, generate this prime
energy as your first priority of research and






[Names: Yadi, Citro]
When the yajakas churn the arani woods with
their arms to produce Agni, it rises like a potent force
and shines in flames, radiant as in the light waves of
the sun and moon in circuitous motion, incessant and
wondrous beautiful, and it burns the grass all round on
earth, dislodges the stones on mountains and breaks the
clouds in the sky.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 29 1167






[Names: Jato]
Arisen, Agni shines, warm and soothing and
beautiful as flames of fire, illuminating as light, energy
and strong horse power, travelling, reaching vibrant,
sensitive and even bearing intelligence, rich with lovely
gifts, sung and celebrated by wise visionaries: which
sacred and universal power, carrier and creator of life’s
fragrance, brilliant people serve, create and use in yajnic
programmes of love and non-violence for the general
good.






[Names: Sida, Devavirdevan]
High priest of yajna, expert performer, be seated
in your own place of performance. Set up and conduct
the yajna in the house of the man of noble creative
action. Agni, lord of light and fire and energy you are
the protector and promoter of good and benevolent
people and you serve the powers of nature. Create and
bring abundant gifts of food and energy, good health
and long age, and bless the yajamana.








[Names: Krnota, Ayamagnih]
Friends, comrades of yajna, create the clouds
of vapours and steam, laden with rain showers of wealth
and fertility, immediately, unerringly, enthusiastically.
Move forward and rise to the heights of strength, energy
and power. This fire of yajna is the winner of battles,
heroic, by which good people challenge and win over
the forces of evil.





[Names: Ayam]
Agni, master of knowledge, light and fire, and

energy, this vedi, this fire, this arani wood, the deep
dense earth, the laboratory, seat and source of energy,
is your home and identity from where, according to the
seasons, you arise and shine. Knowing that, come, sit
on the vedi, and then let our hymns of divine adoration
rise to the heights of heaven.







[Names: Tanunapdaducyate, Matarisva]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 29 1169


When Agni is pervasive and immanent in space,
it is called ‘garbha’, the foetus in the womb of space.
When it pervades and energises the wind, it is called
‘Narashansa’ which rises as the object of admiration by
the people. When it expands its power and presence in
the sky, it is called ‘matarishva’, lying and breathing in
the lap of the mother. And when it moves in fast motion,
then it means ‘the blowing of the storm’.






[Names: Sunirmatha, Agne]
Agni, brilliant light, fire and power, well
produced with powerful tools and apparatuses, safely
stored, well preserved in concentrations as in batteries,
is a revolutionary illuminative power. O master of light
and power of energy, Agni, develop and expand our
yajnas of production and call up, advance, concentrate
and conserve the wonderful powers of nature for the
devotees of peace and progress.






[Names: Ajijanannamrtam, Dasa]
Men of science and technology produce the
immortal, imperishable and forceful motive power of
Agni, and ten moving streams of water, ten fingers of
the hands, moving forward in nimble work, all working




together like ten sisters, welcome and advance this
dynamic power for the good of humanity as it is






Served by seven priests and seven pranic
energies, Agni arises from its eternal cause and shines
bright and beautiful in the lap of its mother source, earth,
wind and sky, and the solar region, illuminant in the
dark night as well, proclaiming itself as the victor of
battles day by day, day and night, without a wink of let
up, since it is born of a powerful mother source, Vayu,
eternal energy of existence.






[Names: Amitrayudho, Marutamiva, Dyumnavad, Agnim]
Those who, like the forward forces of the winds,
fight against the enemies, who are first born favourites
of the Lord, and highly ambitious, who light the fire in
the home, each one of them, and who know the whole
world of the Lord’s creation : they are blest with the joy
of wealth, power and honour in life.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1171






[Names: Yadadya, Dhruvamaya, Somam, Soma]
O master of the science of yajna, in this
corporate programme of yajnic creation being organised
to-day, we elect you to the office of the highpriest and
chief yajaka. Be firm herein, and let peace and Dharma
prevail all round firmly, and O scholar of eminence,
creating the soma joy of life, come, enjoy the pleasure


Mandala 3/Sukta 30






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Icchanti, Somam, Soma, Titiksante]
Indra, lord of honour, power and glory, friends
and lovers of soma, excellence and joy of life, crave
your love and friendship. They distil the soma, the very
essence of life’s meaning and value, and command the
honour and prosperity of living. They forbear the
calumny, malignity and even the violence of society,
for they know that none is wiser than you, nothing is of


higher value than your love and friendship.






[Names: Sthiraya]
The farthest of spaces are not too far for you, O
lord commander of the waves of super energy. Come
by the circuit of the vibrations of light, instant carriers
of yours. These yajnas are enacted for the lord
omnipotent and omnificent on the move without motion,
(being omnipresent, immanent and pervasive in every
particle of matter, energy and thought). Come, the fire
is kindled and blazing, the crush is ready for soma, and
the clouds are laden with showers.






[Names: Indrah, Yadugro]
Indra, lord of honour and majesty, self-protected
and strongly helmeted, abundant in wealth, saviour and
pilot over the seas, commander of disciplined and
committed soldiers, lord of instant action, destroyer of
enemies, when opposed among mortals, you rise with
blazing power and passion. O lord of valour and
generosity, where are those acts and heroic powers of


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1173






[Names: Tvam, Jighnamanah, Tava]
Indra, ruling lord of humanity, you roam around
with dignity shaking and breaking firm and otherwise
unshakable clouds, hoarders, strongholds of darkness and
ignorance and other enemies of humanity all by yourself.
The earth and heaven, clouds and mountains, all in
measured movement devoutly committed to your law
and discipline abide and act in obedience to your will.






[Names: Utabhaye, Puruhuta]
Also, O lord ruler of humanity and the world,
Indra, invoked, invited and celebrated by many, in your
glory, being free from fear, destroyer of demonic
darkness and breaker of mountainous clouds all by
yourself, whatever you firmly speak with your awful
voice of thunder, and the way you hold and sustain these
measureless earths and heavens, O lord of power and
grandeur, is but a reflection of your majesty.








[Names: Jahi, Anucah, Anuca]
Indra, may your chariot going forward by the
speed of winds and sunrays move on majestically. May
your thunderbolt, destroying the enemies, shoot forward
victorious. Destroy the opposition at the back, close at
hand in secret, and upfront in action. Let truth reign in
the world and let it prevail everywhere.






[Names: Yasmai, Bhadra]
Indra, lord of abundance, wealth and honour,
the mortal man, for whom you hold and bring the gifts
of life and grace he has never had so far, gets and enjoys
all that as his homely blessings of everyday. O lord
invoked, served and celebrated by all people of the
world, blissful is your love and kindness, abundant and






[Names: Sahadanum, Puruhiuta]
Indra, lord of power, justice and majesty,
universally invoked, served and celebrated, just as the
sun, with its blaze, strikes the dark demon of the cloud,


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1175


thundering, growing, flying with the winds, breaks it
and crushes it into gladdening showers, so do you, with
your power and justice, strike the dark hoarding demons
of society coexisting camouflaged with the rich and
liberal progressive people, vociferous, fattening, and
scoffing at the poor, make them ineffective to grab with
the hands and rush around robbing the innocent, break
open the hoarded wealth and let it out in showers for
the joy of general society.





[Names: Astabhnad]
Lord ruler of the world, seat yourself in the
house of yajna on the dear green earth, abundant,
peaceful, mighty and measureless. Indra, lord
omnipotent and generous sustains the heavens of light
and the middle regions of the skies. Let the waters
created by you in heaven and skies reach here on the
earth. O lord ruler, let the actions performed by you on
the seat of yajna reach the skies and the heavens with
the fragrance.







[Names: Alatrno, Sugan, Puruhutam]
Indra, lord of the universe, omnipotent you are,
destroyer of the enemies. You protect the cow stalls,
the earth’s orbit and the flow of speech, and the enemy,
stricken with fear, retreats even before the blow of the
thunderbolt is struck. You create safe and straight
highways for the cows to move, for the earths and stars
to revolve and for the Divine Speech to flow in the
vibrations of nature and the mind of humanity so that
songs of celebration arise and resound in space in
homage to the Lord invoked and worshipped by the





[Names: Utantariksadabhi, Sura]
Indra, lord of light, riding the chariot of glory,
all by himself fulfils with his lustre both heaven and
earth together full of wealth. May you, O lord of valour
and lustre, and our friends bring us from the skies food
and energy and wealth of knowledge all in one.






[Names: Disah]
The sun traverses and illuminates the directions


of space day by day indicated and roused to activity by
the rays of light but does not transgress them, and when


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1177


it reaches a particular stage of the journey, it withdraws
the light and releases the region to rest for the night.
This too is a reflection of the power and glory of Indra,






[Names: Lord, Almighty, Didrksanta, Usaso, Visve, Indrasya, Indras, Puruni]
When the night is on the wayout, all the inmates
of the living world love to see the great and glorious
light of the dawn proclaiming the majesty of the rising
sun, and, when the dawn arises, they realise the holiness
and grace of Indra’s infinite acts of omnipotence.






[Names: Mahi, Visvam]
The moving world moves on bearing the great
and glorious light of the lord and whatever mature and
maturing vitality is held in the flowing streams of
nature’s matter and energy, and whatever delicious
delicacies are treasured in the earth and in the cow’s
udders, all these Indra creates and holds therein for the
sustenance of life in existence.








[Names: Durmayavo]
Indra, lord giver of light, knowledge and the
beauty and prosperity of life, be firm, advance and grow
higher and stronger. There are treasures on the way,
highways and byways, impediments and obstructions.
Enlighten and warn friends and admirers about these
for the sake of yajnic living and advancement. There
are people crafty, malignant, armed robbers, enemies
and killers in ambush. Warn of these and protect the






[Names: Sanim, Vrscemadhastadd]
Indra, lord of majesty, I hear the tumult of the
covert enemies below. Strike on them the fieriest
thunderbolt. Pluck them off from the root. Challenge
and beat them down, destroy them, annihilate them,
eliminate the demons.





MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1179


Indra, lord of power and justice, sustainer of
life and its progress, pluck off the evil from the root,
break it at the middle, nip it in the bud and at every
shoot, and, having cast the fiery thunderbolt upon the
saboteurs of truth and justice, life and law of existence,
destroy their hate and enmity to the farthest end of their
reach.






[Names: Svastaye, Rayo]
Indra, discriminative leader and pioneer in the
pursuit of truth and excellence, as for the good and well-
being of life, with your warlike heroes and powers of
science and technology, you sit on the seat of the earth’s
yajna, preside over the wealth of the nations and guide
the ambitions of humanity revealed and pursued of old.
May we, we pray, be sharers in the vast wealth and
prosperity of the world and may the blessings of
generations of man power and honour, prosperity and






[Names: Urva]
Indra, lord of wealth, honour and majesty, bring




us the honour and excellence of prosperity full of light
and wisdom. Let us abide and persevere in the
abundance of your grace and kindness. Let our
aspirations rise high and higher like the flames of yajna
fire. O lord ordainer of the wealth of existence, ruler
and protector of our hearth and home, let our aspirations
and ambitions for total fulfilment be realised.






[Names: Imam, Svaryavo, Indraya]
Let this prayer and aspiration be fulfilled in joy
with the attainment of cows, lands and the light of words
divine at the speed of light, and let it expand with the
golden beauty of the moon and accomplishment of life’s
end and aim, a prayer and aspiration such as lovers of
joy, intelligent celebrants, with the best of their wit and
imagination, construct and compose in poetry and
express in loud voice for you, lord Indra. They are
carriers of the divine message as we are, waiting for





[Names: Divaksa]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 30 1181


Indra, generous lord of honour and valour,
protector and promoter of lands and cows, strengthen
and advance our families, expand our lands and shine
our speech. May knowledge of science and divinity,
speed and power come to us peacefully as our share of
good fortune. Lord of light and knowledge you are, virile
and generous, commanding real strength, lord of power
and prosperity, giver of lands and cows. Give us the
light, give us the knowledge, let us awake into new life.






[Names: Sunam, Indram, Srnvantam]
We invoke, sing and celebrate Indra, lord giver
of light and wisdom, commander of honour and
prosperity, highest guide and leader of humanity, in this
battle of life. Instantly does he listen to our prayers,
bright and blazing is he in the battles and contests of
life for protection, killer where he must be, breaker of
the clouds of darkness, ignorance and poverty, and he
is the winner, collector and consolidator of the wealths
of life. We invoke him for protection, progress and
victory in our battles of life.




Mandala 3/Sukta 31








[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Kushika, Aishirathi, Rshi, Sasad, Pita, Sagmyena]
Let the scholar dedicated to the cosmic law of
solar radiation approach and study the morning rays of
the sun, grand children of the sun, being children of the
dawn which is the sun’s daughter, and let him study the
light and communicate the knowledge to his disciples
— even to control and apply the light in practical use.
And just as a father clothes and beautifies his grand
child, the daughter’s baby, and feels happy and proud
at heart, so would the scholar augment the beauty and
power of sun rays born of the sun, converting darkness
into day light, and feel happy and proud.







[Names: Yadi]
The son does not set apart the patrimony for the
son-in-law, he prepares the sister and accomplishes her
with education, culture and presents for his wife, the
mother of his children. The parents give birth to children,


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1183


son and daughter, one for the filial rites and duties for
themselves and family, the other as beneficiary of the
sanctities and accomplishments.






[Names: Agnirjajne, Agnirjajn, Mahan]
Agni arises in flames of fire fed with the ladle
of ghrta in the service of the sun in order to press forward
the children, 1.6., rays of the sun. Great is the offspring,
1.e., the day, of this great power born of the refulgence
of the rays, and great is the movement of the sun by
virtue of the cosmic yajna.






[Names: Indrah]
Victorious Maruts, currents of cosmic energy,
join and serve the sun, fighting the forces of darkness,
thereby manifesting the mighty light rising out of the
night’s darkness. Similarly, manifesting the sun rise, they
serve the dawns in consequence. And Indra, lord self-
refulgent, the sun, is the generator of the dawns and the
rays of light which bring about the day.








[Names: Vilau, Visvamavindan]
When the seven faculties of the mind and senses
grow too strong and rigid in their natural carnality, then
saints and sages of patience and courage, knowledge
and wisdom, calling up their original strength of the
spirit, control their senses, mind and intellect and
recover their vision of the path to universal truth and
the Divine Law. And the soul, with homage and humility,
enters the cave of the heart and discovers the light of
Indra, lord of the universe.






[Names: Vidad, Agram]
O lady of dynamic thought and action, assessor
of the fast moving things of life, if you know the great
but broken path of the mountain and have it repaired at
once as carved by the ancients, if you know the breach
of the cloud known to the ancients and bring it down in
showers, if you realise the noble voice of the ancients’
words of divinity and lead it forward, you would be the
first in knowledge and advancement.






[Names: Agacchadu, Sasana]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1185


Let the man of knowledge and wisdom, inspired
for action go forward with friends and comrades and
break the cloud to bring down the held up showers of
rain for the people of yajnic action. Let the man, himself
desirous of yajna, share life and action with the youth
and, always loving and respecting others, be one with
them like the life-blood flowing in the nation’s veins.






[Names: Satah]
The man on top, friend and comrade of the
nation, first among all, who knows the models, equals
and adversaries existing from moment to moment, who
knows everything that is born on earth, who removes
drought and poverty, who rises higher step by step to
the light of heaven, who loves friends and respects
seniors, may, we pray, save us from calumny, malignity
and ill-will.






[Names: Idam]
Let those who carve a path to immortality for
themselves sit on the holy seats of yajna with earnest
desire and sincere mind offering hymns of praise and




prayer to Indra. For sure, this yajna is their expansive
seat of action by which, through observance of right
conduct and self-sacrifice, they can try to realise their
year round objective of spirituality over the months in






[Names: Sampasyamana]
Watching and realising their own selves they
rejoice, tasting the sweets of light and life eternal. The
voice of the ecstasy of these settled celebrants rises and
shines across earth and heaven and they confirm their
faith in the world of Indra’s creation and install their
faithful heroes on guard over earths and divine voices
of love and faith.






[Names: Urucyasmai]
He, Indra, destroyer of darkness, dispeller of
ignorance and breaker of the cloud, with simultaneous
creations, yajnic materials and yajnic processes of
consumption and formation, creates the rays of light in
the solar region, planets in the firmament and cows on
earth. The wide earth, a very generous mother cow full


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1187


of wealth, bearing precious ghrta, water and honey
sweets of herbs distils the nectar foods and other
delicious materials from nature for this Indra in the
service of living beings.




[Names: Pitre, Viskabhnantah]
Divine experts of cosmic action build for this
father creator and ruler, Indra, a great home, bright and
beautiful, illuminate it and proclaim it wide. Themselves
sitting firm on the vedi, holding and supporting it as
Prakrti, nature’s creative and sustaining force of cosmic
gravity, they cast it up in orbit, measuring the force
upward and the force of gravity.






[Names: Mahi, Giro, Indraya]
O seeker and celebrant of Indra, nature and
divinity, if in the act of exploration, your great intelli-
gence and penetrative vision were to hold on to the ever
expansive spirit of heaven and earth, in which the entire
light, words and vision of existence, irreproachable and
invincible, lie embedded for Indra, then that is the state
of sovereignty in research and meditation.








[Names: Mahya, Saktira]
Indra, lord of glory and majesty, I love and pray
for your favour and friendship. O breaker of the cloud,
dispeller of darkness and evil, all eternal powers and
energies, divinely ordained, concentrate in you and
emanate from you. O lord potent and universal protector,
we offer our hymns of praise in your honour and pray
for shelter under your protection. Give us the vision,
give us the light, give us the knowledge.





[Names: Puruscandram, Puruscandra, Indro, Suryamusasam, Suryamusasa]
and wisdom, brings for his devotees and friends vast
field and opportunities for action, immense wealth of
gold, knowledge and inspiration, movement and
expansion. With men, leaders and the force of winds,
he provides the light of the sun, beauty of the dawns,
inspiration of the Divine Word, the passion of fire, and
he creates the paths of progress for them.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1189


at: wes




[Names: Apascidesa, Madhvah]
And this lord omnipresent and infinite, fiery
controller and guardian of human households, creates
the waters and the world’s golden wealth of materials,
knowledge and culture and joy all together. And these
waters, honey sweet and purifying, highly productive
of food and wealth and joy, inspiring poets with their
purest streams, thereby inspire and excite the people
day and night for advancement.


[Names: Swami, Dayananda, Apah]
metaphorically as intelligent, educated and cultured
people of dynamic nature who inspire the nation with
their knowledge and conduct.)






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas, Anu, Pari]
The green earth and the bright heaven, holding
the wealth of existence, mutually sustained by the force
and grandeur of the sun, go round in concord like the
dark night and bright day going on and on in unison,
both doing homage to the sun. The same force and




grandeur, Indra, lustrous lord ruler of the world, your
loving friends, going by the simple paths of truth and
law, follow in order to collect the holy grass for cosmic
yajna and avert untoward accidents and oppositions.






[Names: Patirbhava, Sivebhir]
Be the protector, sustainer, and promoter of the
voices of truth and cosmic laws of existence, O dispeller
of darkness, breaker of the cloud and destroyer of evil.
You are great, life eternal, generous and virile, universal
giver of good health and full age. Come, take us on,
moving, reaching, inspiring, with friendship, kindness
and benevolence, and bless us with divine modes of
protection and progress.






[Names: Tamangirasvannamasa, Druho]
That Indra, ruler of the world, ancient yet ever
new, I honour and serve with homage and salutations
in order to join him in the governance and administration
of the common wealth. O lord of power, plenty and
majesty, throw off and eliminate all hostile, impious and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 31 1191


uncreative elements of society, and bear and bring us
peace, prosperity and joy for the sake of victory and






[Names: Mihah]
Showers of rain, pure and purifying, pour down
and spread around far and wide. Take us across these,
lead us to life’s well-being and total fulfilment. Indra,
lord of the world, warrior of the chariot you are, protect
us from violence, and at every step, at every moment,
make us victors of lands and cows, sense-control and
self-discipline with the voice divine.






[Names: Adedista]
Just as the sun, lord of light and breaker of the
cloud of darkness, shoots its rays of light with its power
and splendour, penetrates to the centre of dark energy
and dispels the darkness releasing the energy, similarly,
O lord of light and power, commanding and revealing
your own lights and words of knowledge and the truth
of reality, open out all the doors and reveal the secrets




of universal knowledge with the power and force of
universal law which sustains the world of existence.






[Names: Sunamhuvema, Srnvantamugra]
Fighting for victory in this battle of life, for the
sake of defence, protection and advance in the
engagements of action, we invoke and call upon Indra,
auspicious lord of power and prosperity, first and highest
among leaders, careful listener, fierce, passionate and
noble winner of wealth and victory.


Mandala 3/Sukta 32






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indra, Somam, Soma, Somapate, Somapat, Prapruthyd, Sipre]
Indra, creator giver of honour, excellence and
prosperity, creator, preserver and promoter of the soma
success of life, accept and enjoy this soma drink of
homage which is your delicious share of the mid-day
session of our yajna of struggle and success in creative
[Names: Breathe]
muscles, lord of wealth and connoisseur of the purest


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1193


delicacies. Unharness your horses and enjoy yourself
here on the vedi.






[Names: Gavasiram, Brahmakrta, Marutena, Marut, Rudraistrpada]
Indra, destroyer of suffering and poverty, have
a drink of this pure exhilarating soma, well churned,
distilled and blended with milk and seasoned in sun.
We offer it to you for your joy and exhilaration. Enjoy
it to the full in the company of divine scholars and
producers and refiners of gold, and scholars of the Rudra
order. Drink and rejoice and be virile and generous as a
cloud of showers.






[Names: Susmam, Madhyamdine, Marutasta]
Indra, lord destroyer of evil, of impressive visor,
holding the thunder-bolt in hand, those who augment
your strength, your forces, and your lustre and valour,
and those who admire and serve you to the degree of
worship, are Maruts, heroes as tempestuous as the winds
in storm. In the company of all these and with the Rudras
who rout the wicked, drink the soma in the mid-day
session of the national yajna of defence.








[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Yebhirvrtrasyesito, Maruto]
Indeed the Maruts stir the honey sweets of soma
for Indra, lord ruler and commander of the world, and
they, heroic brave like the winds of storm, are his force
who rouse his passion against the evil. Stirred by these
he knows and reaches the fatal core of Vrtra, the demon,
who believes he is invulnerable.






[Names: Manusvadindra, Sasvate]
Indra, lord giver of honour and glory, eager for
yajnic action and fond of yajnic gifts of fragrant
delicacies, come like a man of thought and meditation,
join our yajna and have a drink of soma for lasting
strength and inspiration. You move the vapours and
waters to the skies by performance of yajna and currents
of wind and rays of the sun. As such, O rider of the
horses of light and waves of energy, turn round and come
to enjoy the fragrances.




[Names: Tvamapo, Sayanamindra]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1195


Indra, when with the wielded weapon of the
thunderbolt in battle, you destroy Vrtra, demonic cloud
of darkness lying asleep in stolid state, covering and
with-holding the blissful waters of vital rain showers,
you release the waters of life and joy to flow, and the
streams rush forth in freedom like horses released from
the stables.






[Names: Yajama, Yasya]
We love, join and worship Indra, lord of glory
and majesty, with homage and holy food: Indra, lord
most ancient beyond calculation, great and sublime,
unaging and ever youthful, the bounds of which Lord
worthiest of reverence in yajna, no near and dear heaven
and earth ever measure, nor can they ever measure or






[Names: Puruni, Dadhara, Suryamusasam, Suryamusasa, Lord, Almighty]
gifts and graces, and His laws, none among the noblest
humanity do ever violate, nor the mightiest powers of
nature ever transgress: Indra, lord of generosity and
holiest action, who sustains this earth and heaven, and




creates the sun and the dawn and the day.






[Names: Adrogha]
Indra, lord of love free from jealousy, negativity,
discrimination or hypocrisy, ever true, inviolable and
eternal is that greatness and glory of yours, that sun
which, as it arises, drinks up the soma of nature to
recreate, augment and return it to nature. Neither the
heavens of light, nor days, nor months, nor seasons,
the might and majesty of yours, omnipotent as you are.






[Names: Tvam, Yaddha]
Indra, mighty lord of light and senses and mind,
as soon as you arise and manifest, you drink up the soma
vitalities of the holiest regions of life and nature for
pleasure and growth, since then, you pervade the heaven
and earth and then you grow to be the maker and
sustainer of the artists of beauty and singers of divinity.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1197






[Names: Ahannahim]
Indra, potent lord of light universally manifest
in existence and supremely generous, you break up the
serpentine cloud of darkness waxing and overshadowing
the oceans of air and vapours in the firmament and cover
the earth with rain and light. Even the region of light
cannot equal and contain your might because (while
you strike the cover of darkness with the thunderbolt in
one hand) with the other you hold and sustain the earth.






[Names: Yajno, Yajnena]
Indra, ruler of the world and giver of honour
and excellence, your yajnic action, social and generous
programme, is the mode of progress and promotion: It
creates joy and prosperity, eliminates poverty and
suffering, and promotes love and social cohesion. Be
the leader of yajna, protect and promote yajna by yajna,
and let your yajna protect and promote your thunder-
arm in breaking the cloud of darkness for the rain
showers of prosperity and joy in plenty.








[Names: Yajnenendramavasa]
The person who creates honour and excellence,
peace and prosperity for humanity by yajna, creative
action of the corporate community and promotes it by
protection, preservation and further yajnic action, who
rises by the appreciation and praise of the seniors,
cooperation of the middle classes and the hopes,
aspirations and dreams of the new generation, to sucha
person let me turn as front leader, as Indra, ruler and
law-giver for humanity.






[Names: Vivesa, Anhaso]
When thought is stirred and words arise in me
in praise of Indra before the end of the day with gratitude
how he would take us over across the world of sin and
evil, then people too on both sides of the flood call upon
him as captain of the ship on the move to take them
over the seas to the shores of life beyond.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 32 1199




[Names: Apurno, Samu, Indram, Somasa]
Full to the brim is the cup of life for Indra to
drink, filled with the best of thought, perception and
action, like the dense cloud of vapours poured in by the
sun. Dear friends and admirers, lovers of the soma-joy
of life, come close and stand round Indra in homage to
join and celebrate the Lord’s gift of life.






[Names: Natva, Puruhuta, Ittha]
Indra, mighty lord of light as the sun, invoked
by one and all, neither the deep sea nor the dense clouds
nor the high mountains all round can contain or hold
you back when inspired by friends for friends you strike
and break the formidable cloud, impenetrable except
for the thunderbolt.



[Names: Sunari, Srnvantamugram]
For protection, victory and well-being, in this
battle of life, we invoke Indra, auspicious lord of power




and prosperity, highest leader, careful listener, fierce
fighter, destroyer of enemies, and winner of wealths.


Mandala 3/Sukta 33






[Names: Nadis, Streams, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Gaveva, Jjavete]
From the lap of mountains, arising brilliant and
passionate like the dawn, laughing and sparkling, and
bolting like a horse and mare, like two beautiful mother
cows yearning to meet their calves, two streams, one
expansive and divided (vipat), the other deep and
concentrated, fast and overflowing the banks (shutudri),
flow in unison rapidly to meet the sea with their water.


Note: Swami Dayananda interprets this mantra
as a metaphor of two brilliant women teachers issuing
forth from a mighty source of learning and going to
meet their disciples. He does not accept the
interpretation that Vipat and Shutudri refer to two
particular streams of these names. He does not accept
the historical comparative method of Vedic
interpretation which says that these mantras were
composed on the banks of Vipat and Shutudri streams.
On the contrary, he says that the words of the Veda
above.


Why these names in the Veda then? That’s the


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 33 1201


question. Swamiji says that words of the Veda are
independent of history and geography. Particulars names
in history such as Rama, Krishna, and others, for
example, and names in geography such as Vipat and
Shutudri and Ganga were taken from the Veda and not
vice versa. There is no history nor geography of persons
and places in the Veda. All such words, which appear to
that’s the scientific method, just like the technical terms
of science which are structured and interpreted






[Names: Indresite, Samarane]
Moved and inspired by Indra, lord of light and
rain, sharing and receiving the impulse to grow, you
flow with crystalline waters, like beautiful chariot mares,
towards the sea. Meeting and growing together with
rising waves, feeding the environs, brilliant and graceful,
each of you meets and augments the other.


(The metaphor of learned women, meeting,
cooperating and beautifying the life around with
education and the graces of culture continues to apply.)








[Names: Accha, Vatsamiva]
I go to the river, I go to the sea, dearest mother
generator and receiver of the rivers.


We go to the river, free, wide and auspicious.


The streams flow to the sea like mother cows
hastening to the stalls to meet the calf, loving and
caressing, reaching together in equal love and joy living
together in one home.






[Names: Anu]
We rivers rising with water and fertilizing the
land move on by the same course appointed by the divine
maker, never relenting in the flow, our birth itself and
flow is never meant to stop.


(The mantra refers to the stream of life,
continuance of the race, the family and the tradition of
education and culture.)






[Names: Ramadhvam]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 33 1203


Bide a while, listen, pray consider and enjoy
my word of peace, prayer and beauty. Relax, why rush
on like a storm to the bottom mysterious deep. Son and
disciple of a self-realised soul, I invoke and call upon
the river and the sea from the core of my heart and mind,
I need the vision and the protection.


(The mantra points to the irresistible flow of
existence and the soul’s cry for a moment’s vision of
constancy against the flux of mutability.)






[Names: Indro, Devo]
Indra, lord of thunder, carved for us the paths
we follow when he broke the ocean of dark energy in
which the streams of existence lay confined. Into those
channels the lord creator, Savita, cosmic sun of
omnipotent arm, made us flow. In his channels we flow
on and on, wide and deep, without rest.


(Mutability does not stop. The flux goes on and
on, but you can stop the flow of your experience of the



[Names: Pravacyam]
That omnipotence of Indra, that cosmic act by




which he breaks the dark energy of the state of
annihilation (Pralaya) is worthy of song and celebration.
With his voice of thunder he breaks the silence of the
inert forces of Prakrti, and the waves and waters of
cosmic energy flow into existence, in-vested with the






[Names: Etad, Ukthesu, Purusatra]
O singer and celebrant, neglect not, nor forget
these holy words of yours which the ages to come will
honour and resound. O poet of divinity, master maker
and artist of eminence, love us and serve us with faith
in your yajnic programmes. Be not arrogant to us or to
noble people in general. Salutations to you!






O sister streams of existence in cosmic flow,
powers of dynamic action, listen to the prayer and
exhortations of the artist maker and poet. He has come
to you from afar by a fast moving chariot. Lower your
depth and turbulence, flow below the axle of his chariot
wheels, bow to him, and help him to cross the flood.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 33 1205






[Names: Sasvacai]
O poet artist and maker, we listen to your words,
you come from afar with a cart and chariot, and we greet
you with salutations eagerly as a woman overflowing
with love meets her child, and a maiden meets her lover
with embraces.






[Names: Yadanga, Bharatah, Bharata, Arsadahah, Indrajutah, Indrajuta]
O dear streams of water and national economy,
as the producers and managers of the nation may cross
and manage you with your consent, so may the people
of the settlement too, desirous of crossing you, when
impassioned and inspired by Indra, ruling light of the
world, cross and manage the waters. And then, for sure,
may the flood rush on. O managers and planners of the
nation’s yajna, worthy of love and reverence, I admire
and pray for the vision and wisdom and the good-will
of friends and creators like you.








[Names: Atarisurbharata]
May the producers, managers and rulers seeking
and developing lands, and cows, and animal husbandry
manage water resources. Let the intellectuals study and
share the secret of river power. O people of the land,
develop the rich and productive streams and rivers and
fill the fields and canals with water for irrigation. Come
all, go far, be quick and effective.






[Names: Udvaurmih, Maduskrtau]
O streams and rivers, may your flow, the waves,
touch and sanctify the flagpole of yajna. May the waters
relieve the yoke of bullocks. May the streams, fast, wide
and free, never destructive but blissful, unhurt, protected
and developed, auspicious as a boon, bring us peace,
prosperity and joy. (Life is a flow, inspiring, energising,


[Names: Manage]
Mandala 3/Sukta 34




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indrah, Indra, Satrun, Brahmajutastanva]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 34 1207


Indra, lord ruler of the world, overcomes the
hostile forces with light and thought and the power of
persuasion. He opens and expands the cities bound in
the dark and, abundant and charitable as he is, relieves
and rehabilitates the helpless poor. Inspired by divinity
and universal vision, rising and expanding in body and
mind with plenty and prosperity, merciful and freely
giving, he fills both heaven and earth with light and
joy.




[Names: Makhasya]
Indra, lord of life and giver of light, I arise and
receive the inspiration of the power and generosity of
your yajna, glorifying the divine voice for the sake of
immortality. Lord of power and ruler of the world, you
are the leader and pioneer of the nations of the world,
ordinary people, specialized groups and exceptional
people of brilliance and generosity.






[Names: Indro, Ahan]
Indra, heroic warrior of exploits, master of
tactics, overwhelms the demon of darkness and,
passionate for action, counters the magical moves of




the crafty enemies and overthrows the crippled monster.
Thus does he set free the cows confined in the forests,
voices suppressed in silence, and the streams of water
locked up in the cloud and sunrays.






[Names: Prarocayanmanave]
Indra, lord of the showers of joy, reveals and
brightens the days, fights the battles alongwith his
commandos, and comes out victorious. May he then
unfurl the flag of the day’s light and victory and win
the light for the mighty battle of life as a whole in the
flow of existence.






[Names: Indrastujo, Acetayad, Puruni]
overwhelming the forces of battle, blazing with the
mighty thunderbolt, breaks through the thick of enemy
lines. He enlightens these thoughts and minds for the
celebrant and augments this pure and unsullied light of




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 34 1209




[Names: Maho, Vrjanena]
Many great and good acts of this mighty Indra,
ruler and warrior, are worthy of admiration. Lord of
might and splendour, hero of victory, he crushes the
guiles and evils of the wicked with his strength, and
eliminates the thieves and robbers of society by the force
of his tactics and intelligence.






[Names: Yudhendro, Vivasvatah]
Indra, lover and favourite of humanity, protector
and promoter of truth, reality and the good people, with
his fight and force of strength and intelligence does great
good deeds for the noble powers of nature and humanity.
And those great exploits of his, brilliant poets and
scholars celebrate with their songs of homage, the waves
and echoes of which rise and resound in the house of
the sun.






[Names: Satrasaham, Sasana]
People of intelligence, patience and intelligence




may please and share the pleasure with Indra, lord of
the world, who upholds truth and challenges untruth,
who is worthy of choice, giver of strength and courage,
who distinguishes between good and evil, and gives
happiness, pranic energy and divine bliss, and who
creates, gives and shares the gifts and beauty of this
earth and heaven with us.






[Names: Sasanatyan, Suryam, Surya, Hiranyayamuta, Purubhojasam, Purubhojasa]
Indra gives us the horses and other modes of
fast travel. He gives us the sun and enlightenment. He
gives us the cow for milk, land and speech, and golden
wealth for the sustenance of all. He destroys evil and
the wicked and protects the good and virtuous people
for the joy of all.






[Names: Bibheda]
Indra gives us herbs and tonics everyday. He
gives us waters of the firmament. He opens up the
sources of strength and energy. He stimulates the organs
of speech and inspires articulation and the growth of
various languages. And he is the controller of the men
of impetuous action to a steady state of balance in


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 35 Van
thought and will.






[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugram]
We invoke, invite and celebrate Indra,
auspicious lord of wealth, honour and excellence, friend
of the good and controller of the wicked. In this battle
of life, we call upon him, best and highest of men and
leaders, for victory. We call upon him in all our struggles
for protection, promotion and progress, for he listens
to us, destroys the evils of darkness and ignorance, and
wins, preserves and promotes the wealth, honour and
excellence of life and culture. Great is he, mighty


Mandala 3/Sukta 35





[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Tistha, Vayurna, Pibasyandho, Indra]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, ride the chariot
drawn by horse power of water and fire and come
straight to us like the wind in all your glory in good




company. Come and partake of the holy food we offer
in faith and truth of word and deed in homage for your
joy and entertainment.






[Names: Upajira, Puruhitaya, Puruhita, Dravad, Indram]
I yoke the fastest horses, fast as sun-rays, to the
centre pole of the chariot of Indra, lord universally
invoked, praised and called upon for action, so that they
may rush, bear him and carry wealth and honour from
all round and bring it to this yajna of knowledge and
science.






[Names: Grasetamasva]
Indra, bold and generous lord commanding food
and energy, take the two mighty fiery steeds of sun-
rays close together, protect and take water too, let the
horses free, consume the food and fuel of flames, and
you too consume the food prepared and seasoned by
fire every day in the bowels of the earth.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 35 1213




[Names: Brahmana, Sthiram, Somam, Soma]
By word I yoke the horses which sense and obey
the word of command. Friendly they are, extremely fast
to reach the yajnic destination. Indra, lord of knowledge
and power, riding the chariot which is steady and
comfortable, knowing and discovering further, go close
to the moon and bring the nectar of magical powers.





[Names: Atyayahi, Somaih, Somai]
Indra, may your motive chariot powers, of wide
and extensive back never slacken, exhaust or stop. We
are the other collaborators in your yajna, ever and
constant, who do all for you with the distilled yajnic
essences of what you need. Go far to the target and come
back to us victorious.






[Names: Tavayam, Asmin]
Indra, this soma is yours, come you hither, happy
at heart, partake of it, lasting and constant as it is in
power and energy. Sit on the holy grass in this yajna
and hold it in the strong interior of the chariot.








[Names: Stirnam, Somah, Tadokase, Purusakaya, Purusaka, Marutvate, Marutvat]
The liquid fuel, distilled and packed, is ready
for you. The foods for the consumption of your motive
forces are prepared and ready. All the inputs for you
too are ready and reserved for the lord of the chariot,
mighty helpful, creative and generous, lord of the wings
of winds.






[Names: Imam, Tasyagatyda, Anu]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, the best
of men, mountains and clouds, waters and vapours in
unison have prepared this nectar sweet of soma for you
with currents of solar energy and treasures of the earth.
Lord of glory, happy at heart, scholar and discoverer,
take the soma, and protect and promote the product and
your partners on the way.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 35 1215




[Names: Maruta, Tebhiretam, Somamindra]
Indra, lord of knowledge, power and glory, the
winds and men you engage in your soma project of
science and development, who lead you to honour and
advancement, and who become your force and allies :
with them, celebrating in joy, shining and resounding,
drink of the soma with the tongue of fire.





[Names: Jihvaya, Adhvaryorva]
Indra, glorious ruler of the world, drink of the
soma distilled with the tongue of fire. O lord venerable,
drink of it and protect it with your strength and power.
Lord of power and honour, join and develop the yajna
instituted and conducted by the yajamana and the
highpriest with oblations of fragrant materials offered
with their own hands.








[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugr]
For victory in this battle of life, we invoke, invite




and call upon Indra, lord auspicious of bliss, commander
of honour, power and prosperity, and the best of men
and leaders. For defence, protection, preservation and
progress in the struggles of life for development, we
look up to him, responsive listener, mighty lustrous
destroyer of the demons of darkness and ignorance, and
a winner of all round wealth of the nations.


Mandala 3/Sukta 36


Indra Devata, Vishvamitra Gathina (1-9, 11) and Ghora





[Names: Angirasa, Rshi, Imamu, Sutesute]
Indra, O lord united with friends and devotees
by continuous modes of protection, who rise by
admirable acts of promotive generosity and advance in
honour and reputation by greater and higher actions in
one yajna after another, accept this praise and prayer
for the gifts of success and acquisitions of value.






[Names: Indraya, Indra, Somah, Soma, Rbhuryebhir, Prayamyamanan]
Indra, the somas, essences of energy and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 36 1217


enlightenment, are distilled from the heavens by
enlightened people for advancement of the honour and
excellence of life, by which Rbhu, master of intelligence
and expertise in social affairs, grows strong in every
aspect of development and destroys the evil which must


Indra, lord ruler, drink of this powerful,
inspiring, elevating vitality of strength and enlighten-
ment, and hold and govern the elements under control
for the protection, promotion and advancement of
honour and excellence.






[Names: Piba, Somasah, Somasa, Yathapibah, Soman]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, drink of
the soma and grow in honour and power. For sure, the
[Names: Somas]
today are yours. As you drank of the earlier ones, so
drink the new ones today and protect the honour and
excellence of life, admirable leader as you are.






[Names: Mahan, Savah, Naha, Somaso]
Great, master of knowledge and power,




overwhelming in the battle of life and lord of terrible
splendour, Indra possesses and commands informidable
prowess and heroism. Even the whole humanity on earth
does not comprehend the grandeur of this wondrous
power commanding the winds whom the creators of
soma, light of the sun, beauty of the moon and fragrances
of yajna inspire and enlighten.






[Names: Indro]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, is great, illustrious,
generous and gracious giver of honour and excellence
of prosperity. He rises to valorous and virtuous action
and achieves every success by the word and vision of
Divinity. His lands, cows and lights of knowledge are
creative and profuse, and his gifts are always blissful
more and ever more.




[Names: Atascidindrah]
Just as rivers originate and pursue their course
to the sea, and as vapours rise to the firmament like


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 36 1219


chariots going by highways to their destination, so does
soma mixed with milk and seasoned in sunlight offered
in homage to Indra, supreme power of earth and heaven,
inspires, and Indra sits over the assembly as first and
presiding power, cream of the nation, bright as sunrays.






[Names: Samudrena, Somam, Amsum]
Just as rivers join the sea bearing distilled soma
from the essences of nature for Indra, lord of the world,
so do the performers of yajna, men of generous hands,
joining the scholars of oceanic depth of learning, distil
the soma vitalities of nature and, with hands full of
fragrant offerings, sanctify the honey sweets of life with
streams of pure and holy showers of piety for honour
and glory.






[Names: Hrada, Somadhanah, Somadhana, Anna, Puruni]
Like lakes and mountain valleys are the
generous treasure holds of the bearers of soma. Many
are the yajnic processes of the creation and
reinforcement of the soma nectars. Indra, lord of




knowledge and brilliance, when he creates the first foods
and nourishments for life and tastes and approves of
these, then he, breaker of the clouds, selects soma as
the first and most invigorating power.






Indra, lord of light and life, bear and bring us
the soma, fill our treasures, fulfil us wholly. Let no one
withhold it from us. We know you are the creator and
protector of the wealths of life. O lord of the winds and
velocities of energy, bless us with that which is the
greatest and highest of your gifts.






[Names: Asme, Asme, Satam, Sarado, Siprin]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence of
prosperity, lover of purity and excellence of naturalness,
ruler and protector of the world, give us abundance of
the wealth of universal character and value. O lord of
grandeur and handsomeness, bear and bring for us a
full life of hundred years, and bless us with an unbroken
line of brave progeny.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 37 1221






[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugram]
In this yajnic struggle of life for peace and plenty
and the achievement of speed and excellence, we invoke
and call upon Indra, lord of honour, power and
innocence of naturalness, giver of joy and best of men
and leaders, who listens to us, is lustrous and terrible,
and destroys the demons of darkness in the battles for
progress and who is the creator, protector and promoter
of the wealths of universal value.


Mandala 3/Sukta 37






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Vartrahatyaya, Savase, Indra]
Indra, lord of honour and valour, commander
of the forces of life and freedom, we pledge to abide by
you and exhort you for breaking of the clouds of rain,
for the destruction of darkness and evil, for rousing
courage and valour, and for challenging and beating
back the enemy in battle. And we pray, inspire and exhort
us too with full power and preparation.








[Names: Arvacinam]
Indra, lord destroyer of evil and enemies, hero
of a hundred acts of yajnic creation and development,
may the sages of vision, imagination and effective
communication refresh and update your mind and eye
with foresight so that you face the challenges of the






[Names: Namani, Indrabhimatisahye]
Indra, lord ruler excellent and honourable, hero
of a hundred acts of imaginative vision, with all our
best words, thoughts and resolutions, we pray and exhort
you to realise your names and attributes in action so
that under your leadership we may face the challenges
of the time successfully against the arrogant and proud
enemies.






[Names: Purustutasya, Purustutas, Indrasya, Indras]
We exhort and exalt Indra, universally admired
ruler of the world and sustainer of his people, by
hundredfold celebrations of his names, attributes and
brilliant exploits of heroism.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 37 1223






[Names: Indram, Puruhitamupa, Bharesu]
I invoke Indra, invoked and worshipped by all,
for the destruction of evil and victory in life’s battles
for food, energy, prosperity and progress.






[Names: Vajesu, Satakrato]
Indra, be the challenger, warrior and winner of
battles for prosperity and progress. O lord of a hundred
creative actions, we invoke, exhort and exhalt you for
breakup of the cloud into rain and elimination of the
demon of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty.






[Names: Dyumnesu, Sravahsu]
In the battles of forces in plans and programmes
of development for prosperity and excellence, in the
contests of forces positive and negative for good and
evil, in the onslaughts of stormy troops of hostility, in
the efforts for growth in food, energy and enlightenment,
in the struggles for self-realisation against pride and
arrogance, Indra, O spirit of the soul, voice of
conscience, genius of the nation, and invincible strength




of character, tolerate, endure, challenge, fight and throw
out the enemies of life’s light and joy.






[Names: Susmintamam, Somam, Soma]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, protector of life
and humanity, leader of a hundred noble actions and
master of knowledge, for our protection and progress,
protect, defend, govern and promote the strongest and
most prosperous, most brilliant and honourable, and the
most wakeful and vigilant powers and people, and thus
defend and safeguard the honour, happiness and
excellence of the nation.






[Names: Indriyani]
Indra, ruler of the world, master of a hundred
noble acts of governance, your powers and organs of
perception operating among all the five classes of
people, i.e., teachers and intellectuals, ruling powers
and defence forces, producers and business men,
ancillaries, and others, I accept and honour all these as
powers and forces of yours.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 38 1225




[Names: Agannindra, Susmam]
Indra, ruler and protector of the world, the assets
of the dominion are high and rising. Hold and govern
this formidable wealth, honour and excellence of the
nation. And let us all, we pray, raise and exalt your
courage and power, honour and glory.






[Names: Arvavato]
Indra, lord of might, ruler of the clouds, wielder
of the thunderbolt and refulgent as the sun, come to us
from far and from near, wherever you are. And whatever
or wherever your abode, from there come to us here
and now.


Mandala 3/Sukta 38




[Names: Indra, Devata, Prajapati, Vaishvamitra, Vachya, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Just]
form of art from a piece of wood, so you shine and
sharpen your intelligence, and, thinking and




contemplating the farthest favourite places of space,
reach there like a ray of light well joined to the sun’s
chariot. Such men of intelligence and poets of wisdom
I wish to see, intelligent as I am by the grace of Indra.






[Names: Inota]
O seeker of knowledge and light divine, ask
these men of vision and wisdom about the life and birth
of the poets who possess a treasure of knowledge in
their mind, do great noble deeds, create knowledge and
fashion it forth in heavenly words. And then, may these
favourite vibrations of your mind, rising and elevating
you, explore and pursue the paths of higher knowledge
and Dharma of the universal order.






Bearing vibrations of the mysterious in their
mind here itself in the world, going over the spaces
between heaven and earth for the cosmic order, they
visualise and measure the world with definitive
operations of the imagination, go over and within the
earth, and traverse the joining firmament and space


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 38 1227


between heaven and earth, and realise the cosmic
relations in the service of the supreme lord who wields
all these together in law.






[Names: Atisthantam, Mahat]
All the visionary sages realise and celebrate the
one lord supreme, robed in his own glory, who pervades
the world of existence. Great and glorious are his names
and attributes: self-refulgent, omniform, generous and
potent, life of life, who sustains the immortals of






[Names: Asuta, Surudhah, Divo]
Indra, first and eternal lord, supreme, generous
and omnipotent, creates these forms of existence. These
ancient forms of this world are life-inspired and life-
giving. Two immortal powers, both ruling and brilliant,
Indra and Varuna, Spirit and Energy, ruler and people,
with their will and action from the light of heaven hold
and sustain the divine yajnic order of nature and
humanity and promote the light of knowledge.







[Names: Trini, Puruni, Vayukesan, Vayukesa]
O brilliant powers of divinity, Indra and Varuna,
spirit and energy, ruler and the people, both of you
sustain and adorn the three houses of the social order:
Executive, Legislature, and Education (Rajarya Sabha,
Dharmarya Sabha and Vidyarya Sabha), and you
maintain all the various ancient values, forms and
institutions of the society. Moving with thought and
imagination here itself, I have seen the gandharvas,
leaders gifted with speech and ideas flying on the wings
of the winds, committed to the sanctity of duty in the
holy social order of yajna, serving and sustaining the
earth and her environment.






[Names: Tadinnvasya, Anyadanyadasuryam]
Sages of vision and imagination measure and
describe the nature, character and forms of the earth by
the speech and words of this divine and generous Indra,
lord of light and knowledge and speech. And these sages
and poets, wondrous makers of forms in words and
materials, watching the light and energy of divinity in
different earthly forms, recreate and re-enact the forms
in this social order on this earth.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 38 1229






[Names: Apiva]
No one can deny nor destroy the light and beauty
of the golden gifts of this lord Savita, creator of this
beautiful world, or of my recreation of it in word or
material or institutional form. Whoever takes to it for
support or sustenance wins the showers of universal
joy from all pervading heaven and earth just as a young
mother receives the pleasure and bliss of the birth of






[Names: Yuvam, Gopdajihvasya]
Both of you, Indra and Varuna, Spirit and energy,
power and justice, ruler and people, bring us straight
that great and celestial gift of joy and well being which
is the gift of tradition and eternity. May that great and
heavenly joy be ours from all sides. Wonderful artists
of word and form see and realise all the creations of the
constant lord of infinite forms who is the protector of
eternal speech and divine consciousness.








[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugram]
We invoke Indra, lord of power and majesty for
protection and victory in this battle of life. Auspicious
is he and blissful, and the best among men and leaders,
for the achievement of food, energy and advancement
of body, mind and soul for the individual and the nation.
He listens. He rises lustrous and blazing at the call for
defence and victory, destroys the demons of darkness,
violence and poverty in the strifes, breaks the clouds of
rain showers and collects the trophies of excellence and
glory for his people.


Mandala 3/Sukta 39






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Sasyamane]
The song that arises from the heart, which is
composed and sung in honour of Indra, father protector
and sustainer of the world, reaches him well and directly.
Indra, lord of power, love and majesty, accept that song
of adoration raised in full consciousness, inspiring in
the yajna of life and knowledge, and know it is the song


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 39 1231
of a devotee.


Indra, O worshipful soul, know the nature,
character and actions of the Lord Supreme by this song.


at: meu



[Names: Divascida, Sasyamana, Bhadra]
Coming from the light of Divinity, ancient and
eternal, ever rising, ever wakeful and awakening the
mind and soul into divine awareness, celebrated in yajna
and the sacred ways of life, blessed and blissful, like
the dawn, adorned in the purest garb of immaculate
words and verses, coexistent with Divine consciousness
and abiding with fatherly sages, may that holy light of
the Vedic Word be ours.






[Names: Yama, Vapumsi]
Just as cosmic energy creates the twin lights of
the sun and moon, and just as the sun radiates the circuit
of light energy that creates the Ashvins, which then bring
forth the dawn, which inspires the tip of the tongue in
adoration, and the twin flow of light currents dispelling
darkness serves to reveal the objects of the world, so




does Indra, lord omniscient create the twins of
Revelation, word and meaning of the Vedic speech,
which both activate the tip of the tongue in spontaneous
articulation and stay there. They both together,
dispelling the darkness of ignorance in the light of
knowledge, stay, serve the world of created objects and
stay there in the memory.






[Names: Nakiresam]
None among living humanity is reviler and
maligner of those who are our ancestors, parents and
teachers, who are veterans, warriors, in the battles of
speech, knowledge and wisdom. Indra, lord of majesty,
power and generosity, hero of divine actions, strengthens
them with firmness of will and action and creates fortifi-
cations for their traditions, institutions and familial lines.


[Names: Sakha, Satyam, Anugman, Anugma, Suryam, Surya]
Where, in the human body, when the soul is


anxious to know the mystery of truth and light divine,
does it find the holy cows of the Lord Supreme, words


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 39 1233


and meanings of ultimate reality, the light? Surely then,
there in the body itself, with nine friendly faculties of
freshest powers (five pranic energies and mind, intellect,
memory and self-awareness), and with another team of
ten friends (five pranic energies and five senses),
following the path of truth in meditation, the soul
discovers the sun, Light Divine, self-refulgent, existing
in the depth of the self, otherwise covered under
existential darkness of ignorance.






[Names: Indro, Saphavanname, Guha]
Indra, the soul in pursuit of knowledge and
meditation, discovers the honey sweets of the mystery
of existence revealed in the light of divinity in the cave
of the heart and in the Voice Divine voluble in the folds
of memory. It discovers the secrets of motion and
velocity and of production and generosity in the Word
and in the Light.


Let man bow in reverence, be humble and
generous, and hold the secret, deeper than the deepest
within, on the palm of the right hand. (No pride, no








[Names: Jyotirvrnita, Somapah, Somapa, Somavrddha, Purutamasya, Purutamas]
The man of knowledge discriminates and
separates light from darkness. Let us be fearless, far
from sin and evil. Indra, O man elevated by the light
and inspiration of the spirit of divinity, O defender of
truth and piety, listen and live by these words of the
learned poet and artist.






[Names: Jyotiryajnaya, Anu, Bhuri]
Let there be light radiating from heaven to earth,
and let the fragrance of fire rise from earth to heaven to
join the three worlds for the yajna of human existence.
Let us be far from sin prevalent around through the light
of intelligence. And may the Vasus, sustainers of life
on earth and the sages who command the light of
knowledge as saviours and redeemers, be generous like
celestial oceans with showers of bliss for the man of
might and high charity.







[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugram]
We invoke Indra, generous lord of light and
majesty, and best of men and leaders, for success in this


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 40 1235


battle of life. He listens to our call and prayer, rises
lustrous and blazing, for our protection and progress,
destroying the forces of darkness and winning us the
wealths of light and prosperity in our struggles for


Mandala 3/Sukta 40






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indra]
In this soma-yajna of the creative business of
life when the time is ripe, O lord of honour and majesty,
Indra, we invoke and invite you, lord of bliss, mighty
brave and generous as rain showers. Come, grace the
yajna, and protect and promote the honey sweets of food,
energy and the joy of life.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Purustuta, Piba]
Indra, lover of life and excellence, sung and
celebrated by many, cherish the nectar-sweet of soma
distilled and inspiring for the completion of yajna. Drink
of the delight of life to the lees, to your heart’s content,
grow strong and vigorous, and shower the blessings of
divinity on the celebrants.








[Names: Tira]
Indra, lord of might and majesty, ruler and
protector of the people, celebrated defender of truth and
rectitude, destroyer of darkness and evil, come with all
the nobilities of humanity and promote and perfect this
yajna of ours so that it overflows with the bounties of
life and nature for all.






[Names: Somah, Ksayam]
Indra, lord of knowledge, protector of truth and
lovers of rectitude, all these soma essences of nature,
distilled, seasoned and reinforced, soothing sweet and
inspiring, trickling in drops and flowing in streams,
come to your abode.





[Names: Dadhisva, Somamindra, Tava]
Indra, lover of life and health a long age, the
soma distilled drop by drop in sunlight is selected for
you. Take it, bear it in the stomach, and it will give you
the vigour and joy of a full life.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 40 1237






[Names: Girvanah]
Indra, lord of honour, excellence and majesty,
honoured by songs of celebration, served and pleased
with streams of sweet soma in homage, pray protect
and promote our soma-yajna of life and endeavour. By
you alone is acknowledged the honour, joy and value
of life and karma.






[Names: Indram, Somasya, Somas]
Seekers and celebrants, serve Indra and pray for
honour, excellence and prosperity of imperishable value,
and as I drink of the soma of his grace, so he too waxes
in divine joy as he accepts our homage.






[Names: Arvavato]
Indra, lord destroyer of the clouds of darkness,
giver of the showers of joy and prosperity, come to us,
dynamic celebrants of life and divinity, come from far
and near, receive, acknowledge and cherish these songs
of ours offered in homage.







[Names: Yadantara, Indreha]
Indra, lord giver of prosperity, invoked from
within, from far and from near, come from there,
anywhere, take us and bless us with grace.


Mandala 3/Sukta 41


[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indra, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Haribhyam]
Come lord of clouds and mountains, Indra,
illustrious as the sun, invoked and invited, come straight
to us, wholly without reserve, come for a drink of soma
by horses fast as wings of the winds.


[Names: Satto]
The yajaka is seated for our yajna according to
the season, the seats are fixed and spread in order, the
stones have been used for the morning libations.



MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 41 1239


[Names: Vihi, Sura]
These hymns are sung in honour of Divinity. O
Spirit Divine, come and grace the sacred grass. O lord
of power and majesty, come and enjoy the delicious






[Names: Rarandhi, Ukthesvindra]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, destroyer
of darkness and evil, breaker of clouds and harbinger of
showers, celebrated in song, abide and rejoice in these
celebrations of the season’s prosperity in our yajnas, in
these hymns of divinity and in these holy chants of






[Names: Matayah, Savasaspatim, Somapamurum, Somapamuru, Indram]
Intelligent people love Indra, great and broad
minded, lover of soma and protector of honour and
prosperity, and commander of strength and power, just
the same way as cows love their calf.








Indra, lord lover of soma and commander of
power, rejoice at heart with your whole personality for
the realisation of food, energy and wealth of life. Let
not your devotee and celebrant face an occasion of





[Names: Vayamindra]
Indra, lord of love and power, we, your devotees
and admirers, bearing gifts of homage, sing and
celebrate your honour. And you love us too, our very
shelter and home.






[Names: Mare]
Indra, lord lover of speed and progress, forsake
us not, leave us not, go not far away, come hither close
to us. Lord self-sufficient and self-refulgent, be here
with us. Rejoice.






[Names: Arvancam, Ghrtasnu]
May two carriers with flames of fire, fed on
clarified and bright burning fuel, carry you forward, up
and down, in a comfortable car and reach you to the


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 42 1241


heights of the sky.


Mandala 3/Sukta 42


[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Somamindra, Haribhyam]
Indra, lord of power and honour, come hither to
our soma yajna and taste our soma seasoned with cow’s


milk. Come by your chariot drawn by horses, self-
programmed to reach us.





[Names: Tamindra, Kuvinnvasya]
Indra, lord of power, honour and prosperity,
come taste this pleasure of soma floating in the skies
and distilled by the clouds. Great are the virtues of this
soma, highly soothing, satisfying and inspiring.



[Names: Indramittha, Avrte, Somapttaye, Somapttay]
Let my words of adoration thus inspired rise up
from here and reach across the sky beyond the clouds
to share the ecstasy of soma with Indra.








[Names: Indram, Somasya, Somas]
We invoke and invite Indra, lord of energy and
knowledge, here, with songs of adoration and words of
sacred speech, to have a drink of soma, and we pray he
may come again and again.






[Names: Ssatakrato, Somah, Soma, Jathare]
Indra, father of morning freshness, lord of a
hundred acts of yajna, distilled are these soma essences.
Take these, hold them safe in the treasury of this world
for a fresh lease of life’s energy.


[Names: Vidma, Adha]
We know you for sure, O lord of knowledge
and vision, winner of wealth and bold fighter of battles


for health and energy. And now we pray to you for the
gift of peace and comfort of well-being.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 43 1243


[Names: Imamindra, Agatya]
Indra, lord of power, honour and energy, come

and have a drink of this soma of ours filtered with the


shower of clouds, reinforced with rays of the sun and
accompanied by a diet of barley milk.






[Names: Tubhyedindra, Somam]
Indra, lord lover of power and energy, for your
drink I distil and reinforce this soma in my own yajnic
house of science. It would inspire, strengthen and delight






[Names: Tvam, Kusikaso]
Indra, veteran lord and ruler of the world, we
children of knowledge and humility invoke and invite
you to have a drink of the soma of our own making for
the sake of protection and progress.


Mandala 3/Sukta 43








[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Priya, Somapeyam, Somapeya]
Indra, lord of honour and power, riding your
chariot, come to us for a drink of soma, brilliant and
exhilarating, distilled from the light of the sun. Leave
[Names: These]
fragrant offers of homage invite you to the yajna vedi.





Indra, lord and leader of the nation, come to us
across the multitude of people by your chariot of horse
power to receive our blessings of old and our good
wishes. These worshipful people all with songs of
adoration invoke and invite you, they love to be friends
with you.



[Names: Aham]
Indra, brilliant creator of wealth and master of
development, come fast by your car of motive power as


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 43 1245


a friend to join our yajnic programme of development
for the growth of food, energy and overall prosperity.
With the best of people, in the best of words and thought,
I invite you and welcome you with the best of delicious
offerings to our house of honey sweets.






[Names: Dhanavadindrah]
And while these mighty friendly powers of light
and wind, well employed in a beautiful car immaculately
built, transport you to join the session of developmental
programme as a partner, I pray, O friend, listen to the
adorations of a friend.






[Names: Kuvinma, Kuvinma, Siksah]
O lord, make me a great protector of the cow,
the earth and the holy Word. Lord of wealth and power,
lover of simple and natural ways of living, make me a
brilliant guardian of the people. Make me a man of
sagely vision, a seer of divine mantras, and bless me
with knowledge and immense wealth of imperishable
value.








Indra, adorable lord giver of honour, excellence
and prosperity, the motive powers of your chariot,
mighty and harnessed together like fire and wind,
impetuous forces of potent and generative nature, rise
and fly to the heights of the sky, dividing the space, as
and accelerated, complementarily exhilarated, carry you
forward and transport you to our house of yajnic






[Names: Syena, Yasya]
Indra, lord of power and passion for life, drink
of the potent soma created by the vibrations of generous
nature and brought down from the sky by the eagle
flights of your car for you, lord of love and ambition,
for your people. It is in the ecstasy of soma that you
inspire the children of the earth with energy, and it is in
the ecstasy of that energy that the earth abides and turns
round and round.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 44 1247






[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugr]
We invoke, invite and call upon Indra, lord
creator and giver of knowledge, best of the leaders of
humanity, in this battle between the learned and the
ignorant, for success in discrimination between
knowledge of truth and ignorance, for initiation and
completion of our search for knowledge and in our
battles between the good and evil forces. We call upon
Indra, destroyer of conflict, winner of wealth and
knowledge, sympathetic listener and lustrous lord of
judgement and discrimination, and above all commander
of wealth, power and honour for the good of humanity.


Mandala 3/Sukta 44






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Ayam, Soma, Jusana, Indra]
Indra, lord lover of soma and the honour and
lustre of life, this soma is dedicated to you. Brought by
your carrier powers, let it be for you. To taste of it and
enjoy it, ride the chariot drawn by the powers of horse
and come to us. (The chariot is the chariot of the sun


and the horses are sun-rays.)






[Names: Haryannusasamarcayah, Suryam, Surya, Vidvanscikitvan, Sriyah]
Lord of love and beauty, you shine the dawn.
Lord of light, you illuminate the sun. Lord omniscient,
light of the world, Indra, riding the sun-rays, you create
and augment all the beauty and wealth of the world.




[Names: Dyamindro, Adharayaddharitorbhuri]
The heaven which holds the light of the sun,
the earth which wears the green apparel of light, and
the middle regions between heaven and earth in which
the light shines and the winds blow and where food for
life abounds in plenty, Indra, lord of light and life holds
it all and sustains.






[Names: Jajnano, Haryasvo]
Rising and manifesting, the potent lord of light
and showers of generosity illuminates the beautiful


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 45 1249


world of existence. The lord of sunrays in his arms
wields the blazing weapon of thunder and lightning.
And he holds and sustains the sun and shines self-





[Names: Indro, Apavrnoddharibhiradribhih]
Indra, the sun, with its brilliant rays, uncovers
and manifests his glorious form of light girdled round
by the radiant halo and with his light reaches and re-
reveals the earth and her environment sprinkled over
by cloud showers.


Mandala 3/Sukta 45


[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, come by
the rays of light, beautiful and colourful as the feathers


of the peacock. May none, as fowlers ensnare birds,
catch you. Outskirt the fowlers as a rainbow and come.






[Names: Vrtrakhado, Sthata]
cidarujah.


Indra is the breaker of the clouds. He shatters
the caverns of the demons, routs the cities of sin and
releases the flow of waters. Sitting firm in the middle
of the chariot behind the horses in the uproar like the
sun on the back of the rays, he breaks even the




[Names: Gambhiran]
ivasata.

Indra, lord of life, power and prosperity, you
promote and overfill the yajna and bless the yajamana
like the deep sea and protect the earths, cows and the
grass for them. As a good cowherd protects and feeds
the cows and guards the fodder for the cows, so do you,
O man, protect and promote the yajna. And as the cows
gain the food, and as the rivers and rivulets reach the
sea for self-fulfilment, so would you enjoy the delicacies
of life and reach the Lord, Indra, for self-fulfilment.






[Names: Vrksam]
Bring us wealth of the world, brilliant and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 46 1251


indestructible, as our share, for the devotees in a bond
of covenant. As a gardener with his hook shakes a tree
laden with ripe fruit, so shake for us the auspicious tree
of life and bring down the fruits of wealth and light
from the heights of heaven to help us cross the seas of
the material world.






[Names: Svayurindra, Purustuta]
Indra, you are self-sufficient, self-refulgent,
sovereign, innately honourable, self-growing with your
own lustre, universally admired and celebrated. Be most
kind and benevolent to us, we pray.


Mandala 3/Sukta 46






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Yudhmasya, Ajuryato]
Indra, great are the acts and achievements of
yours, Indra, mighty fighter, virile and generous, self-
refulgent, lustrous and blazing, young, firm and senior,
fierce challenger, unaging youthful, hero of thunder and
lightning, famous and great.








[Names: Mahan]
Great you are, adorable high, mighty winner of
wealth with showers of generosity, fierce and potent,
challenger and vanquisher of adversaries. You alone are
the sole ruler of the world. Go, move the people, make
them fight the adversities and settle them in peaceful
homes.






[Names: Indrah]
Self-refulgent, Indra exceeds all measures of
definition and description. With his own majesty, he is
uncomprehended by all the brilliancies of the world.
With his own omnipotence, he is greater than heaven
and earth. And simple and natural in character and
function, he is greater than the mighty space and time
in existence.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 47 1253




[Names: Urum, Indram, Somasah, Somasa]
Men of peace and vision, fed on the light of
divinity and nectar from heaven, attain and enter the
presence of Indra, vast and deep, potent and lustrous
by nature, all-world comprehensive, guardian of
humanity and promoter of collective vision and
intelligence, in the same way as streams of water flow
and reach and enter the ocean.






[Names: Somamindra]
Indra, lord of power, honour and generosity, the
soma, life’s joy and ecstasy, which by virtue of your
love and law, earth and heaven bear as a mother bears
the baby in her womb, the highpriests of the yajna of
love and nonviolence purify and promote as homage in
service to you.


Mandala 3/Sukta 47






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Marutvan, Indra, Somam, Soma, Marutva, Anusvadham, Anusvadha]
Indra, lord of the winds and showers of favour
from heaven, drink the soma of the light of divinity and
life’s joy and ecstasy to your heart’s content for
inspiration and exhilaration. Let the waves of the honey
sweets of soma quench your thirst and exhilarate your
ambition. You are the ruler and protector of the light
and joy distilled from heaven on earth.






[Names: Sajosa, Sura, Jahi]
Indra, friend of humanity, companion at the
table, commander of the winds and forces of your
auxiliaries, breaker of the cloud and dispeller of
darkness, wise and brave, destroy the enemies, initiate
and push on the battles, and create fearlessness all round
for us.






[Names: Somamindra, Maruto]
Indra, ordainer, preserver and sustainer of the
cycle of seasons, protect and promote the soma distilled
by divines and friends for us according to the seasons.
Protect and promote the Maruts, storm troops of yours
who, in your service, destroy adversaries, dispel


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 47 1255


darkness to bring in the light of reason and divinity,
bring showers of rain and, for you, win and bear the
honour and grandeur of majesty.






[Names: Anumadanti]
Indra, lord of honour, prosperity and majesty,
drink the soma with your friends and stormy troops of
the Maruts who did you proud in battle against the
darkness of serpentine forces, and, O lord of sunrays,
who fight on in the battle for waters, light and cows,
and celebrate with those wise scholars and sages who
exhilarate, exalt and enlighten you in the joy of victory.






[Names: Marutvantam, Marutvanta, Visvasahamavase]
Here on the yajna vedi of our social order, for
the latest modes of defence and protection, we invoke,
exalt and celebrate Indra, commander of the stormy
troops of Maruts, virile and generous with showers of
favours, progressive and advancing in glory, universal
glorious, all patient and all victorious, blazing brave
and giver of strength and fortitude.




Mandala 3/Sukta 48






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Sadyo, Sadhoh]
The newly risen sun, mighty generous and
beautiful, protects the essence of food in order to sustain
and promote it for life. Indra, O sun, drink first the good
and delicious essence of soma mixed with milk as it
suits your desire, and protect and promote the soma for
life.

(The mantra also applies to the brilliant ruler of
the social order, and every new authority of taxation
and the defence, protection, promotion and development
of the people and the order, the primary aim being
happiness and progress of society with taxes as the
means and not the end strictly, with reference to the
needs of the system.


The mantra can also apply to the birth of human
life, its growth and maturity. It can be applied to the
birth of the sun itself in the process of creative evolution.
In short, Indra should be interpreted as the sun, the
human soul, 1.e., jivatma, the creative energy and the
ruler.)


aan


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 48 1257



[Names: Yajjayathastadaharasya]
As you were born, that same day, in the desire
for life and sustenance, you drank the nectar sweet of
soma abiding and maturing in the cloud and on the
mountain, which your loving mother, as life’s creative
spirit, inspired with love, recreated and nourished for
you in the house of your great father much in advance
of your birth.






[Names: Upasthaya, Syadabhi, Prayavayannacarad, Somamudhah, Somamudha]
Having approached the mother, he yearned for
food and saw her breast overflowing with exhilarating
soma of milky food and fiery energy. Growing, going
forward, moving and leading others, strong and wise,
versatile in form and action, he performs great deeds.






[Names: Ugrasturasalabhibhityoja, Tvastaramindro]
Blazing brave, lustrous and impetuous victor
over fastest forces, overwhelming in strength, he is a
versatile master of his manifestation in action. By nature
and birth he commands and controls the creative energy




for development and, drawing it in from nature, he
drinks the soma from all sources of nature and humanity.






[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugram]
We invoke, invite and call upon Indra,
auspicious and benevolent giver, commander of wealth,
power and honour, best of men and leaders, for
protection, defence and victory in this battle of life. He
listens to prayer for protection in battles and rises, a
fierce fighter, destroyer of demons and dark clouds, and
winner of the wealths of life.


Mandala 3/Sukta 49






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Samsa, Somapah, Somapa]
Celebrate and glorify Indra, ruler of the world,
great, hero of noble actions, fashioned by all pervading
divinity, breaker of the clouds and dispeller of the forces
of darkness, whom the brilliancies of the world elect
and heaven and earth consecrate as ruler, and in whom


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 49 1259


all soma-makers and soma-lovers of the world find
fulfilment of their heart’s desire.






[Names: Inatamah]
In battles, none for certain can surpass Indra,
self-refulgent and blazing by his manifold strength. Best
of men and leaders is he, abiding with humanity in
command of his impetuous forces. Most potent is he
and most determined, widest in reach and effect, and
with his essential purity of mind and strength of
character, he frustrates the life and age of the wicked to






[Names: Sahava, Bhago]
Undeterred and victorious in battles, instant in
action, going forward like a current of energy, he
vibrates through heaven and earth. Rich and generous,
lord of power and prosperity, he is to be invoked and
invited in yajnic programmes of enlightened people like
a very shower of rain. And he is kind and generous,
ever gracious, ready like a father with gifts of life and
sustenance for his children.








[Names: Dharta, Vayur, Ksapam, Suryasya, Suryas]
Sustainer of the light of heaven and earth and
the skies, all pervasive, going high and higher like a
chariot, mighty as the wind, controller and ruler of the
people by the people, he is the light of dawn after the
night of darkness, creator and harbinger of new and
higher light, and, like the generous heaven and earth,
giver of our share of food, energy and success in life.






[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugram]
In this battle of our life for food, energy and
victory in the struggle, we invoke, invite and call upon
Indra, best and highest of men and leaders, auspicious
and generous lord of power and prosperity. Bright and
blazing is he, listens graciously when we call upon him
in the battles for defence, protection and success,
destroys the demons of darkness, and wins the wealths
of life for his children and celebrants.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 50 1261


Mandala 3/Sukta 50






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indrah, Indra, Soma, Oruvyacah, Marutvan, Marutva]
Indra, strong, virile and generous, lord creator
and giver of power, prosperity and excellence of life,
commanding the force of the winds and stormy troops
over the wide world, may, we pray, come, and having
come enjoy the offerings made in truth of word and
deed with faith and humility and, pleased with these
offerings, grant fulfilment of the devotee’s mission of






For your fast movement in work and travel I
employ the fastest vehicles and appoint the most
dynamic people in your service by which you come fast
and protect the light of the world for us. O warrior of
the helmet, lord of beauty and grace, may the intelligent
and industrious people help you on here where you may
drink this delicious soma of our making with them.








[Names: Gobhirmimiksum, Jyaisthyaya, Mandanah, Somam, Purudha]
With words of welcome and praise, the
celebrants install and consecrate Indra, the ruler,
generous as showers and saviour promoter of the
common wealth, in the highest office of governance. O
lord ruler, drink and enjoy the soma of the nation’s
prosperity and happiness, and, moving on the simple
and natural paths of progress, initiate, inspire, and bring
us many ways the knowledge, lands and cows required
for the people.






[Names: Imam, Svaryayo, Indraya]
This desire, prayer and programme, O lord of
power and prosperity, fulfil to our heart’s desire over
the earth and extend it to the heights of heaven, with
abundance of cows, horses, golden prosperity and
celebrated means of success and advancement. May
there be glory to you and joy come to the earth. In search
of light and joy, earnest sages and scholars of holy


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 51 1263


Shastras with their understanding, imagination and
resolution, together with the will of the people, compose
this prayer and exhortation for you, lord ruler of the
world, and present it to you for the honour and
excellence of life.






[Names: Sunam, Srnvantamugr]
In this battle of existence, for the sake of success
and victory, we invoke, invite and call upon Indra, best
and highest of humanity, auspicious creator and
commander of power, prosperity, honour and excellence
of life. Blazing glorious is he, intent listener to prayers
of his people, a fierce fighter for protection and progress,
a destroyer of the demons of darkness, evil and poverty,
harbinger of the showers of prosperity and a victor of
trophies and treasures of corporate life.


Mandala 3/Sukta 51




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Carsanidhrtam, Indram, Indra, Vavrdhanam, Puruh, Puru]
Address these comprehensive words of prayer




and celebration with offers of yajna to Indra, lord ruler
and sustainer of the people, munificent, honourable,
growing in power and prosperity, universally acclaimed
and celebrated, immortal in fame and glory, close and
closer day by day in love and exhortation of the people.
Let the songs glorify the lord.






[Names: Satakratum, Sakinam, Vajasanim]
My words of prayer and praise constantly reach
Indra, lord of a hundred great acts of yajna, deep and
munificent as the sea, mighty powerful, leader, source
of sustenance and light, winsome warrior and victor,
shatterer of the strongholds of evil, instant starter and
instantaneous reacher, sanctifier of the home, presiding
presence and ceaseless shower of bliss.







[Names: Akare, Vivasvatah]
In the house of wealth, the celebrant of Indra is
praised. Indra loves and appreciates the simple and
honest prayers and celebrations of the innocents. In the


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 51 1265


house of light and splendour, he feels pleased. O man,
praise and pray to the challenger of evil forces and the
destroyer of adversity.






[Names: Nrnamu, Purumayo, Jihite]
Indra, let all honour and adore you with holy
words and songs of worship, you who are mighty brave
and best of men and leaders.


Indra is irresistebly brave, strong against the
violent, highly meritorious, and he goes forward for a
test of victory. All alone he rules over the heavens and
the enlightened children of the earth. Salutations to the
sole lord ruler of his world of light and life.






[Names: Purvirasya, Indraya]
Many and ancient are his blessings and defences
among the people. Abundant wealth does the earth hold.
The regions of light, the sun light, the greenery, the
flowing waters and vapours, the veteran citizens, the
forests, all these hold, preserve and protect many forms
of wealth for Indra, ruler of the world.








[Names: Tubhyam, Bodhyapiravaso]
Indra, lord of excellence, accept and cherish the
songs of the celebrants which bear the wealth of divine
praise in your honour, which bear the truth of existence
with gratitude. O lord omnipresent, lord of vitalities,
friend and shelter of all, know this, and bring for the
celebrants the latest methods of protection and good
health and long age.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Marutva, Tava, Sura, Sarma]
Indra, leader of heroic warriors, in this business
of the world, protect the joy and excellence of life as
you protect the joy of those who resist danger and
violence to their lives. O lord commander of the brave,
intelligent people of imagination and yajnic action adore
and pray for your ways of conduct and restful haven for
home.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 51 1267




[Names: Jatam, Puruhita]
Indra, lord of love and majesty, invoked and
invited by many, come with the storm troops of the
winds and vitalities, and, here in the world, taste, protect
and promote our soma of life’s joy and excellence
distilled by our friends and vibrant youth, since as you
arose and manifested to view, all the brilliancies of the
world adored and investitured you with power and
honour for the sake of grandeur and glory in life.






[Names: Apturye, Maruta, Tebhih]
This lord Indra is a friend and universal ally.
The Maruts, vibrant youth and stormy troops of the
nation, stand by him and exhort and exalt him in the
speedy march of the nation to victory. With these, may
Indra, consuming, absorbing and transforming the dark
energies of life to light and joy, drink the soma distilled
in the generous yajamana’s own house.






[Names: Idam]
O lord and ruler of wealth, power and potential,
drink the exciting soma of this generous yajamana,




elaborately distilled with vigour and splendour and
offered with the voice of homage and reverence.


[Names: Yaste]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, whatever and
whoever be in accord with your power and pleasure,
pray control, direct, administer and order the body-polite
into settled form, and may all that give you pleasure
and satisfaction, lover and creator of soma peace as you
are.





[Names: Sirah]
Indra, heroic lord ruler of the world, whatever
you receive into the body of your treasury for asset and
energy, may that wealth and energy inspire your mind
with knowledge and enlightenment, and strengthen your
arms for potential development of the wealth of nations.


Mandala 3/Sukta 52




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Dhanavantam, Indra]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 52 1269


Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence,
accept and enjoy in the morning our gift of homage and
yajna mixed with roasted rice and curds and sanctified
and offered with the chant of holy words.





[Names: Purolasam, Tubhyam]
Indra, accept and enjoy the purodasha cooked
and seasoned with soma, relish and grow strong. The
sweets of offerings flow to you.


[Names: Vadhuyuriva]
Accept and eat the purodasha and cherish the


voices of exhortation offered by us like one impassioned
for the love of his wife.






Indra, lord of universal word of wisdom and
discrimination, accept and enjoy our purodasha offered
in the morning session of yajna. Great is your word and
light and creative action of cosmic dimensions.








[Names: Madhyamdinasya]
Indra, lord of light and power, accept, enjoy and
sanctify the taste and joy of the yajnic rice and pudding
of the mid-day session of the yajnic business of life
which the singer, celebrant and generous devotee eager
for the success of his endeavour profusely offers in
worship and homage to you with words of love and





[Names: Trtiye, Purustuta, Rbhumantam, Rbhumanta, Siksema]
O lord of knowledge and poetic imagination
admired and revered by many, in the third and closing
session of the day’s programme of yajnic action, accept,
enjoy and exalt the value of our gift of rice and pudding
which we, doing our best in thought and action, bring
and offer to you, lord in command of food, energy,
knowledge and expertise of the art of living.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1271




[Names: Pusanvate, Pusanvat, Apupamaddhi, Sura, Somam, Soma]
We prepare the roasted grain and curds for you,
giver of health and nourishment, lord of sunbeams
possessing the fastest means of motion. O breaker of
the clouds of rain and dispeller of the shades of darkness,
heroic brave, master of knowledge, relish the cake and
drink the soma with your friends and supporters and
commandos of the speed of winds.






[Names: Prati, Bharata, Divedive, Somapeyaya, Somapeya]
Bear and bring roasted rice and purodasha in
homage fast and full for this hero of the best of leaders
and warriors. Indra, fierce and fiery hero of arm and
speech, may the forces of equal form and performance
rise for you, dedicated as you are to the soma of life’s
dignity and excellence, and may they exalt you with
glory day by day.


Mandala 3/Sukta 53










[Names: Indra, Rathanga, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Indraparvata, Vitam]
Indra and Parvata, sun and cloud, come on the
grand chariot of light, wind and rain, bring us lovely
foods and drinks of energy for the heroic people, O
powers divine and generous, receive the offerings in
the yajnas of love, faith and non-violence, feed on the
music of the songs, and wax with the hymns of






[Names: Tistha, Somasya, Somas, Piturna, Sacivah]
Maghavan, lord of wealth, power and prosperity,
come and stay at peace in comfort, do not go away, feed
yourself at pleasure in company with us on the soma
joy of excellence. Indra, lord ruler of a noble people as
you are, as a child clings to the hem of the father’s cloak
for love and security, so do I, with sweet words and
prayer, seek shelter and support in you for security and
peace.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1273




[Names: Samsavadhvaryo, Edam]
Let us sing in praise of Indra, O high-priest of
non-violent yajna, join me in response to my voice and
we’ ll create a lovely song of exaltation for Indra. Come,
sit on the holy grass of the yajamana and then let there
be an excellent song of jubilation in honour of Indra.






[Names: Jayedastam, Yada, Soma]
Indra, maghavan, lord of power, prosperity,
peace and passion of life, the wife is the real spirit of
the home. She is the haven of conjugal bliss. There may
the horses yoked to your chariot bear you. And whenever
we prepare the soma, then let Agni, the fire of life, be
the messenger of passion and inspiration for you.






[Names: Para, Yatra]
Maghavan, lord of power and prosperity, go far,
and come back home. Brother, both ways there is a
meaning and purpose for you, here as well as there,
where there is the start (with harnessing of the horses)




or the finish of your grand chariot of power and speed
(with unharnessing of the horses at the terminal).





[Names: Apah, Somam]
Indra, lord of peace and joy and brilliance, drink
the soma, go home, the delightful haven, there is your
blessed love, there is the start and finish of your grand
chariot journey for the brilliant battle, there is the
harnessing and unharnessing of the horses. And there
you are abundant with charity.






[Names: Angiraso, Visvamitraya]
These lovers and creators of food, scholars of
the secrets of the body system and inspirers of pranic
energies, various children of the light of heaven, heroes
of universal vitality, giving health and wealth of life to
the darling friend of humanity cross over the seas of
existence through a hundred yajnic programmes of
action.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1275




[Names: Rupamrupam, Triyad]
Indra, lord of knowledge, power and action,
manifests infinite forms of his own divinity, extending
his essential and wondrous powers for us as he, lord
omniscient of the truth and law of existence, reveals
himself every moment, constantly irrespective of time
and season, through his own mantras, mystical formulae,
three ways in meditative yajnas from the light of






[Names: Divinity, Mahan, Visvamitro]
Great and glorious is Indra, Rshi, all-seeing, all-
revealing, generator of all forces of nature and,
manifested in all these, vibrates in and by all these and
in great minds. He wields and sustains the river and the
ocean, the flow of nature’s energy as well as the ocean
of nature’s particles of matter and energy. And he
watches all humans for what they do and what they
ought to do. He is the friend and well-wisher of the
world since he showers his gifts of generosity on all.
Universal is his love since he blesses us with guides
and teachers who know and show us the right ways of








[Names: Hamsa, Devebhirvipra]
Like hansa birds singing and rejoicing by the
beauty and majesty of cloud showers, O Kushikas,
vibrant sages and scholars, seers of nature and divinity,
divining into the mysteries of omniscience, watching
the ways of vast humanity, joining together with the
divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity, in the
non-violent yajnas of love and faith enacted and
conducted, sing songs of Divinity in celebrative words
of holy joy and drink the nectar sweets of soma replete
with the power of peace and divine ecstasy.






[Names: Upapreta, Raja, Sudasah, Sudasa]
O brilliant scholars and sages, teachers and
preachers, heroes of action, dedicated to Divinity, yajnic
charity and fraternal expansion, go forward together,
awake and awaken the community, release vibrant
energy and motive powers for the attainment of wealth,
honour and excellence. Let the refulgent ruler break the
clouds of rain, dispel the darkness all round, east, west,


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1277


north, south, up and down below, and then perform the
yajna of unison on the wide earth.






[Names: Indram, Visvamitrasya, Bharatam, Bharata, Janam]
I serve and worship Indra who protects both
heaven and earth and the firmament between the two,
the people of this all bearing mother earth and the wealth
and power of the friendly world of humanity.






[Names: Visvamitra, Karadinnah]
Friends of the world, sing songs of exaltation
and gratitude for Indra, lord of thunderous arm and
power who blesses us with wealth and all round potential
for success.






What do the cows do for you in the country of
the selfish! They yield no milk, nor do they raise the
flames of yajna fire. Bear and bring up the hoard of the




miserly and the avaricious in the open, subject them to
law and control those who cower under pretence of
squalor and poverty.








[Names: Sasarpariramatim, Suryasya, Suryas, Sravo]
Living knowledge and language flowing from
Eternity given through direct experience of the eye,
physical, mental and spiritual, preventing ignorance and
superstition, is daughter of the sun, gift of the omniscient
lord, which, like the dawn, revealing the vast reality of
existence, brings in and extends an immortal and
imperishable stream of awareness and experience
among the brilliant devotees of Divinity.






[Names: Sasarparirabharat]
That stream of language and knowledge,
flowing ever anew from the lord of light, bearing new
life and age with fresh energy is the same which the
grey-haired veteran scholars of cosmic vitality earlier
gave to me, and the stream bears superior kind of food
and nourishment for body, mind and soul for the seekers
among all the five classes of dynamic people.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1279






[Names: Sthirau, Sari, Indrah, Saritoraristaneme]
Let the oxen of the chariot be strong and steady,
let the axle be strong, let the shaft never break, may the
yoke never be damaged, May Indra, lord of inviolable
chariot and action, be friendly with us to give us strength
and to renew whatever is wearing out.





[Names: Balam, Balam]
Indra, Spirit of life and vitality, give strength to
[Names: Give]
and vital energy to our children and our youth. You alone
are the giver of strength, energy and vitality.





[Names: Aksa]
Aksha, centre hold of knowledge, vision and


power, bring us the centre strength of the Khadira wood
for our chariot of life. In our body and mind, as in the




motion of a chariot, infuse light and lustre. O master of
strength and light, universally admired, inspire us with
strength and courage of the conviction, forsake us not
in the streaming flow of life and time.






[Names: Ayamasman, Svastya]
May Vanaspati, lord of the light of life, never
forsake us. May the chariot of life never hurt us. May
the lord and life be good and kind to us and our homes
while we are riding the chariot until we reach the
terminal and the horses are released.






[Names: Indrotibhirbahulabhirno]
Indra, potent lord of honour and prosperity,
come to us today with ample modes of best and highest
modes of protection and give us the joy of life.
Whosoever hate us may, we pray, fall down, and
whatsoever we all hate, that, we pray, may the breath of






[Names: Simbalam, Ukha]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 53 1281


Indra, lord ruler of the realm, just as the arm-
smith heats the steel and tempers the axe, or the gardener
plucks off the shimbala flower, or the boiling pan,
bubbling over, throws out the froth and foam, so does
the commander of the army throw out the enemies.






[Names: Navajinam]
The brave take no cognition of the pain of
arrows. They lead the greedy opponent anywhere,
feeling that he is just a human animal. They do not
demean the weak foot-soldier by a bold horse-warrior,
nor do they lead the horses by an ass in the forefront.






[Names: Bharatasya, Bharatas, Jyavajam]
Indra, these boys, followers of the veteran
the horse like a spirit inspired and send out the twang
of the bow string in battles and contests always without




Mandala 3/Sukta 54








[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Prajapati, Vaishvamitra, Prajapatir, Vachya, Rshi, Imam, Sasvat, Srnotu]
The celebrants create and raise this inspiring
song of praise again and again for all time in honour of
the great adorable lord of mighty yajnic cosmic action.
May Agni listen to our prayer with all the controllable
blazing lights and forces. May Agni, eternal light of
life, with all divine powers listen to us.






[Names: Mahi, Yayorha]
Offer ecstatic songs of celebration in honour of
high heaven and vast earth. Knowing these, and desiring
fulfilment, man goes forward for the light of heaven
and dominion over the earth. Surely in the songs of
heaven and earth, the divine powers of nature and the
best of humanity join together and rejoice in the yajnic
battles of life.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1283






[Names: Yovorrtam, Idam]
O heaven and earth, may your universal law of
divinity be realised in truth in our human world across
the globe. Be good and kind to advance us to greatness
and glory in comfort and well-being. Agni, O lord of
the dominion, this song and yajnic offering is in honour
of heaven and earth. I serve with the best of effort and
thereby move on to the jewels of life.






[Names: Narascid, Surasatau]
O heaven and earth, abiding in and by the
universal law of existence, veteran sages of knowledge
and voice of truth know you and obtain the fruit of their
desire. O mother earth, the pioneers and leaders of
humanity too, knowing both of you, in the battles of
the brave and struggle for life’s prizes, achieve the jewels
of their heart’s desire.








[Names: Dadrsra]
Who knows here for certain, who can say, which
path for sure leads to the lights of the Divine? (He
knows.) Who can divine into the secret laws of the
farthest mysteries? Who actually see even the nearest
and closest operations of these? (He.)






[Names: Kavirnrcaksa, Nana]
The one omniscient poet creator watching the
entire world of humanity comprehends, illuminates and
oversees the two worlds of heaven and earth, both
rejoicing in accord yet sustained apart by one law of
existence, in the cosmic womb of nature’s divinity,
making one but various home as the birds’ on the same






[Names: Samanya]
Alike yet apart far off at the end, they abide in
orbit ever awake and youthful, strong and stable, and
moreover they are called twin sisters since their very
birth, dyava-prthivi, heaven and earth, by name.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1285






[Names: Visvedete, Ejad]
These two, heaven and earth, one together for
sure, yet separate and distinct in identity, holding and
sustaining all the great earthly and celestial created
objects, do not deviate from their orbit. Vibrating yet
constant and stable, the one universe, existence born in
all its variety, moving, flying, expanding all round, is
sustained (by its sole lord and master creator).






[Names: Sana, Devaso]
I study the ancient and eternal, yet ever new,
heaven and earth, twin creation of our great father
creator, just like our brother and sister, wherein brilliant
forces of nature, celebrants of the Divine creator, with
their powers and attributes abide and operate in the wide
open paths of space in existence.








[Names: Srnavannagnijihvah, Mitrah, Mitra, Adityasah, Adityasa]
O heaven and earth, I sing this song of divine
praise and celebration for you. May simple and noble
hearted people of natural truth and honesty, Mitra,
universal friends, brilliant rulers and administrators,
Varuna, powers of justice and discrimination, youth,
Adityas, enlightened people of blazing genius, and poets
of open and expansive mind and intelligence may hear
this and proclaim the truth with a tongue of fire.






[Names: Hiranyapanih, Devesu, Slokamasre]
Savita, creator and giver of light and life, lord
with the golden arms of sunrays and a noble tongue of
fire, descends from the heavens thrice, protecting,
sustaining and advancing us in our yajnic programmes
of life. O lord of light, Savita, hear our song of
celebration and exaltation, diffuse the light, sweetness
and fragrance among the nobilities of humanity over
earth and divinities of nature in space, and create and
then bring us all round prosperity and well being.




MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1287




[Names: Sukrt, Pusanvanta]
May the brilliant Tvashta, divine creator and
maker of forms and institutions, noble of action and
generous of hands, self-possessed of light and wealth,
and keeper and observer of the laws of truth and science
of yajna, bring us all those gifts of prosperity and well
being for our protection and advancement. Rejoice ye
Rbhus, experts of yajna, and yajakas rich with food and
fragrance for nourishment. The clouds on high, the
mighty mountains and the soma stones are up and ready,
the yajna is organised, conducted and accomplished.




[Names: Vidyudratha, Maruta, Sarasvati]
sahaviram turasah.


Stormy troops of Marut commandos riding
fighters, truly disciplined, prompt and powerful, worthy
of honour and reverence, lightning smart, and mother
Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and language of
command, may, we pray, listen and bring us wealth








[Names: Visnum, Purudasmamarka, Urukramah]
May our songs and yajakas, following the divine
path of the creator of life’s honour and excellence, reach
Vishnu, omnipresent lord of marvellous actions. Great
is he, mighty his deeds and gifts. Even heaven and earth,
dyavaprthivi, ancient and eternal, ever youthful mothers
of life, cannot violate him.






[Names: Indro, Visvairviryaih, Purandaro]
Indra, sustaining and preserving both heaven
and earth with universal vitalities like a father and
guardian, pervades and fills both with his divine power.
O lord commander of terrible forces, breaker of clouds
and destroyer of darkness, shatterer of enemy forts,
create and develop a lot of wealth and bless us all with
that wealth, power and honour.







[Names: Nadsatya, Yuvam]
Ashvins, imperishable complementarities of
nature and humanity such as heaven and earth, sun and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1289


moon, heat and cold, father and mother, working in
cooperation, together as in a circuit of energy, are my
sustainers like parents and care givers like brothers and
sisters. Their kinship itself by birth and nature 18 worthy
and venerable.


Ashvins, you always abide strong and stable as
givers of our wealth, honour and fame and, intrepidable
as you are, you protect and promote the gift and the
giver by acts and means which are not selfish nor
ungenerous but which are liberal and philanthropic.






[Names: Mahat, Sakha, Rbhubhih, Rbhubhi, Puruhuta]
Poets, scholars and visionary sages, great and
auspicious is that name and reputation of yours since
you rise to be world renowned celebrities in the roll of
honour of the social order of Indra. O lord, Indra,
approved, invited and invoked by many, friends with
these dear enlightened experts and sagely scholars,
refine this corporate intelligence and sharpen this vision
of ours for common progress and prosperity of the nation
of humanity.








[Names: Aryama, Varunasya, Varunas, Aditiryajniyaso, Yuyota]
May Aryama, lord of justice, Aditi, unimpaired
fertility of Mother Nature, and sages dedicated to yajna
protect and promote our vows of the discipline of
Varuna, lord of rectitude, intact and unviolated. O Spirit
of Divinity, ward off the causes of childlessness and
sterility from our path of life so that our course of home
life may be blest with progeny and cattle wealth.






[Names: Devanam, Purudha]
Agni, messenger of the devas, i.e., vibrations
of the forces of nature and voice of the visionary teachers
of the wisest of humanity, arisen many ways and bearing
all-round knowledge, may speak to us in our state of
open, uncoloured and unvitiated mind and bring us the
tolerance and forgiveness of the earth, enlightenment
of heaven, peace and coolness of waters, light and life
giving vitality of the sun, and the vastness of expansive
space with stars and planets. And may all these forces
and personalities listen and perceive our signals and be
in contact with us.


UAL oul


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 54 1291




[Names: Srnvantu, Adityairno, Aditih, Aditi, Sarma, Marutah]
Let the raining clouds, mighty mountains and
constant stars at peace, ecstatic participants with the
earth and cosmic energy, receive our signals. Let the
constant inviolable energy of the cosmos with light of
the stars radiate and reach us. Let the winds provide us
the joy of well being and peaceful shelter.






[Names: Sada, Bhago, Puruksoh, Purukso]
May the path be straight and clear, full of wealth
and prosperity. O brilliant and generous powers of
nature, fill the herbs with honey to the full. Agni, brilliant
and generous power, may honour and prosperity forsake
me never, nor my friends, during our friendship that is
abiding. And may I be blest with wealth and a house of
plenty and generosity.


TURAL त त 7





[Names: Svadasva, Sravamsi, Visvan, Satrunaha]
Agni taste and relish the oblations offered, shine
and illuminate knowledge and energy all together, and
let food, energy and knowledge flow towards us. You
win all those, and those enemies in battles for victory.
Be happy and kind at heart and let all the days of life be
bright for us.


Mandala 3/Sukta 55








[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Prajapati, Vaishvamitra, Vachya, Rshi, Usasah, Usasa, Vrata]
Before the dawns of primeval time, which arose
and shone bright, later reflecting and illuminating the
ordained tasks of the forces of nature, arose Mahat, the
first manifest principle of imperishable Prakrti in the
depth of oceanic space. Great and One is the living spirit
and glory of the divine refulgent forces of the universe.





[Names: Puranyoh]
Agni, lord and light of the world, in this universe
and its business of knowing and doing, we pray, may
the brilliant forces of nature and humanity never oppose


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1293


and hurt us, may the primal [0181116 energies of parental
sustenance never neglect and damage us, may the one
great principal bright and breathing spirit in the primal
forms of existence never hurt us. Great and one is the
life and glory of the multiple divinities of the universe.






[Names: Purutra, Samiddhe]
My desire and ambitions are great and many,
they soar high and far in search of holy fulfilment. I
pray I may realise them well in solemn yajnic action,
shine myself and illuminate the ancient traditions. Let
us all speak the truth, sing songs of Divinity when the
fire is rising in flames of yajna, and let us exalt the
universal law of Divinity operative in the universe.
Great, glorious and one is the life and spirit of the life
and spirit of the divinities of natural force.






[Names: Samano, Saye, Sayasu, Anya]
One self-refulgent ruler, constant and unvariable
spirit and presence pervades the inexhaustible forms of
Prakrti, dormant in inert matters and energies, and
moving and extending with waves and currents of water,
light and other energy forms to the sunrays and green




forests. One mother Prakrti, bears the individual form
such as the baby, the other, Divine Spirit, rules and
sustains it. Great and glorious is the one living,
breathing, omnipresent and omnipotent spirit of the
inexhaustible variations of nature’s divinities.






[Names: Aksit, Anurut, Antarvatih]
Life abides in the ancient forms and in others,
later ones, asserting with the desire to be, in the new
born ones and in the mature youthful ones, and fertilising
the unfertilised. Great is the glory of the generous and
refulgent powers of nature’s Divinity, one and only one.






[Names: Sayuh, Mitrasya, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitras]
Agni, vital heat of life, pervades far and farthest,
dormant or manifest, child of two mothers, akasha and
vayu, Space and cosmic energy, moving and operating
freely without bonds, by itself, All this is within the laws
of the one supreme lord, universal friend and controller
of the universe. Great and glorious is the life and action
of the living forces of nature, one and indivisible.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1295






[Names: Dvimata]
Agni, self-refulgent child of two mothers,
cosmic space and cosmic energy, universal yajaka in
cosmic yajna and, on the seats of yajna such as earth,
moves on in its orbit fixed by the Divine and shines and
abides in the vast space. Happy celebrants bear and offer
joyous songs of homage to the sun and the cosmic energy
of Agni. Great and glorious is the life and refulgence of
the divinities of nature, one and only one.






[Names: Surasyeva, Antarmatiscarati]
All that comes into the light of the brave
refulgent sun ever on the move and striking everything
at the closest and farthest seems on the left side of the
light, inferior. Source of light and intelligence for the
world, it moves through and across the objects in the
womb of cosmic space. Great and glorious is the life
and vital power of the divinities of nature, one and only
one.








[Names: Vapumsi]
He that pervades all, ancient and eternal self-
refulgent creator and harbinger of light and knowledge,
great and glorious, vibrates wide awake in all these
modes of Prakrti by his beauty and majesty. Wielder
and sustainer of all forms and institutions, ever manifest
and eloquent, speaks to us in the soul, that is the great
and glorious life breath of all the divinities of nature
and humanity, one and absolute without a second.






[Names: Visnurgopah, Agnista, Vishnu]
protective, wielding and sustaining all the dear immortal
homes of existence, preserves and promotes the highest
food and agents of life such as heat, water, air and the
earth. Agni, vital heat and light of life’s vitality, knows,
reaches and maintains all the regions of the universe.
Great is the glory of the life breath of the divinities of
nature and humanity, one and only one.


HAUL


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1297




[Names: Nana, Syavi]
Two twins, night and day, manifest in many
forms and reveal all those many forms. One of them
shines bright, the other is dark. The dark one and that
which is bright are sisters. Great is the glory and power
of the divinities of nature, one and undivided.






[Names: Mata, Rtasya]
Where mother and daughter, day and night,
heaven and earth, generous as cows, yielding
there I offer worship, O lord ruler of the world, to you
in the house of universal truth and law. Great and
glorious is the life and action of the divinities of the
universe, one, undivided and absolute.






[Names: Anyasya]
Kissing and caressing the other’s child, 1.6., the
cloud, which is a concentration of vapours from the
earth, the mother sky waxes with joy and laughs with
thunder. By which process of nature’s, by which region




of space, does she hold the milk of life in the breast?
She receives it from the waters of the universal order
and waxes, and the earth grows with nourishment from
the nectar waters of the sky. Great and one is the glory
of the divinities of nature.


(The earth too, as one of the mothers, kisses and
caress the heavens’ child, sunlight, and waxes with joy.
She fills her breasts with nourishment with rain from
the skies and feeds both human life and nature. The
vapours then rise and shower down, completing the
cycle of nature’s law.)


HAUS




[Names: Padya, Pururupa]
The earth bears and sustains many forms of
innumerable variety. The high heaven, caressing the sun,
sustainer of the three regions of the earth, middle region
and the region of light, stays above. Knowing this, I
move freely in the house of Rtam, the cosmic order.
Great is the glory and one the variety of the Lord’s





[Names: Infinity, Pade, Sadhricina]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1299


Positioned both inside the same one wonderful
house of space, one of them is hidden in the dark, the
other is manifest in open day light. Their path of
movement and their goal is one and the same, universal,
and yet it is different and separate, (they meet and yet
they never meet). Great is the glory of the Infinite
Divine, one and yet different.






[Names: Sasaya]
Let the ‘cows’, day and night, heaven and earth,
stars and planets, move and shake and shower the nectar
milk of light and life, vibrant and full, abundant and
fresh anew. Great is the glory and gifts of Divinity,






[Names: Yadanyasu]
The one omnipotent lord, sun and shower of the
days and nights, roars with creative passion in all regions
and directions of skies and space, and he plants the seed
of life in the multitudinous variety of the forms of the
other, Prakrti. He alone is the beauty and majesty of the




nights as the moon, he is the blazing splendour of the
day as the sun and the ruling law and lord of the universe.
Great is the glory and life breath of the inexhaustible
divinities of nature, one, inviolable, absolute.






[Names: Virasya, Solha]
Come ye all people, let us sing and celebrate
the wondrous valour and vibrancy of this great hero,
Indra, the soul. Sages and scholars know of him. Six
and six, five and five horses draw his chariot, (these
being five perceptive faculties and one intellect, five
volitional faculties and one mind, five principal pranic
energies and five subordinate pranic energies). Great is
the glory and majesty of the lord of divine variety, one
and only one.






[Names: Devastvasta, Purudha]
Self-refulgent and generous lord of existence
as Tvashta, maker of forms, and as Savita, generator
and giver of light and vitality, inspiring and pervading
the universe, creates, nourishes and sustains his children
and all these worlds of the universe in many ways and


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 55 1301


thus manifests himself in infinite forms and ways. Great
is the glory and unity of the divine forms of his creation
and of the divine breath of life in them.






[Names: Mahi, Srnve]
Indra, omnipotent lord creator, inspires the great
and united heaven and earth with light and life, and
they both are blest with the splendour and generosity
of this lord. And I, brave and free, blest with honour
and prosperity of the divine gifts of heaven and earth,
hear of the glory and generosity of the lord. Great is the
glory and great the gifts of the lord’s divinities, all one
and united.






[Names: Imam, Purah, Sarmasado]
Like a brilliant ruler who is a benevolent friend
of his people, and like the warlike heroes, leaders,
pioneers and citizens who bring victory and prosperity
to their motherland, Indra, omnipotent lord creator,
abides by the heavens and by this mother earth of ours
which contains all our wealth and sustains all her
children. Great is the glory and great the gifts of the
lord’s divinities, all one and united.








[Names: Nissidhvarista, Indra, Sakhayaste]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, auspicious
and generous is the world of your creation, soothing
are the herbs, energising the waters, wondrous the
wealth earth bears and sustains. O lord of beauty and
majesty, let us be friends with you, sharers of your
honour and excellence. Great is the glory, one the spirit,
and absolute the power and spirit of your divine
manifestations. Let us be one with glory and divinity.


Mandala 3/Sukta 56








[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Prajapati, Vaishvamitra, Vachya, Rshi]
Original and inviolable are the laws and
observances of divine forces in nature and in humanity.
Enchanters cannot transgress them, wise men of steady
mind do not violate them. Neither heaven and earth,
nor scholars free from hate and jealousy with all their
knowledge, nor the fixed mountains can break or bend
the strong and resolute.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 56 1303






[Names: Tisro]
One constant and unmoving bears six burdens.
The moving ones go round the one which is sun and
shower and the universal law. Three great regions go
round in space in constancy. Two remain hidden in the
cave of mystery. One is apparently seen.


(The one unmoving is Ishvara who creates
Mahat and five elements from Prakrti. Three great ones
are Bhu, earth, Bhuvah, the middle region of the sky,
and Svah, the region of light, of which the higher two
are unseen while the earth is seen. Another interpretation
is that the one unmoving is the sun, the six are the
seasons. The one constant can be interpreted as Prakrti
also which bears Mahat and the elements and the three
greats as sattva, rajas and tamas. The mantra is mystical
and mysterious and the beauty is deep in mystery.)





[Names: Tripajasyo, Tryanikah, Purudha]
The sun and shower and the Law is lord of three
worlds, bears the forms of the universe, feeds the three
worlds like the mother cow, sustains all and fathers the
children of existence. Three are his beautiful forces,




sattva, rajas and tamas. Lord of highest power, he rules
and sustains all. Lord of power, sun and shower, he bears
the seed of all the universal forms of existence.






[Names: Abhika]
Immanent in these stages of the evolution of
forms such as stars and living beings, the lord knows
them all and 1, in love and devotion, invoke and chant
his gracious name. The celestial currents of water and
energy love to flow for him, each in its separate path, to
him and from him.






[Names: Rtavariryosanastisro]
Self-refulgent creator is the ruling lord of light
and life in all cosmic acts of creation and sustenance.
Three are the rolling floods of light, air and waters, in
heaven and skies and on the earth. Of the vision, thought
and expression of the sagely poets and Rshis, he is the
origin and inspiration. Three are the streams of causal,
subtle and physical energy with cosmic truth and law
flowing to the life on earth like youthful maidens rushing


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 57 1217


to meet their lover. Three are the regions and three the
lights, agni (fire) on earth, vayu (air and electricity) in
the sky, and aditya (light) in heaven, sustaining life in
the cosmic yajna in three sessions.






[Names: Trira, Tridhatu]
Savita, lord creator and giver of light and life
and inspiration, bring us three of the choicest blessings
of wealth and excellence day by day in three sessions
of daily yajna. Create and give us the wealth of three
metals of excellent order. O lord of honour and
excellence, saviour and sustainer, O heaven and earth,
O mother Sarasvati, bear and bring us the patience,
courage and fighting strength for winning the victories
of life.





[Names: Mitravaruna, Apascidasya]
Thrice does Savita shower us with inspiration
and energy from the light of heaven, so do Mitra and
Varuna, refulgent powers of nature and humanity,
friendly, just, and generous of hands. Indeed, the flowing
waters, heaven and earth and the wide firmament, all




pray for the gifts of light, wealth and power from this
lord Savita for yajnic advancement in life.






[Names: Triruttama, Rtavana]
Three are the best and highest lights, formidable
and indestructible: fire, electricity and the solar energy.
These three brave and heroic powers of the lord of light
and life’s energy shine in the world. Heroes of truth
and cosmic law and the fluent light of rectitude, vibrant
and tempestuous, blazing brilliant far and wide, may,
we pray, shine like divinities thrice and threefold in the
yajnic battles of life by virtue of the lights of heaven.


Mandala 3/Sukta 57






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Sadyascid, Indras, Indra]
Let the man of discrimination know and
appreciate my language and intelligence, rich and
versatile, freely moving like a cow over the wide wide
pasture, i.e., field of knowledge, which always readily
yields the abundant milk of knowledge. Agni and Indra,


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 57 1217


the powerful and the brilliant, are great admirers of this
understanding and language of knowledge.






[Names: Indrah, Visve]
Indra and Pusha, the power and the pranic
energy of divine nature, generous and inexhaustible with
open hands like happy friends, shower the gifts of the
light of heaven and reveal it in the language of divinity.
Brilliancies of the world rejoice in the acquisition of
this light of knowledge and language. O Vasus, scholars
of the first order, I wish and pray I may benefit from the
pleasure and peace of your gifts of light, knowledge
and the language of divinity.








[Names: Accha]
Those young women who love and desire the
virility and vitality of a youthful husband, knowing that
they have come to maturity and there is full vitality of
impregnation therein, approach the man in marriage with
reverence and love in a graceful manner and, like cows
in season, receive and bear and rear the great gift of a


baby having a handsome body of full and perfect parts.


(The image in this mantra describes not only
the relationship of man and woman in married life but
also the relationship of heaven and earth and the rain of
fertility from the clouds in the process of natural






O men and women abundant and generous as
clouds, joined together in home yajna, with the best of
mind in the best of words, I revere and celebrate heaven
and earth, man and woman joined together with heart
and mind in marriage as two-in-one. O men, these
women are showers of love and joy and prosperity for
you. They rise high, sweet and soothing and beautiful,
equal partners in the family yajna and divine procreation,
worthy of respect and reverence as the flames of yajna
fire.





[Names: Tayeha]
O Agni, fire of home yajna, gracious lady of the
house, honey sweet is your tongue like the beautiful


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 58 1217


flame of light which radiates intelligence and wisdom
far and wide and wins admiration among the noblest
people. With this sweetness and light of speech and
grace of manner, bring in on the vedi of home yajna all
the sagely souls worthy of reverence and let them drink
of the nectar sweets of a blessed home.


(The mantra also implies the women’s
contribution to the material prosperity and cultural grace
of a happy home.)






[Names: Tamasmabhyam]
Agni, presiding power and light divine of the
yajnic home, wonderful is the flame and fragrant flow
of your generosity which swells and showers like the
streams of a cloud without reserve or fear or favour.
With that same abundant flow, pioneer intelligence,
noble wisdom and universal mother fertility, O treasure
home of prosperity and power omniscient and


Mandala 3/Sukta 58








[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Dhenuh]
The holy cow, dawn of the Voice Divine,
overflowing with love and beauty of Eternity, the light
and meaning of the Voice like the calf borne in the womb
of exuberant mystery, moves around at freedom. The
dawn riding a radiant chariot, harbinger of a new day,
she bears and brings the light of truth, and the song of
the dawn is awake, O Ashvins, teacher and disciple, the
light and life of the world is live.






[Names: Suyug, Jarethamasmad]
O Ashvins, harbingers of the light of life, right
thoughts and intelligence, vision and wisdom move
towards you by the paths of universal truth and law and
rise higher as children look up to the parents and rise.
Come up front, ward off from us the disposition of greed
and poor calculation, teach us the right ways of dealing
with the business of living, and we shall do what your







[Names: Suyugbhirasvaih, Slokamadreh, Kimanga]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 58 1217


Ashvins, harbingers of light and life, destroyers
of suffering and poverty, listen to this prayer of the
yajamana liberal as the cloud: Come by fastest horses
well yoked to the chariot of the wheels of whirlwinds.
O dear friends, our breath of life, haven’t the sages of
yore said of you that you are instant fighters against
want and deprivation?


sus i




[Names: Mitraso]
Ashvins, scholars, teachers, specialists, come by
whatever fastest means of transport you can at the
earliest and study our plans and projects. All the best
people of the world invite and call upon you. These
cherished programmes and achievements on earth and
plans of solar energy are for your consideration which,
as friends, they dedicate to you for approval and
application in advance of the sunrise.






[Names: Tirah, Puru]
Ashvins, scholars of science and energy of light


and winds, cross over many many regions of earth and
skies and come here. O lords of power and prosperity,




let your songs of praise ring among the people. Reach
here by paths of brilliant sun-rays. O destroyers of
suffering and poverty, all the treasures of sweets and
pleasure are for you.






[Names: Puranamokah, Punah]
Ashvins, leaders of the human nation, old and
constant is your friendship, blissful, restful and pleasing
as a holiday home. Your wealth and power lies in the
culture and philosophy of the self-sacrificing pioneers.
Let us together, equal and alike, doing friendly and
benevolent acts, again and again, join, sing and






[Names: Vayuna, Nasatya, Somam, Soma]
Ashvins, experts of arts and sciences, equal
to the distressed, abundantly generous, come you both
by the winds yoked as horses to the chariot, without
delay, without injury to yourselves, join us and drink
the soma of joy.


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 58 1217






[Names: Asvina, Ratho]
Ashvins, scholars and masters of science and
technology, may abundant energy and maintenance and
comprehensive success come to you to your heart’s
indefatigable in effort, with words of thanks and praise,
approach and assist you. Your chariot built with the
materials of nature on the principles of natural force
and law, powered with solar energy, spatial electricity
and vapours of the clouds, and accelerated by
thunderous friction of gears goes round earth and heaven






[Names: Somastam, Somasta]
Ashvins, leaders of the nation’s defence and
governance, the power and glory of the soma of our
success is overflowing, with the highest sweetness of
honey, pure as well as shared by you and all. Come,
taste of it and enjoy and celebrate, and protect it in the
home. Your chariot indeed is wondrous of form and
perennial in performance. Surely the action and effort
of the creator and builder and of the maker of soma is




come to success. Let us call it a day!


Mandala 3/Sukta 59






[Names: Mitra, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Mitro, Mitrah, Mitra, Mitraya, Mitra, Mitra, Lord]
speaking to people, and directing them through their
direct experience, inspires and moves them to act and
exert. Mitra holds and sustains the heaven and earth
and the children of the earth. Mitra fully watches the
people and their actions without a wink of the eye.






[Names: Aditya, Adit, Siksati]
Mitra, lord of universal love, Aditya, lord self-
refulgent, may that person be active and alert in action,
blest with ample food and drink and the joy of life who
abides by your divine law and learns and makes others
learn the ways of divine discipline and action. O lord,
the person under your gracious protection is neither
conquered nor killed by any mortal. Sin and evil reach
him not, much less touch and pollute, either from far or


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 59 1217
from near.






[Names: Anamivasa, Adityasya, Adityas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
Free from physical and mental sickness and
disease, all rejoicing by virtue of the wide earth, under
instructions of the divine Word, strongly organised and
moving freely over the vast expanse of mother earth,
abiding by the rule and discipline of the self-refulgent
sun, may we, we pray, live under the benign eye of Mitra,
lord of universal light and love, and have the benefit of
his favour and pleasure.






[Names: Ayam, Tasya]
Mitra, lord of universal love and friendship, is
worthy of reverence and worship. He is worthy of
service and giver of peace and comfort. He is the brilliant
ruler of the vast social order of the world, all wise by
nature and manifestation. Let us act and conduct
ourselves so as to have the benefit of the love and favour
of this lord worthy of homage and service in yajna and
enjoy the bliss of his kindness and grace.








[Names: Mahan, Tasma]
Aditya, lord self-refulgent and inviolable, is
great, approachable with humility and faithful offerings
in yajna. Inspiring people with courage and self-
confidence to act and exert themselves, he is the giver
of peace and joy to the thankful celebrant. For such a
friendly lord most adorable, offer this cherished stream
of oblations of havi into the holy fire.






[Names: Dyumnam]
The care and protection, wealth and
enlightenment of the self-refulgent sustainer and
ordainer of humanity is eternal and omnificent, most
wonderful and inexhaustible, glorious and infinite.






Mitra, lord of universal love, light and
friendship, having created the heaven and earth along
with their light, food and energy, manifests himself by
the expansive universe, and transcends them both by


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 60 1217






All the five classes of people offer service and
oblations to Mitra, radiant lord of love and friendship,
who commands all desirable power and protection. That
lord sustains all the brilliant and generous powers and
forces of nature and humanity.






Among the brilliant and generous people and
among the average people too, Mitra, radiant lord of
universal love and friendship, creates and provides for
fulfilment of the desires of the man of renunciation
dedicated to yajnic offerings, in response to his
observance of the chosen vows of holy discipline.


Mandala 3/Sukta 60






[Names: Rbhus, Indra, Rhbus, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Rbhu, Theha, Yabhirmayabhih]
O Rbhus, leaders of science and technology,
your intelligential fraternity is right here and here only,
where men of passion and determination advance and
reach those goals by that art and those techniques,
miraculous ones, by which you, warriors of the bow
and children of the skies, instantly changing roles and
of the fruits of yajnic endeavour.






[Names: Yabhih, Yena]
O Rbhus, by the knowledge and powers with
which you make and break the clouds, by the skill with
which you resuscitate and rejuvenate the cow from a
skeleton and win back the earth with the shield of
protection, and by the mind with which you create the
energies and design circuitous movement, by these you
rise to the brilliance of divinity.







[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Saudhanvanaso, Samibhih]
Men of intelligence, wisdom and vision, enjoy


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 60 1217


the love and friendship of Indra, lord omnipotent of the
world. They perform actions worthy of the son of
infallible man. Warriors of the bow, dedicated to noble
action with good intention and righteous resolution,
doing acts of goodness leading to peace and joy, attain
the state of immortality.






[Names: Indrena, Ssriya]
O Rbhus, leaders and pioneers of humanity,
commanders of knowledge, science and power, warriors
of the bow and rovers of the skies, when the soma is
distilled and the nation is on top, go forward and rejoice
with the honour and splendour of the land, sharing the
chariot as friends with Indra, and then be one with the
plenty, prosperity and grace of the people who love you.
There is nothing equal to your valour, courage and noble





[Names: Dhiyesito, Somama]
Indra, lord of power and splendour, come with




the Rbhus, commanders of plenty and energy of the
winds, and shower the soma distilled and supervitalised
into the bowls of the supplicants. Lord of magnificence,
inspired with love and gifts of intelligence, come to the
house of the generous giver and rejoice with the people
and the pioneers.






[Names: Rbhuman, Rbhuma, Sacya, Imani, Purustuta]
Indra, lord commander of the intelligent and
energetic wielders of power, sung and celebrated by
many, give us the gift of joy and the grace of holy vision
and action in this session of yajna. These daily sessions,
and the laws of nature alongwith the dharmic and karmic
observances of humanity move but only in your service.






[Names: Rbhubhir]
Indra, giver of life’s honour and excellence,
come with the visionaries of light and intelligence, come
with leaders of dynamic action, hastening, strengthe-
ning, vitalising, come here and listen to the celebrant’s
song of thanks and praise offered in the yajna. Come


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 61 1217


with fulfilments of a hundred cherished desires, leading
men by hundred ways of knowing and doing in the
business of yajnic living.


Mandala 3/Sukta 61






[Names: Usha, Devata, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Rshi, Purani]
O Dawn, lady of light, mighty with spirit and
energy, replete with intelligence and revelation, mistress
of grandeur, accept and enjoy the celebrative address
of the admirer. Queen of splendour and generosity, old
yet ever youthful, versatile sustainer of many, loved and
adored by the whole world, you go on the rounds in
accordance with the laws of truth in pursuit of your own






O Dawn, brilliant and generous harbinger of the
day, immortal divinity, shine and illuminate. Come
riding the chariot of the beauty and majesty of the moon,
inspiring mind and speech with the truth of life and




nature. May the well directed horses, which are the
resplendent rays of the sun, bring you here on earth.






[Names: Usah, Samanamartham]
O Dawn, breath of nectar and torchlight of
immortality, you rise upfront and shine above all the
worlds of the universe. Ever new and ever young,
serving one master and one purpose, you go round and
round as the wheel of time.






[Names: Svarjananti]
Like the thread spun and woven extensively
with the cloth, expansive with the rays of light, the
radiant queen of the day, the dawn of light, goes on and
on the round, effulgent, generous, creating and giving
paradisal bliss and inspiration from close to the sun
expanding over to the ends of the earth.






MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 61 1217




[Names: Accha, Urdhvam]
Come ye celebrants, bear and bring songs of
praise with offers of homage to the dawn over there,
radiant and inspiring queen of light. Up there in high
heaven she holds the nectar sweets and splendour of
life, glorious, sublime, and blissful to the sight of


ATUT: 1S Il

[Names: Rtavari, Ayatimagna, Usasam, Usasa]
Observing the Law of Divinity, descending from
the heights of heaven, the dawn is revealed by the
showers of light, rich in wealth and splendour,
illuminating the earth and skies with wondrous beauty.
Agni, enlightened performer of yajna, watching
the rising dawn shining in glory, and praying to the
Almighty, you attain the wealth of your heart’s desire.







[Names: Rtasya, Usasamisanyan, Usasamisanya, Mahi, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Purutra]
In observance of the laws of nature, moving the
rise of the dawns, the sun, mighty cause of energy
showers, pervades and illuminates heaven and earth.
The supernal energy of nature, powers of attraction and
repulsion, sustains both heaven and earth and the sun
as well as the golden moon, in various ways.


Mandala 3/Sukta 62
Devata: Indra-Varuna (1-3), Brhaspati (4-6), Pusha (7-






[Names: Savita, Soma, Mitra, Varuna, Vishvamitra, Rshi, Jamadagni]
Indra and Varuna, powers of energy and water,
these circuitous revolutions of your energy, highly
valuable and undeniable, are not to be opposed or
damaged for both of you in the interest of protection
and progress, for, if they are damaged, where would be
that honour and reputation of yours by which you bear
and bring food and comfort for your friends?


Aue





[Names: Ayamu, Purutamo, Sajosavindravaruna]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 62 1217


This first and most eminent yajaka of all,
desirous of wealth, honour and excellence of permanent
nature, invokes and calls upon you. Hence you, Indra
and Varuna, harbingers of power and peace, together
with the winds, heaven and earth, triple energies of wind,
light and earth, listen to the call and prayer of mine.






[Names: Asme, Asman, Saranairava]
Indra and Varuna, may that wealth of power and
peace be for us. O Maruts, heroes of the winds, may
that man power of all-heroic order be ours. May the
highest powers of nature and humanity protect us with
shelter and modes of defence, and may our joint
programmes of developmental yajna, and mother earth,
and divine knowledge and speech bless us with
imperishable gifts of honour, excellence and prosperity.






[Names: Brhaspate, Rasva]
Brhaspati, ruler and sustainer of the wide world,
master of universal vision and wisdom and guardian of
holy speech and yajaka, be pleased to accept our gifts
of homage and yajaka. O lord universally adorable, grant
us the jewels of wealth and honour in favour of the


generous yajamana.






[Names: Sucim, Anamyoja]
O lovers and seekers of knowledge and the holy
Word, in your programmes of education and
development, bow in homage with words of gratitude
and offers of yajna to Brhaspati, master and guardian
of universal knowledge and human speech, with a pure,
unsullied mind and intellect.


O lord and master, I love and pray for
indomitable courage and valour (to follow the path of
universal truth and righteousness).




[Names: Vrsabham, Brhaspatim]
I bow in homage to Brhaspati, master of
knowledge and speech, mighty generous and creative,
indomitably brave, exponent of all forms and variations
of world knowledge and world language, most eminent
and brilliant of scholars among men, the one and only
one worthy of choice and homage.





[Names: Iyam, Pusannaghrne, Pusannaghrn, Asmabhis, Sasyate]
MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 62 1217


O brilliant master, giver of mental and spiritual
nourishment, this is the latest song of homage and
reverence composed and sung by us for you in honour
of your light of knowledge and flames of fire (for world



[Names: Vadhuyuriva]
Please to accept, appreciate and cherish this song
of mine, inspired, true and exciting, and protect the love,
thought and beauty of imagination enshrined in it like a


The One who sees all the things and living
beings and all the worlds directly and instantly in all
their variety, and watches all of them together as one,
in truth, that lord giver of life and sustenance, we pray,
be our saviour and protector.





[Names: Dhiyo]
We concentrate and meditate on the radiant glory




of self-refulgent lord Savita, lord giver of light and life,
who may, we pray, inspire and energise our mind and
intelligence. That glory alone is worthy of choice and
meditation.





[Names: Devasya, Bhagasya]
Inspired, energised and enlightened with far-
sighted vision and intelligence, we pray for the divine
gifts of generous, gracious and glorious Savita, lord
giver of life, light and inspiration.





[Names: Devam, Bhih, Namasyanti]
Men of piety, knowledge and intelligence,
inspired with will and light divine, who control and
direct their mind and sense, bow to generous and self-
refulgent Savita in meditation, adore him with songs of
ecstasy and offer him thanks and homage with yajnas
and self-sacrifice.





[Names: Somo, Rtasya]
The stream of peace and joy in meditation flows
on by the paths of the mind and reaches where the senses


MANDAL - 3 / SUKTA - 62 1217


and mind terminate, the very seat of light divine and
origin of the spirit’s will to move into the existential flow.






[Names: Anamiva]
May Soma, spirit of peace and joy in nature,
blissful as the moon, create healthful foods and drinks,
free from disease, for us humans, bipeds, quadrupeds
and other animals and fulfil our physical and material
needs and desires.






[Names: Asmakamayurvardhayannabhimatih, Somah]
May Soma, stream of life’s vigour and joy,
invigorating health, prolonging life, and resisting,
challenging and eliminating devitalising toxins and
diseases, all enemies of health and age, abide in our
home, our seat of yajna, and our body.





[Names: Mitravaruna, Madhva]
May Mitra and Varuna, sun and shower, heat
and cold, fire and water, and friends of the nation
inspired with justice and rectitude, fertilise and energise




our lands and environment with waters and yajnic
enrichments, protect and promote our cows and other
cattle wealth, develop our milk products, and make the
earth flow with streams of milk and honey. May all these
powers do good to humanity, our lands and our homes.





[Names: Urusamsa, Draghisthabhih]
Mitra and Varuna, friends of humanity,
dedicated to justice and values of rectitude, universally
adored and exalted with homage, dedicated to
observance of truth and purity of life and conduct, you
shine and reign by the strength of your will and vision,
dexterity of your art and expertise and the acts of
persistent patience and endurance.






[Names: Grnana, Patam, Somamrtavrdha]
Mitra and Varuna, friends of humanity dedicated
to love and justice, exalted by life and acts of truth,
exalting universal law and the flow of existence,
celebrated by men of vision dedicated to rational and
empirical experience of reality, abide in the house of
truth and righteousness on the vedi of yajna, protect,
promote and enjoy the beauty, peace and ecstasy of life.




| AUM ॥






[Names: Original, Sanskrit, Text, Transliteration]
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda)


English translation by


[Names: Tulsi, London]
(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


Sanskrit Text as per publication of














[Names: Paropakarini, Sabha, Ajmer, Publisher, Vijaykumar, Govindram, Hasanand, Delhi, Edition, First, Price]
RIGVEDA Vol. II by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.












[Names: Particulars, Page, Seis]
—3:0::—


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


(vi)


DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION



[Names: Vowels]
(* 27


[Names: Consonants, Guttural]
Palatal


[Names: Lingual]
+


sa
Gu
6








[Names: Dental, Labial]
CS)” ® im


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDALA 4


Mandala 4/Sukta 1






[Names: Agni, Varuna, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Tvam, Amartyam]
Agni, light and fire of life, brilliant and
impassioned people always kindle you to action. Quick,
relentless and refulgent, a very home of rest and peace
and light as you are, they kindle and raise you with their
best and noblest effort and action. O men, join, honour
and respect this divine and imperishable power among
humanity to full force of illumination, generate this holy
power, intelligent, universal and living light for all,
generate and develop it to full beauty and delight over
the wide earth.





[Names: Varunamagna, Rtavanam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




And O light and fire of life, Agni, bring in your
brother and complementary power, Varuna, the very
spirit of cool, peace and justice of life, and direct him
toward the noble and brilliant performers of yajna. Bring
him well with best thoughts and intentions, bring the
lover of yajna, highest and most venerable, partner in
social organisation, observer of the laws and operations
of universal truth and goodness, refulgent as the sun,
sustainer of humanity, brilliant ruler, universally
accepted and consecrated by the people.






[Names: Sakhe, Agne, Marutsu, Tokaya]
Agni, O friend, loving and gracious, destroyer
of enemies, just as a swift horse by a fast moving chariot
on the highway and the wheel of Time drives the master
to the destination, so come, hasten your friend Varuna,
power of peace and justice, to us. O refulgent master of
knowledge, being friends with Varuna, the winds and
the solar lights of the world, the people and brilliant
eminences of the world, reach us, bring us the peace
and joy of life. Blazing brilliant and gracious, bring
peace and well-being for our children and grand
children. O lord of light and knowledge, love and justice,
peace and beauty, destroyer of evil, bring us peace,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 3
beauty and the graces of life.





[Names: Varunasya, Varunas, Yajistho, Sosucano]
Agni, O lord and master of knowledge and
enlightenment, we pray, you keep off from us the
displeasure of Varuna, highest authority of justice. Lord
blazing brilliant and purifying power worthy of
invocation, harbinger and disseminator of divine gifts
and fragrances, ward away from us the entire hate and
enmity the world might have toward us.






[Names: Varunam, Usaso]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, pray
be our first and last preserver and protector, closest at
this rise of the glorious dawn. Delighting, rejoicing and
giving, join Varuna at the yajna and bring us peace and
joy. Noble yajaka, responsive to our call, come and bless
us with goodwill and well-being.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Asya, Srestha, Suci]
Open, highest and most wonderful among
mortals are the gifts and actions of this brilliant,
generous and glorious ruler, pure and bright like the
heated clarified ghrta of the inviolable cow, lovely and
profuse like the liberality of the abundant cow, mother
earth, and the inexhaustible speech of self-refulgent lord
of omniscience. He watches all and his gifts are directly






[Names: Trirasya, Anante]
Three are the supreme manifestations of the
generous refulgent Agni, true, lovely and universally
cherished which arise and shine. Pervasive everywhere
in endless space in the presence of the infinite divine
lord of the universe, he shines pure, refulgent, generous
and beautiful.


(This mantra refers to the various manifestations
of cosmic energy which is the existential potential of
the Supreme Lord Creator operating at different levels
in different modes. In other words, we may call it the
manifestations of Adi-Shakti, the Lord’s consort Prakrti,
originally manifesting as sattva, rajas, and tamas.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 5


On earth, Bhuloka, it is fire and magnetic energy,
which is agni. In the middle regions of the sky,
Bhuvahloka, it is electrical energy, which is vayu. In
the higher regions of light, Svahloka, it is aditya, solar
energy. The sun too manifests in three different phases,
at dawn, at noon and in the evening when it is setting.
The efficacy of the sun in these three phases is different.


At the individual human level, it is physical
energy, mental energy and spiritual energy. In yet
another way it is the vital heat which maintains the
physical body, i1.e., annamaya kosha; it is pranic energy
which maintains the pranamaya kosha and the
manomaya kosha; and it is the higher psychic energy
which maintains the vijnanamaya kosha and the
anandamaya kosha. Of these three, one feeds, the other
energises, and the third illumines.


However, mantras such as this have to be
interpreted in a state of meditation, and since meditation
is the birth-right of every human being, we are free to
divine into the mystery of the mantric vision in our







[Names: Rohidasvo]
That Agni, harbinger of light and warmth of life,
destroyer of darkness and evil, loves, pervades,
illuminates and rules over all the forms and places of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the world. He is the yajamana, receiver and giver of
sweets and fragrances. Riding a golden chariot drawn
by ruddy horses and waves of light, delightful of tongue
as well as flames of fire, majestic in body form, always
rejoicing and emanating joy, he is a very treasure home
of prosperity, happiness and excellence like an assembly
house of power, governance and wealth of a nation in






A brother yajaka on the yajna vedi of creation
and governance, he awakens and enlightens the people.
To him they move on to consecrate him in the seat of
power and yajna with a long rope of powers, obligations
and controls for balance. He abides in the seat of
governance and justice fulfilling his roles, generous and
brilliant, achieving the dreams and realities of the
nation’s imagination.





[Names: Agnirnayatu, Dhiya, Dyauspita]
And may that Agni, leader and lord ruler,
knowing everything full well, lead us to that valuable
jewel wealth of this world, loved, coveted and enjoyed


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 7


by the brilliant divinities which the immortals of all the
world with their skill and intelligence created and which
the heaven and father creator showered and consecrated
as real and true.






[Names: Apadasirsa]
That Agni, which brings us the jewel wealth of
the world, first arises from its original cause in the
Mahat-tattva, the first existential evolute of Prakrti. Then
it manifests in the sun as light, and then in the middle
regions of space as vayu, electricity. Moving without
head and feet, concealed yet joining youthfully the
inmates of various regions, light in the sun, cloud in the
sky, homes of people and depth of the earth, it operates




[Names: Prasardha, Sparho]
With study and appraisal discover and find
energy and power in the original source of cosmic waters


and the abode of fire, i.e., the solar energy, currents of
wind in the sky and magnetic energy of the earth, energy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and power which is lovely, youthful and unaging,
energising body systems and giver of beauty and joy.
For the generous human soul, seven darling yajakas,
i.e., five pranas, mind and intellect create this vital
energy in the body.






[Names: Asmakamatra]
Here in our human world, in this programme of
energy discovery, our parental seniors and thinkers
dedicated to the yajna of natural and psychic energy sit
at peace in a state of tranquillity, searching and invoking
the light of the dawn and discover and open out the
showers of energy waves locked up inside the clouds
and mountains.






[Names: Pasvayantraso]
Those parental seniors and researchers, breakers
of the clouds and shatterers of the mountain caves break
open the treasures of energy and refine and intensify
the power. Others who watch them and their programme
fully describe their achievement how, equipped with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 1 9


practical apparatuses, dedicated to their mission, they
discover the light and thus, with their intelligence and
sentiment, strengthen and do good to humanity.






[Names: Drlham]
They, best of men, leaders and impassioned
pioneers, with a searching mind pursuing the light
concentrate and meditate on the sun, all pervasive, ocean
deep, strong and bottomless treasure hold of infinite
light, language and knowledge, holding and at the same
time controlling and directing the radiation of light rays,
and they, with words of divine vision and mysterious
meaning open up and reveal the wealth of light, word
and knowledge.






[Names: Tajjanatirabhyanusat]
First they study, reflect and meditate on the
seven ultimate forms of mother speech and thus realise
and know it in the essence through word, meaning and
the self-existent reality behind the word. And having
realised the content of divine speech, they celebrate the
red lights of the dawn bearing and revealing that lord
of speech manifesting by the splendour of the dawn of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








The dense darkness of the night is dispelled, the
solar region shines and the light of the dawn ascends in
all her splendour. The sun rises and shines on over the
fields and plains of the wide world, watching the acts
and ways of right and wrong among the mortal
inhabitants of the earth.






[Names: Adit, Visve, Mitra]
And then men of vision, wisdom and knowledge
light, celebrate and proclaim the might and splendour of
Agni, bearing and enjoying the jewels of wealth gifted
by the light and energy of the sun, fire and electricity.
May all the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity,
and Mitra, the sun, friend of life, and Varuna, the spatial
waters, givers of love, peace and justice, be good and
true to the wish and desire and intellectual efforts of
humanity in all homes and over all the paths of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 11




[Names: Accha, Susucanamagnim, Sucyudho]
Let us sing and celebrate Agni in hymns of
praise, Agni bright and pure and purifying, yajaka who
invokes and awakens the bounties of nature for us,
sustains the world and is most worthy of love and
reverence, who fills the udder of the cows with milk
without injury and augments the holy acts of humanity
like the food purified and sanctified by the sun.





[Names: Visvesadmaditiryajniyanam, Agnirdevanamava]
Like the indivisible and inviolable sky for all
the performers of yajna, like the welcome guest for all
the householders, Agni, universal light and lord
omnipresent and omniscient, may, we pray, taking up
the protection and promotion of noble humanity and
renewal and refreshment of the environment, be the
harbinger of peace and prosperity for children of the
earth. (So may be the teacher and the scholar.)


Mandala 4/Sukta 2




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Hota]
Agni which is immortal among mortals and
refulgent among divinities of world and nature, itself
ever true and dynamic destroyer of evil, is fixed in the
cosmic order of law and rectitude. By virtue of its own
greatness it is the invoker and harbinger of natural
bounties, most worthy of reverence with homage of
oblations for the purification, illumination and
inspiration of mankind. And Agni is held, recognised
and realised in the heart.






[Names: Dita]
Agni, lord giver of light, child of omnipotence,
great and sublime, giver of mighty strength, here in this
world of ours, risen today to full glory among both
divines and humans born and initiated, you move as
the light and energy of yajna, carrying the fragrance,
inspiring and engaging all who are pure and generous
and move by the brilliant paths of nature and rectitude.







[Names: Atya, Antariyase]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 13


Agni, light of the world, I know and realise your
waves of cosmic energy ever moving in circuit at the
fastest with the energy of the cosmic mind, creating and
increasing, sprinkling and showering with water and
energy of ghrta, red as rays of the dawn, blazing as the
sun, with which you move across the world of existence,
inspiring and engaging the mortals, immortals and the
human children of the earth.




[Names: Aryamanam, Varunam, Varuna, Svasvo, Maruto]
edu vaha suhavise janaya.


Agni, lord of light and power, commanding
instant waves of communication, fastest modes of
transport, immense wealth and infrastructure for
development and prosperity, come and, for these people
dedicated to the yajna of corporate programmes of
common development and progress, bring Aryaman,
power of justice, Varuna, spirit of freedom, choice and
excellence, Mitra, love and friendship for all these
people, Indra, energy of the clouds and electricity,
Vishnu, universal spirit of cosmic unity, Maruts, energy
of the winds, and the Ashvins, light of the sun and
soothing beauty of the moon.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Goman, Ilavan]
Agni, giver of light, power and prosperity, peace
and justice, commanding wealth of cows, sheep and
goats, horses, and unity and productive cooperation in
yajna you are friend of the people, leaders and pioneers,
blest with lands, knowledge and holy speech of divinity,
possessed of vital strength, destroyer of the wicked,
supported by the people and assistants. Presiding over
the assembly, you know great and long lasting is this
wealth of the nation, broad based and rising high and
vast. Come, take over the house of government which
is beyond pollution, corruption and destruction.







[Names: Yasta, Bhuvastasya]
Whoever bears the sacred fuel for your fire of
yajna by the sweat of his brow, or tires himself out, not
sparing himself while coming to you to serve, Agni,
come to your own, and rising, be the protector of his
land and person against all violent bullies and sinners.






[Names: Yaste]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 15


Agni, giver of light and wealth, ruler of the
world, in the home where the generous house holder
spares food and bears it to you for the hungry, where he
welcomes, appreciates and regales the happy guest,
where, dedicated to the divinities and brilliant people,
he lights the fire and worships Ishwara in full faith, in
that house, O lord, let there be abundant wealth, peace
and stability.






[Names: Yastva, Usasi]
Whoever sings in praise of you night and day,
who with gifts in homage does you proud with things
dear to you, save that man of generosity in his home
from sin, come like a knight of golden horse and rescue
him from evil.






[Names: Yastubhyamagne]
Agni, giver of light and wealth of life, whoever
offers you honour and service in faith, ever ready,
holding up the ladle full of holy ghrta and offering
oblations to the imperishable fire, overflows with wealth
without fear of deprivation, and the sin of the evil doer


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.










[Names: Yasya, Pritedasaddhotra]
Agni, youthful light of yajnic human action,
brilliant and generous giver as you are, whatever mortal
offers you the yajna of service, with spirit of sacrifice,
love and non-violence, well performed with reverence
and faith, you accept and enjoy. May that service and
spirit of charity bring him the grace of heaven. May we
too be performers and promoters of that yajna, and may
that grace be ours too.






[Names: Cittimacittim, Raye]
Let the man of knowledge and discrimination
distinguish between sense and wisdom on the one hand
and non-sense and ignorance on the other, between the
broad open paths of right living and the covert ways of
wickedness, and between mortals and mortals. And O
giver of knowledge and light of discrimination, Agni,
for the sake of honour and well being and for our
children give us worldly wealth and liquid assets and
protect our immortal merit of rectitude.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 17






[Names: Kavim, Atastvam]
Wise visionaries, bold intrepidable scholars and
sagely teachers, maintaining the inmates, disciples and
seekers of knowledge in their home schools, teach them
the knowledge and discipline of life. Therefore, O master
and ruler, Agni, by practical steps you go, observe and
assess these wonderful schools and their people. They
are all open and worth seeing.






[Names: Tvamagne, Ratnam]
Agni, giver of light, knowledge and power, ever
fresh and youthful, noble guide in proper ways of living,
ruler of the wide world, friend of the people, bear and
bring the beauty, peace and jewel wealth of life for the
protection and advancement of the intelligent admirer
who has distilled the soma of life’s joy, confidently
conducts the business of life to success, conquers
suffering unto overflowing happiness and refines the
manners and graces of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Adha, Ratham]
And Agni, O ruler of the world, as we, dedicated
to you, work for you with our hands and feet and indeed
with our body and soul, so may all the intelligent people,
cooperating with you with the work of their dexterous
hands, move together as by a chariot car and take you
and all to the destination of truth and rectitude toward






[Names: Adhd, Divasputra, Angiraso]
And then, like the seven rainbow colours of the
lights of mother dawn, let us raise ourselves to seven
classes of intelligent and dynamic functionaries: ruler,
presidents of councils, army, commanders, people,
services and ancillaries. Let us create leaders and
visionary pioneers of knowledge and education. Let us
all rise to be the children of light, dexterous as divine
architects, dear as vital breath of life, and then, cleansing
and brightening up the well provided prosperous people
who are wealth of the motherland, let us break the clouds
for rain and shatter the mountains of difficulty
converting them to opportunities.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 2 19




[Names: Sucidayan]
Agni, ruler of light and humanity, let us all
together, dedicated to truth and rectitude, rise and shine
as did our forefathers, earliest and later ones, and pure
and sanctified, singing songs of divine praise, breaking
new ground upon the earth, let us rise to the heights of
power and discover new lights of existence, and so may






[Names: Sukarmanah, Sucanto, Indramur, Agnim]
Brilliant people of noble action, deeply
committed to holy pursuits and aspiring to rise to the
stars, fanning their life to light and purity in the crucibles
of knowledge and experience as they refine gold and
temper steel in the furnace, raising the flames of fire
and exalting the honour and excellence of the nation,
sitting and discussing in conferences, extend the bounds
of terrific energy and knowledge of the earth and skies
unto the stars.






[Names: Martanam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




As the master proclaims the material wealth of
his house of prosperity, as the commander proclaims
the forces under his command, so do you, O lustrous
ruler, reflect the presence around you of noble and
brilliant leaders and scholars. And thus do the multitudes
of people, like the rise of dawns, plan and prepare for
the rise and progress of the land just as the producer
master prays for the generous cloud and wishes for the
health and age of life’s longevity.






[Names: Akarma, Anunamagnim, Purudha, Anunamagni]
We act in service to you, O Lord Agni, giver of
light and life to the world, by which alone we can be
called good performers. The brilliant dawns, wearing
the divine mantle of truth and showers of light, perfectly
and variously adorn the fire-divine, perfect and glorious
eye of the self-refulgent Lord of the universe, which is
the sun.







[Names: Ucchocasva, Puruvara]
These are the words of thanks and praise we


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 21


poets speak for you, Lord Omniscient Agni. Please to
accept these, consider, shine and rise to reveal the light
of your glory to our vision. Make us rich with the wealth
of divinity. Lord universal friend of the many who
choose, lead us to glorious honour and excellence in


Mandala 4/Sukta 3






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Rudram, Rudra, Agnim, Agni]
All ye people of the land, before the unexpected
and inconceivable thunder and lightning, light the fire
and, for the protection and advancement of your
peaceful, non-violent yajnic social order in the midst of
heaven and earth, appoint the golden gloried ruler, a
very Rudra, saviour of the good, a terror for the evil,
hota, a yajaka and not a grabber or hoarder, but one
inviolably dedicated to truth and Dharma.





[Names: Ayam, Arvacinah]
This is the seat of office we create and offer to
you. It is offered as a young loving wife dressed in her


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




best finery offers her love to her husband and protector.
and self prepared, take this seat and see these are the
people looking up to you.




of Asrnvate adrpitaya manma nrcaksase sumrlikaya


[Names: Devaya, Sastim, Samsa]
I offer a hymn of praise and appreciation as an
expression of my thought, O wise and virtuous ruler of
the world, to you, brilliant, immortal and divinely
blissful, who listen attentively and politely without pride
and arrogance, watching the human situation all round
in the interest of common good. Accept and approve of
the hymn I present, be gracious as a cloud of showers, a
maker of soma and a creator of honeyed joy.






[Names: Tvam, Kada]
Agni, ruler of humanity, you know the truth and
law of existence, you think freely and rightly too. Know
the truth and character of this nation of ours. Let them
know too of the truth and law of right knowledge and
conduct for the sake of right action. When will there be
proper and friendly discussions of yours and assemblies
in your yajnic house of law and government?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 23






[Names: Katha, Varunaya, Varuna, Katha, Mitraya, Mitra]
‘What is our sin, or crime or misconduct?” Agni,
ruler of the world, when and why would you speak thus
to Varuna, lord of justice and rectitude? to the lord of
light and knowledge? to the bountiful? to the earth and
the dear motherly woman? to the chief of law? to the
man of power and prosperity?






[Names: Subhamye, Parijmane, Rudraya]
Agni, ruler of the world, when would you be
growing with and among the intellectuals? And growing
with and among them, when would you speak to and
about the eminent in knowledge, strength, peace and
good will, all round goers, truthful and the landed
farmers? to the chief of justice about the killers of





[Names: Sarave]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, when and how would you speak to and
about the great creator and producer for nourishment
and growth, Pushan, to and about Rudra, destroyer of
enemies, the generous yajaka, the giver of holy materials
for yajna? How would you pray to Vishnu, universally
celebrated lord sustainer of the world? Lord generous
and peaceful at heart, how would you speak to and about
the great forces of defence against violence and






[Names: Marutamrtaya, Marutamrta, Prati]
Agni, O Jataveda, lord ruler and master of
knowledge of things in existence, how would you speak
to and about the sacred law of truth, about the forces
swift as the winds? And when asked, what and how
would you speak about the mighty great leaders bright
as the sun among people? How would you speak to and
about the excellent, abundant and inviolable sky? O
master of knowledge, rising higher and higher in
awareness, achieve the light, reaching unto the solar



[Names: Rtena, Krsna]
yena payasa pipaya.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 25


Agni, O lord giver of the light and life of the
world, I honour and respect the truth and law of
existence by observance of the truth and law of life on
earth as required and determined by the demands of
life on earth and set out in the language of the earth,
while I live on earth one with the honey sweets of the
ripe and raw treasures of the earth. May the mother earth,
being green and bright with nourishments, grow with
food and drink for the sustenance of her children by the
efforts of her children.


wet: WON




[Names: Agnih, Aspandamano, Sukram]
Sustained in tune by the truth of life and law of
existence, nourished on food and drink from spaces
above, the virile bull, manly man and lustrous Agni,
creator of light and life on earth, ruler of the world,
moves around with majesty, unagitated, bearing the
dignity and vitality of health and age, replete with energy
and generosity like the cloud, and distils the fire and
lustre of life from the skies as milk from the mother
cow.






[Names: Rtenadrim, Sunam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Ye leaders of the world, by the force of Rtam,
nature’s law, when the cosmic fire of energy is awake,
then the roaring winds, breaking the cloud with their
currents, rain down the showers, mankind on earth find
peace and prosperity, and the light, riding the dawn,
rises to view as the radiant sun.






[Names: Vaji]
Agni, light of life, ruler of the world, by Rtam,
force of eternal truth and nature’s law, do the celestial
waters of life, immortal, unhurt, with currents of spatial
oceans bearing honey sweets of life’s energy, ceaselessly
flow on like a war horse flying on to battles, in order to
move life on and on with energy without end or






Agni, giver of the light of intelligence, let us
not go to the meeting place of a deceitful person, nor to
the door of a violent grabber, nor take the debt or
obligation of a crooked brother, and may we, we pray,
never try to benefit from, much less depend on, the
strength and expertise of an enemy in the garb of a


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 3 27






[Names: Raksa, Jahi]
Agni, ruler of the earth, blissful giver of
happiness, all protector, presiding genius of yajna, social
justice and noble conduct, protect us with all your
methods and forces of protection and defence, shine
and inspire us to good action, eliminate the blackest sin
and hardest crime, destroy the wicked, even powerful
ones and on the increase.






[Names: Ebhirbhava, Sastirdevavata]
Agni, giver of light and life, with these songs
of prayer and these learned devotees, be pleased and
happy at heart. Accept and approve of these dedicated
people of thought and action. Brave and heroic leader
dear as breath of life, accept and enjoy these gifts of
homage and reverence. May this song of praise offered
by the holy celebrants be pleasing to you and exalting.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Nivacana]
Agni, giver of life and light, lord of knowledge,
vision and wisdom, leader, ruler, pioneer, all these songs
of adoration, creative, deep and grave, meaningful and
fruitful, fluent and poetic, are sincere expressions of
the heart which I, inspired and moved to ecstasy, present
to you, poet and scholar, with divine hymns of holiness
in the company of the wise and dedicated celebrants.


Mandala 4/Sukta 4






[Names: Agni, Rakshoha, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Krnusva, Trsvimanu]
Arise, be strong and brilliant, go over and round
the earth in orbit, spread your network over the dominion
and, firm and powerful, move as a king by the elephant.
Impetuous and terrible, shoot like a rocket all round
wherever needed for thirsting and ensnared earth as it
could be, and, like an archer as you are, fix the demons
of violence with your blazing arrows.





[Names: Tava, Patumsyagne]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 4 29


[Names: Your]
Shining and blazing with power and force, strike off
the enemies wherever they be. Unhurt, whole and
unopposed, shoot out all round burning rockets of
defence like sparks of fire fed on ladlefuls of ghrta
offered into the fire of the vedi.





[Names: Prati]
Agni, brilliant ruler and blazing power, shoot
out detectors, appoint detectives and spies, and send
out ambassadors, be swift in action and response, and,
bold, unhurtful and undeceived, be the protector and
sustainer of this human nation, and whoever be the
sinner or supporter of the wicked far or near us must
not insult, impair or violate your rule and order.






[Names: Udagne, Suskam]
Agni, mighty and brilliant power, rise in flames
and shine on, let the light spread around. O wielder of
blazing weapons, burn off the unfriendly and the
enemies. Shining and rising power, whoever creates
enemies and causes adversity, burn down like a dry fibre


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


of flax.





[Names: Urdhvo]
Rise high and shine there, having fixed the
enemies far from us, and thus reveal the divine actions
of your own and of the enlightened. Loosen and reduce
the firm establishments of the gate crashers and the go-
getters whether related or unrelated, and destroy the
enemies of the order of enlightenment.




[Names: Visvanyasmai]
Agni, most youthful power of enlightenment,
that person knows and enjoys your love and good will
who directs his voice and actions toward the magnificent
lord supreme of the universe, who dedicates all his
happy days and his wealth and good fortune to his
service, and who, being master of himself and his
fortune, wide opens and lights up his doors for his
devotees.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 4 31




[Names: Sedagne, Piprisati, Visvedasmai]
Agni, refulgent lord ruler of the world, he would
be highly prosperous and generously charitable who
loves to serve you with unfailing oblations of havi and
songs of praise and prayer. And surely for such a person,
in his own life, within his own home, all his days would
be happy and his yajna and all desired acts would be






[Names: Arcami, Svasvastva]
Agni, mighty ruler of the world, I pray for your
favour and blessings of love and good will. May these
words of my favourite voice address you and this
adoration of mine glorify you. Blest with noble horses
and beautiful chariots, may we exalt you, and may you,
day by day, hold and sustain our social order and its
systems of governance and administration.






[Names: Krilantastva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Let man amply and wholly serve you, refulgent
ruler of the world, sincerely by heart and soul, day and
night, day after day. Let us all, guardians of the total
wealth and honour of the people, rejoicing at heart as
playing with arms for defence of the nation, serve Agni,
father protector of humanity.






[Names: Yastva, Tasya]
Whoever possessing noble horses and golden
gold approaches you by a chariot loaded with treasures
of wealth, and offers service and hospitality readily and
accept and own as a friend, protect him as a guardian
and save him as a redeemer.






[Names: Maho, Tvam]
I shatter great evils and open deep mysteries by
kinship with Divinity and words of eternity which I
inherit from my father guardian who commands all
knowledge of existence and the language of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 4 33


master of universal dynamics, self controlled controller,
give us the vision and knowledge of the ultimate reality
and the Word imperishable.






[Names: Asvapnajastaranayah]
Agni, life of life, light eternal, universal
intelligence, your streams of life, your rays of light and
waves of cosmic energy, sleepless, continuous, gracious,
relentless, inviolent, and indefatigable, which ever flow
integrated and together may, we pray, bless our yajnic
home and give us a fresh lease of life every moment.






[Names: Raraksa]
Agni, lord of universal knowledge and power,
all those defensive powers of yours which, ever watchful
and protective, save people from sin and protect them
from evil and crime as their own kith and kin who cannot
by themselves see, all those holy yajnic powers of noble
action, O lord, protect and promote, so that the
repressive enemies may not be able to terrorise the poor
and the ignorant.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Tvayad, Syama, Ubha]
Agni, ruler of the world, defender of truth and
holiness, may we, protected by you and blest with
knowledge and power, follow your guidance and noble
policy and win the honour and excellence of the world.
Guide aright, order and control both the eulogiser and
the calumniator far and near, and, with appropriate
measures, take us out of timidity and make us bold in
defence of truth and rectitude without embarrassment
or hesitation.






[Names: Sasyamanam, Dahasaso, Mitramaho]
Agni, greatest friend, adorable lord and ruler of
the world, with this lighted fuel and enlightened
contribution to the yajna of the social and cosmic order,
we offer the song of homage to you. Be gracious to
accept it. Burn down the revilers and the evil
perpetrators of destruction and protect us against the
jealousy, calumny and scandalous actions of the
enemies.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 35


Mandala 4/Sukta 5






[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Vaisvanaraya, Anunena, Anun]
How shall we, in accord with Agni, happy and
rejoicing, offer homage, service and support to the great,
generous Vaishvanara Agni, vital fire sustaining the
earth, leader and ruler of humanity who, with his awful
might and unbounded reach, mighty lustrous as he is,
holds up this vast world like a column bearing the
burden of a mighty structure.






[Names: Pakaya, Agnih, Never]
Agni, self-refulgent and generous self-existent lord of
his infinite wealth and power, who has given us this
great gift of food, energy and wealth of abundant nature
for the simple, growing, maturing world of mortal
humanity, Agni, whois self-revealing through the beauty
of his own creation, immortal, omniscient teacher, best
leader of men and awfully great.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sama, Padam, Agnir]
Agni, refulgent lord immanent in earth and
heaven, commanding blazing heat and light, abundant
a thousandfold, generous and virile as sun and cloud,
mighty powerful, master of knowledge, may, we pray,
speak to me of the great and deep knowledge and karma
pertaining to earth and heaven, body and soul, deep as
the mystery of sun and stars.






[Names: Agnirbabhasat, Socisa, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
May Agni, blazing lord of power and stern rule
of law, commanding the wealth, power and prosperity
of the world with his splendour and magnificence, crush
with the heat of his power and force of his justice the
dear favourites and strongholds of those who sabotage
and destroy the stability of the systems and institutions
of the noble and friendly powers of enlightenment,
justice, peace, unity and cooperation.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 37




[Names: Abhrataro, Papasah]
As maidens without brothers and guardians to
care for them, as wives who deceive their husbands, go
astray from the right path and follow a wrong course of
life, so the misguided people, self-deceived evil doers,
false and untrue, go astray and, following the wrong
course, create this hellish state of life in society.






[Names: Idam, Brhad]
Agni, master of knowledge and power, purifier
of body, mind and soul, I pray, bear and bring for me
sevenfold knowledge of matter, mind and motion,
knowledge which is universal, deep and grave, greatly
powerful and wide in range and application. Bless me
with the knowledge along with the gift of love and
courage as a burden of great responsibility. I assure you
I am a humble seeker and I shall bear the burden well
without arrogance and violence.





[Names: Taminnveva, Sasasya]
That equal, beautiful, constant and vital zone


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of light and heat of Vaishvanara Agni fixed round and
over the surface of the dormant and colourful earth,
separated and condensed from the solar sphere in earlier
purifying and sanctifying us by the light of the Lord,
reach and reveal through our holy acts of study, prayer
and holy action.






[Names: Pravacyam, Yadusriyanamapa]
What is worthy of being proclaimed, hidden in
the secret cave of this word of mine, and what the
scholars and visionaries, purifying and sanctifying,
mysteriously whisper closely to you is That Orb of light
and heat which, like a liquid zone of vapours, covers,
vitalises, sustains and reveals the dear, first, highest life
and beauty of the dawn, of cows and the flying earth.


[Names: Idamu, Yadusviya, Yadusvi, Rtasya]
This same orb of light and zone of vitality,
greatest of the great, glorious, ancient and eternal,


blazing over the regions of the waters of space and the
facts and laws of existence, which the productive earths


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 39


serve and follow and join as partners of the system,
which vibrates in the depths of the heart and vibrates in
the depths of the soul, I know, you know, all perceive.


Rat go ॥




[Names: Adha, Matuspade]
And the light shines between heaven and earth,
one with all, vibrating in the highest regions of Mother
Nature at the closest and within, directly watching and
knowing the raining clouds, the blazing sun, and the
blowing wind and flowing waters. All ye men and
women, know that lovely and wondrous mystery of the
spirit of colourful reality of existence hidden in the cave
of the heart.






[Names: Rtam, Tvamasya, Yadu]
O Jataveda, omniscient and omnipresent Agni,
if I were asked, I would speak the truth in all humility
by your grace: All this that is, all that exists in heaven,
all that is in and on earth, all that is the wealth, power
and excellence, all is yours, it abides in you, you pervade
it all, you govern it all and, ultimately, you absorb it all


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


by drawing in and reducing it to the point of zero.






[Names: Kimno, Guhadhvanah]
O Jataveda, you know all and everything in
existence. Speak to us and guide us: Of all this world,
what wealth is ours? What jewels? Speak to us of that,
so that going by the light of divine vision and
intelligence we may achieve the best and reach the
highest goal that is ours, and we at the end don’t have
to go empty handed, reviled and exposed.






[Names: Vayuna, Kada]
What are the rules of the game of karma? What
ultimate bounds? Speak to us, enlighten us: When could
we, racing like a courser, moving like waves of energy,
creditably reach our cherished goal? When would the
sun, the dawns and the celestial vibrations of
immortality like life-giving nurses inspire us with light
and lustre to rise to perfection?




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 5 41




[Names: Anirena]
Agni, light and spirit of knowledge and master
of the language of knowledge, listeners remain
unsatisfied, their thirst for knowledge unquenched, with
lifeless, unsubstantial, ambiguous and deficient words.
Then what do the speakers speak of you, or to you, or
[Names: Being]
should come to you, speakers as well as listeners, for
light, knowledge and words for effective and living






[Names: Asya, Sriye, Rusad, Puruvaro]
For the expression of the grace and majesty of
this Agni, lord of light and ruler of the world, bright
and blazing, generous, home and haven of all like
mother earth, his force and splendour shines in his home.
And he himself, refulgent giver of radiance, magnificent
in form, treasure home and universal giver of heavenly
and earthly gifts for all, shines with regal magnificence
and wealth of the world like mother earth shining with
the greenery of her abundance and generosity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 4/Sukta 6






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Urdhva, Tvam]
Agni, lord of light, ruler of the world, cosmic
yajamana, sit on top of our yajna of love and non-
violence among the divine yajakas of nature and
humanity. You alone know the world and all our
thoughts, intentions and will, and you, at the heart of
all performers, comprehend and transcend the
knowledge, intelligence and awareness of the scholar.





[Names: Amuro, Urdhvam]
Agni, all wise, universal yajamana, receiver and
giver, creator of joy, brilliant in knowledge, sits and
abides among the people in their yajnic social
endeavours, diffuses the light and fragrance of yajna
above close to the heavens like the sun and, like a builder
and a column, holds the dark away.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 6 43




[Names: Yata]
The night is come on her round vibrating with
the wealth of rest and peace, applying a soothing balm
to the hours of holy time and ushering in the approach
of dawn, and the sun, harbinger of fresh energy, new
born like a baby, self-proclaiming and enlightening the
showering the nectar of soma, anoints the morning time
of the day.





[Names: Stirne, Paryagnih]
The sacred grass is spread over the vedi, the
fire is lit and rises, the adhvaryu, chief priest organiser,
is up and doing, having started the yajna. Agni, the sun,
like the shepherd of the waking world, celestial yajaka,
goes over the three regions of heaven, earth and sky
radiating the light and illuminating the world.






[Names: Pari, Dravantyasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, performer of yajna, happy and
exhilarating, honey sweet of expression, moves and
expands at its own self-controlled speed and will,
keeping within the laws of existence. The rays of its
light and the flames of fire rise and radiate like the waves
of energy, and when it shines and blazes, all the worlds
in existence feel the pressure of its force and power.








[Names: Bhadra, Socistamasa]
Agni, lord blissful of light, love and justice,
commanding divine force and power, fearsome,
eternally true and manifesting in infinite variety of the
world of change, equal, kind and gracious is your eye
by which you watch every living being. No evil forces
can cover with darkness the light that is yours, nor can
any devil and destroyer attribute any sin or smear or
partiality to your body of law and justice.






[Names: Adha]
Agni is the generous giver whose gifts cannot
be denied or hidden as the gifts of father and mother,
too, toward fulfilment of life’s desire cannot be denied


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 6 45


since Agni as a friend, blazing with light and glowing
with generosity, blissful and sanctifying, shines among
the people over everything that concerns humanity.






[Names: Dviryam, Usarbudhamatharyo, Agnim, Sukram]
Twice do the five classes of people among all
on together like running streams and working together
like fingers of the hand, kindle and raise Agni, vital
and beautiful, and thunderous as a bolt against darkness
and suffering.




[Names: Tava, Arusaso]
Agni, ruling power of light and liberality, those
rainbow colours of your light and seven streams of
energy are replete with the grace and power of ghrta,
red with the passion of life, straight and simple, natural
and free, bright, generous, strong and right, destroyers
of evil and harbingers of the benedictions of Divinity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Syenaso, Ssardhah, Marutam, Maruta]
Agni, ruling power of the world, your flames of
fire, blazing rays of light and electric waves of energy
are patient and forbearing, yet challenging and
victorious, awful and deeply perceptive and penetrative.
Instant in action, they fall upon their object like falcons
from the sky, and their force is like that of a roaring
storm of wind shears.





[Names: Akari, Hotaram, Samsam]
Sung is the song of prayer and praise for you, O
lord refulgent, the yajaka raises his voice in adoration
which, pray, graciously accept for the good of the
devotee, and bring him the object of his desire. Let
people, loving and inspired, bearing fragrant homage
with humility, come and sit round the vedi in worship
of Agni, universal yajamana, loved and admired by


Mandala 4/Sukta 7




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 7 47




[Names: Ayamiha, Yamapnavano]
This Agni here is the first and foremost power
felt, lighted, installed and glorified by the pioneers of
knowledge and yajnic action. It is the first performer of
the cosmic yajna of creation, most adorable, worshipped
in yajnas and all other programmes of love and non-
violent development. The same wonderful and all
embracing light and power, men of science and Divinity
blest with descendants and disciples develop and glorify
in the forests and every household for the benefit of






[Names: Agne, Anusag, Adha]
O Lord, when would people be in tune with the
divine light, omniscience and generosity of yours in their
consciousness? And when would the mortals hold your
presence as adorable in every moment, in every thought
and action, in every home?


[Names: Rtavanam, Visvesamadhvaranam]
When would the mortals in every home adore


the universal Agni, watching and realising in yajna the
presence of the lord of the order of universal law,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




commanding the cosmic intelligence of existence and
lighting up all the yajnas of the world in evolutionary
development with vital fire as he lights up the heavens
with stars?






[Names: Asum]
The one that sustains all people of the world,
that vital fire, instant carrier of sunlight, the very sign
of life, maturing everything existent, the people of the
earth and their descendants, when would it be received
and installed in every home?






[Names: Tamim, Ranvam]
Fully and appropriately they install, maintain
and sit by that Agni, receiver and giver of gifts in yajna,
enlightening, bright and happy, drying, maturing and
vitalising things like light and fire, most lovable and
adorable. They maintain, serve and benefit from it seven
ways through five senses, five pranas, and mind and
intellect, and worship the power in every home of every




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 7 49




[Names: Sasvatisu, Citram]
That Agni, present in permanent sources, in
forests, immanent everywhere, independent and free,
wonderful as hidden in a cave, knowledgeable and
deeply meaningful, they maintain and serve.






[Names: Sasasya, Mahan, Agnirnamasa]
Far from sleep, the bounties of nature rejoice in
the entire spaces of the skies and over the celebrations
of yajna. We pray that the great Agni, light and lord of
yajna, fed on offerings and rich in gifts, commanding
the laws of truth and showers of bliss may pervade our
home for the performance and completion of yajna.






[Names: Veradhvarasya, Duta]
Agni, omnipresent lord of yajna fire, you know
the motions and vibrations of yajna rising and pervading
in both earth and skies since, being carrier of the
fragrance, ancient and all mobile, inviolable and
unconquerable, you rise and reach even the heights and
caverns of secret heavens.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.










[Names: Krsnam, Yadapravita]
Let us know the motive force and paths of your
brilliant light, both centripetal and centrifugal, the light
and fire moving ahead, all round, blazing bright, unique
among all forms of light. Just as an unpregnated female
receives and carries the new embryo, so held in the
and rise to the heights as carrier of flames and fragrance.






[Names: Sadyo, Socih, Vrnakti, Anuvati]
The light and lustre of the flames of this Agni
instantly risen becomes worth seeing when the wind
fans its flames and spreads the blaze into the forests
and uproots strong and firm trees and, with the flames
as jaws it crushes and devours the strong as food. And
when with the breeze and vital heat it fans the vegetation
with its currents, it protects, matures and provides the
foods for life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 8 51




[Names: Trsu, Vatasya, Agnih]
Mighty Agni, fire and energy, fast and quick,
speedily bears and brings food, and functions as instant
carrier of communications. Running and rising fast, it
joins the company of the winds and, like a galloping
horse and current of energy, it travels over vast distances.
I invoke Agni (for light, food and communications).


Mandala 4/Sukta 8






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Dutam, Yajisthamriijase]
O scholar and master of the science of fire and
energy, with your words and thought you study and
develop the power of Agni, carrier of communications,
all round operative in the universe, bearer of food and
fragrances, imperishable, and most creative, productive,
cooperative and valuable catalytic agent of the natural
and human world. O men and women of the world, the
scientist develops it for you all.






Ye men and women of the world, that knower


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




alone knows Agni, treasure hold of heavenly light and
divine beneficence of universal wealth. That Agni is
great, that alone brings us here the light and graces of
nature and divinity.






[Names: Gnamam, Dati]
That brilliant scholar knows the operative
powers of nature and knows how to respect and value
them. He inspires the learned and noble people, and he
energises and moves nature’s gifts for the creation of
wealth and power in the house of yajna. Agni thus
bestows the cherished gifts of wealth and comfort for
the good life.






[Names: Vidvan]
Agni is Chikitvan, all immanent brilliant
presence that wields and holds and knows. It is the
yajamana as well as deity of the yajamana, which
internally energises all motion, communication and
activity of life and nature. The knower knows the
treasure hold of light, energy and universal intelligence
in concentration as well as in expansion.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 8 53




Let us dedicate ourselves to you, Agni, like those
who, with liberal offers of havi, give themselves unto
you in devotion for the gifts and powers of universal
energy, light the fire and make the streams of the waters
of life flow free across the globe.



[Names: Srnvire]
They enjoy life in peace and comfort with plenty
of wealth and noble strength and powers who study fire,
learn about its properties and pursue it with reverence
and self sacrifice through the yajna of research and



[Names: Asme, Purusprhah, Purusprha, Asme]
Let wealths of various kinds and universal value
come and abound among us, let food and energy of all
varieties flow and arise among us (as divine gifts of
Agni, lord of heat and light and cosmic energy).





[Names: Savasa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




He, Agni, is the most dynamic of brilliant
visionaries of the world who, with his power and force,
like a flying arrow, shoots off the sufferance and
ailments of the people.


Mandala 4/Sukta 9






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Agne, Tyetha]
Agni, be kind and gracious. Great you are as
you come to these divinely dedicated people sitting
round the fire of yajna and you bless them all round


[Names: Dito]
He is rare among the human people of the world
who is kind, protective, pioneer, exceptional and
immortal giver of light and knowledge. May this power
be the destroyer of the suffering of entire humanity.

3. That light and power, Agni, sacrificing,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 9 55


sanctifying, happy and rejoicing, is investigated,
discovered and worshipped in all holy programmes of
life, and everywhere in yajnic homes where it sits as
the prime and central presence.






[Names: Agniradhvara]
And Agni joins the yajna of love and non-
violence as master of divine voice, in the home where
he abides as the head of family, and in the yajna he
presides over as the high priest, having mastered all the





[Names: Vedas, Vesi, Havya]
You are the guide of the performers of yajna
and teacher of the people in general, and you receive
the respect and yajnic gifts and fragrances offered by





[Names: Vesidvasya, Havyam]
You accept the message of this devotee whose
yajna of love and social cooperation you join without
violence, and you receive the inputs of holy fuel to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




communicate the meaning, message and fragrance to
the destination where it is meant for.


[Names: Asmakam, Asmakam]
You join and accomplish the ends of our holy
acts. You expedite our yajna of love and non-violence
for social cohesion, O life breath of humanity, Agni, O
power omnipresent and omniscient, listen to our call
and prayer and bless us with success.



[Names: Pari, Yena]
Agni, ruler of the world, may that rare invincible
chariot of your power by which you protect the generous
givers in yajna, we pray, be directed to us and promote


Mandala 4/Sukta 10


[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Agne, Rdhyama]
Agni, mighty power of light and motion, with
songs of praise and prayer and with holy acts of service


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 10 57


offered in homage to you today, we augment, celebrate
and glorify you, fast as nature’s waves of energy, bright
as intelligence and blissful as yajna, and dear as love
closest to the heart.






[Names: Adha, Rathirrtasya]
And now Agni, O light and ruler of the world,
be the rider and commander of the chariot of the plan
and programme of our creative and developmental yajna
of the human nation, a yajna which is blissfully fruitful,
expertly organised and sophisticated, truthfully in
consonance with the laws of nature and the environment
and positively good, great and far reaching in
consequence for life.






[Names: Ebhirno]
Agni, light and life of the world, majestic as the
sun’s refulgent glory, good and loving at heart, in
response to these our songs of praise and prayer and
acts of piety, come straight and bless us with all your
forces of protection and promotion and give us, lead us
to, the success of our heart’s desire.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Abhiste]
Agni, brilliant ruling power of the world,
speaking in these words of ours to you, we would pay
homage to you in appreciation, thanks and praise for
your gifts of protection and promotion for us. And see,
the people, happy and bold, raise shouts of joy like the
roar of thunder from the skies in celebration of your

[Names: Tava, Sriye]
Agni, glorious ruler of the world, your gracious
eye, equal and beneficent for all, all time whether it is
expressive of your regality.


[Names: Ghrtam]
Agni, lord self-refulgent and potent in your own
essence, the light of your presence manifesting in the
world body is immaculate, pure as ghrta and sacred as
celestial water, and it is unalloyed as gold which shines


and pleases like light of the moon and dazzles as
radiance of the sun.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 11 59




[Names: Krtam, Ittha]
Agni, lord giver, observer and commander of
the law of natural truth and justice, you drive away from
mortal humanity and from the man of yajnic
performance all sin, hate and enmity even if it has been
done and has existed since time immemorial.






[Names: Siva, Sano]
Agni, lord of light and ruler of the world, may
our friendship and fraternity among the nobilities and
divine personalities of your rule and order be auspicious
and blessed, and may that sacred relationship be the
anchor and centrehold of our conduct and action in the
entire social order of governance, administration and
economy of the system.


Mandala 4/Sukta 11


[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Bhadram, Rusad, Suryasya, Suryas]
Agni, mighty presiding power of the world, holy


and blissful is your splendour at the dawn of sunrise as
it shines in majesty, and while it shines, it is seen by


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




night also, as glorious to the sight as by day. And in that
bright and blissful form of beauty and majesty I see
delicious food for life and energy for mind and soul.






[Names: Visvebhiryad]
Agni, lord of light and majesty, universally
manifest and acknowledged, while you are praised and
honoured by the devotee with the action and inspiration
of your light and glory, break open the locks of the mind
and intellect of the devotee since, O lord of brilliance
and purity, commanding the grandeur of the world and
giving with and through all the divine powers of nature
and humanity, you bless us with the knowledge and
wisdom of the living world.






[Names: Tvadange, Tvadeti]
Agni, lord of light, energy and intelligence, by
you are great poems inspired. From you flows genius
and intelligence. By you are revealed hymns of
celebration and holy action. From you arise the resources
of life for development. O lord of valour and beauteous
form, from you flow the wealths of existence in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 11 61


circulation for the mortal man of versatile intelligence
and generosity.






[Names: Tvad, Tvad]
From you arises heroic energy, victorious power,
all expansive and unfailingly true which wins the desired
object of all round success. From you is created the
wealth produced, expanded and multiplied by noble
experts which is full of blessings. From you is created
the self-driven transport of high velocity which reaches
the destination instantly. Such you are, Agni, tremendous
source of inexhaustible energy.






[Names: Tvamagne, Dvesoyutama]
You, Agni, lord and master of light and
knowledge, energy and power, mortal men in search of
joy and beauty, light and immortality seek, serve and
develop you with their acts and intelligence, as first and
foremost power of life, brilliant and generous, immortal,
sweet and joyous of tongue, free from hate and enmity,
self-controlled and all-controller, wise and perfect
master of the household.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






6. Are asmadamatimare anha are visvam durmatim


[Names: Dosa, Sivah]
Agni, child of omnipotence and patience, take
off from us callousness, take away sin, take away all
hate and enmity from the world. Whosoever you protect,
you promote, lord generous and refulgent, you are good
and kind to him night and day. He is blest. May all be
good and gracious!


Mandala 4/Sukta 12






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Yastvamagna]
Agni, lord and master of light, knowledge and
wealth, he who lights and serves you with ladlefuls of
ghrta for the offering of food thrice every day will be
blest with wealth, honour and well being all round by
virtue of his service to you and noble works, O Jataveda,
lord of universal knowledge, and he will be enlightened
with knowledge and self-awareness.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 12 63






[Names: Idhmam]
Agni, lord sublime commanding power and
force, any person of high endeavour who bears and takes
you forward, serving your great force and splendour,
he/she is blest with wealth and grandeur, rising in
strength and power, blazing with light and fire and
eliminating hate and enmity every day and night.






[Names: Agnirise, Agniris, Dadhati]
Agni rules and commands the great order of
defence, governance and law of society. Agni rules over
the highest wealth of food, energy and movement.
Strongest and most youthful, Agni, holding and
and power, ever in unison with the celebrant, bears and
secures the jewel assets of life for mortal humanity all





[Names: Yacciddhi, Purusatra, Krdhisvasman]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, youthful lord of light and the world of
light, if we, unawares or out of ignorance, happen to
devoted people, then free us from that sin and render us
sinless children of the good earth. Relax the hold of all
sin and evil from over us.




[Names: Mahascidagna]
yaccha tokaya tanayaya sam yoh.


Agni, lord of light and purity of power, save us
even from great and extensive sin committed or suffered
either close to or among the noblest powers or the
ordinary mortals, let us never be hurt or injured. We are
your friends. Give us peace and well being for our
children and further future generations.






[Names: Yatha]
Vasus, holy divines of knowledge and speech
dedicated to Dharma and education, just as you release
language, bonded in word, meaning and object all
integrated, free into expression and communication,
similarly loosen the bonds of sin from us to set us free
and take us across the seas of life which must be crossed


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 13 65


with merit and virtue.


Mandala 4/Sukta 13






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Partyagnirusasamagramakhyad, Yatamasvina]
Agni, brilliant as sun, vibrant as wind and potent
as electric energy, stirs in advance of the lights of rising
dawns happy at heart, and the Ashvins, currents of
elevating energy, move on to the house of the man of
noble acts, a house blest with the jewels of life, while
the refulgent sun, generous giver of the breath of life,
moves on (on its daily round) with its light.






[Names: Urdhvam, Anu, Suryam, Surya]
The refulgent sun, giver of light and life’s
energy, radiates the light on high and, as if in love with
the earth, diffuses the particles of light around in space
with passion. And according to the laws of Nature,
Varuna and Mitra, waters and winds, and all other causes
which elevate the sun rise to activity by the sun on their


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








One of the objects which for sure the fixed
centres of cosmic energy for sustenance dedicated to
their appointed task create for the dispulsion of darkness
is the sun. That sun, centre, eye and light of the entire
moving world of the solar system, seven mighty forces
of nature carry and conduct and seven blazing rays of
light radiate for the appointed purpose.






[Names: Vahisthebhirviharanyasi, Davidhvato]
O Deva, refulgent sun, borne by seven mighty
carriers of light, you go round in orbit radiating your
rays and dispelling the cover of darkness. The vibrating
rays of the sun in the middle regions of the sky remove
the mantle of darkness.






[Names: Anayato, Kaya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 14 67


Unsupported and unbound, high up above yet
looking downward, how is it sustained? Why doesn’t it
fall down? By what strength of its own does it go on?
Who sees it thus behave? The pillar sustainer of the
vault of heaven with the cosmic law of Rtam sustains it
too. Who sees that pillar of the universe which sustains
this giver of bliss?


Mandala 4/Sukta 14




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Pratyagnirusaso]
mupa no yatamaccha.


Refulgent Agni, omnipresent in the world of
existence, with his own grandeur and lustre lights up
the bright and beautiful dawns. Hey Ashvins, ever true
and beautiful, universally praised harbingers of light,
twofold breath of energy, teacher and preacher, come
well by the chariot and grace this yajna of ours.






[Names: Urdhvam, Apra]
May Savita, brilliant and generous, giver of light
and life’s energy, create light and radiate energy high


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




up and give enlightenment to the whole world, as the
refulgent sun, with its rays, illuminates the heaven and
earth and the skies.





[Names: Avahantyarunirjyotisaganmahi, Prabodhayanti]
Crimson clad in brilliance, great and glorious,
bright with morning rays, comes the blessed dawn by
the chariot in top-notch harness, awaking the world to
the joy and bliss of the new day.






[Names: Usaso, Soma]
Come ye Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn,
breath and beauty of the morning, men and women
dedicated to Divinity, may these strong chariots and
horses bring you here in the light of the dawn. These
honey drinks of soma, vital energy of life, are for you.
Come, virile ones, and rejoice in this yajna (of the
creation of a new day).




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 15 69




[Names: Anayato, Kaya]
So close and unsupported, unbound and free,
so wide and high looking down, as it is, what is that
power which holds it up from falling down? By what
force of its own does it go on as it does? Who sees that
power, pillar sustainer of the vault of heaven, which
sustains it with the cosmic law of Rtam, blissful as it


[Names: Agni]
Mandala 4/Sukta 15


Agni, Somaka Sahadevya and Ashvinau Devata,





[Names: Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Agnirhota, Devo]
Agni, brilliant leader, sustainer, yajaka and the
clarion call of our yajna, most refulgent of the brilliants,
most adorable of the adorables, being potent and warlike
as a missile, is conducted all round and followed in the
corporate business of our life.






[Names: Pari]
Agni, leader and pioneer, like a hero of the war
chariot goes thrice round and round the yajna of our


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




corporate life, bearing the wealth of peace and well-
being among the noble powers and peoples of the world.



[Names: Agnir, Dadhad]
Agni, lord of food, energy and the dynamics of
life and society, commanding a full poetic vision of
corporate life, comprehends the gifts and oblations of
the holy fire of the nation, bearing the jewels of life’s
wealth for the generous giver.

[Names: Ayam, Dyuman]
This is he, that fiery and brilliant Agni, leader
of yajna, vanquisher of the enemies of life and society,
who is lighted and joined first of all in corporate
struggles for the attainment of the holy gifts of Divinity.



[Names: Asya, Tigmajambhasya]
Only that brave man among mortals can
command the wealth and power of the world who is a
yajnic follower of this Agni, dynamic leader, generous
giver and unflinchingly just and powerful.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 15 71






[Names: Tamarvantam, Sisum, Marmrjyante]
Him the followers serve, adorn and adore day
by day who is lovable and victorious like a war horse
and brilliant as a very child of heavenly light.




yah. Accha na huta udaram.


[Names: Neither]
prepared as I am, may the youthful Agni, companion
power of divinity, awaken and inform me by the gifts
of Ashvins, light and knowledge of the teacher and the
preacher, breath and beauty of nature and the light and
fragrance of yajna.





[Names: Prayata]
I readily accept the breath and beauty of nature
and the light and fragrance of yajna, gifts of the Ashvins,
teachers and preachers, adorable messengers of life
coming from Agni, youthful brilliance of Divinity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Dirghayurastu, Somakah, Somaka]
Divine Ashvins, teachers and preachers, may
this youth, your celebate disciple, dedicated to Divinity,
be blest with long life, blest with the light of peace and


[Names: Dirghayusam]
Divine Ashvins, messengers of the light of
Divinity, brilliant and generous teachers and preachers,


both of you bless this youth, devotee of Divinity, with


Mandala 4/Sukta 16






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Tasma]
May Indra, lord ruler of the world, ever true,
mighty bounteous and ever righteous in natural ways,
come to us. May his men and powers hasten to us to
help and bless. For his sake we produce energising food
and distil exciting soma. Praised and appreciated and
praising and appreciating, he provides us all with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 73
sustenance and protection in this world order.






[Names: Suradhvano, Samsatyukthamusaneva, Scikituse]
Indra, such as you are, guard us in this yajnic
programme of holy living so that we may enjoy life and
you too be happy with us. Guard us, pray, O Ruler, as
you would the boundaries of the path of progress.
Forsake us not till the end. The wise celebrant like a
poet and lover sings songs of adoration and speaks
words of wisdom to enlighten the simple innocents eager
to learn and pray.






[Names: Kavirna, Diva]
The generous man of might and vision
accomplishing the performance of various yajnas of
the shower of light from above, preserving it with
reverence and advancing it, creates knowledge from the
light above, and then the scholars, admiring and
pursuing it further by day, create seven kinds of science
and technology and raise seven orders of scientists and
technologists. (The mantra suggests the science of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


spectrum and development of light technology.)






[Names: Svaryad, Andha]
The heavenly light and paradisal bliss that is
revealed by the reflections of knowledge and radiations
of the sun, the greatness and sublimity of ultimate reality
that is revealed and shines as the dawn of the day, the
impenetrable layers of darkness that are laid open and
bare, all that, Indra, the best of men and highest of
leaders and divinities, does for the sake of humanity
for their highest good so that all may see and admire.


aya uu




[Names: Vavaksa, Atascidasya]
Indra, lord supreme of nature and Rtam, the law
of nature, wields and sustains both heaven and earth,
immeasurable though they are. He pervades both and
transcends them with his power and grandeur. For this
very reason, his power and grandeur too exceeds
everything else of the universe since he pervades,
transcends and presides over all the regions of the
universe in existence.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 75






[Names: Visvani, Sakro]
Indra, world ruler, commanding knowledge and
power, exhausts all the possibilities of human action
with his dedicated friends who, even with words of
passionate for action, open up and reveal the hidden
treasures of wealth and energy of nations, like cowherds
releasing cows from the stalls or winds breaking the
clouds and releasing the waters.






[Names: Prarnamsi]
Indra, ruler of the world, just as, when
thunderous rays of the sun break the dark cloud holding
waters of rain, the earth rejoices and rivers flow to the
sea, so O mighty one, all-aware and intrepidable hero,
be the master protector and promoter ruler with your
strength and power and, by virtue of the centrifugal force
of your power and law, break open the dark strongholds
of energy and action, and let the freedom and vitality of
humanity flow in action unto the ocean of eternal


[Names: Divinity]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Puruhuta, Sano]
Indra, universal celebrity, when you break the
cloud of hoarded potentials and your simple and straight
policy of governance and administration comes into full
view on earth, then you, such leader and commander of
ours, sung and celebrated by scholars and scientists,
manifest your power and policy further and break open the
many centre-holds of human intelligence and social energy.






[Names: Accha, Utibhis]
Indra, winner of the light of heaven and
harbinger of light on earth, lover of humanity, lord of
glory, for the sake of desired goals and for the
achievement of honour, wealth and excellence, inspire
the poet, promote language and education, advance the
seeker, scientist and researcher, with protection and
incentive, and whoever be the clever exploiter opposed
to knowledge, social good and general well being, let
him be defeated.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 77




[Names: Kutsah, Kutsa]
O destroyer of the wicked, come home to your
own with your heart and soul. May the sage and the
warrior be eager for your friendship. May both of you,
being of equal mind, sit together in the home. May the
woman, discriminative and expert in the sacred law of
Dharma, know you well and cooperate.






[Names: Yasi, Rjra]
You advance with the thunderbolt, O protector
of the people, destroyer of enemies, riding the chariot,
commanding the house like currents of the winds, a very
team of energy and velocity in hand, the lord of vision
and creation who destroys the wicked and wins the glory
of victory.



[Names: Kutsaya, Sadyo]
For the sake of the wise and discriminate, you
root out persistent want and drought. On the rise of the
day you overthrow a thousand forms of pettiness and
stinginess. You destroy the evil and the wicked by your


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




thunderous force and, like the solar orb, scatter the





[Names: Tvam, Pancasat]
For the sake of the man of rectitude and
continuance of law abiding generations of the pious
yajnics, you subdue the swollen and wide spread
wastours, hunters of forest wealth and destroyers of social
good. Create a new force of fifty thousand warriors and
like a storm of wind blow off the enemy strongholds,
changing the old outmoded forms for the new.




[Names: Sura]
Indra, warrior hero blazing as the sun, around

you the new form of your immortal self manifesting a



elephant, a ferocious lion, awfully burning off the lustre
of enemy forces.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 79




[Names: Indram, Sravasyavah]
Those who love life, wish for the wealth of life,
strive for the bliss of heaven on earth through yajnic
action, desire for food, energy and victory in the battle
of living, and with songs of praise and faith wish to
achieve delightful health and nourishment in a paradisal
home, all should go and join Indra, brilliant and potent
ruler of the world.






[Names: Tamidva, Puruni]
For sure that Indra, holily invoked and
honoured, we invoke, join and celebrate, Indra who does
all those many wondrous things for humanity, who, for
the celebrant like me, bears and provides all the many
desired kinds of food, energy and victory, and who is
the source giver of things we love for all mankind.







[Names: Tigma, Ghora]
Indra, lord of excellence and glory, mighty brave


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




upon the people in the midst of some battle, or, O
the earth, then you alone, O world ruler, are the protector
of our body of humanity you know.






[Names: Bhuvo, Tvamanu]
Indra, ruler of the world, be protector of the holy
and graceful scholar and promoter of arts and sciences.
Be our friend and supporter, free from greed and
violence in the battles of life for victory so that, O lord
and your guidance. Be the bearer and giver of the world’s
wealth for the faithful celebrant.






[Names: Ebhirnrbhirindra, Dyavo]
Indra, lord of glory, commander of the world’s
honour and excellence, lord of wealth and grace, with
all these leaders of men, your lovers and celebrants all,
wealthy, powerful and honourable, and with all our
wealth and power, we pray, let us all shine being brilliant
as sunrays in the battle of life and let us enjoy and
celebrate life and the lord all nights and days and seasons


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 16 81
all the year round on top of the world.






[Names: Evedindraya]
Thus for Indra, lord of glory, virile and generous,
let us create wealth and offer songs of homage and
celebration just as the Bhrgus, scientists and engineers,
create and offer the chariot, so that he may not forsake
us but firmly retain our friendship, and, bright and
blazing as he is, he may continue to be our protector
and saviour of our body and the social order.






[Names: Nustuta, Akari]
Indra, appreciated, praised and worshipped,
appreciating, approving and praising your devotees,
create and give ample food and energy to the celebrants,
like rivers flowing and swelling with waters. O lord of
speed and transport, with the best of our intellect and
imagination, the new homage and new song is created
and offered to you. And, we pray, with the same intellect
and imagination may we be chariot champions blest with
divine gifts of prosperity and spirituality.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 4/Sukta 17






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Tvam, Indra, Anu, Tvam, Savasa, Jaghanvantsrajah]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, you are great and
glorious. The earths do homage to your divine order as
do the heavens. By virtue of your glory alone are the
earths and heavens reverenced as great. By your power
and prowess you break the cloud and release the floods
of water locked up and devoured by the dark and deep
of the clouds.





[Names: Tava, Rdhayanta]
By your blazing glory, O lord manifest, does
the heaven shine and dazzle. By force and fear of your
essential law and power does the earth move in order
and the deep clouds and mighty mountains, excellent
all bound in law, shower rain on deserts and make the
floods of water flow.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 83




[Names: Bhinadgirim, Vadhidvrtram]
Indra, hero bold and invincible, happy and
joyous, striking thunder and lightning with his mighty
force, thereby manifesting his lustrous blaze of power,
destroys the cloud of darkness with the thunderbolt,
making the floods of water flow with rapidity after the
vapours have been unlocked and released.


(The mantra is a metaphor of the energies of
life, of nature as well as of humanity, being unlocked
and released by the ruling power with a strike of the
force of law and justice against the strongholds of
darkness, evil and selfishness which lock up those
energies and prevent them from flowing into channels
of progress and evolution.)






[Names: Suviraste, Yaim]
Magnificent and brave is your creator, your
maker, to be honoured with reverence and awe, and let
the creator, maker, of Indra, the ruler, be brilliant, the
very light of the world, doer of great and holy deeds,
the very epitome of the world, who gives rise to the
great, omnificent, heavily armed and excellently
empowered ruler, unswerving and unrelenting from his
position, powers and obligations.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Satyamenamanu, Indrah, Puruhuta]
The ruler of the people, Indra, invoked and
celebrated by many, all by himself, alone, shakes and
stirs many a great one, and surely all his admirers, in
response to the munificence and generosity of the
brilliant lord of magnificence and majesty, approve and
support him, celebrate and rejoice with him.






[Names: Satra, Soma, Satrabhavo]
May all the members and sessions of his
assembly be good and true and successful. May all the
sessions of the joyous celebrations of this great ruling
order be happier than the happiest. Indra, O ruling lord
president of the wealth of nations, be true to the entire
body of people in the state of prosperity and rule with a
mind above everything you rule and possess.






[Names: Tvamadha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 85


Indra, lord ruler of the world and destroyer of
evil and ignorance, rising high as the first born of the
home land, you take over the entire body of the people
as presiding power, and then the lowest sections of the
people and the sleeping sloth of the population, and
then, O lord of fire and power, strike and shake up the
sleeping giant with the thunderbolt and root out the
serpentine ignorance and darkness.






[Names: Satrahanam, Hanta]
Accept, honour and exalt Indra, ruler of the
world, destroyer of untruth by the rule of truth and
generous, wielder of the thunderbolt of law and force,
who is destroyer of the dark cloud of evil and selfishness,
provider of food, energy and advancement, giver of
honour and excellence, magnanimous and all-ways
successful achiever of glory.


[Names: Ayam, Ayam]
This ruler, elected, accepted and exalted,


inspires and enlightens, he stirs and moves and leads
trained armies to the battles of life, is excellent and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




magnanimous, listens to people and wins fame, and
decides and acts with unique self-confidence. He creates
and bears food and energy and leads forward in progress
whoever approaches and cooperates with him. Let us
all be friends with him and win his love and confidence.






[Names: Srnve, Yada]
This ruler is Indra, of resounding fame is he,
winner of victories, destroyer of the killers and
destroyers of the world, fights, and by fighting expands
the lands of noble rule by the laws of peace. And when
he expresses his righteous anger in action against
misrule, the entire world, whether firm or unsettled, fears
and shakes in awe.





[Names: Samindro, Ebhirnrbhirnrtamo, Sakai]
By his strength and nobility, Indra wins over
lands rich in the wealth of cows, precious gold and noble
horses. Liberal and excellent he is and wins over the
people ancient and far off who may be. And with these
best of men and leaders, and by the power and talent of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 87


these, while he shares the gains of expansion with others,
he also continues to wield and command the wealths of
the world.






How far does Indra reflect on the debt he owes
to his mother? How far on that he owes to his father?
How does he gratefully acknowledge the gift of his
makers? He who refreshes and renews his power and
influence repeatedly by virtue of these makers and
rejuvenators and moves on like the wind pressed on
with thundering clouds?






[Names: Ksiyantam, Vibhanjanurasaniman]
Indra settles the unsettled, gives a home to the
homeless. Commanding power and glory, wielding
thunder and lightning like radiance of the sun, he
advances to battle and crushes the enemy to dust. And
commanding wealth and honour of the world, he
establishes the celebrant in a state of excellence and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








This Indra, lord ruler of cosmic energy, moves
the wheel of the sun in orbit and then stops the
continuance of the day’s activity for rest. By virtue of
the same energy the dark cloud in its tortuous motions
holds and releases the waters to shower and flow. And
the same Indra holds the great defining dark
concentrations of energy in its cosmic womb at the




[Names: Asiknyam]
In the great dark night of the universe, Indra is
the yajamana of creation, the clarion call as well as the
performer, preserving the fire eternal.


[Names: Gavyanta, Indram, Janiyanto]
ima cyavayamo’ vate na kosam.

Desirous of cows, horses, speed and energy,
science and progress, and the love of our mates, we,


scholars, sages and intelligent people exhort and move
Indra for friendship, hero brave and generous, giver of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 17 89


birth and progeny and unfailing provider of protection
and well-being. We move and exhort him as we lower a
bucket into a well, shake it, fill it up with water and
draw it up for our benefit.






[Names: Tratano, Sakha]
Know that, O people, who is our saviour and
protector, ever watching, always present with us as
brother, teacher and benefactor of loving peaceful
devotees, friend, father and progenitor of our forefathers
and sustainer guardians, all doer and all giver of life,
health and age to the lovers of life on earth.






[Names: Sakhiyatamavita, Vyam]
Indra, friend and protector of friends you are,
know us and enlighten us. Lord admired and celebrated,
bless the devotee with health, wealth and long age. Lord
of power, honour and excellence, Indra, with all our
limitations, we admire, honour and celebrate you only,
exalting you with these our acts of love, devotion and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Stuata, Asya, Sarma]
Indra, lord of honour, power and excellence,
ruler of the world, admired and worshipped, is the one
who all by himself breaks and destroys many irresistible
clouds of vapours, darkness and evil. Whoever is dear
to him, a celebrant of this lord, and takes shelter under






[Names: Sravo]
Thus does Indra, lord of wealth, power and
excellence, free and irresistible, abounding and generous
sustainer of the people, do and achieve what is good
and true for the world. O lord of light ruling over the
living beings, who create and bear great food,
sustenance and honour for the celebrant, the same
honour and excellence, pray, create and give for us all
and bless us.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 18 91




[Names: Nustuta, Akari]
Indra, lord supreme of honour and excellence,
praised and worshipped in holy voice, create and
augment food, energy and sustenance for the celebrant
like streams overflowing with water for all. O lord
omnipresent, moving yet unmoving, we create and offer
ever new songs of praise and homage in your honour,
and pray, give us the will and intelligence by which we
may be masters of chariots and be thankful and obedient
servants of Divinity.


Mandala 4/Sukta 18




[Names: Indraditi, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Ayam, Anuvittah, Anuvitta, Atascada]
ma mataramamuya [411८17८ kah.


This is the path ancient and eternal, known and
followed, by which all saints and sages and divine facts
and forces are born to grow and rise, from which the
whole world comes into being and evolves to greatness
and grandeur. Therefore, do not do anything by that way
to insult or desecrate the mother, nature, earth, human
mother or animal, or any source of generation.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Nahamato, Bahuni]
This path is dark and deep, unfathomable, yet it
is unavoidable. Therefore, I won’t evade it, nor trespass
it either by another tortuous route or by a wayside alley.
Many are my jobs yet unaccomplished, many the battles
to be fought by many, many the questions to be asked
of many.






[Names: Parayatim, Tvasturgrahe, Somamindrah, Somamindra, Satadhanyam]
I see the mother passing away, neither anyone
going with nor anyone following after. Indra, the spirit
of life, by itself in the house of Tvashta, divine artificer,
receives a hundredfold joy of earthly form and drinks
the soma of the ecstasy of living in the cup of existence
fashioned by the maker.






[Names: Jabhara, Nahi]
What would he do in truth singly, particularly
or distinguishably, whom uncountable months and
seasons and years have earlier borne, supported and
cherished a hundred times? And for sure there is none


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 18 93


exactly like or equal to him, no copy, either among those
who have been born so far or among those who would
be born in future.






[Names: Avadyamiva, Athodasthatsvayamatkam]
The mother, worthy of reverence and full of the
pride and joy of motherhood, bears Indra, living foetus,
in the womb as a silent secret nourished with her vital
blood. This Indra, nestled by itself as a living form,
nourished, growing and wearing its own form as a
garment, abides, and when it is born it fulfils the purpose
of heaven and earth (as it fulfils the purpose of father
and mother).






[Names: Samanah]
These streams of water, flowing, murmuring,
ecstatically singing, rush on like beauteous rays of the
dawn. Ask them what they say thus, what mounts they
strike and circle, what banks they overflow, what
limitations they overcome, what clouds they touch.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Kimu, Mamaitan]
What do the ripples, murmurs and songs of
excitement of the streams, imaging the immanent power
of Indra, say to the mount they hit, the cloud they touch
and to this humanity? They speak for Mother Nature,
Aditi: My son Indra, breaking the cloud with the mighty
thunderbolt of solar energy released the waters and made
the streams to flow.






[Names: Mamaccana, Mamaccidapah]
Once Mother Nature, a youthful female, in a
state of passion conceives you and brings you to life
and birth. Then another, a voracious raging demoniac
swallows you. Yet another, cool and kind, overflowing
with love, caresses and comforts you as a child. And
[Names: Indra]
with his own essential strength.






[Names: Adha]
Maghavan, lord of might and excellence, when


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 18 95


the self-deluded fool, though arms and shoulders
broken, in a state of madness, striking right and left
later higher and crush the head of the wicked opponent
with a deadly strike of the thunderbolt.




[Names: Grastih, Arilham]
manam.


Just as a young cow gives birth to the calf, so
does the mother, Mother Nature, give birth to Indra,
jiva, the blessed soul, essentially a lover of life, inspired
with the will to love and live, to act, to move around
and to know the Divine Word. A divine child is man,
lover and winner of honour and excellence, and
invincible, blest with the human body.







[Names: Utamatamahisamanvavenadami, Athabravid]
Then (having given birth to the soul) Mother
Nature (inspired with divinity), loving, longing and
yearning for the well being of the child, softly speaks,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




warning the great off-spring: Dear child, the devas,
senses, mind and all, are neglecting, forsaking,
misleading you (in your state of darkness, ignorance
and unawareness). Indra, the born soul, dispelling
darkness and destroying Vrtra, demon of ignorance,
speaks loud and bold to Vishnu, intelligent spiritual self:
Dear friend, arise and act for self redemption (through
existence with the devas, senses, mind and the






[Names: Kaste, Kaste]
Indra, obedient soul, holding on to the feet of
the father, who can render your mother a widow? Who
can hurt you while asleep or moving about? What is
that supernormal power over and above your state of
grace which can corrupt you? (Answer: None.)






[Names: Avartya, Suna, Apasyam]
At peace beyond fluctuations of the mind, I

ripen and refine the inner visions. I see no saviour either


in the experience of the senses or among the external
powers of nature. Indeed, I have seen even Mother


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 19 97


Nature insulted and desecrated. Ultimately it is the bird
of heaven that brings me the divine message, nectar
sweets of the honey of real life.


Mandala 4/Sukta 19






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Mahamubhe]
Indra, lord ruler of power and excellence,
wielder of the thunderbolt of law, justice and protection,
all the scholars of the world, nobles and divines,
defenders, holy yajakas and both earth and heaven elect
and invite you alone, great, vast and high in grandeur,
lord sublime, unique and incomparable. They invoke
you for the destruction of Vrtra, demon of darkness,
ignorance and selfishness.






[Names: Avasrjanta, Ahannahim]
Indra, lord of the world, men of age, experience
and wisdom, firm in their values and conduct of life, as
also the brilliant nobles and divines of the world, create
and consecrate the ruler of the earth dedicated to truth
as the very being and purpose of his existence. And like


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the sun, light of the world dedicated to his eternal task
and nature, breaking the cloud sleeping over the locked
up vapours, and releasing the streams of water to flow
and feed the world, the ruler destroys the demons of
darkness and their strongholds to make the waters of
life to flow and give new energy and freshness of life to
the people.






[Names: Atrpnuvantam, Sapta]
Indra, lord of light, power and excellence, ruler
of the world, with a stroke of the thunderbolt destroy
without relent the serpentine demon, Vrtra, insatiable,
blocking up and sleeping over seven streams of the
onward flow of life.






[Names: Aksodayacchavasa, Drlhanyaubhnadu]
Indra, with his own strength and courage and
by his blazing forces, shakes the earths and skies just as
the winds beat and shear the currents of water flows
and concentrations of vapour. Lustrous, passionate and
inspired, he crushes mighty strongholds of the enemy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 19 99
and breaks down the peaks of mountainous adversaries.






[Names: Atarpayo]
As mothers rush to the child to protect it, so do
the multitudinous armies rush forward to defend you
alongwith the chariots. You break the clouds, fill the
rivers with water and make them flow and thus, O lord
Indra, you set the locked up seas rolling.






[Names: Tvam, Aramayo]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, with thanks and
homage to nature and her maker, serve the earth, great
protective mother of her children, universal sustainer
of life overflowing with nourishment for the defender of
humanity and destroyer of enmity for the sake of peace
and well being of all. Fill the earth with food and plenty,
make her a lovely place for living, let the streams ripple
and flow, make the seas roll, inviting all to surf and
swim and navigate, and cross the storms of existence.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pragruvo, Dhanvanyajran]
Like the winding streams of rushing waters, let
Indra, ruler of the world, develop the fatal armour as
the destructive and defensive force. Let him enlist young
and intelligent women dedicated to truth and progress.
Let him plan and provide irrigation projects for the
desert lands to restore their fertility. Similarly let him
develop the cattle wealth and take care of the wives of
the warriors and make them play a creative role in






[Names: Purvirusasah, Saradasca, Paristhita, Indrah]
Just as the sun causes the ancient dawns to rise
and moves the cycle of the seasons such as winter and
others and move them on and on, and just as solar energy
breaks the clouds and makes the rivers flow, so let Indra,
ruler of the world, break open the locked up energy of
still waters and make it flow in streams for the
development and progress of the earth and her children.


ad neu


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 19 101




[Names: Vamribhih, Vyandho]
Indra, master of motive energies and controller
of the speed and direction of resources, by rising hills
hold the unused and unusable water of the streams
emerging from the source from further flow, collect and
lift the flows together, redirect the water so that the fields
and crops receiving the water proclaim the gift as it
flows out from the reservoir filling the canals.






[Names: Prate, Yathayatha]
Rajan, glorious ruler of the world, the deeds of
ancient and eternal value you have done, the
programmes you have accomplished, and the self-
proclaiming acts of generosity and noble adventures you
have performed, the noble scholar and poet sings and
celebrates in your honour, O wise leader and master,
exactly as you have performed in the interest of





[Names: Akari]
Sung and celebrated thus, Indra, O ruler of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




world, create, bear and bring food, energy and
knowledge for the celebrants just as the rivers flow for
us all. And thus, this the latest song of homage and
adoration is offered to you to the best of our knowledge
and intelligence. Bless us, we pray, with intelligence
and knowledge so that we may be warriors of the chariot
in the service of Divinity and humanity.


Mandala 4/Sukta 20


[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
SITU I | त



[Names: Ojisthebhirnrpatirvajrabahuh]
May Indra, strong and blazing hero, impetuous
and impassioned warrior of the arms of thunder, ruler
and sustainer of the people, harbinger of the cherished
fruits of noble desire and peace, come to us from far
and near for our defence and protection. Lovers of the
battles of life as we are, join us in our heats and meets
and battles of action for progress with the most powerful
weapons and warriors of the time.





[Names: Tisthati]
May Indra, lord great and glorious, commanding


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 20 103


wealth, honour and excellence, wielding thunderous
arms of latest design and power, come to us with his
forces, come well at the fastest for our protection and
all round success, and may he, we pray, stand by us in
the conduct of this yajna of ours for victory in our battle
of peace and progress in the field of production,
development of energy, and advancement in arts and
sciences.






[Names: Imam, Svaghniva]
This yajna of our social order, Indra, lord
commander of wealth and power, honour and
excellence, ruling, guiding and sharing the governance
of our cities, you would join and share with us in our
plans and discussions throughout the holy programme
of ours. And we hope, O wielder of the thunderbolt,
that with you as the leader and pioneer we shall fight
like hunters of the wild and win the battle for the
achievement of the wealth and values of the good life.






[Names: Usannu, Somasya, Somas]
wealth and strength and power, glowing with love and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




kindness for us, happy and joyous at heart close by us,
preserve, protect and promote the plenty and prosperity
of the nation’s honour fought for and won for every
partner and then, after the battle and struggle, enjoy the
honey sweets of life with a taste of the food and pleasure
of peace and progress.






[Names: Maryo]
Mighty and full abundant is Indra who is praised
and celebrated by the latest sages and scholars like a
tree laden with ripe fruit, like a victor putting the enemy
to flight. Like a man loving and honouring his beloved,
knowing, loving and respecting Indra at the closest and
highest, I too celebrate and exalt Indra invoked and
glorified by the whole humanity.






[Names: Girirna, Indrah, Adarta]
Inherently mighty like a cloud and a mountain,
dynamic and sublime, Indra is blazing glorious, ever
known for his power and patience, destroyer of enemies,
thunderous of arms, awful as an invincible warrior,
abundant as the sea and overflowing with the wealth of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 20 105


life.


[Names: Udvavrsanastavisiva, Puruhita]
By birth and by nature, there is none to resist
him and to turn his back, none to destroy the wealth
and power of his glory and majesty. Ever pouring forth
the showers of favours, blazing with forces under
command, O lord of might and passion, universally
invoked and exalted, bear and bring for us the wealths
and honours of the good life.





[Names: Ikse, Siksanarah]
I see you watch over the treasures of the wealth
and home of the people and open up the treasures of the
languages and learning of the earths. You are the leader
of knowledge and education, warrior and victor of wars,
and director of the circulation of the collective wealth
and assets of the world in many ways.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Kaya, Sacya, Sacistho, Puru]
What is that knowledge and expertise, what sort
after all, by which, let me hear, you, mighty majestic
and most versatile, somehow achieve success and
victory again and again, and by which, being the greatest
breaker and destroyer of sin and evil and crime, you
bear and bring plenty of wealth for the generous






[Names: Mano, Navye, Saste]
Indra, lord of majesty and generosity, we pray,
forsake us not, bear and bring and give us that plenty
and variety of wealth which is yours meant for a gift to
the generous devotee in this new, productive, admirable
and well directed yajnic song of celebration in your
honour, and may we, we pray, continue to speak and
sing in praise of your glory.





[Names: Akari]
Indra, generous lord of knowledge, wealth,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 21 107


honour and excellence, sung and celebrated thus by the
devotees, bear and bring and increase your gift of the
wealth of food, energy and knowledge of arts and
sciences for the celebrants like the overflowing streams
of water across the earth. This new homage of song and
adoration is created and offered to your honour so that,
O lord of horse and armour, we pray, we may rise as a
nation of chariot warriors, generous and obedient to
[Names: Divinity]
Mandala 4/Sukta 21






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Vavrdhanas]
May Indra, ruler and protector of the people,
come here to us for our protection and advancement
and, praised and sung, may the brave hero share our joy
of celebration. Exalted and ascending he is, time tested
his forces, bright and blazing as light of the sun. May
he, we pray, strengthen our social order and raise it to
the heights of prosperity.





[Names: Tasyediha, Yasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Here on this earth praise Indra, celebrate his acts
of bravery and generosity, appreciate and honour the
leaders and commanders of the mighty and majestic
glorious achiever, whose yajnic rule over the social order
is worth knowing and holy as an umbrella over the
people like the cover of universal and effulgent sunlight,
challenging, fighting, winning, forbearing and






[Names: Svarnaradavase, Marutvan, Marutva]
Let Indra, with vision, power and energy to rule,
come instantly from the heavens, from the earth, from
the sea or from the orb of the sun and from the ethereal
spaces for our protection and promotion. Let the lord
of the winds come from afar or from the vedi of cosmic
yajna and from the centre of truth and rectitude.






[Names: Sthurasya, Vayuna]
In the holiest programmes of our daily business
of life, we honour and celebrate Indra who rules the
great and permanent assets of the nation, who wins
victories by the winds in the battles of the lands and
movable wealth and who, with bold and intrepidable


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 21 109


confidence and initiative, wholly and faultlessly directs
the circulation of the nation’s wealth for development.






[Names: Rnjasanah, Puruvara]
He who moves forward, who creates and holds
food stocks for the sake of consumption in emergency
and establishes courtesy and mutual respect as a value
of social culture, who creates and uses the language of
cooperation and social cohesion for the unity and
cooperation of the common wealth of order, who is
accepted and celebrated by many many people with
words of reverence, and who, by all these ways, creates
honour and prestige for the nation of humanity, calls
for the shots in world assemblies and rises higher as





[Names: Dhisa]
If the wise people sitting in the house of a loving
and nobly ambitious man of yajna, were to do homage
with their intelligence and wisdom to the generous giver
and yajaka and to those who are realised souls worthy
of company, then the one, Indra himself, really great,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




beyond anger and fear, would come and join there as
the leader and high priest, as indeed the very fire, winner
and carrier of fragrance, in the battles of life in the house
of the yajamana taking it as his own affair in his own
house.






[Names: Satra, Susmah, Guha]
When truly in yajnic session in honour of the
lord sustainer of humanity, Indra, the light and power
of the generous lord showers upon the celebrant for his
fulfilment, then the hidden wealth and potential in the
mind and home of the loving and faithful yajamana
blooms forth for the fruition of his intelligence,
advancement and life’s joy.






[Names: Vidadgaurasya]
When I open the flood gates of the cloud and
break open the path of the mountain, I augment the flow
of the rivers with fresh reservoirs. And then the wise
pioneers diving deep and reaching the depths of the
brilliance and generosity of nature’s resources carry on
researches for the food, energy and speed of life’s


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 21 111






[Names: Bhadra]
Noble are your arms, O lord Indra, as
instruments of noble deeds, gracious your hands
generously giving the wealth of life to the celebrant.
What and where is the seat of your dispensation? Why
not bless us with joy? Why not rejoice and give us the
thrill and the ecstasy?






[Names: Indrah, Purustuta]
Thus does Indra, ruler of the world, brilliant and
ever true, destroyer of the demons of darkness and
enmity, give us abundant wealth for the devotee. O lord
praised and universally celebrated, give us the wealth
of the world by virtue of noble and creative actions.
Pray give us the privilege of your divine protection so
that we may enjoy the gift of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Akari]
Indra, lord of knowledge, honour and excellence
of wealth and well being, praised and celebrated, bear
and bring the wealth of food, energy, knowledge and
progress for the devotee like the flowing streams of
living waters. This new song of homage is offered to
you, O lord of speed and advancement, so that with
action and intelligence we may be masters of chariots
and noble servants of Divinity.


Mandala 4/Sukta 22






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Yanna, Brahma, Savasa, Somamuktha]
Indra, lord of light and power, supreme ruler of
the world, commanding honour and majesty, who is ever
with us as a friend, who loves us, who does great things
for us and, bearing the awful might of thunder and
generosity of the cloud, and bestowing on us food,
energy and knowledge, honour and fame, greatness of
wealth and grandeur, peace of mind and joy of health,
and admirable art and poetry, goes on and on with his
glory and majesty.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 22 113






[Names: Vrsa, Sriye]
Indra, brave and generous, fierce and mighty
brilliant but kind and generous, best and highest of
leaders, blazing with his majesty and shooting out the
vibrations of his four-winged forceful power of thunder
directed all round by his arms of protection and progress,
interweaves the harsh and variegated regions of the earth
into a unified pattern under the warm cover of a single
umbrella for the sake of mutual harmony and beauty of
life.






[Names: Dadhano]
Indra is the leader who, brilliant ruler, most
wielding the blazing thunderbolt in hands, makes the
earth and skies shine with his grandeur, and, with his
great forces and dynamic intelligence, makes the proud
and passionate tremble and the loving and shining ones




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Visva, Susmya]
All the solid spheres and mountains of the world,
the floods and waves of liquid motions, the regions of
light ancient as time, the earths, all born of the dynamics
of Prakrti, the source mothers of the earth such as heat
and water and oceans of space, or the roaring winds of
the interspaces, all these like the world of humanity, the
lord of omnipotence, Indra, bears, moves and sustains.






[Names: Yacchura, Savasavivesth]
Indra, lord and presence omnipotent, invincible
and intrepidable, those acts of yours greater than the
greatest are worth admiration and exaltation in all
celebrations of the world which, with your might,
bearing and sustaining the fixed stars and moving forces
of the universe, you perform with your power and force
of thunder to break the clouds holding up the process
of evolution.







[Names: Adha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 22 115


Indra, lord of great valour and magnificence,
generous as rain showers and magnanimous at heart,
all those universal acts of yours are great and true. The
cows, the earths and the words of vision stream forth
with nourishment, energy and inspiration. And by your
fear and force of law the rivers rush on with rapidity
and the seas roll round with awe.






[Names: Atraha]
And surely, O lord of horse and armour and
speed of progress, Indra, those sisterly and forward
looking dynamic forces of yours in the land, noble and
brilliant all, managing the resources along disciplined
and determined lines, forces which you released to move
forward at freedom on the long and high road to their
goal, rush on with pleasure, favour and hopes for
protection and exhort and exalt you.





[Names: Pipile, Sami, Sasama, Saktih, Asmadryak]
Distilled is the soma of exciting joy of life’s
action as homage to you. May it reach you like the sea.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




And O lord, bring us the peace and power of the
omnipotent and self-refulgent Divinity at the fastest like
a driver controlling the reins of a tempestuous courser.






[Names: Asme, Asmabhyam]
O lord of peace, patience, power and victory,
bless us with all those gifts of yours which are
permanent, challenging, highest and most generous. For
us, destroy the demons of darkness and enmity which
deserve to be destroyed, and ward off and annihilate
the onslaughts on the worshipful humanity.






[Names: Asmakamitsu, Srnuhi]
Indra, ruler of the world, commanding wealth
and valour and honour, giver of the speech of wisdom,
lands and cows, listen to our voice, measure, mark out,
plan, and apportion for us vast and wondrous successes
in the field of food, energy and victory. Inspire us with
all the possibilities of intellectual and scientific
achievement, and let us awake into a heaven of light
and freedom.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 23 117






[Names: Akari]
Thus faithfully praised, celebrated and
worshipped in song, O lord of power and progress, Indra,
bless the supplicant worshipper with food, energy and
advancement like the streams that flow abundant. This
homage of worship is created and offered with the best
of our intention and intelligence praying that with the
divine gift of latest genius we may be warriors of the
chariot and obedient servants of Divinity.


Mandala 4/Sukta 23






[Names: Indra, Rtadeva, Devata, Vamadava, Gautama, Rshi, Katha, Pibannusano, Somamudhah, Somamudha]
How to evolve and exalt the grandeur of life?
Which creative yajaka’s holy programme of yajnic
instruction and evolution to join? Which milky drink
of soma to drink from the mother’s breast?


The great, generous and protective lord of
honour and excellence, loving and owning up the
devoted disciple supplicant, cherishing his offer of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




homage, blesses him with the gift of refinement and
exaltation of his innate wealth of honour and grandeur.






[Names: Kadasya]
Who is the brave who reaches the ecstasy of the
lord’s company? Who attains to him and shares the
manifestations of his vision and intelligence? When does
he know and realise the wonder and variety of this lord’s
benediction? When does the lord’s grace flow for the
protection and advancement of the supplicant in yajna?






When does Indra listen to the supplicant? And
while he listens, when does he grant that the time for
his liberation and ultimate protection is come? What
are, for sure, the ultimate bounds (if any) of the lord’s
gifts of grace? How do the celebrants sing of the
gracious lord for the supplicant?




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 23 119




[Names: Devo]
When does the supplicant, though bound in his
limitations yet intent upon his search for Divinity, attain
to the wealth of the lord’s grace?


When the lord self-refulgent and infinitely
generous becomes cognizant of my yajnas of service
and devotion, accepts my offers of food and fragrance
in the vedi, and owns me as his child and disciple in







[Names: Usaso]
When would the refulgent and generous lord in
this light of the dawn accept and cherish the devotion
and friendship of mortal humanity? When would his
love and friendship extend to the human friends who in
this yajna of love and covenant extend their love and
ambition over practical work in divine service?





[Names: Kimadamatram, Sriye]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O lord, when and how shall we describe your
firm and protective love and friendship and your
brotherly affection to our friends?


The cosmic body of this gracious lord and the
various stages of his creation are for the beauty and
glory of existence, blissful as heaven, various and most
wondrous. So also are the beauties and generosities of
the sun for the love and sustenance of life.






[Names: Druham]
Keen to eliminate the hateful, destructive and
to greater force, and where the existing forces thus grow
fiercer, our ruler, awesome and bold as terror, like a
man under pressure of an obligation, wipes out unknown
fears like the dawns dispelling darkness.





[Names: Rtasya, Rtasya, Sucamana]
The protective forces of truth are everlasting.
The vision and understanding rooted in truth removes
all hurdles and breaks the clouds of darkness. The word
and message of truth clears up the ears of the deaf,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 23 121


awakening and brightening up the man who hears,
giving him the light of Divinity.






[Names: Puruni, Rtena]
The foundations of Truth and Eternal Law are
unshakable, boundless and beautiful, the very
embodiments of truth, beauty and Dharma for life forms.
By the Law of truth do people enjoy long life and
showers of joy. By the Law of truth do our voice and
senses follow truth and reach the very source of reality
and the seat of the law of eternal truth.






[Names: Rtam, Susmasturaya, Rtaya]
The pursuant of truth attains to truth. The
operation of the eternal law of truth is fast,
instantaneous, so fast that it is omnipresent, all operative.
The abundant earth, deep interspaces and the high
heavens all like the mother cow yield the milk of life in
service of the eternal law of truth.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Akari]
Indra, world ruler, omnipotent lord of universal
truth and abundance, thus praised and worshipped, bear
and bring food, energy, and the sustaining power of life
for the celebrant in abundance like the rivers
overflowing with life giving waters. This new song of
homage and fragrant yajna is offered in worship, O lord
of the universal dynamics of nature, in hope with prayer
that with vision and intelligence we may be masters of
the chariot and dedicated workers in your service of the
law of truth.


Mandala 4/Sukta 24






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Dadirhi]
O citizens of the land, what is that order of praise
and approbation which would persuade and move Indra
toward us for our joint success and prosperity? A very
child of might is he, inspirer of the brave, most youthful
hero of latest knowledge and modern tactic, eminent
warrior, creator and munificent giver of wealth for his
supporters, manager and promoter of the earth and its
resources, and leader and commander of the generous


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 24 123






[Names: Indrah]
He is to be invoked in the battles against
darkness, evil and crime, lord adorable as he is, profusely
adored, Indra, lord of honour and excellence, achiever
of truth and giver of noble riches. He, lord of wealth,
might and majesty, bears and bestows choice gifts of
honour and freedom upon the mortals who dedicate
themselves to the lord of existence and pray for success
and divine grace in the ways of life.






[Names: Taminnaro, Mitho]
People and leaders both call upon him in their
battles of life in search of freedom, those who seek
release and those who look to him for the protection of
their bodies. Together, men and women, men and
leaders, go to him for freedom from suffering as well as
for the well being of their children and grand children.






[Names: Kratuyanti, Indrayante, Indrayant]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




People of the land, both bright and blazing as
well as impetuous in action, together, joining in the
pursuit of knowledge and yajnic action do their best
and holiest in faith in their own fields of social
development freely, and when all the citizens thus
engage in battle against the demons of darkness, evil
and poverty and conduct themselves with discipline on
a war footing, they unitedly and unanimously choose
Indra as their guide and leader in action.






[Names: Adiddha, Aditsomo]
And then the warriors all work for the honour
and excellence of the nation through joint action. And
then let the fruit of the action and struggle, like delicious
pudding seasoned, be consolidated and reserved. And
then when the present and future is secured, let the soma
of joy be prepared and ripened for the warriors of
courage and valour, and then let all join Indra, virile
and generous leader, in the celebration.






[Names: Krnotyasmai, Somamussate, Somamussat, Sadhricinena]
One who thus does honour and distinguished


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 24 125


service for Indra, ruler of the world, and ५181115 the soma
of excellence and joy for him who, of course, loves
honour and excellence and joy for humanity, and one
who, with an undivided dedicated mind, without any
selfish axe to grind, acts as a friend and supportive
warrior for him in the battles of humanity: Indra too for
such a person creates and awards rare and choicest gifts
of honour and dignity like a friend.






[Names: Indraya, Prati, Susmamindrah]
Whoever for Indra, today, distils and ripens the
soma of honour and excellence, confirms and
consolidates the gains of victory over darkness, evil and
want, and perfects the production for national
consumption: to such a person Indra responds, loving
and listening to his songs of praise arising from the heart,
and the lord in-vests him with inner strength of valour
and showers of unbounded generosity.





[Names: Yada, Acikradadvrsanam, Somasudbhih, Somasudbhi]
When the ruler of the land and noble head of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




his people and destroyer of the enemies perceives a
tumult of battle around and afar, he displays his long
range deployment of arms and armies, while the
citizenry at home, as a sustaining and supportive force,
exhorts him and proclaims aloud his internal strength
of morale created and sharpened by the creators and
refiners of national energy.






[Names: Bhuyasa]
The poor ignorant trader buys the pleasure of
glitter and sense at the great price of the spirit. Drained
out, exhausted and disvalued, he goes back: “I want
back what I had parted with in exchange for what I had
got.” No, not now. With all that he can surrender, he
cannot redeem even a little of what he has lost. The
poor as well as the intelligent get back only what they
bargain for in word and action.






[Names: Kaimam]
Who can buy this Indra, this spiritual glory, from
me for all time with the ten senses and their pleasure?
None. Yes, when one dispels the evils of darkness,
ignorance and indulgence, then the lord gives it back to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 25 127


me.




[Names: Akari]
Indra, lord of glory, thus praised and celebrated,
bless the supplicant with food, energy and enlightenment
just as overflowing streams bring living waters for
humanity. O lord of power and progress at high speed,
thus is the song of celebration and yajnic homage offered
to you, the newest presentation, so that with your
blessings of intelligence and action we may be master
warriors of the chariot and great servants of Divinity.


Mandala 4/Sukta 25






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Jojosa]
Who today among noble humanity, lover of the
light of divinity, inspired with holy ambition and
enthusiasm, enjoys the favour and friendship of Indra?
Or, who, having offered oblations of distilled soma into
the lighted fire for the achievement of great redeeming
divine protection, enjoys the honour and excellence of
life? Answer: The friend and lover of humanity who is
dedicated to Indra, the supreme ruler.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Indrasya, Indras]
Who bows with words of prayer to Indra for the
gift of peace, pleasure, honour and excellence of body,
mind and soul? And who submits to him in search of
knowledge and self-awareness? Who loves the lights
of the dawn and the lovely cows in the morning? Who
waits on Indra for help and protection? Who feels
anxious for friendship and fraternity with him? Who
prays for security and poetic vision to the lord of
omniscience? Answer: Who ever wants to do good unto
all including the self as servant of Divinity.






[Names: Adityan, Aditya, Aditim, Aditi, Jyotiritte, Kasyasvinavindro, Agnih, Agni]
Who these days opts for and wins the protection
and benedictions of the divine powers of nature? Who
pursues and prays for the light of the suns in orbital
phases, the generosity of nature and mother earth, and
the secrets and mysteries of light? Whose achievement
of knowledge and contribution to life’s peace and joy
is favourably in tune with the nature and operation of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 25 129


the laws and properties of the Ashvins, earth and the
skies, Indra, the sun, and Agni, heat and magnetic energy
of the earth? Answer: One who acts in cooperation with
nature for life and in the service of Divinity.






[Names: Tasma, Sarma, Agnirbharatah, Agnirbharata, Indraya, Suryam, Surya]
To him Agni, the cosmic power and presence
that holds, sustains and governs the world of nature and
humanity, provides a happy home, and he would watch
the rising sun for a long long time who is able to say
this with confidence: We pursue knowledge and create
the means of comfort and happiness for humanity, the
world of human interests, and the highest qualities and
attainments of human values among the people of the
world, and this we do for Indra, Lord of humanity and
the entire world of existence.






[Names: Aditih, Priyah]
Neither many nor few, nor even the fiercest, can
overpower him who acts in the service of Indra,
governing power and presence of the universe. Indeed
mother earth, in fact mother nature of imperishable


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




wealth, blesses him with abundant peace and joy in a
happy home, for, to Indra, the one who does good is
dear, the lover of Divinity is dear, the follower of the
path of rectitude is dear, and the creator of comfort, joy
and enlightenment for life is dear to this lord.






[Names: Supravyah, Nasusverapirna]
Indra, leader and ruler, instant destroyer of
enmity, 1s openly accessible to the person who creates
and produces good things and thus contributes positively
to the peace, progress and happiness of life, and he fully
protects and promotes such people and raises them to
maturity as the sun ripens grain. But to the person who
is uncreative, and malignant scandalizer, he is not
accessible, not a friend, or a brother, or protector, in
fact he is awfully opposed to such negatives.

(Creativity and a positive, contributive attitude
to life is a value, while uncreativeness and a negative,
destructive attitude is a dangerous disvalue. The former
is to be protected and promoted, but the latter has to be
opposed and eliminated.)






[Names: Asya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 26 131


Not with the miserly man of wealth does Indra
bargain any friendship since he is the master creator of
peace and joy and lover of honour and excellence. He
does not acknowledge, much less approve of the wealth
of the ungenerous. In fact, he exposes the wealth of the
hoarder until, exposed and ashamed, he is reduced to
nullity, because, basically and exclusively he is for the
creative and generous who produce and mature the
wealth of the nation to the state of honour and dignity.






[Names: Indram, Indram, Indram]
People at the farthest and at the nearest, highest
and lowest, and people at the middle, all call upon Indra,
lord of honour and excellence. People on the move and
those at the end of the journey call upon Indra, lord of
peace and security. People settled in the home and
warriors on the battle field call upon Indra, lord of
prosperity and victory. And the leaders of the people
and the men fighting for food, struggling for energy
and panting for speed and progress call upon Indra, lord
giver of food, energy and advancement.


Mandala 4/Sukta 26






[Names: Indra, Suparna, Brahma, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Aham, Suryasca, Aham, Kutsamarjuneyam, Kutsamarjuneya]
I am the thinker and law-giver of existence, I
am the light of life, I comprehend the time and space of
the universe, I am the visionary, I am the centre and
shaker at the core. I create the thunder and light and I
make the thunderbolt. I am the poet of omniscience and
passionate lover of my creation. Come ye all and see.






[Names: Ahamapo, Anu]
I give the earth for noble humanity, and I bring
rain and rolling oceans and waves of energy for the
mortals who give in charity, and, in consequence, saints
and sages who love are blest with light divine.






[Names: Sambarasya, Satatamam]
In the state of perfect bliss, I first move ninty
and nine streams of cloud showers together, and as I
protect and promote the man of hospitality and the giver
of enlightenment, I open hundred-fold gates of delight
and prosperity for the whole world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 26 133






[Names: Syenah, Maruto, Syenebhya, Acakraya]
Just as the eagle bird is the fastest of all the birds
of prey in flight and descent so may that glorious
heavenly bird of light wings, the sun, which moves by
its own mighty force without wheels and which is prime
among the powers of nature, the Maruts, may bring for
humanity food and energy blest by the best and brilliant
bounties of Divinity.






[Names: Bharadyadi, Tuyam, Syeno]
When the bird of the wings of light, vibrating
as sunrays, flying fast as thought by the wide paths of
space brings and releases food and energy here, and
then from here itself flies back fast with earthly, sweets
of soma juices (to bring them back, reinvigorated), thus
this eagle wins thanks and praise from earthly humanity.






[Names: Ryjipt, Somam, Soma]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




The eagle bird of light, enjoying the company
of heavenly planets, coming from far off country by
simple paths, having taken from that distant region of
light sweet celestial delights of soma energies of life,
gives us that nectar and, taking the soma sweets of earth
grows stronger and more generous.






[Names: Adaya, Atra, Somasya, Somas]
The eagle bird of light, ruler and illuminator of
the world, bears and brings a thousand delights of soma
for life with unbounded yajnic creations of organic
tonics for health and, in the ecstasy of the drink of soma
on earth, doing noble actions and maintaining human
habitations with wisdom and equanimity of mind,
eliminates all stupidity and negativities!


Mandala 4/Sukta 27




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Garbhe, Satam]
Having been in the mother’s womb, I have
witnessed and known the birth and growth of all these
divine creations (such as the elements, earth, water,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 27 135


senses, and mind, etc.). Hundreds of golden cities and
iron walls have protected me. And having lived all this,
Ihave got out to freedom like a falcon bird of the winds
with impetuous speed.


(The mantra describes the soul’s journey through
births and death’s across the body forms and then the
release to the freedom of Moksha.)






[Names: Irma]
That womb of nature couldn’t hold me against
my will and pleasure. I sat in there with all my vigour
and penetrative vision. And when the Lord inspirer who
sustains the hundreds of golden cities and iron walls of
prison wards off the contraries of flesh and blood, then
the falcon bird of the spirit, rising up and high, crosses
the storms and shears of winds to freedom.




[Names: Srjadyadasma, Jjyam]
When the falcon bird of the spirit descends from
heaven singing and roaring with energy, then if the


winds and storms of existence hijack the master of the
golden city, then, just as the warrior draws the string of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the bows and shoots off the arrow, so the soul, archer
subduer of contraries, with the light radiating from the
flame of the heart, draws up the string of yoga meditation
and shoots away the fluctuations.






[Names: Rjipya, Antah]
The falcon bird of the spirit, going by the path
of rectitude always under the protection of Indra, lord
of life, bears the sacred vessel of the body like a prize
from the vast regions of joy and energy and, at the end,
flying up, the bird on the wing jettisons the sacred vessel
like the plume of a bird bound down to the nest.






[Names: Adha, Sukramandhah, Adhvaryubhih]
Let Indra, the brave soul, blest with and
commanding honour and prosperity, bear, in response
to the Lord’s grace, the bright and beauteous body vessel
nourished by mother earth and cows, satisfying, pure
and powerful, and let him enjoy the food seasoned and
sanctified by holy yajakas, and prime delicious drink


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 28 137


for realising the beauty and ecstasy of existence. Yes,
let the fearless brave spirit bear the body vessel to drink
of the joy of life and to celebrate the gift of divine


Mandala 4/Sukta 28






[Names: Indra, Soma, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Ahannahimarinat]
With you and for your friendship, O Soma,
power, pleasure and excellence of life, did Indra,
resplendent ruler of the world, set the spatial waters
afloat, broke the cloud, made the seven streams of water
flow and opened up the hidden treasures of life.




Soma, power of cool and bliss of nature’s cosmic
energy, with force, constantly counters the cycle of solar
radiations operating with mighty catalysis and coming
from higher regions, and thus the great all round
negativity of sun rays against life is warded off.



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ahann, Agnir, Durge, Sarva]
Indu, Soma, cool and bliss of mind, nature and
people of the land and forces of peace, with your
balancing action, Indra, powerful and blazing, destroys
darkness and evil, as fire burns off the demoniac forces
before the mid-day yajna in the battle of life. Thus does
the spirit of life, with Indra and Soma, hot and cold in
the existential circuit of nature, destroy and ward off a
thousand onslaughts of impending dangers and attacks.
And so do the acts of yajna in the home of the family
and fortress of the ruler.






[Names: Visvasmat, Abadhethamamrnatam, Satrun]
Indra, ruler of the world blazing as the sun,
reduce the evil and wicked to nullity all round, and save
the people and the forces of generosity from ignominy.
Indra and Soma, power and peace of the land, ruler and
people, bind down the enemy forces, give peace and
security to the good, and thus win honour and fame with
your weapons of protection.






[Names: Adardrtam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 29 139


It is true, O potent commanders of honour and
excellence, Indra and Soma, destroyer of evil and creator
of peace and prosperity, together you release the earth’s
vast energy and progressive forces, break open the
resources of wealth and fertility, and release the lands
from oppression into freedom.


Mandala 4/Sukta 29






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Anah, Indra, Purun, Puru]
Indra, lord ruler of honour and excellence, spirit
incarnate of power and prosperity, come with all the
vigour and velocity for our protection and progress.
Invoked and invited, happy and rejoicing, come with
the fastest achievements. You are the wealth of the nation
incarnate, truly the harbinger of success. Praised,
appraised and pursued by the highpriests of knowledge
and action, come directly and indirectly by all paths of
centripetal movement to bless our manifold yajnic
programmes of creation and production.





[Names: Svasvo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




And he does come, lord of men and master of
knowledge all-aware, when he is invoked and invited
to the yajna by those who distil the soma for yajna and
sprinkle the vedi with holy water and ghrta. Then,
commanding the horse and speed of the chariot, brave
and fearless, self-confident and honoured, he rejoices
with the heroes who create the soma, honour, grandeur
and the joy of life for humanity.






[Names: Sravayedasya, Udvavrsano, Indrah]
Speak to him, let him hear, he loves to hear of
the cherished policy and direction for the sake of speed
and success in action so that he may be happy and rejoice
with you all. And then he, Indra, ruler of all and creator
of honour and excellence, generous as showers and
blazing brave in action, would create paths of progress
into a state of freedom from fear and success, and thence
would flow the ultimate release.






[Names: Accha, Satani]
With grace, he goes to the supplicant with
protection, thus, to bless the earnest seeker invoking
him and singing in praise. He holds the supplicant and
celebrant closest to his heart and, yoking a hundred


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 141


thousand horses to his chariot, wielding the thunderbolt

for creation and protection, he hastens to the devotees.


[Names: Tvotaso, Bhejanaso, Puruksoh, Purukso]
Under your protection, O lord of power and
glory, Indra, lord ruler and giver of honour and
excellence, let us be earnest seekers of knowledge, brave
and brilliant celebrants of Divinity, so that we may be


dedicated sharers of the abundance of the lord of light,
wealth, and generosity of sustenance incarnate.


Mandala 4/Sukta 30
Indra, Indra and Usha Devata, Vamadeva Gautama Rshi




[Names: Nakirindra, Nakireva]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, destroyer of evil
and breaker of the cloud like the sun, there is none higher
to you as you are.



[Names: Satra, Anu, Satra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




In truth and honour of conduct, all the people
together move around you in orbit, harmoniously, as
do the wheels of the chariot revolve round the axle.
Truly you are great, commanding honour and universal
fame.






[Names: Visve, Indra, Yadaha]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, all the nobilities
of humanity and divinities of nature, with all their
wisdom and resolution, relentlessly fight for you day
and night so that you are always victorious over the
enmities and negativities of life.



[Names: Yatrota, Kutsaya, Kutsa, Musaya, Suryam, Surya]
Where the battle rages in support of the warriors
fighting in defence of the oppressed and the wise, there
Indra, O lord of honour, power and justice, take up the
solar disc of thunder and crush the wicked.






[Names: Yatra, Tvamindra]
Where in the battle against the evil and the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 143


violent oppressing and fighting against all the nobilities
of the world you take up arms, you destroy the wicked






[Names: Pravah, Sacitbhiretasam]
Where you set in motion the streams and breezes
of comfort and joy for humanity, there also you move
and protect the sun orbiting at terrible speed with your
actions of omnipotence.






[Names: Kimadutasi, Atraha]
And what more! You are, O lord ruler and
commander of the wealth and power of the world, you
are the most passionate lover of rectitude and fiercest
destroyer of evil. And lo! you are the top redeemer of
the generous and shatterer of the selfish.




[Names: Etad, Striyam]
divah.


This truly is the manly valour you display in
action. In addition, this too is your wonder that you
dispel and ward off the rays of the malevolent star which,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




though, is the daughter of heaven like the dawn, the
light of which, too, you overcome.


[Names: Divascid, Usasamindra]
Indra, great you are. Surely the dawn is glorious,


daughter of heaven, which you refine, adorn and glorify,
and then make her disappear when she waxes with pride.


[Names: Aposa]
Indra, mighty ruler of heavens, breaks the
chariot of the dawn as she waxes, but when the chariot
is broken, she withdraws from the broken chariot in


fear and awe. (So do the forces of gate-crashing pride
withdraw under the blazing power of the ruler.)


[Names: Etadasya, Saye, Sasara]
When the chariot of this dawn is broken and
lies in unobstructed path ways of space and the dawn is


gone far away, then the sun, coming from afar, radiates
its glory far and wide.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 145





[Names: Pari]
Indra, lord of the elements, with your
inexhaustible force and power, you sustain the flow of
full and overflowing turbulent rivers on the earth.






[Names: Susnasya, Puro]
And when with your force and power you break
down the strongholds of this demon of drought and
sprinkle the land with water, then you acquire the wealth
of the land and the knowledge of science for the people.






[Names: Avahannindra]
Indra, ruler of the elements and vast spaces on
earth, you break the dark cloud of rain from the vast
skies on high and make the rivers flow from the
mountains, thereby rendering the generous people and
venerable families stronger and more generous.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






But destroy the hundreds and thousands of the
violent demons who are fixed in society like five fellies
fixed round the spokes of a wheel.






[Names: Utatyam, Satakratuh, Ukthesvindra]
And Indra, who performs hundreds of yajnic acts
of creation and generosity with his knowledge of the
Shastras, invites the formidable children of leading
pioneers of the nation to participate in the theoretical
and practical affairs of the state.



[Names: Ssacipatih, Turvasayadu, Indro]
Indra, lord of the people and the sacred voice,
ruler of the world and master of knowledge, helps the
man of efficiency, the man of effort, and also the simple
folk who do not know how to swim and enables them
all to cross the hurdles of life over to the shore.



[Names: Utatyd, Arnacitrarathavadhih]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 30 147


Indra, lord of goodness and nobility of power,
always smashes the grabber and the smuggler in
possession of wondrous transport across the world of
movement and communication over the border.






Indra, destroyer of evil and want, leader of
humanity, you restore and rehabilitate the two, the blind
and the disabled abandoned by society. None can reach
that level of service and philanthropy.





[Names: Satamasmanmayinarh, Divodasaya, Divodasa]
Indra, lord of power, justice and generosity, for
the sake of the creative and the generous giver you break
a hundred adamantine strongholds of hoarded wealth
like the sun that breaks the cloud concentrations of rain
to bless the generous earth.





[Names: Asvapayad, Dasanamindro]
Indra, the ruler, should smash three hundred
thousand of social saboteurs with weapons of far
reaching calibre for the peace and security of the law-


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




abiding servants of the nation and for keeping down of
the violent.






[Names: Yasta]
Indra, such as you are, ruler and protector of
the earth, destroyer of evil and promoter of the good,
you are equal and kind, like the sun, for all in treatment
since you bring about all that you do and achieve for all
of them as they deserve according to law and justice.






[Names: Adya]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, for sure whatever
deeds of courage and valour and of manly honour and
excellence you do for the good or against the wicked,




[Names: Vamam, Vamam]
darulati.


Indra, lord of glory, ruler of the world, destroyer
of evil, may Aryama, ordainer of the world’s law and
justice, give you the highest and most admirable gifts
of honour. May Pusha, lord of health and sustenance


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 31 149


bless you with the best of vigour and strength. May
Bhaga, lord of grandeur and excellence, grant you the
highest prosperity and dignity. May the generous lord
of art and beauty give you the best of art and craft and


Mandala 4/Sukta 31





[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Kaya, Kaya, Sacisthaya]
When would the Lord, sublime and wondrous,
ever greater, ever friendly, shine in our consciousness
and bless us? With what gifts of protection and
promotion? What highest favour of our choice? What
order of grace?






[Names: Kastva, Drlha]
What is the truest and highest of joys and foods
for body, mind and soul that may please you? What
wealth and value of life to help you break through the
limitations and settle on the rock-bed foundation of




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


[Names: Satam]
Friend of friends and protector of celebrants you
are, come and bless us too with a hundred modes of
protection and advancement. Be ours, O lord!

[Names: Niyudbhis]
Ruler of the world, turn and come to us on the
wheels of a chariot in motion. Come lord and help us
turn the wheel of the social order at the speed of winds.



[Names: Pravata, Abhaksi]
You walk down to the people, as one walks on
foot, by the paths of their holy words and actions of
yajnic offerings. I worship you and serve you like the
sun with the light of the sun.






[Names: Adha]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, all the ardour,
passions and yajnic offerings of men offered in honour
and service to you move like wheels continuously and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 31 151


reach you and then later to the sun.






[Names: Sacipate, Dataramavididhayum]
O lord of beauty and grace, power, intelligence
and will, sages of vision and devotion celebrate you as
lord of infinite honour and excellence in existence,
boundless giver and self-refulgent beyond imagination.






[Names: Puru]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, you give
immense wealth for the celebrant devotee and creator
of soma instantly, and ever more augment it many ways






[Names: Nahi]
Indra, lord omnipotent of infinite wealth and
generosity, the violent and the destroyers can never get,
nor do they choose to receive, the hundreds of gifts and
stall the wondrous deeds you do for the devotee.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.







[Names: Asman, Asman]
Indra, lord of infinite love, the hundred ways of
your divine protection, we pray, may protect us, the
thousand ways of promotion advance us, the infinite
blessings and good wishes lead us to fulfilment.






[Names: Maho]
Take us up, O lord, and receive us under your
divine protection for friendship, all round well being,
and for the great gift of the immense wealth of this



Ruler of the world, Indra, lead us on day and
night with abundant wealth of all kinds, lead us on and
on with all the protection and favours of divinity.



[Names: Asmabhyam, Navabhirindrotibhih]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 153


Indra, lord ruler of the wealth of the world, open
for us the gates of the cow stalls like the cow herd, open
the secrets of the Divine Word like the Omniscient, open
the treasures of the earth like the earth’s ruler and
protector, open the doors for us with the latest safeguards
and methods of protection.



[Names: Asmakam, Indrana, Gavyurasvayuriyate]
Indra, unchallengeable ruler of the world, our
chariot of progress goes on advancing, bold and
unobstructed, blazing bright, irresistible and
imperishable, winning the wealth of the holy earth with
unbounded speed and energy.



[Names: Asmakamuttamam, Surya, Varsistham]
Indra, refulgent sun, ruler of the world, lead us
to the highest heights of glory, our fame resounding
among the divinities, as in the most generous heavens
far above.


Mandala 4/Sukta 32




[Names: Indra, Ashva, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


[Names: Mahan]
Indra, lord and ruler of the world, mighty
destroyer of darkness and evil, come with all great
powers and protections, join and guide our progress.


[Names: Bhrmiscidghasi, Citram]
You are ever on the move, harbinger of good,
instant promoter, wondrous great in the fighting forces


of awful power, and you do wonders in matters of
protection and all round human progress.






[Names: Dabhrebhiscicchastyamsam, Sakhibhirye]
You stand by friends who are dedicated to you
even though they be the humblest and few, and with
your mighty power and lustre punish the violator of the
law and values of Dharma howsoever strong and

[Names: Vayamindra, Asman]
Indra, ruler of the world, we are with you, wholly


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 155


dedicated in word and deed. We bow to you in


[Names: Help, Anadhrstabhira]
Wielder of the thunderbolt of law and justice,


come and join us with marvellous, irreproachable, and
irresistible modes of defence, protection and promotion.






[Names: Bhuyamo, Yujo]
friends of yours, loyal and dedicated to you, blest with
cows and lands, knowledge and culture for the sake of
strength and speed of progress to resist and crush the
negative forces.




[Names: Tvam]
Indra, you alone rule over power and prosperity


and the speed of progress. Pray bring us ample food
and energy and the high speed of progress.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Stotrbhya]
The supplicants do not ask of you anything
otherwise since, O lord of power and world’s wealth,
Indra, praised and celebrated, you liberally grant ample
wealth of power and prosperity, honour and excellence
to the celebrants and devotees.





Indra, lord ruler of the world and its wealth and
power, the most enlightened scholars and celebrants
praise and pray to you in the holiest words for the gift
of food and energy, power and progress beyond






[Names: Puro]
Indra, lord of might, joyous and brilliant victor,
we sing and celebrate those warlike exploits of yours in
which you stormed the fortresses of slavery and broke




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 157




[Names: Tate, Sutesvindra]
Indra, lord of victorious might, in those lands
which you awakened into the joy of freedom, the
celebrants, men of knowledge and wisdom all, sing in
praise of you and celebrate those valorous deeds of yours
which you performed in there as for your children.





[Names: Avivrdhanta, Aisu]
Indra, lord of light and splendour, men of light
and wisdom, best of them all, and the singers of song
sing in praise of you and exalt your honour and fame.
Pray bless them all with honour and excellence worthy
of the brave.





[Names: Yacciddhi]
Indra, lord of love and justice, fatherly
omnipresence for all, since you are general and
universal power of all the eternal presences, equal and
universal for all, we invoke and pray to you as the one
father figure for our good.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Arvacino, Somanamindra, Somapah, Somapa]
Indra, ancient, eternal and latest and immediate
power and presence, haven and home for all, turn to us
with divine favours, rejoice with us as guardian of the
honour and excellence of humanity, giver and augmenter
of food and freshness of energy and the creator and
protector of the joy of life and ecstasy of living.





[Names: Asmakam, Arvaga]
Indra, may the song of praise and prayer
composed by our wise poets rise and reach you, and
then, we pray, turn the horses of your chariot hitherward
to us.






[Names: Purolasam, Vadhuyuriva]
And then taste the delicious sweets of our yajnic
hospitality and enjoy the music of our song like a lover
cherishing the company of his beloved.






[Names: Sahasram, Satam, Somasya, Somas]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 32 159


Indra, leader of power, pleasure and excellence,
we pray for a thousand top speed generalists and a
thousand intensive specialists and a hundred barrels of
the soma of national excellence and celebrative joy.





[Names: Sahasra, Sata, Asmatra]
Indra, lord of excellence and beneficence, we
activate and accelerate a hundred and thousand schemes
of development of research and extension of knowledge,
enrichment and fertility of lands and improvement of
cows, other cattle wealth and milk products, and hope
that the wealth and prosperity of your social order would






[Names: Dasa, Bhurida]
We study, research and produce tens of jars of
liquid gold. Destroyer of ignorance and poverty, you
are the giver and creator of unbounded wealth.


[Names: Bhuri]
Indra, giver of unbounded wealth, give us


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and bring us profuse amounts of wealth. For you give
and wish to give nothing less than immensity.






[Names: Sura, Purutra]
Indra, destroyer of want and darkness, for sure
you are the giver of immensity. Brave and magnificent,
you command universal fame and glory. Come, we pray,
bless us, you are the giver of success and glory.






[Names: Prate, Samsami, Mabhyam, Ssisrathah, Anu]
Lord of omniscience and the universal eye, giver
of the Divine Word and the earth and her wealth, power
and presence imperishable, I praise and celebrate your
divine agencies that bear and bring us the wealth of
life. Let these divinities keep it up, and allow not the
earths and inspirations to slacken.






[Names: Kaninakeva, Babhru, Sobhete]
Like the two pupils of the eyes, overly strong
and lasting, ever new, ever cherished and subtle divine
harbingers of the truth, goodness and beauty of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 33 161
blissfully in the hours of human yajna.






[Names: Aram]
May the waves of divine energy, instant,
constant and never failing, never hurtful, travelling in
the day and in the night, to the upper solstice and the
nether solstice, be ever blissful to me in the hours of


Mandala 4/Sukta 33






[Names: Rbhavah, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Rbhubhyo]
I send up my words to the Rbhus, scientists, as
a messenger, in order that they be broadcast around,
and I hope that they would be converted into a subtle,
clearer and more powerful message—words which,
carried up by currents of energy by their own floating
vibrations, immediately rise to the upper layers of space
and become acts of nature to come back in the finer





[Names: Yadaramakrannrbhavah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




When the Rbhus, sages and scientists, through
service and action, receive instruction from parents and
teachers, and have done enough to their own satisfaction
and satisfaction of the seniors, they graduate to join the
fraternity of the enlightened, and then, constant in study
and meditation, bring about maturity and fullness of
mind and spirit for independent work.






[Names: Punarye, Sayana, Rbhurindra]
And then they, the Rbhus, who, with their
knowledge and dedicated service, rejuvenate their
parents and senior generation grown old, nerveless and
almost lying like a broken pillar, and bring them back
to their youthful time, thus keeping the tradition young
and alive: may they, vigorous geniuses, far reaching in
imagination, marvellous in invention, mighty and
majestic in achievement, and brilliant and blissful in
conduct, come to our yajna of science and research,
protect us and promote our progress and advancement
far ahead.





All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 33 163


The Rbhus, sages and scholars of genius and
knowledge, bold and blissful, who protect the cow,
mother knowledge and the speech of knowledge, and
also the mother earth like nursing a holy child, those
who serve the mother tradition and rejuvenate and
strengthen every part of its body like a darling love,
who bring new vigour and new lights to its body of
science and knowledge, they, the Rbhus, attain to
immortality in the living history of the advancement of
human civilisation by these noble acts of holiness.






[Names: Jyestha, Kanistha]
The eldest of the Rbhus says: Let us make two
cups for the drink of soma for the celebration of life’s
enlightenment. The younger, more brilliant, says: Let
us make three. The youngest, most brilliant, says: Let
us make four. Tvashta, the teacher, universal lord maker
of forms, O Rbhus, honours and praises these words of
yours. (Thus knowledge, science and technology grows
from one generation of scholars to another.)


The four cups of life may be interpreted as
[Names: Dharma]
material and mental fulfilment, and Moksha, ultimate
purpose of living and ultimate freedom.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Satyamucurnara, Vibhrajamanamscamasan]
The Rbhus, brave and blessed, speak true what
they speak, then they accomplish what they say, and
then they achieve this reward of their action. Tvashta,
the divine maker, wise and all-seeing eye of the world,
who sees the Rbhus’ cups of life shining as daylight
sees them, loves them and blesses the makers. Thus
should men do in life.






[Names: Suksetrakrnvannanayanta]
When the scholars and sages of the science of
yajna remain on holiday for twelve days in the years,
resting and refreshing themselves, enjoying the
hospitality of a prominent host, then the sky is overcast,
the showers pour, fields are made fertile, the rivers flow
and vegetation grows on barren lands, (and this by rain



[Names: Ratham]
The Rbhus, who design and manufacture a
strong built chariot for people to travel by, create a


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 33 165


universal language of universal knowledge for the world
prevailing all over the world. May they create universal
wealth for us all — heroes of noble action, noble
protection, and dexterous of hand as they are.






[Names: Vajo, Varunasya, Varunas, Rbhuksa]
The wonderful acts and products of these Rbhus,
exceptional scientists, later, the younger intellectuals,
themselves brilliant with their mind and work, honour
and apply for further development: thus the food and
energy becomes the favourite input for the ‘devas’,
following researchers, for higher outputs of finer food
and energy, the powerful thunderbolt becomes the arm
for Indra, ruler and defender, and the extensive waves
of subtle transmission become the perceptive and active
agencies of Varuna, the presiding power.




[Names: Indraya, Indra, Mitram, Mitra]
The Rbhus, holy thinkers, creators and makers,


who, using their intellect and imagination and rejoicing
with the revelations of the chants of sacred verses, create


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the circuit of energies, produce the motive powers, and
construct the chariot for Indra, ruler and the nation, may,
we pray, bring us health and nourishment and wealth
and build permanent assets for us as protective and
promotive friends doing good to friends.




[Names: Idahnah]
O Rbhus, noble creators and makers, today the
holy men bring you soma to celebrate and enjoy. The
divines favour not the slothfuls, they extend no hand of
friendship unless you are tested in the crucibles of hard
work and self sacrifice. May the Rbhus bring us, 111 truth,
the wealths of life in the third session of yajna.


Mandala 4/Sukta 34




[Names: Rbhavah, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Rbhurvibhva]
Rbhu, the technologist, Vibhva, specialist of
natural energy, Vaja, specialist of food and vitality, and
Indra, specialist of electricity and power, all harbingers


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 34 167


of the jewels of wealth, may come and grace this science
yajna of ours. Today, the divinity of intelligence brings
you the nectar of joy and celebration of success for a
drink. May the joy of the occasion inspire you.






[Names: Vidanaso]
O Rbhus, blest from your very birth with the
love of knowledge, commanding knowledge and the
power of knowledge, work and rejoice with the scholars
according to the seasons. May the peace and pleasure
of life reach you, may divine intelligence and the ruling
powers of the world with munificence bless you. And
may you, for our sake, arouse the wealth of the nations,
brave citizens and the coming generations.





[Names: Ayam]
O Rbhus, this yajna is enacted for you which,
come and take over like the best of men inspired with
the bright light of knowledge and expertise. Friends and
devotees would stand by you, and you would be the
front leaders of the world at the speed of winds.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Abhiudu, Pibata]
yam savanam madaya.


O Rbhus, leaders of humanity, may the yajna of
yours be a source of jewel wealth for the common man,
for the generous giver and for the organiser and sustainer
of the programme. O leaders and pioneers of the speed
of winds, carry on with joy, let all enjoy the fruits. I
dedicate the final session of the yajna to the ecstatic joy
of you all.





Come, O potent, brilliant and great Rbhus, best
of the leaders of men, commanding the wealth and
knowledge of the world, praised and celebrated, come
as arising glowing youth comes home at the end of the
day, and may these exhilarating drinks offered to you



6. A napatah Savaso yatanopemam yajiam namasa


[Names: Sajosasah, Indravantah, Indravanta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 34 169


Rbhus, strong, imperishable heroes and leaders
of science and knowledge, invoked and invited with
reverence, come and join this yajnic programme of
development and production. Loved and loving, eminent
scholars, commanding wealth, honour and power, come
and accept the delicious treat of the host and protect
and promote the good fortune of the community.






[Names: Sajosa, Indra, Somam, Soma, Agrepabhirrtupabhih]
Loved and loving Indra, lord of power and
honour, come, share and promote the joy of the soma
celebration of honour with Varuna, men of high
endeavour and success. Loving friend, praised and
celebrated, come, celebrate with the Rudras, people of
justice and rectitude in the land, and protect and promote
their honour and prestige. Loving, joining, socialising
and celebrating with the leading pioneers, planning
guardians of the nation according to the change of
seasons, wedded couples, households and trustees of the
jewel wealth of the land, protect and promote the honour
and excellence of life with soma celebrations of joy.






[Names: Sajosasa, Sajosaso]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O Rbhus, scientists and intellectuals, create joy
and rejoice: Rejoice with the Adityas, scholars of the
top order of brilliance in accord with the various phases
of the sun, rejoice in harmony with the clouds and the
mountains, rejoice together with the divine energy of
nature and the life-sustaining light of the sun, and rejoice
in confluence with the flowing rivers and the rolling
seas and the treasures of the jewel wealth of nature, and
share the joy with us too.






Who are the Rbhus? Those who create and
activate complementary circuits of energies, who serve
the parents and sustain and rejuvenate health anew, who
provide protection and promotion, who refine and
extend knowledge and the language of knowledge,
develop cattle wealth and renew the earth resources,
who design and structure fast modes of travel and
communication, who design and construct armour
against external attacks, who cross the globe unto the
sky and space and who command universal knowledge:
pioneers and leaders of the best of men who can raise,
train and organise a noble younger generation.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 35 171




[Names: Puruksum, Puruksu]
Those who create, bear and bring life’s wealth
full of cows and horses, food and energy, knowledge
and speed of progress, all round prosperity, all round
sustenance and security, and a brave new generation,
and who create, praise and celebrate all such wealth of
the world, such Rbhus, heroic scholars, leaders and
pioneers, happy creators of joy, may bear and bring such
wealth, honour and prosperity for us.






[Names: Napabhuta, Samindrena, Rbhus, Rbhu]
never thirsty for anything, you will ever feel praised and
appreciated in this yajnic programme of creative life.
Rejoice with Indra, ruler and commander of honour and
power, rejoice with the Maruts, dynamic youthful citizens,
and with the brilliant ruling leaders, O generous and
refulgent creators of joy and prosperity, rejoice for the
creation of the jewels of life’s beauty more and ever more.


Mandala 4/Sukta 35




[Names: Rbhavah, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Thopa, Savaso, Asmin, Rbhus, Rbhu]
of the bow, come here close to us, do not stay away,
never feel dispraised. In this yajna enacted for you, let
the honour and joy of creation and celebration be as
much for you as for Indra, resplendent lord giver of






[Names: Agannrbhinamiha, Sukrtyaya]
Let the jewel wealth of the Rbhus’ performance
come and let the joy of the soma success distilled from
nature be here for the people to share who deserve the
prize, since with their admirable action and brilliant
intelligence and will they have designed and
manufactured one chariot fourfold in performance.






[Names: Vyakrnota, Sikset, Athaita]
You develop the cup of life to fourfold success
of completion and perfection: Dharma, artha (material
development), kama (self-fulfilment), and Moksha
(ultimate freedom). O friend, teach and say: This is it,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 35 173


this is the art of living. And then, O eminent scholars,
dynamic scientists, dexterous technologists, join the
fraternity of divines and move on to the path of


eae




[Names: Kimmayah]
What in truth is this cup of life which, with your
wisdom, you analyse, specify and realise as four-in-one?
O sages of vision and imagination, distil the soma-
essence of it for the joy of life and drink as well as
protect and promote the nectar sweet of honey.






[Names: Sacyakarta, Sacya]
O Rbhus, with your truth of knowledge and holy
science, you rejuvenate your parents to youthful health.
With truth of vision and imagination, you reveal the
fourfold cup of life’s beauty and joy for the drink of
divinities. With your truth of science and technology
you create the power and construct the chariot faster
than bullet speed for the ride of Indra, world’s presiding
power of rule and law. You are really the master creators
and controllers of the speed and jewels of life on earth.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Tasmai]
Whoever for you distils at the end of the day
the exciting soma juice of the beauty and joy of life for
the celebration of the holiness of existence, for him, O
Rbhus, thinkers and wonder workers of the speed of
winds, generous as showers from the clouds, spirits of
ecstasy, create and give the wealth of an all round brave
progeny for times to come.






[Names: Pratah, Samrbhubhih, Indra]
Indra, world ruler of honour and majesty, rider
of the chariot of sun rays, drink the soma distilled in
the morning. Drink the soma distilled at midday only
for you. Drink with the Rbhus, men of science and
wisdom, creators of the jewels of wealth, whom you
have drafted as friends by your noble action.






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 36 175


The Rbhus who rise to divine virtues by noble
actions and, like the eagle, soar to the skies, create and
bestow jewels of life on others and, bold and
courageous, infallible and imperishable warriors of the
bow, they rise on and become immortal.






[Names: Tadrbhavah]
O Rbhus, generous at heart and dexterous of
hand, the third yajnic session and creation of soma
replete with the jewel wealth of life’s essence which
you have accomplished with your noble action, that
nectar sweet of soma seasoned and reinforced is here
for you. Drink it with the exciting pleasure of your
senses, mind and soul.


Mandala 4/Sukta 36




[Names: Rbhavah, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Anasvo, Mahattadvo]
O Rbhus, divine engineers of superhuman order,
that admirable three wheel, three engine, three stage
chariot of yours, powered without horse, controlled


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




without reins, created as your grand realisation of the
divine formula, goes round and round over the earth,
across the skies unto the regions of space without erring,
and the same you control and feed.






[Names: Ratham]
Those Rbhus, scientists and engineers of
exceptional genius, alert of mind and vision, who created
the well structured, well controlled unerring chariot with
their thought, imagination and meditation beyond the
mind, we recognise and invite to this soma session of
scientific yajna for the order of national honour.






[Names: Tadvo, Jivri]
O Rbhus, fast and imaginative scientists and
engineers universally recognised and honoured, that
practical realisation of yours of the divine word and
formula becomes a great news for the brilliant leaders
and scholars, since by that you rejuvenate the parental
ancestors old and worn out for long and equip them
with new life and energy of youth to go about and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 36 177
onward in time.






[Names: Ekam]
You develop one cup of soma into four, make
one versatile chariot into fourfold efficiency, and reclaim
and develop barren and eroded land back to fertility
with your thought and imagination, and thus
immediately you attain to a status of immortality among
the divine benefactors of humanity. Rbhus of world fame
and high speed of action, such achievement of yours is






[Names: Rbhuto, Vibhvatasto]
The wealth most meritorious, received through
the Rbhus, that which is created by the most famous
and dynamic leaders, that which is created by the world
famous Rbhus themselves, the person wide awake and
perceptive whom the wise and generous divinities
protect and promote: this is worthy of honour and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Suro]
He is the hero, he is the pioneer, he is the
visionary prophet by eloquence, he is the brave, he is
the warrior, unchallengeable in battle contests, he wins
health and wealth, and he wins strength and prowess
whom the Rbhus, world heroes of the speed of winds,
protect and patronise.




[Names: Srestham, Dhiraso]
yamasi.

Most distinguished and elevating is the form and
position held by you, Rbhus, masters of art and science
and pioneers of progress. Accept and appreciate the song
of celebration. Stay constant, poets and visionaries,
scholars of high wisdom. Such we recognise and honour
you by this holy song of praise.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 37 179


[Names: Yuyamasmabhyam, Dyumantam]
vayah.


O Rbhus, scholars and scientists of high order,
with your knowledge, art and wisdom, create and
provide for us the food, energy and modes of care and
comfort we need for the sustenance of humanity. Create
and bring us the light of science and progress of
technology, strength and power coupled with generosity,
highest form of life’s wealth and health and age.





[Names: Sravo, Yena]
Happy, joyous and generous, O Rbhus, create
and prepare for us here a noble progeny and a prosperous
nation, create wealth here, food, knowledge and honour
worthy of the brave here itself by which we may
enlighten others too full well. O scholars of science and
wisdom, give us that wonderful art and knowledge and


Mandala 4/Sukta 37




[Names: Rbhavah, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yatha, Rbhus, Rbhu]
scholars and leaders of science and progress, come and
grace our yajnic programme of non-violent develop-
ment, come by the paths of divinity so that, happy and
joyous, you may take over the humanistic project of the
people in these happy days of the season.






May those yajnic projects of yours for the
creation of happiness and prosperity be satisfying and
delightful to your heart and mind, and may the fruits of
yajnas served by holy men and fed with ghrta flow to
you with fragrance. May the soma cups of joy full to
the brim enrapture you and, drunk to the leas, excite
and exhilarate you to your best performance.



[Names: Tryudayam, Juhve, Rbhuksano, Somam, Soma]
Rbhus, eminent scholars and miraculous
makers, as your threefold gift of science, technology


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 37 181


and wealth of power and excellence for the highest of
people is a source of bliss and comfort, so do I as one
among the same people high and low, dedicated to the
vast divinities, offer you the treat of soma, best of wealth
and joy as gift, in truth of thought, word and deed,
offering loved by the noblest divine souls, the Rbhus.






[Names: Pivo, Indrasya, Savaso, Indras]
riding brilliant chariots, clad in corselets of steel, be
[Names: Consequently]
children of Indra, universal energy, unassailable images
of strength and power, for your joy and celebration, the
first and foremost tribute of soma yajna is selected and






[Names: Rbhumrbhuksano, Indrasvantamam, Indrasvantama, Svinam]
O Rbhus, in the struggle of life we invoke and
call upon the wonder visionary man of art and science,
wealth of all kinds, most heroic warrior, cooperative
ally, most powerful leader, and furious fighting force
ever dependable, inalienable. (That is the Rbhu we


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sedrbhavo]
O Rbhus, visionaries of science, power and
action, whoever the man you and the ruler, Indra, protect
and promote, would be the man of dedication and
discrimination with actions and intelligence, an
admirable ally in the business of life with the fastest
modes of movement and progress.






[Names: Rbhuksanah, Rbhuksana, Asmabhyam]
O Rbhus, visionaries and craftsmen of the art
and science of life, leaders of the speed of winds,
teachers and pioneers bright and brave, open and reveal
for us our paths of progress in our yajna of corporate
living. We rightfully admire you and humbly pray to
you so that we may realise all our hopes and ambitions
and ultimately cross the ocean of life.




[Names: Indra, Samasvam, Sasta, Puru]
O Rbhus, leaders and pioneers of vision and


progress, O lord ruler of the world, Indra, never failing,
ever true, teach us, give us that order of wealth and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 38 183


speedy progress with power and horse which leads the
people to honour and prosperity in life to the full.


Mandala 4/Sukta 38








[Names: Dyavaprthivi, Dadhikra, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Purubhyastra, Ksetrasam]
O heaven and earth, ruler and commander,
generous givers, whatever the gifts of munificence
earlier than the earliest for the many recipients, they
are all yours: whether they are gifts of fields and fertile
lands with generous grants or, as terror for the wicked,
you give to the evil doer the crushing bolt and intense
fall from grace.






[Names: Rjipyam, Syenam, Suram]
Or, like the brave parental master, you give the
war horse, destroyer of many enemies, or the roaring
war craft, winner of victories for many people of the
world, and the refulgent hero like the rising sun,
supporter and defender of humanity, or the simple man


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of rectitude, or the eagle like fighter that pounces upon
the target, or the instant flier and pilot or the relentless
doer of the master’s order.






[Names: Purur, Padbhirgrdhyantam]
War horse or the aircraft which, rushing like
turbulent waters to the sea, the people of the world
admire and celebrate with joy, which, like a brave and
tempestuous warrior, advances to the heat of battle by
leaps and bounds and grabs the enemy and which,
rushing like a wind sheer tears the enemy force apart.


sat: usu





[Names: Scarati, Avirrjtko]
Which in battles stems the united force of the
enemy and goes over lands and seas of the earth in
majesty, which openly displays its strength of arms and
thrust openly, and watches over the grand yajnic
programmes of humanity and wards off the enemies and
adversities from the life of noble people.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 38 185




[Names: Nicadyamanam, Sravascaccha]
Just as people cry out for help when a thief
attacks their cloth and hearth and home, so do people
call out to the fighter warrior in battles for the safety of
their hearth and home and herds of cattle wealth when
they see the terrible enemy descending like a hawk
intending to attack.






[Names: Srenibhi, Srajam]
Keen to be the first and prime leader in front of
these battle formations of the war chariots, creating a
garland pattern, graceful like a bridegroom in
procession, he goes like the wind raising a cloud of dust
and radiating beams of light like the sun.






[Names: Turam]
And that hero, mighty and brilliant, dedicated
to truth, keen for service in battle in his own person,
commanding the strong and smart warriors on fronts,
going up and forward by straight paths, tossing up dust
in battle, shaking it off from the eyebrows, goes on


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


making things straight and favourable for all.






[Names: Yada]
And when the hero in passion takes up arms in
battle, those who face him shake in fear as from the
thunder of lightning from the skies, and then when he
engages thousands of adversaries he grows terrible and
irresistible and comes out victorious.





[Names: Utainamahuh]
And people praise the drive and superior power
of this hero of human endeavour and accomplishment
for humanity, and the warriors going to battle describe
him as the roaring war horse, the booming war craft of
the skies and the supreme of arms going with but ahead
of thousands.





[Names: Surya, Jyotisapastatana, Sahasrasah]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 49 187


Just as the sun with its rays fills the skies and
space, so does Dadhikra, the roaring war horse, the
booming war-craft and the superior war hero with
characteristic power and majesty fascinate all the five
classes of people. May this hero, tempestuous mover,
giver of a hundred and thousand favours to the people
bring our words of praise to golden honey sweets of
success and fulfilment.


Mandala 4/Sukta 39






[Names: Dadhikra, Devata, Vamadava, Gautama, Rshi, Asum, Ucchantir]
Varily we praise the swift Dadhikra, the war
horse of earth and skies, and we sing in praise of earth
and heaven too. May the glorious dawns inspire and
mature me, cleansing me of all the evils and weaknesses
of earthly existence.






[Names: Mahascarkarmyarvatah, Puruvarasya, Puruvaras, Purubhyo, Mitravaruna]
O Mitra and Varuna, President of the Council
and commander of the army, dear as pranic energies of
life, inspired and enlightened, I praise the mighty war


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




horse, Dadhikra, sustainer of sustainers, a shower of
blessings, saviour of the people, a gift swift and blazing
as fire, which you have given for the sake of noble






[Names: Anagasam, Usaso]
Whoever does honour and worship to Dadhikra,
mighty life sustaining energy of the Divine and offers
oblations into the burning fire at the rise of dawn, him
Aditi, mother earth and the skies and space, lead to a
state of purity from sin and evil and elevate him to a
state of love and friendship with Mitra and Varuna,
friend and highest authority of humanity.






[Names: Dadhikravna, Svastaye, Varunam, Varuna, Marutam, Maruta, Indram, Indra, Mitramagnim, Mitramagni]
While we study and discover the food, energy
and power gifts of the great Dadhikra, cosmic sustainer
of sustaining energies and of the good that the Maruts,
powerful people, for sure do for our good and
advancement, we at the same time study with devotion
[Names: Mitra, Agni]
power, and Indra, electricity which wields the arms of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 40 189








[Names: Indramivedubhaye, Dadhikramu]
Science researchers and engineers and technolo-
gists going to centres of production, and both the rulers
and the people, all invoke and develop Indra, electrical
energy, Dadhikra, basic energy, flow of waters, and
awareness of the modes of comfort which the friendly
and generous powers, Mitra and Varuna, at national and
international levels, give us as gifts for the people.






[Names: Dadhikravno, Surabhi]
We sing in praise of Dadhikra, divine energy,
victorious, all achieving spirit and power, who may, we
pray, refine our sense of taste and other refinements and
may help us live a full and healthy life across the floods
of existence.


Mandala 4/Sukta 40




[Names: Dadhikra, Surya, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Dadhikravna, Apamagnerusasah, Suryas]
We study and develop for human purposes the
forces of Dadhikra, all victorious cosmic energy which
impels various forms of natural energy, and we tap and
develop the power sources of water, fire, dawns, sun,
Brhaspati and pranas. May all the lights of the dawns
and new revelations inspire me and mature my projects.






[Names: Satva, Satyo]
Dadhikrava, cosmic energy, potent and
omnipresent, all sustaining, all inspiring of sense and
mind, responsive to the dedicated enquirer, acting fast
in foods, power sources and light of the dawns, true
and imperishable, dynamic, flowing, heating, flying,
may respond and create food, energy and the joy of life.







[Names: Syenasyeva]
And like the wings of an arrow, everything
follows the curves and waves of the motion of this


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 40 191


accelerating, flying, driving and pressing forward like
an eagle, and traversing the spaces with terrific power
and velocity.






[Names: Kratum, Anu]
And that flying horse, missile of terrific power,
Dadhikra, tied and programmed at the mouth, neck and
the flanks, carries a warhead at terrific speed, and,
following its programmed action, crosses the marks of
its course to the target.






[Names: Hamsah, Nrsad]
Hansa, the divine bird, soul unpolluted, resides
in purity in biological forms in the skies, and, as yajnic
doer, sits on the vedi in family home among people, the
best ones, and rises up to the heights of heavens. It is
born of the waters on the earth from the Law of existence
and from the clouds. That is the truth, the Law.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 4/Sukta 41






[Names: Indra, Varuna, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Indra, Varunad]
Indra, O lord of power and glory, O Varuna, lord
of justice and rectitude, who could win the favour of
your blessing, which song of praise and prayer,
expressive of yajnic reverence like an immortal yajaka
would win your favour? Which song and tribute, O Indra
and Varuna, sung in your honour, expressing humility
and surrender as holy offering would touch your heart?







Indra and Varuna, lord of power and of justice,
abounding in strength and grace, generous and refulgent,
the man who tries in honest action to win your friendship
destroys darkness and evil and wins over enemies in
battles with great weapons of defence and protection.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 41 193




[Names: Yadi, Somaih, Somai]
Indra and Varuna, ruler and the elected people
in power, if they hold and govern the jewel wealth of
the nation in trust for the people, and the people would
then appreciate, approve and admire them, then this way,
they, both friends in agreement, for friendship of the
people, would be happy and rejoice with the honour
and prosperity of the law created with the honest effort
of all in unison.






Indra, ruler, and Varuna, chief of justice, mighty
impassioned powers in this system, wield the light of
knowledge and law in the social order. Who ever is
malignant, evil doer and terror monger against us, strike
the shattering blow of justice and punishment on him
and create faith and confidence in the light and lustrous
power of the law.






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, leader and giver of knowledge and power,
and Varuna, embodiment of cherished virtue and
intelligence, as Indra, lord of clouds sends down rain
showers on earth and fertilises her, so, be the promoters
of the intelligence and enlightenment of the children of
the earth so that, as the earth, rich in vegetation,
overflows with food in a thousand ways, so the
knowledge, language and enlightenment of the
community may grow a thousandfold and overflow with
creative work on the great moving earth.






[Names: Toke]
Indra and Varuna, ruler and administrator, for
the good of our children and grand children on these
fertile lands on this moving and progressive earth, be
the sun for the health and beauty of life, be the cloud
for the fertility and virility of the nation. Indra, giver of
light and energy, Varuna, lord of law and justice, with
all your protections and promotions, be the destroyers
of want and suffering, be the harbingers of health and
plenty and enlightenment.





[Names: Yuvamiddhyavase, Vrnimahe]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 41 195


Indra and Varuna, ruler and sustainer, lord of
life and power, giver of freedom and justice, we choose
to dedicate ourselves to you for the sake of protection
and progress as ever before, great and beneficent friends
like brothers, brave and fearless, greatest majestic, and
kind as parents as you are. Lovers of the earth and cows,
knowledge and the language of Divinity as we are, we
opt for you in freedom for the sake of love and






[Names: Sriye, Somamasthur, Vayuh, Vayu, Indram, Varunam]
Indra and Varuna, benevolent energy and
inspiration of nature and Divinity, all senses, mind and
intelligence in search of efficiency and refinement in
the business of life flow to you for the sake of protection
and promotion. So may my mind, senses, vision and
voices of exploration and celebration turn to Indra and
Varuna for light and inspiration and abide by them for
beauty and delicacy like the earth and other planets
relating to the moon for the sweetness and beauty of





[Names: Upemasthurjostara, Sravaso]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




These senses and mind of mine keenly desiring
to win the wealth and vision of life may proceed to Indra
and Varuna, light and power and inspiration of nature
and Divinity, and abide thereby, awaiting, getting and
enjoying the wealth and wisdom of life like little
Brahmacharinis of a girls’ institution of education






[Names: Asvyasya]
May we, with our mind and soul, be masters of
the lasting wealth of horses and chariots, of achievement
and further progress, of health and nourishment, and
may those two, Indra and Varuna, ruler and
administrator, teacher and preacher, ever active with
their latest modes of protection, promotion and progress
join us and share our health.





Indra ruler, and Varuna, administrator and
commander, great and majestic, come to us with the
best of protection, promotion, progress and welfare and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 42 197


join our battle of life so that, participating in the
struggles of that battle, joining and shining together with
you, we may play our game with the best of capacities.


Mandala 4/Sukta 42






[Names: Atma, Indra, Varuna, Devata, Trasadasyu, Paurukutsya, Rshi, Mama, Kratum, Varunasya, Varunas]
I am Indra, sovereign spirit of the universe.
Twofold is my kingdom: heaven and earth, or, the world
of nature and the world of humanity. I am Varuna,
highest Intelligence and the Ruling Power of the
universe. All the Immortals, divine forces in the service
of Varuna are ours, they comprise and conduct the
mighty yajna system of the universe. Thus I rule all: the
world of humanity, all that is highest and closest in the
world of forms, and all that is hidden.


(This mantra is a metaphor of the living,
breathing, intelligent, self-organising, autonomous and
sovereign system of the universe as macrocosm as well
as microcosm. At the macrocosmic level, Indra is the
Supreme Sovereign, immanent and transcendent Spirit,
and Varuna is the immanent ruling force, intelligence
and the law of Rtam. Indra-varuna is a functional version
of the Supreme Spirit which is both immanent and
transcendent. At the microcosmic level, Indra- Varuna


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




is the individual soul with all its faculties of awareness,
intelligence, mind and senses. At the world level too,
Indra- Varuna may be interpreted as the Ruler and the






[Names: President, Aham]
I am Varuna, ruling spirit of the world, best and
highest. For me do the first manifestations of the spirit
in nature hold the wealth and power of existence. They
are the divine immortals who comprise and conduct the
creative yajna, the spirit in body form. I rule the world
of humanity, the phenomenal forms and all that is hidden
in potentiality.






[Names: Ahamindro, Varunaste, Varunast, Tvasteva]
I am Indra, the highest, omnipotent, and
transcendent. I am Varuna, highest and best immanent
and omniscient. Happy and exalted, having created the
vast and deep and firm heaven and earth as Tvashta,
cosmic maker, I hold and move in unison the sun and
earth and all other regions of the universe.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 42 199




[Names: Ahamapo, Rtena]
I shower the rains of energising and fertilising
waters. I hold and rule the sun and cosmic energy in the
space of nature within eternal law. By the same eternal
law of mine, the child of eternity, the threefold world of
natural constituents, sattva, rajas and tamas (thought,
energy and matter) manifests and expands and keeps to
the law. Thus do I create, hold and rule the universe.






[Names: Krnomyajim]
The best of men and leaders, equipped with good
horses and modes of transport and communication,
fighting for strength and sustenance, the chosen ones,
knowing me and struggling to attain to me call upon
me in the battle of existence. I, Indra, commanding the
wealth and power of the world, highest of the lustre
and glory in existence, create the battle for their victory
and raise the heat of action.






[Names: Yanma, Somaso]
I do all those acts of creation, sustenance and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




victory. None can restrain or resist the supernal power
that’s mine, mysterious and unknown. When the flames
of my soma yajna rise, the fire crackles and the hymns
of celebration reverberate, the boundless heaven and
earth shake in fear. There is none that equals me.





[Names: Viduste, Tvam, Varunaya]
That greatness and grandeur of yours all the
scholars of the worlds know. O lord omniscient, you
yourself speak of it to the selected men of vision. You
are the breaker of the clouds, we hear, and you set the
rivers aflow and release the waters locked up in lakes
and clouds.






[Names: Asmakamatra, Indram]
When the seven sages, senses, pranic energies
and flowing streams, which are our feeding and
sustaining powers like father and mother, are locked up
in darkness then, as they join Indra, so they join the sun
(wakefulness), who is superior to the darkness of Vrtra
and presides over half of this world with his light (until
light and life is restored).


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 43 201






[Names: Purukutsani]
O Indra and Varuna, the abundant power of the
thunderbolt, light and showers offer you the homage of
yajnic inputs of food for consumption and holistic
expansion of creative nourishment. And thence, further,
you give it on to this earth’s ruler, destroyer of darkness
and evil, who presides over half the world (and rises in
majesty with the break of dawn).






[Names: Raya, Indravaruna]
Let us rejoice with the wealth of peace and
refreshment with energy while we sleep, just as the
devas, divine powers of nature, are replenished with
spirit and joy by the offer of yajnic homage, and cows
rejoice with grass. That vibrating energy of life, Indra
and Varuna, you bear and bring for us day and night
without break. Reveal that language of enlightenment,
all calm and undisturbed.


Mandala 4/Sukta 43


[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Purumidhajamidhau, Sauhotrau, Rshis]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sravatkatamo, Kasyemam]
Who listens? Which of the adorables? Which
brilliant divinity loves and entertains the song of prayer
and adoration? To whose heart shall we dedicate this
eulogy, divine, highly presentable, and dearest to the






[Names: Ratham, Suryasya, Suryas]
Who is kind and blissful? Which one comes at
the fastest and earliest? Which one of the adorable
divinities is the most benevolent? Which one is the
chariot, power driven, which moves instantly at the
fastest, they say, which the daughter of the sun, the
Dawn, chooses for the ride?





[Names: Maksu, Saktim, Diva]
Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and
humanity, magnificent on the move, you come instantly
at the call of time like rays of the sun displaying his
power over the smiling earth at the end of night. Coming


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 43 203


from the heavens, divine with wings of light, by which
one of nature’s immaculate forces do you become the
most powerful and eloquent?






Ashvins, what could be the simile or metaphor
to describe or define you? On whose invocation and
invitation would you come to us? Even though someone
might be great, who could be as great and selfless around
as you? Sweet powers, destroyers of evil, rise higher
and higher for our defence and protection.






[Names: Madhva]
Great and grand is your chariot that goes round
the regions of light, it comes to you from the oceans
and from the oceans of spatial waters. Honey sweet you
are, honey sweet is your wisdom. You and your wisdom
shower us with sweetness of honey when your people
at the stage of ripeness reach you for company and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sindhurha, Tadu, Suryayah, Suryaya]
The waters of the flowing rivers and rolling seas
evaporate and lend moisture to your horses of sun rays
which rise like birds bright and red, and then your
chariot, quick and soaring, coming and rising, is seen
and known by which you become masters of the dawns.






[Names: Theha, Urusyatam, Sritah]
Here itself in this world, O Ashvins, both of you,
ever correct and true as you are, of equal mind and rich
with the treasures of wealth and speed of light, may
that holy and dynamic intelligence and wisdom which
attends on you may, we pray, be for us too and may it
bless and promote the celebrant who, looking to you
with surrender and faith, may achieve the desire of his
heart. Our ambition and fulfilment is centred on you

Mandala 4/Sukta 44




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Purumidhajamidhau, Sauhotrau, Rshis]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 44 205




[Names: Suryam, Surya, Purutamam, Purutama]
Ashvins, complementary currents of cosmic
energy of the Divine, today we invoke you and call for
that chariot of yours which is wide extended, joins earth
and heaven, carries the light and energy of sunrays, ages
not, carries the sound and which is abundant in various
wealth which never diminishes but continuously
enriches the earth.






[Names: Yuvam, Sriyam, Yuvor]
Ashvins, children of light, infallible and
imperishable, generous and brilliant divinities, with your
intelligence, power and expertise, you win that treasure
of wealth which the spaces conduct and concentrate in
your chariot and thereby provide food and nourishment
for your body and mind.





[Names: Rtasya]
Ashvins, who with the offer of homage today
directs his thoughts and prayers to you for the sake of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




protection and advancement, or for the drink of soma
in celebration of success, or to learn and win the truth
of eternal Dharma of existence, Rtam? Who with
salutations and liberal hospitality prays for favour of






[Names: Hiranyayena, Purubhu, Pibatha]
Ashvins, twin powers of the Divine, universal
of form and presence, ever constant in thought and
action, come by the golden chariot to join this yajna of
ours, drink of this honey sweet of the soma of success
and bring the jewels of wealth for the supplicant people
of action and endeavour.




Come well and soon to us by the paths of heaven
and earth riding your well structured chariot of gold.
Let not others detain you, nor divert you from the natural
life link which the forefathers and teachers of old gave
you in pursuit of Divinity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 45 207




[Names: Nino, Puruviram, Puruvira, Naro]
Ashivns, destroyers of evil and misery, brilliant
as the sun and gracious cool as the moon, give us the
wealth of life comprising brave children, great and vast
prosperity for all of us, rulers as well as the people,
since the leaders of the nation offer you songs of
adoration and teachers of the people shower you with
words of prayer in praise of Divinity.






[Names: Theha, Urusyatam, Sritah]
Ashvins, ever constant and true, here itself in
this world, may this holy wisdom and knowledge of
yours which is peaceable and procurative of science and
speed of prosperity and progress, bless us, we pray. Both
of you, we pray, protect, promote and elevate the
celebrant. Our desire and ambition depends on you and
we look forward up to you alone.


Mandala 4/Sukta 45




[Names: Ashivns, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Prksaso]
There rises the sun, chariot of the Ashvins in
motion. It goes high up on top of the heavens, gaining
heights and leaving the regions below. In this are three
analogous kinds of food and energy: wind, water and
electricity. And there is the fourth, the cloud on top of
all, laden with the honey sweets of showers.







[Names: Udvam, Apornuvantastama, Usaso]
On the rise of dawns, honey sweets of foods
and energies and the horses and the chariots raise you
high up, Ashvins, while they remove the veil of darkness
and spread the brilliance of morning light like the glory
of heaven all round.






[Names: Madhvah]
Ashvins, drink the sweets with lips addicted to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 45 209


the taste of honey. Start the chariot to reach the dear
sweets of life. Take to the high road on the way home
by the chariot bearing the sweets of success as the sun
and wind bear the cloud of showers.






[Names: Hamsaso, Udapruto]
Flying gracefully like hansa birds, pleasant and
agreeable, fleet and comfortable, golden winged
morning birds floating across mists and waters, giving
the luxurious feel of breezy ecstasy: such are your horses
which transport you across the spaces like bees flying
to the honey cups of flowers, by which you proceed to
the yajnic programmes of humanity creating the honour
and excellence of life.






[Names: Svadhvaraso, Yanniktahastas, Somam, Soma]
Holy yajnic performers, creating and bearing
honey sweets of vitality, leaders and pioneers brilliant
as fire, every morning, welcome and praise the first rays
of the sun, while the clean handed, clear eyed, wise


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




priest, saviour from sin and disease, grinds with stones
the holy plant of soma for honey juice and all wait for
your arrival, O Ashvins, harbingers of morning joy.






[Names: Akenipaso, Surascidasvan, Anu]
While the approaching and vitalising morning
rays everyday dispel the darkness and spread the brilliant
light across the skies like regions of heaven, and the
sun, using the rays as chariot horses, goes in majesty,
you show the paths of the world by virtue of your own
power.






[Names: Yena]
Ashvins, path makers of the world, having the
knowledge and intelligence that I have attained, I speak
to you of the chariot that’s yours, which is imperishable,
equipped with unfailing horse power, by which you
instantly and all time go over the skies and spaces and
by which you bear and bring excellent food and energy
full of sacrificial vitality that carries us across the seas
of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 46 211


Mandala 4/Sukta 46
[Names: Indra, Vayu, Devate, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
(Indra and Vayu are open-ended symbols to be
interpreted according to the context of life which the
mantra shows: Indra may be interpreted as power and
protection, and Vayu as power in motion, energy for
motion and advancement.)


[Names: Agram, Tvam]
Vayu, fast as waves of energy, drink the first
and best of honeyed drinks distilled in the best of our
heavenly acts, since you are the protector and promoter
of the earliest arts, acts and nobilities of humanity.





[Names: Satena, Indrasarathih, Indrasarathi, Vayo]
Vayu, strong in command of vast forces with
Indra as your charioteer, come with hundreds of choice
acts and gifts, and enjoy a drink of the best of our
preparations to your heart’s content.






[Names: Indravayi, Vahantu, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra and Vayu, may a thousand horses moving
to the choice delicacies transport you hither for a drink
of soma.





[Names: Ratham, Indravayu]
Indra and Vayu, come, take to the chariot of
golden frame, rising and touching the heavens, serviced
and heading to a holy yajnic programme, be there.






[Names: Rathena]
Indra and Vayu, come here by the chariot, big
and spacious and powerful, and go to reach the man of





[Names: Pibatam]
Indra and Vayu, friends with the devas, generous
brilliancies of nature and humanity, distilled is this soma,
the best in the house of the generous yajaka, drink to




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 47 213




Indra and Vayu, here may be the end of your
journey for the drink of soma and here may the chariot
and the horses be released so that you may drink the
soma of Moksha.


(This sukta may be interpreted in another way
in the light of this mantra: Indra as the soul, Vayu as the
prana energy of breath and blood circulation, the chariot
as the body and horses as the organs of perception and
volition, distillation of soma as creative yajnic action,
drinking as the fruit of action, and release of chariot
and horses as the freedom of the soul from the body
and senses.)


Mandala 4/Sukta 47




[Names: Indra, Vayu, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Vayo, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Vayu, lord omnipotent, self-refulgent and

generous centre object of universal love, I come to the
top of the honey sweets of yajnic creations of light and
joy for the life divine, cleansed and pure as I am now.
Come for a drink of soma by the chariot and the team of




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Indrasca, Somanam, Somana, Yuvam]
Indra and Vayu, you two love and deserve the
drink of these somas distilled in yajnas. Just as waters
all together flow to the sea, so do all flows of soma and
all movements of dedicated devotees end up when they
join you.






[Names: Vayavindrasca, Savasaspati, Niyutvanta]
Vayu and Indra, most powerful, commander and
ruler of the power and force of existence, controllers of
the dynamics of energy, come hither together by the
same chariot as two in one for the protection and
promotion of our yajna of production, honour and






[Names: Purusprho, Asme]
Indra and Vayu, omnipotent power and most
dynamics Divinity, power and energy of nature, ruler
and controller of humanity, leaders and pioneers of the
community, and lords of the accomplishment of yajnas,
loved and honoured of all, bless us with all those acts
and gifts of yours which are surely and certainly divine
for the sake of the generous and charitable devotees.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 48 215


Mandala 4/Sukta 48
[Names: Vayu, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Vihi, Vayava]
Vayu, receiver of the inputs of yajna and carrier
of the fragrance, imperishable, lord of wealth as the
vibrant scholar, come by the golden chariot as glorious
as the moon to our yajna for a drink of soma and for


protection and promotion of the honour and excellence
of our programme.





[Names: Niryuvano, Indrasarathih, Indrasarathi]
Perennial young, ineffable, constant in motion
and velocity, mover of fire, electricity and the sun, Vayu,
highpriest of cosmic yajna, come by the golden chariot
of the moon for a drink of soma and for protection and
promotion of the finest creations of humanity.






[Names: Anu]
Vayu, both heaven and earth, sustained by your
cosmic energy, hold and sustain the wealth of the world


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and are themselves the form and wielders of the forms
of the world, moving in accord with your force and law.
Come by the chariot of the golden beauty of the moon
and drink the soma distilled by us in our yajna.


[Names: Vahantu]
Vayu, may the ninety nine forces of cosmic
energy yoked to your chariot transport you by the golden
chariot of the moon controlled by thought of the mind.
Come to our yajna for a drink of soma.




[Names: Vayo, Satam]
Vayu, vibrant ruler of power, force and yajnic
development, use a hundred of the best of force and
people in your project of development, and let your
chariot of a thousandfold wealth and power come to us
for our yajna.

Mandala 4/Sukta 49






[Names: Indra, Brhaspati, Devate, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Idam, Uktham, Sasyate]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 49 217


Indra, O lord intrepidable of ruling power,
Brhaspati, O lord protector and promoter of the wide
world and its comprehensive knowledge, this is the holy
offering of food and this the heartfelt offering of happy
tribute made for your acceptance and enjoyment.



[Names: Ayam, Indrabrhaspati, Soma, Carurmadaya]
Indra and Brhaspati, ruler and scholar of
eminence, this soma for you is offered as a drink of
pleasure and ecstasy of the highest order.



[Names: Indrabrspati, Somapa, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
May Indra-Brhaspati, ruler scholar of eminence,
and Indra, controller and defender of power, honour and
excellence, connoisseurs of the delight of soma, come
to our home for a drink of soma. May they protect and
promote the honour and prestige of the land.






[Names: Asme, Satagvinam, Indrabrhaspti, Asvavantam]
May Indra and Brhaspati bear and bring for us
a hundredfold wealth of cows, lands and knowledge,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and may they bring us a thousandfold wealth of horses,

transport and progress in science and technology.



[Names: Asya, Somasya, Somas]
Indra and Brhaspati, the soma is extracted and
distilled. We invoke and invite you for a drink of this
soma.


[Names: Somamindrabrhaspati, Madayetham]
Indra and Brhaspati of the house of honour and
power, drink the soma in the home of the generous


yajamana as your own and give us the honour and
pleasure of your company.


Mandala 4/Sukta 50




[Names: Brhaspati, Indra, Devate, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Yastastambha]
Brhaspati, the sun, which, positioned in the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 50 219


midst of the three regions of earth, skies and heaven,
sustains the earth and other planets to the ends with its
force and its rays of light and gravitation;


Or, the Lord of mighty universe who is
omnipresent in the worlds of earth, skies and the heavens
of light and rules the universe to the ends of it with his
omnipotence and Word of revelation;


Or, the ruler, who, self-established in
knowledge, action, and prayer, rules the world to the
ends of the earth with his power and word and force of
law;


Or, the eminent scholar, who, master of the three
realms of knowledge, Divinity, Prakrti, and the soul with
the word of the Veda, rules the heart and intellect of the
people to the ends of the earth with his knowledge that
is power and his word:


Him, lord of sweet voice and vibrations of
communication and gravitation, the ancient seers,
shining since the first moments of human existence,
vibrant with living knowledge and holy desire, sing,
celebrate and advance in human consciousness.






[Names: Dhunetayah, Prsantam]
O Brhaspati, vibrant scholars and heroes are they
who inspire the holy and brilliant man of knowledge
and centres of advancement, and help us progress in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




culture and achievement. O lord of progress and
advancement, protect and promote the home and
profession of every such person and institution, creative,
brilliant, fearless, and generous and extensive in






[Names: Brhaspate, Tubhyam]
Brhaspati, far off and most high is your seat of
majesty whence travel and ever abide your rays of light
and Law which then touch the oceans of water to break
them into vapours so that, like deep dug wells and clouds
laden with milky showers of honey sweets, they pour
down in abundant rain in your service for you and your






[Names: Brhaspatih, Saptasyas]
Brhaspati, the cosmic sun, first born of the
supreme light of existence in the highest heaven, with
seven mouths for consumption of materials and seven
rays of light for creation of energy, born among many
the mightiest, dispels the darknesses from the world with
the thunder and lightning power of its majesty.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 50 221


(So should the ruler and the scholar be in
knowledge and power.)






[Names: Brhaspatirusriya]
With a mighty jubilant roar of thunder and
terrible shower of electric energy, Brhaspati breaks the
crooked cloud, releases the showers, activates the
production of food for holy offerings and wins the
gratitude of the green earth, fertile cows and rejoicing




Thus do we, O lord Brhaspati, offer homage to
the father, divine giver of light and rain showers, with
food, and salutations, yajnas and oblations of fragrant
havis, and we pray that we may be blest with noble and


brave progeny, and we may be masters of the wealths
of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in Sa id raja pratijanyani visva Susmena tasthavabhi


[Names: Brhaspatim]
He surely is ruler of the world who faces all the
practical battles of life with his own strength and
courage, and who holds in faith, honours and worships
Brhaspati, lord supreme sustainer of the universe, most
cherished and the first immanent lord of life.






[Names: Tasmai]
Surely he dwells with peace and contentment
in his own home, and him nature favours with all her
gifts as her loving all-generous child, and to him all
people spontaneously bow in reverence, whom Brahma,
Lord Supreme as well as visionary of the Vedas, prime
Spirit and prime person, favours and blesses as the
brilliant ruler with the divine presence.





[Names: Apratito, Avasyave]
Unchallenged, unopposed, that ruler wins over


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 50 223


and rules all the wealth and powers, assets and liabilities,
whether they belong to the opposition or to his own
supporters, who does honour and service to the holy
man of Vedic knowledge, who feels he needs protection
and support and offers worship and support to the lord
omniscient and omnipotent in support of his people.
Indeed all the nobilities of humanity and all powers of
nature strengthen, support and protect that ruler as the
man of God for all his people.






[Names: Indrasca, Somam, Soma]
Brhaspati, master of the knowledge of
omniscience, and Indra, lord ruler of the world, both
rejoicing and giving showers of wealth and comfort to
the people, drink the soma of bliss in this yajna of human
excellence. O lords of glory in your own right, may the
majesty and sublimity of divinity bless you both and
may you create and give us the wealth and honour of a
brave and perfect nation with a brave young generation.






[Names: Brhaspata, Avistam]
Brhaspati and Indra, scholar teacher of science


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and Divinity, ruler of the world, lead us on to
advancement, we pray, be with us as our own, and may
your vision and wisdom be ours for ourselves. Inspire
and protect our mind and soul, awaken our thought and
action. Lord and master, kind and favourable, help us
exhaust and eliminate our weaknesses, want and


Mandala 4/Sukta 51






[Names: Usha, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Idamu, Purutamam, Purutama, Nunam]
Yonder in the east arises and shines that glorious
light of the dawn revealing itself from the depths of
night’s darkness and inspiring us to wake up and see
the light of knowledge. Surely daughters of heaven, the
sublime lights of the dawn illuminate the earth for us to
see the paths of the day’s action.






[Names: Asthuru, Usasah, Usasa]
The lights of the dawn, various wondrous, shine
magnificent in the east like daughters of omniscience,
bright and bold like flag posts of yajnas of the day, pure


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 51 225


and purifying as flames of fire, opening the doors of
light from the deep folds of the night’s darkness.






[Names: Ucchantiradya, Acitre]
Brilliant and blissful magnificent lights of the
dawn now in the early hours of the morning wake up
and inspire liberal yajakas for the gifts of charity and
performance of the morning yajna, while deep down in
the folds of impenetrable darkness the slothful misers
sleep on, unconscious, unaware and lost in the state of






[Names: Kuvitsa, Yena, Yadusaso]
O divinities of the dawn, let that ancient chariot
of yours which is ever new every morning be ever so
great and magnificent by which, rich and luxurious in
wealth and grace of beauty, you come and shine for your
darling, dear as breath of life, who has nine cows or
ten, i.e., earthly virtues, and seven mouths for
consumption and many more for creation.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yuyam, Prabodhayantirusasah]
O divine lights of dawn, you always move over
and across regions of the world by the rays of light
travelling by the straight paths of truth and natural law
across the oceans of space, waking up and inspiring the
sleeping world of life, humans and animals, to rise and
move for the day’s activity.




[Names: Subham, Rbhunam, Rbhuna]
Where and which of these dawns is that ancient
one by which the wonder works of the Rbhus,
miraculous artists and experts, were accomplished?


Which one of these glorious dawns that go about so
blissfully, all alike and unaging? No, not known.


sid ie i
[Names: Yasvijanah]
For sure those were the dawns of ancient time,


givers of abundant wealth of one’s heart’s desire, born
of the law of Divinity, rooted in eternal truth and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 51 227


rectitude, in which the holy yajaka, worshipping the
Divine with songs of praise and celebration, always and
immediately achieved the wealth of his choice and
desire. They are the same even now, the old ever new.






[Names: Rtasya, Usaso]
They are the celestial lights of Divinity, part of
cosmic dynamics, waking up the homesteads to activity
and proceeding like streams of cows going to the
pastures. Thus do the dawns arise, radiate, wake up life
and celebrate the Divine. They rise and act the same
way in the east since eternity, radiate equally the same
way, illuminating the same way, eternal, ever new, old






[Names: Guhantir]
Thus do the dawns, equal, alike, unobstructed
and inviolable, radiate and roam around, covering the
vast spatial darkness with light and vesting things with
beautiful forms of their own by their catalytic rays of
light and blaze, penetrating, pure, purifying, beautiful
and edifying.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Rayim, Syonada]
O daughters of the light of heaven, angelic
damsels of divinity, bear and bless us with the wealth
of progeny so that, illuminative as you are, edified into
a state of wakefulness and enlightenment through the
peace and bliss of your love and beauty, we, awake and
enlightened, may command a blessed force of warlike
heroes.






[Names: Vayam, Dyausca]
O lights of dawn, daughters of the glory of
heaven, brilliant, radiating and illuminative as you are,
I sing of you as you are, symbol of cosmic yajna, and I
pray we may be blest with the glory of divinity,
splendour of humanity and the honour and wealth of
excellence which the heaven and earth and the daughters
of heaven and earth may bear and bring for us.


(Swami Dayananda extends the meaning of the
dawns from ‘daughters of heaven’ to heavenly daughters
of humanity’, enlightened women, makers of happy
homes. A happy home is a very heaven, he says.)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 52 229


Mandala 4/Sukta 52






[Names: Usha, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Prati, Divo]
That joyous dawn, pioneer of the sun, harbinger
of the new day, shining at the departure of her sister,
the night, rises to view every morning as the daughter
of heaven, arousing the world to fresh life.



[Names: Sakhabhudasvinorusah, Like]
bright, mother pioneer of sunrays, shower of nature’s
light and bliss, the dawn is a friend of the Ashvins, the
sun and moon.





[Names: Utoso]
O Dawn, while you are a friend of the sun and
moon and mother of sunrays, you also command the
wealths of the world.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yavayaddvesasam]
O bright and illuminative dawn, spirit and
beauty of truth and holiness, while you dispel hate and
anger and inspire love and admiration, let us know and
celebrate you with songs of praise and honour.



The bright and blessed light rays of the dawn
appear moving like herds of cows, like showers of solar
energy and like clusters of galaxies: the refulgent dawns
filling the wide spaces with light and splendour.

[Names: Apaprust, Anu]
Bright and wide awake, inspiring the world with
light and awareness, replete with the virtue of divinity,
removing the veil of darkness with light, O dawn, protect
us, protect and promote all, as you have the power and



[Names: Usah, Socisa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 53 231


O dawn, with your rays of light, you radiate and
fill the wide heavens and the skies, and the regions of
universal love, so do you bless your loved one with the
purest light of love and bliss.


(Swami Dayananda interprets the dawn literally
as well as metaphorically: The dawn is not only the light
of the morning, daughter of the sun, but also the light
of the home, blessed and beautiful lady of the house
who fills the home with light and virtue and inspires
her beloved husband with love and bliss.)


Mandala 4/Sukta 53






[Names: Savita, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Chardiryena]
We love, choose and pray for that great, lovable
and cherished energy and refulgence of Savita, self-
refulgent, all observant, giver of light, life and breath
of energy by which, all by himself, he gives the peace
and shelter of a blessed home to the generous yajnic
devotee. May the same lord of light and life arise for us
day by day and bless us with the bliss of a sweet home.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Devo, Vicaksanah]
Upholder of the heaven of light, sustainer of the
universe, Prajapati Savita, lord of light and vision, wears
the refulgent mantle of many forms and colours and, all
watching, illuminative, radiating and expansive, filling
all regions with the life breath of energy, creates and
inspires adorable peace and joy of living.





[Names: Apra]
Savita, self-refulgent creator, giver of light and
life, pervades the highest regions of light, the middle
regions of the skies and the regions of the earth and
creates the poetry of omniscience for the revelation and
communication of his own divine law. He extends the
arms of his omnipotential power and presence thereby
in-vesting and advancing the world of his creation into
the honour and excellence of life day and night.








[Names: Adabhyo, Prasragbahu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 54 233


Undaunted and intrepidable, the self-refulgent
lord of infinite generosity, Savita, illuminates the worlds
of existence and guards and superintends the laws of
nature and holy resolutions of humanity. He extends
his arms of help and protection for the children of the
earth and, wielding his omnipotence of the laws of
existence, he shines and rules over the wide regions of
the mighty universe.






[Names: Trirantariksam, Tisro]
Lord Savita with his power and presence
pervades and inspires threefold middle regions,
threefold regions of firmament and spatial oceans,
threefold lights of fire, lightning and the sun, three orders
of heaven and threefold regions of earth, and with his
love and power he guides, protects and fulfils us by the
threefold laws of creation, sustenance and dissolution
of the world.






[Names: Brhatsumnah, Sarma]
Lord giver of abundant peace and joy, creator


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sustainer, mainstay of the moving and unmoving world
and controller of both, may the self-refulgent lord Savita
of infinite generosity grant us peace and prosperity of
an excellent home for threefold protection of body, mind
and soul, elimination of sin and evil and rest in


[Names: Agandeva, Jinvatu]
May the self-refulgent lord Savita arise, promote
the peace and prosperity of our home by every season
and bring us abundant food and energy with the bliss of
noble progeny. May he inspire us day and night to higher


honour and achievement and advance us all round to a
settled state of homely wealth for generations to come.


Mandala 4/Sukta 54

[Names: Savita, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi]
atau



[Names: Abhuddevah]
Lord Savita, giver of abundant light and joy, is
adorable for all of us, the lord who is now praised and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 54 235


worshipped day in and day out by the best of men and
leaders of humanity, and who gives for the people
abundant good fortune of the jewels of wealth just as
he creates and gives the best and highest of wealth for us.






[Names: Devebhyo, Adiddamanam]
Savita, lord creator of life, you alone first of all
create and inspire the immortal bliss of freedom, the
highest gift of divinity for mankind, awarded to the
devotees of yajna and divine worship, and then you
alone reveal yourself and open up the treasures of divine
gifts for the generous people followed by children who
keep up the family tradition of piety.






[Names: Devesu, Purusatvata]
Whatever our trespass whether out of ignorance,
or helplessness, or pride, or arrogance, or sense of
power, either among or toward the divine people, or
the generous and brilliant, or even ordinary people, for
that trespass, O lord Savita, giver of light and inspiration,
give us the strength and inspiration to correct ourselves
and be free from sin and evil here itself in this life we
are human, after all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Yatprthivya]
Never shall the grandeur of divine Savita be
violated and destroyed, grandeur by which he wields
and shall ever wield the whole universe, by which he
creates the wide expanse of the earth and the glory of
high heaven whereon is seen the imprint of his fingers.
That grandeur is ever true, imperishable.






[Names: Indrajyesthan, Indrajyestha, Yathayatha]
Savita, O lord creator, you create the stars and
forces great as the sun and cosmic energy, greater than
the mighty mountains and the thunderous clouds, and
you create the regions and orbits for these wherein they
abide like home dwellers. And as these fly around and
observe the cosmic law, so they abide for your honour
and grandeur doing homage to your glory.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 55 237




[Names: Indro, Sarma, Adityair, Aditih, Aditi]
Savita, lord creator, the created ones such as sun
and moon and the human beings, who daily do homage
to you thrice every day, may all these, earth and heaven,
the sea with waters, mother nature with her solar lights,
and Indra, the sun, and lord omnipotent create for us
homely sweetness and give us a peaceful home for rest.


Mandala 4/Sukta 55






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Sahiyaso, Varuna, Mitra]
O Vasus, shelter homes of life, which one of
you is our saviour, our protector? O heaven and earth,
O mother nature, safeguard us. O Mitra and Varuna,
friend and lord of justice, who is our protector and
defender against the powerful challenging man? O noble
people, who bears and brings us the best gifts in yajna?





[Names: Yaducchan, Yaduccha, Vidhataro]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Those who love and respect and have realised
the primal seats and sources of divine bliss, who dispel
the darkness and illuminate them, wise destroyers of
suffering, creators and sustainers of boons of divine
bliss, bear and bring immortal bliss without relent, they
are the destroyers of want and misery, and they abide
by and sustain the laws of truth and shine in glory.






[Names: Ubhe, Usasanakta]
I praise the divine Aditi, Mother Nature and
imperishable Eternity, blessed home of existence and
the ocean, with songs of celebration for the sake of
friendship and the gift of welfare and happiness, and I
pray that just as the two protect and sustain us day and
night, so may the night and the dawns, both intrepidable,
nourish and sustain us.






[Names: Vyaryama, Varunasceti, Indravisnu, Sarma]
May Aryama, lord of justice, and Varuna,
supreme ruler, show us the paths of life with light and
knowledge. May Agni, leading creator and controller
of food and energy, open up the paths of progressive
development on earth. May Indra, controller and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 55 239


commander of power, and Vishnu, sustainer and
protector of a steady state of law and order, both praised
and celebrated as leaders of excellence, provide us a
life of peace, freedom and security and a sweet home of
conjugal bliss and promising progeny.






[Names: Marutamavamsi, Patpatirjanyadanhaso, Yaduta]
I pray for protections of the cloud, the mountain
and the winds and warriors, and for the gifts of Bhaga,
generous giver of power and prosperity, the lord
protector and promoter of all. May the ruler of the land
save us from sin and crime that might arise, and Mitra,
friends, like real friends, protect and advance us in life.






[Names: Samudram]
As the sailors who desire to cross the sea study
and appraise the sea and sea conditions to sail over, so,
O dedicated performers of yajna, study the earth and
heaven along with thunder and clouds and the desired
water gifts of the skies so that streams of vapour and
showers of rain be released for the rivers to flow over
land to the sea.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Devairno, Nahi, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
May divine Aditi, Mother Nature, with all her
generous forces nourish and sustain us. May divine
saviour save, protect and sustain us without relent and
neglect. (So may our mother and father guide, protect
and sustain us.) And we must not try, much less even
feel, that we can hurt or compromise the high position
and favour of Mitra, the friend, Varuna, senior guide
and judge, and Agni, leader, fire and vital energy.





[Names: Agnirise, Agniris, Tanyasmabyam]
Agni, ruler of action and endeavour, rules the
wealth, power and honours of life. Agni, fire, commands
the prosperity, good fortune and grandeur of humanity.
Agni provides all these for us.





[Names: Puru]
Usha, O lady of morning light, beauty of the
home, blest with holy speech of inspiration,
commanding wealth and honour, mistress of intelligence


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 56 241


and speed of progress in action and endeavour, bring
us manifold wealth and honour of our cherished desire.






[Names: Indro]
That power, prosperity, honour and excellence
for us, may Savita, the sun, Bhaga, ruler of wealth and
power, Varuna, the chosen leader, Mitra, the friend,
Aryama, the chief of justice, and Indra, commander and
controller of power and rule of law and order, may bring
us with all wealth and success of excellence and joy.


Mandala 4/Sukta 56






[Names: Dyavaprthivi, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Mahi, Yatsim]
The great heaven and earth, greatest here both,
grow bright and beautiful with pure and purifying
showers of light when the sun, radiating and all round
pervading both the great and best regions of the
universe, rises and roars like a bull in the heavens with
wide expansive rays of its glorious radiation.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Devi, Rtavari, Sucayadbhir]
Divine dyavaprthivi, sun and earth with their
divine forces—the sun with light and the earth with her
motherly nurture and noble people — both worthy of
love and study with dedication, loving and non-violent,
abide constant in the universe. They are generous with
showers of light and vitality, firm in the cosmic law of
truth, replete with waters of life, loving all and hating
none, blest with bright and creative progeny — the sun
with planets and satellites and the earth with vegetation
— carrying on and leading the process of cosmic yajna
with their pure and purifying rays of light and vibrations
of creative generosity.






[Names: Urvi, Sacya]
That One alone, lord of omnipotent holy action
omnipresent in these worlds of the universe, is the lord
who creates the heaven and earth wide and deep with
concentrations of particles together in beautiful forms
self-sustained without external support. He is the lord
eternal and omniscient who moves these with his vision
and holy power.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 56 243



[Names: Uruci]
May the heaven and earth, vast, together loving,
kind, favourable and fertile, revered and admired by
the world, bless us with vast homes managed by
dedicated ladies and may we, with our will and
intelligence, achieve and command many chariots and





[Names: Suci]
O resplendent heaven and earth, pure and
unsullied, we offer earnest praise in honour to you and
approach you with prayers.





[Names: Punane, Uhyathe]
Divine and pure heaven and earth, together in
body with your innate power and potential, you shine
in glory and observe the laws of eternal truth in






[Names: Existence, Mitrasya, Mitras, Pari]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O mighty heaven and earth, helping friends and
devotees to cross the hurdles to attainment, fulfilling
the laws of truth to bliss, you preside over the yajnas of
life to perfection of success.


Mandala 4/Sukta 57








[Names: Kshetrapati, Shuna, Shunasira, Sita, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Ksetrasya, Gamasvam]
We prosper in life by virtue of the master of the
field as by a benefactor or a friendly army. May he,
giver of good health and nutriments, develop fertile
fields, cows and horses and, in this way, provide peace
and joy for us all.






[Names: Madhuscutam]
Master of the field, as the cow produces milk
and you milk the nectar for us, so produce the rippling
sweets of honey for us, and so may the masters of
running waters, laws of nature and holy action discover
the sacred knowledge of science like sanctified ghrta
seasoned with honey for the peace and joy of us all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 57 245






[Names: Madhumatirosadhirdyava]
May the herbs and trees, all vegetation indeed,
be full of honey for us. May the heavens of light, the
skies and the oceans of earth and space be full of honey
for us. May the farmer, master of the field, be gracious
with honey for us. And let us join, serve and cooperate
with the farmer as well as with nature as we should
without hurting, injuring and polluting.



[Names: Suna, Sunam]
Let the oxen and horses draw the plough and
carry the burdens happily for growth and prosperity.
Let the men work happily, let the plough furrow the
field neatly, and let the whole process move on happily
and effectively for growth and prosperity.






[Names: Sunasiravimam, Tenemamupa]
O Vayu and Aditya, wind and sun, farmer and
helpers, listen to this word and follow: the water which


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




you create in the regions of light, and which you move
in the light of science, pray bring down to irrigate this
holy land of the fields.






[Names: Arvact, Yatha]
O charming furrow, be straight and deeply well
drawn. We love and celebrate you so that you bring us
good fortune, so that you bring us the best fruit of our
labour and endeavour.





[Names: Indrah, Indra, Pusanu]
Let Indra, the farmer, take over and look after
the furrow with seed, and may the sun shine warmly
over the seed. Let Pusha, fertility of nature, feed and
energise the grain. And let the earth mother, full of the
milk of life, produce more and more of pure foods year
by year for us.




[Names: Sunamasmasu]
Let the ploughmen plough the land happily for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 58 247


our peace and nourishment. Let the farmers work with
the oxen and horses happily for peace and joy. Let the
clouds shower with milk and honey joyously for peace
and prosperity. Let the share and plough, the ploughmen
and their helpers, and the powers of fertility bear and
bring us peace, prosperity and joy for us all.


Mandala 4/Sukta 58








[Names: Agni, Surya, Apah, Gavah, Ghrtam, Devata, Vamadeva, Gautama, Rshi, Samudrad, Ghrtasya]
From the seas of earth and space arises the wave
of honeyed energy, and close by the sun and soma that
is produced in the solar yajna it joins and collects the
nectar of immortality. That mysterious identity of cosmic
fertility which is for us and for life as a whole flows
from the tongue of divinities and originates from the
centre of Eternity.






[Names: Vayam]
The name and identity of that spirit of energy
and immortality we sing and celebrate in divine words


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in this yajna, and, with reverence, surrender and self
sacrifice, give it unto ourselves in the soul to hold on to
it in life. May the Lord Omniscient so close to us hear it
well chanted in celebration, the same Lord of Vak, the
eternal Word, who commands the four Vedas as high
peaks of knowledge and breathes out the same for us in
revelation.






[Names: Catvari, Sirse, Tridha]
Of this mighty self-refulgent Lord, Word and
Dharma, four are the high peaks of light and self
proclamation: Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and
Atharva-veda; three legs on which it rests: jnana or
knowledge, karma or action, and upasana or prayer; two
heads: abhyudaya or worldly well being, and Nihshreyas
or moksha or ultimate freedom; seven hands or the seven
verse forms. Three way bound in faith, action and
meditation, it is the thundervoice of Divinity which
proclaims itself through the beauty, wonder and terror
of nature and the music of the Veda. And this mighty
presence of mighty self-refulgent Lord and the self-
awareness of omniscience is enshrined in the heart of






[Names: Indra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 58 249


Ghrta, the essence of the nature, purpose and
science of life, three way hidden in mystic language
and held by natural forces, the enlightened ones
discover, create and produce: Indra, cosmic energy,
electricity, thunder and lightning, holds and reflects one,
the sun holds and radiates another, and the third they
discover from their meditation on Divinity with their
own vision and intelligence.






These streams of light and life’s energy flow in
a hundred streams from the innermost depth of the heart-
ocean, but not perceptible to the negative soul. Residing
in the golden grove, myself wrapped in golden hue in
their midst, I watch the light all round, the gold and the
essence of life.






[Names: Samyak]
These streams of light and life flow like
vibrations of the voice divine, purified and sanctified
by the innermost soul of the heart and mind. The streams
of ghrta, joy of life, flow like deer flying from the
hunter’s arrows towards the shelter of the divine saviour.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sindhoriva]
The streams of ghrta, life’s energy, flow on to
join the sea like strong currents of a river rushing on in
tumult by simple, straight and holy paths of the bed
carved by Divinity, and I, inspired by the waves of ghrta,
like a fiery stallion flying, breaking the bounds of world
pressures all round by the force of inner vibrations, move
on to my divine destination.





[Names: Grtasya, Agnim]
As youthful ladies of love and virtue, inspired
with passion and smiling in bliss, proceed to meet agni,
enlightened husband, so do streams of ghrta move and
flow into the vedi to meet the lighted fire, and the rising
fire, loving and gracious, cherishes to receive the flow
of the holy yajaka’s offer.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 4 / SUKTA - 58 251




[Names: Kanya, Yatra, Somah, Soma]
Where the yajna of holy action and meditation
is enacted and the bliss of divine soma is created, there
I see all round the flow of the streams of consciousness
into that vedi of divine fire wherein, like a maiden in
all her beauty, finery and perfume proceeding to meet
her bridegroom at the wedding yajna, the individual soul
flies and is accepted and sanctified in the supreme spirit
of Divinity.





[Names: Abhyarsata, Imam]
Let the voice of holy praise and divine
celebration rise and resound, O saints and sages and
scholars of eminence, bear and bring us the light of
knowledge enshrined in holy speech, lead us to honour,
excellence and victory, and help us create wealth for
the world leading all to the bliss of peace and common
good. Guide, lead and direct this yajna of ours, the
streams of honeyed ghrta flow for the fire divine.






[Names: Dhaman, Apamanike]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O Lord, within your presence by your power is
sustained the entire world of existence. That same power
and presence vibrates in the depths of the oceans, in the
cave of the heart, in the breath of life and age, in the
waves of water and energy, in the vibrations of thought,
and in the heat of action in nature and humanity. That
power and presence vibrating in existence, O Lord, we
pray, let us realise. Let us flow with that constant flow
of vibration of Divinity in and across the fluctuations
of mutability.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


253


MANDALA 5


Mandala 5/Sukta 1
Agni Devata, Budha-Gavishthara of Atreya Family Rshis






[Names: Abodhyagnih, Yahva]
Agni is seen and known while rising by the
burning samidhas lighted by the yajakas at dawn coming
up like a cow early in the morning, and the flames, like
branches of a mighty tree, rise brilliantly and touch the
sky where there is no pain, no darkness.






[Names: Abodhi, Agnih, Agni, Samiddhasya]
The yajaka Agni, good at heart, is seen to invoke
the divinities and noble sages to the yajna and rises high
while the fire keeps burning and rising. The light of the
burning fire is seen as a blissful divine power and then
the great refulgent sun rises from the night’s darkness.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yadim, Addaksina]
When the pure and lustrous fire of yajna, as the
sun, rises with its pure bright flames and takes over the
reins of the conduct of the yajnic world around, then
the invigorating and powerful dakshina offering is made
with the ladles, the flames of fire rise high, and the fire
higher and higher up voraciously consumes the offering.





[Names: Aghimaccha, Usasa, Sveto]
The minds of holy celebrants of Divinity turn
intently to Agni as their eyes wait for and turn to the
rising sun. And when the heaven and earth, both
different of form, one bright and the other dark and
green, bring forth this Agni at the rise of the dawn, day
light appears and the world grows bright.






[Names: Janista, Damedame]
Arises Agni, victorious yajaka, the fire and the
sun, for sure in advance of the day every morning,
benevolent, active in everything good and holy, bright
in the woods and every home, bearing sevenfold jewels


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 1 255


of light and flame, and then settles in yajnic business,
carrying the yajna on and on. The yajna must go on.






[Names: Agnirhota, Yuva, Purunihstha]
Agni, host and performer of yajna, settles in the
lap of the mother, earth and nature, in the beautiful
fragrant world and its people, conducting the yajnic
business of life which must go on. Young and bold,
bright, intelligent and creative, imaginative as a poet,
dedicated to all without exception, committed to truth
and the law divine, sustainer and controller of the people,
he goes on at the centre of everything, bright and
blazing, never relenting, never slackening. The yajna






Ever and onward, with food, surrender and
service in faith, people light, praise and worship that
Agni, wise and vibrating, excellent in the
accomplishment of yajnic projects, host, priest and
organiser of life’s business, who pervades heaven and
earth with light and fragrance and blesses the people


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




with enlightenment. Daily they renew their dedication
and commitment with vows of truth, feed the power
with ghrta, and refine the light and power to shine it
more and more.






[Names: Marjalyo, Sahasrasrngo]
Agni, pure and purifying catalytic power, is
refined in itself. Self-controlled and a powerful
controller, sung and celebrated by poets, it is a welcome
guest, auspicious and beneficent for all of us as a breeze
of peace and freshness. Agni, O light of a thousand
flames of eminence, generous as cloud showers, blazing
lustrous, you are the pioneer, overtaking, conquering,
and leading all others forward with your power and
force.






[Names: Ilenyo]
Agni, lord of light and power, for whosoever
you rise on the vedi, light up in the home, or shine in
flame in the cave of the heart most lovely and gracious,
for him you excel and surpass everything else instantly
and forever: adorable, sublime, effulgent, dearest and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 1 257


most welcome guest of all communities and habitations
of men and women.






[Names: Tubhyam, Sarma]
Agni, most youthful power and presence,
devoted people from far and near bear and bring and
offer homage and yajaka to you. Listen, know and accept
the praise and prayer of the celebrant. May your shelter
and protection for us be wide and great, full of peace
and well being.






[Names: Adya, Vidvan]
Agni, refulgent lord of knowledge, ascend your
strong and brilliant chariot of light today with your
adorable powers and associates, and across the wide
paths of space bring here the nobilities of eminence of
your alliance for joining and sharing our feast of yajnic
offerings to the divinities.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Avocama, Gavisthiro]
We sing this song of adoration in honour of the
lord of light and knowledge, holy, potent, and generous.
The holy yajaka dedicated to sacred speech and light of
heaven, thus, ought to direct his beautiful song of praise
and prayer with oblations and salutations rising high to
the skies as to the sun in heaven.


Mandala 5/Sukta 2






[Names: Agni, Devata, Kumara, Atreya, Vrsha, Jana, Rshis, Kumaram, Anitkamasya]
The youthful mother bears and supports the
foetus concealed in the womb, she does not, cannot,
give it to the father in the state of immaturity. People
cannot hurt its strength and vitality hidden in secret.
But when it is born, they see its beauty and vitality before






[Names: Kametam, Purvirhi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 2 259


O youthful lady, sweet is this baby you carry
which the consecrated mother bore. I saw the foetus
grow and grow for many many years many times before.
And I see it born of the mother when she delivered it.






[Names: Hiranyadantam, Dadano]
I see him born of the mother’s womb far and
near with a golden spoon in his month, pure and bright
of form, wielding his weapons of essential potential.
And I give him the feed of immortal elixir for life. What
can those deny Indra, the soul? What can those who
reject knowledge and celebration of Divinity do against






[Names: Nothing, Ksetradapasyam, Sobhamanam, Puru]
I see him born of the mother, mother earth and
[Names: Mother, Nature]
by himself like an army on the march, commanding great
beauty and grace. When he is born they hold him not,
withhold him not, they cannot, and the young mothers,
having given him birth, grow old and grey haired, and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








Who can take away my wealth alongwith my
lands and cows, sense and mind, feeling as if they are
the cowherd stealing away my bull alongwith the cows,
when in fact Agni himself is their protector and
energiser? And those who try to grab them must despair
and give up since the lord omniscient continues to
protect, create and recreate the human wealth.



6. Vasam rajanam vasatim jananamaratayo ni da-


[Names: Brahmanyatrerava]
The law and order of humanity and the human
habitations, negative forces try to obstruct and sabotage
in the communities among themselves. But the power,
potential and intelligence of Atri, enlightened people
free from physical, mental and spiritual fears and
limitations disinflate that negative effort and the




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / <^ - 2 261




[Names: Sunascicchepam, Evasmadagne]
Agni, O lord of light and ruler of the world, you
save even shunah-shepa, the connoisseur lost in senses,
reviled and condemned; you save him from a thousand
snares of the world so that the man settles back in peace
of mind. Same way, O lord and light of the world, come,
O highpriest of the yajna of life, grace our yajna here
and snap the snares of suffering and slavery off our body,
mind and soul.






[Names: Hrniyamano, Indro, Anu, Anusista]
The observer of the laws of righteousness and
divinity says: Let the element of hate and anger be away
from me. Indra, man of knowledge and power, who
knows and speaks of you, O Agni, destroyer of the
pollution and impurity of body, mind and soul, has
spoken to me and, instructed by him, I come to you in
search of purity and purgation.






[Names: Pradevirmayah, Sisite]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni shines and blazes expansively with mighty
rising flames of light, and with its lustre and power
illuminates and reveals all things of the world. It
sharpens and extends its arms of light and power for
the destruction of evil and challenges and throws out
the strength and wiles and acts of the clever forces of
negation and destruction.






[Names: Utasvanaso, Made]
And let the blazing weapons of fire roaring in
the heights of the skies be raised for the destruction of
evil forces, for as they strike for the joy and victory of
life’s positive forces as the very flames of terror, the
obstructive forces of evil would fail to avert or oppose






[Names: Etam, Yadidagne]
Agni, light and power divine among the strong
and wise, I, dedicated to knowledge and service, bold
and patient, keen to do good in word and action,
structure this song of celebration like a skillful engineer
designing and making a chariot for you. O lord refulgent,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 3 263


if you are kind and gracious to accept it, then by the
same song we would win sweet and heavenly waters of
life, light and energy for the joy of life.






[Names: Tuvigrivo, Ifttmam, Agnim, Sarma, Sarma]
Agni, strong and graceful power and flame,
roaring as a bull and generous as cloud showers,
growing and promoting, free from enemies, master ruler
and sustainer, creates and bestows wealth and power of
the noblest kind: Thus do men of spiritual vision and
divine wisdom celebrate this Agni in holy words. May
Agni bless the man of generosity and self sacrifice, man
of thought and discrimination, with a happy and peaceful
life, holy family and a happy home.


Mandala 5/Sukta 3




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasushruta, Atreya, Rshi, Tvamagne]
Agni, flaming fire, light of knowledge and
power of the world, when you are born, you shine like


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Varuna, light of the dawn and spirit of justice and
discrimination in mankind. When you are in full blaze
of your glory, you are like Mitra, bright sun, friend of
all. In you reside and abide all the powers of nature’s
divinity, O child of omnipotence, and you are Indra,
giver of honour and excellence for the man of charity
and generosity.






[Names: Tvamaryama, Anjanti, Mitram, Mitra]
Agni, lord of energy and living vitality, when
you bear the mysterious name of youth among men and
women, you become Aryama and assume the role of a
judge with discrimination. When you join man and
woman in wedlock, with equal love of mind and heart,
they celebrate you with holy words and hospitality with
cow’s milk and butter.






[Names: Tava, Sriye, Maruto, Rudra, Padam]
Agni, you are Rudra, lord of justice and
dispensation. For your honour and excellence vibrant
people come to you and anoint you and glorify the
beautiful and wonderful name that is yours. The office


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 3 265


of Vishnu, protector and sustainer, is vested in you, by
that you protect and maintain the secret name and
identity of the lights of stars.






[Names: Sriya, Puru, Hotaramagnim, Samsamayoh]
O lord of light and generosity, ruler of the world,
by virtue of your light, honour and grace, brilliant
scholars of vision, commanding wide powers and
immortal knowledge, and the people in general, loving
and desiring admirable wealth and beauty of life,
establish, serve and expand the fire of various forms of
yajna of social and scientific projects, in your honour,
holy yajaka and giver of life’s benefits.






[Names: Visasca]
Agni, there never is a generous giver and yajnic
performer before you, nor is there any one higher
celebrated by poets in hymns, lord of your own essential
wealth and power as you are, worthy of homage. Lord
of light and generosity, whoever the host where you are
invoked and invited as yajnic deity, you bless the people
by the yajna with fulfilment.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Vayamagne, Vayam]
Agni, lord refulgent ruler of the world, may we
grow and prosper, we pray, under your protection,
searching for wealth, raising the fire with havi offerings
and ourselves rising in wealth and knowledge with the
yajna. Let us win in life’s contests, in yajnas, day by
day, O child of strength and protector of power and
valour, and let us be blest with children and grand






[Names: Jahi]
Whoever commits sin and crime against us, may
Agni, lord ruler and dispenser of justice, turn that sin
and crime upon the sinner and calumniator. May the
lord of light and knowledge, Agni, silence that
imprecation, whoever be the person that hurts us with
double dealing, sin and scandal.






[Names: Tvamasya, Samsthe]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 3 267


Agni, refulgent power of light and generosity
settled in the midst of this people, yajakas ever since
time immemorial honouring you as harbinger of nature’s
wealth join you and adore you in yajna with oblations
of havi. And when you join them and settle in their midst
then, raised and fed by the people on fragrant materials,
you rise in flames as brilliant lord giver of the wealth of
lite,





[Names: Kada]
Agni, born of omnipotence, I think of you,
meditate on you: You are the saviour from suffering
and mortality as a child is for the parent. You are the
scholar of science, visionary of existence and observer
of the eternal laws of Dharma. Emulate, excel and save
the parent, the protector and the yajaka who lights you
in the vedi, fight out and eliminate suffering, sufferance,
evil and destruction. Pray when would your eye of grace
favour us? When would you inspire us and show the
path of rectitude to guide us?






[Names: Bhuri, Kuviddevasya, Agnir]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O shelter home of life, Agni, father and sustainer
of living beings as you are, the worshipper adores you
by many names which adoration if you accept and
acknowledge with pleasure then the worshipper, loving,
adoring and growing like fire by the light and power of
the generous lord, creates joy and well being for himself,
and Agni too, loving and favouring the adorer by his
own divine knowledge and power, waxing with love
and kindness, bestows the joy and well being of life
upon the supplicant.




[Names: Tvamanga, Stena]
Dearest ruler of the earth, most youthful power
of the world, Agni, save the celebrant, purge the
supplicant of all the evil and sufferings of the world:
thieves are seen prowling around, enemies lying in wait,
ignorant people lying in hidden corners, all following





[Names: Nahayam]
These celebrants and supplicants observing the
law divine are dedicated to you, O lord Agni. Also,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 4 269


whatever their weakness or trespass, that too has been
confessed to the lord protector and sustainer. We pray
may this Agni, lord omniscient and omnipotent,
increasingly pleased and gracious, never forsake us and
never deliver us unto the maligner or the injurer or the
evil of failure and disaster.


Mandala 5/Sukta 4






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasushruta, Atreya, Rshi, Tvamagne, Tvaya]
Agni, lord and brilliant ruler of the world,
protector and sustainer of the wealths of life, I serve
and celebrate you in the constructive business of
cooperative living without hate and violence. With you
and under your guidance and inspiration, collecting
speed and strength for progress, let us, we pray, win the
battles of mortal humanity and be happy.




[Names: Havyavalagnir, Sugarhapatyah, Sravamsi]
Agni, our father, sustainer and ruler, ever
youthful and unaging, carrier of holy materials and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fragrances over and across the world is all pervasive in
power and presence, resplendent, all illuminative and
all revealing, and blissful in form and appearance. May
he provide for us all the healthful food, and energies
for a happy household and may he, knowing us well
and what is good for us, measure out, determine and
grant all the bounds and laws of our wealth and
properties, rights and duties, which we must not violate





[Names: Visam]
Install Agni in the seat of power, protection and
creative governance, Agni the poetic sage and visionary
of the people, chief of human settlements, pure and
unsullied, the light and fire of the world, strongly based
in ghrta and waters, highpriest of the yajnic human
organisation, conversant with every detail of the social
order, and he procures and rules the choice gifts which
people love and desire.


afar is



[Names: Jusasvagna, Jusasva, Suryasya, Suryas]
Agni, all knowing lord of light and destroyer of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 4 271


enemies, pervasive across the earth and pleased with
world voice, joining the sunrays and working with them,
come, join our yajna lighted and rising with the fuel on
fire, enjoy yourself and bring the noblest generous
powers of nature and humanity along to partake of the
fruits of our corporate endeavour of yajna.






[Names: Justo, Visva, Satru]
Agni, enlightened scholar, ruler of the world,
loved and honoured as a member of the family and
welcome visitor to the house, having challenged and
eliminated all the opposing forces of hate and enmity
in the world, come to this yajna of ours and bring us
cherished foods and delicacies.






[Names: Vadhena, Piparsi]
Agni, enlightened ruler of the world, born and
risen as the very child of strength and honour, drive
away the wicked, thieves and robbers, augmenting the
food and energy for your own body politic. O best of
men and leaders, protect and promote the noble


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




enlightened people and replenish the powers of nature
and thus strengthen and promote us in our joint
endeavour of living.






[Names: Vayam, Asme]
Agni, noble ruler of life and humanity of the
earth, pure and purifying power, rising in flames of piety
and well being, with holy songs of celebrative
knowledge and practical work and with correct inputs
of yajnic materials, we offer you homage and service
for human progress and all round welfare. For us, create,
collect and receive the wealth of universal value and
hold in trust the honour and prestige of the entire human
nation.






[Names: Asmakamagne]
Agni, blazing light and fire, child of omni-
potence, ruler of three worlds, join and bless our non-
violent yajna of creation and production for the good
of life. Let us be blest, we pray, to be followers of
universal Dharma and piety of action, and protect and
promote us with peace and comfort in a happy home of
threefold bliss for body, mind and soul through three


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 4 273


seasons for the human family.






[Names: Visvani, Agne, Atrivannamasa]
Agni, lord ruler commanding knowledge of the
world of existence, constantly supported by relentless
active assistants, as a sailor helps travellers to cross the
sea by boat, so do you, we pray, help us cross the most
difficult obstacles of the world. Served and celebrated
with homage and service with surrender, you are the
protector and sustainer of our bodies and material
interests, this be gracious to know we know.






[Names: Yastva, Jatavedo]
While I, a mortal man, invoke, sing and celebrate
your gifts and glory, immortal lord omnipresent in the
world of existence, I pray with a sincere heart in full
awareness of your omniscience and omnipotence as a
supplicant, give us the gift of honour and excellence
and bless us that with good progeny we may attain the
state of immortality and ultimate freedom.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Yasmai]
Whoever the person doing noble work in piety,
for whom, O Jataveda, lord all knowing the things born,
Agni, lord refulgent ruler of the world, you create and
provide a lovely life of freedom and action, he attains a
wealth of horses, dynamic self-progress, noble children,
brave warriors, lands and cows, and above all the bliss
of well being.


Mandala 5/Sukta 5






[Names: Apri, Sukta, Mantrawise, Devata, Vasushruta, Atreya, Rshi, Susamiddhaya, Agnaye]
For success and self-fulfilment, ardenly offer
hot and sharply catalytic ghrta into the intense fire,
lighted, rising and radiant in the vedi, Jataveda, fire of
life vibrating in everything in existence including

For self-realisation in meditation, collect and
concentrate your mind and consciousness into focus and


direct it into the light of Divinity all pervasive, and
shining in the cave of your heart also.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 5 275






[Names: Narasamsah, Kavirhi]
Only the best of men admired by humanity
effects such a yajna, the man intrepidable, whatever the
circumstances, the man of poetic vision, so generous
that sweetness and charity flows from his hand like
honey dripping from the honey suckle.






[Names: Ilito, Sukhai]
Served and celebrated in yajna, O light of life,
Agni, hastening hither-ward by holy chariots for our
protection and advancement, bring into the world the
dearest wonderful wealth of honour and excellence with
peace, comfort and freedom from fear.






[Names: Urnamrada, Bhava]
O ruling light of the world, soft, softening and
protective, the mantric songs resound, arise and expand,
bright and pure. Be gracious for our good and give us
our share of wealth, honour and enlightenment in the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Devirdvaro, Srayadhvam, Prapra]
O celestial doors of light divine, open welcome
wide for us to walk through to the heavenly shades of


peace and protection, expand, beautify and beatify the
yajna of life for us.


[Names: Supratike, Dosamusasamimahe]
We arise, welcome and honour the night and
the dawn of day, both gracious and blissful of form,


energisers of life, mighty strong, observers of nature’s
law and makers of yajna.




[Names: Vatasya, Imam]
Divine performers of yajna, night and the dawn
of day, blessed benefactors of humanity, celebrated in
songs of praise and prayer, come by flight of the winds
to grace this yajna of ours.



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 5 277




[Names: Sarasvati, Barhith]
Ila, divine knowledge of infinite omniscience,
Sarasvati, divine language of existencial knowledge,
and the divine spirit of mother earth, three divine givers
of material, mental and spiritual bliss, may, we pray,
come and sanctify our holy grass on the vedi and bless
our yajna without delay and without fail.






[Names: Sivastvastariha, Yajneyajne]
Shiva, lord of peace and bliss, Tvashta, destroyer
of suffering, spirit of the universe all pervasive, come
to us in our business of health and growth by your own
love and grace and protect and advance us all round in
every performance of ours, yajna by yajna.





[Names: Yatra, Tatra]
Lord of sun rays and master of vegetation and
forests, wherever you know are the secret abodes of the
divine powers of nature and their names and definitions,
there guide our yajna to reach for knowledge and further




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Svahagnaye, Varunaya, Varuna, Svaha]
Let there be right words of description and exact
definition for Agni, light and fire energy. Let there be
right words of knowledge and choice for Varuna, right
values and judgement. Let there be right actions for
Indra, power, energy, honour and excellence for the
Maruts, the people. Let there be honour and holy care
for the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity.
Let there be right materials as inputs for the holy
scientific yajna of development and growth in gratitude
to nature and the Lord Divine.


Mandala 5/Sukta 6






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasushruta, Atreya, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Astamarvanta]
Agni is that power and presence of energy, I
believe, which pervades everything and in which and
by which all things abide and function. The cows abide
in it, move by it and end up into it. Horses abide in it,
move by it and end into it. So do all fast moving streams
and objects, permanent forms, and all forms of energy
move by it and retire into it. O scholar of Agni, universal
energy, produce and bring up food and energy for the
celebrants and supplicants for Agni. This energy is
originally set in motion by Agni, the Cosmic omnipotent
Spirit. (In the mantra agni is described as astam, 1.6.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 6 279






[Names: Agniryo, Samarvanto]
That is Agni which is the abiding power,
pervasive and moving force, and that is what I study
and celebrate. The cows and horses, stars and planets
and the rays of light, and sound and word come from,
move by and go unto it, from which and into which and
by which the slow moving ones move and function;
and by which and toward which brave and eminent
scholars rise to fame and create and produce the wealth
of food and energy for the celebrants and supplicants.






[Names: Agnirhi]
Agni, light and energy of existence, alone
provides fast modes of transport for the people. Studied
and developed for wealth, Agni provides automatic and
self-sustaining energy for the people. O scholar scientist,
create and bring choice foods and energies for the
celebrants and supplicants.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yaddha]
Let us kindle you, light and fire of life, generous
divinity, refulgent and unaging so that the wonderfully
admirable light of your blaze shines in heaven and you
bring food and energy for the celebrants.


TUM




[Names: Suscandra]
Agni, light of life, lord of power, purity and
splendour, golden beautiful, generous, sustainer of the
people and carrier of fragrant oblations across the
spaces, fragrant offers are made to you with the chant
of holy verses in praise of your identity, attributes and
functions. Generous creative power, create and bring
food and energy for the celebrants.






Those radiations of your energy into other forms
of energies feed, invigorate and develop the wealth and
growth of life in existence. They inspire, impel and
collect, they expel, expand and organise, and thus they


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 6 281


animate the circuitous dynamics of centripetal and
centrifugal forces in systemic unison of the universe. O
living power, create and bring food and energy for the






[Names: Tava]
Agni, O mighty power of the universe, those
mighty radiations of your flames of energy feed and
animate all objects into motion in space and they, with
the radiating waves of your power, energise, expand
and hold in poise the orbits of motions for the stars,
planets and the galaxies. O mighty power, create and
hold the food and energy of life and bless the celebrants.






[Names: Nava]
Agni, mighty power and light of knowledge,
bring us new forms of food and energy and give us new
revelations of blissful earths and stars in existence. And
we pray, may we, who worship and celebrate you, be
your messengers in every home. O lord, bring us the
food and energy of life and light of knowledge ever
new for us, your celebrants and supplicants.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Ubhe, Srinisa, Savasaspata]
Agni, mighty lord of golden glory in form,
creator and wielder of universal energy, you catalyse
two ladlefuls of liquid fuel in your crucible for impulsion
and expulsion in cosmic metabolism. Thus, O lord, fulfil
us too in holy tasks of yajna and create and bring food
and energy for the celebrants.




[Names: Evan, Dadhadasme, Anusak]
Thus do the celebrants and supplicants
positively dedicated to Agni study and apply natural
energy for practical purposes by holy speech and yajnic
structures of research and experimentation, so that agni
may hold and bring us lustrous strength and dynamic
energy of electric speed and success.


O lord of power and energy, create and bring
food and energy for the celebrants.


Mandala 5/Sukta 7




[Names: Agni, Devata, Isha, Atreya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 7 283




[Names: Sakhayah, Varsisthaya]
O friends, all your food and energy well
collected and all your song of description and
celebration is for Agni and is dedicated to Agni, lord
giver of light and energy, highest of the powers and
abodes in the universe, power manifest in divine
manifestations of energy and the power omnipotent






[Names: Kutra, Arhantascidyamindhate]
Where is that Agni on whose revelation and
arrival in the home-steads of humanity, people, the best
and highest of them, rejoice? which scholars and sages
light and raise? and which even the least of living beings
generate?






When we join together and pray for foods and
energy forms, and the oblations of holy materials into
the fire for the good of humanity rise in fragrance, then
Agni with its power takes over the reins of rain showers
and abundance of wealth and well being.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Pavako]
He, the power unaging, pure and purifying, gives
signals of his light and guidance even for those who are


far away when he leaves behind the night and rides the
waves of light over the tops of trees.






[Names: Abhimaha]
On whose rise, as the sun’s, and in whose service
people shed the sweat of their brow in pursuit of the
paths of life, to that Agni and the sun, the entire people
of the earth look up and rise as children rise on the back
of the parent.






[Names: Purusprham, Purusprha]
For the service of Agni, unaging sustainer of
the world, let mortal man know and attain to Agni,
favourite love of all, because Agni is supreme among
the pleasures of life and Agni is the ultimate home of
living beings, in fact, of everything in existence.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 7 285




[Names: Hirismasruh]
Like a generous man with a golden beard and
pure white teeth, Agni, wise and expert with his forces
like a liberal giver, gives to the dedicated supplicant a
dwelling in the skies.






[Names: Sucih, Atrivat, Susurasuta]
For him, 1.e., the supplicant yajaka, the man free
from threefold suffering of body, mind and soul, Agni,
bright and pure, releases the honour and splendour of
life like currents of thunder power, which mother nature
spontaneously generates for him and which flows to






[Names: Samasti, Aisu, Srava]
Agni, lord of light, giver of peace and power,
when the ghrta has been offered into the fire and the
flames arise, then let there be a shower of peace for the
bearer of oblations, your gift for the yajaka. O lord, bear
and bring wealth of honour and excellence, food and
energy, and a noble mind with wisdom and vision and
vest the same in these dedicated people.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Adagne]
This is the song of praise and prayer, O lord,
Agni, giver of light, peace and power. Born among the
dedicated aspirants, I accept the gift of peace and
passion, power and property and cattle wealth. Let man
be Atri, free from threefold suffering of body, mind and
soul. Let man challenge the ungenerous and fight out
the impending dangers, human as well as natural, and
hold on to noble men and aspirations.


Mandala 5/Sukta 8






[Names: Agni, Devata, Isha, Atreya, Rshi, Tvamagne, Puruscandram, Puruscandra]
You, light of the world, life of life, Agni, the
lovers of Truth and universal law dedicated to yajna
since time immemorial kindle and install in the home
for protection and progress: Agni, ancient and eternal
born of omnipotence, golden glorious, worthy of
reverence, sustainer of the universe, self-controlled and
abiding in divine law, head of human family, chosen
and worthy of choice.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 8 287


(Swami Dayananda applies this hymn by
implication and extension to home life and the homely
fire yajna, of which the head and yajamana is the married
couple. Agni, further, may be interpreted as the head of
a State and of the world government elected and anointed
by common consent.)






[Names: Ssociskesam, Brhatketum, Pururupam, Pururupa]
Agni, light of life, people have enshrined and
consecrated you in their heart and home: Agni, a
welcome guest on the rounds, ancient presence with
flames of fire for locks of hair, master of the home, high
beacon of light, pervasive in all forms of the world,
creator, lover and giver of wealth, neatly settled in
homes, commanding noble and sure modes of protection
and progress, pure, cleansed and free from hate and





[Names: Guha]
enshrined in the heart, knower of the yajakas and the
delicacies of yajna, discriminator between right and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




wrong, positive and negative, good and evil, highest
treasurehold of the jewels of wealth, gracious and
glorious with honour and excellence, light of the
universe, loud and bold in universal service, directly
accessible in yajna and rising in flames by ghrta.






Agni, lord of light and sustainer of the world,
celebrating you in many ways with holy songs of praise
and prayer, we sit by you with reverence, with offers of
oblations in the holy fire. O lord Angira, pervasive in
every particle of the universe, bright and generous,
kindled and rising in flames by the mortals’ offers of
havi, be gracious, accept our homage and bless us with
honour and excellence in life.


[Names: Pururupo, Purunyanna, Purustuta]
Agni, pervading in all the many forms of
existence, praised and celebrated by all since time


immemorial, you bear and bring abundant food and
health and life for every individual and every


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 8 289


community. You shine with might and splendour, and
that splendour of yours, glorious one, no one dare






[Names: Urujrayasam]
Agni, ever youngest, unaging power of
existence, kindled and shining in flames, bright and
generous sages and scholars among humanity and
divinities of nature make you the carrier and
disseminator of fragrant energies of life and health, and
install and enshrine you in the vedi, ghrta fed, wide
expansive, brilliant, watchful and inspirer of
intelligence, ever invoked and invited.






Agni, light of life invoked and received from
the revelations of heaven, enlightened people in pursuit
of self-realisation enkindle and raise you in the vedi
with fuel and ghrta of the holiest kind. They light you
in the heart with the fuel of their sense and mind and
self-awareness. And you, rising with the fuel and
sprinkled with ghrta, ever abide expansive in all their


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




business of earthly existence.


Mandala 5/Sukta 9






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gaya, Atreya, Rshi, Tvamagne, Manye]
You, O fire divine, mortals bearing havis with
reverence in homage, honour, celebrate and worship,
and I meditate on your presence in omniscience to pray:
Radiate the holy light and fragrance all round and let it
come to me also, generous one.





[Names: Agnirhota]
Agni is the high-priest of Nature’s abundance
for humanity, blessing the house of the liberal devotee
ready to kindle the holy fire, since all nutriments,
energies and all yajnic gifts of Divinity coexist and work
with Agni.


[Names: Dhartaram]
And just as two arani woods produce the fire,
and just as mother and father beget and nurse a new


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 9 291


born baby, so do we kindle, raise and serve the holy fire
of yajna and worship the lord of life, sustainer of human
communities and high-priest of cosmic yajna.






[Names: Puru]
You who burn up vast forests and devour grasses
like a hungry animal are a product of tortuous waves of
energy, too tempestuous and too difficult to grab.






[Names: Adha, Yadimaha]
Fire whose flames mixed together with smoke
rise up and shine when the yajaka or the yogi, thrice
excelling others in body, mind and soul, lights up the
fire, refines, intensifies and raises the flames close to
and into the heights of heaven just like a smelter blowing
and intensifying the fire with the blower.





[Names: Tavahamagna, Dvesoyuto]
O light and fire of life, Agni, may we, with your
protections and friendly exhortations, cross over the sins
and weaknesses of mortal humanity as we overcome


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


the hate and enmity of the wicked.






O lord of patience and power, Agni, create the
right leaders among us. Bless us with the wealth of life.
Inspire and move us to act. Come, be with us for the
achievement of food, energy and prosperity. Help us
win and make progress in our battles of life.


Mandala 5/Sukta 10






[Names: Agni, Devata, Gaya, Atreya, Rshi, Agna]
Agni, irresistible power of motion and

advancement for the aspirants, bring us the most brilliant
honour and excellence of life. Bless us with abundant
wealth, open the path of progress and guide us on the
way.






[Names: Tvam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 10 293


Agni, unique unrivalled power of the world, help
us advance by yajnic action and the greatness of our
experts. The man rising in divine strength and
intelligence and acting in your service is adorable for us.






For us, Agni, lord of light and knowledge,
increase and exalt the health and home of these, men of
vision and splendour, sages, scholars, teachers, leaders
and all, bright and brave who, with songs of praise and
prayer, have come to attain the honour and excellence
of existence.






[Names: Susmebhih]
Agni, lord of beauty, majesty and ecstasy, the
words of your voice, potent and pregnant with sense
and power, shine and reverberate all round in space with
the message of action and achievement at the fastest,
the wise expansive vibrancy of which, a shower from
heaven, by itself, awakens and inspires the leading
people of imagination with flames of fire.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tava, Parijmano]
Agni, those flames of your light and fire, bright
and blazing, go round with might and majesty like
cosmic waves of lightning energy commanding the
kingdom of the world, as if by a roaring chariot leading
to victory.






[Names: Asmakasasca]
And now Agni, for our protection and progress
and for the relief and advancement bound in limitations,
come so that all our leaders, bright and bold, may cross
over all the bounds in all the directions of space.






[Names: Hotarvibhvasaham]
Agni, light of the world, dear as breath of life,
generous sage and scholarly yajaka, liberal giver, praised
by devotees and approving and praising the celebrants,
bring us wealth for the devotees and the worshipper
good enough to challenge the mighty, and come for us
so that we may win the battles of life and grow higher
and higher.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 11 295


Mandala 5/Sukta 11






[Names: Agni, Devata, Sutambhara, Atreya, Rshi, Janasya, Ghrtapratiko, Ssucih]
Agni, fire energy, friend and protector of man,
ever awake, versatile power, it arises for the latest good
of humanity. Feeding and rising on the fuel of ghrta,
shining pure and magnificent with heat and light
touching the skies, it shines and gives light for those
who feed and keep the fire burning.





[Names: Yajnasya, Indrena]
Agni 15 the leader, mark of the science of yajna,
first highpriest in the process, which the leading lights
among people kindle and establish in three stages of
life in three departments of the acquisition of
knowledge, observance of Dharma and performance of
karma, in three regions of earth, sky and the solar sphere.
And Agni takes the prime seat on the grass on the vedi
with Indra, power, devas, divine givers of nature, as it


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




comes with its chariot which carries it with fragrance
to all regions. It is the sanctifier for yajnic initiation,
conduct and congregation, and it is the very light, beauty
and grace of the holy project.






[Names: Asammrsto, Ghrtena, Sritah]
Agni, born of parents natural, unadorned and
free, pure and radiant, charming, with the gift of being
the leading light rising from the sun, when you are
invoked and invited, people raise and advance you with
oblations of ghrta and then your light and fragrance as
the flag of your majesty rises to the regions of the sun.






[Names: Agnirno, Agnirduto]
May Agni come straight to our yajnic actions of
social value. Leading and enlightened people light and
raise Agni in every home. Agni is the disseminator of
the fragrance of yajna over lands and spaces. Intelligent
people of holy action take to Agni, the power that effects
creative actions of the enlightened for social good.


(Swami Dayananda interprets agni in the sense
of the enlightened leading heights of society who help


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 11 297


people to do good to the community. Agni is thus not
only the divine fire but also the leader, teacher and the






[Names: Tubhyedamagne, Tvam, Savasa]
Agni, this sweetest song of honour and adoration
is presented to you. The holy sentiment and prayer is
addressed to you in praise of your holiness and peace at
heart. The great holy voices protect, promote and fulfil
you and make you stronger with power just as great
rivers flow and add to the depth and power of the sea.








[Names: Tvamagne, Angiraso]
Angira, life breath of the universe, light and fire
of the world, Agni, pervading every forest, every ray of
light and every living being, holy yajakas dedicated to
you as to the breath of life awaken and realise you
through meditation in the cave of the heart when you
are hidden as a mysterious flame, and you, stirred
through contemplation, concentrated and enkindled, rise


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




as a great power of light and victory. Rightly they call
you manifestation of the omnipotent.


Mandala 5/Sukta 12






[Names: Agni, Devata, Sutambhara, Atreya, Rshi, Pragnaye, Ghrtam]
As in yajna, we bear and bring and offer
oblations of ghrta into the vedi, so do I compose and
bring the language of inner consciousness purified in
meditation and offer it in honour of Agni, great, adorable
in yajna, giver of the showers of water and the light of
truth, life breath of the world, inspirer of thought, and
generous giver of strength and power.






[Names: Rtam, Anu, Naham]
Agni, light of the world, you know the law and
dynamics of world order. Know the truth and sincerity
of our yajna and worship, and release the showers of
eternal light of truth and open the doors of nature’s
generosity. I follow the generous and brilliant lord’s path
of truth and rectitude but not by violence nor with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 12 299
duplicity. I follow the path of honesty and sincerity.






[Names: Kaya, Veda]
For what reason, Agni, you being the latest
scholar and observer of the laws of truth by the laws of
truth, would you not know of the earth and of our songs
of adoration? Lord protector and observer of the laws
and cycle of the seasons, generous and brilliant, give
me the knowledge. I do not well know the lord giver
and protector of the wealth of life.






Agni, ruler of humanity, what are your
injunctions and prohibitions of law and order to deal
with the opposite forces? Who are the guards and what
are the safeguards? Who are your allies? Who the
leading lights? Who preserve and maintain food supplies
and food resources? Who are the people and what the
elements that shelter falsehood? What are the safeguards
against false and malicious words and reports?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sakhayaste, Sivasah, Adhursata]
Agni, bright ruler, those friends and allies of
yours, wide spread and intelligent, who were favourable
earlier but have become unfavourable and negative later
would of themselves be destroyed, all these, by their
own words, speaking crooked things to simple people
of rectitude. See they are eliminated.






[Names: Yaste, Tasya, Sesah]
O brilliant ruler, Agni, whoever the man with
reverence and holy oblations in yajna serves your yajna
of the social order, he protects and promotes the rule of
truth and rectitude, the rule of the generous, brilliant
and non-violent ruler. May his house as the house of
the ruler go on rising high and higher, from good to
better, the house of the progressive man on sound
foundations of economic surplus and all round security.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 13 301


Mandala 5/Sukta 13






[Names: Agni, Devata, Sutambhara, Atreya, Rshi, Arcantastva, Agne]
Agni, light of life, brilliant ruler, reverend
teacher and scholar, singing hymns of adoration we
invoke you. Singing songs of joy we enkindle and
celebrate you. With homage and reverence, we come
and pray for protection, light and advancement.






[Names: Agneh]
With desire for the creation and achievement of
the wealth and power of brilliant Agni, we study and
concentrate on fire energy in focus and structure a joyous
song of success in praise of the rich and generous power
touching the lights of heaven and for sure that would
make the achievement possible.






[Names: Agnirjusata]
May Agni, life and light and fire of the world,
yajaka, creator and giver of wealth among the people,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




hear and accept our prayer, come and join the brilliant
creative geniuses and bless us with wealth.





[Names: Tvamagne, Tvaya]
Agni, you are all pervasive, loving and
integrative, creator and giver, cherished and venerable
leader for choice. By you is the yajna of life and the
yajna of the social order enacted and extended.



Agni, praised and celebrated power, creator
giver of food and energy and winner of victories,
intelligent people serve, develop and raise you to the
heights. May Agni give us valour, virility and honour.



Agni, just as the felly of a wheel holds and
surrounds the spokes of the wheel, you hold and reign
over the brilliancies and divinities of nature and
humanity, and you create and refine all the wonderful
varieties of the world’s wealth for us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 14 303


Mandala 5/Sukta 14






[Names: Agni, Devata, Sutambhara, Atreya, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Havya]
Light the immortal holy fire, physical, mental
and spiritual, with a celebrative song of its attributes
and qualities. Refulgent, it bears the wealth of life in
nature’s variations, carries the fragrance of oblations to
these divinities and brings us the gifts of divinity to
bless the nobilities of humanity.






[Names: Tamadhvaresvilate, Yajistham]
That refulgent immortal divine fire bearing rich
gifts, loved and most loving among the human
community, the mortals light, serve and worship in
creative, productive and holiest projects of yajna, love
and non-violence in the service of the Lord and




[Names: Sasvanta]
Agni, that divine refulgent generous power, the


humans, immortal souls, with ladles dripping with ghrta,
sprinkle, serve and worship so that it may carry their


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




offerings across the spaces and bring them the sweets

of yajna.


[Names: Agnirjato, Avindadga]
Agni, lighted, raised and manifesting, rises
radiant and, destroying the negativities, dispelling the
darkness and driving away the wicked with its blazing
light, reaches over the earth and rays of the sun, waters


in the middle regions of the skies and touches the lights
of heaven.



[Names: Agnimilenyam, Agnimilenya, Vetu]
Serve, develop, honour and worship Agni,
adorable, poetic visionary of omniscience, shining
bright on ghrta and rooted in fertility. May Agni hear
and accept my invocation and prayer and come to bless
my yajnic business of life.



[Names: Svadhibhir]
The devotees light, raise and exalt Agni, light
of life, ever wakeful watcher of the world, with songs
of adoration, deeply meditative and highly eloquent,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 15 305


created by realised souls with words of Divinity in the
state of samadhi.


Mandala 5/Sukta 15






[Names: Agni, Devata, Dharuna, Angirasa, Rshi, Ghrtaprasatto, Agnih, Agni]
I bear and offer words of adoration in honour
of Agni, omniscient presence, visionary creator, glorious
and eternal lord worth knowing. Pleased with the offer
of ghrta and sincere devotion in yajna, Agni is the breath
of life, gracious, giver and commander of the wealth of
existence, sustainer of the universe and ultimate haven
of the world.






[Names: Rtena, Devo]
Those who know and realise the unborn eternals
of existence by the forms and functioning of the
manifested mutables, and sit by the leading lights
abiding by the sustainer of the laws of heavenly stars,
would know the mysteries and power of yajna in the
highest heaven, abide by the sustainer of the laws of
Rtam, and realise the Truth, observing the laws by


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Anhoyuvas]
Those who eliminate sin and perplexity grow
inwardly in the self and offer incomparable gifts of
austerities and meditation for the eternal power, Agni
within. And he, the lordly power newly arisen in the
soul, would, like a passionate lion, destroy the hostile






[Names: Mateva, Vayovayo, Jigasi]
Agni, rising and expansive, you bear and sustain
every person like a mother, taking and giving food for
nourishment and enlightenment. You go to everyone,
shine as fire within for a new lease of life even for the
weak, and in this way you glorify life, and by yourself
go on self-revealing, taking on new and universal forms
of life.






[Names: Vajo, Savasas, Padam, Atrim, Atri]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 16 307


Agni, light of life, generous giver, may your
omnipotence protect the strength and courage of
humanity to the highest degree, our plenty and prosperity
to the utmost bounds, and may you, we pray, protect
the wealth of humanity like a guard holding his foot
firmly down. And revealing the light of divinity in the
cave of the heart, enlightening the devotee for great
spiritual wealth, you bless all with the vision of Divinity.


Mandala 5/Sukta 16






[Names: Agni, Devata, Puru, Atreya, Rshi, Brhadvayo, Mitram, Mitra]
For heat and light, energy and power, and for
vision and excellence in life, study, develop and revere
that mighty inexhaustible Agni with vast and rich inputs,
which like a friend, people have lighted and instituted
as a prime and divine power with high praise and
celebrations since the earliest times.





[Names: Agniranusag]
With light and power, and with holy acts, Agni,
highpriest of humanity, giver of the strength of arms,
bears our inputs to the divinities of nature and, like a
friend, brings us cherished gifts of nature and Divinity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni makes the development and achievement possible






[Names: Bhaga, Asya, Visva, Ssusmamadadhuh]
In the song and celebration of this mighty power
of excellence, in the friendship of this lord of high light
and majesty, in this roaring power and energy, in this
noble master of wealth and all round prosperity, Agni,
in which all mankind place their faith and trust, let us
all abide, invest, preserve and develop our power and
potential, and from this let us receive our strength and
fragrance of life.






[Names: Adha, Tamidyahvam]
Agni, lord refulgent of power and glory, bless
these heroes with the gifts of strength and noble valour.
As the heaven and earth go round that mighty sun in
orbit and homage, so do the honour and valour of life’s






[Names: Nina, Suryah, Surya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 17 309


Agni, come and bless us now as ever, come
roaring, rejoicing and joining our celebration, bring us
the gifts we cherish. All of us here and all the brilliant
brave wholly dedicated to you pray for peace and joy.
Come as a friend, our own, promote and advance us in
the battles of life’s dynamics.


Mandala 5/Sukta 17






[Names: Agni, Devata, Puru, Atreya, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Pururilitavase, Pururilitavas]
Come Agni, generous self-refulgent life of the
world, the entire humanity thus, having organised holy
projects of peace and non-violence, invokes and invites
you, potent power, with yajnas for the sake of protection
and advancement in knowledge, power and




[Names: Asya]
saya.


O man, honourable in your own right by your
own virtue, dedicated to your particular duties of
Dharma, with best of thought and mind, with your words
of mouth, for sure, praise that Agni, bliss beyond
suffering, wonderfully brilliant, charming and gracious,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


and supreme over all.






[Names: Devo]
O man, blest with the holy speech of communion
and the divine light of this Agni, by whose energy-
showers streams of adoration shine all round widely
like rays of the sun, by that same holy light and divine
speech destroy the want and suffering of existence.






[Names: Adha, Sasyate]
By the yajna and holy action of this brilliant
generous power, creators of positives and destroyers of
negatives, men of wisdom and discernment, achieve
wealth and circulation of wealth by modes of transport
and communication. And then Agni, venerable power
for development, is valued and honoured among all






[Names: Urjo]
Brave men of knowledge, wisdom and brilliance
study, produce and bring us cherished gifts of Agni, fire


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 18 311


and electricity, gifts of divinity, by word of mouth and
steady application. Agni, O power of permanence, for
all our good, protect and promote energy, be strong and
strengthen us for all our good and well-being, and stand
by us for our success and advancement in our battles of
the business of life.


Mandala 5/Sukta 18






[Names: Agni, Devata, Dvita, Mrktavaha, Atreya, Rshi, Prataragnih, Purupriyo, Visvani]
Let Agni, beloved of all people, freely roaming
around as a visitor, be welcomed and honoured early
morning, the immortal spirit and power which pervades,
energises and beatifies all acts and things worth doing,
giving and receiving among the mortals.






[Names: Dvitaya, Indum, Anusak]
Agni, immortal spirit and power, by virtue of
the grandeur of your own potential bring light and
sweetness, power and prosperity for dvita, dedicated
celebrant twice born, educated and cultured, who loves
free knowledge and bears the knowledge and power
for your service only.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Aristo]
O dedicated celebrants, for you with holy words
of prayer I invoke Agni, harbinger of light and power,
good health and long age, that presiding power of yajna,
that welcome visitor. O lord giver of speed, power and
progress, Agni, I pray for them whose chariot, blest with
light, power and prosperity as they are, rolls on






[Names: Citra, Stirnam]
Who are the holy visitors like Agni? Who are
the dedicated celebrants and yajnic devotees of Agni?
Those in whom the light of Divinity shines bright and
various, who preserve and promote holy songs of
dedication and pursue yajnic actions, and who spread
holy grass on the vedi, propagate knowledge, and bear
and offer holy materials in yajnic projects of love and
non-violence among people for the sake of peace and
ultimate freedom of salvation.






[Names: Dyumadagne, Sravo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 19 313


Those who give me fifty modes of speed and
progress in life alongwith their description and words
of thanks to Divinity, for those men of power and
excellence among the leaders of humanity, O lord of
light and heavenly knowledge, Agni, spirit of
immortality, just like a human friend and leader, create
and bring honour and glory of vast and universal order.


Mandala 5/Sukta 19




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vavri, Atreya, Rshi, Abhyavasthah, Upasthe]
For the man of attainment, adverse circum-
stances do arise. Let the man in the real situation accept
this eventuality. And then, let him be close to mother
Divinity for light and rise to face it successfully.






[Names: Juhure]
Those who challenge adverse circumstances and
sit by Agni, light of Divinity, day and night without a
wink of sleep, they enter the adamantine city celestial.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Svaitreyasya, Niskgarivo]
vajayuh.


Living beings of spatial waters, common men
on earth, the man wearing a golden necklace, and the
priest chanting loud hymns, loving and wanting food
and energy sweet as honey, all grow by the energy of
vital fire and, with holy chant and yajnic action, develop
the light and power of brilliant Agni.






[Names: Priyam, Gharmo]
Friend and associate of heaven and earth,
intrepidable, eternal, dynamic, like the vital fire of the
body which assimilates all it receives for energy, I, living
fire of existence, receive and assimilate all I love as
delicious milk and remain unconquered.






[Names: Krilanno, Vayuna]
Agni, radiant as rays of the sun, sporting with
the wind and self-declaring with heat and ash, come
and be good to us, and so too may be those potent flames
of yours, fierce, fiery, sharp and penetrating, fully
collected and intensified in form in vehicles and batteries
for transport and communication.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 20 315


Mandala 5/Sukta 20






[Names: Agni, Devata, Prayaswantah, Atreyah, Rshis, Yamagne, Ssravayyam]
Agni, scholar of eminence, expert in matters of
food, energy, success and victory in the affairs of life,
whatever you think is the real wealth worthy to be heard
of, acknowledged, and, accepted for application as
friendly and companionable power, speak to us among
the generous and illuminative divines in words of truth
in faith with admiration.






[Names: Savasah]
Agni, these senior dedicated devotees of yours,
who take to the strength of your power and passion for
truth, do not waver in their faith, they keep away from
malice, crookedness, double dealing and tortuous
behaviour.






[Names: Hotaram, Yajnesu]
Agni, we opt for dedication to you, original


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




yajaka, generous giver, agent and instrument of strength
and success, and, creatively endeavouring in our yajnic
programmes, we invoke and invite you with the holy
voice of faith.






[Names: Ittha, Raya]
O lord giver of strength and light of life,
enlighten us so that we may, under your protection,
advance on way to wealth and rectitude day by day, and
by our words and voice be your companions and co-
dwellers in the home, blest with brave children.


Mandala 5/Sukta 21





[Names: Agni, Devata, Sasa, Atreya, Rshi, Manusvattva, Agne]
Agni, light of life, like a living human presence
[Names: Like]
enkindle, serve and develop you. O breath of life,
Angira, like a human power and sagely presence, inspire
the brilliant and generous sages with the light of life for
the sake of those who love the divinities.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 21 317




[Names: Tvam, Srucastva]
Agni, fire of life, loved and kindled, you shine
and blaze in the human community. Excellent in form
and beauty by birth and nature you are, and ladles full
of ghrta move to you in love and faith and, on the
oblations of ghrta, you rise and shine among humanity.






[Names: Saparyantastva]
All the divine powers of nature and all brilliant
sages of humanity in one accord, with love and
reverence for you, install you as the conductor and
carrier of their yajna forward. Serving you, O visionary
of poetic excellence, they honour and worship you as a
divine power in their yajnas of creative and corporate






[Names: Devam, Samiddhah]
O sages and scholars, with your service in yajnas
of love and non-violence in honour of the divinities of
nature and noble humanity, man serves and worships
the generous and radiant Agni. O radiant power and
presence, Agni, pure and potent, lighted and raised to
the full, shine on, illuminate the truth of existence and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the flow of life from the particle onward and reveal the
chain of cause and effect in the process of evolution.


Mandala 5/Sukta 22






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvasama, Atreya, Rshi, Pravisvasamannatrivadarca, Visi]
O vishvasaman, master of all world power and
property, songs of praise and prayer, peace and
tranquillity, shine, illuminate, develop, honour and sing
in celebration of Agni, blazing as fire, pure and potent
power and presence of nature and humanity, yajaka,
creator and giver, most enlightened and blissful among
people, worthy of song and celebration in yajnic
projects. Celebrate Agni like Atri, man of vast
knowledge and freedom from suffering.






[Names: Nyagnim]
Hold on to Agni, meditate, worship the power
omnipresent in things born, generous Divinity, cosmic
yajaka in seasons of time, holiest friend and companion,
haven and home of divinities such as earth and heaven,
and ultimately the power that winds up the cosmic game.
May that Power and Presence, most intimate, reveal
Itself in the heart, the friend, the Self.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 23 319






[Names: Cikitvinmanasam, Varenyasya]
Agni, refulgent lord of life and giver of light,
we mortals, approaching the generous lord of supreme
intelligence worthy of choice for protection and
enlightenment, meditate on your presence and pray for
the favour of your grace.






[Names: Agne]
Agni, giver of strength and courage, listen to
this word of our prayer for light, protection and
advancement. O lord of gracious visor and presiding
power of the home and family, celebrants free from three
kinds of suffering, of body, mind and soul, exalt you
with songs of celebration, supplicants free from three
kinds of passion, hate, anger and greed, adore you with
words of worship.


Mandala 5/Sukta 23




[Names: Agni, Devata, Dyumna, Vishvacharshani, Atreya, Rshi, Agne, Visva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, commander of honour, power and majesty,
bring us that wealth of strength and courage of the
conviction, honour and dignity most forbearing,
challenging and victorious which may instantly face,
fight and overthrow all the opposing forces against
humanity in the battles of life.






[Names: Tamagne, Tvam]
Agni, commander of valour and power,
forbearing, challenging and victorious, bring us that
overwhelming wealth of fighting force and stability
which may face and overthrow the opposing forces of
the enemy. You are the pillar of truth indispensable,
wonderful, generous giver of food, energy and
endurance, wonderful and in possession of cows, lands
and the right language of communication.





[Names: Visve, Hotaram, Puru]
Agni, all people, all friendly and allied forces
ready in arms for the call, come and make choice offers
of things required, without reservation, to you, host and
yajaka, dear most welcome in homes and seats of




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 24 321


[Names: Agna]
pavaka didihi.


Agni, that all watchful commander of the world
brings us challenging strength and victorious force.
Agni, light of life and ruler of the world, in these homes
and places, shine, lord of wealth, shine for us, fire pure
and light illuminating, shine in command of the wealth
and honour of humanity.


Mandala 5/Sukta 24


[Names: Agni, Devata, Bandhu, Subandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu, Gopayana, Laupayana, Rshis, Agne, Sivo]
Agni, lord of light, fire of life, you are our closest
friend and saviour. Be good and gracious, the very spirit
and security of the home for the inmates.


[Names: Vasuragnir]
mam rayim dah.


Agni, you are the home and shelter of the world.
Pure and purifier, you create and give the food for life
and energy, wealth and honour. Give us the food, energy
and light of life. Come and pervade this home as the
very spirit and security.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Such is Agni. May the lord awaken us, listen,
enlighten us. Hear our prayer, save us from all sin. We
want no sin. We love no sin and evil.






[Names: Socistha]
Lord most pure and purifying, light of
illumination, with all our friends, for sure, we pray to
you for peace and life’s well being.


Mandala 5/Sukta 25




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasuyavah, Atreya, Rshis, Accha, Agnimavase, Agnimavas, Rasat]
Sing well of Agni, light of Divinity, with
enthusiasm, for your protection and progress. He, spirit
of truth and rectitude, who inspires the sages with the
light of truth and life’s stability may, we pray, give us
wealth and stability. Agni is a saviour as a son is,


overcomes hate and enmity and takes us across the seas
of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 25 323




[Names: Hotaram]
That alone is true, unquestionable and inviolable
whom the seniors and brilliant sages kindle and install
on the vedi, the leader and ruler, liberal giver and host
of yajna, sweet and serious of tongue and commander
of wealth and splendour by virtue of his innate light
and flames of holy fire.


(Swami Dayananda applies this mantra to the
choice and investiture of a ruler.)






[Names: Sano]
Agni, O lord of our love and choice, life of life,
light of the world, give us the stability of mind and
intelligence and, alongwith the highest, choicest and
best thought and understanding, kindle and bring us
splendid wealth with do’s and don’ts of holy teaching.


[Names: Agnirdevesu, Agnirno]
Agni, life of life, light of existence, revealing
energises, inspires, shines, illuminates and enlightens


as it is present in divinities such as earth, and nobilities
such as scholars and sages, and vibrates in all mortals.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O scholars and sages, serve, pursue, and develop Agni
with the best of your intelligence and understanding.






[Names: Agnis, Aturtam]
Agni, generous light of yajna, gives to a liberal
yajaka and man of charity progeny fond of study and
listening, abundant in food and wealth, widely read in
sacred lore, most virtuous and invincible, who brings
honour and glory to the parents.





[Names: Agnirdadati, Agniratyam, Agniratya]
Agni, lord of light and ruler, gives us a leader,

ruler, and progeny who protects and supports the good,
who fights and wins over evil with arms and forces,
and to this invincible victor he gives transport and
communications of fastest efficiency.






[Names: Mahisiva]
The fastest transport, fastest communication,
lightning adoration is for Agni, lord of light and power.
Shine high and wide and intense, blazing power, and as
all greatness and grandeur flows from you, so do all


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 26 325
wealth, all energy and all victories flow from you.






[Names: Tava]
Blazing are your flames of fire, radiant your rays
of light. Your identity is proclaimed like rumble of the
cloud, and your voice like thunder and lightning radiates
from heavens by itself.






[Names: Evan, Agnim]
Thus do we, aspiring for wealth and power,
adore and celebrate you, lord of forbearance, challenge
and victory. May Agni, omnipotent lord of holy action,
save us and, like a boat over seas, help us cross over all
hate and enmity of the world.


Mandala 5/Sukta 26


[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasuyavah, Atreya, Rshis, Agne]
Agni, light of Divinity, fire of life, generous and
brilliant giver of knowledge and enlightenment, with a
sweet and lustrous tongue, bright and blissful, you bear


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and bring the divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity to the vedi and serve them from here with
light and energy.



[Names: Devan]
Agni, pure and purifier, light of fire feeding on
ghrta, showerer of life’s beauty and grace, shining with
manifold lustre, indeed the very light and bliss of
heaven, we pray: With a sweet and lustrous tongue of
flame full of bliss, bring for us the nobilities and
divinities of nature and humanity for a feast of pleasure
and enlightenment and serve them with love and
reverence.



[Names: Vitihotram]
Agni, creative visionary of the light of heaven,
in our yajnic project of love and non-violence, we invoke
and enkindle you, universally great, self-refulgent and
giver of the gifts of peace and enlightenment.






[Names: Hotaram]
Agni, light and fire of yajna, spirit of creation


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 26 327


and cooperation, come with all the divinities and
nobilities of nature and humanity for the presentation
of the fruits of yajnic creation. We elect and invite you
as the presiding priest and the chief yajaka.






[Names: Yajamanaya, Devaira]
Agni, giver of the prizes of yajna, come with
the divinities, sit with the nobilities on the holy grass in
the holy assembly, bearing noble vigour and splendour
for the host of yajna who prepares and offers the pleasure
and power of peace and excellence in the yajna and
bless him and all.






[Names: Samidhanah, Devanam]
Agni, burning and blazing, winning a thousand
forces over, you protect and promote the universal
values of knowledge and practical conduct in
cooperation. Surely you are the adorable harbinger of
the bounties of God and nature for humanity.






[Names: Nyagnim, Dadhata]
Hold on to Agni, light and fire of life, pervasive


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in all things in existence, bearer of yajna fragrance, most
youthful energy, and divine yajaka of nature and




[Names: Strnita]
May the yajna, creative and fragrant activity of
mankind and nature, spread around in due order and
reach the bounds of divinities pervasive unto the ends
of the expansive universe. Come ye devout performers,


spread the holy grass for the yajnas and expansion of
the fire and fragrance.





[Names: Edam, Varunah, Varuna, Mitrah, Mitra, Maruto, Devasah]
May the Maruts, dynamic leaders, Ashvins,
complementary powers like teachers and preachers,
friends, Varuna, judges, and brilliant nobilities with all
the people come, and sit on this vedi for yajna.


Mandala 5/Sukta 27


Agni and Indra-Agni Devata, Tryaruna Traivrshna,




[Names: Trasadasyu, Paurukutsa, Ashva, Bharata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshis]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 27 329




[Names: Anasvanta, Traivrsno]
Agni, life and leader of humanity, the Lord,
protector and sustainer of the true and _ the good, giver
of higher knowledge, mighty powerful and dear as
breath of life, shower of bliss for and from the earth
and heaven and the sky, commanding existence,
omniscience and beatitude, has blest me with tens,
hundreds and thousands of cows and transports. I honour
and exalt the lord of all wealth and power and pray the
lord may know my people and my gifted power and
potential and protect the same.




2. Yo me Sata ca vimSatim ca gonam hari ca yukta


[Names: Vaisvanara, Sarma]
Agni, life and light pervasive in the world, leader
of entire humanity, honoured, exalted and exalting in
the universe, you give me teams of twenty and hundred
cows and horses yoked to well structured and firmly
balanced chariots, pray give a happy and comfortable
home for the man aspiring for the truth, beauty and
goodness of life.





[Names: Trasadasyuh]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O lord of light and life, Agni, thus does
Trasadasyu, the man terror for the wicked, aspiring for
favour of your attention and kindness, Tryaruna, blest
with physical health, mental insight and spiritual vision,
with concentrative mind sings anew in praise of you,
lord ever fresh and most youthful, who ‘for me
(i.e. Trasadasyu, Tryaruna) reveal the ancient and eternal
Word of omniscient awareness’.






[Names: Dadadrca]
“Who for me reveals the ancient and eternal
Word...”, whoever speaks thus in homage to Agni in
the interest of the social order of the world and for
advancement of the brave, enlightened people, to him,
endeavouring with holy chant, may Agni give wealth,
to him, aspiring for truth and rectitude, may the lord
grant the light of divine intelligence.


[Names: Yasya, Asvamedhasya, Soma]
The loud and bold voices, creative acts and
generous gifts of ‘ashvamedha’, national yajna in
relation to threefold programmes for life, environment


and energy, like a drink of soma, give me pleasure in a


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 28 331






[Names: Indragni, Satadavnyasvamedhe, Ksatram, Suryamivajaram, Suryamivajara]
May Indra and Agni, knowledge and power,
force of law and enlightenment, generous and giving in
a hundred ways, in this ashvamedha yajna, i.e., non-
violent holy plan and programme of national
development and governance, enact, uphold and sustain
the social order as they hold the sun in the vast heaven.
Unaging, ever young harbingers of honour and valour
to the system, ever fresh they are.


Mandala 5/Sukta 28






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvavara, Atreyi, Rshi, Samiddho, Socirasret, Agnirdivi]
The fire of yajna, kindled and rising, reaches
the light and energy in the solar sphere and, with its
various and expansive lustre, extends to the dawn, and
then the East. Vishvavara, laden with versatile food and
energy for the world, activating nature’s bounties like a
yajnic ladle full of ghrta, it illuminates and showers the
world with gifts of Divinity at the end of the dewy night.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Samidhyamano, Visvam]
Agni, O light and fire of life, kindled and raised
in the vedi and in the mind, you rise and shine in the
midst of immortality and abide with the supplicant
yajaka as a friend for his life’s well being. Whoever
your care and protection, the person wins, holds and
commands the world’s wealth in existence and, since
then for all time, O light divine, he offers service with
complete surrender in obedience to your will like
hospitality in obligation to an honoured guest.






[Names: Agne, Satruyatamabhi]
Agni, mighty power, may your highest gifts of
wealth, honour and splendour be for great good fortune
and well being in life. Make our homes full of conjugal
bliss, well maintained with discipline and control. Help
us face and fight out the greatest enemies in the conflicts
of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 28 333




[Names: Samiddhasya, Sriyam, Vrsabho]
Agni, mighty ruling power of the world, burning
bright and great, I honour and adore your wealth and
splendour. Valorous and generous, prosperous and
majestic, you shine glorious in the yajnic projects of
the world.






[Names: Tvam]
Agni, invoked, kindled and raised to the full in
light and splendour, you honour and inspire the
nobilities of humanity and feed and replenish the
bounties of nature. O noble power of the yajnas of love
and non-violence, you are the receiver and disseminator
of our oblations and you are the harbinger of the gifts
of nature’s bounties.






[Names: Vrnidhvam]
O man, honour and serve Agni with offers of
fragrant havi in creative and developmental programmes
of love and non-violence in humanity. Select, elect and
serve the light and fire of life, receiver of our oblations
and giver of the gifts of life and nature.


(Swami Dayananda interprets Agni as the fire


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of yajna, as the scholar and teacher who gives
knowledge, and as the ruler who receives, creates and
distributes the wealth in the social order of humanity
with love and without violence.)


Mandala 5/Sukta 29




[Names: Indra, Ushana, Devata, Gauriviti, Shaktya, Rshi]
is Tryaryama manuso devatdata tri rocana divya


[Names: Arcanti, Marutah, Maruta, Indrasi]
Indra, lord of power and ruling power of the
world, in the holy yajna of the social order, its
governance and administration, those heroes of the
speed of winds honour and serve you whose strength
and expertise is pure and sanctified : men of judgement
and discretion who are thrice blest with full knowledge,
noble action and devotion to Divinity; men of brilliance
who are self-established with health of body, mind and
soul, familial joy and social commitment; and men who
enjoy the favour and grace of Divinity. Indra, you are
their seer, philosopher and guide, imperturbable,
inviolable and unchallengeable.





[Names: Maruto, Anu, Adatta]
With dedication and loyalty, when the Maruts,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 29 335


supportive heroes of the social order, serve and honour
Indra, the ruler, happy and honourable, ruling and
enjoying the state entrusted to him, then, just as the sun
with thunder and lightning breaks up the clouds and
releases the showers and mighty streams aflow, he too
takes over the thunderbolt of law and power and, striking
the serpentine demons of darkness and evil, sets the
mighty streams of national energy to flow in showers
and creative streams.






[Names: Somasya, Somas, Taddhi]
And may the Maruts, heroes of the winds,
dedicated to Brahma and the Vedas and the ruling lord
Indra, now drink of this soma of national honour and
glory so well distilled by me. That honour and glory
alone, dedicated to Divinity in yajna, for man can win
cows and lands and holy wisdom, of which Indra alone
is the guardian, having destroyed the forces of evil.





[Names: Jigartim]
And then Indra holds and firms up the earth and
heaven separate and yet together pervading both with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




his presence and power just like separating a fear-
stricken deer and a devouring tiger by the power of his
presence and holding off the demon tiger snorting


(Compare the laws of gravitation separating and
holding together in firm relationship two heavenly
bodies according to their mass and distance under the
presiding presence of the force of natural omnipotence.)






[Names: Adha, Somapeyam, Somapeya, Suryasya, Suryas]
And further, O lord of honour and power of
omnipotence, all the divinities of nature and humanity
offer you the drink of soma in response to your yajnic
action of systemic integration and sustenance when the
various rays of the sun radiating forward all round and
nourishing life stop on the planet on your behest (to
feed life and drink up the sweet juices of soma).






[Names: Nava, Arcantindram]
When Indra with thunder and lightning destroys
ninetynine serpentine strongholds of evil and darkness
obstructing the light of Divinity in this world, then the
Maruts, guardian forces of humanity on earth, honour


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 29 337


and adore the omnipotent lord with trishtubha hymns
of celebration.






[Names: Sakha, Satani, Somam, Soma]
Agni, a friend, for a friend, Indra, alongwith
Indra and the holy action of Indra, the sun, in this world
soon ripens the sap in three hundred fields and forests
of man, and then Indra, great and generous, drinks up
the soma in order to break the clouds of rain and let the
rivers flow to fill three great lakes in three worlds of
heaven, earth and sky.





[Names: Karam]
power and excellence, when you ripen and mature three
hundred great fields and forests and create and protect
three great lakes of soma, all the divinities of the world
invoke Indra like a great hero and offer homage since
he breaks the cloud of serpentine hoards of showers.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Usanad, Vanvano]
Indra, glorious ruler, when the man of light and
passion and you both come home by chariot driven by
swift and robust horses, then, again with love and desire
for victory, pray go with the thunderbolt and the best of
the brilliancies and defend the strength and honour of
the nation.


aba: Neon




[Names: Pranyaccakramavrhah, Anaso]
Extend the orbit of enlightenment for the
thunderbolt. Clear the paths and areas for development,
peace and freedom of movement. Eliminate the
shameless, the wicked and the thieves with punishment,
and stop the entry of the malicious, throw them in jail.






[Names: Stomasastva, Somamasya, Somamas]
May the eulogies of the poetic lovers of song
and their singers exalt you. Punish the man who exalts


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 29 339


and raises the warring forces against you. Let the men
of simple honest mind be keen to make friends with
you. Maturing and completing the plans and
programmes of the state, celebrate and enjoy the honour
and splendour of the order.






[Names: Navagvasah, Indram, Gvyam]
Men of new ideas treading new paths of
knowledge and polity, men of controlled mind and
senses, celebrants ready with distilled exhilarating soma,
adore Indra with songs and presentations of homage
and, celebrating him, the dedicated admirers, best of
men and leaders, extol him revealing his vast but hidden
virtues of divine knowledge.






[Names: Katho, Ssavistha]
Indra, ruler of the world, mightiest hero
commanding wealth, power, honour and excellence,
sage and scholar, how shall we, in yajnic assemblies of
the nation, fully describe, sing and celebrate your
achievements and your potential, the exploits that you
have done and those new ones you are sure to achieve


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








All these many exploits of the world [from
creation and sustenance to organisation, organisational
elimination included], Indra, ruler and lord of power
and excellence, which you have done and which you
would do, unresisted and irresistible, by nature and
nurture, by vigour and valour, O wielder of the
thunderbolt, bold and terrific, no one can comprehend.
There is none who can obstruct, hold or surpass those
overwhelming powers and forces of yours.






[Names: Savistha, Vastreva]
Indra, the holy chant and homage of gifts,
newest and latest, being offered, graciously accept and
cherish, which, for you, O lord most powerful, we have
created. Like a beautiful dress of thought and devotion,
I, a sincere artist in pursuit of life’s wealth and peace
and a steadfast and skilful maker, have designed and
created the song like a chariot.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 30 341


Mandala 5/Sukta 30
Indra, Indra and Rnanchaya Devata, Babhru Atreya Rshi






[Names: Puruhita]
Where is that thunderous catalytic power? Who
saw that Indra, harbinger of peace and comfort travelling
like a pleasing chariot along the waves of attraction and
repulsion which, laden with wealth and wielding the
force of thunder moves on and, invoked and invited by
many for protection and promotion, goes to the house
of the host with desire for the taste of life’s pleasure?






[Names: Avacacaksam, Aprcchamanyan]
With the desire to pursue and achieve success, I
have discovered and described the science of this mighty
source of immanent energy. Let me consult and ask
others too who would speak of Indra, the energy, to me.
And the best of men and leading scholars among men,
enlightened all, we would realise and achieve it in full.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vedadavidvanchrnavacca]
The knowledge acquired and energy created in
practice, O scholar, Indra, let us speak of and proclaim
your achievements which you share with us. Let those
who don’t know hear and know of it too. This scholar
who bears the knowledge and power is the mighty
possessor of honour and excellence, and he commands
all the power and the forces.






[Names: Sthiram, Indra, Asmanam]
Indra, commander of light, knowledge and
power, rising, you firm and resolve the mind to stability
and constancy. In battle, you alone, by yourself,
overcome many. You illuminate the cloud and the
firmament and break the mountain with your power and
force, and you recover and reveal the vastness of earth,
the sun rays, the wisdom of knowledge and the ocean
fire enshrined in words.





[Names: Paro, Atascidindradabha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 30 343


When you, highest and best power, arise and
manifest, bearing great name and high renown in far
off regions, and win over and release the waters
concealed in the cloud, since then all the forces of nature
accept the power of Indra and obey the divine law.






[Names: Tubhyedete, Marutah, Maruta, Ahimohanamapa]
Vibrant heroes and these yajakas in obedient
service offer you songs of adoration, prepare the food
and distil the soma for you, Indra. And with his
wondrous forces, Indra engages the crafty cloud holding
the waters by his deceptive wiles and sleeping like a
giant in apparent security.






[Names: Atra, Siro]
Indra, commander of honour and valour, ruling
lord of excellence, from your very emergence thirsting
for battle, breaking the cloud with the roar of thunder
and lightning, energising and winning prizes for
humanity with the desire to make way for progress, you
arise here and now and break the stronghold of the dark
cloud locking up the waters of rain showers.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Yujam]
Make me your friend and instrument since you
break the top of the cloud, replete with vapours but
resistant to release the rain, hold the firmament
wheeling, circling and resounding, and divide space into
earth and heaven and make them turn round and round
like wheels for the winds to blow in the firmament and
the humans to live on the earth.






[Names: Striyo, Antarhyakhyadubhe]
Dasa, enemy of an inferior order, uses women
as secret weapons and warriors. But what can these poor
forces do against me (in violation of my discretion].
Let the ruler, Indra, see deep into both the language and
warriors [of this enemy, the open policy and the secret
tactics), and then advance upon the slavish enemy to
engage him in battle.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 30 345




[Names: Samatra, Somasah, Somasa]
If the cows exult in unison with calves
everywhere, if the sunrays play together on the herbs,
if the lands smile with greenery and the earth rejoices
with her children, and then, suppose the cows were
separated from the calves, the rays of the sun were
intercepted from the herbs, the lands were locked off
from greenery, the earth were bereft of her children,
then must Indra, brilliant ruler of the earth and the skies,
should join the mothers and children with his might so
that the soma drinks distilled may gladden him and his






[Names: Yadim, Soma, Purandarah]
When the somas, honours and pleasures of the
earth, created, distilled and energised by the sagely
scholars and people of yajnic creativity, exhilarate Indra,
the ruler and his order, then the generous and valorous
lord roars in the assemblies and in the homesteads and
he, breaker of the enemy strongholds, having drunk of
the honour and glory of the nation, again gives to the
nation fertile lands, cows, open sunlight and words of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Bhadramidam, Rnamcayasya]
Agni, refulgent ruler, it is a great blessing of
Indra, the sun, giver of four thousand rays of light,
wealth of existence, and destroyers of negativities,
which he collects from nature, and gives us. He is the
best leader and guide of humanity, and with gratitude
and best efforts we should acknowledge and benefit
from these gifts of energy and power.






[Names: Supesasam, Tivra, Indram, Agni]
of evil and darkness, create and give me a beautiful home
with a thousand bright rays of light, and at the end of
the departing night in the light of the dawn, blazing
fires bear distilled soma oblations and rise to Indra, the
sun, and give him delight.






[Names: Aucchat, Atyo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 31 347


When the fugitive night of rest and peace in the
home departs, having made up the want of light at the
rise of dawn, blest and beautiful, collecting and bearing
nature’s gifts, then babhru, the crimson sun, sustainer
of life, moving like a flying horse at instant speed,
showers four thousand gifts of energy and intelligence
and the creative yajaka receives and shares the gifts on
and from the vedi.






[Names: Catuh, Gharmascit]
Agni, O self-refulgent light of life, glorious ruler
of the world, let us receive and share four thousand gifts
of the wealth of light, energy and intelligence present
in the lights of the dawn, and let us, O friends of
knowledge, vibrant scholars, receive and share that
golden wealth and heat of life which is tempered and
refined in the pravargya yajna of self sacrifice and

Mandala 5/Sukta 31


Indra, Indra or Kutsa, Indra or Ushana, Indra and




[Names: Kutsa, Devatah, Avasyu, Atreya, Rshi, Indro, Yutheva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of honour and excellence,
commander of power and forces, accelerates whichever
supersonic chariot he rides and inspires whichever
region he rules for a great leap forward to the heights.
All round protector and pioneer, like a shepherd who
leads and drives his flock and followers forward, he
gives the clarion call, gathers his forces with the desire
to advance and win, and goes fast forward, unhurt and
unobstructed, first and foremost leader and pioneer
thirsting to realise his ambition.


HA?




[Names: Nahi]
Indra, commander of horse and speed of
progress, giver of golden wealth, advance all round, be
not lustful, be with us and share the honours. There is
none better settled, successful and prosperous than you.
Look after the unmarried, widows and widowers, help
them to have a meaningful life.






[Names: Udyat, Indra, Pracodayat]
When strength and virility is born and matures


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 31 349


with the growth of health and vitality, then let Indra,
the disciplined soul, control and command all the senses,
mind and intellect, awaken and exercise the creative
potentials innate but yet dormant within, and with inner
light of the soul keep off the resurgent darkness.






[Names: Anavaste, Brahmana, Indram, Puruhuta]
Indra, mighty ruler, expert craftsmen design and
make the chariot for your fast movement and
communication, the defence scientist and engineer,
Tvashta, makes the blazing thunderbolt for you, and
the scholars of the Veda celebrate your power and glory
with hymns of adoration and exalt you to break the
demonic cloud of darkness and want for showers of rain
and prosperity.



[Names: Vrsne, Anasvaso, Aditih, Aditi]
Indra, ruler of honour and excellence, when the
brave warriors and noble citizens offer songs of
adoration to you, then, O generous lord, the clouds and


the sky in unison with them and with you and those
dynamic powers even without horse and chariot,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




inspired by your power and grace, surround the wicked
and destroy them.






[Names: Sathivo]
Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence,
commanding force and power, let me speak to you of
the acts and instruments old and new which you have
achieved and which you would achieve, which scholars
and scientists, having immense knowledge and bearing
immense possibilities of gifts for mankind, exploring
both earth and the skies, would make it possible for
you to win waters from the clouds and pranic energies
from air.






[Names: Tadinnu, Susnasya]
That is your act, achievement and further
possibility, generous ruler of the world, giver of gifts,
and eminent scholar, since you break the clouds, destroy
the serpentine demons of darkness, create prosperity
and excellence for mankind here on earth, and,
mastering the wondrous knowledge of the secrets of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 31 351


energy and techniques of power, you stall the
negativities, make the waters flow and achieve further






[Names: Tvamapo, Turvasaya, Turvasa, Ugramaydatamavaho, Kutsam]
Indra, ruler of the world, giver of honour and
glory, pioneer and helmsman of the people, you make
the abundant waters flow for Yadu and Turvasha, men
of management, production and control, you achieve
the rare and difficult energy of electricity powerful as
thunderbolt, and then the brilliant people, lovers of life
and humanity all, enthusiastically admire and celebrate
both you and your thunderous achievement.






[Names: Indrakutsad]
Indra, ruler of the world, and Kutsa, creator and
controller of energy and the force of power, both
travelling by chariot, let the running horse powers of
energy at instant speed transport you both to the centre
of life’s business. Both energy and power arise from
the currents of waters and waves (as of sunrays), and
both of you control and complete the projects from your


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




seat of office and residence, wherefrom you dispel the
darkness and want from the centre of their power and






[Names: Vatasya, Visve, Marutah, Maruta]
Let this scholar of creative vision working for
defence and protection, take to, explore and advance
the forceful currents of winds employed as effective
agents of travel and transport. All your scholars, friends
and forces here, O powerful ruler, at the speed of winds
increase and advance the power, prosperity and defence
potential of the land.





[Names: Surascid, Bharaccakrametasah]
Let the brave and brilliant pilot of the chariot
first steady the chariot in the initial motion in the night
and then take off rising to the clouds. The craft bearing
its gears and stages of motion presses forward,




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 32 353




[Names: Ayam, Vadan]
O citizens of the land, this Indra, the ruling lord,
has come to the yajna vedi to see his friends and all
with the desire to observe and enjoy the finest
achievements of the nation. The scholars too
proclaiming their achievements are brought to the vedi
where learned priests dedicated to the yajna of love and
non-violence conduct and manage the programme and






[Names: Vavandhi]
O lord of immortality, Indra, those who love
truth, knowledge and peaceful progress for themselves
and others may abide loving and self sacrificing. May
the mortals never come to suffer evil, never commit sin
and crime. Bond with the yajakas who are committed
to truth and holy action, vest them with honour and
splendour, and bless us that we too, your own, be among


Mandala 5/Sukta 32




[Names: Indra, Devata, Gatu, Atreya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Adardarutsam, Mahantamindra]
Indra, maker and breaker of things, you break
open the springs, open the doors, let the streams aflow,
and free the bonded to live free and enjoy, you who
break the cloud and the mountain, let out the streams to
flow into rivers and the sea, having destroyed the
demons and broken the cloud.






[Names: Tvamutsan, Ahim, Sayanam]
Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you let the locked
up springs of water flow like milky streams of the cloud
down the mountain slopes according to the seasons. O
ruling lord of light and lustre, breaker of the serpentine
cloud of darkness, take up and command the blazing
forces for action.






[Names: Tyasya, Indrah]
Indra, the ruling lord, alone by himself,
unequalled and universally acknowledged and adored,
destroys the might of that great informidable demon of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 32 355


darkness and negativities with his blazing powers and
actions like the sun breaking the cloud, and then he






[Names: Tyam, Vrsaprabharma, Susnam]
That demon of darkness and negativity whose
might is only the drought, locking up the rains and
consuming and thriving on the food and morale of these
people of the earth, growing and growing and roaming
around in the prevailing darkness and want is strong:
yet the might and rage of that demon, shushna, drought
and famine, Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, destroys
with his lightning strike and rises as lord victor of the
clouds and rain showers.






[Names: Yadim]
O noble lord of the mighty social order, Indra,
with your actions and intelligence you know and expose
the hidden weakness of this otherwise incomprehensible
demon thirsting for fight, and, happy and elated in the
hope and thrill of victory, you shut him up in the depths


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


of darkness.






That demon of drought and negativity thus lying
and sleeping in sunless darkness with some vapours of
water but still growing, Indra, ruler of the social order,
great and generous, exhilarated by the hope and joy of
victory and raising his thunderbolt breaks, and destroys
that demon.






And when Indra raises the thunderbolt of justice
and punishment against the great demon of wickedness,
in favour of the great and generous man of charity, and
thus displays his mysterious force and power, and at
the raising of the bolt he punishes the wicked, he reduces
them to the lowest state of living beings.




[Names: Apadamatram]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 32 357


For sure that flood of water, honey sweet,
and roaring, the blazing sun, Indra, seizes with a great
blow of electric charge of thunderbolt and breaks it in


(So should the ruler break open the hidden
treasures of the land.)






[Names: Susmam, Indrasyaujaso]
Who can comprehend and hold his force and
blaze? The One alone by himself bears all the wealths
though unseen. And these two divine creations, heaven
and earth, move by the awful force and blazing
splendour of this mighty Indra.






[Names: Nyasmai, Indraya, Anu]
To this Indra, cosmic energy and the earth, both
divine, submit in love and obedience like a maiden in
love submitting herself to her lover. When Indra radiates
the cosmic splendour and power with these natural
phenomena, then the entire humanity and all stars and
planets do homage to the divine and self-refulgent
omnipotence of Indra with these acts of obedience to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


the law.






[Names: Ekamnutva, Indram]
among the people: One and only one self-existent and
self-refulgent lord and protector in truth, guardian of
all the five people, commanding divine excellence and
majesty. I hope and pray that my people, hoping and
loving, self sacrificing day and night, may attain to the
latest manifestations of Indra and his newest gifts of






[Names: Grhate]
Indra, ruling lord of the world, thus do I hear of
you, I feel the vibrations, inspiring life according to the
seasons, bestowing wealth and honour on noble
scholars, what the sages dedicated to divine knowledge
receive and what desires and ambitions with prayers
they place in you.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 33 359


Mandala 5/Sukta 33






[Names: Indra, Devata, Samvarana, Prajapatya, Rshi, Mahi]
For the sake of great strength and power, let me
thus focus on the people who are not too strong and
draw the attention of this mighty ruler, Indra, who,
honoured and admired among people, is keen to fight
for progress and, in the struggle onward, enlightens our
mind and directs our efforts on the right path.






And you Indra, master and ruler of the nation,
commanding power and prosperity, generous as showers
of rain, thus addressed with reverence and listening to
our prayer, take up the reins of the people, be with them
and harness their energy, and with love and faith pursue
the noble policies for advancement to completion.






[Names: Tistha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, mighty lord, refulgent and generous, those
who are not with us and are not for you are disjoined
from reality. It is their ignorance and impiety toward
the motherland. O lord of the force of thunder in hand,
ride the chariot, take up the reins, equipped as you are
with excellent forces for advancement. Guide and lead.






[Names: Puru, Tatakse, Suryaya, Surya]
Many are your acts of generosity, Indra, which
you have done for the land and cattle wealth and for
fertility of the fields, O generous lord, and while fighting
in the battles of life in your own seat, you create the
light of life like the sun and earn for yourself the name
and fame of the abundant cloud of showers.






[Names: Vayam, Sardho, Asman]
Indra, lord illustrious breaker of the dark cloud
of might, we are yours, and these leaders creating and
forming power and force, the chariots that go round for
transport, all these are yours. Come, O lord, and bless
us with all your imperishable power, come like power
and splendour incarnate, most welcome among the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 33 361






[Names: Paprksenyamindra]
Incomprehensible is the splendour in you, Indra,
lord of glory, all the wealths of humanity abide in you,
yours is the ongoing dance of creation, yours is
immortality. Universal abode of existence, give us the
pure wealth of life, wealth that is possible. You are the
lord and master commanding immense wealth, honour
and power. I praise, admire and pray for your grace and






[Names: Sura]
Thus O lord brave and fearless, Indra, protect
us, the celebrants, poets, makers and artists, teachers
and preachers with all modes of safety and security. And
giving us the glowing corselet of self defence in the
battle business of life, enjoy the beauty and sweetness
of life created, distilled and offered by the admirers and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vahantu, Syetaso]
And may those ten horses (ten senses of
perception and volition or five senses of perception and
five pranic energies) of the child of the wielder of the
thunderbolt, wise and bold, terror of the wicked, lord
of golden wealth, abiding on the heights carry me on in
life. Playful yet stable are they, gifts of the bountiful,
and with holiness of words and actions I abide with
them, (and enjoy the beauty and sweetness of life).





[Names: Marutasvasya, Marutasvas, Sahasra, Anukamaryo]
And may those vibrating gifts of the lord, who
commands the winds as a charioteer drives and controls
the horses, red hot in action, vested with holy perception
and action, help me in the abundant creative yajna of
the social order, so that the Lord and Master, inspiring
me and giving me grace a thousand ways, may love and
accept me like an ornament for the body.





[Names: Mahna]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 34 363


May the living voices of Vedic mantras and
wealths of existence with all their grandeur of meaning
and value, coexistent with the lord of original Word,
loved by the scholar of holy intention and purpose,
divined and envisioned in right selection of words by
the Rshis, all dynamic and relevant by moving forward
to modern contexts come to me like cows going to their

Mandala 5/Sukta 34








[Names: Indra, Devata, Samvarana, Prajapatya, Rshi, Ajatasatrumajara, Sunotana, Purustutaya, Purustuta]
The lady of light and joy, grace unbound,
unaging power, divine Shakti, as the human offering
too, in yajna, follows the lord omnificent, Indra,
omnipotent, free from enemies ever born. Sow the seed
of piety, distil the soma, mature it for the lord creator,
giver and receiver of food, energy and eternal wisdom,
universally adored and worshipped, and bear and offer
the fragrance that will take you across the seas of






[Names: Yadim]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




He, lord of wealth, honour and power, who
satisfies his hunger with soma and exults in honey
sweets of food offered, and who, wielding the mighty
thunderbolt of justice and punishment, out of love for
life and the people raises his bolt of a thousand potentials
to punish and destroy the wild beast of violence and
ferocity: that is Indra, that is the ruler.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Apapa, Sakras]
He who creates soma day and night and offers
it to this lord Indra surely rises to heights of brilliance
in knowledge, power and honour. But Indra, the lord
commanding wealth, power, honour and excellence,
disowns and throws off that man far and farther from
himself who lives and works only for self-decoration
and self-exhibition and associates with the selfish,
miserly and wholly acquisitive.





[Names: Yasyavadhit, Vetidvasya]
If the powerful ruler punishes somebody’s father
or mother or brother, he does not for that reason forsake


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 34 365


that person, nor does he go back on his decision. Indeed
he expects and accepts the homage of the man since he
loves effort and endeavour, and he is the shelter of all
and a treasure of wealth. He does not fly away from sin
and guilt, he faces it and fixes it.


ATU




[Names: Jinati]
He does not wish to begin anything with the
five senses and ten pranic energies in association with
a selfish, slothful, unyajnic person even though he were
otherwise thriving. In this manner he defeats and
punishes the lazy and the selfish. But a terror as he is to
the wicked, he loves and serves the pious and learned
person in the place where cows roam around and the
place resounds with chant of the sacred Word.




[Names: Vitvaksnah, Indro]
Brave in the battle of life, Indra destroys
suffering and rides the wheel of time and cycle of the


seasons. Averse to the selfish and uncreative, he helps
and raises the creative men of yajna so that life may


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




grow higher and better. Self-controlled and awe-
inspiring, Indra is the ruler and ordainer of the world, a
power, dynamic, ever modern and progressive, who
controls the services of the nation according to the force
and pressure needed on time.





[Names: Samim, Durge, Puru]
For sure he augments the food and comfort of
the celebrant but takes away the grains of the thief, and
for the charitable he gives wealth good for people. And
into dungeon darkness are thrown all those people who
challenge his blazing power and provoke his






[Names: Yujam]
If Indra, lord of honour and excellence, terror
of the enemies and inspirer of the people by virtues of
his nature and character, were to come across and select
two men possessed of honest wealth and all round
strength and courage from among the brilliant people
over the reputed and spotless regions of the land, he
would appoint one as his assistant, and the other for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 35 367


economic management providing for abundant water
and wealth of cows and food products.






[Names: Sahasrasamagnivesim, Ssatrimagna, Tasma]
Agni, refulgent ruler, you adore Indra, giver of
a thousand gifts of fire and electric energy, powerful,
self-evident mark of honour and grandeur. Such as you
are, I pray, like rivers flowing in bounds to the sea, may
the disciplined people be dedicated to you and may the
social order, brilliance and majesty vest in you as their
very home and glory incarnate.


Mandala 5/Sukta-35






[Names: Prabhuvasu, Angirasa, Yaste, Asmabhyam]
Indra, lord refulgent, ruler of the world, for our
protection and promotion, bear and bring for us that
straight and most effective vision and action of yours
which is pure and most bountiful, tolerant and yet
challenging for people and informidable in our battles
of life, the discipline inviolable.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Yadindra]
Indra, refulgent ruler, bear and bring us for the
protection, progress and sustenance of the people those
three, four or five principles of policy and values of
society which, according to you, are the best ways of
the peace and advancement of the people, and let us
settle and establish ourselves therein with your law and


Note: This mantra is the basic formula of any
socio-political structure and its governance and
administration for the preservation, advancement and
balanced sustenance of society. Details have to be
worked out in the light of permanent values, history
and tradition, and present and future implications. We
may consider the following:


(A) Three: Physical, mental and spiritual well-
being of the individual, society and the total human
community, the departments of governance and
administration, legislation and education; care,
preservation and replenishment of the earth,
environment and higher sphere; the government, the
people, and the defence forces.


(B) Four: The four classes of the people, 1.e.,
teachers and researchers, defence forces and
administrators, producers and businessmen, and the
ancillary workers; The four stages of individual and


[Names: Brahmacharya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 35 369


preparation and consolidation), Grhastha (family,
professional life and social responsibilities and
management), Vanaprastha (retirement and voluntgary
community service), and Sanyas (total freedom,
renunciation and social service). This is Varnashrama


[Names: Dharma]
(C) Five: Four classes of people and the other


Five levels of organisation: individual, family,
professional community, nation, and the global and


Vedic suggestions are symbolic and general,
particular details are to be worked out in the light of the
Vedic purpose of life and living for the realisation of
Dharma, righteousness in practical life, Artha, material
well being, Kama, fulfilment of the Self, and Moksha,






[Names: Vrsajutirhi]
Indra, refulgent lord of power and protection,
we invoke and pray for your protection, most cherished,
since you are the most generous and gracious.
Uninterrupted is the shower of your grace like the
showers of a cloud, as you arise, instantly victorious,
commanding and bearing the protective blessings of
existence such as knowledge, power and humility.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vrsa, Savah, Svaks]
Indra, ruling lord of the world, you rise as the
shower of bliss for munificence and achievement of
success. Your power is the shower of joy. Your self-
government and free social order is powerful, your mind
is irresistible, your strength is for the good of the people.






[Names: Tvam, Sarvaratha, Satakrato, Savasaspate]
Indra, lord of lustre and majesty, wielder of the
thunderbolt and generous as a cloud, master of
commander of forces and power, take to your chariot,
deploy all the chariots of battle forces and advance upon
that mortal enemy who challenges the love and
friendship of the people.






[Names: Tvamid, Ugram]
O lord, all the people ready for yajnic action of
defence and advancement, having touched the skies by
their chant and fragrance, all ready in full gear, invoke
and call upon you, breaker of the cloud and destroyer
of darkness and suffering, blazing with force of
grandeur, first among the best leaders old and new. This
is the clarion call for victory in life’s battle for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 36 371
sustenance and success.






[Names: Asmakamindra, Sayavanam]
Indra, ruler and commander of the people, take
over, command, lead and protect our chariot of the
nation, formidable, advancing in the contests of life,
going ahead with all forces of the nation in one field
after another and winning victory after victory.






[Names: Asmakamindrehi, Vayam]
Indra, lord of might and blazing power of light,
come, we pray, and protect our chariot by your
intelligence, wisdom and tactics. O lord most potent,
let us have our cherished sustenance and word of
wisdom in this kingdom of love and beauty. Let us know
and meditate on the holy song of success and adoration
in this kingdom of light and peace.


Mandala 5/Sukta 36




[Names: Indra, Devata, Prabhuvasu, Angirasa, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Dhanvacaro]
Come, Indra, lord of honour and excellence, you
know the wealth, beauty and excellence, of the world
of existence, you know how to give, you are the giver
and treasure hold of the wealth of life, golden orb of
the full moon. Like a sojourner of the skies, like a bird
and falsehood, come, drink the nectar of refreshing,
rejuvenating, regenerating milk of life, your rightful




00 A te hanu harivah Sura 5707८ ruhat somo na


[Names: Anu, Puruhita]
Indra, great and brave lord of heroic people, may
love and sweetness play on your lips, let fragrance
breathe from your nose, let success and glory play on
[Names: Soma]
ruler of the world all honoured and adored, like a
victorious army rejoicing on victory, we all with all our
voices in unison invoke and entertain you so that we all




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 36 373




[Names: Cakram, Puruhuta, Rathadadhi, Puru]
Indra, invoked and adored, blazing as sun and
generous as cloud, ever greater and greater, commanding
knowledge, honour, power, and treasure hold of all
wealth, like a wheel in motion my mind is trembling
for fear of want of intelligence and understanding and,
in praise and adoration of you as commander of the
chariot, it raises the voice of prayer and supplication.
Listen lord, shelter, haven and home of all.






Indra, lord of wealth, power and honour, you
have attained the heights of wide spaces. This celebrant
like a soma press which extracts streams of soma or
like a cloud of showers sends up words of praise in
your honour for your beneficence. You control and give
gifts of wealth by both right and left hands. O warrior
of the chariot and leader of men, we pray, do not





[Names: Vrsa, Sano]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, you are brave and generous, may the
gracious heaven elevate and exalt you. Generous and
great, you move and rise by ground and powerful modes
of transport and yajnic action. May the great lord of
mighty chariot, clad in strong helmet, generous of action,
wielder of the thunderbolt engage and protect us in the
battle of life.




[Names: Yune, Maruto]
Let the people of the world bow in honour and
reverence to the scholar, expert of the knowledge of
motion and speed who teaches this young student the
two allied subjects of the science of heat and electric
energy with three hundred applications of it and designs
a world famous vehicle for transport.


Mandala 5/Sukta 37


[Names: Indra, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Suryasya, Suryas, Tasma, Usaso, Indraya, Indra]
The flame of Agni, heat and light, invoked and
kindled on the base of ghrta, water, rising fast and
beautifully vies with the light of the sun. “This we create


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 37 379


in honour of Indra, the ruler’: for the scholar scientist
who says this, let untiring dawns of light and excellence






[Names: Samiddhagnir, Gravano]
Agni, light and fire, raised and rising, touching
the skies, suffusing the clouds, creating the soma for
life and energy, crackles, and adores Divinity. The
roaring clouds proclaim its force and refreshing power.
The yajaka scientist with his yajnic inputs into the fire
rises and moves to the sea (with fragrant vibrations rising
to space, with waters flowing to the seas).






[Names: Vadhur, Asya, Sravasyad, Puru]
Just as a loving bride goes to her groom and the
bridegroom receives the consecrated bride, and both
together run the home and take the family forward, so do
fire and water mixed and working together drive the
chariot and from the power and its revolution and
thunderous roar many thousands of projects are moved


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Indras, Somam, Soma]
That ruler does not face want and trouble in
intense liquid, friendly with earth connection, and goes
forward with various forms of power. The ruler moves
forward, breaks the clouds for rain, destroys the demon
of darkness with light and knowledge, and settles his
people in homes, thus progressing all forward in health
and sustenance and earning a name for wealth and
power.






[Names: Pusyat, Priyah]
That nation moves forward in yoga, creation of
new assets, and in kshema, preservation of the progress
and achievement earlier attained, rises higher in social
dynamics both ways, and wins further ground in both
together: the nation which reverentially loves solar
energy, which reverentially takes interest in fire energy,
and which spares its best and sweetest surplus in the
service of Indra, development of electric energy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 38 377


Mandala 5/Sukta 38






[Names: Indra, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Urosta, Satakrato, Adha, Indra]
Indra, hero of a hundred holy actions with
insight and counsel, wide and high are your powers and
wealth, abundant your gifts. Ultimate watcher and
observer of all that is in the world, ruler of the mighty
social order, lead us on to wealth, power, honour and
excellence and help us rise to the heights.




[Names: Yadimindra, Savistha, Paprathe]
ram.


Indra, ruler of golden majesty, lord most potent,
destroyer of suffering, whatever food, energy and light
of knowledge, great and renowned, you bear and bestow
upon us you increase and extend, and it resounds far
and wide as the highest of fame most unchallengeable
by mortal man.






[Names: Susmaso, Ubha]
O ruler of the clouds and mountains, dispenser


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of generous and adamantine justice, these powers and
potent people of yours, these lights and the enlightened,
all these brilliancies that obey your law and do your
will both shine and exalt earth and heaven with their
power and generosity for the achievement of cherished






[Names: Asmabhyam]
Indra, O lord destroyer of darkness, want and
suffering, bring that human wealth of values, honour
and excellence which is worthy of anyone here, there
and everywhere in terms of efficiency of your divine
order. Give us the power and freedom from fear, since
you love us and wish us to rise and prosper.






[Names: Sura]
Indra, lord of unbounded action and generosity,
potent ruler of the world, may we with these cherished
protectors and promoters of lands and cows and
revelations of light. Let us be preservers and promoters


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 39 379


Mandala 5/Sukta 39






[Names: Indra, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Yadindra, Radhastanno]
Indra, O lord of light and power, mysterious and
sublime, refulgent ruler of the clouds and mountains,
omniscient dispenser of munificence, whatever the rain
of blessings showered by you, whatever the wealth and
honour of success, not yet ours, pray give us with both




[Names: Yanmanyase, Vidyama]
davane.


Indra, whatever you think is worthy of choice,
bear and bring that brilliant gift of heavenly quality.
Let us receive that and let us know that as a blessing of
your unbounded generosity worthy to be received and
justified with gratitude.



[Names: Tena]
Adriva, wielder of thunder arms and ruler of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




clouds and mountains, with that mind and courage of
yours which is great, renowned and magnanimous
leading to sure success, break down the strongholds of
darkness and scatter the forces of negativity to reveal
the light of rectitude for success and victory.






[Names: Manhistham, Indramupa]
For the praise and celebration of Indra, greatest
of the powerful among you and ruler of the people, offer
songs of adoration with the eternal verses of the Vedas
as did the ancients for the benediction of the lord and






[Names: Asma, Samsyam, Indraya, Tasma]
For this Indra, lord and master, indeed, is the
holy poetic voice of praise. For that lord giver of
universal wealth and light of knowledge and wisdom
do poets free from threefold bondage of body, mind and
soul raise and offer their songs of adoration. Him, the
voices beautified with threefold graces of sound,
meaning and structure, free from threefold defects of
sound, meaning and structure exalt and glorify.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 40 381


Mandala 5/Sukta 40






[Names: Indra, Surya, Atri, Devata, Bhauma, Rshi, Somam, Soma, Somapate, Somapat, Vrsannindra]
Indra, creator and protector of honour,
excellence and prosperity, come with the clouds of rain
showers, and taste and promote the distilled soma of
the herbs of the earth. Come, generous lord, greatest
dispeller of darkness and suffering, with the strongest
and most enlightened, commanding the creation of



[Names: Vrsa]
Deep is the cloud, the hope and ecstasy is high,

and this soma distilled is potent and delicious. O
generous lord, Indra, creator of valour and destroyer of
darkness and suffering, come and realise the highest
prosperity with the showers of rain clouds.





Indra, potent lord of generosity, magnanimous


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




giver of the showers of joy, wielder of the arms of
thunder, greatest breaker of the clouds of rain and
destroyer of evil, I invoke you with the strongest and
most liberal powers and gifts of prosperity to come with
various and wondrous securities, protections and


fara: 2॥




[Names: Ryist, Yuktva, Somapava]
Dynamic guardian of the path of rectitude to
the last, wielder of thunder, generously brave, breaker
of tempestuous missiles instantly, terribly forceful,
refulgent ruler and sovereign commander, destroyer of
the darkest enemies and protector of peaceful prosperity
and joy of the people, Indra comes post haste by fastest
horses, and at the noon day session of yajna joins the
celebrations of the nation’s honour and excellence.






[Names: Aksetravid]
When the moon lighted by the sun affects the
sun with the darkness of its shadow, when it is in line
with the sun and earth, then the person who does not
know his area feels confused during the eclipse and the
regions too appear confusing. Similarly O sun, light of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 40 383


the spirit, when the veil of darkness covers knowledge
and awareness of the spirit, then the ignorant man feels
confused and the world too appears different, that is,
the material appears as ultimate reality and the spirit is
eclipsed. He makes no distinction between body and
soul.






[Names: Svarbhanoradha, Gilham, Suryam]
And then Indra, when the cosmic energy which
moves the stars and planets removes the shadow of the
moon from the sun, then Atri, man of knowledge, with
his fourth state of the soul, that is, turiya, direct vision
of Reality, regains the sight of the sun earlier covered
by the shadow of the moon.


Similarly, when Indra, lord of light, removes the
illusion of darkness which intercepts the light of the
spirit below it, then Atri, the sage of knowledge and
discrimination, with this fourth stage of spiritual
development, regains the light earlier covered by the
darkness of ignorance.




[Names: Tvam]
mehavatam varunasca raja.


O sage, Atri, free from the bondage of confusion


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




between body, mind and soul, I am your friend. Let not
this malevolent ogre out of anger, dread or hunger
devour me. You are a friend. So is this Varuna, ruler of
light and man of judgement and discrimination. May
you two, I pray, protect me from darkness, ignorance
and confusion.






[Names: Gravno, Atrih, Suryasya, Suryas]
Then Atri, sagely scholar of four Vedas, free
from threefold confusion, illusion and sufferance,
collecting hymns of adoration, joining wise sages,
singing songs of adoration in honour of Divinity, teaches
and illuminates the supplicant disciple, removes the
clouds, dispels the veil of darkness and illusion, and
restores the light of the heavenly sun into the spirit.






[Names: Atrayas]
That sun and light of heaven, covered by the
shadow of the moon and hidden by the veil of darkness,
the Atris, sages of knowledge in the fourth state of
spiritual development, turiya, direct vision of Reality,
free from threefold confusion, illusion and sufferance,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 385


restore and regain for themselves and their disciples.
Others cannot see that light because they do not have
the spiritual vision and freedom from illusion.


Mandala 5/Sukta 41






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Rtasya]
O Mitra and Varuna, light and bliss of heaven,
complementary energies of prana and udana, friend and
man of justice, teacher and preacher, who, for sure,
dedicated to truth, can know you? Who can thank you
in words? Protect and promote us wherever you be in
your regions of truth and natural law in the light of
heaven, the firmament or the earth, and bless us with
food and energy, speed and progress, vision and wisdom,
and material and spiritual wealth for the generous man
of yajna.





[Names: Rbhuksa, Namobhirva, Maruto, Rudraya, Rudra]
May the light of the day and the peace of night,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the ocean, the cosmic order, health and time of age,
spiritual vision, spirit of nature, cosmic flow of energies,
be friendly with us. May all these who, together in love
and loyalty with Rudra, lord of generous abundance and
universal justice of correctitude, bear and carry our
prayers and adorations and yajnic offerings with all our
obedience and salutations to the Lord.






Ashvins, complementary harbingers of light and
life energy, observers and keepers of the laws of nature
and guiding principles of humanity, teachers and
preachers, I invoke you for extension of the paths of
winds and clearance of the channels of progress, and I
call upon you for strengthening and sophistication of
the chariot powers of humanity. Come ye all fellow men,
travellers and friends, concentrate your thoughts and
intentions on the life breath of existence flowing from
the regions of light as you bear and bring the food and
fragrance for the yajna fire.





[Names: Pusa, Agnih, Agni]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 387


The refulgent yajaka, forbearing, challenging
and victorious, intelligent and self-conscious (Kanva),
Trita, active and expansive in the three regions of the
universe, i.e., the sun, wind and electric energy, heat
and light, nourishment and growth, power, prosperity,
honour and excellence, all operative together in love
like friends, with brilliant holy ambitions for the
advancement of the world, may, we plan and pray, come
like warriors flying to the battle business of life on the
wings of fastest coursers.






[Names: Suseva, Marutasturanam, Marutasturana]
O Maruts, dynamics of nature and progressive
forces of humanity, create, bear and bring the wealth
and power born of action and advancement. Develop,
hold and use knowledge and intelligence for the
achievement of all forms of power, honour and
prosperity. All the actions and movements of yours are
for your good, and by all these progressive steps of
yours, the yajaka, creator and giver of fragrance,
humanity, the child of brilliant ambition, grows happy
and enjoys peace and comfort.






[Names: Vayum, Vayu, Isudhyava]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




With your holy chants of mantras and offers of
fragrant inputs into the yajnic fire of corporate action,
create the wind and electric energy usable in your
transports for progress. Create the brilliant, vibrant,
admirable scholar and scientist of energy. And may these
watriors of energy and scientific intelligence dedicated
to progress and the truth and goodness of the laws of
natural and human dynamics, serving heaven and earth,
motherly divinities, bear and bring universal light and
nourishment for our intellectual and cultural






[Names: Usasanakta]
In consequence, for your success and
achievement, by virtue of your holy and powerful efforts
and your intelligent and enlightened chants and
oblations, may the night and day, both great and potent,
like intelligent and educated women, carry your yajna
across the world and bring you from heaven the wealth
of the world for humanity.






[Names: Dhanya]
Happy with myself, celebrant for you all, and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 389


for the achievement of wealth, power and all round
prosperity, I honour, adore and serve the leaders who
work for food and nourishment for growth. I honour
the artist, architect and maker of forms, and love creative
and friendly intelligence, trees and herbs, with
reverence, gratitude, replenishment and renewal.






[Names: Tuje, Panita]
May the clouds and mountains be for the
expansion of our charities. So may be the Vasus, abodes
of life such as earth and oceans, suns and planets, as
well as the brave and generous people of strength and
self-realised, creative and corporate powers, and may
they all augment our honour and reputation in all fields
of human welfare.


[Names: Vrsno, Grnite, Susaih, Agniretart]
I admire and adore the lightning fire, child of
waters, which pervades the three worlds of the universe


and gives showers of life for the fertility of the earth.
Like a moving power with locks of light with its force


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and motion, Agni energises the rays of the sun, moves
the clouds and enlivens the forests with greenery.






[Names: Katha]
How shall we speak to the seeker of nature’s
catalytic powers breaking and making the changing
forms of matter and energy, how speak to the earnest
seeker of knowledge, of wealth, production and
prosperity? May the flowing waters and clouds, herbs,
heavens, rays of sunlight and high mountains with locks
of forests help and protect us.






[Names: Srnotu, Srnvantvapah]
May the lord creator, controller and sustainer
of energies listen to our voice of prayer, listen and reveal
the mystery. May the master of the science of energy
listen and enlighten us. May the lord omniscient,
pervasive in waters and the skies, ever moving,
omnipresent, listen and reveal the knowledge. May the
crystal waters and the perennial streams and showers
issuing forth from the mighty clouds and mountains
speak to us like the clairvoyant ancient seers and seekers.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 391






[Names: Vayascana]
Listen ye, great ones, and let us know for certain
those acts and motions of yours which we speak of and
pray for, which, all great and generous ones, bearing
cherished gifts of food, energy, health and age, ever
growing stronger and expansive, mighty powerful with
their catalytic forces, come to the mortal seeker who
tries to know and search them out.




[Names: Vardhantam]
I speak of the celestial and terrestrial evolution
of things and forces and their actions and attributes for
the holy pursuer of creative yajnic action. May the
heavenly light and words of knowledge grow with
peace, beauty and bliss in action. May the waters of life
and energy grow and flow like the spatial oceans




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Padepade, Sakra, Sisaktu]
At every stage of evolution, my growth with
divine praise and prayer is evident, replete with power
and grace bearing all natural and divine modes and
materials of protection and progress. May mother earth
and her nectar sweets of energy with sages and scholars
bless us with the rich gifts of her simple, natural and




tivanih.


How shall we honour and serve the generous
and renowned Maruts, dynamics of nature and the
dynamic leaders and scholars of humanity, with offers
of gifts and acts of homage in order to thank and
supplicate them in words of reverence? Too generous
and too highly renowned are they even for the best and
choicest words of ours. May the generous cloud in the
sky never forsake us to suffer want and injury. May there
always be ample blessings of nature and Divinity for us




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 41 393




[Names: Atra, Sivam]
Thus does mortal man honour and celebrate you,
O divinities of nature and humanity, for progeny and
for abundance of wealth and cattle. Thus does mortal
man win your favour. Give me here in the world well
being of the body and sustenance for health, and may
mother earth with her generosity keep off debility and
decay of my health and the onset of old age.






[Names: Sasa]
O Vasus, divinities of nature and humanity, may
we receive that holy intelligence of yours, that
energising food, by our praise and prayer in honour of
mother earth, nature and the cow, and may that mother
power, generous, loving and merciful, O divinities, sages
and scholars, the lady overflowing with kindness, move
for us in response to us for our good, for our honour
and prosperity.






[Names: Urvasi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May the divine Ida, voice of omniscience,
generous nature and the wide earth, mother of
multitudes, sublime and overwhelming, enlighten and
inspire us. And may the majesty of divinities,
commanding universal light, comprehending the
meaning, purpose and energy of life itself, revealing
knowledge and wisdom come to us.




And let the scientist help us and the lord
omniscient bless us, with strength and energy from all
sources of nature.


Mandala 5/Sukta 42






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Varunam, Varuna, Prsadyonih, Srnotvaturtapantha]
Let my holy voice, the chant of OM, full of peace
and bliss, light of my higher energy of udana, rise up
and reach Varuna, cherished lord of love and justice,
Mitra, lord of light and friendship, Bhaga, lord of honour
and excellence, and Aditi, mother Infinity of heaven
and earth. May the lord Supreme listen and receive, the
lord of Eternal Word and speech coexistent with space
and Divinity, ministrant of five pranic energies,
indefatigable and irresistible in the ways of his power
and action, giver of life and energy, lord of bliss, Bliss


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 395






[Names: Prati, Aditir, Brahma]
May Aditi, mother of eternal speech, receive and
love my song of praise and prayer as a mother holds her
child to the heart, dear, cherished and soothing. Brahma,
lord Infinite that is dear, kind and benevolent to the noble
people, supreme giver, who inspires prana and udana
energies, is our lord adorable.






[Names: Udiraya]
Sing, celebrate him that is the most imaginative
of poets, exalt him with honey sweets of song and
homage, and may he, the inspirer creator, Savita,
refulgent and generous lord, in response to our homage
and effort, give us cherished wealth and honour of our
choice for the good of our body, mind and soul.






[Names: Samindra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence, you
lead us on with a holy mind, with efficient senses,
intelligence and songs of homage, with bright and brave
people. Lord of humanity, commanding the motive
forces of the dynamics of existence, let there be all good
and well being for us. Lead us on with knowledge and
wealth of divinity, with whatever is good and beneficial
for noble people, and with the wisdom of the brilliant
people devoted to yajnic creation and divine service.






[Names: Devo, Indro, Rbhuksa]
May the brilliant and generous, the prosperous
and honourable, the creator inspirer, rich and generous,
participant sharer, commander of honour and excellence,
winner of loud showers, producer of wealth, the
powerful intellectual, commander of power and
progress, the man of wisdom and distant vision, the
immortals and powers of tempestuous advancement,
may all these protect and promote us on the path of






[Names: Marutvato]
We sing and celebrate the acts and achievements


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 397


of the lord of men and winds, incomprehensible,
victorious, unaging and undecaying. O lord of honour
and power, Indra, neither the ancients, nor the moderns,
nor the succeeding ones nor anyone else would
comprehend your power and potential.






[Names: Puruvasur]
First sing in honour of him close at hand who
wields and governs the jewel wealth of existence,
Brhaspati, Lord Almighty of the boundless universe,
giver of wealth and honour, lord most blissful,
omnificent, universally adored, who blesses the
celebrant and supplicant, and brings him the wealth and






[Names: Tavotibhih]
Brhaspati, O lord of unbounded wealth of the
universe, the people who are free from injury, enjoying
wealth and power, brave and fearless, sharing the
blessings of your protections, who are generous and
honourable and give horses, cows and clothes in charity,
all enjoy the good fortune of wealth and power and the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


grace of divinities.




[Names: Visarmanam, Apavratan, Suryad]
Render the wealth of those people fruitless and
unproductive who eat by themselves inspite of our songs
of divine praise in honour of charity. Deprive them of
the light of the sun who observe no rules of good
conduct, and who, while growing materially in the lord’s
creation, revile the lord giver and desecrate the food.




[Names: Yaohate, Maruto, Samim]
O Maruts, dynamic leaders of the people, take
him down straight, not in round about words, who
invokes and entertains the wicked in the holy
programmes of society, who reviles the noble work of
the divine celebrant and who, even though trying hard
apparently, demeans his values and desires.




[Names: Tamu, Yaksva, Rudram, Rudra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 399


Praise and exalt him who wields the strong bow
and sharp arrow in support of life and shelters the
creative, corrective and protective forces of the world.
Do good work in cooperation with the great and
magnanimous people, and honour and serve with
homage and holy offerings Rudra, lord of power, justice
and punishment, brilliant and generous giver of life and






[Names: Damunaso, Sarasvati]
May those who are generous at heart, noble at
work, liberal of hand, bold and bountiful, motherly
women, streams of water flowing within bounds of
divinity, vastly illuminative, perennially flowing with
without reserve, pure and immaculate, we pray, bless us.







I offer my latest song of praise arising
spontaneously and dedicate my intellect and imagination
in honour of Indra, blissful shelter of the world, who,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sculptor of the forms of his creation, has provided and
made to flow this water for us in the streams of his
daughter, the earth.






[Names: Jaritar]
Let this celebrative song, O celebrant, rise and
reach the roaring, thundering lord of earth and eternal
speech who, replete with blissful waters, rolling like
spatial oceans, goes forward sprinkling the earth and
illuminating heaven and earth with the showers of light
and life.






[Names: Esah, Marutam, Maruta, Rudrasya, Rudras, Kamo]
Let this song of praise reach and excite the
power and force of the Maruts, fellow humans, youthful
children of Rudra, Lord of law, justice and
discriminative wisdom, and let my love and desire
inspire them for wealth and honour of the world. O
celebrant, celebrate the dynamic forces of humanity,
generous and showerful as the clouds.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 42 401






[Names: Praisah, Devodevah]
May this song of celebration ring over the earth,
resound across the sky, and vibrate among the trees and
herbs for the production of wealth. May the lord
supreme, God of the divinities of nature and humanity,
be kind to me and listen to my invocation and prayer.
May the mother earth be kind and never ill-disposed to
us.




[Names: Urau]
O divinities, saints and sages, may we ever
prosper in the unbounded generosity of nature and of






[Names: Samasvinor]
O lord, we pray, may we ever follow and benefit
from the latest and blissful guidance and noble policy
of the Ashvins, teachers and scholars. Bring us, O divine
-twin powers of nature’s complementarities, wealth,
brave progeny and all the imperishable good fortunes


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of honour and excellence. Let us prosper with your
protection and vision of progress.


Mandala 5/Sukta 43






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Maho]
Let the Voice of Divinity like mother cows,
flowing with milky streams of meaning and metaphor,
instantly vibrating unto the mind and soul, incessantly
rippling and soothing without violence or difficulty,
come and bless us with honey sweets of divine peace
and spiritual awareness. Sevenfold are they in sound,
music and meaning, expressive, grand and infinite. The
celebrant yajaka, joyous and ecstatic, invokes, augments
and proclaims the voices for the highest wealth and well
being of life.



[Names: Pita]
We offer songs of adoration with homage and
offers of yajnic food and fragrance to win incessant
blessings of loving and non-violent heaven and earth


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 43 403


for the sake of food and sustenance, knowledge and
progressive advancement in life. May the father, mother,
heaven and earth, sweet and loving of voice and word,
liberal and unstinted of hand, bless us with honour and
excellence at every stage of our battle business of life.






[Names: Adhvaryavas, Sukram, Hoteva, Bharata]
O priests of the scientific yajna for peace and
unity with love and non-violence, working on the holy
powers and mysteries of wind and electric energy, take
up pure energised waters, and create and bear the energy
for Vayu, spirit and ruler of humanity. O Vayu, brilliant
ruler, first of all preserve, protect and promote this honey
sweet energy so that we may be happy and enjoy life
together for your honour and pleasure.






[Names: Dasa, Somasya, Somas, Samitara, Madhvo]
Just as ten fingers join the two hands, and the
dexterous priests use the stone press to extract the soma
juice, and just as the sun with its bright rays, happy and
rejoicing, distils the potent pure honey sweet vitalities
of energy existing in the clouds and mountains, so do
the happy performers of scientific yajna for peace, expert


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




specialists of energy, using their hands and mind and
senses, working on the clouds distil the purest rays of
energy, the honey sweet essence of nature’s sources of
wind and waters.






[Names: Asavi, Somah, Soma, Hari]
Indra, brilliant ruler, commander of winds and
waters, distilled is the soma of energy for your
knowledge and enlightenment, for your power and
potential, and for delight and grand celebration, love as
you do the honour and excellence of prosperity. Invoked
and invited to the celebration, harness the fast controlled
powers to the chariot, come straight, and accomplish
the programmes you wish to complete.






[Names: Madhormadaya]
Agni, O light of knowledge, scholar scientist,
loving and cooperative, lead us on to that great,
continuous but unaddicted knowledge of divine value
with your humility and yajnic inputs, knowledge which
is highly creative and productive for honey sweet
delights and celebration of mankind, which is vastly
revealing of mother nature’s truths and worthy of further


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 43 405


pursuit by the progressive paths of divinities and






[Names: Anjanti, Piturna, Agnim, Agni]
Like a darling child in the lap of father, like the
fire of yajna in the vedi, the disciple in pursuit of the
light of knowledge and fire of life is seated in school
close to the teachers like a seedling growing to fullness,
whom sagely scholars, purifying, seasoning and
tempering like steel and gold by the heat of fire,
strengthen and prepare for a full yajnic life.






[Names: Accha, Santama, Mayobhuva]
Let the good and great, wide and high,
refreshing and beneficent voice of ours like a messenger
go to invoke and invite the Ashvins, teachers and
preachers, complementary powers of nature, positive
and negative currents of energy circuit, and may the
Ashvins, kind, peaceable and peace giving come to us
straight like the centre pin of the axle and nave of a
chariot wheel, and share our treasure wealth of
knowledge, power and material well-being.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








I offer the song of homage and reverence in
honour of Pusha, power of nourishment, and Vayu,
energy of wind and electricity, both power givers for
success and achievement, inspirers of mankind, and both
spontaneous and instant givers of wealth and progress.






[Names: Maruto, Yajnam, Maruto]
O Jataveda, light of life, sagely scholar of the
knowledge of things in existence, invoked and invited,
kindled and raised, you bring and speak of all the
energies of winds and electricity of all names and all
descriptions for men. O Maruts, winds and energies, in
response to the mantric formulae and the celebrant’s
songs of adoration, come all and bring all modes of
protection and advancement along to the sagely
scholars’ yajnic pursuit of research and development.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 43 407




[Names: Sarasvati, Havam, Sagmam]
May Sarasvati, divine mother of knowledge and
language in the cosmic flow, loving and responsive to
her children, come to bless our yajna, bearing ghrta and
waters of life’s energy and inspiration from heaven, the
vast skies, clouds and mountains. May she join us like
a mother overflowing with love, listen to our words of
prayer for peace and pious advancement and give us
the vision.






[Names: Sadad]
Enshrine the eminent sage and scholar
specialised in the round blue skies, great and rising
pursuant of space, in your seat of yajnic learning, in the
home and in the assembly : the scholar concentrating
on the ultimate natural causes, bright and illuminative,
golden in performance, the very dawn of light and
knowledge, we honour and serve.






May the wielder and sustainer of existence,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




mighty refulgent and blissful, invoked, enkindled and
raised in the vedi come and bless our yajna with all
means of protection and progress, the lord illuminating
our voices of praise and prayer, vitalising herbs and
vegetation, kind and loving, lord of nature’s three modes
of thought (sattva), energy (rajas) and matter (tamas)
which are transparent, red and dark green, the lord
generous as showers and giver of health and age.






[Names: Matuspade, Susevyam]
On the sacred and excellent vedi on the floor of
mother earth, lovers and admirers of life come in pursuit
of the joy of living, bearing holy offers for the sacred
fire. And just as they cleanse the new born baby and
welcome it in new life, so they feed, serve and develop
the holy fire with love and offers of food and fragrance







[Names: Brhad, Devodevah]
People senior in age and wide in experience,
eminent in knowledge and intelligence, men and women
together, offer homage to you, Agni, lord of light and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 409


great. May the lord Divine, light of all divinities, be
kind and gracious to me, and may mother earth look at
us with favour and never forsake us.




[Names: Urau]
O Divinities, may we ever be in the light of your
unbounded grace, free and uninterrupted.





Ashvins, complementary powers of nature,
teachers and preachers, men and women together, all
kind and blissful, may we go on in life by your latest
protections and noble paths of progress and morality. O
immortal divines, bear and bring us wealth, and brave
progeny and all the good fortunes of the world.


Mandala 5/Sukta 44
Vishvedeva Devata, Avatsara Kashyapa and others Rshis




[Names: Praticinam]
Indra, Ruler as of ancient times, as before, as
always, as of now, with your holy voice you draw upon


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the highest, heavenly, blissful force and power present
upfront and instantly victorious in the battles of life,
and you grow and progress in consequence of that same
power and force. O Ruler, let us all honour and augment
and serve that power.






[Names: Sriye, Sugopa]
Ruler of the world, you are the self-refulgent
light of heaven, illuminator of spaces and mover of the
still clouds of vapours in the skies, the lord whose lights
and graces are for the beauty and majesty of life. You
are the protector, defender, preserver and promoter. You
are not for deceit or violence. You are the cause and
agent of holy action, sovereign with your powers and
potential, and your name is identical with truth and law.






[Names: Atyam, Prasarsrano, Anu]
(He abides in, with, and above the dynamics of
the yajnic evolution of existence: consumer, consumed,
consumption, evolution and devolution, the beginning
and the end, all): He abides with the food of life. He is


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 411


truth, reality, eternity. He is the wielder, sustainer and
commander of the world in existence. Inviolable is his
word, uncharted his way. He is the yajaka, creator and
giver. He is the lord and controller of power and
potential, challenge and forbearance. He is ever on the
move across the skies and spaces. He is the generous
cloud, the seedling in the womb of existence, ever
young, unaging, antidote of negative destruction, and
loving support of all.






[Names: Suyantubhih, Subhih]
O children of the earth, for your good and
comfort, immediate as well as distant, are these united,
cooperative, well controlled radiations of the sun all
round, fostering the truth of nature’s law in their own
way: For that Master Spirit, the sun sucks up the vapours
of water from the ocean and other lower places by well
directed, all dominating waves of light, and then makes
the cloud release the waters in rain showers to flow down
in streams and rivers into the ocean.


(In the same way the administrative forces of
the ruler, working together in cooperation within the
law, collect the taxes from the various communities of
the people and the ruler uses the collection for rain
showers of the people’s protection, promotion and
prosperity without hoarding anything for himself.)


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sanjarbhuranas, Dharavakesv]
Shining and vibrating by flutter of the leaves of
trees, proclaiming the presence of the spirit manifested
in life forms living and aging in the world of creation,
in the caves of the heart, you shine and radiate in the
consciousness, O lord of rectitude and paths of
naturalness. Grow on, live on, O lord, in the yajna of
creation and let the life forms grow on and advance.




[Names: Yadrgeva, Mahim]
sahah.


Who are the sagely divines of humanity? As they
see the truth of reality, so do they speak of it. They
behold it and stand thereby by the holy reflection of it
in divine works of creation or in the visions of their
own imagination. And they, men of courage, wide and
bold in speech and imagination, bear and bring for us
great illuminative speech of knowledge and high and
mighty undecaying valour, forbearance and spirit of
challenge which creates great heroes in the service of
truth and rectitude. They are human divines.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 413






[Names: Vetyagrur, Ghramsam, Suryah, Surya, Sarma]
The leader, reborn in knowledge and courage
of action, goes forward challenging, thirsting for battle,
radiant by mind, visionary of present and future,
protecting the light of day, preserving our future wealth
of generations, and protecting our hearth and home, self-
possessed and self-established as he is.






[Names: Jyayamsamasya, Yadrsmin]
The ruler and scholar who receives and serves
the superior, the holy and advancing voice of the seers
and sages by virtue of the knowledge and efforts of this
industrious scholar, and you whose name and fame
resounds among the people, whichever way the name
and fame and knowledge is received, and the man who
attains the knowledge of that all by his own effort and
karmic discipline and carries the tradition on by himself,
self-possessed and self-established, may all these do us
good on our way of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Samudram, Atra]
The fame and advancement of these people
resounds over seas and abides over spaces, nor does
their yajnic progress suffer where hymns are chanted
and wealth grows in holiness. Here the heart’s desire of
the worshipper is not obstructed where holy intelligence
and intentions abide for guidance in action.






[Names: Avatsarasya, Savistham]
With our collective thoughts and intentions and
with all our love and delight, we desire to have that
ruler for the social order whose high strength and
dynamism is respected by the wise and enlightened
scholars, who is a strong disciplinarian and organiser,
who commands intelligence and eloquence, who is a
holy and cooperative man of yajna, sociable as a friend
and who can preserve, protect, defend, promote and
enlighten the people and the system. Only such a person
deserves to be the ruler.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 44 415






[Names: Syena]
Of these people, he, the ruler, is the Shyena,
eagle, harbinger of nectar, the watchful eye, and the
marksman for the target, the destination. He is Aditi,
the inviolable identity, symbol of nature, character,
tradition and the nation. He is Kakshya, orbit of
movement as well as the rampart, ever in harness, and
he is the joy of life. Of this universal leader, all
embracing and giving, all powerful, they jointly and
separately desire and ask for advancement, know his
generosity, and find their own fulfilment in his presence.






[Names: Sadaprno, Srutavit, Ubha]
He is an unfailing giver of fulfilment, holy and
cooperative in joint action for development, destroyer
of hate and enmity, strong of arms, scholar of the Vedas,
accessible saviour and helper and friendly for all of you.
He receives both friend and foe appropriately and
realises both material and spiritual good, shines and
illuminates, the leader who serves this social order and
this people with effective and acceptable means and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


policies.






[Names: Sutambharo, Bharad]
The baby’s parent, the yajaka’s protector and
promoter, the teacher, ruler, guardian of humanity who
preserves, sustains and advances whatever wealth and
joy is achieved, the treasure hold of all history and
tradition and intellectual and scientific progress on the
march, bearing the milky food for body, mind and soul
like the mother cow and forbearing earth, he goes
onwards high proclaiming his knowledge and vision,
the divine gift, without a wink of sleep: He is worthy of
reverence.






[Names: Soma]
Whoever is awake, the Rks love and bless.
Whoever is alert, the Samans move and elevate.
Whoever is active without a wink of sleep, this soma of
life’s joy and ecstasy addresses and says: O seeker and
yajaka, I am for you, a friend and shelter home.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 45 417






[Names: Agnirjagara, Agnirjagara]
To Agni, soul of life awake, the light of Rks
radiates with love. To Agni, light of life awake, the songs
of Samans vibrate with love. To Agni, the fire of life
aflame, the streams of nectar flow with love, and to the
soul of life, the light of awareness and the fire of action,
the ecstasy of life says: I am yours with love, a friend,
your very haven and home.


Mandala 5/Sukta 45


[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Sadaprna, Atreya, Rshi, Vida, Usaso, Apavrta]
Brilliant sages with holy songs of adoration
worship the self-refulgent Lord and break the cloud of
ignorance. In consequence, the dawn of light follows,
dispels the nights of darkness, and then the refulgent
sun of divine knowledge opens the doors of human
reason and intelligence with knowledge.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sriyam, Dhanvarnaso]
The sun takes on the refulgent form of beauty
like the grace of divinity, and from the vast heavens,
the dawn, mother of light rays, goes forward revealing
the beauty of the world. Streams and rivers, charming
bright and refreshing, flow rushing on to the sea. The
regions of light rise on, expansive like a measured
column of the day’s sustenance.


(The mantra is a metaphor, in continuation of
the previous mantra, of the expansion of the light of
knowledge and onward flow of life.)






[Names: Asma]
In honour of this adorable ancient sun, cause of
the birth of planets and the cloud, and for the fertility of
the earths, the vapours leave the cloud to rain in showers.
Let us too, high shining like the sun, realising the light
of knowledge, illuminating all around, giving in charity,





[Names: Suktebhirvo, Indra, Ukthebhirhi, Maruto]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 45 419


With unambiguous holy words approved by
scholars and loved and used by divine brilliancies, we
study and experiment with Indra and Agni for the
invocation and achievement of electric energy and fire
power for protection and progress, just as, with the same
holy words, for all time, poetic men of vision and
imagination and dynamic scientists engaged in creative
and productive joint works, shining and illuminating in
the pursuit of truth, work and conduct holy programmes
of research for you all.




vama vartyah. Are dvesamsi sanutardadhama’ -

Come ye all today, let us engage in works of
vision and wisdom as intelligent holy people. Let us
throw off all evil and eliminate it. Let us always keep
hate and enmity far away. Let us move forward and
enthusiastically join the yajamana engaged in creative
and productive work for advancement.








Come friends, let us take up works of science
and reason by which mother knowledge reveals and,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




like the dawn, opens the doors of light and power, by
which the man of war and tactics wins the helmet and
armour, and by which the industrious producer achieves
fertile land and ample water.

[Names: Anunodatra, Rtam]
7. Let the priest of dexterous hand, generous
like the cloud, celebrant of divinity and nature’s powers,
set the yajna in motion, inspiring the new generation
on the move to keep the fire burning for ten months at
least, and the dynamics of revelation would flow to the
yajna, open the secrets of the Word and knowledge and
control of mind and senses, and vibrant men of initiative
would enact projects of truth and universal good.




[Names: Visve, Utsa]
8. When on the rise of this glorious dawn the
Angiras, vibrant scholars and sages dedicated to yajnic
divinity, meet and rejoice with the rays of light, then,
the oceanic source of these rays of light being in the
highest heaven, it is the radiations of Divinity on the
waves of nature’s vitality that transmit the revelations


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 45 421
of light and knowledge and bless the yajnic seekers.






[Names: Raghuh]
Let the sun, commanding seven horses of its
spectrum lights, come to the earthly part of its domain
like a flying courser, a hawk-like harbinger of nectar,
dispelling darkness, and ripening food with its light and
heat, and let it shine, an unaging youth, a visionary
creator and inspirer, going over lands and planets on
the long course of its orbit in space.


So may the light of the Spirit descend into the
earthly form of the body of five elements and five senses,
mind and intelligence, and illuminate the individual
personality of the soul to keep it a youthful visionary
and self-inspiring poet, creatively playing around with
the mind and senses, dispelling the darkness of
ignorance and ripening the existential potential of its
nature, across the world of five elements, and ahankara
and mahan modes of nature, for its advancement over





[Names: Udga]
When the sun yokes its far ranging rays of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




spectrum light to its chariot, it rises over the bright and
lustrous ocean of spatial waters, and its intelligent and
well directed horses carry it over the orbit like the
constant waves of the sea carrying a boat, with the result
that the overflowing waters stand around listening and
raining down in showers. Similarly when the self-
luminous soul yokes the five senses, the five pranas
and the mind and intelligence to its purpose of action in
yoga yajna, it rises over the bright and blazing world of
existence, the seven lights of natural powers, perceptive
and well directed by the soul in the state of constancy,
carry it over the waters around waiting for its orders, and
the soul reaches its destination where it joins the Divine.




[Names: Dhiyam]
O divinities of nature and humanity, I pray, I
may absorb into my pranic energies and actions that
blissful intelligence of your gift by which the rising souls
on the move cross the seas over ten months. May we,
by this, be protectors and promoters of our sages and
our divine nature. May we, by this, cross the seas over
sin and evil.


Mandala 5/Sukta 46


[Names: Vishvedeva, Devapatni, Devatah, Pratikshatra, Atreya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 46 423




[Names: Hayo, Nasya]
Like a trained horse on the new path, the man
of knowledge takes on a new programme, voluntarily. I
too carry on the new programme which is protective,
defensive and progressive. I do not want it abandoned,
nor do I have anything reserved or secret about it, and
further, only a scholar pioneer and leader advancing on
the path of rectitude would take men and leaders






[Names: Agna, Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Ubha, Marutota, Sarasvati]
Agni, O brilliant power of light, fire and
knowledge, may Indra, powers of honour and
excellence, Varuna, chosen powers of justice and
goodness, Mitra, friends, devas, noble powers of nature
and humanity, Vishnu, universal lover of life all over,
Maruts, leaders of the force and speed of the winds,
create strength and courage and bestow it on us. O
Ashvins, cooperative powers of truth and rectitude of
behaviour, Rudra, powers of justice and punishment,
and voices of scholars and sages, Pusha, power of
nourishment and vitality, Bhaga, creator of honour and
prosperity and Sarasvati, spirit of knowledge, listen to
our voice.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Indragni, Huve, Marutah, Maruta, Pusanam, Pusana, Samsam]
mutaye.


I invoke and study, for the benefit of protection
and progress, heat, light and electricity, prana and udana
energies of vitality, the atmosphere and the sky, the sun
and higher regions of light, air and winds, clouds and
mountains, waters and other liquids, all pervasive space,
vitality of vyana energy, spirit of the universe, universal
power and prosperity, creative energy of the universe,
and all their positive and beneficial attributes and






And may the omnipresent lord Vishnu, sustainer
of life, Vata, waves of wind and electric energy, the
creator and giver of wealth, and Soma, spirit of peace
and joy do us good without delay or violence. And may
the experts and specialists, and the Ashvins,
complementarities of natural evolution, and the maker
of forms and sophisticated designs, all with their skill


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 46 425


and power and knowledge enlighten and train us in arts
and crafts for the achievement of life’s wealth and
honour.






[Names: Marutam, Brhaspatih, Sarma]
And may that celestial and adorable power and
force of the tempestuous nature of winds in consonance
with joint human interest and advancement come and
be installed in our homes, assemblies and centres of
production. And may Brhaspati, father and ruler of the
wide world, Pusha, giver of nourishment and
sustenance, Varuna, highest leader of our choice, Mitra,
friendly and loving as breath of life, and Aryama, lord
of justice and correctitude grant us peace, joy and
progress worthy of a happy home.






[Names: Bhago, Aditih, Aditi]
And may those clouds and mountains, and
streams and rivers, admirable and majestic, shine and
flow for our sustenance and progress. May Bhaga, lord
of honour, excellence and prosperity, generous friend


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of all, come to us with universal strength and protection,
and may Aditi, inviolable Mother Nature of unbounded
generosity respond to our invocation and prayer and






[Names: Devanam]
May the motherly divinities of nature and the
motherly women in happy and blessed homes of pious
people, loving, sustaining and spontaneous, protect us,
constantly advance us to rise in strength for the
achievement of success in battles of life. May all these
divinities and nobilities of the earth and of the oceans
and celestial waters of space, constant in their holy tasks,
ever responsive to our prayer give us peace and felicity
of home and family.






[Names: Srnotu, Varunani]
May the brilliant divinities of nature and women
of noble and divine disposition, protective and
progressive, be good and responsive to our voices of
prayer. May motherly lightning energy, heat and healing
energies, earth and heaven, spirit of justice and soothing


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 47 427


cool of waters, and the cycle of seasons respond. May
of women, scholars of earth, heavens and oceans, be
kind and responsive to our progress.


Mandala 5/Sukta 47




[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Pratiratha, Atreya, Rshi, Prayunjati, Avivasanti]
sadane johuvana.


Great and glorious mother arises in all her
youthful splendour from the lights of heaven and,
invoked, invited and adored on the vedi, she comes with
radiations of light and intelligence collected from the
nourishing and sustaining divinities of nature and
humanity, awakening, enlightening, speaking loud and
bold, and preparing the daughter for life in the home
with knowledge and wisdom. (The Dawn is mother, the
earth is daughter.)


(The mother of the home, and the mother teacher
in the school, is great and adorable as a human deity
because, having collected her knowledge and wisdom
from her parents and teachers, she arises like the dawn
of light and prepares the daughter for intelligent living
in an enlightened home.)




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ajirasastadapa, Anantasa]
The radiations of the light of the dawn, as the
actions of wise and brilliant parents and teachers,
abiding in the centre of immortal eternity and flowing
therefrom, move all round fast and ceaseless, vast and
endless, on their paths across and over heaven and earth.






[Names: Uksa, Madhye]
The mighty deep and generous ocean of waters,
the blazing sustainer bird of space, the sun, enters in
the spatial womb of its mother, divine Nature, fertilized
by the original and eternal father creator. Placed in the
midst of the heavens of light like a multicolour diamond,
it traverses on and on, lights up, sustains and marks the
expansive ends of the upper and lower strata of the
sphere of heaven.







[Names: Catvara, Tridhatavah]
The directions of space, receiving the sustaining


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 47 429


light and warmth of life, bear it up. Ten directions of
space feed the world they hold as a baby to keep it going.
The rays of the sun radiate from the highest region of
light and fill the threefold world of sattva, rajas and
tamas, heaven, firmament and the earth, reaching all
round to the borders of it almost instantly.






[Names: Idam]
Just as rivers hold and celebrate the flowing
waters, so do people revere and adore this refulgent sun
of wondrous form which two twin sisters, day and night,
born of the same mother, hold and nurse the same one
brother though born of another mother.





[Names: Upaprakse]
Celebrants compose songs of adoration from
their heart and intellect and extend yajnic homage up to
this sun by the paths of light and fire just as mothers
weave and sew clothes for the child and joyous wives
eagerly move to join their generous husbands.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tadastu, Mitravaruna, Asimahi]
O Mitra and Varuna, lord of love and judgement,
sun and the sea, day and night, mother and father, prana
and udana energies, O Agni, yajna fire purifier, revered
teacher, teacher pioneer and giver of enlightenment, may
this cherished song of ours be for our peace and
blessedness which is all time free from suffering and
pain. May we attain a home and haven of high excellence
and unshakable honour and prestige. Salutations to the
great and glorious heaven of light, eternal and


Mandala 5/Sukta 48






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Pratibhanu, Atreya, Rshi, Kadu, Amenyasya]
When shall we all sing and celebrate in honour
of our own domain, our cherished independent identity
and social order, our own honour and glory, which,
commanding its own power and splendour, pursuing
its own policy, extends its resounding actions and waters
of peace and freedom among the people, across the lands
and over the clouds of immeasurable skies and spaces?
When shall we think and reflect upon this?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 48 431






[Names: Vayunam, Vayuna]
Those acts and policies of peace and freedom
provide incentives to the brave and extend knowledge
and positive action programmes over the entire world
of humanity, through uniform treatment and equality of
law for all. A brilliant nation of vision and noble action
doesn’t procrastinate over the present, agitating over
the past or worrying and waiting for the future, it crosses
the bridges in front right away.






[Names: Satam]
Ever and instantly, this nation shines and
sharpens its best arms and armaments day and night
with the stones (which sharpen the arms and press the
soma too) or with the clouds of showers against the
evil of want and suffering of ignorance, and otherwise
too hundreds of its forces actively working together in
their own fields spend their time moving forward in a
state of readiness with a challenging spirit.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Tamasya, Saca]
That character and disposition, that form and
policy of its dynamic flow, that admirable force of its
arms like the razor’s edge, I know, is in keeping with its
identity for the purpose of peace, protection and
progress, and, like a comfortable home full of plenty, it
holds the jewels of wealth and felicity for the people at
the beck and call of the inmates.






[Names: Purusatvata]
The nation, the ruler, the fire, the sun, wearing
a charming form, shining with forces all round in all
four directions, encounters the opposing darkness with
the tongue of light and flame. We know not how, with
what strength and power, from where this Varuna, best
and highest power of justice and wisdom, Bhaga,
commanding wealth and felicity, Savita, inspiring all
with exhilaration, brings and bestows on us all the
cherished gifts of life, how he makes everything


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 49 433


Mandala 5/Sukta 49






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Pratiprabha, Atreya, Rshi, Devam, Puru]
For you all today I love, gratefully desire and
pray for favour of the brilliant and generous Savita,
inspirer of light and life, Bhaga, treasure source of
honour and prosperity and the loving spirit of life and
living beings that showers the jewel wealth and felicity
on all. O Ashvins, leading complementarities of nature
powers and humanity, ruler and people, leaders and
followers, men and women, parents and children,
teachers and disciples, blessed participants and
celebrants of life for all, I love to be friends with you
and pray that I may love, cooperate and be with you
day in and day out.






[Names: Prati]
Sagely scholar, watch the evolution of life and
energy, meditate on the self-refulgent Savita, inspirer
of life, with Vedic songs of praise and prayer, and with
homage and gratitude speak precisely of the supreme,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the most precious felicity pervading and participating
in the evolution of life, knowing well the gifts of the






[Names: Adatraya, Aditirvasta, Indro, Agnirahani]
Aditi, eternal and infinite creative power of lord
Savita’s Nature, Prakrti, wears the mantle of the
morning. Pusha, nature’s nourishing power, and Bhaga,
inexhaustible generosity, produce, promote and give the
choicest gifts of food for consumption and creation of
[Names: Indra, Vishnu]
energy, Varuna, udana energy for evolution, Mitra,
pranic energy of life, Agni, heat and light for life, all
these creative and generative powers give rise to the
days of light and bliss for us.






[Names: Anu]
May lord Savita, creator, with his radiating
energy, grant us that treasure of cherished values of
hearth and home which I celebrate as organiser and
achiever of yajnic production, and which the flowing


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 50 435


rivers and swelling seas promote with love and desire
in obedience to the lord. O lord, we pray, may we, blest
with energy and felicity of existence, be protectors and
promoters of the wealth of the world.






[Names: Avaitvabhvam]
Let untold wealth and knowledge flow to those
who offer homage and yajnic service to the Vasus,
creative abodes of life and sustenance in the world of
nature, and to those who raise their voice of adoration
in honour of Mitra and Varuna, friendly sun and seas
and all embracing space. O Vishvedevas, creative
divinities, create for us wealth of exceptional order so
that we may abide and enjoy under the protection of
heaven and earth.


Mandala 5/Sukta 50


[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Svasti, Atreya, Rshi, Visvo, Visvo]
Let all the mortals, people of the world, choose
and win the favour and friendship of the brilliant leader
and pioneer who targets and commands the wealth of
the world. O people of the world choose the wealth,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




power and splendour of the world for the sake of growth
and advancement.






[Names: Anusase, Anusas]
O brilliant leader and ruler, those who have
chosen you are wholly for you, and so are these whom
you approve and admire. All the assets and powers of
the nation are yours to rule and protect, and to share,
defend and augment the same we are keen to join you
and win your favour.




Are visvam pathestham dviso yuyotu yuyuvih.


From here, from this elective and promotive
yajna of total cooperation, serve and strengthen and
immigrants and others, raise and promote the women,
mothers of the nation, and, maker and breaker as you
are, throw off all the hate, enmity and negativities
obstructing the paths of progress.






[Names: Yatra, Nrmana]
Where the fire, placed, invoked and kindled in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 51 437


the vedi rises in flames, where a fiery leader, elected,
supported and enthused goes around watching and
and loved at heart by all, and where the homes abound
with brave and brilliant youth, there the streams of
prosperity flow deep and calm like inalienable partners
of the nation.



manamahe.


O brilliant leader, pilot of the nation to peace
and prosperity, this warrior of the chariot is yours, this
peace, this wealth, power and prosperity is for you. This
peace is for wealth and this peace and prosperity is for
holiness of well-being. This warrior of the chariot, peace
and prosperity honours and adores food, energy and
knowledge. We love and adore this peace and prosperity.
We love and adore you and the nation honoured by the
divines.


Mandala 5/Sukta 51




[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Svasti, Atreya, Rshi, Agne, Devebhir]
Agni, light of knowledge and fire of life, come


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




with all the means and methods of protection and
progress, come with all the divines of the world and
divine generosities of nature to enjoy what knowledge
and nourishment we have distilled for your treat and
bring the wealth and knowledge you have gained for us.






[Names: Rtadhitaya, Agneh]
O divine scholars, radiations of nature’s
vitalities, observers of the laws of universal truth,
followers of the truth of Dharma and the Dharma of
Truth, come to our yajna of love and non-violence and
scientific creation in honour of the Lord. Agni, leading
light of the world, drink the joy of life by the tongues of
fire.


[Names: Viprebhirvipra, Devebhih, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
O vipra, vibrant scholar, eminent sage of the
present age, come with other scholars, with the
knowledge and freshness of the morning light and
breeze which stir and radiate with the dawn. Come with
the divines for a drink of the soma we have distilled.






[Names: Ayam, Somascamiu, Priya, Indraya, Indra]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 51 439


This soma, inspiring power and honour of the
nation, reflected in the defence forces as soma is held
in the charu vessel, and held in the body politic as soma
is poured in the goblet, is the love and pride of Indra,
ruling lord, and Vayu, tempestuous defence forces.






[Names: Vayava, Piba]
O Vayu, force and power of the nation, come
for the delight of a drink of the soma of knowledge and
enlightenment with love and joy for the self sacrificing
people. Enjoy the flavour of the food and stimulating
taste of the drink on the tongue.






[Names: Indrasca, Tanjusetham]
Indra and Vayu, ruler of the land and commander
of the defence forces, you deserve a drink of the soma
of the nation’s power and culture. Come, watch the
effects and delicacies of their taste and decency, and,
inspired with love and holiness, enjoy the beauties of
life.






[Names: Suta, Somaso, Nimnam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Just as rivers flow downwards to the seas, so
the sweetness and decency of the soma of human values
and culture distilled with effort and cooperative action
flow to Indra and Vayu, the strong and the progressive.






[Names: Sajurvisvebhirdevebhirasvibhyamusasa, Atrivat]
Agni, giver of enlightenment and the fire of life,
friend and associate of all the generous divinities,
companion of the dawn and the Ashvins, circuitous
complementaries of natural energies, come into this
world of creative humanity like an omnipresent power
free from threefold bondage of body, mind and soul,
rejoice and proclaim your message of light and love
loud and bold.






[Names: Sajurmitravarunabhyam]
Agni, giver of knowledge and power, come
together with prana and udana energies of nature, come
together with the peace and beauty of the moon and the
vastness of omnipresent space, come like a sage free
from the threefold worries of past, present and future,
come to the world of creative and endeavouring
humanity, rejoice and proclaim your message of
knowledge and action loud and bold.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 51 441






[Names: Sajuradityairvasubhih, Vayuna]
Agni, giver of health and knowledge, come
together with the light of the sun as in the changing
months and seasons, come with the generosity of the
abodes of life such as earth, come with the breath of
life and glow of health, come with the force and
freshness of the winds, come to the world of joint human
yajna like one free from threefold ailments of body, mind
and spirit, rejoice and proclaim your message of health
and energy loud and bold.






May the Ashvins, complementarities of nature
and humanity such as teachers and preachers, day and
night, sun and moon, prana and apana energies, bring
us peace and well-being. May Bhaga, lord of glory, bless
us with peace and honour. May the eternal imperishable
Mother Nature and indivisible Vedic revelation of
omniscience bless the independent scholars with peace
and spiritual joy and vision. May the nourishment and
showers of the life-giving cloud bring us peace and joy.
And may the heaven and earth bless us with peace of
mind, joy of knowledge and spiritual illumination.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Svastaye, Somam, Soma, Vayumupa, Brhaspatim, Adityaso]
Let us study and describe Vayu, wind, energy,
and pursue programmes of peace and joy for our social
good and well-being. May the lord ruler who controls
and sustains the world be good and kind to us. Let us
pray to the Lord of the expansive universe and honour
the head of all the world communities for our peace
and progress. May the scholars of the highest order and
the cycle of the solar phases of time and seasons be
good and kind to us for our well-being.






[Names: Visve, Deva, Rudrah, Rudra]
May all the generous divinities of nature and
brilliant sages of the world be good and kind to us for
our well-being today. May the all pervasive vitality of
life’s energy be kind and favourable for our peace and
well-being. May all the generous scholars and brilliant
experts be for our good and advancement in peace with
joy. May Rudra, lord of law and justice, be good and
kind and save us from sin for our well-being. May all
the divinities protect us.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 443






[Names: Mitravaruna, Indrascagnisca]
May Mitra and Varuna, sun and moon, prana
and udana energies of nature, rich in life’s wealth of
vitality, be for our good and well-being and guard us to
move on the right path of action. May the universal
electric energy and the vital heat of life’s vitality be
kind and good for our well-being. O Mother Nature,
eternal and imperishable one, do us good, be kind and




[Names: Suryacandrama, Punardadataghnata]
mahi.


Let us follow the path of peace, progress and
well-being like the sun and moon, moving forward with
men of knowledge and self-awareness, giving, receiving
and giving again, in our orbit without hurting and
encroachment on the rights of others, at the same time


Mandala 5/Sukta 52




[Names: Marutah, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Maruta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Anusvadham, Anusvadha]
O bold yajaka, riding the spectrum flames of
holy fire, honour and celebrate those divinities worthy
of reverence and homage who exult with electric
vitalities of the winds and vibrancy of dynamic people
without hate and jealousy within the laws of nature and
their own potential, and who accept the homage and
spontaneously respond according to nature.






[Names: Sasvatah]
Bold and brilliant, they are friends and constant
companions of the strong among the stable minded
people, and on the highways of life they, sincerely and
spontaneously, protect and promote the brave and






[Names: Sarvarih, Marutamadha]
Streaming and overflowing with generosity like
the cloud and the sun, they shower the nights and dawns
of twilight with showers of rain and dew. We admire
and celebrate the grandeur, potential and forbearance
of the winds on the heights of heaven and the strength
and stability of vibrant people in the brilliance of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 445




[Names: Marutsu, Visve]
risah.


For you all, let us admire and honour all those
of you and hold them among the Maruts as children of
stormy winds and rays of light who protect our songs
of praise and prayer and promote the flames and
fragrance of yajna throughout human history and save
humanity from violence with strength and determina-
tion.




[Names: Arhanto]
Honour and admire those leading lights who are
deservingly meritorious and commanding, generously
charitable, strong and determined, loving and brilliant,
and who dedicate their songs and yajna to the dynamic
Maruts among humanity worthy of reverence.






[Names: Anvenan, Maruto]
While the leading lights and mighty warriors


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




with blazing arms launch the attack upon the enemy,
then, for sure, upon the heels of these tempestuous forces
and shining leaders the light and splendour of the world
follows spontaneously like roaring streams of water.






[Names: Vrjane]
The heroes of the earth who rise in honour and
glory, the winds and currents of lightning energy in the
wide wide skies, or the roaring waters flowing in the
river beds and around, or the splendour of the regions
of light, these are the Maruts worthy of honour and
celebration with homage.






[Names: Sardho, Marutamucchamsa]
Honour and celebrate the strength and courage
of humanity, admire and value the honest wisdom and
rectitude of the scientist and the expert. O leading lights
and brave pioneers of the human nation, moving forward
with steadiness and dignity, join the onward march of
humanity for a noble divine purpose. Join it




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 447



[Names: Sundhyavah]
And they, the Maruts, leading lights and

warriors, self-secure on the tortuous paths of existence,


shining bright and pure, with their valour and wheels
of the chariot ride the clouds and shatter the mountains.





[Names: Apathayo, Anupathah, Anupatha, Etebhir]
Travellers hitherwards, or travellers by various
ways, or travellers over the interior ways, or travellers
of open and successive ways, thus and by these names
and descriptions they bring expansion to my yajna.





[Names: Adha, Adha]
Leaders of knowledge and advancement,
sometimes they carry the burdens by themselves,
sometimes appointed as a team in cooperation with
others, and sometimes stationed far away: thus their
forms and functions are various, wondrous, beautiful
and beatific.




12. Chandah stubhah kubhanyava utsama kirino


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Poetic celebrities, some of them, thirsting for
self-expression, burst out in lyrics and sing and dance
in divine ecstasy from the depth of the heart. Some of
them like streams profusely flowing for us are protectors
and saviours, and some of them shine in the sight of the
beholder because shine they must by nature.






[Names: Tamrse, Marutam]
Those who are great and strong, formidable
scholars of science, of heat, light and electric energy,
poetic visionaries, writers and singers, and sages of the
sacred love: for that class of dynamic leaders and path
finders, O Rshi, seer, sage and scholar, offer reverence
and homage and, with the celebrant’s words of praise
and appreciation, give them the feel of the joy and
holiness of their vocation.






[Names: Accha, Mitram, Mitra, Divo]
Just as a maiden goes to her chosen friend and
love, so, O Rshi, sagely seer and scholar, with gifts of
homage, go reverentially to the congregation of the
Maruts, dynamic scholars, leaders and divinities of the
world. O Maruts, brilliant as light, loving, bold and
determined, blazing with splendour, celebrated by the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 52 449


wise and visionaries, come, hasten to our yajna and
receive our homage.






[Names: Dana]
As the stream flows and meets the sea, so should
the man of thought and reverence eagerly meet the
Maruts, brilliant and divine natures in humanity, with
gifts of homage and associate with the wise and brave,
celebrated and gracious scholars, leaders and path
makers who are well versed in law and the ethics of






[Names: Sikvasah, Rudram, Rudra]
I meet, associate, and write with the Maruts,
those leading lights wise and brave who speak to me as
to a friend and brother in search of human and divine
bonding. Mighty powerful are they who speak to me of
the Holy Word, of heat and light of the sun, the earth
and the cow. They speak of the rainbow skies and spaces,
and of Mother Nature, and then they reveal to me the
omnipresent omnipotent Father and Rudra, lord of
justice and mercy.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sapta, Sakina, Yamunayamadhi]
Seven and seven are the Maruts, wise and brave,
and each one of them gives me a hundred gifts of
knowledge, will and strength for action, and love of
life and divine worship. What I have heard
comprehensively on yama and niyama, ethics of conduct
in social and personal life, and on the subject of success
regarding earthly life (abhyudaya), and the philosophy
of attainment and ultimate destination and arrival
(nihshreyas), I specify and refine for practical
application and success in the earthly situation and in
relation to the ultimate freedom of Moksha in the
personal psychic and spiritual situation.


Mandala 5/Sukta 53





[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut, Marutam, Maruta]
Who knows the origin of these Maruts? Who
was present in the peace and pleasure of the Maruts?
Whoever concentrates the mind, meditates on their
presence, and joins them, and then has the clear and
specific language to describe them, knows these stormy




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 53 451


[Names: Aitan, Kasmai, Sudase, Sudas]
saha.


Who perceives them riding their chariot on earth
and in the skies and who knows whither they move?
For which generous man or power do they rise and flow
and turn like friends with the showers of their mysterious
message and food for life?






[Names: Naro]
They speak to me who come to me with lights
of revelation, flying like birds in ecstasy: “Noble men
among mortals free from sin and folds of ignorance have
seen these Maruts.” Say this, appreciate and praise the






[Names: Sraya]
The people who are innately brilliant, who shine
in their open works and achievements, in their speech
and expression, in garlands of applause in series of
action programmes, in their golds and jewels of honour,
and who ride pioneering chariots of nations and resound
in the twang of their bow: they are the Maruts.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yusmakam, Maruto, Anu, Jiradanavah, Vrsti]
O Maruts, leading lights and unaging pioneers,
I take to your chariots for your pleasure and exhilaration
and rise to the clouds of shower and lights of heaven.




6. A yam narah sudanavo dadasuse divah kosam-


[Names: Parjanyam, Parjanya]
The treasure wealth of holy vapours, which the
generous leading lights of the science of yajna cause to
move from the regions of sunlight for the generous
creators and givers of food and energy, shower down to
the earth and skies: The skies then form the clouds and
let them rain down on the earth and the floods move as
directed over the thirsty lands.


(This mantra is on the science of rain and
irrigation which can further be explained with reference
to Chhandogya Upanishad 5, 4, 1 to 5, 8, 2, and Gita 3,
14-16.)






[Names: Tatrdanah, Syanna]
Released and freely flowing, soaking and
breaking the lands with the flood, the rivers flow over


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 53 453


and on, irrigating the lands like mother cows feeding
the people. Like horses they go on covering and leaving
their track behind, the streams revolve as they go on in
their circular course of yajna.






[Names: Mava]
O Maruts, leading lights and stormy forces of
nature and humanity, creators and givers, come, come
from the lights of heaven, come from the skies, come
from near and afar, be on the move, never stay still, do






May the earth and her environment never move
without light and water for you. May the flowing river
and the rolling sea never stop for you. May the wind
and vapour, blowing, flowing and refreshing for human
of the Maruts, on the earth and in the environment be
for your comfort and well being. Let nothing hold you
back.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






O people of the earth, the showers of peace,
comfort and well being rain down on you in response
to your strength, the speed and shine of your war-like
chariots, the joint power and performance of your
leaders, and the latest powers and policies you work
out and follow for your peace and progress.






[Names: Sardham]
Let us move together step by step in disciplined
order in accord with the united interests and aspirations
of each unit of the defence forces, each unit of the
economic order and each unit of the social order of these
people for you all as a nation with the appraisal and
appreciation of these with the best of our understanding
and action.






[Names: Kasma, Marutah]
For which cultured, creative and generous
personality, for which producing and providing
community of yajnic gifts, do the Maruts, dynamic
forces of life, move forward today by this chariot with
controlled motion and direction?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 53 455






[Names: Yena, Asmabhyam]
O Maruts, dynamic and progressive leaders and
powers of life, that action and message of advancement
by which you create and bear the food and imperishable
seed of life and progress for the baby and the child and
the rising generation, bear and bring the same gifts and
action for us too, the honour and good fortune, universal
health and wealth, and the secret and source of that
accomplishment we ask of you.




[Names: Atiyama, Vrstvi]
marutah saha.


O citizens and leaders of the world, let us get
over the malignant scandalisers and crooked evil
mongers, having given up inner evils and despicable
failures and adversities with noble thoughts and positive
actions. Let us have the showers of peace and united
action, waters of holiness, light of truth and wisdom,
and food and tonics for good health, all with the Maruts




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




15.  Sudevah samahasati suviro naro marutah sa


O Maruts, leading lights of life, great and
glorious, brilliant is that man, brave and fearless, whom
you protect and promote across the seas. Let us too be
the same, your own, all for you.




[Names: Yatah]
Adore the Maruts, natural saviours and leading
lights of humanity, givers of life and food for energy
while moving on the holy path of this yajnic celebrant
of theirs, rejoicing at the same time like cows running
for their favourite grass. Invoke them like ancient eternal
friends, and, loving as they are, celebrate them with holy
songs of adoration.


Mandala 5/Sukta 54

[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut, Marutaya, Maruta, Gharmastubhe]
cata.

For the self-refulgent force and power of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 54 457


Maruts, leading lights of humanity, offer this song of
adoration. And for the renowned yajaka who lights and
feeds the fire to adore the divinities of nature through
yajna on the heights, moves the clouds and brings the
showers, offer gifts of human wealth of high value with
songs of praise and appreciation. Loving scholars value
the gifts of divinity from the lights of heaven.






[Names: Marutas]
O Maruts of sky and space, your powerful
currents of wind laden with vapours, bearers of food,
energy and healthful age for living beings, going all
round on the wings of electric energy, take on the
thunder of lightning roaring as trinity of wind, water
and lightning, and the waters shower over the earth
everywhere as harbingers of food and health for all.







[Names: Vidyunmahaso, Abdaya, Marutah]
O leading lights of humanity, know that the
Maruts command the mighty electric energy in the skies,
light up the thunder, energise the winds and break the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




clouds. Blazing with splendour, ferocious with force,
roaring with thunder, they wear the rumble of spatial
boom shaking the mountains and burst in floods of






[Names: Vyaktun, Rudra, Maruto]
O potent Maruts, mighty blazing and roaring
powers of cosmic winds, Rudras, breakers and makers
of things, you shake the nights and days in and out, you
shake the skies and atmosphere, you move the particles
of matter and pass over regions as the ship sails over
the sea. You break open the strongholds of nature and






That lustre and splendour of yours, that
extensive grandeur of yours radiates like the light and
gravitation of the sun. Incomprehensible is the course
of your radiations of energy which penetrates even the
dark and densest clouds and mountains which are


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 54 459






[Names: Abhraji, Adha]
O Maruts, leading lights of nature and humanity,
commanders of strength, creativity and intelligence,
your power and splendour is apparent as it shines since,
like a storm, it shakes the flood and the forest. O friends
and comrades, guide our activity relentlessly in motion
onward on the straight and right path just as the eye
shows the path to the traveller and helps him to move
on and makes it easy for him to follow.






[Names: Nasya]
O Maruts, divine powers of nature and brilliant
leading lights of humanity, the person you protect and
guide, mature, refine and temper is never overcome,
Nor do his powers, honours and excellence, defences
and protections ever deplete and exhaust. Indeed, the
person grows in knowledge as a sage and shines bright
in splendour as a leader and ruler.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Niyutvanto, Pinvantyutsam]
Great organisers, winners of multitudes and
human habitations like leading lights, makers of men
and dispensers of justice on the paths of life, the Maruts
are reservoirs of vitality and exhilaration like the clouds
of living waters and freshness of breeze. And when the
mighty forces set out in motion, whistling, roaring,
thundering, they fill the rivers, lakes and oceans over
and surfeit the earth with honey sweets of food and
energy for the joy of life.






[Names: Pravatvatiyam, Pravatvatih]
The wide world of abundant ways opens and
clears its highways for the Maruts, adventurers who
move like winds. The heaven of light extends all her
expansive spaces for those who fly. The regions of the
skies open up their paths for the winds, and the life
giving clouds and mountains open up their depths and
caverns for the heroes of initiative and adventure.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 54 461






[Names: Yanmarutah, Surya]
O Maruts, leading lights of the love of life and
joy of heaven, you bear the burdens of life together for
all and lead them all to celestial joy and the truth of
Dharma. You feel delighted and celebrate the sunrise,
and never do your horses in harness relent, but galloping
on at high speed reach the destined end of this existential





[Names: Amsesu, Agnibhrajaso, Siprah, Sirsasu]
O Maruts, warriors of the winds for humanity,
on your shoulders are blazing lances, at your feet your
assistants, on your chests are shining corselets, on your
chariot are flames of the purity of fire, in your hands
are flashes of lightning, and on your heads are protective
golden helmets. Victory is assured.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tamnakam, Samacyanta]
O Maruts, leading celebrants of action and
Divinity, like a master of his own freedom in the laws
of Truth and Divinity, shake the tree of existence by
your noble action, bring down the balance sheet of your
fruits of karma to Zero and win that rewarding state of
ultimate freedom and bliss, void of suffering, beyond
comprehension, which is pure ineffable refulgence of
Divinity. Winding up their tally of karma, dismantling
their fortifications, shining in the light divine, waxing
in their search for Truth, when the celebrants raise the
chant of Aum, they declare the victory and rest at the
end of the road.






[Names: Yusmadattasya]
O Maruts, leading lights of wisdom and vision
for humanity, masters of discriminative knowledge,
travelling by radiations of Divinity in the mind, let us,
we pray, be masters of the life-giving wealth of light
divine given by you. O Maruts, bless us with that wealth
of thousandfold value which decays not but shines like
a star of heaven for ever.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 55 463




[Names: Yuyam, Yuyam]
O Maruts, leading lights of humanity, you
protect and promote the heroic wealth, honour and
excellence of the nation with her heroes. You revere,
protect and promote the sage who chants the hymns of
Samaveda in celebration of humanity and Divinity. You
bear and bring the food, energy and the speed of progress
for the maintenance of life on the globe, and you hold
and maintain the harmonious, dynamic and glorious





[Names: Idam, Satam]
O Maruts, leading lights of humanity and
generous divinities of nature, instant givers of protection
and all round support, listen and accept this holy voice
of mine: I feel blest with that wealth of yours by which
we can promote the life of humanity as in a heaven of
bliss on earth, and by which we would live a happy life
over a hundred years with strength and success.


Mandala 5/Sukta 55


[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Prayajyavo, Maruto, Iyante]
Adorable Maruts, devout pioneers and leading
lights of yajnic progress in unison with humanity,
commanding vast knowledge and power to bear the
mighty burdens of life, wielding brilliant weapon in
hand with golden corselet on the chest, press forward
by coursers of instant speed controlled by sense and
judgement. So do their noble chariots on and on.


Let the chariots roll on with the leading lights
on way to the land of honour and excellence.






[Names: Svayam, Utantariksam, Subham]
Great and glorious as you are, you know, you
hold and command the blazing forces by yourself, and
while you go over, explore and know the vast earth and
the environment, rule accordingly and shine. And let
the chariots roll on with the blazing pioneers and with
their might and splendour traverse the skies and spaces.




[Names: Sakam, Virokinah, Suryasyeva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 55 465


Maruts, leading lights and rulers of the earth
and her children, risen together, excellent, anointed,
sanctified and covenanted together for the honour,
excellence and grace of life, rise and advance the
freedom and happiness of life for the people, and thus,
with their interests and holy ambitions, shine in truth
and rectitude like rays of the sun. Let the chariots roll
on with the leading lights to the holy lands of bliss and






[Names: Abhusenyam]
O Maruts, leading lights of life, graceful is your
greatness and grandeur, radiant your form and conduct
as light of the sun. With your light and grace, lead us to
establish ourselves in the regions of immortality. Let
the chariots roll on with the leading lights to the heights
of goodness and grace.





[Names: Udirayatha, Marutah, Maruta]
O Maruts, ruling lights of the earth, just as the
winds raise vapours from the seas and shower them


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




down from the sky, so you inspire the people, energise
the earth, shake up the clouds and bring the showers of
prosperity from the seas and spaces. O wondrous
workers and generous leaders, the fertilities of nature,
sunlight, earths and cows never desert you, nor ever
exhaust for you. Let the chariots of life roll on with the
leading lights of generosity to happiness and prosperity.






[Names: Yadasvan, Visva]
O Maruts, windy travellers of the skies, when
you use liquid fuel and air for motive power in the front
part of your chariot, put on your protective golden suit
and release the energy drop by drop and spark by spark,
you leave behind all the contestants on the journey. Let
the chariots roll on with the travellers of space for a
noble cause for a noble destination.







O Maruts, heroes of the earth and skies, no
mountains, nor clouds, nor rivers in flood any way


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 55 467


disturb the place you reach. Indeed, your course is all
over the earth and skies and unto the regions of light
across the spaces. Let the chariots roll on with leading
lights of the earth and space for the well being of life






[Names: Yadudyate, Yadudyat, Sasyate, Visvasya]
O Maruts, leading lights of the world and havens
of life and comfort, whatever is old, and whatever is
new, and whatever is spoken, admired and adored : of
all that be cognizant and aware in the full. Let the
chariots roll on with leading lights of knowledge and
life’s joy for the good of humanity.






[Names: Mrlata]
O Maruts, leading lights of life, rulers of the
earth and travellers of the sky and spaces, give us peace
and comfort. Hurt us not. Bring us abundant joy in a
happy home. Come, listen and accept our song of
friendship and adoration, and show us the right path.
Let the chariots roll on with the leading light of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




knowledge, love and adventure for the good of all life






[Names: Yiuyamasman, Jusadhvam]
O Maruts, leading lights of yajna, lords in
command of the world’s wealth, adorable performers
of yajna, come you all, happy, singing and rejoicing,
join our yajna and enjoy the sweets of our yajnic
homage. Lead us from all adversities to excellence and
prosperity. We pray: may we be masters, protectors and
promoters of the world’s wealth, honour and excellence
for all.


Mandala 5/Sukta 56






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut, Agne, Viso, Marutamava]
Agni, ruler of the land, today I call upon the
most daring troop of the Maruts, commandos of the
nation decorated with golden honours of rainbow
briliancy from amongst the most shining and intelligent
defence forces of the country.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 56 469






[Names: Yatha]
As you believe at heart that they are such and
closest to you and to your expectations in response to
your call. Then encourage and promote them, they are
just pictures of terror for the enemies.






[Names: Milhusmativa, Rkso, Marutah, Maruta]
Like a youthful woman wedded to a virile
husband, the earth, unhurt and rejoicing, comes to us
for protection, defence and promotion. O Maruts,
youthful warrior defenders of the land, like a shooting
star is your force, strong, unchallengeable, and terrible





[Names: Asmanam]
The Maruts are those heroes who rush forth with
their valour and splendour, throw off the yoke like


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




untamable bulls and scatter the enemy forces, and with
their advances shake up resounding mountains and






[Names: Marutam]
O ruler, O citizen, rise up with joy and
confidence, for, as we call in or call out of the stalls a
herd of cows, so I call upon and arouse the ancient and
abundant host of these mighty Maruts exalted by songs
of praise.






[Names: Yungdhvam, Yungdhvam]
O warriors and engineers, use the red flames of
fire for moving the chariot like red horses, use the
collected and stored solar energy, use the fast moving
impulsion and expulsion, and use the strongest
accelerative force to carry the load and move the chariot
to the destination.






[Names: Marutasciram, Marutascira]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 57 471


And now, O Maruts, adventurers and explorers
of the earth, that volatile, wondrous and vociferous
energy of red flames is here used in the chariot. It would
not delay you any more in your advancement. Ignite
and accelerate it in the chariots.






[Names: Ratham, Marutsu]
We call up and ready in harness the stormy and
resounding chariot of the Maruts in which both earth
and the heavens treasuring many adorable energy prizes
join with the Maruts in a bond of friendship.






[Names: Yasmintsujata]
I admire that force and power of your chariot,
shining, adorable and good for the chariot, in which are
exalted the generous earth-and-heaven energies, nobly
manifested and beneficent in abundance as friends of
the Maruts.

Mandala 5/Sukta 57




[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Indravantah, Indravanta, Rudrasa, Iyam]
O Rudras, powers of justice, rectitude and
dispensation, commanding honour, power and
excellence of the world, loving kind and friendly, going
by golden chariots of glory with gifts of good fortune,
prosperity and well being for all, this love, desire,
understanding and prayer of us all is addressed to you:
Come like a wave of divine nectar for the thirsty waiting
for a drink on the shore.






[Names: Vasimanta, Svasvah, Maruto]
O Maruts, tempestuous heroes of the world,
children of the essence of nature in love with the earth,
you are blest with the voice of thunder, light of
knowledge, wisdom and understanding of the speed of
mind, mighty bows, unfailing arrows and inexhaustible
quivers, noble steeds and excellent chariots and the best
arms and armaments. Go forward, noble heroes, and do
good to all.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 57 473




[Names: Dhunutha, Jihate, Kopayatha, Yadugrah, Yadugra]
O Maruts, children of the firmament, winds and
tempests of nature’s energy, you agitate the regions of
light, break the clouds and shake the mountains to create
wealth for the generous giver. At your approach forests
shake with fear and the earth vibrates when in a state of
passion for water showers you join and charge the clouds
of vapour.






[Names: Vatatviso, Pisangasva]
The Maruts command the fury and splendour
of the winds. Cleansed and anointed by holy water, they
replete the showers of love and justice all the year round.
They are highly impressive and handsome in body and
mind as self-controlled people are. They command the
moderate yellow as well as the intense red flames of
the yajnic fires of life’s dynamics. Untouched by sinful
involvements, refined and discriminative in thought and
judgement, they are refulgent like the sun and large-
hearted like space by virtue of their innate greatness.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Purudrapsa, Sujataso]
Universally generous like the perennial stream
of soma and showers of nature’s joy, versatile of form
and action as light in spectrum colours, holy and vastly
charitable, they see the reality in all its variety of true
colours as light reveals the real forms without screen
effects. Commanding imperishable wealth, power and
competence in their own right by birth and genetic merit
of previous karma, they wear their beauty and regality
of life and conduct in their heart and hands. Loving,
brilliant and adorable, the Maruts define, deserve, serve
and thus justify the name and description: Immortal.






[Names: Rstayo, Nrmna, Sirsasvayudha]
O Maruts, leading lights of humanity, on your
shoulders you bear the blazing lances and the burdens
of forbearance with courage and splendour of life, while
the force of action is concentrated in your hands. On
your heads you carry the care and comfort of humanity
with the arms and ammunitions of protection and
progress in your chariots. Indeed, the entire wealth and
honour, beauty and grace of life reflects in your body
and personality.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 57 475






[Names: Gomad, Prasastim]
O Maruts, leading lights of humanity, generous
divinities of nature, indomitable powers of love and
justice, give us the wealth of lands, cows and the
revealing language of knowledge bright as sun rays.
Give us the force of noble heroes equipped with fast
transport and uninterrupted communications. Give us
wealth and competence for success with the beauty and
graces of culture. Promote our power and prestige so
that we may share and participate in your human
protection and divine evolution to the grace of freedom
and immortality.






[Names: Haye, Satyasrutah]
O Maruts, leading lights of humanity and
divinities of nature, commanders of unbounded wealth,
honour and excellence, immortal souls, learned sages
of the laws of nature and time, world renowned voices
of truth, poetic visionaries young beyond aging and
debility, diviners into the infinite Word and world
languages, heroes of universal generosity and generative
vitality, bless us with wealth of the world, peace of mind
and everlasting grace.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 5/Sukta 58






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut, Tamu, Marutam, Maruta]
I admire the blazing, tempestuous group of these
of the fastest transports and communications, move like
storms, a very picture of velocity, and, shining and self-
controlled, dominate over the regions of the immortals.






[Names: Tvesam, Mayobhuvo]
O sagely scholar, admire and exalt that group
of leading lights, brave, generous and dexterous of hand,
enthusiastically committed to noble causes, wondrous
workers abundantly charitable, who are versatile
achievers without reserve or bounds by virtue of their
own innate strength and expertise and who are a
tremendous source of peace and prosperity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 58 477




[Names: Maruto, Ayam, Agnirmarutah, Agnirmaruta]
O Maruts, eminent leaders and pioneers, may
all those winds of the firmament come to you to-day in
this yajna which bear the clouds and impel the rain
showers. O leading scholars and scientists, poetic
visionaries and youthful researchers, lighted is this fire,
come and take it over for the rain yajna.






[Names: Yuyam, Yusmadeti, Marutah]
O Maruts, leading lights of the nation, holy
performers meeting and working together for yajnic
development, you create the inspiring ruler who is an
architect of the nation. From you arises the administrator
of strong hand and will. From you arise the warriors of
strong arms, and from you arises the brave man, the
hero who commands the army, the cavalry and the flying
force for the people.






[Names: Prsneh]
Like the spokes of a wheel in motion, together,
undivided, equal and integrated, whole, generative, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Maruts rise anew like days on and on with their power
and forces. Children of mother earth, firmament and
radiations of sunlight, strongest and most eminent, with
their own perception, understanding, dedication and
determination, they analyse, catalyse, integrate and
generate new ideas, forces, institutions and traditions,
all renewed and revitalised.






[Names: Ksodanta]
By their motive forces and chariots equipped
with strong wheels of initiative and advancement, the
Maruts proceed with showers of new life as leaders and
pioneers of a new age, and as they proceed, the dormant
vapours of life agitate with new ferment and join the
rays of the sun, the cloud roars with thunder and
lightning and the earth receives the showers of new life.






[Names: Prathista, Vatan]
As the Maruts proceed, the earth waxes with
desire and fertility. Like the husband man, the Maruts
shower their own vitality on earth as the seed of new
life. Thus do the Maruts, forces of new life, generative
and enlightened, commanding power and judgement,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 59 479


yoke new winds and motive forces to the chariot of life
and move the wheels of history forward with the shower
of their own sweat of the brow.






[Names: Haye, Satyasrutah]
O Maruts, leading lights of history, be kind and
gracious and rejoice with us. You command the grandeur
of life’s wealth, honour and excellence. You are the
immortal spirit of humanity, observers of Law and Truth,
renowned and blest with the Revelation of Truth, poetic
visionaries, ever young and modern, masters of
universal voice and blest with the spirit of renewal and
regeneration.


Mandala 5/Sukta 59


[Names: Maruts, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Marut]
sata: 12 ति



[Names: Uksante]
Adore and exalt those who are close to you, who
do good and observe truth and law in their character,
conduct and action for you, for your welfare, for the
generous, and for the earth, the firmament and the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




regions of light. They energise the motive forces, radiate
their light and lustre upto the regions of space and attain
their ends by the seas.






[Names: Amddesam, Duredrso]
By the power and force of these Maruts, the
earth trembles with fear and, like an overloaded boat
going over the sea, shakes in agitation under pressure.
Seen from far, they are known by their movements and,
leading lights as they are, they go forward in the great
battle business of life and its organisation.






[Names: Gavamiva, Sriyase, Srngamuttamam, Atya, Sriyase]
For the beauty of the regions of the earth, you
are like the highest peak of mountain ranges. In the
shower of vapour and in the clearance of mists, you are
like the sun, eye of the world. You are handsome and
excellent like race horses, and, O leaders and pioneers,
you shine like rays of the sun for the glory of humanity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 59 481


[Names: Yuyam, Marutah, Maruta]
davane.


O Maruts, leading lights of the world, you are
great. Who can reach your grandeur and achievements?
Who can realise your divine vision and imaginative
creations? O virile heroes, who can approach your power
and potential? You illuminate the earth as sun beams
and even shake it like particles of dust, while you rain
down showers of generosity as gifts for the charity and
welfare of the people.






[Names: Marya, Suryasya, Suryas]
O Maruts, leading lights of the world, sanguine
and bold, you are ever going forward like horses on the
course, uninterrupted. Brotherly and friendly toward all
equally, fighting like warriors for all, you are always
struggling for a better world. Rising and growing like
mortal life forms, you are evolving continuously. And
with the torrents of rain you dim the blazing light of the




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Sujataso, None]
among them, they are equals all, burst forth into life
through layers of impediments. Nobly born by nature,
children of heaven, earth and the firmament, they are
mortals, humans all, who, as we wish, come to us and
appreciate us all. They grow and rise by their own
strength and grandeur.





[Names: Vayo, Srenth]
They soar together like flights of birds with the
innate force of their light and lustre over mighty
mountain peaks across the middle regions to the bounds
of expansive heaven. Commanding the two-way motion
of their circuitous energy, they shake the clouds of the
sky and break them into showers.





[Names: Mimatu, Aditir, Acucyavur, Usaso, Maruto, Rudrasya, Rudras]
May the heaven of light and mother earth bless
us and help us rise in light and generosity, peace and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 60 483


joy. May the dawns, wonderful givers, join us and help
us to rise in beauty and grace of life. O Rshi, lord of
universal vision, may these Maruts, children of the lord
of justice and rectitude, sung and adored, singing and
rejoicing, shower the treasure of heavenly light and joy


Mandala 5/Sukta 60
Maruts and / or Agni Maruts Devata, Shyavashva Atreya Rshi






[Names: Agnim, Agni, Rathairiva, Marutam, Maruta]
Collecting the work already done for us in the
field, happy and enthusiastic, in perfect faith with
relentless dedication and investments, I study and adore
Agni, heat, light and electric energy, rich source of
protection and progress, in order to extend the
knowledge, hoping that, going round the world as if by
tempestuous chariots of the winds in right order, I would
raise the song of celebration in honour of the scholars
and humanity. May the lord of knowledge accept and







[Names: Srutasu, Rudra, Vana, Maruto]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Rudras, pranic energies of life and natural
catalysis, Maruts, heat, light, electric and wind energies,
which abide and energise streams and showers, which
work in means of transport and comfort, and which are
described in works of revelation and research, are
mighty, tempestuous and blazing. O Rudras and Maruts,
catalytic, integrative and regenerative energies, under
your power and fear of natural law the sun-rays radiate,
the forests tremble, the earth moves and shines, the
clouds break and the mountains shake.






[Names: Parvatascinmahi]
O Maruts, tempestuous energies of divine
omnipotence, when you agitate, blow and flow together
like streams of water—which 15 just your play in life—
the densest cloud and the great ancient mountain cower
in fear and the top bounds of the regions of light vibrate
with the waves of your boundless roar.






[Names: Vara, Sriye, Sreyamsas]
Like eminent people nobly born in life’s
affluence who adorn themselves with their innate graces


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 60 485


and golden attainments of culture and education, the
Maruts, leading lights of humanity, commanding honour
and excellence, riding their chariots, do great actions
of truth and rectitude in their life and conduct for the
beauty of human culture and grace of living as
reflections of their inner self.






[Names: Ajyesthaso, Yuva, None]
together, the Maruts, leading lights of life and humanity,
work and grow and advance for the honour and
prosperity of life and living. Their father and creator,
Rudra, lord omnipotent of justice and dispensation, ever
young, giver of sustenance, and mother earth and the
firmament, ever abundant and generous for the Maruts
through the bright days, look after them and inspire






[Names: Yaduttame, Yaduttam]
O Maruts, creators of prosperity, honour and
excellence, and Rudras, leading lights of justice and
rectitude, and Agni, leading light of knowledge, whether


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




you abide in the highest, or middle or the lowest regions
of life and action, or in the light of heaven, establish us
in right knowledge and action of the transparent order,
and know of our action and homage which we offer to
Divinity in our life.






[Names: Agnisca]
O Agni, leading light, and Maruts, dynamic
leaders and pioneers, blest with knowledge and wealth
of the world, you abide on top of the regions of light
and love by your own will and desire and bring down
showers of light and wisdom. O leaders and pioneers,
such as you are, movers and shakers of the negatives,
and as you rejoice on the vedi with the yajakas, bring
down the gift of life’s wealth and beauty from over the
levels of ordinary mortals for the yajamana and the
creative soma yajaka.




[Names: Agne, Somam, Soma, Pavakebhir]
ketuna sajuh.


O leading light of the world, Agni, Vaishvanara,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 487


power and passion of life, friend and associate of higher
light and wisdom by virtue of your character and
conduct, come rejoicing to the vedi, share and enjoy
the sweets of soma, life’s joy, wealth, honour and
excellence in the company of the Maruts, dynamic
people on the march who are pure and gracious, praise-
worthy, pride of the republic, purifying, inspiring,
strengthening and beautifying the world, people who
love life and add to the grace of life by living well and


Mandala 5/Sukta 61




[Names: Maruts, Shashiyasi, Tarantamahishi, Purumidha, Marut, Vaidadashvi, Taranta, Rathaviti, Darbhya, Devatah, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Paramasyah]
Who are you, leaders and pioneers, best and
most excellent, that come one by one and reach all
together from farthest of far distances?






[Names: Prsthe]
Where are your horses? Where the reins? What
is your power and potential? How do you move? Where
is the saddle on the horse back? Where is the bridle that


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


controls the direction by the nose?





[Names: Jaghane, Putrakrthe]
They goad and spur on the horses’ flanks, the
riders make them move fast in order, their muscles
strained and waxed, as parents raise their children to
the optimum with freedom and control.






[Names: Para, Agnitapo]
Go far, brave leaders of the people, nobly born
and nobly educated, men of vibrant discipline trained
in the crucibles of fire as you are, and happily married.




[Names: Sanat, Satavayam, Syavasvastutaya]
The woman who opens her arms with love and
joins her brave and dynamic husband shoulder to
shoulder in work and household jointly achieves a
hundredfold wealth of land and cattle, plenty of food
and energy, and movable and immovable acquisitions.



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 489




[Names: Sastyast, Adevatrad]
O man, the woman deserves your respect and
reverence and love because she remains a generous and
graceful accomplisher in the home in spite of the man’s
want of piety and success.


[Names: Devatra]
She who knows well the man struggling with
want and deprivation, thirsting for love and recognition,
ambitious for dedication and success, steadies her mind


in concentration and the divine will in action for success
in married life in piety.






And I say: Whether the man is worthy of praise
or unworthy of praise, but being the husband he is half
of the woman’s life (as the woman is his better half),
and has equal rights and responsibilities in the family
affairs and equal conjugal rights.







[Names: Syavaya, Purumilhaya, Purumilha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




And she, my wife, young, happy, learned, going
fast forward, clearly shows the way of life to me, virile,
learned, seeker of high renown, going forward by
chariot, which we two draw like two equal ruddy horses.






[Names: Yome]
Hail to him, disciple of a specialist of transport,
who gives me a hundred gifts of lands and cows and
forms of knowledge and takes me across the seas as by






[Names: Yatmvahanta, Atra, Sravamsi]
Those who bring hither instant showers of rain,
tasting sweets of honey drinks here, bear and hold the
food, energy and wealth of the world.


[Names: Yesam, Divi]
Those, who by their beauty and grace of culture
shine over earth and skies in chariots like the sun in


heaven above, (bear and hold the food, energy and
wealth of the world).


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 491






[Names: Yuva, Maruto, Subhamyavapratiskutah]
Young, bright and bold, that group of Maruts,
pioneers of humanity, riding their bright and blazing
chariots, admirable beyond reproach, rises over the
spatial oceans, unobstructed and unchallenged.





[Names: Rtajata]
Who would know of them for sure where these
tempestuous heroes born of truth, immaculate and free
challengers of sin, work and rejoice and celebrate their


[Names: Yuyam, Srotaro]
O leading lights, admirable heroes, with
intelligence and understanding, thus, you are inspirers,
guides and saviours of mortals. And you listen when
they call on you in peace or distress for help and



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Puruscandra]
Thus they, adorable benefactors, creators of

good and destroyers of evil by yajna, abundant in golden


gifts, may, we pray, continue to bring us the wealth and
honours of excellence we desire.






[Names: Etam, Giro]
O divine spirit of night and vibrations of peace,
listen and, like a charioteer, for me, carry this song and
words of prayer far to the regenerative lord of life.






And then say this for me: The yajna is complete,
soma is distilled, the chariot arrived in peace, and my
prayer and desire never goes astray.






[Names: Parvatesvapasritah]
This man of yajnic action, honour and
excellence travelling by chariot straight like rays of the
sun across the clouds lives in the world and reaches his


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 62 493


Mandala 5/Sukta 62






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Shrutavid, Atreya, Rshi, Rtena, Suryasya, Suryas, Dasa, Sata, Ssrestham]
O Mitra and Varuna, light and life of the
universe, I know the thousand radiations, and I have
seen that one fixed centre of your reality, Rtam, Eternal
Truth, covered by Rtam, cosmic manifestations of its
mutability and the laws of mutability, where the
radiations converge and wherefrom they are released
around. And that eternal centre is the essential, ultimate
and highest form of all existential forms of divinity, the
One and yet many at the same time.






[Names: Mitravaruna, Visvah, Anu]
O Mitra and Varuna, sun and the surrounding
waters of life, that living grandeur of yours, the One
constant impeller of life, the unmoved mover, Spirit of
existence at the centre, vests in the immovable forms of
life, herbs and trees, by days and nights. Thus you
nourish all the streams of life while one of you, the sun,
goes round and round in orbit by the law of the One at


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


the centre.






[Names: Adharayatam, Mitrarajana, Vardhayatamosadhih]
Mitra and Varuna, sun and space, light and law,
heat and water, refulgent rulers of the world, generous
creators and givers, together with your powers and
actions, you hold the earth and heaven, feed and promote
the greenery of nature, sustain the planets, and create
and shower the rains.






[Names: Ghrtasya]
Mitra and Varuna, rulers and scientists of the
world, may your motive forces of transport well used
and well steered like horses by reins and light by rays
bear you and bring you hither. Purified and reinforced
waters and liquid fuels are under your command, and
let streams of water flow when the fire is ignited.






[Names: Srutamamatim, Namasvanta, Mitrasathe, Mitrasath]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 62 495


Mitra and Varuna, leading lights and dynamic
forces of the world, in keeping with Vedic tradition and
your own honour and fame, enhancing your personality
and character, preserving and promoting the wide earth
and environment, like protecting and augmenting the
light and fire of yajna with mantric chants of application
and acts of self-sacrifice, with wealth of food and energy
for input, and commanding strength and expertise, you
sit at the high steer of the nation and join centres of
production and progress across the earth.






[Names: Akravihasta, Rajana]
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of vision and
judgement, ruling and refulgent powers of humanity,
kind and loving nobilities of non-violent hands, holy
of action, helpful for others, seated at the centres of
yajnic activity over the earth’s regions, ruling and
protecting the social order without hurting and
damaging it, both of you bear and hold up the order of
a thousand pillars together and protect it against fear
and violence of terror.





[Names: Hirnyanirnigayo, Bhadre]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




This social order is distinctive, discriminative
between gold and merely glittering. It rests on pillars
of gold, and it shines like lightning in the skies. Its policy
is framed and defined in the house of holiness or, let us
say, on the fields of fertility. Let us hope and pray we
join and share the honey sweets created by the leading
lights and rulers of judgement at the helm of the nation
and by the people in the home by the fire-side.





[Names: Hiranyarupamusaso, Aditim, Aditi]
O Mitra and Varuna, rulers and leaders of the
earth, commanding vision and judgement, at the break
of dawn and rise of the sun you ride your chariot of
golden pillars and take your seat on the helm and thence
watch the realm for what is permanent of value and
preservable and what is merely transient and







[Names: Tena, Mitravarun, Mitravaru]
O Mitra and Varuna, ruler and leading lights of
strength and judgement, generous as breath of life,
unchallengeable protectors of the world, come and bless


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 63 497


us with that greatest, highest and imperishable home of
protection in which, sharing the honey sweets of life
with all, we may live to achieve our ambition for victory
in the struggle of existence.


Mandala 5/Sukta 63




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Archanana, Atreya, Rshi, Rtasya, Yamatra, Mitravarun, Mitravaru]
divah.


Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and lord of justice
and rectitude, ruler and judge, guardians of truth and
law, observers of truth and law and eternal Dharma, you
abide in the highest regions of existence in the presence
of Divinity and ride over the chariot of life and the state
while you occupy the highest seats of the social order.
In this state, whoever you protect is blest, rains of honey
sweets shower on him from heaven above.






[Names: Samrajavasya, Mitravaruna, Vrstim]
Mitra, lord of love and friendship, Varuna, lord


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of judgement and discrimination, rulers and leading
lights of this world, you shine in splendour and reveal
the light of Divinity in the yajnic business of life on the
earth. Just as thunder and lightning light and shake the
earth and sky, so do you rule the earth. We pray to you
for the shower of joy, success and the nectar sweets of
immortal values in this mortal state of life.






[Names: Samraja, Citrebhirabhrairupa]
Mitra and Varuna, ruler and leading lights like
sun and shower, shining in majesty, blazing with
splendour, brave and generous, guardians of heaven and
light of the earth, watchful observers of the world,
wielding wondrous clouds of rain and power, you stay
close by us and send down showers of rain and roar of
thunder by the awful force of light and winds of nature’s
breath of life.





[Names: Maya, Srita, Tamabhrena, Parjanya, Parjan]
Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and lord of bliss,
ruler and leading lights of the social order, your power


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 63 499


and generosity is based in the light of Divinity and issues
from there. The sun, an agent and manifestation of the
same, shines with its light as weapon of enlightenment
and purification. You cover the sun with an ocean of
vapour and energy of cosmic electricity in the regions
of light, then the cloud is formed and showers of honey






[Names: Ratham, Marutah, Maruta, Rajamsi]
O Mitra and Varuna, generous ruler and
enlightened leaders, the Maruts, dynamic scientists and
engineers, brave as warriors and tempestuous as winds,
design and structure a faultless chariot and use it for
the comfort and welfare of mankind. They rise in the
company of sunrays to the wonderful regions of the
skies, light and lightning in yajnic programmes for the
good of all. O brilliant leaders, give us showers of water,
milk, generative energy and creative vision.






[Names: Vacam, Mitravarunay, Parjanyas, Abhra]
Just as the cloud deeply filled with vapour and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




highly generous rumbles with its voice of thunder and
showers rains of water, fertilising, exciting and pure,
similarly, O scholars, teachers and preachers, loving as
Mitra, friend, and discriminative as Varuna, the judge,
speak to us that language of knowledge and wisdom
which is comforting, refreshing, regenerative and life
giving, wonderfully engaging and illuminating, full of
wonder and variety and light of life. Let the dynamic
people, vibrant as winds live in plenty like the cloud,
and rise to the light of heaven with knowledge and
power. Powerful as Indra, brilliant as Sun, and generous
as Prajapati, give us the showers of knowledge and
speech, holy, bright and blazing, free of sin and evil.






[Names: Dharmana, Rtena, Suryama]
Mitra, O lord of light and love, and Varuna, lord
of law and justice, knowing and discriminative,
dedicated to the observance of the Law, you uphold,
protect and promote the entire world of existence in
order by Dharma, Rtam, cosmic dynamics and the innate
strength and will of life. You shine in manifestation by
Law and you maintain the sun in the regions of light
like a marvellous chariot on the highway by the Law.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 64 501


Mandala 5/Sukta 64






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Archanana, Atreya, Rshi, Varunam, Varuna, Mitram, Mitra, Pari]
O Mitra, loving friend, and Varuna, learned
scholar and lover of justice, with words of prayer and
adoration we invoke and invite you, destroyers of
negativity and enmity, moving forward by the strength
of your arms and leading to the golden goal of joy and
bliss by paths of knowledge, love and rectitude, moving
as you do like shepherds leading cows to the stall.


[Names: Sevam]
O Mitra and Varuna, sages of love and justice,
extend your hands of generosity alongwith your
knowledge and wisdom to this aspiring supplicant. I


adore and proclaim your admirable treasure of light,
love and justice over the entire regions of the world.






[Names: Yannunam, Mitrasya, Mitras, Asya, Sarmany]
I wish and pray I go by the same path and reach


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the same goal, the home of divine bliss of this dear lord
of love and non-violence, Mitra which the sages follow
and reach.





[Names: Yuvabhyam, Yaddha]
May I, with prayer and adoration, receive from

you, Mitra and Varuna, that excellent treasure of wealth
and wisdom which abides in the home of the prosperous
celebrants when they have reached their golden goal of
joy and which I aspire to emulate.





[Names: Varunasca]
O Mitra and Varuna, loving friend and friend of
justice and rectitude, come to us with your brilliance of
knowledge and grace our home, your own place, for
the advancement of friends and devotees on way to






[Names: Yuvam]
O lord of love and friendship, Mitra, O Varuna,
lord of justice and rectitude, those whom you vest with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 65 503


the great social order and high excellence and guide
and conduct for our sake, advance and raise higher in
honour and excellence for victory, wealth and well being
for us.






[Names: Ucchantyam, Sutam, Somam, Soma]
Mitra and Varuna, ruler and pioneers of the
nation, adorable guides and unifiers of humanity, come
running fast on feet firm as the elephant’s and join my
yajna at the rise of dawn in the light of the sun in this
holy social order. Accept the song of adoration and
prayer of the celebrant and enjoy it like distilled soma
of yajna and excellence of the social order.


Mandala 5/Sukta 65






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Ratahavya, Atreya, Rshi, Yasciketa, Varuno]
He who knows is a holy performer of good
action, Sukratu. Let the sukratu speak to us of the Lord
and of truth, universal love, justice and rectitude, whose
vision and language of vision, Mitra, friend and lover,
and Varuna, who can discriminate between truth and
falsehood, eminent among the eminent worth meeting,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




love and admire. Let mitra and varuna among us speak
to us of Mitra and Varuna, Lord of love and justice.






They command the highest knowledge and
illumination, they are eminent among the brilliant,
learned scholars of Revelation. They command and
preserve the truth, they preserve and protect the divine
law of nature, they observe and uphold the universal
law and Dharma among every community of humanity.






[Names: Svasvasah]
O Mitra and Varuna, twin powers of love and
friendship, justice and rectitude, ancient and eternal, I
approach you for protection and promotion, and speak
to you and speak of you: you command knowledge, you
command revelation and communication, you give
knowledge, you give means of communication and
transport, food and energy, struggle, speed and success
to the people of charity and generosity.






[Names: Mitro, Mitrasya, Mitras]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 65 505


Mitra, friend and lover, for sure, provides a wide
path away from sin for us to have a safe and spacious
haven of peace on earth. The love and friendship of the
Lord of instant action who protects and upholds us
against sin and evil is for humanity, abundant for anyone
who cares to benefit from it by prayer and effort.






[Names: Vayam, Mitrasyadvasi, Anehasastvotayah, Varunassesasah, Varunassesasa]
Let us pray and make effort that we may abide
in the widest protection of Mitra, lord of mercy, friend
and lover of the universe. Let us be free from sin, evil
and violence, safe under your protection, O Lord, ever
dedicated to truth and law, and let us live as loved
children of Varuna, lord of justice and rectitude.






[Names: Yuvam]
O Mitra and Varuna, friend and lover of
humanity, upholder of justice and rectitude, you inspire
and exhilarate this human nation to action, unite them
and lead them to the common goal. O lord of love, mercy
and justice, pray do not ignore the supplicants on way
to prosperity and excellence, do not forsake our people
and future generations on the path of piety and progress,
promote and exalt us and our leading lights to reach the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




haven of peace and bliss.


Mandala 5/Sukta 66






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Ratahavya, Atreya, Rshi, Varunaya, Varuna]
O learned and intelligent people, for a perfect
dynamic order of truth and righteousness, abundant,
great and joyful, hold on to brilliant, generous and divine
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and justice who
discriminate between right and wrong, truth and
falsehood. they are destroyers of hate and enmity,
negativity and contradiction, and inspirers of holy,
creative and integrative action, dedicated to creative
yajna of the human nation.





[Names: Adha]
They alone successfully lead to a steady, vibrant
and inviolable social order and, like committed and
covenanted powers, establish a bright and blessed
heaven of humanity on earth.






[Names: Rata]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 66 507


O Mitra and Varuna, for the onward movement
of these chariots of yours we freely offer the wide earth
and her highways and honour you and the creative song
of the sacrificing celebrant with our chants of praise.






O Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and
friendship, justice and rectitude, poetic visionaries
commanding unprecedented and unsullied power,
inspiring wonder and awe, you are widely known of
the people by the brilliance of your knowledge, abundant
praises of the versatile poet and the strongholds of
strength and power over the earth.






[Names: Tadrtam, Jrayasanavaram]
That truth of Law and rectitude, water and
abundant food, profuse renown, and wisdom of the sages
for attainment of the people, O mother earth, Mitra and
Varuna, widely ranging over time and space, day by
day, action by action, pray shower on life and humanity
abundantly and incessantly without bounds.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vyacisthe]
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of the world,
we invoke you and pray that the power, prosperity and
excellence of life which you shower upon the earth for
humanity, we too, wise and brave, may try to augment
and maintain in the wide order of universal freedom
and law which is the common responsibility of the united


Mandala 5/Sukta 67






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Yajata, Atreya, Rshi, Balittha, Aditya, Adit, Varuna, Mitraryaman, Mitraryama]
It is true, thus, that three brilliant and generous
powers of divinity vested in humanity organise, sustain
and promote the grand, united and adorable world order
achieved and established: Mitra, spirit of love,
friendship and constant vigilance; Varuna, spirit of
justice, rectitude and discriminative sense of values and
wisdom; and Aryaman, innate energy, comprehensive
vision and all embracing spirit of progressive planning
and guidance.





[Names: Dhartara]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 67 509


O Mitra and Varuna, leading lights and rulers
with the spirit of love and justice, organisers and
sustainers of the people, destroyers of hate, enmity and
contradictions, since you occupy the golden seat of
power, pray rule, guide and promote the peace and
welfare of the social order of the people.






[Names: Visve, Vrata]
All the ruling, sustaining and promotive powers,
Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, knowing everything of the
systemic order, are committed to the laws, discipline
and values of the order, keeping their feet on the ground
realities as their sacred duty, and they protect the people
against evil and violence and promote them towards a





[Names: Sunithasah]
Surely they are the best and highest in truth,

keepers of the rule of law and rectitude, dedicated to
universal truth and law, generous among and for every
community, holy guided guides of the people, and they
keep the wheel of Dharma moving against the evil of
ignorance, injustice, poverty and sloth of every kind.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Mitrastuto]
O Mitra, friend, O Varuna, friend of justice,
which one of you is not praised and appreciated? Which
one of you is not best of form and function in
manifestation? Indeed, all our thoughts and reflections
turn to you in homage. All our adorations are addressed
to the powers free from evil and injustice, to those who
command knowledge and good action beyond threefold
miseries of body, mind and soul of the individual, society
and humanity.


Mandala 5/Sukta 68


[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Yajata, Atreya, Rshi, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra, Mahiksatravrtam]
Sing in holy words in honour and praise of Mitra
and Varuna, ruling lord of light and dispenser of justice,
who hold and sustain the great world order and maintain
the universal values of eternal Truth and Law for you.





[Names: Samraja, Varunasca, Mitrascobha, Deva]
Mitra and Varuna, both brilliant rulers of nature
and humanity, sources of the showers of fertility,
prosperity and felicity, are eminent and adorable,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 68 511
honoured among the brilliancies of nature and humanity.






[Names: Tanah, Mahi]
Great is your power and potential for us over
the wealth and excellence of heavenly and earthly
values, culture and conduct and behaviour. Great is your
rule and order over the divinities of nature and humanity.






[Names: Rtamrtena, Adruha]
They live, serve, strive and search for the
realisation of Rtam, eternal and universal values of Truth
and Dharma, by their earnest pursuit of truth and
Dharma in life and conduct, Rtam, and thus, free from
hate, jealousy and violence, achieve the strength and
excellence they long for and rise, shining in merit as
leading lights of humanity.


[Names: Vrstidyava, Brhantam]
Harbingers of showers from heaven, making the
waters flow on earth, creating, preserving and promoting
the energy, fertility and production of the generous earth


and environment, ruling and realising the desires and
aspirations of humanity, Mitra and Varuna bring about


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




a great and expansive haven of peace, prosperity and


Mandala 5/Sukta 69






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Uruchakri, Atreya, Rshi, Varuna, Mitra, Vavrdhanavamatim]
Mitra and Varuna, prana and udana energies of
the life of existence, you wield and sustain the three
regions of light, three regions of the ethereal sphere,
and the three layers of the earthly sphere, sustaining,
protecting and promoting the expansive form and
structure of the world in dedication to the unaging laws
of Rtam, universal Law.






[Names: Travatir, Trayas]
O Mitra and Varuna, nourishing, energising and
radiating are your rays of light, fluent and overflowing
your showers and streams of milk, honey and life giving
waters. Three are abiding clouds of virility and fertility
inspired with love and vested with vibrant life seeds of
the three mighty regions, radiating with knowledge,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 70 513
karma and worship, O brilliant ones.




[Names: Pratar, Aditim, Aditi, Raye, Mitravaruna, Suryasya, Suryas]
tanayaya Sam yoh.


O Mitra and Varuna, life-givers of love and
justice, early morning I invoke and pray to eternal
mother nature for divine intelligence, at mid-day when
the sun is high, I pray for light and splendour, and in
the all blissful yajna, I pray for health, wealth and all
round peace and well being for the children and all future





O Mitra and Varuna, light and life of existence,
who are wielders and sustainers of the regions of the
earth, the middle regions of the skies and the highest
regions of light and all the heavenly stars, no brilliant
humans, no divinities of nature, no immortals ever
violate your laws of eternal constancy.


Mandala 5/Sukta 70




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Uruchakri, Atreya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pururuna]
O Mitra, O Varuna, great and abundant is your
protection and wisdom which, O friend, in all sincerity
you love to share and extend to us.






[Names: Vayam, Rudra]
O Mitra and Varuna, Loving friends of justice
and rectitude, free from hate and jealousy and destroyers
of violence and injustice, may we receive, we pray, that
energy and sustenance, that protection, guidance and
wisdom of yours so that we may internalise it and pursue
it in our life and conduct.





[Names: Patam, Turyama]
O destroyers of hate and violence, lovers and
dispensers of justice and rectitude, with all your care
and guidance, protect and promote us. Save us, O
89101118, against evil in our person and social
institutions so that we may get over all forces of
negativity, crime and destruction.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 61 515




[Names: Sesasa]
O Mitra and Varuna, friend and justicier,
accomplishers of wonderful acts of yajna, creation and
by any body else’s share of yajnic sustenance, nor
withhold our share of yajnic contribution for our selfish
purposes, either for our own person or for our children
and friends, either for the present or for future. (Help
us to live by our own effort.)


Mandala 5/Sukta 71





[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Bahuvrkta, Atreya, Rshi, Varuna, Mitra, Upemam]
O Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and
friendship, justice and rectitude, destroyers of
negativities, hate and enmity, promoters of love and
unity, knowledge and positive action, come to us and
join this pleasing and elevating programme of love and
non-violence, this yajna for common good.





[Names: Visvasya, Isana]
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and
unity, justice and discriminative awareness,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




commanding universal knowledge and ruling power,
you shine and reign over all. We pray, inspire and elevate
our mind and intelligence to fullness.






[Names: Asya, Somasya, Somas]
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love,
friendship and felicity, justice and rectitude, our yajna
is accomplished, the soma is distilled. Come, drink of
the soma of this worshipful celebrant yajaka, share and
bless our yajnic achievement of success and progress.


Mandala 5/Sukta 72






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devata, Bahuvrkta, Atreya, Rshi, Atrivat, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Like the sage free from threefold suffering of
body, mind and soul, with songs of adoration, we invoke
Mitra and Varuna, leading lights of love and justice,
offer yajnic homage in their honour and service, and
pray that they may come and grace our seats of yajna
for a drink of soma and bless our accomplishment of
the creative and productive programme.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 73 517




[Names: Vratena]
O constant protectors of achievement and
progress, unshakable leaders dynamic at the centre of
movement, dedicated to the vows of piety, guides of
the people on the march forward and onward by the
laws of Dharma, come, grace the seats of yajna in the
world order and drink the soma of success and




[Names: Mitrasca, Varunasca]
Let Mitra and Varuna, loving friend and
discriminative judge of circumstance with
comprehensive vision making the right choice, cherish,
join and guide our yajna, corporate programme of


progress, sit on the holy seats of yajna and celebrate the
finale with a drink of soma in honour of success.


Mandala 5/Sukta 73




[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Paura, Atreya, Rshi, Ashvin, Yadadya, Puru, Purubhuja, Ashvins, Ashvin]
of the circuit of nature’s divine energy, wind and
electricity, you are present far and near in the middle


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




sphere of the sky and operative far and near here and
now, abundant, sustaining all and sustainable by all. O
men and women, let us try these currents of energy come
to us for the benefit of all.






[Names: Purubhitama, Varasya]
Here I invoke and practically realise the
abundant and extensive currents of natural energy
bearing many and mighty potentials, highly useful, most
powerful and non-stop in operation for our purpose of
power and comfort.






[Names: Irmanyad, Paryanya]
Ashvins, instantly moving harbingers of light
and energy, one brilliant wheel of your chariot, one part
of your circuit, you have set in motion for the expression
of your brilliance by the sun. By the other, like night
after the day and by the circle of night and day, you
complete the circle of the day and year and thereby with
your might and splendour you illuminate the terrestrial
and ethereal regions and count up the ages of humanity




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 73 519




[Names: Tadu, Nana]
Ashvins, complementary, powers of nature, and
humanity like teachers and preachers, leaders and
followers, for all these that you have done for us, for all
that, I honour and adore you in consequence. Born and
arisen without sin and free of negativity, come and guide
our friends and brothers for our sake.





[Names: Surya, Pari]
When the dawn, daughter of the sun, like a bride,
comes and rides your fast moving chariot, ruddy, shining
and blazing, birds, beasts and humans always look up
to you and adore you all round.






[Names: Yuvoratrisciketati, Ghar]
Ashvins, leading lights and pioneers of life on
the path of truth and rectitude, Atri, the sage who has
conquered threefold suffering of existence knows you
fully with an undisturbed mind and adores you with
hymns of praise when he experiences and receives from
you the fire of life free from sin and untruth.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ugro]
Ashvins, leading lights and path finders of
humanity, the mighty rumble of your advance expanding
in all directions is heard at every stage of your
movements when Atri, the celebrant sage of threefold
freedom turns his attention to you by virtue of your noble




[Names: Madhva, Rudra]
vam.


Ashvins, roaring powers of nature like sun and
wind, mixers and makers of the sweets of earth, when
you fill the oceans of ethereal and terrestrial regions
and abundant showers slake the thirst of honey sweets
of green, they ripen and bear and bring offers of ripe
fruit and nourishing food for you.






[Names: Satyamid]
Ashvins, leading lights of nature and humanity,
earth and heaven, sages and scholars, true it is as they
say you are the harbingers and givers of peace and well-
being. Most kind and responsive to the call of devotees,
we pray, come and bring us the highest bliss on the wings
of wind and light.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 74 521






[Names: Santama]
May these songs of praise and celebration be
pleasing and exalting for the Ashvins and bring peace
and prosperity for us, the songs which we conceive,
design and structure like chariots of power and felicity
while we compose words of yajnic homage in ecstasy.


Mandala 5/Sukta 74






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Paura, Atreya, Rshi, Ashvin, Kustho, Tacchravatho, Atrirvama]
Divinities of the earth, Ashvins, rich at heart,
abiding in the mind, harbingers of showers of wealth
from the heights of heaven, Atri, the sagely celebrant
who enjoys three-fold freedom of body, mind and soul
today prays in service to you. Pray listen to him.






[Names: Kuha, Kasminna]
Where are they? Where are they heard and
renowned, the brilliant ones in heaven, ever dedicated


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




to truth in heavenly conduct and behaviour? O brilliant
divines, Ashvins, in which community do you operate?
Who shares and benefits from your flowing rivers and






[Names: Kasya]
Who do you go to? To what course or goal? For
what purpose do you harness your chariot? Whose songs
do you love to hear and enjoy? We love and felicitate
you for our cherished desire.






[Names: Pauram, Jinvathah, Yadim]
O citizen, you proceed to the citizen in deep
waters and resume and raise him to new life for the
citizen and the coming generation for the extension of
their action and achievement already made and like a
lion even jump into the den of hate and enmity to protect
and promote them.






[Names: Yuva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 74 523


Like a physician and surgeon you discard the
debility of age like an old and worn out garment when
you renew it back to youth which could be fascinating
even for the love of a damsel.


retire, and aging person from an exacting public position
to replace him with a young, energetic, intelligent man
capable of take him over the onerous duty and
responsibilities of a youthful nation.)






[Names: Asti, Sriye, Srutam]
Here for sure is your dedicated devotee and
celebrant. We abide within your eye sight for the sake
of the beauty and grace of life. Listen to us and come
with your modes of protection, Ashvins, who command
treasures of food, energy and the forces of renewal,
rejuvenation and advancement.






[Names: Purunama]
Who of the many many mortals today could win
your love and favour, O favourite celebrities of the saints
and scholars? Which one of the wisest? Which one at
last could win your recognition and favour, O
commanders of the treasures of food, energy, wealth,
power and the forces of life? By all yajnas at his


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


command, could he? Probably, for sure may be.






[Names: Puru]
Ashvins, leading lights for humanity, may your
chariot, fastest of all, adorable among mortals, victorious
over many negativities, hate and enmities, be directed
hitherward, reach us and take us across the oceans. (Let
us create the chariots as divine gifts and sail over the
oceans across the skies.)






[Names: Samu, Arvacina, Syeneva]
Ashvins, leading lights, masters of speed and
direction, creators of the honey sweets of life, may that
creation, invention and achievement of yours be ours,
adorable for our good. Most modern intellectuals,
eminent scientists of imagination, give us the chariot
with wings to fly with the birds, by winds like the eagle,
and shine.






[Names: Asvina, Vasviru]
Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, wherever


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 75 525


you be and whatever you do, please listen to this
invocation, adoration and invitation of ours to live and
justify existence, and please know: All your plans and
actions for peace, prosperity and progress in life fructify
in full, all your ambitions are fulfilled. We love and
admire you and all those who work together to realise


Mandala 5/Sukta 75






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Avasyu, Atreya, Rshi, Ashvin, Prati, Stota]
Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, the
celebrant visionary of life’s reality and mantric meaning,
adores your achievement in befitting words of song in
response to the beauty of your dearest chariot which is
the carrier and harbinger of showers of wealth and well
being. O creators and makers of the sweets of existence,
the celebrant prays: Listen to my song of adoration and
accept the invitation to live and create the joy of life.





[Names: Atyaydtamasvina, Dasra]
Ashvins, leading lights of life in existence,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




destroyers of suffering, harbingers of peace and
prosperity, creators of honey sweets, listen to my prayer:
Come over regions of earth across the spaces, travelling
by golden chariots over golden highways, navigating
by rivers and oceans, so that I may cross all hurdles of
existence and live as the immortal that I am.






[Names: Rudra]
Ashvins, come you both to us, bearing jewel
wealths of life; come, O Rudras, dispensers of justice
and punishment, travelling by golden chariot over
golden highways, loving and listening partners, givers
of food, energy and speedy progress, creators of the
sweets of life, come in response to our invocation and
listen to our prayer.






[Names: Sustubho]
Ashvins, harbingers of the showers of wealth
and joy, haven of the abundant and generous, the
celebrant is delighted in your chariot and feels elevated.
His song is dedicated to you, and he, mighty strong,
handsome of body, seeker of your favour and purity,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 75 527


prepares the offering of homage for you. O creators and
givers of the sweets of life, listen to my prayer and praise.






[Names: Bodhinmanasa, Vibhis]
Ashvins, leaders and guides of enlightened
mind, travelling far and fast by chariot, responsive to
praise and prayer, you reach the sincere searching man
of holy mind free from duplicity as by flight of birds. O
creators and givers of honey sweets, listen to my






[Names: Vayo]
Ashvins, leaders and pioneers of adventurous
men, may your horses, flying birds, controlled by
thought, consuming burnt fuel, bring you hither with
gifts of peace and well being for a drink of the soma of
success and splendour. O creators and harbingers of
honey sweets, listen to my prayer.






[Names: Asvinaveha, Tirascidaryaya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




indomitable leaders ever dedicated to truth. Even if you
are far away, pray do not be indifferent, slacken not the
reins, cross over the winding paths and come. O creators
and givers of honey sweets, listen to my prayer.






[Names: Avasyum]
In this yajna of creation, invention and
production for social good, O masters, indomitable
Ashvins, twin protectors and promoters of creative
people and noble works, come and grace the celebrant,
supplicant with songs of homage for protection and
patronage. O creators and givers of showers of honey
sweets, listen to my prayer.






[Names: Abhudusa, Ayoji]
The dawn is risen. The holy fire, giver of shining
wealth, is placed in the vedi according to the season.
Your chariot, Ashvins, is in harness, invincible and
immortal. O destroyers of hate and suffering and givers
of showers of wealth and honey sweets, come, listen to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 76 529


Mandala 5/Sukta 76






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Ashvin, Usasamanikam, Usasamanika, Arvanca]
The holy fire of the sun shines here while the
splendour of the dawn radiates as advance forces of the
solar fire, and the holy voices of the sages arise in
adoration. O Ashvins, vitalities of divinity, reach here
by chariot of the dawn and join the rising fire of the
house-hold yajna of noble men and women.






[Names: Divabhipitve, Sambhavistha]
Ashvins, divinities of nature and humanity, most
auspicious harbingers of peace and joy, invoked and
invited to the yajna here, celebrated and adored, coming
at the fastest, almost instantly reaching with protection
and promotion at the rise of the day, you do not destroy,
nor restrict, nor confine what has been refined, seasoned
and sanctified by yajna. In fact, you bring safety and
security against adversity and self-betrayal for the




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Diva, Samtamena, Suryasya, Suryas]
And this exuberance of yajnic celebration and
joy is not confined to the present moment only, it extends
over days and nights. Come Ashvins, divinities of nature
and nobilities of men and women, come at the rise of
dawn, at mid day when the sun is risen up on high, in
the evening when the cows come home. Come all day
and night with your gifts of safety and security, peace
and joy.






[Names: Idam]
Ashvins, harbingers of light, enlightened men
and women, this house, these inmates, this open door
home, all this is your ancient abode in the very light of
heaven. Come here, bearing and bringing for us
nutriments and energy from the vast regions of light
and space, cloud and mountains, and from the waters
of earth and space.





May we join, unite and move on with the latest


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 77 531


and blissful protection and ethics, morals and policy of
the Ashvins, leading lights of the world. O leaders and
pioneers of life in nature and history, bring us, lead us
to, wealth, honour and excellence, valiant children and
all the gifts of good fortune and immortality in the world.


Mandala 5/Sukta 77





[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Ashvin, Prataryavana, Pratarhi, Samsanti]
Arise, meet and adore the Ashvins, first early
morning visitors and harbingers of holy light and life’s
vitalities. They join and bless the yajna and shower and
share the soma before the covetous grabbers and
hoarders are up. They join and guide the yajnic business
of life while the saints and sages, men of poetic vision
and intelligence, earliest sharers of the bliss, sing in
praise of the leading lights of divinity.






[Names: Prataryajadhvam, Utanyo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Invoke the Ashvins early morning, join the
leading lights and adore them at yajna, evening is not
the favourite time of the lovers of divinity as the
morning. And who else other than us, is the yajaka who
loves and adores the Ashvins in yajna, and worthy of
love and reverence, the earlier, the worthier, anywhere,






[Names: None, Hiranyatvanmadhuvarno, Manojava]
Ashvins, leading lights of divinity, scholars,
scientists and engineers, your chariot comes hither laden
with gold, honey sweet and charming, bringing showers
of water and ghrta, carrying wealth of food and energy.
It is fast as mind and powerful as wind and storm by
which you cross over all hurdles and evils of the world.






One who serves and works with the Ashvins,
leading lights of divinity and humanity, all free from
untruth and falsehood, achieves by his creative works
abundant cherished food. He shares the food and success
with others in yajnic living, advances his rising


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 78 533


generation by the same works, surpasses those who do
not raise the sacred-fire, and always destroys the evils.






[Names: Samasvinor]
Let us abide by the noble guidance of the
Ashvins and go forward by their latest blissful protection
and progress. O leading lights of life, we pray, lead us
to the wealth of life and bless us with brave heroes and
all the good fortunes of the world and values of


Mandala 5/Sukta 78





[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Saptavadhri, Atreya, Rshi, Ashvin, Asvinaveha, Hamsaviva]
Ashvins, complementary sustainers of life as air
and water, men and women, teachers and disciples, ever
true to reality, come together into the world, be not ill-
disposed or hostile, fly like a pair of swans hither to the
distilled sweets of life.






[Names: Asvina]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Ashvins, twin harbingers and sharers of divine
love and joy, come like a couple of golden deer, like a
pair of white fawns to the cherished green, fly like a
couple of swans hither to share the distilled soma of
joys with us.






Ashvins, twin divines like teachers and
researchers, creators and developers of food and energy
for speed and progress, come and join our programme
of development for the realisation of our cherished
goals. Fly like a couple of swans to the pleasures of






[Names: Atriryad, Syenasya, Santamena]
Ashvins, harbingers of new life like sun and
moon, when Atri, man of threefold freedom, in
depression, struggling to emerge, calls upon you for help
like a woman in distress, pray fly to his rescue and
rejuvenation like an eagle with protection and fresh lease
of life giving him peace, stability and reassurance.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 78 535




[Names: Srutam]
O man, spirit of desire, as the baby on maturity
leaves the folds of the mother’s womb, so give up the
bonds of mortality to freedom. O Ashvins, harbingers
of knowledge and freedom, listen to my call of prayer,
release saptavadhri, the spirit that has lived out the
fivefold sense experience and the two-fold adventure
of thought and desire.






[Names: Bhitaya, Mayabhirasvina]
Ashvins, complementary powers of evolution,
discrimination and vision, for the man in fear of
existence, for the supplicant in sufferance, for the sage
of vision, and for the man of sevenfold bondage of sense
and mind, for all these, with your divine powers, let the
tree of life seed and grow well for experience and then
let it fall off for the soul’s freedom.


[Names: Yatha]
Expectant mother, just as the breeze of life feeds
and vibrates the pool of lotus life all round, so may your


foetus in the womb vibrate with life and growth and be
born when it matures in ten months.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.







O baby in the womb, just as the breeze, as the

forest, as the sea ripples with vitality, so may you vibrate


and move in the womb and, maturing in ten months, be
born alongwith the sheath of life.





[Names: Dasa, Niraitu]
Let the individual soul reposing in the mother’s
womb for ten months be born as the baby, healthy and
unhurt, in the mother’s state of good health and perfect
life and live on as extension of the mother beyond her
life.

Mandala 5/Sukta 79




[Names: Usha, Devata, Satyashrava, Atreya, Rshi, Mahe, Yatha]
O dawn, lady of morning light brilliant with
splendour, arouse us and enlighten us today for the
achievement of grandeur, wealth and excellence of life


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 79 537


as you have been the giver of enlightenment and
generosity ever before, O majesty of renown, symbol
of life’s extension, nobly born, commander of the
nation’s power, achievement and love of noble truth.


(Swami Dayananda interprets this mantra as an
address to the lady of the house.)






Daughter of the light of heaven, lady of justice
and moral guidance who ride a chariot of pure brilliance,
as you have shone before, so may you ever shine now
and after in future, O lady, forbearing and challenging,
renowned for truth and righteousness, extensive, nobly
born and blest with prosperity, achievement and
discrimination between truth and untruth of thought and






May she, daughter of the light of heaven,
harbinger of all wealth, establish us today in the light
of life. She is most forbearing, dedicated to truth and
prosperity, lovable, nobly born, the enlightened lady of
knowledge and eternal truth who herself shines in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Maghair]
O lady of light, glorious dawn, nobly born,
enlightened and dedicated to eternal truth and noble
achievement, those celebrants who are rich and generous
and command the beauty of grace and heat of fire in
dedication and adore you with holy songs of praise and
liberal gifts of yajna deserve and enjoy your favour for






[Names: Yacciddhi, Pari]
O lady of light, nobly born and enlightened,
truthful and progressive, these celebrants of yours who
adore you for gifts of wealth and splendour receive,
hold and command creditable means, materials and
wealth for success while, loving and shining, they give
lots in charity.







[Names: Aisu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 79 539


O dawn, lady of light, nobly born, enlightened,
progressive and truthful, commanding wealth and
power, vest these brave and generous celebrants with
honour and excellence worthy of heroes, who, blest with
wealth and honour, give us means and materials for
success in life which are free from discredit and shame.






[Names: Tebhyo]
O dawn, lady of light, mistress of honour and
excellence, nobly born and enlightened, truthful,
dynamic and progressive, bear and bring vast wealth
and honour of high order for those brave celebrants who
produce wealth, means and materials for success in
terms of food and speed, cattle wealth and transport,
progress and prosperity and in their generosity share it
with us.






[Names: Sakam, Suryasya, Suryas]
And O daughter of heaven, nobly born and
enlightened, spirit of truth and progress, come with the
rays of the sun, pure and purifying, sacred and
sanctifying, and bring for us food and energy, lands and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Vyuccha, Nettva]
Daughter of the light of heaven, nobly born and
enlightened, truthful and progressive, rise and shine,
and let us shine too. Do not procrastinate, do not protract
your sacred act, accomplish the act and rise. Just as the
ruler punishes the thief and the enemy, just as the sun
burns dry grass with its heat of light, that way let no






[Names: Etavad]
O dawn, lady of light, nobly born and
enlightened, ever true and progressive, brilliant and
enlightening, such you are and more competent and
pleased to give to your dedicated celebrants, whom you
never neglect, never frustrate, but ever bless and
promote higher and higher.


Mandala 5/Sukta 80




[Names: Usha, Devata, Satyashrava, Atreya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 80 541




[Names: Dyutad, Devim]
Saints and sages with holy mind and hymns of
adoration honour and celebrate the divine dawn, crimson
hued, shining brilliant, grand and sublime, illuminating
hours of time and regions of space, observing universal
law of eternity by simple natural conduct, and bringing
the morning light and bliss of the sun.






[Names: Brhadratha]
This glorious dawn, vast and great, goes forward
riding her mighty chariot, arousing humanity from sleep,
lighting up easy paths for movement, all illuminative,
giving light in advance of the day.





[Names: Patho, Puru]
Harnessing the crimson rays of the sun to her
unfailing wealth of light and rejuvenation. Marking
paths of movement for the good of the people, the divine
dawn shines, loved and adored by the people as the
source of universal good.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Rtasya]
Revealing her body of light from the east, this
lady of light radiates fast on both sides right and left
over day and night. It follows the path of eternal law
and, knowing well everything in nature, it neither
violates nor goes astray over the quarters of space.




The sacred dawn, revealing her radiant majesty
like the lady of light for us to see and admire, this
daughter of the sun stands above pure and sanctified as
if doing her morning ablutions and, dispelling hate and
darkness, warding off negativities, she walks with her
train of splendour.






[Names: Vyurnvati]
Yonder stands this daughter of heaven like a


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 81 543


maiden, holy and inspiring to the best of men, and then
moves to the west, revealing the day’s phases of her
splendour and opening up new possibilities of cherished
achievements for the generous man of yajnic action.
Ever bright and youthful, she thus moves the daily
rounds of light anew as ever before since times


[Names: Note, Swami, Dayananda]
interpretation of the Dawn by implication: He interprets
Usha as the newly married woman rising like the dawn
over the world of her new home, bringing new light
and new possibilities of life’s achievements. The
wedding of the couple is a new morning for the family,
life moves on, new phases of the day move on westward,
new generations follow, life goes on and on like the
daily round of night and day. The sun remains the same,
days and nights are new. Life remains the same, the
phases are new. The bride is holy, sacred, inspiring,
worthy of love, respect and reverence.


Mandala 5/Sukta 81




[Names: Savita, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Yunjate, Vayunavideka]
Enlightened sages concentrate their mind and
senses and meditate on the infinite, omniscient and
vibrant omnipresence of Divinity who alone as sole


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




power and ruler knows and governs all the laws and
ways and facts of existence and watches, rules and
dispenses the karma of yajakas and others. Great indeed
is the glory, and high the praise of Savita, lord of life
and self-refulgent giver of light.






[Names: Visva]
The omniscient creator, eternal poet and maker,
creates and pervades all forms of existence and produces
all good things for the well being of humans and animals.
He, Savita, creator and energiser, lord of love worthy
of our choice, manifests and illuminates the heaven of
light and joy, inspires the rise of the dawn with light
and rules and shines the sun and after.






[Names: Yasya]
Savita is the lord of life, creator, self-refulgent,
all pervasive, whose majesty, Law and ways, all other
powers of nature and humanity with all their potential
follow, the lord omnipresent who, with his grandeur and
omnipotence, creates, pervades and transcends all


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5/SUKTA - 81 545
regions of the universe.






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas]
Savita, lord of light and life, you pervade and
illuminate three orders of light, sun, moon and electric
energy and love to play with the sun’s rays. You envelop
the night at both ends and, with your laws and function,
O lord self-refulgent, you become the friend and
measure of everything.






[Names: Utesise, Utedam, Syavasvaste]
Savita, spirit of life and inspiration, self-
refulgent giver of light, you alone by yourself rule over
the world of existence. O generous and self-refulgent
lord, by every stage of evolution in order of time you
remain the giver of light and nourishment for growth.
And you pervade, illuminate and rule over this entire
world of existence so that the sun itself receives light
and adoration by virtue of your light of illumination.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 5/Sukta 82






[Names: Savita, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Srestham]
We choose to pray to the lord creator Savita for
his love and favour so that we may receive the highest,
all sustaining and all victorious glory of the lord self-
refulgent and omnipotent.






[Names: Asya, Whoever]
violate or impair the self-glorious dear absolute
dominion of lord Savita’s divine freedom.




Only Savita, lord of power, honour and
excellence, creates and augments the jewel wealths of
life for the man of yajnic generosity. We pray we may
know and receive his favour and grace for a share of
that wonderful glory.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 82 547





[Names: Adya, Para]
O generous lord Savita, create for us here and
now honour and good fortune full of noble people and
progeny. Drive away bad dreams and ward off dreamy






[Names: Visvani]
O lord Savita, ward off and sterilise all the evils
of the world. Grant us that which is good. Vitalise,
energise and promote all that is good.




[Names: Anagaso, Visva]
Free from sin and evil in the yajnic world of
lord Savita’s creation, we pray, we may receive the
cherished gifts of life in service of the mother, mother
earth and nature.






[Names: Satyasavam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




With songs of adoration we worship and
celebrate lord Savita, cosmic yajaka of eternity, self-
refulgent generous father inviolable protector and
sustainer of the world of existence.






[Names: Svadhirdevah]
We adore and worship self-refulgent, self-
existent lord of creation, Savita, who transcends both
the day and night of existence and self-abides without

[Names: Slokena]
We invoke and adore lord Savita who informs


all these born ones by his Word, who creates and inspires


Mandala 5/Sukta 83



[Names: Parjanya, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Parjan, Accha, Kanikradad]
Hail the mighty cloud well with these holy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 83 549


words of song, serve, celebrate and energise it with
homage in yajna for peace and a happy home. Roaring
and thundering with passion, the virile cloud, giver of
life and freshness, impregnates the herbs with the seed
of generation.






[Names: Utanaga, Parjanyah]
The cloud shakes the trees, destroys the demons
whom the whole world fears, and when it roars and
releases the water of rain pregnant with life, it kills the
evil doers with the terrible bolt and saves the sinless
and the generous forces of life.






[Names: Rathiva, Durat]
Indeed like a charioteer urging on the horses by
the whip, the cloud condenses and intensifies the rain
carrier showers down to the earth, and, for that, when it
strikes the ocean of vapours in the sky with thunder to
turn it into rain, the space resounds from far like the
roar of a lion.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








Fast and fresh blow the winds, lightnings flash,
herbs spring up, the sky swells and overflows, food
grows, spirits arise and songs resound over the world
when the cloud fertilises the earth with the showers of
life.





[Names: Yasya, Sapha, Yasya, Sarma]
O cloud, rain shower of life and fertility, in
consequence of your commitment to the laws of sun
and shower, the earth submits and surrenders, the animal
stirs with passion and fire, the herbs burst forth in all
forms of life. O cloud, such as you are, give us a great
home of peace, joy and excellence.


AU





[Names: Divo, Maruto, Arvanetena]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 83 551


May the Maruts, windy currents of energy, bring
us rain from the regions of the sun. May the mighty
cloud showers of fertility bring us growth. O cloud,
harbinger of vitality come down here with showers of
rain flooding the earth and giving us breath of life and






[Names: Drtim]
Thunder and roar, O cloud, bring the vitalities
of life and fertilise the earth for generation. Go far and
wide by chariot run on water, draw the reservoir of
waters released unto yourself, and conduct them
downward so that the upward vapours may be brought
down in showers.


Saad: we ॥




[Names: Mahantam, Ghrtena]
The sun holds the mighty reservoir of vapours
up on high, the cloud pours it down in showers. Let the
lakes and rivers flow with waters released to freedom.
O cloud, fill the earth and sky with water so that there
may be ample food and water for the cows.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.







[Names: Pratidam]
When the cloud roars and thunders and destroys
all the negativities which do evil, then in response to
the cleansing and vitalising rain this entire humanity
and all else that is on earth rejoices in celebration.






[Names: Avarsir, Ajijana]
Pour down the showers, O cloud, take over the
earth for generation, fertilise the thirsting lands for
growth, produce herbs and plants and trees for food of
the people, and win the thanks of a grateful humanity.


Mandala 5/Sukta 84




[Names: Prthivi, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Balittha, Truly]
bear the thunder breaker of the clouds, bear the burden
of mountain ranges, hold on the flood of rivers and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 85 553


contain the rolling oceans. O mighty one on the onward
move, you are the one who thus with your great power
and force rule and sustain the land and her people.






[Names: Stomasastva]
O moving one, the celebrants adore you day and
night with songs, you, O bright one, who shake and
impel the roaring cloud like a war horse onward to


[Names: Drlha]
Surely you are strong and firm who, with your
strength and splendour, sustain the herbs and trees, since
the rains of wealth and sustenance shower for you down
from the thunder and lightning of the regions of light.

Mandala 5/Sukta 85






[Names: Varuna, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi, Srutaya, Varunaya, Varuna, Suryaya, Surya]
Offer homage and reverence of the highest and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




deepest order full of love to Varuna, the one sovereign
ruler and lord of love and judgement over all, who
hammered and shaped the earth into form and, like the
host of a yajna of peace and non-violence, overspread
the earth with the atmosphere as a protective and
promotive cover as a shield for the sun, as protection
against heat for the sake of generative power and
fertility. His divine voice resounds across the universe.






[Names: Vanesu, Hrtsu, Somamadrau, Suryamadadhat]
Varuna, lord of love and judgement for life,
extensively vested sap in vegetation, energy in horses
and others that move, milk in cows, faith, love and will
to act in the hearts, vitality in waters, sun in heaven and
soothing joy in the cloud and soma plant on the






[Names: Nicinavaram, Varunah, Tena]
Varuna brings into existence heaven, earth and
the middle region of the sky, and he forms the cloud for
shower on the earth down below. By that the sovereign
ruler of the whole universe, the supreme, brings about
the rain which fertilises the earth as it nourishes the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 85 555






[Names: Unatti, Samabhrena, Srathayanta]
Varuna fills the earth and sky and the regions of
the sun with vapour when he desires to create the milk
of life, thereafter the clouds are laden with vapour, and
then forceful currents of wind energy strike the clouds
from within and release the showers of rain.





[Names: Imamu, Maneneva, Varunasya, Varunas]
This marvellous omnipotence of the renowned
life giver Varuna, I celebrate in words, who pervades
the space and, abiding in the middle regions of the
universe, marks out the earth as if by measure, purpose
and design, and creates it from the sun.






[Names: Imamiu, Ekam, Yadudna]
This great power of the most creative lord, who
can challenge and violate? None, just as all the streams


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and rivers flooding the lands and rushing on do not fill
the ocean with water.





[Names: Aryamyam, Vesam, Sisrathastat]
If we happen to commit a sin of omission or
commission or transgression toward a man of judgement
or friend or companion or a close ally or inmate of the
then, O Varuna, loosen the snare of sin and help us be




[Names: Tree, Kitavaso, Sarva]
Like gamblers in the game, if someone attribute
sin or deception to us, which may be true or may not be
true, or which we might not even know, all that, O lord
of light and judgement, loosen so that we may be free
and be dear to you.


Mandala 5/Sukta 86




[Names: Indra, Agni, Devata, Atri, Bhauma, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 86 557




[Names: Indragni, Drlha]
Indra and Agni, divine power and knowledge,
celestial and terrestrial energy of electricity and fire,
both ruler and enlightened leaders, whosoever the mortal
you protect, guide and promote, he breaks through
massive obstructions in the battle business of life, and
wins his way to wealth, honour and splendour, just like
the sagely scholar of threefold freedom of body, mind
and soul who penetrates through three layers of
language, vaikhari, madhyama and pashyanti, 1.6., word,
thought and deep memory, and reaches the vision of
the para, the supreme Word and silence of Divinity.





We adore and solicit Indra and Agni which,

among the forces of life, are indomitable, in the battles
for power and prosperity, admirable, and among the five
orders of society and among the five pranic energies
are of prime importance.




[Names: Tayorid, Prati]
esate.


The sharp, impetuous and blazing force in the
hands of these two mighty powers moves by the speed


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of sunbeams in destroying the cloud of darkness and
strikes where it must.






[Names: Pati]
Indra and Agni, most adorable scholars of the
science of terrestrial and celestial energy, heat, light and
electricity, and masters of fast automotion and material
prosperity, we invoke you both for the speed and
movement of chariots for success.






[Names: Arhanta]
Exalted, thriving day by day for the sake of
mortal humanity, brilliant, indomitable, adorable and
generous Indra and Agni, ruling powers and enlightened
scholars, we honour you at the head of our creative and
developmental yajna like the soma of success and
celebration in matters of science and progress.





[Names: Evendragnibhyam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 87 559


Thus homage of adoration is offered to Indra
and Agni, scholars of earthly and spatial energy. From
energies, by scholars is received strength, energy and
power, materials for yajnic investment and development,
ghrta, delicacies, like water showers sanctified by the
clouds. May they, we pray, bring and bestow upon the
scholars and celebrants high renown and abundant
wealth, may they bring and bestow upon the admirers
food and energy for a happy life.


Mandala 5/Sukta 87






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Evayamarut, Atreya, Rshi, Marut, Marutvate, Marutvat, Savase]
O vibrant man of vision, all ye men and women,
let all your songs and flights of thought and vision born
of the voice of the heart reach Vishnu, all pervasive
lord, commander of the winds and warriors, indomitable,
highly majestic, adorable and cooperative, blissfully
appreciative, relentlessly active and absolute in justice
and power.


ASA: UU


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Kratva, Maruto]
Evayamarut, O vibrant visionary and celebrant
of the Maruts, these warriors and pioneers of humanity
are self-made, risen by themselves who proclaim
themselves through their knowledge and self-awareness.
O Maruts, stormy leaders, that power and force of yours
is unchallengeable by virtue of your noble acts, grandeur
and generosity. O men, their force is indomitable, they
are inviolable, unshakable like mountains.






[Names: Ssrnvire]
Evayamarut, O celebrant of the Maruts, they
hear the voice of Divinity from the light of heaven, they
are heard by their voice from the heights of heaven. Pure
and brilliant, they live in holiness and felicity. No tyrant,
impeller or compeller, can bend them in their right and
abode. Self-refulgent like the flames of fire, they radiate,
they make the winds blow and set the rivers aflow.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 87 561




[Names: Yadayukta, Sevrdho]
He, Evayamarut, Vishnu, lord of infinite action
and commander of the Maruts, universal energies,
transcends by infinite possibility the great constant,
central and universal seat of his presence, that is, this
universe. When evayamarut, the man of vision, master
of his senses and faculties, connects with the lord by
heart and soul by the guidance of dynamic teachers and
preachers, unenvious and brilliant, he rises from his own
state of existence and joins the lord omnipotent of





[Names: Svano, Yena]
Like the rumble of the Big Bang of creation,
may the lord of the Maruts, Vishnu, shake you, O men
and women of the world, shine you and inspire you, the
everfelt in the heart, by virtue of whom the Maruts,
natural energies and pioneers of humanity shining by
themselves, unshaken yet dynamic like rays of the sun,
golden gloried, self-armed and nobly ambitious, stand
the challenges of existence and achieve their end and
aim.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Aparo, Sthataro]
yah.


Unbounded is your greatness, O heroes of
ancient might. May your brilliant power protect and
promote evayamarut, vibrant sage of vision and
knowledge. In the heat of battle when missiles are shot,
stay firm in the open view unshaken. Such as you are,
O Maruts, blazing as flames of fire, protect us against
the maligners and the revilers.






[Names: Rudrasah, Rudrasa, Dirgham]
Heroes of the winds, scholars of the middle
order, dispensers of justice and punishment, performers
of holy creative actions, commanding power and glory
like flames of fire may protect and promote us and the
sagely scholar of vision and dynamic performance. Wide
and lofty grows the earthly abode of humanity by virtue
of those whose grandeur grows high and onslaughts
grow terrible in the battles against the evil and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 5 / SUKTA - 87 563
wickedness of unimaginable order.




[Names: Adveso, Visnormahah]
sanutah.


Maruts, heroes of the speed of winds, free from
hate and jealousy, with zeal and ardour for righteous
action, come to our earthly abode and lead us on the
path of goodness and progress. O lord of the winds,
Vishnu, listen to the song and prayer of the celebrant.
O leaders and pioneers, come like warriors of the chariot
and join the power and grandeur of Vishnu, lord of the
wide world and space, accomplish acts of universal
generosity and throw off hate, jealousy and animosity
from the earth.




[Names: Ganta, Jyesthaso]
tavo nidah.

O Maruts, adorable heroes of the world, come
and join our yajna of holy living with grace and
earnestness. Listen to the prayer of the celebrant of the
winds in need of protection and advancement. Most


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




eminent and most enlightened among us, be generous
givers of knowledge, wisdom and enlightenment of
Divine order like showers of the cloud from the sky so
that no maligner or reviler can resist and challenge you



All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


565


MANDALA 6


Mandala 6/Sukta 1






[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Tvam, Tvam]
Agni, light of life faster than mind, you are the
prime mover of this cosmic intelligence and evolution,
marvellous creator and foremost performer of universal
yajna. O generous father of life, you alone generate the
inviolable life force and strength of will vested in
existence for us to resist and overcome all negative
forces of the world for survival and onward progress.





[Names: Adha, Anu]
Then let the prime yajaka, being adorable,
inspired to create and give in unison, be seated at the
head of yajna on the earthly vedi of life foremost in the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




midst of holy chant, and you, leading light of humanity,
yourself knowledgeable and illuminating, seekers of
great wealth, honour and light of Divinity, follow him
as the leader.






[Names: Vrteva]
Enlightened persons with many productive
offerings of yajnic value follow Agni, prime yajnic
leader, leading to wealth by normal paths of creative
production, Agni that is shining as well as catalysing,
splendid and blissful, great and rising high, generative
and all time illuminative.





[Names: Padam, Sravasyavah, Namani]
Yajna performers aspiring for honour,
excellence and spiritual vision of Divinity by surrender
and yajnic homage obtain untainted wealth and honour.

O lord Agni, they receive name and reputation worthy

of yajakas and abide and rejoice in your blissful





All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 1 567




O lord, people both simple and learned, glorify
you on earth, people’s wealth both material and spiritual
exalts you. Pray, O lord, you be the people’s protector
and saviour toward their success and freedom, giver of
light in their heart and soul, father, mother and the
ultimate home of humanity.








[Names: Saparyenyah]
That Agni worthy of yajnic service and,
affectionate, yajaka and giver of yajnic gifts, rejoicing
provider of happiness abides among people as adorable
presence. O lord, in a posture of reverence and faith,
with homage and surrender, we pray, let us be seated in
the home where you ever shine in your refulgence.






Agni, adorable giver of light, we, blest with holy
intelligence and aspiring for well being and light of
divinity, pray that you, shining with universal light and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




knowledge, lead the people to the state of enlightenment
and freedom.




[Names: Visam, Sasvatinam, Pretisanimisayantam]
We celebrate and exalt Agni, giver of light and
wisdom, visionary creator, ruler and protector of the
people who never go out of existence, destroyer of
suffering, generous benefactor of the people, inspiring
leader for progress and development, holy purifier,
refulgent power and adorable guide for the sake of
wealth, honour and excellence.






Agni, giver of light and life, that man does
honour and worship to you who brings and offers you
yajna with sacred fuel and holy materials, who knows
what to offer and offers the oblations with faith and
surrender. Such a man protected and promoted by you
is blest with honour and admirable capacity for action.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 1 569




[Names: Asma, Vedi]
Agni, giver of light and knowledge, child of
omnipotence and source of strength, we offer high
reverence and worship to you in honour of your
greatness and glory, with homage, sacred fuel and
fragrant yajnic materials into the vedi, with chant of
holy words and songs of praise, and we pray that we
may always abide and strive for noble actions in your
benign presence and favour.






[Names: Sravobhisca, Brhadbhirvajaih]
Agni, refulgent giver of light and power and
knowledge, which overspreads heaven and earth with
light, also renowned for gifts of sustenance and energy,
is the saving power for life. O refulgent power, shine for
us more and ever more with abundant and expansive
gifts of food and energy and stable forms of wealth and
power.






[Names: Nrvad, Purviriso]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O father and guardian of humanity, Agni, giver
of life and beneficence, give us a blessed home for our
children and grand children, full of material and cattle
wealth, abundant and expansive food and energy,
freedom from sin and evil, where there may be ample
means of well being, honour and excellence.






[Names: Purunyagne, Purunyagn, Purudha, Puruni, Puruvara]
Agni, O leading light of life and humanity,
brilliant by virtue of knowledge, power and generosity,
may we by your kindness and grace obtain wealth and
prosperity of various kinds and orders. O giver of
knowledge, power and excellence, Agni, universally
loved and adored, infinite are your gifts of wealth
abiding in your dominion which you hold in treasure
for the dedicated supplicant.


Mandala 6/Sukta 2





[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Tvam, Tvam, Sravo]
Agni, leading light of life, like an inmate of our

earthly home, like a friend for sure you protect, promote
and sustain our honour and excellence. O watchful


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 2 571


observer of all, our haven and home, you preserve and
advance our food and energy, honour and fame, like






You alone people adore with yajnic acts and
songs of praise. The warlike, the non-violent, the mover
of the skies, the all watchful, everyone comes to you.






[Names: Sajosastva, Yaddha]
Loving and friendly people, leading lights of
humanity, all of one accord, kindle and light you, the
light and symbol of yajna, for which reason the rational
communities aspiring for peace and well being invoke
and invite you to their noble programmes of love and






[Names: Rdhad]
The man who with his intelligence and holy
action serves, worships and offers homage to you and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




thus promotes you, generous giver, he enjoys peace and
prosperity under protection of the vast heaven and
crosses over all hate and jealousy as well as sin and
evil.


[Names: Samidha, Vayavantam, Satayusam]
The mortal who responds to your urgent call
and with holy fuel offers you intense and abundant


oblations of yajna obtains and prospers in a happy home
for a hundred years.





[Names: Tvesaste, Suro]
Shining bright and rising high, your flames and
fragrance reach unto the height of heaven. O pure and
purifying fire, with light and splendour you shine like
the sun.

[Names: Adha, Ranvah]
O light and fire of life, you are adorable among


the people, welcome to us like a cherished guest,
delightful like a venerable senior in the sacred city,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 2 =)


darling as a child running to the parent for protection
and security.






[Names: Kratva, Parijmeva, Ssisuh]
Agni, holy light and fire, you manifest by
attrition in the wood, by yajna in the home, active,
sportive and restive like a courser, moving everywhere
like wind, soothing and satisfying as food, intimate as
self will, comfortable as home, vibrant as a wave of
energy and pure and innocent as a baby.





[Names: Dhama, Sikvasah]
Agni, eternal light and fire of existence, for all

those solid objects of existence, apparently imperishable
regions of the universe, you are as the bull is for the
grass since, O lord of eternity, your mighty flames of


annihilation consume them as the bull consumes the






[Names: Vesi, Samrdho]
Angira, vital fire of life pervading every limb


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of the body, breath of life vibrating in every part of the
universe, eternal highpriest of cosmic yajna, enter,
pervade and bless the home of the devotees conducting
the yajna of love and non-violence. O lord protector
and ruler of the people, make them prosperous, accept
and enjoy their holy offering.




[Names: Accha, Mitramaho, Vihi]
tavavasa tarema.


O most adorable friend, venerable and refulgent
light of the world, speak well to the noble and brilliant
holy men of the eternal Word of universal knowledge
and wisdom of heaven and earth. Bear and bring
prosperity and well being on the blessed earth in happy
homes to the loving and dedicated people. We pray help
us cross over all sins and evil, hate and jealousy. Let us
cross over all negativities and undesirables, cross over
all of them, cross over to the life divine by your
protection and grace.


Mandala 6/Sukta 3


[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Agne, Varunah, Varuna]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 3 575


Agni, leading light and ruler of the world,
guardian of Truth and Law, manifesting in truth and
law and the fire and fragrance of yajna, that mortal man
lives in peace who protects the truth and abides in truth,
and he receives the gift of your infinite light and grace
who loves Divinity and noble humanity, and whom you,
O lord of love and justice, loving, kind and generous
father, with loving care and merciful justice, you protect
and save by abandonment of sin and evil.






[Names: Samibhir]
If the mortal does good to others with humility
and yajna, lives in peace with auspicious acts of holiness,
and does service to Agni, giver of success and prosperity,
with acts of charity and self surrender, then, for sure,
neither want of honour and glory, nor sin and evil, nor
pride and arrogance can ever touch him.




[Names: Suro, Suca, Hesasvatah]
The holy sight of Agni, leading light of
humanity, like the sun, and the message of thought and
wisdom of the brilliant light that radiates, is pure and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




immaculate, and yet it is awesome and comes as terrible
to the vitiated. Indeed wherever the source and abode
of this blazing destroyer of the night of darkness and of
his prophetic voice be, as that of light in sunrays and of
fire in the wood, it is delightful and elevating.






[Names: Tigmam, Vijehamanah]
Sharp is his path like the razor’s edge we may
like to follow, great his form and appearance shining
brilliant, open his mouth self-controlled as the horse’s,
sharp his tongue as an axe, and he melts rigidities like a
smelter and burns wooden prejudices like fire.





[Names: Citradhrajatiraratiryo]
Free from dead wood, he shoots his target like
an archer freely. He sharpens his blaze like the edge of
an axe. Swift and wonderful in speed, relentless in work,
he discards rest and slow speed of movement like a bird
of flight flying off from the branch of the tree of his




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 3 577




[Names: Saim, Socisa, Naktam, Mitramahah, Mitramaha]
He, leading light of the world, wears the light
of the morning sun and, in return, like crackling fire,
proclaims himself with the light and blaze of the new
day, being the greatest friend of humanity. Red as flames,
bright as sunlight, he lights up the night of darkness
and arouses humanity into the day of light, awareness
and activity, being the harbinger of the immortal light
of Divinity. Yes, bright and blazing, he rouses people
into the light of day.






[Names: Divo, Ghrna]
Whose presence as of the light and grace of
heaven, and order, the generous cloud worships and
proclaims, whose light and vitality is manifested in herbs
and trees, and who, by his flight and velocity and
omnipresence, vests the spaces of motherly heaven,
earth and sky with the wealth of living sustenance as
with his light and grace.




[Names: Dhayobhirva, Sardho, Marutam, Maruta, Rbhurna]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Who flashes like lightning, shines with his self-
refulgence and potent presence, and constantly
illuminates by his manifestation by the beneficiary stars,
planets and plants, by his associates and assistants, and
by his celebrants and worshippers of his virtues, and
who, blazing and impetuous, like the divine intelligence
and maker, fashions the forms and force of the winds
and the stormy powers of humanity : that is Agni, life
of existence and leading light of the world.


Mandala 6/Sukta 4






[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Yatha]
Agni, leading light of life, ruler of the world,
child of strength, source of strength and courage, yajaka
and generous giver, as you do selfless yajnic service to
life and Divinity like any human, so you today in our
battle of life, out of love for loving and dedicated people,
pray invoke the divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity to join us.






[Names: Visvayuryo]
May that lord, Agni, refulgent as the sun, light


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 4 579


of the day, adorable, worth knowing and realising, bear
and bring us food for life and energy for action, that
lord who is life of life, immortal among mortals,
manifests like a cherished guest at dawn and knows all
that is born in existence by omnipresence.






[Names: Dyavo, Sukrah]
Like the lights of heaven, sages celebrate the
lord’s glory. Pure and immaculate, like the sun, he wears
the lights and colours of existence. Purifying like fire,
he pervades the forms of the world of existence, and at
the ultimate end withdraws all that existed before, and
remains, ageless and eternal, the sole and absolute






[Names: Vadma, Agnirjanu]
O inspirer of life, Agni, self-manifestive loud
and bold, you are all pervasive in everything that is food
for life since by nature and operation you generate both
food and energy. O creator and giver of energy, bear
and bring us food and energy, be victorious like a ruler
and abide in peace and non-violence as an inspiration.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Nitikti, Vayurna, Turyama]
Agni sharpens his instant weapon of radiance
against darkness, consumes the consumables for energy,
rules over existence like breath of life, surpasses even
the rays of light. O lord of radiation pervading all round
by waves of omnipotence, destroyer like a superlative
missile of those crooked ones who fall in its way, may
we too likewise overcome those who negate your gifts
of life.




[Names: Citro, Socisa]
Agni, light of life, as the sun with thunderous
rays of light, so you pervade heaven and earth with
splendour and majesty. Marvellous and sublime, with
you rule dispelling all kinds of darkness.






[Names: Tvam, Srosyagne, Indram, Savasa, Indra, Vayum, Vayu]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 5 581


Agni, lord most charming and blissful, with
brilliant songs of adoration we celebrate you. Listen to
our song of sublimity. Like Indra, lord of omnipotence,
like Vayu, breath of life, the best of leading lights of
humanity adore you with all their might and sense of




[Names: Nino]
madema Satahimah suvirah.


Agni, lord of light, wealth and bliss, with honest
and loving people lead us to wealth and honour, peace
and well being by paths of holiness, cleanse us of sin,
blow off evil from us. That peace and joy you bestow
upon brilliant and brave celebrants and upon the
supplicant, bestow upon us too, we pray, so that we,
blest with brave children, may rejoice for a full life of


Mandala 6/Sukta 5




[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Huve, Puruvaro]
For you all, I invoke and invite Agni, giver of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




strength and forbearance, young, sweet and loving of
speech free from malice, most youthful, wise and all
aware, cherished friend of all without jealousy, who
creates, inspires, invigorates and brings us gifts of
universal value and drives away the evils.






[Names: Ksameva]
In you, lord of eternal flames of power and
generation, cosmic yajaka and generous giver, holy
performers of yajnic acts repose their confidence, and
to you, day and night, they attribute all the gifts of life.
By virtue of you, cleanser and purifier, all regions of
the universe like earth bear cherished gifts of nature for






[Names: Tvam]
Come you, leading light wrapped in the light of
divinity, sit and abide among these people with your
knowledge and yajnic action. Be like a chariot harbinger
of choice gifts of life. You are wise and you command
universal awareness. You know all that is born in
existence and, integrated with life and society, you
inspire and promote the wealths of the world for the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 5 583






[Names: Mitramaho]
Agni, O dearest and greatest friend, tempered
in the crucibles of austere discipline to the highest
degree of intensity, whatever the force or power internal
or external, close around or far off which might weaken,
attack, injure or destroy us, pray burn up and eliminate
by your own essential, unaging, generous and most
youthful power of discipline and fire.






[Names: Yaste]
Agni, O source giver of strength and inspiration,
whoever serves you with yajnic acts of self-sacrifice
and offers you homage, worship and songs of
celebration with sacred fuel to keep the fire burning,
rises in knowledge and life’s awareness, advances in
wealth, honour and fame, and shines out with immortal


wae HU


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yacchasyase]
Agni, lord of forbearance and challenging
might, loved, inspired and impelled, do that fast with
your power and force, resist and repell the envious
contenders, for which you are admired by the celebrants.
Do that, O lord wearing the aura of light and fire, and
accept the devoted supplicant’s thanks and homage
expressed from the depth of mind and soul.


ANON



[Names: Asyama, Syama]
Agni, leading light of the world, ruler and
pioneer of humanity, by virtue of your protection and
spirit of advancement, let us realise that will and desire
we pray for. O lord creator and giver of wealth, let us
achieve that wealth and honour blest with the brave we
forward, that energy, sustenance and progress, let us be
blest with that honour and excellence which is immortal.


Mandala 6/Sukta 6




[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 6 585



[Names: Vrscadvanam]
Whoever desires and plans for advancement into
new ways of progress, defence and protection, tries and
experiments with newest forms of yajna, socio-scientific
developments in pursuit of Agni, heat, light and electric
energy, source and generator of power, breaker of the
clouds, illuminator of pathways into darkness and the
unknown, bright catalytic agent, giver of peace and
prosperity for well being and divine agent of cosmic
evolution.





[Names: Svitanastanyatu, Puruta, Puruni, Anuyati]
That energy, Agni, which is brilliant, expansive
and roaring, constant in light without a flicker, abiding
in imperishable thunder and lightning, is the fire purifier
which lies dormant in many forms in solids, and it is
versatile and explosive.





[Names: Sucayascaranti, Tuvimraksaso]
Agni, cosmic energy, those universal waves of
your power impelled by nature’s currents radiate all


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




round, pure and purifying, embracing everything,
breaking and remaking everything that comes their way.






[Names: Sukrasah, Sucayah, Sucismah, Adha]
Life and light of the world, those vitalising pure
and radiant waves of your energy flowing down like
horses freed from their bound, fertilise and impregnate
the earth, and then their circulation across the sky, taking
over the mountain tops shines all over the earth.






[Names: Surasyeva]
Further, the tongue of flame, the flash of
lightning, like the thunderbolt of mighty Indra, warrior
of the flash and thunder’s roar, shakes and shines with
the blaze, striking and shattering things like a warrior’s
blow, and thus the terrible onslaught of irresistible Agni
destroys the forests.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 7 587




Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, with
your light spread over all places and activities of the
earth, and shine by the great and glorious radiation of
your power. With your force and power, resist and repel
all fears and envious contenders and, saving and
protecting those who ought to be served and protected,
break down the enmities and negativities.






[Names: Candram, Puru]
Agni, marvellous leading light of the world,
ruler of the wonderful human order of brilliance, inspirer
of love, benevolence and bliss, join and mix various
wonderful elements with beautiful and soothing
elements and then create for us enlightening, most
expansive wealth inspiring for all the youth and for the


Mandala 6/Sukta 7


[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Murdhanam, Kavim]
The divinities of nature and humanity light the
sacred fire: supreme light of heaven, vital fire of life of
the earth, Vaishvanara, leader and energiser of the world,
born of cosmic law and the fire of cosmic yajna. It is
the visionary, even the revolutionary, poet, ruler of the
world, sacred as a chance visitor, voice of the people,
sustainer of life and its order.




[Names: Nabhim, Vaisvanaram]
Divines and brilliant people light and sing in
praise of Vaishvanara, sacred fire of the world, centre-
hold of yajna and creative programmes of development,
treasure source of wealths, divine challenge and
cherished deity of their service, motive power of non-
violent projects, the real symbol and the very life of





[Names: Tvad, Vaisanara]
O leading light of the world, Agni, by you arises
the dedicated scholar, energy, sustenance and progress,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 7 589


and the warriors who brave the challenges and win. O
Vaishvanara, fire of earthly existence, brilliant leader
and ruler, lead us to wealths of the world worthy of
being fought for and won.





[Names: Tvam, Tava]
O Vaishvanara Agni, light and vitality of the
world, all brilliant scholars and divines of humanity love
you as a baby and celebrate you all round like the rising
sun at dawn, or like a young scholar emerging from the
home of his parents and teachers like the sun from
heaven over the earth. By virtue of your holy acts, the
mortals achieve the immortality of holiness and






[Names: Vaisvanara, Yajjayamanah, Vayunesvahnam, Vayunesvahna]
Vaishvanara, leading light and fire of life, Agni,
the great ordinances of yours none can challenge, those
which you, arising in the lap of your parents from heaven
over the earth take on as your essential character and
identity in the light of days in relation to the laws of
existence from the earth to the Supreme Spirit and Lord
of the universe.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Vaisvanarasya, Tasyedu]
By the vision and radiance of immortal
Vaishvanara, the tops of heaven are pervaded, measured
and transcended. On him, as base which is also the
summit of existence, rest all the worlds of the universe
which manifest like hair on the head, grow like seven
branches from the one root, or flow like seven streams
from the centre source.






[Names: Pari]
Vaishvanara, merciful lord of the world and
humanity, cosmic yajaka and visionary creator, who
conceives, creates and ordains all regions of the
universe, who illuminates the radiance of heaven, who
pervades, expands and transcends all the worlds of
existence, is the sole lord supreme, unchallenged ruler,
sustainer and protector of the mortal world and the state
of immortality.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 8 591


Mandala 6/Sukta 8






[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Prksasya, Vaisvanaraya, Sucih, Soma]
Spontaneously I sing and celebrate the
knowledge and omnipotence of Jataveda, omniscient
lord creator, omnipresent, generous, refulgent and
merciful. The holy thoughts and words of the song flow
ever fresh, pure, soothing and sanctifying like the
streams of soma in honour of the universal lord and
leading light of the world.






[Names: Vyantariksamamimita]
He, Agni, ordainer of the laws of existence,
manifesting in the highest heavens like the sun, protects
and sustains the laws of life, being ordainer and observer
of the laws of existence. Vaishvanara, immanent in the
heart of humanity, holy protector of yajnic actions,
pervades the firmament and, with his grand potential,
gives the magic touch of refulgence to the heaven of
joy.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Vyastabhnad]
Vaishvanara, leading light and life of existence,
universal friend and light giver, marvellous and all
immanent unmoved mover, holds the heaven and earth
in balance, covers, i.e., dispels darkness with light,
revolves heaven and earth, day and night, wearing both
like changing and alternate forms and thus sustains the






[Names: Apamupasthe, Agnimabharad]
In the midst of spatial oceans of particles in the
firmament, great scholars and scientists perceive,
receive and develop Agni celebrated in the Rks and
closely abide by it in study like people abiding by the
ruler for their benefit. Vayu, currents of cosmic energy
abiding in space, acts as carrier and bears Vaishvanara,
universal energy of heat and light from the far off sun
for the benefit of the world.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 8 593




[Names: Yugeyuge, Pavyeva]
Agni, leading light of the world, from year to
year, age by age, bear and bring for the dedicated
celebrants latest and newest wealth and honour for
advancement in knowledge and action. O brilliant ruler,
unaging and imperishable, strike down the agent of sin
and crime as you strike down a tree or a cloud by thunder
and lightning.






[Names: Asmakamagne, Vayam, Satinam]
Agni, leading light of the world, Vaishvanara,
kindly ruler of the hearts of humanity, among our people
who are blest with wealth, honour and power by virtue
of your gifts of protection and advancement, establish
anoble, courteous, inalienable and unaging social order
of freedom worthy of the brave. We pray we may win a
hundredfold and a thousandfold victories of food and
sustenance, energy and progress under your protection
and promotion.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Adabdhebhistava, Raksa]
ruling presence of the world, loving and adorable
guardian present in the three worlds of earth, heaven
and the firmament, presiding power of the three councils
of governance, legislation and education, with your
loving, non-violent and irresistible forces of defence
and protection for advancement, pray protect and
promote our saints and sages, scholars and the brave
heroes and leaders. And protect us all, sustain and
advance the courage and morale of all the celebrants
and generous givers and yajakas. Save us all, O lord
adorable, lead us all across the seas of darkness to the


Mandala 6/Sukta 9




[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Ahasca, Vaisvanaro, Jjyotisagnistamamsi]
The dark half of the earth’s daily round, the
night, and the bright half, the day, revolve alternately
in the terrestrial atmosphere alongwith their cognizable


characteristics. Vaishvanara Agni, the sun, darling of
the world, as it rises, overcomes and dispels the darkness


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 9 595


with light like a ruler eliminating the dark and evil forces
of society.






[Names: Naham, Kasya]
I know not the warp nor the woof of the web of
life. Nor do I know the design of the web which the
weavers weave together in their constant concourse of
nights and days. Whose son here or far off, pure and
purifying, could say what ought to be said by virtue of
the father, or teacher or the supreme teacher at the
closest? Who knows?






He surely knows the warp, he knows the woof,
he speaks of what ought to be spoken according to the
season and the circumstances, he who knows the flow
of the stream of life and time, who is the master and
keeper of the eternals, and eternal knowledge, who
knows and moves up and down, far and near, seeing
the reality by the eye of the other, the supreme lord of




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ayam, Jyotiramrtam, Ayam]
This supreme lord is the prime yajaka, giver and
receiver. See and know this immortal light among the
mortals. And this is that other, the individual soul,
unshaken, immovable, firmly seated in the personality,
immortal, growing in knowledge and vision and the
body in which it is born.






[Names: Dhruvam, Visve]
In order that the individual soul may see the one
immovable blissful divine light enshrined in the cave
of the heart, there is the mind, fastest of psychic faculties
in the personality of all those who direct themselves to
the one centre. All the organs of perception, in fact all
the illuminative elements of nature, all of equal
competence, united together and in unison with the mind
efficiently move toward the individual soul.





My ears, as I feel impelled to have a vision of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 10 597


the inner light of divinity, my eyes, the light of the spirit
enshrined in the heart, my mind which connects with
far off things, all move to help me see the light of divinity
within me. What at all shall I say more? What shall I




vatutaye nah.

Agni, light of life, life of the universe abiding
at the centre of darkness and mystery of existence, all
divinities of nature and humanity with all their sense
and power bow to you in awe. We pray may Vaishvanara,
immortal light of the soul and the universe, protect us
for safety, security and well being, protect us for peace
and progress.


Mandala 6/Sukta 10




[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Puro, Pura, Agnim, Agni]
In your well-planned and projected programmes
of yajnic development free from violence, first and
foremost, with right formulae and right process, place


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




in the fore front Agni, holy fire and leading light,
charming presence, brilliant and pure power leading to
the right goal by the right path. That power and presence
alone, kind and loving, immanent in all that exists, leads
holy acts of love and kindness to sure success.






[Names: Tamu, Agnibhir, Stomam, Susam]
Agni, sagely yajaka brilliant in knowledge and
fiery in will and action who inspire people with passion
and enthusiasm, pray listen to the song of celebration,
powerful as love and pure as ghrta, which wise and
thoughtful people sing and sanctify in honour of this






[Names: Pipaya, Sravasa, Citrabhis]
That sagely scholar thrives among mortals with
honour and excellence who serves and advances the
holy fire with songs of praise and holy materials. And
Agni too, commanding marvellous light and flames,
blesses him with wonderful forms of protection and
advances him on the paths of progress with plenty of
wealth, land, cows and gifts of knowledge and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 10 599


Ulach: US Il



[Names: Adha, Socisa]
As Agni rises and manifests itself like the sun,
itis seen from afar and, going over areas of darkness by
the paths it makes for itself, it fills the wide spaces of
heaven and earth with its light. The light and fire, pure
and purifying, thus overcomes the deep darkness of the
night with splendour and reveals its glory and the reality
of things.



Agni, leading light of life, for all time with
wonderful vigour, power and forces of action in perfect
safety and protection, bear and bring abundant wealth
and excellence for us and for those leaders of
magnificence who stand out before other people by


means and materials, honour and fame, courage and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Imam, Bharadvajesu]
Agni, leading light of life, loving and anxious
for the success of this yajnic programme of development
and service, bring holy food, energy and sustenance.
You always bless the men of munificence, power and
success with glory and excellence. Protect us in the
battles for science and energy and the wealth and values
of our choice.


suvirah.
Agni, leading light of life, drive away hate,
jealousy and the enemies. Promote food and energy,
protect and replenish the earth and her resources,


advance knowledge and holy speech. Bless us that we
may be happy and live a hundred years with heroic


Mandala 6/Sukta 11




[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Yajasva, Marutam, Maruta, Mitravaruna]
Keep the fire of yajna burning, O yajaka, loved,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 11 601


inspired and invoked, leading light of life most
reverential, bulwark of defence and protection like the
force and freshness of winds for the unity and
engagement of the people in common causes of creation
and development. Bring up for us Mitra and Varuna,
powers of love and friendship, judgement and
protection, the Ashvins ever true, heaven and earth, keep
them on ever active together for the advancement of






[Names: Tvam, Pavakaya]
Agni, you are our leading light of yajna,
charming and blissful, free from jealousy among
mortals, radiant and generous creator giver in our yajnic
endeavours, harbinger of wealth by the purifying flames
of fire with havis offered with the holy ladle of ghrta
and catalysed to fragrance. O lord of us all, develop
your own self of radiant fire and develop the social
structure of order.






[Names: Dhanya, Vepistho, Angirasam, Angirasa]
Blessed is the mind and intelligence in pursuit


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of life’s wealth and grace which concentrates on you,
Agni, for the celebrant soul to realise the manifestations
of Divinity when the devotee, most vibrant sage among
the Angirasas, wise saints and scholars, sings as a poet
in ecstasy for the cherished attainment.






[Names: Adidyutat, Ayum]
O Brilliant, self-refulgent, glorious power of
noble action, Agni, leading light of the world, rise over
the wide earth and heaven. All the five classes of people
bearing sacred offerings honour and celebrate you with
submission and homage as abundant giver of life’s
blessings, indeed as the very spirit of life. O man, rise
and join the Spirit omnipresent.






[Names: Vrnje, Amyaksi]
Surely when the grass is gathered with
reverence, the ladle overflowing with ghrta is raised
over the fire with sacred hymns, the vedi is firmly settled
on the ground, then the yajna is accomplished on the
earth as the eye is established in the sun (from birth to
death with the last rites).


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 12 603






[Names: Dasasya, Rayah]
Agni, leading light of life, shining in infinite
manifestations, cosmic yajaka and giver of fragrance,
blazing with divine flames of fire, omnipotent generator
of strength, bestow on us wealths of existence so that,
blest with the light of Divinity, we may complete our
life’s journey and avoid the paths of sin.


Mandala 6/Sukta 12






[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Madhye, Ayam, Socisa]
Agni, ruling light of the world, cosmic yajaka
in the midst of the yajnic house of space, radiates as
light of the sun to join the heaven and earth together.
So does this yajaka, child of courage and forbearance,
observing the laws of truth and yajna in the midst of the
house of yajna, shine from afar like the sun and extends
over earth and heaven (with the fragrance of fire).




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Trisadhasthastataruso]
Agni, adorable self-refulgent ruling power of
life and yajna, let the light of the sun join your radiance
as in yajna for universal good so that the light pervasive
in heaven, firmament and earth like a dynamic saving
power of vitality may create and develop means and
materials for wealth and prosperity, honour and
excellence for humanity.






[Names: Tejistha, Adrogho]
Agni, whose brilliant pervasiveness blazing in
the rays of the sun and shining over the forests radiates
advancing on its path like the sun in orbit, manifests by
its self-refulgence in herbs and trees as a power free
from hate and jealousy, a presence indispensable and
inevitable, dynamic and imperishable.


[Names: Sasmakebhiretari, Drvanno]
That refulgent ruling power of the world, Agni,


knows and resides with all that exists and it is honoured
and celebrated in our welcome homes by us with all


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 12 605


our strength and enthusiasm. Manifest even in the
simplest forms and in wood and forests, loving, noble
by intelligence and holy action, Agni is honoured with
homage and yajnas as father, celebrated like a
tempestuous power and loved like the light of dawn.






[Names: Adha, Sadyo]
And then people admire and celebrate its light
and splendour which it releases, refines and intensifies
into forms as it goes along on way by the earth, which
power whoever knows, always and instantly radiating,
flowing, pervading, flying, moving and shaking like
flood and storm, the man becomes brilliant with
knowledge and shines with the power of superior arms
and armaments.






[Names: Agnibhiri, Vesi, Satahimah]
Agni, ruling light of the world, instant dynamic
and omnipresent power burning with all kinds of light
and fire, protect us from reproach, create and bring us
wealth, honour and excellence, ward off and destroy
hate, enmity and evil, and let us all enjoy and celebrate


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




a full hundred years of life in the company of brave
children and heroic warriors of the earth.


Mandala 6/Sukta 13






[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Tvad, Srusti]
Agni, ruling light of life, lord of good fortune,
honour and excellence of the world, from you arise and
grow all riches, honours and graces of life like branches
of the tree growing and extending from the same one
root. Sure and beneficent wealth, strength and spirit to
break the demon of darkness, thunder for the cloud and
rain from the skies, glorious showers of the waters of
life and the adorable flow of holy action, all these too
arise and expand from you alone.







[Names: Tvam, Agne]
Agni, leading light of the world, like a
jewel wealths of the world. Power of extra ordinary
deeds of glory, you move and abide everywhere like


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 13 607


the circumambient wind, omnipresent. O refulgent and
generous friend of the world like the sun, you are the
light and path-maker for our pursuit of the highest and
widest paths of universal truth and life’s onward flow,
and you are the gracious dispenser of the fruits of human
action.






Agni, leading light of life, only that wise and
vibrant sage, observer, protector and promoter of truth
and the paths of truth, destroys the evil and darkness of
the world with strength and courage, and only he
commands the knowledge and power of a worthy leader
whom you, O lord omniscient and omnipresent in the
world of truth, call, inspire and bless with wealth and
fire for action and success, and whom you accept as





[Names: Yaste, Visvam]
Agni, O child of omnipotence and maker of the
brave, generous and brilliant ruler of the world, whoever
is the mortal who with songs of praise and prayer and
noble yajnic deeds receives by the vedi, seat of yajna,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




his focus and favour for action, he abounds in cherished
gifts of life and commands the wealth and power of the
world with all treasure sources of prosperity.






[Names: Krnosi]
Agni, leader and ruler of the world, creator of
strength, courage and forbearance, bear and bring those
renowned acts of enlightenment and brave heroes and
that abundant food and nourishment, cattle wealth,
health and age which you create with your strength and
power for sustenance and support of the people and
weaker sections of the community and in defence against
the wolfish thieves and violent enemies.






[Names: Vadma, Visvabhir, Satahimah]
Agni, leading light of the world, creator and
giver of strength and forbearance, great and eminently
enlightened leader, speak to us of truth and knowledge.
Lead us to have brave progressive children, grand
children and heroic warriors. Let us have complete
happiness and fulfilment with all our songs of praise


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 14 609


and prayer and let us enjoy life for a full hundred years
in the company of our brave children.


Mandala 6/Sukta 14






[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Agna, Bhasannu]
The mortal who dedicates his faith and worship,
reason and intelligence with all his thoughts and
intentions, devotion and prayers to Agni, light and fire
of life, surely shines as first and foremost in excellence,
blest with food and energy, knowledge and
enlightenment for all round protection and progress.






[Names: Agniriddhi, Agnim]
Agni is enlightened and giver of enlightenment,
wisest and most worshipful, a seer of ultimate reality
and revelation. Thoughtful people honour and adore
Agni, high priest of cosmic yajna and giver of all
blessings, in their yajnic acts of creation and






[Names: Nana, Turvanto]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Successful people in the socio-economic field
vie with each other in various ways for protection and
progress, overcoming anti-social elements for the
purpose of challenging and defeating the unprincipled
by their ways of discipline.





[Names: Agnirapsamrtisaham, Yasya, Savasah, Satravo]
Agni blesses and makes way for the rise and

advancement of the brave man of action who challenges
and conquers the attacks of evil and protects and
promotes the good life of truth, because in the face of
his courage and valour the enemies shake with fear and





[Names: Agnirhi, Sahava]
Agni, generous and brilliant leader, for sure,
with his knowledge and power protects mortals from
hate, jealousy and enmity. He is an open and
spontaneous protector, and whoever the man he protects,
his wealth and honour is safe, open and unchallengeable
in the battles of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 611


[Names: Accha, Mitramaho, Vihi]
tarema.


Agni, leading light of life, generous and
refulgent lord, greatest friend adorable, speak to us well,
specially to men of brilliance and the people who love
to know of the knowledge of heaven and earth, and of
the three fires of earth, firmament and the solar sphere:
fire, wind, and electricity and light. Bring us the good
life of truth and all round well-being and a happy home
for peaceful living. Help us get over jealousy, sin and
crime and evil conduct, help us get over malignity,
reproach and enmity, protect us, save us and let us cross
over the seas of life by your grace.


Mandala 6/Sukta 15







[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Vitahavya, Angirasa, Rshi, Imami, Vetid, Sucirjyok]
O sage and scholar, this holy guest of yours
visiting and waking you up at dawn, guardian and
sustainer of all people of the world, you honour and
adore with sacred words of song. He comes from the
heaven of light, is wholly pure and immaculate by nature


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and, subsisting in the earth and everywhere, constantly
consumes what never perishes, never decreases.




[Names: Mitram, Mitra]
divedive.


Agni whom the wise ones discover in sun rays
and generate in arani wood is firm, well placed, sweet
as nectar and adorable. As such, O leading light of
marvellous knowledge, kind as a friend and rising high
in flames of fire and light of life, ever pleased with the
supplicant, you are honoured and exalted with holy
songs of celebration day by day by the devotees.






[Names: Rayah, Bharadvajaya]
Agni, child of omnipotence, leading light and
giver of strength and courage, loving ruler free from
jealousy and grabbing cruelty, be promoter of the
efficient and the expert, be the master of external,
internal and victorious power and honour, bring
settlement, peace and comfort for the people, rise in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 613


expansion for the giver and receiver of yajnic creations,
and honour the man of science and technology with
recognition and advancement.






[Names: Dyutanam, Agnim, Vipram]
Honour and felicitate with songs of praise and
place of eminence the radiant Agni, leading light and
pioneer, dear as an honoured guest, harbinger of peace
and joy, holy organiser and creative high priest of the
joint programmes of humanity, like a vibrant sage and
scholar, speaker of heavenly words, giver and carrier
of yajnic materials of fragrance and wealth of honour
and above all a beacon of light for advancement.






[Names: Pavakaya, Turvan, Usaso]
Free from age and decay, Agni, with purifying
splendour of enlightenment, shines over the earth like
the dawns with light at break of day, rushing and
overpowering darkness like a war hero on course in
battle, thirsting for victory in its blaze.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Agnimagnim, Agnimagni]
devesu vanate hi no duvah.


In the daily business and holy observances of
life, honour and serve Agni regularly day by day with
offers of fuel and fragrant food. Agni is dear and dearer,
welcome as a learned visitor worthy of honour and
felicitation. Serve and exalt imperishable Agni with
words of faith and reverence. Refulgent Agni vests
brilliant divinities of nature and eminent scholars with
valuable wealth and knowledge and blesses us with
cherished gifts of life.




[Names: Samiddhamagnim, Sucim]
ahe jatavedasam.


I glorify the lighted fire, pure and purifying
power, firm and foremost in holy works of love and
non-violent development. In our state of peace and
comfort, we celebrate and pray to the vibrant light giver
of gifts, universally admired, free from jealousy, poetic
creator, all knowing and present in all that exists.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 615





[Names: Tvam, Devdasasca]
Agni, life of life, light of existence, brilliant
saints and sages and ordinary mortals too for ages and
ages have meditated on you, light divine, with homage
and self-surrender and found their haven and home in
your presence, O lord disseminator of fragrance,
receiver of homage and giver of grace, immortal,
protector, adorable, ever awake, infinite, ruler and
sustainer of humanity.






[Names: Vibhusannagna, Anu, Sivo]
Agni, lord beatific, purifying fire, gracious to
both wise and innocent according to your eternal law,
self-refulgent light giver for the brilliant and generous,
you pervade heaven and earth with your saving
presence. As we meditate on your holy light and vision
of knowledge, in consequence by your grace be kind
and good to us, O lord of three worlds, omnipresent,
omniscient and omnificent.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Vayunani, Agnir]
We, people of limited knowledge, honour, adore
and worship Agni, lord of glorious flames of action, of
beatific vision, gracious wielder of the universe, lord
in all knowable objects and laws of existence, bless us
and reveal to us, immortal souls, all that ought to be





[Names: Tamagne, Savasota]
Agni, lord of light and grace, him you protect
and promote with fulfilment who dedicates his thought
and action to you and meditates on you, lord omnipotent
of universal vision and poetic creation. And whoever
offers you rising flames of yajna and progressive action,
you shower him with wealth, power, honour and
courage.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 617




[Names: Tvamagne]
Agni, lord of force and forbearance, we pray,
you protect us, the devotees, against the violent and the


May food and water free from negativity, mighty
powerful against the violent come to you. May cherished
wealth and power of a hundred and thousandfold
efficacy come to you.






[Names: Agnirhota, Devanamuta]
Agni is the cosmic highpriest of the dynamics
of existence, lord protector of the house of life, ruler
omniscient and omnipresent of all that is, and he knows
the origin of all that comes into existence. He is the
most adorable lord of the bounties of nature and of
mortal humanity. May he, lord of truth and law, accept
us as participants of cosmic yajna and carry on the yajna
of creativity for us.





All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, lord of light and fire of purity, high priest
of cosmic yajna, receiver and giver of fragrance of the
people’s non-violent programmes of life, harbinger and
overwatcher like a bird of flight, breaker and integrator
of natural evolution, you pervade the laws and processes
of nature. Let the universe grow ever expansive by your
omnipotence and, O youthful spirit of life, bring us today
what the noblest gifts of life are for us from you for our




tarema.


Agni, light of life, Maghavan, lord of cosmic
glory, you reveal to us, bring us, the daintiest delicacies
and strongest powers of life and wield the heaven and
earth together to sustain the expansive universe. Protect
us in the struggles of life so that we may cross over all
evils of the world, cross through all of them, win over
all of them by your grace and protection.






[Names: Kulayinam]
Agni, lord commander of glorious flame and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 15 619


power, highpriest and foremost yajaka, with brilliant
nobilities of nature and humanity, take over this home
and sit on this vedi covered with holy grass, the home
full of people and prosperity and overflowing with
fragrant ghrta, and lead the yajna to a noble end for the
yajamana in honour of Savita, lord creator, the cosmic
organiser of Nature’s yajna.






[Names: Imamu, Yamankuyantam]
This actual as well as potential vibrant energy
of fire and electricity, scholars of nature produce by
rotative friction as described in the Atharva science of
Veda, the energy which travels in waves and is far
reaching and deep penetrative for darkness and things
hidden in darkness.






[Names: Janisva]
Produce the fire and generate the energy for
noble humanity, for universal good and total well being.
Bring up the brilliant scholars together, collect generous
and imperishable energies of nature which advance the
truth of science and glorify the laws of nature, and let
the yajna reach the heights of heaven.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Vayamu, Asthuri]
awa




Agni, leading light and power, sustainer of
people’s homes, we exalt you and develop power and
energy higher and higher with knowledge and inputs of
fuel so that our multipower transports and domestic
us by your penetrative and far reaching lustre of
knowledge and vision.


Mandala 6/Sukta 16






[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Tvamagne, Devebhir]
Agni, self-refulgent leading light of the
universe, you are the chief highpriest of all yajnic
developments of nature and of all creative and
developmental programmes of humanity for common
universal good along with the brilliancies of nature and
nobilities of humanity among the human community.






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 621


O lord almighty, with inspiring words of
enlightenment and bliss, consecrate our yajna, join us,
bring up noble and brilliant divinities and with them






[Names: Vettha, Agne]
O refulgent lord of knowledge and wisdom,
Agni, you are the prime agent of holy action in corporate
programmes, you know the highways and byways of
existence, and you command the brilliant powers of
nature and humanity by your instant moving presence
across time and space.



[Names: Tvamile]
I worship you, lord both immanent and
transcendent, with all my knowledge, power and
potential. You are the ordainer and sustainer of life. I
pray for your gift of peace and well-being and yearn for
your company, adorable lord, in the yajna of corporate
action.



[Names: Tvamima, Puru, Divodasaya, Divodasa, Bharadvajaya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




You are the source giver of all these many
cherished gifts of life for the enlightened, generous,
creative yajaka, master of knowledge, wealth and
honour dedicated to social service and charity.


[Names: Tvam, Srnvan]
Imperishable harbinger of light and wisdom, like
a divine messenger, listen to the praise and prayer of
the vibrant sage and scholar and bring up the man of


exceptional brilliance who commands the knowledge
of nature and Divinity.






[Names: Yajnesu]
Agni, leading light of the world, learned mortals
worship and adore you, refulgent giver of abundance,
in corporate acts of creativity and development for the
achievement of divine gifts of success and





[Names: Tava, Visve]
All generous and charitable people inspired with
love and desire yearn for a vision of your presence and
holy action. O lord, let us have the vision and let us join


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 623








Agni, leading light of life, ruler of the world,
you are the generous performer of the yajna of existence,
deeply benevolent to humanity by holy words of
wisdom. O lord, bless the loving people with the light
and wisdom of heaven, most enlightened as you are.


[Names: Agna]
Come Agni, sung and celebrated, to join our
feast of enlightenment, accept our homage to create the


gifts of life and yajnic development, and take the
honoured seat in the assembly.





[Names: Brhacchoca]
Angira, breath of life, light of the world,
expansive, lustrous pure and most youthful, we honour
and exalt you with offers of fuel and ghrta to raise the
flames of fire to the heights.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sanah, Sravayyamaccha, Brhadagne]
Agni, lord of light and lustre, mighty expansive
power, you bless us graciously with admirable strength
and courage worthy of universal honour and fame.






[Names: Murdhno]
Agni, light of life, the wise scholar and devotee,
Atharva, dedicated to love and non-violence, discovers
and churns you out without violence from the highest
sphere above the skies which supports and sustains the





[Names: Tamu, Vrtrahanam]
The seer divining into the meaning of Veda-
mantra, who is the child of love and non-violence
dedicated to scholarly teachers, lights and develops you,
breaker of the clouds and shatterer of the strongholds
of darkness.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 625


[Names: Dhanamjayam]
The bold and generous scholar, leading light of
the paths of life, lights and develops you, Agni, destroyer
of the darkness of life and winning source of life’s
wealth in battle after battle for progress and prosperity.



[Names: Ehyu, Ebhirvardhasa]
Agni, leading light and pioneer, come, listen,
thus do I speak in honour of you, and listen further to
higher words, and rise higher with these words sweet
and soothing like rays of the moon and exciting as
draughts of soma.



[Names: Yatra, Tatra]
O leading light, where, wherever in fact, is your
mind, there you hold your efficiency and identity, and
there indeed you create your haven and home.






[Names: Nahi]
Never is the perfection, abundance and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




fruitfulness of your food and sustenance ever wasted
away, instead it increases, O haven and home of life
and creator of its sustenance. Hence accept our homage
and reverence.





[Names: Agniragami, Purucetanah, Purucetana, Divodasasya, Divodasas]
Agni, light of life, sustainer of existence, breaker
of the clouds of darkness and giver of the bliss of rain,
all enlightened and protector of generous enlightened
souls, is attained by relentless service, yajna and practice
of meditation by the man of universal charity.





[Names: Vanvannavato]
That Agni, light of the world, all loving,
upon us all the wealth, honour and excellence of the
world solely by his greatness and power.



[Names: Brhat]
Agni, light of life, pioneer of the world, just as
the sun with its splendour of light reveals and illuminates


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 627


the world more and more as ever before, so you too, as
ever before, with latest, well controlled and onward
moving light and wealth, honour and excellence of
knowledge, pervade, illuminate and expand the world
of humanity.






[Names: Arca]
O friends, offer your songs of adoration and
yajnic programmes of corporate action and advancement
in dedication to Agni, leading light of humanity, with
full strength and unshakable courage. Thus you worship
the lord and sing songs of exaltation in honour of the
all knowing illuminant power of divinity.






[Names: Sahi, Diutasca]
May that Agni, cosmic highpriest of nature’s
yajna, receiver of oblations and giver of the fruits of
corporate action, visionary power of creative holiness,
harbinger and disseminator of fragrance like a
messenger, creator and distributor of the finest things
of life, join us and be seated with us on the vedi for all
ages of human history.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Marutam, Maruta, Vaso]
Agni, leading light of the world, giver of
peaceful and progressive settlement, bring up and
honour in unison those refulgent powers of purity and
self discipline of universal law, Mitra and Varuna, sun
and moon with coolness of the oceans, love and
friendship, brilliant divinities of nature and humanity,
human and natural forces vibrant as winds, and the
wealth of heaven and earth on the vedi of our corporate
programmes of yajna.






[Names: Vasvi, Urjo]
Agni, leading light of the world, immortal source
of universal strength, your equal vision and provision
of earthly settlement and peace for all the mortals
yearning for love and sustenance in life is all time sure
and true.






[Names: Kratvadaastu, Srestho, Marta]
O lord, may the holy man of yajnic action and
charity, generously giving, loving and offering homage
in adoration to you, rise to eminence here and now, be
master of noble wealth and follow the path of rectitude
to ultimate freedom.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 629






[Names: Taranto]
Agni, all those devotees of yours, who enjoy
your protection and pray for food, energy and sustenance
for a full happy life, cross over indigence and hostility,
wiping off the envious and the stingy hoarders away
from their path.





[Names: Agnistigmena, Socisa, Agnistigm, Agnirno]
Agni, with the flaming light of pure refulgence,
dries up and burns off all hostility of the world and
brings the wealth of life for us, dedicated supplicants
and celebrants.






[Names: Suviram, Jahi]
Lord omniscient, all immanent of universal
vision, bring us the wealth of life coupled with noble
strength and brave progeny. O lord of creative action,
eliminate the cruel and wicked forces of negativity in
the interest of progress.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Raksa]
Save us, O lord omnipresent 11 existence, from
sin and evil. O lord of omniscient vision, O voice of
divinity, give us the ultimate protection and security in



[Names: Yono, Tasmannah]
Agni, leading light of purity and justice,
whatever the malignant force of negation, whatever the
mortal power that strikes to eliminate us, give us the
strength and protect us against that evil, to survive and
move on.



[Names: Marto]
Brilliant lord of love and justice, with your
flames of fire, the power of your word of judgement,
prevention and punishment, stop that person alongwith
the evil deed that intends or is intended to hurt us and
to destroy us.






[Names: Sarma]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 631


Agni, lord of power and forbearance, give a
spacious and comfortable home and security to the
person who commands knowledge and means of service
and sustenance for the society.






[Names: Agnirvrtrani, Samiddhah]
Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, bright,
pure and purifying, invoked, invited and lighted in the
seat of yajna, keen on wealth, honour and excellence
with self-approbation and public exaltation, should
destroy the evils and endeavour to raise the power and
prosperity of the human nation.






[Names: Garbhe, Sidannrtasya]
Agni, life of life and light of the universe,
present in the interior of mother earth, sustainer of the
sun, father of earth and her children, shining in his own
eternal self, in the individual soul and in the world of
imperishable Prakrti, the spirit of the universe, pervades
and inspires the ruling laws of eternal truth and the world
of existence.






[Names: Brahma]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Agni, lord all knowing, all watching, who shine
in the light of the sun, bless us with the food of life that
sustains the children of the earth.






[Names: Upatvaranvasamdrsam]
Agni, blazing light of life, lord of bliss and
beatific vision, source giver of the power of action and
forbearance, blest with the food of life and light of the
spirit, we sing songs of adoration and send up our words
of gratitude to you.





[Names: Upacchayamiva]
Agni, lord of bliss and eternal protection, just
as a person runs to the shade for relief from the blazing
sun, SO may we, shining as pure gold, rise and come to
your presence, the blissful shade of divinity, our ultimate
haven and home.






Agni, lord protector of life, destroyer of killer
the fierce rays of the sun, you destroy the strongholds


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 633
of the enemies of life.


[Names: Ayam, Visamagnim]
Like the darling new born baby held in the hand,
like a beautiful bracelet worn on the wrist, the yajakas
place the fire in the vedi, light and raise it, since it is the
blessed source giver of wealth and joy for the people.






[Names: Bharata]
Place, light and raise the brilliant and generous
fire in your home for favour of the bounties of nature
and humanity since it is the immense source giver of
wealth, honour and excellence. Let the holy fire be
instituted and maintained so that you abide in peace
and joy.


[Names: Syona]
Sharpen and constantly intensify the light of
universal Agni, spirit of life, manifested in the all
immanent fire of yajna, like a dear guest worthy of


reverence in the delightful home, the spirit which is
protector, promoter and really the head of family.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Aram]
Agni, leading light of knowledge and power,
generous creator and giver, yoke those motive powers
of yours to the chariot which are best and fastest and
which transport you to the destination of your love and






Agni, leading light of knowledge, generous
pioneer, come fast in all your glory, bring us the dearest
powers for sustenance and advancement for the sake of
peace and well-being, and bring the noble brilliancies
along to celebrate success with the delight of soma.





[Names: Udagne, Soca]
Agni, unaging sustainer of life, shining with the
light of excellence and blazing with glory, rise up with
flames of fire and shine on with inexhaustible splendour,
and help the shining people too to rise in the light of
knowledge and excellence of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 16 635






[Names: Hotaram]
The mortal, who, bearing holy materials of yajna
with love and reverence, serves and worships Agni,
generous and brilliant yajaka of the universe abiding
and operative in the unity of cosmic law and universal
truth, and who prays to the lord with folded hands raised
in surrender and supplication, would shine over earth
and heaven with divine favour and joy.






Agni, O lord of light, omniscience and
omnipotence, thus do we bear and offer the homage of
surrender and self-sacrifice to you, prepared with love
of the heart and sanctified with holy chant of Rgveda,
and we pray may all our people be for you, virile and
generous, inspired with love and brilliance of






[Names: Agnim, Yena]
Thus do brilliant sages light the holy fire and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




worship Agni, leading light and pioneer, lord of action,
foremost leader, highest breaker of the densest clouds
and harbinger of the showers of generosity, who bears
and brings for us the wealth and honours of the world
and who, with his omnipotence, destroys the wicked
hostilities of humanity.


Mandala 6/Sukta 17






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Piba, Somamabhi, Indra, Savobhih]
Indra, mighty invincible lord of the force of
cosmic energy, wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, drink
and celebrate with soma while you are sung and
celebrated since you break the cloud of showers as the
sun, release the vast and great wealth of cows, milk and
ghrta, and with your powers and action destroy all
unfriendly and antilife forces of the world.






[Names: Saim]
The one that is simple and natural in conduct,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 17 637


saviour across the seas, splendid and self-protected,
mightiest among people, breaker of clouds and hostile
strongholds, wielder of the thunderbolt and strongest
winner, such is Indra, and such, O lord, defend, protect
and promote what is won, release the wonderful energies
and overcome the on-slaughts of hostile forces.






[Names: Avih, Suryam, Surya]
Thus protect and promote life and humanity as
ever before, and let the adventure give you the pride of
pleasure. Listen to the Veda, protect the Word of
knowledge, and be exalted by our songs of celebration.
Uncover the light of the sun, enjoy food and drink,
destroy the hostilities, release the speech of humanity
to freedom, and unshackle the lands from bondage into






[Names: Mahamanunam]
Indra, self-refulgent lord of your own essential
power and grandeur, exalted ruler, may these drinks of
soma thus enjoyed shower you with the joy and ecstasy
of victory. So do the people moved with the excitement


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of self-confidence and divine exaltation celebrate you,
great, perfect, potent, magnificent, and victorious yet
forbearing lord of power as you are.






[Names: Yebhih, Usasam, Usasa, Mahamadrim]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, by the powers and
forces with which you place the sun in orbit and rouse
the dawn on course, and vest them both in light and
splendour, and with which you break the strongest
mountain asunder, by the same power and force, O lord
of love and bliss, from your own assembly seat, inspire
and strengthen the great inexhaustible human energy,
generous as cloud of showers, across the earth to rise
and shine.






[Names: Tava, Aurnordura, Angirasvan, Angirasva]
With your wisdom, holy deeds and divine power,
you develop ripeness in the unripe and maturity in the
immature minds and open the strong doors and fill them
with light for the bright people. Thus does the lord of
life and breath energy of freedom liberate the lands and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 17 639
their speech from the violence of tyrants.






[Names: Papratha, Adharayo]
Indra, almighty lord of glorious action and
potential, you create, pervade and sustain the wide earth
and heaven and you sustain, support and order the
compact earth, heaven and the expansive universe, and
you sustain the compact earth, firmament and the solar
sphere, ancient, great and generous mothers of the
children of divinity and themselves the children of
mother Prakrti and the divine law of nature.






[Names: Adha, Adevo, Indramatra]
Indra, lord almighty of bliss and enlightenment,
all the noble powers of nature and humanity hold on to
you, lord absolute and omnipotent, for success in their
life’s endeavours. And when anyone bereft of light
engages in contest against the enlightened, then the
enlightened people maintain their faith in the heavenly
power and win the battle for light and bliss here itself.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Dyauscit, Ahim, Sayathe]
And then even the light of heaven doubly bows
to you, first in awe of the thunderbolt and then also in
awe of your majesty of divine passion, when Indra,
cosmic energy, strikes the approaching dark cloud and
lays it down in showers and sends it to sleep.






[Names: Nikamamarama]
O lord of blazing glory, simple, natural and
forceful, Tvashta, the cosmic maker of forms, shaped
in nature the mighty hundred-angled thousand pointed
thunderbolt of your cherished design for relentless
strikes by which you break the roaring cloud of darkness
for showers of rain in the cycle of seasons.





[Names: Ardhan, Marutah, Maruta, Pusa]
Indra, O potent spirit of the cosmos, let all
vibrant creative and constructive forces of nature and
humanity join in unison and exalt you, ruler of the world,
ripening and maturing a hundred mighty gifts of vitality


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 17 641


in your service. May Vishnu, omnipresent sustaining
power of universal nourishment, ever active on the
move, fill the three oceans of earth, heaven and the
middle regions with life giving nectar of bliss and
excitement for this Indra to break down the cloud of
darkness, evil and want.






[Names: Tasamanu]
Indra, ruling power of the world, creates the
great flood of the rivers collected and controlled all
round and releases the waves of the waters to flow.
Accordingly he prepares the paths of water movement
downward and lets the waters join the sea (thereby
completing the natural cycle of water energy across the






[Names: Indram, Suviram]
Thus may our new homage of praise, prayer and
yajnic service reach Indra, omnipotent lord of the
universe, absolute doer of all actions, mighty, refulgent,
unaging and imperishable, giver of strength and
forbearance, commander of heroes, all armed and
wielder of the thunderbolt of nature’s cyclic energy, and
may our prayer move the lord for our protection and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sano, Bharadvaje]
May Indra, lord ruler of the universe, accept us,
vibrant seekers of light, for the gift of speed and progress
toward victory, honour and excellence, food and energy,
and all round wealth of life. May Indra bless the brave
leaders of humanity, and may the lord establish us all in
the light of divinity and guide us on the path of total
worldly fulfilment and freedom of ultimate salvation.


15. Aya vajam devahitam sanema madema satahimah
suvirah.


Thus do we offer ardent praise and seek to share
divine favour and inspiration fit for dedicated humanity
and pray we may live happy a full hundred years blest
with noble and heroic generations of progeny.


Mandala 6/Sukta 18




[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Tamu, Asalhamugram, Indrah, Indra, Puruhuta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 18 643


Adore him who tames and controls brute force,
loves and shares life with all, unshaken and all admired,
that is Indra, potent ruler of the world, intrepidable,
generous and creative of people. With these words of
celebration, exalt him, and you too would rise.






[Names: Brhadrenus]
Indra is a hero, strong and realistic, a warrior,
socially committed, all loving and friendly, eloquent,
simple, natural and honest, dynamic, stormy in
movement, and a unique embodiment of courage and
tolerance among the best of thinking humanity.






[Names: Tvam, Asti]
Indra, you for sure are the one who fight out
and control the wicked and violent elements and bring
the world communities together for a united world of
progressive and cultured humanity. That indeed is your
strength, real heroism, is it not? Pray speak of that
courage, competence and vision according to the needs
of time and season.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sadiddhi, Ugramugrasya]
Real and true indeed is the courage and tolerance
of the world hero, yours all, I believe, O boldest and
most forbearing warrior, which defines the light, power
and victory of the ruler who is the instant victor over
the victorious, blazing over the violent, stronger than
the strongest and most powerful non-violent destroyer
of the destructive.






[Names: Tannah, Hannacyutacyud]
That age-old friendship of ours with you may,
we pray, be firmly established in you and remain thus
with the vibrant celebrants too who speak this same way
in praise of you, and just as the sun breaks the cloud
and opens the flood gates of rain showers, so may you,
O lord imperishable and generous, shaker of the
otherwise unshaken, destroy the darkness of evil, inspire
and advance the dynamic leaders, and open all the gates
of the human cities on the world highways.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 18 645




That is the lord worthy of homage with all our
intelligence and holy actions, refulgent maker of leaders
and achievers in the great human struggle against evil
and deprivation. That wielder of adamantine power is
to be exalted and glorified in the battles of humanity
for the advancement and progress of our children and
grand children for future generations.






[Names: Savasota]
With immortal power he continues and extends
the name and identity of humanity and, as highest leader
of supreme human virtues and all pervasive with human
presence, he advances the human generations with
honour and excellence, courage and valour, wealth and
fame, and manly vigour and splendour.




[Names: Vrnak, Susnamindrah, Sayathaya]
The man who never suffers from error, never


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




remains self-possessed, conscious of his essential
identity and constancy of character, who shakes the ogre,
the hoarder, the vociferous bully and the exploiter, and
favours the generous, peace loving and enlightened
persons, is Indra, worthy to be the ruler for the peace
and progress of the common-wealth of nations for sure.






[Names: Udavata, Dhisva, Purudatra]
And by raising and refining the admirable power
of action, O lord ruler and sovereign, ascend your chariot
for the battle of life against darkness and deprivation.
Take up the thunderous weapon of power and force in
the right hand, generous lord, shine in all your majesty
and glory of action and destroy the force and wiles of
the enemy.






[Names: Agnirna, Suskam]
Just as fire burns down dry forest woods to ash,
so Indra, O lord ruler awful as thunder, shatter the forces
of terror and destruction, you who, with a mighty blow
of the weapon of justice and punishment, crush the evils
of fear, deceit and terror.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 18 647






[Names: Yahi]
Indra, ruler of the world, lord of abundant
wealth, power, honour and excellence, child of
omnipotence, universally invoked and adored, who join
and reshape the uniform and various powers of nature
and humanity, come here to a thousand devotees by a
thousand ways with wealth of a thousand forms of food,
energy and advancement, lord whose favour and
friendship even the semipious desire to have.





[Names: Nasya, Purumayasya, Purumayas]
The greatness and glory of this lord of
abundance, most ancient and venerable, self-refulgent
tamer of evil, transcends the bounds of the earth. There
is no enemy, no equal measure or rival, nor any defined
seat of stability of this self-sufficient, omnipotent and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Kutsam, Kutsa]
Surely great are your acts, activities and ways
of earthly accomplishment today, as you bring a
thousand gifts of wealth, knowledge and competence
to this mighty, vibrating and hospitable humanity and
raise the earth to the heights of speed and progress.






[Names: Anu, Karo]
Refulgent lord, brilliant sages of the world
rejoice in unison with you in honour as the dispeller of
demonic darkness and adore you as wisest of divine
visionaries since, adored and exalted by them, you bring
gifts of freedom and deliverance for the distressed as
well as for the brilliant and give them health and material




[Names: Krsva]
Indra, lord omnipotent, heaven and earth and


the immortals and brilliants of nature and humanity
move in observance of that support and splendour of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 19 649


yours. O lord of action, inspire us to accomplish what
is yet to be accomplished and to create the latest songs
of adoration by yajnas and yajnic acts of social
development for all.


Mandala 6/Sukta 19






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Mahan, Asmadyrag]
May the great Indra, the sun, overseeing and
pervasive and expansive over heaven and earth,
impetuous but unafflictive, come to us with auxiliary
forces and grow vast and high, helping noble work by
the assistance of active and expert workers.






[Names: Indrameva, Asalhena, Savasa]
Whoever with relentless action and intelligence
and unchallengeable power and courage, for the sake
of development and progress, dedicates himself to Indra,
sun and cosmic energy, vast and high, pervasive,
impetuous, indestructible, ever fresh and youthful, and
forceful, soon for sure grows to power and prosperity


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




to the full.






[Names: Prthu, Srvamsi, Yutheva, Indrabhya, Indrabh]
Indra,, lord of power and peaceful controller,
extend your open, generous and sanctifying hand of
plentiful abundance to us for the gift of food and energy,
power and fame, and guide us constantly in our battle
of life for victory like a shepherd watching, controlling
and guiding his flock.






[Names: Indram, Yatha]
O children of the earth, for the sake of you all
here in the world, we invoke, invite and adore that lord
Indra, fearless giver of joy, with all his power and forces,
in pursuit of knowledge, peace and progress, just as the
sagely celebrants of all time do and live blameless,
irreproachable, and safe and secure against fear and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 19 651




[Names: Dhrtavrato, Somavrddhah, Somavrddha, Puruksuh, Puruksu]
Indra is the lord ordainer and observer of
unshakable discipline of law and order, giver of wealth,
exalted in honour and excellence, and abundant treasure-
hold of cherished riches of the world. Indeed all wealth,
powers and honours of the world move, each in its own
right course, and concentrate in him just as the rivers
flow and all together join and concentrate in the sea.






[Names: Savistham, Visva]
Heroic Indra, destroyer of the evil, leader of the
brave and tempestuous forces of humanity, bring us the
strongest power and valour, most burning and blazing
lustre and dignity, and give us showers of all the wealth
and honours of the world good for the people for their
joy and celebration.





[Names: Yaste, Yena]
Indra, invincible hero, ruler of life, bless us with
that righteous passion of yours, challenging and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




victorious yet forbearing and unhurtful, which inspires
all good virtues and by which, under your protection,
we may triumph in life and live happy in the company
of our children and grand children.






[Names: Satrun]
Indra, lord of life and ruler of the world, bless
us with that overwhelming vigour and power victorious
in our struggles for wealth and prosperity ever rising in
excellence, expertise and generosity by which, under
your guidance and protection, we may be successful in
our battles of life against negative forces and win over
our own people and others unrelated, strangers and






[Names: Susmo]
Indra, ruler of the world, may overwhelming and
generous vigour, force and power come and flow for
you all round from above and below, front and behind,
all ways and every way constantly without break, and
may it come to us from all sides. O lord of peace,
prosperity and happiness, hold, protect and promote the
wealth, honour and excellence of life for us and bless


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 19 653
us with the grace of holy living on earth.






[Names: Nrvat]
Lord of humanity, leader of world pioneers,
we share and enjoy your most human favour and
protection and have the cherished graces of life with
revelations of the Word and actions of holiness. O
refulgent lord, I see your divine glory of both heaven
and earth prevailing among rulers and the people, and
pray sustain this glory of life, great, constant, expansive
and infinite.





[Names: Marutvantam, Marutvanta, Visvasahamavase]
Here on the vedi of this dear green earth, for the
protection of life and the environment and for progress
of the latest order, we invoke, invite and celebrate Indra,
lord of glory, commanding humanity and the winds,
generously valorous, ever rising, free from detractors,
divinely refulgent, all ruling, all forbearing and
victorious, illustrious giver of both tolerance and
fighting power over evil for victory of the good for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Janam, Adha]
O lord of the thunderbolt of power, justice and
punishment, humble that man who proudly holds
himself as the greatest and mightiest against these people
among whom I live and justify my existence. And now,
O lord, for the sake of these very people on earth and in
the battles of the brave for victory, we invoke, invite
and celebrate you among our children, our cows, our
lands and waters, and in the onward flow of our life
and progress.






[Names: Vayam, Puruhita, Satroruttara, Ghnanto, Sura]
We are yours, O lord universally invoked and
adored, and we pray that by these friendly words and
acts of service we may be constantly superior to one
enemy after another enemy of life and progress, fighting
out and destroying the evils of darkness and want in
both spiritual and material fields of life on earth, so
that, under the umbrella of your protection and guidance,
we may enjoy life with wealth, honour and excellence,
rising higher and higher.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 20 655


Mandala 6/Sukta 20






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Dyaurna, Indrabhi, Savasa]
Indra, lord of life, creator giver of strength,
commander of power and forbearance, give us that
wealth and life’s value and that master ruling power
vast as skies and bright as sun which, by its intrinsic
strength of character can stand by people in the face of
hostile forces in our struggle for progress, fight a
thousand battles with success, give us lands of fertility
and smiling greenery, and overcome the darkness of
ignorance, poverty and injustice.






[Names: Divo, Suryam, Surya, Ahim]
Indra, ruler of the world, observer of the original
law and keeper of the honest simplicity of natural
conduct, when in union with omnipresent Vishnu,
omnipotent cosmic energy, you break the cloud of
serpentine motion holding showers of the waters of life
in hiding, then, together with the showers, universal life
breath of vital energies is received, like light of the sun
from heaven, by the brilliancies of humanity and of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


nature such as earth to bless you and your people.






[Names: Turvannojiyan, Rajabhavanmadhunah]
Indra, refulgent and illustrious leader, is
mightiest of the mighty. Breaking the clouds for shower,
having created abundance of food, energy and literature
of vision and wisdom, and having raised a team of
veteran assistants, he becomes the real ruler of humanity,
commander of honey sweets of peace and joy and
saviour of all cities of the common wealth against the
assailant and destroyer.






[Names: Satairapadran, Indratra, Vadhaih]
Here in the world of business and administration
in the advancement of life and light for the men of vision
and wisdom protected from all ten directions, misers,
thieves and robbers all run off by a hundred onslaughts
of the ruler’s admirers. Indra, O lord ruler of light and
life, can any one exhaust, surpass or defeat the power,
knowledge and abundance of the mighty and generous




[Names: None]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 20 657




[Names: Maho, Suryasya, Suryas, Kutsaya, Kutsa]
When on the fall of the mighty thunderbolt of
justice and punishment the demon of darkness and
denial is fallen and the sustaining force of all hate,
jealousy and enmity is withdrawn, then the mighty Indra,
further, opens and extends the field for the positive
leaders and pioneers of vision, creativity and power for
the nation on the march in the higher battle of light and






[Names: Syeno, Siro, Pravannamim]
Crushing the head of the violent destroyer,
churning the mind of the persistent sabotager to
correction, saving the humbled opponent at the end of
his tether now lying at peace for mercy, and providing
all such with adequate means and materials with food
and sustenance for a life of comfort and well being, the
should bring the exhilarating drink of new life and joy
of celebration for this social order.






[Names: Sudaman]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O lord of the power of thunderbolt, with your
power and force, pray never destroy the strongholds
and cities of the protective and promotive leader of
versatile genius and competence. Instead, O lord of
generosity, for such a philanthropic leader of simple
and honest law and conduct of pious virtue, provide
generous gifts and grants of irresistible and permanent
value.






and cherished well being, in order to continuously
advance the dominion and raise it to splendour, adopt,
nurse and promote the world famous, ten ways versatile,
ten ways expansive, powerful and ambitiously receptive
and progressive social order as your own family, just as
the mother elephant nurses, guides and promotes her
calf to maturity without let up.






[Names: Tisthaddhari, Indramrsvam, Indramrsva]
on and wins over the rivals and contenders and, wielding
the cloud-breaking thunderbolt in hand and settled in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 20 659


his dominion seat of power, he aims like an archer and
rides his chariot driven by word-controlled horse powers
which drive the mighty ruler over the expanse of his
dominion.






[Names: Sanema, Sapta, Sarma, Ssdaradirda, Siksan, Purukutsaya, Purukutsa]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, by virtue
of your protection and promotion, we enjoy the latest
gifts of life, and the citizens adore you by these
programmes of yajna since you establish seven cities
for comfortable living, open out seven abundant
autumnal streams against drought and deprivation, and
destroy all forms of slavery and impiety for the
education and advancement of the heroic wielder of
power and weapons of defence.






[Names: Tvamvrdha, Para]
Indra, lord ruler of honour and excellence,
knowledge, wisdom and generosity, be the first and
foremost leader in the service of the great advancing
human nation, specially for the inspired and ambitious
pioneer of art, science and culture. Give the best and
latest home and infrastructure worthy of being granted


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




to the great father figure of future development which
must not be self-destructive or self-defeating in any way.






[Names: Tvam, Sura, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu]
Indra, you are the shaker and arouser of life and
passion. Arouse, accelerate and control the roaring
streams of the nation’s life and wealth like the pulsating
veins and arteries of the human system. O brave hero,
you cross the seas and traverse the skies, let there be
peace and well being with the industrious, self-
controlled and dynamic humanity.






[Names: Tava, Didayadit]
Indra, lord sustainer and giver of peace and joy,
in the business of life, all that roaring action or
sufferance or consumption, all is your world, for you :
the idle, the restful, the sleeping, the shining, the violent,
the faithful bearing holy fuel, the cook, whether
preparing soma with sacred work or doing homage with
songs and prayers of adoration, everything is yours, all
is for you.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 21 661


Mandala 6/Sukta 21








[Names: Indra, Veshvedeva, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Purutamasya, Purutamas, Dhiyo]
Heroic Indra, leader of the world, you are
ageless, ever new, ever fresh. These creations of the
most versatile artist worthy of presentation glorify you,
adorable lord, and they are offered to you in homage
since all creations of intelligence, all wealth and
celebrated glory reach you, lord of the nation’s chariot,
and everything flows from you.






[Names: Tamu, Indram, Yasya, Purumayasya, Purumayas]
Indra is the lord omniscient who alone knows
the ultimate mystery of existence. I adore and glorify
him who is the ultimate content of all speech, who is
exalted by songs of adoration in yajnas, and whose glory
by its sublimity and omnipotence transcends the light
of heaven and the magnitude of the world of nature.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vayunam, Vayuna, Kada]
The lord of his own absolute omniscience and
omnipotence illuminates the world of darkness and
ignorance by the light of expansive knowledge like the
sun which dispels the darkness of night. The mortals, O
lord immortal, who seek to join your domain never






[Names: Yasta, Kaste]
Who is that Indra and where, that lord
omnipotent who does all those things? Which people
does he favour and visit? Among which community or
nation? O lord omnipotent, which sacred act of yajna is
that which pleases you at heart and gives you the
satisfaction of your choice? What sort of praise and
adoration? Who is the yajaka you listen to and respond?






[Names: Purukrt, Puruhiuta]
O lord of universal acts, universally invoked and
adored, all are your friends, pray know and enlighten


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 21 663


them all here and now, all those who are ancient, old
and eminent, middling ones, moderns, most recent ones,
existing and active all over the world.






[Names: Srutyanu, Arcamasi]
Indra, lord of knowledge and power, brave
leader and ruler of the world, the seekers of truth young
and old, ancient and modern all, trying to know you by
question and answer in faith, go by the Word which is
eternal and highest. O lord giver of divine vision,
sustainer of the life and wealth of existence, the more
we know, the greater we find you and worship you as







[Names: Tava]
Against you stands the force of evil powers, O
potent lord of courage and valour, face that firmly and,
with your age old ally and friendly thunderbolt of justice
and punishment, crush those forces and wipe them out
before they rise to dangerous proportions.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Tvam]
Indra, potent lord of courage and valour,
sustainer of the artist, scientist and their creations, listen
to the prayer of the latest seeker of the wealth and
wisdom of existence. O lord responsive to our call in
cherished plans and programmes, you are and have been
the constant friend and guardian of our forefathers in
their search divine for light and fulfilment.






[Names: Protaye, Varunam, Varuna, Mitramindram, Mitramindra, Marutah, Maruta, Pusanam, Pusana]
O scholar of science, study, research, realise and
bring for our protection and advancement the divine
bounties of nature: vital udana and prana energies,
electricity, winds, nourishing vitality of samana energy,
vyana and dhananjaya energies, heat, cosmic energy of
universal sustenance, solar energy, herbs, clouds and
mountains for showers and herbs.






[Names: Purusaka, Srudhi]
O lord omnipotent, adorable in yajna, these

celebrants of your divine powers honour and worship


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 21 665


you with their offers of homage and adoration. Listen
to the devotee’s call and supplications while invoked.
There is none other than you who is like you and who
commands powers and virtues such as yours, immortal
as you are.






[Names: Numa, Agnijihva]
O lord of knowledge, creator and giver of
strength, listen to my words of prayer and come to me
with all universal forms of wealth and those adorable
powers worthy of being cherished who have the tongue
of fire, serve the truth of divine law and who raise
humanity high like the cloud for charity toward the weak
and exhausted.






[Names: Sano, Indrabhi]
May he, Indra, the lord all-knowing, know us
and enlighten us, the leader who goes forward as pioneer
over paths both easy and difficult, carving new channels
of progress over annals of history, and may he bring us
those modes of energy, power and transport which are
wide and versatile beyond wear and tear, indefatigable,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 6/Sukta 22






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Purumayah, Purumaya]
The one sole lord of humanity worthy of yajnic
homage is Indra, whom I adore with these words of
praise. He it is, lord generous, giver of showers of
strength and bliss, eternal, imperishable, omnificent,
omnipotent and forbearing who protects and sustains
life as supreme father and guardian.






[Names: Tamu, Naksddabham, Savistham]
Him our ancient forefathers and the seven sages,
like our five senses, mind and intellect, alongwith their
fellow men, have celebrated and glorified, the lord that
is tamer and controller of opposition, saviour from
suffering, pervasive in clouds and over mountains, sweet
of tongue and strongest in force and power.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 22 667




[Names: Tamimaha, Indramasya, Indramas, Puruvirasya, Puruviras, Puruksoh, Purukso]
We pray to Indra for his gifts of wealth, happy
progeny, man power and generous abundance which
he, lord of unlimited potential, ageless and blissful,
commanding men and transport, would, we hope, bring
us for his joy and ours.






[Names: Tanno, Kaste, Puruhita, Puruvaso]
Indra, speak to us how the ancient celebrants of
yours were blest with the gift of peace and joy. Say what
is your share and contribution therein, what joy and
ecstasy of being, O lord irresistible, forceful, universally
invoked, commanding immense riches, destroyer of evil
and the wicked.




[Names: Tuvigrabham]
maccha.


If the voice and words of a person are vibrant
with devotion and eloquent with enquiry in right earnest
about Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, riding the chariot of
life, strong with iron grasp, bold in action, giver of
tempestuous strength and commander of cosmic force,
then such a person wins the lord’s favour of dominion
over land for food, energy and the happiness of his






[Names: Acyuta]
O lord of your own essential strength and
splendour, divine and exuberant, with this thunder force
of yours fast as mind, imperishable and indomitable,
pray shatter that stronghold of evil growing by illusion
firmly fixed and even reinforced by deceptive reason.






May Indra, lord of infinite knowledge and
power, bless us and you all with the best and latest vision
and intelligence in order that we may adore and glorify
the omnipotent eternal lord as ever, and may the lord
saviour of the celestial chariot bring the universal
strength of action, otherwise unattainable, and take us


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 22 669






[Names: Tapa, Socisa, Socaya]
O lord of generous showers of light and purity
of peace, light up and reveal the blazing magnificence
of the regions of earth, firmament and heaven for people
stricken with hate, jealousy and enmity against life,
humanity, divinity and revelation of the glory of
existence. Let them feel the heat and light of the blaze
from all sides, heat up even the green earth and cool
waters for them and thus let them be cleansed through
suffering and penitence.


[Names: Bhuvo, Dhisva]
Indra, self-refulgent ruler of earth and the world
of light, of humanity and the moving world, ageless
lord of light and justice, take the thunderbolt of light


and justice in the right hand, destroy the wiles of the
wicked and give the light of knowledge to the seekers.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Yaya]
Indra, lord of adamantine will and power, ruler
of the world, bring in that wide ranging and inviolable
peace and well being in a state of constant vigilance
and dynamism to win over enmity and opposition by
which darkness and ignorance can be replaced by light
and knowledge and the lower and average orders of
society can be raised to higher state of enlightenment
and action.







[Names: Sano]
O lord all wise and worshipful, universally
adored and invited, come to us by well controlled and
well directed modes and means of advancement with
those laws and policies of universal interest and value
and application, which neither the impious obstruct nor
the pious camouflage. Come straight here to us with


Mandala 6/Sukta 23




[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 23 671




[Names: Suta, Sasyamana]
Indra, lord of honour, wealth and excellence of
the world, when the soma is distilled, songs of prayer
and adoration are sung and the music of Vedic hymns
swells in the air, and when you move and come, one
with us, loving and ecstatic, drawn by your own fiery
motive powers of saving grace and holding the
thunderbolt in hand, you are great and glorious.






[Names: Surasatau]
Or when, O mighty lord Indra, free from fear,
you protect the creator of the soma of life’s joy in the
battle of the brave for the elimination of darkness and
want and for advancement of light and showers of love
and cherished prosperity, or when you scare away even
the mighty fearsome warriors against life, you shine in
divine glory. O lord Indra, we pray, subdue the forces
of violence, fear and destruction.






[Names: Pata, Somam, Soma, Karta]
May Indra, ruler of the world, be protector of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the joy of life created with cooperative effort under
divine guidance. May the lord of splendour be the leader
to guide the celebrant to the desired goal in protection
and security of justice. May the lord be the creator of a
world of beauty for the brave who endeavour to
contribute to the health and joy of life. May the lord
bless the divine poet and celebrant with wealth and
prosperity in life.






[Names: Ganteyanti]
Listen ye all celebrants and yajakas, Indra, ruler
of the world, is he who reaches all programmes of
positive and creative development by the fastest
transport with dynamic experts of theory and practice
both, who wields thunderous power and weapons,
protects, promotes and shares the soma, invigorating
joys of life, gives cows, fertile lands and brilliant words
of wisdom and guiding policy, creates bravest of the
brave leaders, and listens and appreciates the songs and
celebrations of the admirers among the people.







[Names: Asmai, Indraya, Sute, Samsa]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 23 673


Whatever Indra, lord ruler of light and love,
wishes, we do for him since he creates for us the holy
acts and does all other divine acts of sustenance. When
the soma is distilled and the songs of praise arise, we
celebrate and exalt him so that knowledge, food, energy
and moral rectitude may arise and grow the way it






[Names: Brahmani]
Indra, lord ruler, the more noble acts of growth
and development you do, the more with our intelligentsia
and our people we do our acts of duty for you. O lord
lover of honour and excellence, when the work is done,
the soma is distilled and the time is come for celebration,
we do praise worthy acts with yajnas and sing most
delightful songs of joy in your honour.






[Names: Edam]
Indra, lord of majesty, know and enlighten us,
happily taste the delicious pudding and drink the
exhilarating soma seasoned with cow’s milk so soothing
to the mind and senses. Come, be seated on the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




yajamana’s vedi, and create a wider and higher world
of beauty for your devotees.






[Names: Preme, Puruhutamasme, Puruhutamasm]
Indra, refulgent lord, enjoy and rejoice in
response to these yajnic acts of our homage as they may
please you, and may these our addresses of invocation
reach you, lord universally loved, and may this song of
adoration and enlightened awareness appeal to you for
our protection and advancement.






[Names: Kuvit]
O friends, in all your acts of divine service,
admire and adore Indra, lord giver of light and food,
with yajnic offers of water and endeavours of creative
joy dedicated to him so that the great and magnanimous
lord would be gracious in the sustenance and protection
of you and us all, since he never forsakes the earnest
creator of soma.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 24 675




[Names: Evedindrah, Asad]
Thus is Indra admired and adored among saints
and scholars in the world of honour and excellence when
the soma is distilled and ready for celebration so that
he, lord of honour, power and knowledge, may settle
and abide by men of power and prosperity and be the
giver of universal wealth of value to the devoted


Mandala 6/Sukta 24





[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Vrsa, Sloka, Arcatryo]
Indra, refulgent ruler, is generous as a cloud of
showers in the holy programmes of peace and progress
of the social order, joy incarnate, delightful as a poem,
sacred as a hymn, loved as a friend, lover and protector
of the people’s happiness and achievement, simple,
honest and natural in conduct, admired, revered and
consecrated for the people and celebrated by the holiest
of their voices, lord of honour, power and glory wrapped
in heavenly light, inviolable, ever protective, a very
haven of peace and security.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Taturirviro, Vasuh]
Pressing fast forward against the enemies, brave,
leader of leaders, wide awake and all aware, attentive
to the call of the supplicant, all round protector of the
people, haven and home and real asset of the nation,
admired by the people, patron of artists and expert
professionals, swift and powerful, adored in yajnic
programmes, Indra, the ruler, gives speed and sustenance
to the nation’s progress.






[Names: Akso, Sura, Vrksasya, Puruhita]
Like the axis of two moving bodies such as two
wheels or stars and planets or sun and earth, O mighty
lord of majesty, Indra, universally invoked and adored,
the eternal processes of your creation, protection and
promotion of the expansive universe grow and extend
like the branches of a tree by virtue of your infinite
power and excell the light of the sun and generosity of
the earth.






[Names: Sacivataste, Purusdka, Vatsanam]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 24 677


Indra, refulgent lord ruler of the world, destroyer
of suffering, manifold are your deeds, unbounded your
intelligence, and countless your people. The abundant
streams of your generous acts are expansive, associative
and convergent like waves of light rays and paths of
cows and orbits of stars, and, like tethers of the calves
and axes of planets, they are controllers and yet givers
of freedom, O generous lord of law and liberty.






[Names: Anyadadya, Mitro, Varunasca]
Indra, our friend here, great and just, life giver
and sustainer, master and over all controller of
creative and destructive, integrating and disintegrating,
making and unmaking, and goes on doing thus again
and again in a positive cyclic order.





[Names: Indranayanta]
Indra, lord of beneficence sung and celebrated
in hymns of holiness, just as warriors rush to battle for


victory, so do joyous devotees and celebrants eager for
karmic action and life’s victory hasten to you with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




homage and yajnas performed with these hymns of
praise and songs of adoration, and then, just as rain
showers pour from the heights of clouds and streams
flow down from the top of mountains, so do fruits of
piety and gifts of divine grace shower down and flow,
from you.






[Names: Sarado, Vrddhasya, Sasyamana]
Winters and years wither him not, nor months
weaken him, nor the sun and days wear out Indra
celebrated by hymns of divine praise and songs of
adoration. May the existential manifestation of the lord
supreme, eternal Indra grow on and on in majesty. May
the body and mind of this eternal jiva, individual soul,
grow by the chant of sacred songs and hymns of divine


aes) i
[Names: Ajra, Indrasya, Indras]
He bows not to the strong and forceful, nor


bends before the resolute, nor does he praise or flatter
the bold nor anyone allied to the wicked. Mighty


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 25 679


mountains are, for Indra, plain as fields, and for him
the ocean in the depth becomes firm ground and a





[Names: Gambhirena, Stha]
Mighty lord, purifier and sanctifier of things in
the world of creation, with deep love, profound purpose
and grace unbound, give us abundance of food and
energy and wide ranging knowledge and success. Stay
with us constant with your protection high over us, at
dawn and at dusk, night and day without hurt or let up.


[Names: Sacasvanayamavase, Satahimah]
Indra, ruling lord of the realm, be with us, our
leadership and our policy, and justice for protection and
progress. Save the system here and afar, at home and


abroad, from fear and violence so that, blest with the
brave, we may live and rejoice for a full hundred years.


Mandala 6/Sukta 25




[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Susminnasti, Tabhiru]
Indra, mighty ruler, dispenser of justice and
giver of inspiring vigour and vision, whatever your
modes of safety and security at the primary level,
whatever at the middle level and whatever of the highest
level of the order, with all those protect us in the battle
against darkness, want and negation, and bless us with
these flights of progress and victory, O lord great and





[Names: Abhih, Abhirvisva]
Indra, mighty ruler and commander, with these
forces of defence and protection engaged in action,
break down the pride and morale of the enemy and,
with these, without loss of men and materials or interests
of the country, protect and advance the cooperative
powers employed across the land, the people, and the
services for the noble citizens of the nation.






[Names: Tvamesam, Savamsi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 25 681


Indra, mighty ruler and commander of the
common wealth, whether it is your own people or other
distant ones or sabotagers who join upfront against you
to injure the system, you destroy their forces of sabotage,
eliminate their growing potential and throw them out.






[Names: Suro, Suram, Sarirais, Toke]
When the brave engage the brave in battle with
brilliance of physical force of body, or when people
argue, dispute and shout over rights and inheritance in
relation to children and grand children, or about fertile
lands and cows or waters, then, too, judge and resolve
the dispute.






[Names: Nahi]
Neither the brave nor impetuous nor violent nor

warrior, however great and proud, can stand and fight

against you. Indra, lord almighty, none is your equal,


none adversary, you are supreme over all those that are
born and existent.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vrtre]
If two partners in the matter of integration or
division or separation of finances or management of a
large corporate organisation of men dispute, then he
gets control of the money or the assets whom judges of
piety and penetrative intelligence call upon to manage,
and above all Indra, the ruler, is the ultimate master.


a: ie




[Names: Adha, Asmakaso]
And also, O lord ruler and master, giver of
honour and excellence, destroyer of evil and
wickedness, Indra, be the saviour and protector of all
your people specially of those who are stricken with
fear. Be the defender and promoter of those people of
ours who are the highest leading lights and bravest
heroes who hold the forts and maintain the cities for us.








[Names: Anu, Anu, Consequently]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 26 683


ruler, protector of life and destroyer of negation,
appropriate to your greatness and majesty, in keeping
with the honour and dignity of the world social order,
and in view of the courage and fortitude required to
face the challenges to humanity, the whole world is
given unto you and entrusted, in truth, by the leading
lights and brilliant visionaries of nations in the battle of
light against darkness, of goodness against evil, and of
prosperity against want and squalor.






[Names: Vidyama]
Thus, O lord Indra, giver of honour and victory,
we pray, inspire us to advance in our ambition to win
over our rivals in the battles of life. O lord destroyer,
subdue the warring forces of darkness and selfishness.
Let us all, celebrants and men of knowledge and action,
singing and celebrating your honour day and night,
know you for sure and win the victories by virtue of
your guidance and protection.


Mandala 6/Sukta 26




[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Srudhi, Indra, Surasata]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, lord ruler and giver of honour and
excellence, listen to us: overwhelming and exuberant
we call upon you in the great battle of sustenance and
advancement. When the people march on in the battle
of the brave, then on the decisive day give us the blazing
passion of your force and protection to victory.






[Names: Tvam, Tvam]
The war-like scion of a heroic family of learned
leaders and scholars, seeker of a great new success just
at hand in the field of food, energy, knowledge and
saviour of devotees and defender of truth, and, fighting
hand to hand, looks up to you at the decisive moment
of victory for the acquisition of new wealths of light
and development of lands, cows and branches of energy.





[Names: Kutsaya, Kutsa, Susnam]
You enthuse and inspire the creative visionary
in the work on solar energy, thunder and lightning. You


break open the secrets of concentrated energy for the
man of power and generosity. Thus you shake and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 26 685


subdue the head of invulnerable pride and intransigence
and do praise-worthy service to the leader who honours
and keeps open house for visiting scholars.




tutoh.


Indra, ruler and commander, you create and
maintain an invulnerable war chariot and protect the
strong fighting force shining in ten directions for days
on end. In full dedication to the honour and brilliance
of the social order, destroy violence and terror and
advance the strong, promotive and allied powers that
do honour to the nation.






[Names: Sura, Divodasam, Divodasa]
Indra, mighty destroyer of evil and preserver of
the good, it is praise worthy that with your great force
and, with wondrous saving powers, release from the
cloud pent up showers, so soothing and refreshing, and
thus relieve and protect humanity dedicated as a liberal
servant of divinity.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Somairdabhi, Sacya]
Indra, ruling lord destroyer and preserver,
rejoicing with faithful homage and joyous celebrations
of dedicated followers, you send the oppressive ogre to
sleep in order to save the oppressed and, favouring the
man of right conduct in keeping with your holiness,
you give him the right direction and ward off a sixty
thousand obstacles from his path.






[Names: Aham, Tvaya, Savistha]
Indra, bravest lord of the house of the brave, I
pray, may I too, along with the learned and the wise and
great, attain that high order of vigour and splendour,
peace and well being, with the grace of your presence
bestowed by you, lord of three worlds, which the brave
and learned people value, admire and pray for.





[Names: Vayam, Pratardanih, Srestho]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 27 687


Indra, greatest lord of grace and glory, may we,
in this yajnic programme of power and prosperity of
the human nation, be your dearest friends and supportive
participants, and may the rising generosity and gracious
glory of the world order rise highest in our battle against
darkness of ignorance, injustice and poverty for the
achievement of all round prosperity and well being.


Mandala 6/Sukta 27






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Kimasya, Rana]
What does Indra, destroyer of suffering, do in
the ecstasy of this soma, for the beauty and glory of this
order? What in the exuberance of the drink, in the joyous
experience of its management and satisfaction
therefrom? What in the friendly identity with it and its
people? And what do they know and discern, the
veterans and the youngest of the new generation, who
joyously celebrate in the company of this Indra in the
House? What do they gain?






[Names: Sadasya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Noble deeds of the truth of its reality does Indra
perform in the rapture of its dignity, noble and true
indeed when he drinks of the soma of that experience,
nothing but the truth and dignity of action and policy in
friendly identity with this social order. And they who
joyously sit in his company in the House identified with
the glory of this order, veterans as well as new ones,
they too know and realise the truth and the reality,
nothing but the truth, whole and undiluted.






[Names: Nahi]
Indra, lord of wealth, power and majesty, we
know not anyone equal to you in greatness and glory,
nothing like your regality and munificence, nothing so
perfect as your perfection which reveals ever new
possibilities. None comprehends your omniscience and




[Names: Etat, Sesah, Vajrasya, Susmat]
Indra, lord of power and perfection, this
omnipotence of yours is apprehended when with it you


strike and destroy the greatest and highest adversary to
the very end, which too is just the tip of the might of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 27 689


omnipotence, and when, by the force of the mere roar
and rumble of the thunderbolt hurled, the proudest
enemy is shattered.








[Names: Vadhidindro]
Just as Indra, the sun, breaks the cloud on high
to the last drop of rain, so should Indra, eminent teacher
as well as the ruler, in the act of giving instruction to
the dedicated learners all round vigilant in a sustained
in their love of scholars and scholarship, dispel their
basic fear, ignorance and negative tendencies and thus
eliminate the possibilities of later resurgence of evil with
the healthy fear of unknown and unexpected


[Names: Trimsacchatam, Sravasya, Vrcivantah, Sarave, Puruhuta]
Indra, mighty lord ruler universally invoked and
honoured, let thirty hundred renowned warriors in


armour in a well provided army in top gear breaking
through the enemy lines, shattering the defences, achieve


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Yasya, Turvasam, Turvasa, Siksan]
The ruler whose power and law, internal policy
and external defence, both like two healthy, ruddy and
loving cows, well provided and happily self-satisfied,
operate in the dominion, he, training the efficient force
in radiative communication and productive science,
would throw off the destructive elements of the state.






[Names: Dvayan, Abhyavarti, Agni]
power, honour and excellence, dynamic leader ever on
the move for progress and victory, revered and
celebrated all round, gives me both chariot warriors for
defence of the nation and happy families and a team of
twenty creative ministers to bear the burdens of the
nation, which gift from any of global rulers is


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 28 691


Mandala 6/Sukta 28






[Names: Gavah, Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Prajavatih, Pururupa]
Let the cows come as rays of the sun, sit and
rest in the stalls, be happy and bring us happiness and
good fortune. May they be fertile with many calves, of
many colours and breeds, abundant, yielding plenty of
milk for the health and prosperity of the nation, and
thereby let them be harbingers of light like the morning






[Names: Indro, Bhuyobhuyo]
Indra, the ruler, gives protection and
maintenance grants to the man dedicated to yajna. He
engages him in creative and educational work and thus
gives him fulfilment and purpose in life. This way too
he does not deplete his own knowledge and culture but
maintains it. Constantly and continuously he adds to
the wealth of the nation and, in every region of the land,
he looks after and maintains the devotees of learning,
society and divinity without taking away anything from


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Devansca]
Knowledge, fruits of yajna, generosity,
patronage of learning and culture, these rays of light do
not perish nor deplete nor fade away. The thief steals
injure or insult them. The lord of these cows, lights and
radiations, with which he serves the divinities, learned
and the wise, gives, creates and adds to life’s beauty,
also, he constantly and continuously lives, lasts and rises
with them.






[Names: Urugayamabhayam, Anu]
Neither a vociferous brute raising clouds of dust
like a war horse attains to these rays of light and culture,
nor do these radiations penetrate the thick head of a
[Names: Like]
the rays of refinement roam freely round the open
pastures of the generous man of yajna and social service,
a boundless world of freedom and fearlessness.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 28 693






[Names: Gavo, Somasya, Somas]
May Bhaga, lord of wealth and good fortune,
give me cows. May Indra, lord of power and majesty,
give me good cows. May Bhaksha, adorable lord of
primal food, energy and ecstasy of life, give me good
cows for milk. O people, O lord of power and glory,
Indra, I love and love to have all that is cows, 1.€.,
mothers of food and energy, sources of sweetness, light
and culture, masters of knowledge and wisdom, honour
and excellence. I love that all with my heart and mind,
the beauty, the glory, the ecstasy!






[Names: Yuyam, Bhadram]
You develop the cows of life, mother spirits of
body, mind and soul. Give health and vigour to the weak
and emaciated, turn the ugly and unpleasant to beautiful,
graceful and illustrious. Make the home overflow with
peace, prosperity and the bliss of good fortune. You
command noble speech in the assemblies of the wise
and powerful leaders so that your life and work is praised
and appreciated wide and high in the world.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Rudrasya, Rudras]
O fertile and abundant cows blest with calves,
feeding on fine green grass and drinking pure water
from transparent pools, may no thief ever overpower
you, may no strike of the cruel and sinful butcher ever


(Swami Dayanand applies this mantra to the
duties of the ruler: The ruler should look after the cattle
wealth of the country. The government must protect and
promote the cows. Not only that. Even the people and
their education culture and efficiency are, like the holy
cow, to be protected against violence and promoted with
good food and water and all means of prevention of
social crime and violence.)






[Names: Upedamupaparcanamasu]
In this social order and in the policy, let there
be a union and identity of the ruler with the people,
their lands and their languages. Indra, noble and
illustrious ruler, all giver, let the people share, join and
support you in your creative acts of courage and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 29 695


Mandala 6/Sukta 29






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Maho]
O citizens of the land, leading lights of humanity
in love with knowledge, wisdom and guidance, to win
your friendship and to rise to the heights of life for your
sake, honour and serve Indra, supreme ruler, lord of
knowledge and power. Great is he, all giver, and wields
the sceptre of light, power and justice. Join the great
lord of love and joy and honour him with homage and
yajnic service for protection and progress.






Indra in whose hands are all the gifts of life for
mankind rides the golden chariot of the cosmos, holding
reins of the world in his mighty hands, controlling the
potent forces of nature like horses on the course of time
and destiny.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Sriye, Savasa, Vasano]
Gracious are your feet firmly fixed in liberality
and compassion. The devotees offer their homage of
soma there for glory. You are all conquering, wielder of
the thunderbolt, mighty generous by your own essential
power and munificence, and, wearing a fragrant,
glorious and heavenly robe, blissful sight for all to see,
O director of the cosmic dance, you are the all moving,
all inspiring, omniscient presence and power.






[Names: Soma]
That is the blessed dominion of Indra, ideal
world order raised to systemic purity and integrated to
organismic unity wherein soma is distilled and seasoned
in plenty, ample food is prepared for all, food grains are
grown in abundance, and leading lights of the people,
divinely occupied, sing songs of appreciation in praise
of Indra and rise to the heights of excellence bordering


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 30 697






[Names: Savaso]
No one can reach the end of your power, the force
that binds up heaven and earth as a handful of dust in space.
Still the man of courage and vision without fear, moving
at supersonic speed under the cover of your protection,
does attain that pleasure of fulfilment which a host of thirsty
travellers finds at a shady fount of holy waters.








[Names: Evedindrah, Anuti, Puru]
Thus may the lord sublime, omnipotent Indra,
ever active in golden glory, listen to the prayers of
universal humanity in all direct and indirect modes of
divine protection and grace. Thus does the lord, self-
manifest in boundless power and glory, create and
preserve the abundant wealth of good and destroy
darkness, enmity and negation of evil.


Mandala 6/Sukta 30


[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Bhuya, Indrah]
Again and again the one ageless Indra grows in
manifestation to express his power and creates,
preserves and gives all wealths of the world. The sun
from the regions of light covers half of the earth and
relieves the other half. In turn, the earth and the sky
both receive only half of the light and heat, and the sun
exceeds and excels both.






[Names: Adha, Divedive]
And I know and honour the extensive luminous
life giving power and energy of this sun and of the many
planets that it holds and sustains, which no power can
deny, disturb, diminish or destroy. Day by day, every
morning, the sun rises glorious and, holy participant in
the cosmic yajna of Indra, it generates and sustains many
abodes of life along with the wide earth.







[Names: Adya]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 30 699


the waters of the rivers by evaporation, shower them
and let them flow in river beds to the sea. You attract
the earth by gravitation and let it move in orbit. You fix
the mountains in place and float the clouds in windy
courses, everything in place like guests in a dinner party.
Indeed, O lord of holy action in cosmic yajna, by you
are all regions of the universe set in place, firm and
secure.






[Names: Satyamit, Ahannahim]
Indra, refulgent lord eternal, true it is there is
no one else divine or human as great as you who break
the dark and dormant cloud, release the showers of rain
and let the whirling streams flow and join the rolling
ocean. Similarly, O lord omnipotent, you break the dark
silence of sleeping nature from the state of inertness
and set the processes of creative evolution aflow and
let them ultimately recede into the fathomless ocean of
silence again.






[Names: Tvamapo, Rajabhavo, Suryam, Surya]
Indra, you break open the impenetrable doors


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of the cloud and release the rain showers. You break
the adamantine mountains and let the waters flow in
river courses. You break the bottomless inertness of life
energy and let it flow in evolutionary channels of human
action and courses of history. Creating the children of
the moving world along with the sun and dawn of the
day and the regions of heaven and earth, you reign
supreme as light of the world, refulgent creator and


Mandala 6/Sukta 31






[Names: Indra, Devata, Suhotra, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Abhureko, Indra]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, in you vests the
governance and control of the entire wealth and assets
of the nation, pray be the sole possessor and custodian
of national wealth, O lord of honour and excellence. In
your hands alone lies the direction of the nation,
producers, workers and defence forces all. The wisest
people of the land speaking different languages in
different styles, in their words and actions describe and
celebrate the brilliance of the rule and governance of
Indra to their children and grand children.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 31 701




[Names: Tvad, Dyavaksama]
Indra, sole lord of law and power, by the fear
and pressure of your presence, all the unshakables on
earth and in the skies stir and move along their functional
course. Heaven and earth, clouds and mountains, deep
forests, indeed the entire fixed and functionary world
of existence fears the unmoved motion of your pervasive
presence and dare not relent in their function.






[Names: Tvam, Dasa, Suryasya, Suryas]
Indra, lord ruler and giver of light, having fought
out the voracious drought and bad harvest with the
thunderbolt of natural energy, keen for success in the
development of lands and cows and the project of solar
energy, you deplete ten injurious impediments and ride
the chariot of the dominion like the sun in orbit.




[Names: Asikso, Sacya, Sacivo, Bharadvajaya]
Break open the hundreds of hidden strongholds
and treasures of the wealth and power of the dark clouds


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and hoards collected by the thief, and there, O lord of
light and power of knowledge and wisdom, with
knowledge and expertise, provide the means and
materials of prosperity and well being for the
advancement of the generous scientist, creative artist,
pharmacist, technologist and celebrant of divinity.






[Names: Yahi, Sravaya]
O lord commander of the power of truth and
reality, master of manifold wealth and splendour, ready
for the arduous battle of life, ride the awesome chariot,
go forward, traveller of the path of rectitude, come to
us too with the wisdom of revealed omniscience with
all your modes of defence and protection and proclaim
the truth for the people.


Mandala 6/Sukta 32




[Names: Indra, Devata, Suhotra, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Apurvya, Santamani]
Let me compose an original and comprehensive
song of praise in my own, words in a state of peace


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 32 703


overflowing with reverence in honour of this great hero,
Indra, mighty performer of action, admirable wielder
of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment, unshakable
embodiment of tranquillity.






[Names: Svadhibhir]
By the light of the sun, he illuminates the heaven
and earth, protectors and inspirers of poets like father
and mother. Breaking the cloud of showers, shaking
the mountains of impediments and inhibitions of mind,
sung and celebrated in songs of praise and jubilation,
pleased, inspiring and illuminant in response to the
homage of reverence, he opens the flood gates of light
and song in words, breaking off all impediments to the
original vision and imagination of the poet.





[Names: Sasvan, Purah, Purukrtva]
He is the ruler, himself a visionary, friend of
friends, relentless hero of abundant action, breaker of
the strongholds of darkness, and with the company and
support of assisting partners, celebrants and poetic
creators sitting in meditative posture, he breaks the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




adamantine rigidities of dead wood and wins the battles
for the development of lands and cows and the
advancement of knowledge, arts and enlightenment.






[Names: Puruvirabhir]
Indra, mighty brave and generous ruler, sung
and celebrated in song, come well to the celebrant for
the well being of the people and bless them with high
spirits and ambition for victory and latest great powers
and forces manned by many heroic leaders and warriors
of the rising generation.




[Names: Savasa, Ittha]
and jubilant with vibrant new forces of creation, with
dynamic pioneers advancing like winds who may, thus,
goals day by day, move on, realise anew indestructible
eternal values and never look back.


Mandala 6/Sukta 33




[Names: Indra, Devata, Shunahotra, Bharadvaja, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 33 705




[Names: Sauvasvyam]
Indra, lord of honour and excellence, ruler most
illustrious, generous, victorious and beneficent, inspired
with ardent passion, give us that stormy force of dynamic
action for achievement which, equipped with instant
and unfailing capability, may fight out the unfriendly
powers of darkness in the contests of life and win the
wealths of high value in the world for our cherished
goal.






[Names: Tvam, Surasatau, Tvam]
You alone, O lord ruler, Indra, the people of
diverse speech adore and invoke in diverse words in
battles of the brave for protection and success. You
alone, with the wise and vibrant, subdue the uncreative
and greedy, and you alone give peace and rest to the
celebrants. Indeed, under your protection only, does the
cavalier and the warrior win the light of knowledge and
victory in action.






[Names: Sura, Vadhirvaneva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, brave ruler, leading light of the leaders,
with focussed, objective and decisive judgement,
distinguish between both opponents and supporters, the
vile and the noble, split open both clearly to full
exposure, and, with decisive blows of unfailing tactic,
fight out the negatives in the contests of the dominion
just like a forester felling the dead wood with sharpened
axe.






[Names: Svarsata]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, life of life and
giver of showers of bliss, be our friend and protector
with all your modes of defence and protection for our
[Names: Fighting]
battles of life, O brave and generous hero, defender of
good against evil, we invoke and call upon you to come
and help us with love and grace.







[Names: Nunam, Indraparaya, Indrapara, Ittha, Sarman]
Indra, lord of life, for sure be our friend and
protector, and saviour of others too, for now and for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 34 707


ever, and for the attainment of our cherished goal be
kind and gracious. Singing, celebrating and glorifying
the splendour of the great lord, we pray, may we abide
in the high heaven of divine felicity and, blest with the
sacred Word of Divinity, swim across the seas of
suffering to freedom.


Mandala 6/Sukta 34






[Names: Indra, Devata, Shunahotra, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Indra, Pura]
Indra, lord giver of thought, speech and
knowledge, all universal thoughts and diverse forms
and words of the eternal Word, all languages past,
present and future, proceed from you, return unto you
and abide in you. For sure, all ancient hymns and
recitations, all interpretive adorations of the seers
divining into the visions and meanings of the mantras
vie with each other to reach and concentrate on the glory
of Indra.





[Names: Puruhuto, Purugurta, Puru, Ratho, Anumadyo]
Indra who is invoked by many, admired by


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




many, sole lord adored by many, is sought after by the
wise through creative and reflective yajnic endeavours
for the pursuit of great vision and power with
concentrated mind in meditation. May he be like a
chariot for us across the world of life and consequently
give us ultimate freedom and joy.






[Names: Yadi]
No thoughts can violate Indra, the ruler, nor hurt
him, nor can words comprehend him. In fact, the
thoughts and words of devotees exalt and glorify him.
And when celebrants offer a hundred and thousand
adorations to this lord of exaltation, he is pleased and
then peace and bliss of well being descends on the
devotee.






[Names: Asma, Janam, Somah, Soma]
Just as soma, nectar juice of nature, mixes with
the moon and the moon mixes fully with the sun once
in the month on full moon night, so in this heavenly
relation of life and action between Indra, the ruler, and
the devotee, I join with Indra, and just as showers of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 35 709


rain in the desert exhilarate the people so may the
sessions of yajna advance the devotees and thereby may
they exalt and glorify the lord.






[Names: Indraya, Asad]
For this Indra, this ruler, this giver of the light
of life, is this exalted song of praise and adoration sung
and offered by faithful and intelligent devotees so that
for the victory of light over darkness and ignorance in
this battle of life Indra, lord of all life and the world,
may be our protector and guardian for advancement.


Mandala 6/Sukta 35






[Names: Indra, Devata, Nara, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Kada, Kada]
When would your chariots come to rest in the
garage? When do you give away a thousand prizes of
support and sustenance at the victory celebration? When
do you reward the celebrant with wealth for his song?
And when do you make our acts of thought and will
fructify with the wealth of success and victory?


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Karhi, Tridhatu]
When is it, Indra, brilliant ruler, that you bring
people to meet with people, the brave to meet with the
brave, vying in contest to win the battles of progress,
conquer threefold wealth of knowledge and minerals
over the lands and create and bring us celestial and
blissful wealth, honour and excellence?






Indra, most potent ruler of the world, when
would you bring that wealth of knowledge and holiness
of universal form and character which we too desire for
the celebrant? Commanding highest virtue, when would
you join and inspire our thought and will to rise for the
grand leap forward? When would you lead us to win
the cherished honour, splendour and glory of the earth
worthy of you?




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 35 711




[Names: Pipihisah]
Indra, ruler of the world, give us the honour and
excellence of a free world order, liquid wealth of gold
in circulation, progressive advancement and renown in
abundance for a planned programme, and drink the soma
of attainable success worthy of a nation of knowledge,
virtue and love of divinity, and thus help us create and
structure an earthly order of fruitful prosperity for the
dynamic bearers of science and action, a lovely world
of beauty and splendour indeed.






[Names: Tama]
Indra, valiant ruler, lord of knowledge and
power, destroyer of darkness, hate and enmity, let the
paths of love and progress you approve and proclaim
and the doors of new knowledge you open never be
lover of knowledge and advancement, never forsake the
faithful scholars of divine nature’s fertility, vitality and
virility, never desert the visionaries of the divine Word
of Veda, serve and advance them with means and
materials for relentless pursuit of knowledge and life’s


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 6/Sukta 36






[Names: Indra, Devata, Nara, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Satra, Satra]
Truly all your joys and inspirations, Indra, are
universal, meant for the world. Truly all your earthly
wealth, power and honour is for all children of the earth.
Truly you are the wielder and distributor of all forms of
food and energy which you bear and bring forth in the
divinities of nature and humanity as the very breath of life.






[Names: Anu, Syumagrbhe]
Consequently people honour, value and worship
the vigour and splendour of Indra in this world, and
truly they develop it for the attainment of higher strength
and vitality, and, for the attainment of united
advancement of the progressive forces and countering
the forces of negation in the battle against darkness,
action and root out evil and wickedness.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 36 713




[Names: Samudram]
All modes of protection and security, showers
of strength and generosity, manliness and vigour and
allied virtues and actions converge to Indra, join and
abide in him. Just as rivers flow and reach the sea, so
do all resonant voices of adoration and admirable
qualities of life reach the lord all pervasive in the wide






[Names: Puruscandrasya, Puruscandras, Patirbabhuthasamo]
Indra, sole ruler of the whole world, be the one
unequalled master and protector of the people and of
the golden wealth of the land, and, adored and glorified
by them, release the streams of wealth, honour and
excellence of the world for us.


[Names: Srudhi, Srutya, Savasa]
yugeyuge vayasa cekitanah.
Listen to our prayers and adorations, Indra, lord


ruler who love the prayers and adorations of devotees,
who are resplendent as sun and boundless as space,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




master, protector and giver of wealth, honour and
excellence, so that shining by wealth and power,
growing in knowledge and awareness day by day, you
be, as you have been, kind and gracious to us as ever
before.


Mandala 6/Sukta 37






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Arvagratham, Kirisciddhi]
Indra, resplendent lord ruler of the world, we
pray, may the motive powers attached to your chariot
of universal wealth and bliss bring you hither to us. So
does the enlightened celebrant with joy at heart invoke
and invite you today so that we too who abide with you
in the hall of assembly may grow and prosper.






[Names: Indro]
Let the people go forward and higher in the
measure of action and achievement and continue to rise
in the sacred manner of simple and natural rectitude.
And may Indra, ancient ruler of the world bright as
heaven on earth, shining and ruling over the delightful


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 37 715


order of bliss, rise exuberant and drink of the joy of
soma, peace and glory of the order.






[Names: Asasranasah, Ssavasanamacchendram]
May the motive powers of the chariot of mighty
Indra, ever on the move in the divine orbit in a simple
and natural manner, gracefully bear the lord to the chant
of our yajnic programmes of humanity. Let the immortal
breath of life never be exhausted, let no one waste away
the nectar vitality of immortality.






[Names: Varistho, Yaya]
Indra, highest power of the dominion and fastest
performer among men of wealth and splendour, achieves
and raises the strength and honour of this social order
by which, O lord of courage and power, wielder of the
thunder of justice and punishment, you remove sin and
crime and give rich gifts of reward and recognition to
the scholars and the brave heroes.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






Indra is the giver of solid strength and stable
progress. May Indra, celebrated by the great and exalted
by our words of adoration, rise in glory. Indra is the
destroyer of darkness in the extreme, brilliant and brave
in the essence, and, instant performer as he is, learned,
he is, and the giver of complete fulfilment.


Mandala 6/Sukta 38






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Apadita, Panyasim, Indrahutim, Indrahuti, Indra]
and glorious ruler, perfect, self-existent and self-
sustained, be here direct and accept and exalt our sincere,
abundant and brilliant voice of adoration in honour of
divinity. The lord is a generous and munificent giver,
loves the celebrative voice of the heart and cherishes the
homage of noble godly people on way to divinity.






[Names: Duraccida, Indrasya, Indras, Eyamenam, Indram]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 38 717


The ears of this lord Indra receive the voice of
the speaker even from far off wherever he be, and from
that voice, speaking in response, he raises it to the roar
of thunder. May this voice of mine in honour of divinity,
reaching and celebrating the lord of glory, come back
to me, complete the circuit and bless me as voice divine.






[Names: Brahma]
For you all with the best and highest of mind
and faith I proclaim and celebrate the ancient and
unaging Indra, cosmic energy of the Divine with yajnic
gifts of homage. The eternal consciousness of
omniscience and the voice of the Vedas all resound in
this cosmic medium and the mighty yajna of creation
and evolution too renews, evolves and expands under
this same Indra, divine energy.






[Names: Vardhad, Soma, Vardhahaina]
Let yajna, corporate programmes of research and
development, advance Indra, power and application of
the electric energy of nature. Let soma, positive creations


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and the scholar dedicated to peace and universal
happiness extend the possibilities of power. Let the
divine words of the Veda and the achievement of food
and energy of universal value exalt Indra, lord of divine
energy. And let the dawns, days and nights, hours,
months, seasons, earth and heaven, all glorify Indra,
lord of the universe. Let our thought and chants of holy






[Names: Srutaya, Maham]
Thus for the sake of strength and power, patience
and fortitude as well as for challenge, for defence,
protection and victory in our battles against darkness,
want and evil, for the sake of onward achievement of
wealth and success, and for the use and advancement
of the vibrant learned scholar, O holy sage, let us all
dedicate ourselves decisively and relentlessly to the
great, illustrious, and perfect energy of divine nature,
evolving, rising, and constantly developing it for us by
our yajnic efforts, and let us thus serve and glorify Indra,
omnipotent lord of the universe.


Mandala 6/Sukta 39




[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 39 719




[Names: Mandrasya]
Taste the honey sweet of the Word of this happy
and blissful divine poet, celebrant of light, inspirer of
passion and vision of wisdom, and friend of Divinity.
O refulgent lord of generosity, protect and promote the
brilliant and revealing Word of the poet, bless the servant
of divinity with energy and sustenance and reveal the
words of divinity for the celebrant.






[Names: Ayamusanah, Rujadarugnam]
This poet, like the sun, loving, inspiring and
impassioned, in unison with the truth and law of
existence, with waves of energy bearing rays of light
and showers of rain, breaks the clouds of darkness, lights
up impenetrable tops of mighty mountains, opens up
treasures of wealth, and blesses the untainted and the
celebrants. Thus does Indra fight and shine.






[Names: Ayam, Sarada, Imam, Usasascakara]
Thus does this sun, this cosmic drop of divine
soma, light up the unlighted: the nights, the mornings,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




days and seasons of the year. Thus does Indra create the
light of immaculate dawns which bear up the light as
banner of the days.






[Names: Ayamiyata]
This Indra, the sun, itself refulgent, lights up
the lightless such as earth and moon, and it lights up
the ancient dawns, by the operation of cosmic law. It
goes on in orbit by the centre pin of cosmic gravitation
with other heavenly bodies such as planets and satellites,
drawn by the motive forces of cosmic law and giving
light and comfort primarily to the people of the earth.






Rajan, brilliant ruler, ancient power, praised and
celebrated by devotees, develop and increase abundant
food, energy and wealth for the dedicated liberal giver
of charities, and for the development and accomplish-
ment of holy programmes give waters, herbs, inobno-
xious forests, cows, horses and brave leaders and
competent manpower for the celebrant.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 40 721


Mandala 6/Sukta 40






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Indra]
Indra, refulgent ruler, drink the soma of joy
distilled for your pleasure and majesty, let the motive
power of the dominion, the government and the people,
too be free and relax since they are friends. Sit in the
assembly of the dominion and sing and inspire the
people to celebrate the holy occasion, and bear and bring
food, good health and long age for the celebrant of the
dominion to carry on the corporate business of
governance and administration as a yajna for the lord.






[Names: Asya, Tamu]
Indra, mighty ruler, drink of this nectar sweet
of soma which you tasted at your birth and which you
drank for passion and exhilaration while you arose for
great action in the field of knowledge and governance,
the same soma which the cows and rays of the sun, men
and leaders, waters, clouds and mountains have
collected and seasoned for this drink of yours.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Samiddhe, Soma, Tvayata]
When the fire is kindled and rising and the soma
is distilled, let the strongest motive forces of transport
and the most powerful leaders who can bear the burdens
of the commonwealth bring you here. And when you
are here I invoke and invite you with a mind wholly
dedicated to you, Indra, destroyer of pain and suffering,
come for our great pleasure and prosperity of well being.






[Names: Somapeyam, Somapeya]
Indra, mighty ruler and dispenser of peace and
prosperity, come here without let up with inspired sages
and leaders with magnanimous mind and morale to this
nectar drink of the soma of governance and
enlightenment. Listen carefully to these songs of
adoration and words of the Veda, and, we pray, may
this yajnic business of governance and administration
bear and bring us good food, energy and a long age of
good health for our person and the social order.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 41 723




[Names: Yadindra]
Indra, enlightened ruler, admired and adored in
refined words of homage and reverence, whether you
are in a far off land of your choice you love to promote
in a special direction or in your own place of residence,
or wherever you happen to be, from there, O loving and
friendly leader dedicated to the yajnic order of
governance for its defence and protection, develop and
promote the order by the most vibrant force of daring


Mandala 6/Sukta 41






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Ahelamana, Gavo]
Indra, lord ruler of glory and power, giver of
freedom and dignity, come loving and favourable, grace
our yajna of life and living. Drops of soma flow from
the press for you and sanctify and brighten up the yajna.
O lord of thunder and justice, first and foremost of the
holiest guardians of yajna, just as mother cows rush to
their stalls for their calves, so eagerly come to us and
bless the devotees.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Taya]
Indra, ruling lord of Dharma and rectitude, by
that sophisticated and discriminative palate of yours by
which you always taste the sweets of the flow of life,
and by that discriminative and sublimated thought and
speech by which you always distil the essence and value
of the sweets and shades of life and respond to human
action, taste the sweets of our yajnic performance, and
protect and promote us by your words of wisdom
through the rise and fall of life’s movement. The high-
priest dedicated to love and non-violence awaits you at
the altar. May your wheel of justice and governance
over the earth ever revolve over the order of humanity.




[Names: Indraya, Etam, Somah, Soma]
This soma of the order of beauty and sweetness
of bliss, flowing, free from intoxication and illusion,
creative and exuberant, universal and open in form and


performance, is distilled to the essence in honour of the
generous and potent lord of power and glory. Drink of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 41 725


it, taste and judge of it, O lord illustrious ever on the
move by motive forces yet settled at centre, rule over it
in the light of heaven, live it, itis the very food for your
life and existence.






[Names: Sutah]
This soma, blissful order of life fashioned into
form from the raw materials of life and thought, O lord
of power and glory, is better, more fragrant and inspiring
for the man of intelligence and culture in search of a
life of knowledge, achievement and happiness. Come,
O lord victorious over opposition and contradictions,
to this yajnic order of society and thereby strengthen
all forces of action for advancement and total fulfilment.






[Names: Hvayamasi, Satakrato]
Indra, ruler and protector, we invoke and exhort
you, go forward, let the soma of exhilaration and social
dignity be sufficient and inspiring for your health and
the body politic. O lord of a hundred great actions and
yajnic victories, rise and celebrate the glory of life
among the people raised and refined to the sweetness
and beauty of culture. Guide on, protect and promote


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




us among the nations and powers of the world.


Mandala 6/Sukta 42






[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Pratyasmai, Arangamaya]
Indra, ruler and patron of knowledge and
culture, provide all facilities of the world for this bold
and courageous leading scholar thirsting for knowledge
and constantly going forward to reach the expansive
bounds of his subject, never tarrying, never looking
back.






[Names: Emenam, Somapatamam, Somapatama, Amatrebhir, Indram]
In consequence and return, O scholars and
citizens of the land, be grateful to this Indra, brilliant
ruler, lover of the peace and pleasure of the soma of
knowledge and enlightenment and promoter of scholars
and men of truth and naturalness. Do all possible
homage to him with ample measures of work and
knowledge distilled like soma in the essence from your
brilliant work and noble conduct.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 43 727




[Names: Yadi, Veda]
If you honour the lord ruler with the homage of
pure and brilliant soma of knowledge and yajnic action
in response to his magnanimity, the wise and adorable
lord of the world would acknowledge and appreciate
each act of homage.






[Names: Asma, Kuvit]
O high priest of the yajnic order, bear and bring
an equable share of bright and inspiring food and
maintenance for every one. And may the great and wise
one, the lord, preserve, protect, promote and defend the
rightful constancy of the admirable force and power of
the order against violence and calumny.


Mandala 6/Sukta 43


[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Yasya, Divodasaya, Divodasa, Ayam, Indra, Soma]
Indra, lord of power and glory, this is that soma
distilled and seasoned for you in the exhilaration and
ecstasy of which you, like the sun on high, break down
the forces of darkness and evil to promote the spirit of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




light and generosity. Pray drink of it to your heart’s
content and protect and promote the spirit of it.






Indra, lord ruler, this is that soma, the power
and glory of the yajnic order, distilled and refined in
your honour, the brilliant and pure spirit of which in
the essence you protect and promote in the beginning,
in the middle and at the end of its completion. Pray
drink of it to your heart’s content and rejoice in the
splendour and ecstasy of it.




Indra, lord of glory, this is that soma of
knowledge and power distilled and refined for you under
the force and exhilaration of which you release mighty
waves of energy confined in the thickest cloud and most


solid materials. Drink of it to your heart’s content and
protect and promote the science and power of it.






[Names: Savah]
Indra, lord of vision, knowledge and power,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 729


happy and worshipful devotee of the sweetness, beauty
and ecstasy of life, this is that soma of existence distilled
and refined in the essence for you, the mighty energy,
force and exuberant vitality of which you bear, protect
and promote. Live it, enjoy it to your heart’s content,
and protect and promote its glory on and on.


Mandala 6/Sukta 44




[Names: Indra, Devata, Shamyu, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Indra]
madah.


Indra, supreme lord of your own nature, power
and law, that soma beauty and bliss of the world of
existence created by you, which is most abundant in
wealth and brilliance, which is most glorious in
splendour and majesty, is all yours, all for yourself, all
your own pleasure, passion and ecstasy.


[Names: Sagmas, Somah, Soma]
Indra, O mighty lord most kind, master of your
own power and potential, that exciting peace and
pleasure of life created, those gifts of wealth showered


on rational humanity, the exuberance of munificence,
all is yours, for your own pleasure and ecstasy, and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




rendered back to you in homage and gratitude.






[Names: Yena, Savasa]
Indra, mighty ruler, protector and sustainer of
your own creation, your power and potential and your
own forces of protection by which you promote the good
and positive and destroy the evil and negative like the
ancient and eternal father guardian and like a protective
destroyer for preservation, that is the beauty and glory
and assertive energy of life created by you. That is yours,
your fatherly pleasure and ecstasy. Pray let it evolve
and rise.






[Names: Tyamu, Savasaspatim, Indram]
All ye children of the earth, for you all I praise
and celebrate that Indra, lord dispenser of justice and
punishment without anger or violence, commander of
power and forces of the nation, challenger of all negative
forces of the world, leader of humanity, and great and
glorious ruler of the men of vision and acts of universal
value.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 731




[Names: Taminnvasya, Susmam]
Indra whom universal voices of the world exalt
and celebrate in adoration, is the ruler and protector of
all the effective achievers of the world of nature and
humanity. Him, in truth, the brilliant heaven and the
green earth both serve under his power and law. To him
our homage is always due.






[Names: Vipo]
That lord you exalt by the beauty and sublimity
of your holy song of praise in honour of Indra whose
protections and modes of advancement then rise together
like shoots of soma inwardly stirred by the song under






[Names: Avivad, Sasavantstaulabhirdhautaribhi]
The rising youth, friendly and protective, knows
and achieves strength and expertise, and provides a place
of rest and security for the noble and the wise. Well
provided with food and means of sustenance, eager to
protect and promote, he rises as a guardian power for
friends and companions with unshakable forces of
defence and protection.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Rtasya, Sriye, Dadhano]
On the path of truth and eternal law, the man of
knowledge and wisdom is protected, and the noble and
the wise control and transform their minds for the beauty
and grace of manners and culture. May the Great one,
kind and loving, bearing the holy name, reveal his divine
presence in response to our prayers and protect us
through the paths of life.






[Names: Dyumattamam, Varstyo]
Grant us strength and expertise of the brightest
order, accomplish the tasks on hand and ward off the
age-old adversities of the people, bless us with a long
age of charity and generosity, and let us join and
participate in the battles for wealth and success with
the best of actions and intelligence among people.






[Names: Nakirapirdadrse]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 733


Indra, lord of power and majesty, let us be, let
us live and work only for you, generous and charitable
ruler. Pray do not ignore us, do not neglect us. There is
none visible among the mortals around here our own
such as you, lord of horse and men, otherwise, O lord
dear as breath of life, why would they call you the
inspirer for the achievement of honour and excellence
in life?






[Names: Purvista]
Indra, mighty generous destroyer of suffering,
deliver us not to the unjust and the hungry grabber. Let
us never suffer in the friendship of the generous lord
nor fall off from loyalty. Let us take advantage of the
age old facilities of success among the people. Eliminate
the uncreative and keep us away from ungrateful






[Names: Udabhraniva, Svyani, Tvamasi]
And like thundering clouds, Indra moves and

declares the gifts of success and munificence, horses


and fast accomplishment, cows and abundant food and
drink. O lord, you are the patron sustainer of brilliant


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




artists, inventive scientists and expert technologists. Let
the miserly non-giver never deceive you or injure you, and
never let him deceive the generous and prosperous people.






[Names: Adhvaryo]
O brave high priest of the social order of the
yajna of love and non-violence, bear the best of soma
distilled for homage in honour of the great Indra, ruler
of the world. He alone is the ruler of this order worthy
to rule who rises in personal and social esteem by the
holy voices, both old and new, of the admirers and the
wise seers of the land.





[Names: Asya, Puru, Tamu, Ssiprine, Somam]
Under the inspiration and ardent passion of this
many covert forces of darkness and evil. That same
soma, honey sweet and exhilarating you bear for a drink
to this brave hero who shines in brilliant helmet and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 735




[Names: Pata, Ganta]
Let Indra, the ruler, drink the soma distilled from
exhilarating herbs and protect the spirit and honour of
the nation arisen from the noble rule of the order. Let
him, happy and inspired, destroy the demon of evil and
darkness with the thunderbolt of justice and power. Let
him go and attend the yajna of the order well even from
afar, provide happy and peaceful settlement for all the
people, protect and promote intellectual work and
programmes of corporate action, and sustain and
advance the experts in art, science and technology.




[Names: Idam, Matsad]
This is that life-giving cup of Indra’s nectar
drink, his favourite, from which he drinks the dear
delicious elixir of life so that he feels happy at heart
and inspires the divine force of cosmic energy to ward
off hate and enmity from us and cast away all sin and
evil, and thereby save and strengthen the immortal soul.





[Names: Sura, Abhisenan]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




This way Indra, O valiant hero, happy at heart
and joyous, commanding wealth, power and excellence
of the world, give up all enemies whether among the
related or unrelated people, all unfriendly and menacing
forces, all oppositions up front, and all those who order
far away, destroy them all. Keep the soul untainted and






[Names: Apam]
In these battles of life, among these forces of
positive action, O lord of wealth, power and majesty,
Indra, destroyer of negativities and enmities, make the
way clear for us for the achievement of life’s great
honour and excellence. Indra, lord of glory and victory,
bless us with bravery and spirit of heroism, high
intelligence, and power and prosperity of success in our
struggle and attainment of the waters of life, noble
actions and brave children and grand children.





[Names: Asmatranco]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 44 737


Indra, O leading light and spirit of the nation of
humanity, may the pioneers, brave and heroic, united
with you in thought and action, blazing as sunrays and
falling as showers, instant in initiative and perfect in
defence and protection, generous and magnanimous,
wielding thunder and lightning, willing warriors all,
conduct and bring you here for our strength and joy of






Indra, lord of power and glory, delightful
showers of soma, exuberant and exhilarating like
dancing waves of the sea, come and fill your cup of
nectar and sprinkle your altar of yajna with ghrta. Thus
do the leading lights of nature and humanity bear and
bring the soma of life’s light and joy distilled by brave
and generous leaders of the yajnic order for the mighty
and magnanimous lord ruler of the world.






[Names: Vrsasi, Vrsne]
You are the showerer of the light of heaven. You


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




are the inspirer of the life of earth. You are the showerer
of the waters of rivers and the seas. You are the life
breath of things moving and non-moving all together.
This is the homage, honey drink, bright, delicious, the
very nectar of life for the lord ruler.






[Names: Ayam, Ayam]
This brilliant and divine soma rising and
manifesting with exhilaration and ardent passion, friend
of Indra and one with his glory, stabilises the admirable
rule and order of the world and strengthens the
supporters of it. This soma, bright and blissful as the
moon, keeps the arms and armaments and the justice
and administration of its creator and ruler in order, and
it frustrates the plans and wiles of the unruly and the






[Names: Ayamakrnodusasah]
This ardent passion of Indra, lord omnipotent
creator, makes the dawns bright and blissful inspirers
of love and devotion, vests the sun with light within,
creates the universe of three natural principles of mind,
energy and matter, and infuses the immortal spirit, as


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 739


mysterious and immanent spirit, in the three bright
worlds of heaven, earth and the firmament, and helps
us to discover the immortal bliss with ardent passion of





[Names: Sacya]
This passion and omnipotence of Indra wields
and stabilises the heaven and earth in orbit. It ordains
the seven-rayed chariot of the sun in the system. With
its power and action it places mature living energy in
the fertility of earths, milk in cows and warmth in the
rays of sunlight, and thus it holds and sustains soma,
life energy of existence, in the universe, thereby making
it a living system of tenfold nature, i.e., five elements
and five pranic energies.


Mandala 6/Sukta 45
Indra (1-30) and Brbustaksha (31-33) Devata,




[Names: Shamyu, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu, Indrah, Indra]
May Indra, that eternal lord omnipotent, that
youthful ruler, and that forceful leader, be our friend


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and companion so that he may lead the man of instant
decision and action and the hardworking people on way
to wisdom and right living even from far off distance.






[Names: Avipre, Indro]
He brings food, health and age, life and light of
knowledge for the innocent and for the ignorant and
unintelligent too and wins wealth and honour for the
good life at the fastest without haste and impatience.




[Names: Mahirasya, Nasya]
Great are this ruler’s policies and acts of
leadership, universal and admirable. Never do his
honour, reputation and modes of defence, protection and





[Names: Sakhayo]
Come ye friends and comrades, adore the
harbinger and protector of divine sustenance and light
of universal knowledge, celebrate him in song and
proclaim his gifts of kindness. He is the light of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 741
sublimity, he alone is our vision and wisdom.




[Names: Tvamekasya, Utedrse]
O lord destroyer of evil like the sun, breaker of
the clouds, you are the saviour and protector of the one,
the lonely and helpless as well as of both the people
and the officers of administration as we too likewise
are supporters of the ruler and the people.






[Names: Nayasidvati, Nrbhih]
You control, guide and manage even the
stubborn hatefuls and convert them to ardent admirers
of positive knowledge as men of faith and
enlightenment. So you are called the real heroic leader
and ruler by the leading lights.






[Names: Brahmanam]
I invoke and celebrate in holy words the seer
and scholar of the universal knowledge of the Vedas,
adorable friend and exponent of divine knowledge as
one would serve and milk the cow for living energy or
study and meditate on the holy Word for living light.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Yasya, Virasya]
Seers and scholars say that in the hands of the
heroic leader and ruler, brave challenger and subduer
of all forces, lie and abide all treasures of the world
both material and spiritual. (The real scholar too is one
who commands the knowledge of nature as well as of
the spirit, of this world and of the world beyond.)






[Names: Sacipate, Vrha]
O bold and intrepidable ruler and protector of
the people, lord of mighty action, you break the clouds
and shake the mountains. Pray strengthen the
strongholds of the people and uproot the wiles of the
wicked.


[Names: Tamu, Somapa, Ahumahi, Sravasyavah]
Indra, lord ever true and redoubtable, protector
of the spirit and culture of the good life, ruler and
promoter of food, energy and progressive advancement


of the people, we invoke and call upon you to lead us in
our pursuit of sustenance, progress, honour and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 743
excellence and immortal fame.




[Names: Havyah]
You who have ever been with us and for us since
eternity, who surely are with us in our best of prosperity
and ever at the call of action, the same, O lord adorable,
we invoke and pray listen to our call and come and bless.






[Names: Dhibhir, Sravayyan, Tvaya]
With our intelligence and actions, with our drive
and horses, and with your helping hand and grace, O
lord of victory, destroyer and preserver, Indra, rising
and advancing, we pray, let us succeed in our battles of
life and win wholesome and reputable treasures of peace
and prosperity.






[Names: Abhuru, Bhare]
Indra, lord giver of honour and excellence, great,
adored in words of praise and prayer, when the call is
given, the forces are in array and the battle is raging,
then, O lord of victory, be with us. And when the treasure
is won and abounds for the good in life, then too, O


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


lord pervasive, be with us.






[Names: Taya]
And when your umbrella of protection and
promotion grows most extensively fast and wide, then
by that accelerate our chariot of honour and glory and
let it range wider and wider.






[Names: Jesi]
O leader and ruler, Indra, bravest commander
of the fastest chariot of our social order, thirsting for
victory, by that united chariot of ours in unison with us
you win the treasures of life good for the nation of


[Names: Patirjajne]
O man, invoke, admire and celebrate that one
alone who is unique by himself, ever watchful guardian
of the people, generous performer and showerer of


blissful fruits of his action, and who emerges and rises
as the protector and ruler of all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 745






[Names: Sivah]
Indra, potent lord of action, destroyer of
suffering and giver of bliss, who are good and kind,
friendly and one with the celebrants as our kith and kin,
pray, be kind and gracious to us and lead us to the peace
and happiness of the good life.






[Names: Dhisva, Sasahistha]
O wielder of the thunderbolt of defence and
power, take up the adamantine mace and thunder of
power and justice in your hands for the destruction of
evil and wickedness and face, challenge, resolve and
win the battles ahead.





[Names: Pratnam, Brahmavahastamam]
I invoke and celebrate that most eminent sage
and scholar of universal Vedic knowledge who is great
as ancient seers, friend, and inspirer of dedicated
disciples to win the wealth of life both spiritual and
material.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Girvanastamo]
He alone, most adorable, instant mover and
omnipresent lord of the universe, solely by himself,
rules, protects and promotes all treasures of the earth.


(He alone deserves to be ruler of the world who
is an earthly embodiment of such universal virtues.)






[Names: Sano, Gomadbhir]
O lord of land with controlled mind and senses,
bold and resolute, come to us with your teams of
harnessed services and commissioned forces
commanding speed and movement, warriors of horse
and armour, managers of lands and cattle wealth,
controllers of information and communication, and with
all this infrastructure fulfil our desires and ambitions
for the good life of success and progress.






[Names: Puruhiutaya, Puruhiuta, Sakine]
In your soma yajna in the business of the world
of the lord’s creation, sing together songs of homage in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 747


honour of the universally adored, ever true and eternal
almighty Indra, songs which may be as pleasing to the
mighty lord as to the seeker and the celebrant.






[Names: Sravad]
And surely the lord giver of settlement and gifts
of knowledge, power and speedy progress does not
withhold the gifts since he closely hears the prayers of
the devotee and responds.






[Names: Kuvitsasya, Sacitbhirapa]
May the lord destroyer of evil, negativity and
poverty visit the homestead of the prayerful devotee
blest with lands, cows and divine knowledge and open
up the flood gates of wealth, power and divine grace
for us with his vision and powers.






[Names: Imautva, Satakrato]
Indra, lord ruler of the world and guardian of
the people, just as mother cows look toward and low
out of affection for the calf, so do these people look up
to you with love and reverence, and their voices of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




adoration exalt you, O lord of a hundred acts of kindness
and holiness.






[Names: Dunasam, Asvo]
Indra, potent lord ruler of multifarious acts and
potential, never can your friendship toward the people
be lost or destroyed, it is permanent and versatile. You
are all love and revelation to a person in search of faith
and knowledge, and you are all impetuous victor for a
person thirsting for speed and progress. (The way we
think and act, you respond.)






Indra, ruler of the world of knowledge and
action, be happy at heart by body, mind and soul with
good food, energy and soma, and make others happy.
Subject not your devoted celebrant to the malignity of






[Names: Vatsam]
These words and voices of adoration, O spirit


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 45 749


adorable, reach you, in every yajna, in every cycle of
creation, like cows rushing to the calf with love.





[Names: Purutamam, Purutama, Purunam, Puruna, Vajebhir]
May the most ancient and eternal knowledge in
the speech of the ancient celebrants of divinity,
enlightening and energising humanity with the vital
spirits of existence, reaching the primeval soul, come
to us too, enlighten and energise us too.





[Names: Asmakamindra, Asman]
Indra, lord giver of honour and excellence, may
our song of celebration in your honour carry our
message of homage closest to your heart to exalt you,
and may you, we pray, inspire us to achieve the highest
wealths of life.





[Names: Uruh]
Let the maker, artist, analyst and architect,
occupy and preside over the highest position in the world
of business, wide and high like the embankment of a
mighty river, to contain and control the flow of the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


current of waters.






[Names: Sadyo]
Whose gifts to society flow in a thousand
directions like the currents of wind, his generosity and
charities always and instantly, rise and continue to rise
for the progress of humanity.



[Names: Brbum]
All our artists and artisans always appreciate
and admire the chief architect, learned, wise and brave,
giver of a thousand gifts and sharer of a thousand things
with thousands of people. He indeed is the head of our

Mandala 6/Sukta 46


[Names: Indra, Devata, Shamyu, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Tvamiddhi, Tvam]
vatah.


Indra, lord of power and advancement, you
alone we invoke and call upon for acquisition of food,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 46 751


energy, honour, excellence and progress. All of us,
leading people, makers, poets, artists, artisans and
architects of the nation, fast advancing in all directions,
invoke and exhort you, protector and promoter of
universal truth and values in human struggles for light,
goodness and generosity, and the wealth of life.






[Names: Gamasvam, Jigyuse]
Indra, lord of wondrous powers and perfor-
mance, wielding the thunderbolt of justice and
punishment in hand, great and glorious, breaker of the
clouds and shaker of mountains, invoked and adored in
song, with truth and science, power and force, collect,
organise and win for us the wealth of lands, cows and
rays of the sun, horses, transports and chariots like the
victories of wealth and glory for the ambitious nation.






[Names: Indram, Sahasramuska]
We invoke and adore Indra, lord of glory,
constant watcher of humanity and human actions, and
pray: O lord protector of truth, commanding
thousandfold vitality and flames of fiery forces, master
of universal wealth, be with us for our advancement in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


the struggles of life.






[Names: Badhase, Asmakam]
Indra, ruler of the world, sacred as hymns of
Rgveda, as a bull controls the herd, so you control as
well as defend people with righteous passion and justice
when they rub against each other or face great conflicts.
O lord, be our saviour, giver of enlightenment in the
great battles for wealth, health care, water management
and the harnessing of solar energy.






[Names: Yeneme]
Indra, lord of noblest virtue and knowledge, bear
and bring us that best and most lustrous food for the
nourishment of body and mind by which, O wondrous
hero of golden helmet and wielder of thunder in hand,
you may reach both this earth and this sky upto the
heaven.





[Names: Visva, Mitrantsusahan, Mitrantsusaha]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 46 753


For our defence and protection, O ruler, of all
the brilliant, generous and mighty powers, we invoke
you, illustrious challenger of the enemies of humanity.
O lord giver of peace and settlement in security, crush
and scatter the obdurate negative forces within and
outside, and turn the opponents into friends and





[Names: Yadindra]
Indra, ruler of the world, whatever the lustre
and splendour in humanity across history, whatever the
power and wealth among communities, whatever the
virtue and quality in the five elements of nature or lands
of the earth, or whatever the strength and vigour of the
world of existence, you bear and symbolise all that. Pray,
O lord, bear and bring us all that.






[Names: Asmabhyam, Mitran, Mitra]
O lord of wealth and power of the world,
whatever the wisdom among the learned, whatever the
energy among people of anger and hostility, or whatever
strength and vigour among people of fullness of virility
and generosity, at their best, bring us all that in the battles


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of human contest and competition so that we may face,
fight out and eliminate anger, enmity and malice.






[Names: Chardir]
Indra, lord ruler of the wealth of nations, for
the men of wealth, power, honour and generosity of
heart, and for me too, give a home made of three metals
and materials, comfortable in three seasons of summer,
winter and rains, a place of rest, peace and security for
complete well being. Give the light for them, keep off
the blaze from them.






[Names: Adha]
Indra, lord of peace and power, exalted by words
of adoration, give us warriors who, with their love of
cows, lands and speech and with the force of their mind
and strength of arm and courage, press down the enemies
and destroy their arms and armies, and then, also, O
lord protector of our person and body politic, be with
us at the closest, deep within.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 46 755




[Names: Yadantarikse]
Indra, chief of defence forces, give us those
flying birds of defence and protection which blaze
through skies and spaces carrying deep penetrative war
heads in front, and then, also, be with us for our
leadership, defend and protect us in the battles for our






[Names: Yatra, Surasastanvo, Sarma]
Give us the sweet home where the brave extend
the honour and achievement of their forefathers, and
then, for further extension of the honour, achievement
and tradition of the nation, give us peace and security
free from mental worry and keep off all jealousy, malice
and hostility.





[Names: Asamane, Syendan]
And when, in the effort for creation and in the
struggle for extension of honour and achievement of


new wealth, you inspire the stormy pioneers and
ambitious warriors thirsting for fame, and urge them


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




on to fly like eagles on unequal paths and winding ways
of progress and possibility, then also, O lord, be with us






[Names: Sindhunriva]
The pioneers and warriors of new projects on
earth fly on and move like rivers rushing down to the
sea. They move by superfast carriers whose controls
are held fast in hands, and instantly act in response to
the sound signal and pounce upon the target like birds


Mandala 6/Sukta 47




[Names: Soma, Indra, Dana, Ratha, Dundubhi, Devatah, Garga, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Svaduskilayam]
na kascana sahata ahavesu.


Soma: of course it is delicious, honey sweet,
and it is sharp and strong and intense, and also it has
wonderful flavour. And when Indra, the mighty one,
has happily drunk of this soma, this nectar of life, none
can withstand him in battles.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 757






[Names: Ayam, Puruni]
It is delicious, most exhilarating here in the
business of life. Indra, mighty ruler, having drunk of it,
exults in the battle against want and wickedness for the
achievement of prosperity and, waxing in strength and
passion, destroys the multitudinous forces of evil and
breaks ninety and nine strongholds of darkness like the
sun breaking clouds for rain.






This ecstasy of soma stimulates and refines my
speech, it energises and sublimates my mind and
awareness to love and passion for divinity. Man in the
state of mental stability and spiritual constancy realises
the six dimensional universe of existence beyond which
there is no world of matter or mind higher or lower.





All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




This soma is that cosmic energy which causes
the showers of vitality from the sun and creates the
fertility of the earth. It bears the nectar sweets of three
rolling oceans of heaven, earth and the middle region
and sustains the vast skies.






[Names: Marutvan, Marutva]
This generous and exuberant energy of the
universe commanding the force of the currents of
nature’s inherent power vests the beatific ocean of the
glorious sunrays of immaculate beauty of the mornings.
It is great and, by its mighty gravitational force, sustains
the solar region in position above.






[Names: Dhrsat, Somamindra, Madhyamdine]
Bold and resolute Indra, ruler, destroyer of
darkness and poverty, drink the soma from the vessel
for the battle of life’s wealth. Come to the mid-day
session of yajna and bring the showers. As you yourself
are the treasurehold of wealth, bless us with the wealth
of life.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 759






[Names: Bhava]
Indra, leader and commander of world power,
look at us and watch like a leader moving fast forward.
Lead us to wealth of the world across the oceans. Be
the unswerving pilot of the nation, take us to the shores
beyond and lead us on by the policy and practice of
nobility and gracious living.





[Names: Urum, Rsva]
Indra, sagely scholar and just ruler of the world,
lead us to the higher regions of life, fearless, full of
heavenly light, a haven of bliss and well being. O lord
of constancy, we pray, may we abide in the shelter and
security of the umbrella of your mighty protective hands.





[Names: Varisthe, Satavannasvayora, Isama]
Indra, ruler and guardian of the people, master


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and controller of the wealth and power of the world, let
us ride and abide in the best chariot of our choice in
your well managed system of governance run by the
strongest and most efficient leaders and forces. O lord
of a hundred powers and actions, bring us the best and
most abundant food and sustenance, energy and power.
Let no one as master tread over our wealth, power, and
basic rights of life and freedom.






Indra, ruler sustainer of all, be kind and gracious
to me, please to wish me the good life, sharpen and
inspire my mind and intellect like the razor’s edge. And
whatever I wish out of love and devotion, to you I say
this: Please to accept and grant, and raise me up to the
love and favour of divinity.





[Names: Trataram, Indram, Suramindram, Hvayami]
In every battle of life one after another, I invoke

Indra, lord giver of wealth, honour and power, saviour


Indra, protector Indra, brave Indra invoked with love
and devotion, pure and powerful, universally invoked


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 761


and adored. May Indra bring us the good life and all




[Names: Indrah, Badhatam]
Indra, lord omniscient, mighty protector and sole
lord of his own essential powers may, we pray, be kind
and gracious with his modes of protection and
advancement, ward off hate and enmity and grant us
freedom from fear so that we may be masters and
promoters of the noble strength and honour of life.





[Names: Tasya]
May we enjoy the favour, kindness and love of
that lord adorable, all protective Indra, sole master of
his own essential powers and forces, who may always
ward off from us all hate and enmity far or near.






[Names: Purun, Puru]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Indra, O ruler of the world, like streams of flood
rushing down to the sea, all voices of prayer and
adoration, offers of homage and chants of the holy Word
dedicated to your service rise, reach and concentrate in
you. O wielder of the thunderbolt of power and justice,
you hold, integrate, treasure and distribute immense
wealth of means and materials of success, yajnic
sessions and inspirations, wide ranging waters and social
programmes of action, lands, cows and lights of
knowledge, and all things of beauty and joy leading to
mental and spiritual bliss of peace.






[Names: Yadugramin, Yadugrami, Padaviva, Ssacibhih]
Who can praise and fully celebrate him? Who
can finally serve and join him?


Whoever is passionately dedicated and whom
the lord of glory may favour, govern, and protect day
and night, the lord who, like a man on the walk
alternating his feet in motion moving the hind one
forward and leaving the forward one then behind,
dispenses people up and down according to their actions
and the law of karma.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 763




[Names: Srnve, Edhamanadvilubha]
I hear that Indra, potent lord, controller of all
proud and passionate ones, leading all up and down by
their performance, favouring the good and punishing
the rising proud and arrogant, rules all communities of
humanity, good and evil, and calls them up for justice
and dispensation.






[Names: Para, Ananubhutiravadhunvanah, Saradastartariti]
With love and understanding, Indra, lord ruler,
gives up the dead wood of the old and goes forward
taking on other new forms of life and society like waves
of the sea pressing on fast forward. Shaking off the
callous who refuse to learn by experience he goes on
like the sun crossing over the years of time gone by and
living and shaping new eras of time.






[Names: Rupamrupam, Indro, Pururupa, Sata]
Indra, the supreme soul, pervades all forms of


existence to reveal that pervasive form of presence
according to each form. The individual soul, the jiva,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




takes on one form of life after another to reveal that
existential form of its real self. The ruler takes over each
form of the institutions of his governance to reveal his
power and presence through that institution. Indra thus,
of many many forms of manifestation goes on by
manifold powers and potentials, assisted by thousands
of its motive forces like the master of a chariot drawn
by horses.






[Names: Yujano]
With its powers and potentials yoked to its
chariot-like body form, Tvashta, the soul, shines
gloriously in its existential form here. It takes the best
form of its love and choice by karma, for who would
choose to be with the malicious fools day and night
when the wise and visionaries are sitting close by?






[Names: Agavyuti, Brhaspate]
over the vast virgin land which is a field good enough
for warriors of action to develop and cultivate. O
Brhaspati, lord of knowledge, protector and promoter
of great things, Indra, destroyer of suffering, master of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 765


diagnostics and correctives, let us make the pathway
for the development of cattlewealth and advancement
of knowledge and education in the service of the present
generation of the celebrants of divinity and nobilities
of humanity.






[Names: Divedive, Ahan, Sambaram]
Day by day the sun dispels the equal cover of
darkness arisen at night from its abode to the other half
of the globe. The mighty solar power of showers breaks
the dark vapours concealed in the cloud, strikes the
blazing lightning and opens the flood gates of rain to


(So does the ruler dispel the darkness of
ignorance, injustice and poverty and open the flood -
gates of light and knowledge with justice and





[Names: Prastoka, Divodasadatithigvasya]
Indra, lord ruler, the celebrant of your means


and materials of success and accomplishment has given
ten treasure gifts of land and ten modes of fast transport.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




We accept and reciprocate the gifts of the lord’s showers
of generosity and hospitality from the celebrant giver
of the treasures of means and materials of success, water
showers and the gifts of land, home and wealth for





[Names: Dasasvan, Daso, Divodasadasanisam, Divodasadasanisa]
Let me receive and enjoy in common ten
transports, ten treasures of wealth, ten garments, ten
kinds of food and ten pieces of gold from the brilliant
and generous giver.


(Swami Dayanand suggests in his commentary
that the ratio at the maximum between the lowest and
highest paid working partner in the social order should
be one to ten.)





[Names: Dasarathan, Asvathah]
Let the treasurer give ten chariots equipped with
powerful steer and motive force to the guard and a
hundred cows for the non-violent scholars of the
physical and spiritual sciences of the Atharva Veda




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 767




[Names: Mahi]
Let the ruler, descendant of the creators of all
lawful forms of wealth, support and maintain the
scholars and scientists who create, provide and manage
the great wealth and power of universal value.






[Names: Vanaspate, Gobhih]
O vanaspati, ruler, protector and promoter of
forests and light of the sun for energy, be strong of your
systemic body of governance and strong in the
constituent parts of the system. Manned with noble
young supporters, be our friend, pilot and saviour across
the seas. You are self-controlled in mind and senses,
strongly endowed with refined speech and manners,
strengthen us who are committed to you, and let your
forces win the battles with high morale.



[Names: Divasprthivyah, Apamajmanam, Indrasya, Indras]
yaja.

Enlightened ruler and scholar, the energy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




collected and raised from the sun and earth, the energy,
vitality and patience received and learnt from the trees
and forests, the liquid power of the waters rising and
reinforced with rays of the sun, and the forceful current
of electric energy, with all these energies together
harnessed, create and serve the chariot, the fast
progressive social order worthy of your governance.






[Names: Mitrasya, Mitras, Marutamanikam, Marutamanika, Semam, Varunasya, Varunas]
Enlightened ruler, lord of grace and pilot of the
nation, loving and kind to participants in yajnic
governance, you are the thunder and lightning of the
cloud break of showers, you are the power and splendour
of the people, you are offspring of the light of sun and
love of divinity, you are the centre spring of justice and
discrimination. Lord ruler, accept this offer of homage
as our share of Raja-dharma in the service of the system.






[Names: Purutra]
O victorious lord ruler of the world, let the roar
of the victory drum fill heaven and earth with a fresh
lease of joy and new life. Lord of the whole nation, let
the wide world moving and non-moving know of you


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 47 769


and your glory. Blow over the world, equipped with
armaments of thunder and vision of the wise, ward off
the dangers and throw out the enemies far away.






[Names: Akrandaya]
Call out the forces, challenge the enemies all-
round, inspire us with vigour and splendour, roar like
thunder, repel all evils and negativities, scare away the
barking maligners. You are the strike of lightning, rise
and let us rise too with might and main.






[Names: Amiuraja, Samasvaparnascaranti]
Indra, lord ruler, throw out the enemy forces.
Rally our forces back in form and array, ever ready. Let
the battle drum boom, with the flag flying. Our warriors
on the wing in armour and our leaders in the forefront
advance and fight out the challenges. Let our heroes of
the chariot come out with flying colours.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 6/Sukta 48






[Names: Agni, Maruts, Marut, Pusha, Prshni, Dyava, Devatah, Shamyu, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Yajnayajna, Samsisam, Mitram, Mitra]
In every yajnic programme of your creative and
constructive work, in every word of our voice, join and
let us honour, appraise and develop agni, imperishable
energy pervasive in all things of existence and adore
Agni, omniscient and omnipresent lord giver of
knowledge and enlightenment.





[Names: Urjo, Bhuvad]
Let us honour and serve Agni, infallible cosmic
light and energy, power that is surely our own, lover
and benefactor in matters of creation and development.
May Agni be our protector and promoter in our struggles
for progress and may he be the saviour and cleanser of
our health of body, mind and social order.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 771


[Names: Vrsa, Ajasrena, Socisa, Sosucacchuce]
didihi.


Agni, generous lord giver of showers of light
and energy, wealth and power, you are great, unaging
and immortal. You shine with lustre and purity. O lord
pure and purifying, blazing with universal light and
glory, enlighten us blissfully with the divine rays of
eternal light, knowledge and purity.






[Names: Maho, Arvacah]
Agni, giver of light and power, you join, honour
and serve the bounties of nature and brilliancies of
humanity. Join the great ones in order by holy acts of
yajna, raise your actions and turn the divinities
hitherward for our protection and advancement. Give
us the courage and power to act and win, and join us in
the celebrations of success.




[Names: Yamapo, Sahasa]
sanavi.

Agni, eternal vitality is the generator as well as


the generation of the cosmic heat of vitality and the
cosmic law, whom, in the state of existence, the waters


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and actions of men, clouds and mountains, and the
forests and sun rays feed and promote to the full, and
which arises and kindles when it is produced by the
force of attrition and churning by men on the surface of
the earth.






[Names: Syavasvaruso, Syava]
Agni is that heat of vitality which fills both
heaven and earth with sun light and rises to the skies
from earth by smoke. It is seen to dispel the darkness
prevailing over dark nights, shining red as harbinger of
rain, while it shines in sun rays too as harbinger of the
showers of light and rain.






[Names: Brhadbhiragne, Bharadvaje, Sukra]
power, bright and pure, kindled and rising in the mind
and soul of sagely scholars in pursuit of science, energy
and progress, shine with mighty flames of light, purity
and power, and bring us the wealth of life replete with
light and enlightenment. O generous light and fire of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 773
life, shine and enlighten us.




[Names: Visvasam, Satam]
dadati.


Agni, unaging light and fire of the youthful spirit
of life, you are the master and guardian of the home of
all the human communities of the world along with all
the cities and settlements taken together. O destroyer of
evil and purifier of life in the crucibles of existence,
save from sin the yajamana, who kindles, raises and
develops the fire energy, with a hundred ways of
protection and bless those who support the developers
and celebrants of fire with means and materials so that
they live and work for a full hundred years.






[Names: Tvam, Asya]
Agni, wonderful lord of versatile action, giver
of shelter and security of the home, with protection and
advancement, inspire and raise our means and materials
for success and achievement. O lord of knowledge and
vision, you are the guide and pilot of the chariot and
wealth and honours of this generation. Give us the
message and inspiration of peace, progress and security


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


for our children.






[Names: Parsi, Agne]
Agni, lord of light and culture, you cleanse,
refine and enrich our children and teenagers with all
nourishments and safeguards for body, mind and soul
with unfailing and unchallengeable modes and methods
of education and refinement. Resist and overcome the
passions and negativities which attract natural wrath
and fight out impious temptations from us.





[Names: Asakhayah, Srjadhvam]
Come ye friends all, let us develop the language
and culture of versatile possibilities of creative
achievement by the latest methods and media of
communication, and let us create a new and unshakable
body of knowledge and language of lasting value.





[Names: Sardhaya, Sravo, Marutaya, Maruta, Marutam, Maruta]
O mother teacher, O divine speech, you are the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 7715


one who create, kindle, refine and raise the word and
vision of immortal value for the strength and refinement
of dynamic people for self-enlightenment, and who are
a divine messenger for the good and well-being of
vibrant people of fast action with gifts of comfort and






[Names: Bharadvajayava, Dhenum]
O mother, you bear and bring the milk of twofold
efficacy for the brilliant celebrant and bearer of science,
power and fast action: divine speech yielding universal
knowledge and enlightenment for all, and universal food
for the body, mind and soul for the nourishment of all






[Names: Indram, Indra, Varunamiva, Aryamanam]
O lovers of knowledge and fast action, for the
sake of your guidance and enlightenment, I admire and
pay homage to the divine teacher who is the hero of
who 18 versatile and resourceful like Varuna, universal
power of judgement and discrimination, who is happy
and rejoicing like Aryaman, universal guide, and who
provides universal food of delicate flavour like Vishnu,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


all pervasive preserver and sustainer of the universe.




[Names: Tvesam, Pusanam, Pusana]
karat suveda no vasu karat.


I admire the divine teacher, harbinger of
knowledge and power, I admire the power like the
blazing force of the winds, I admire the resounding
automotive chariot and the nourishing food products
for sustenance so that wealth may be raised to hundred
and from hundred to thousand for the people, hidden
riches may be revealed from the depths, and the brilliant
scholar may create further wealth and power for our
peace and security of well being with knowledge and





[Names: Agha]
O lord giver of nourishment and sustenance,
shining with knowledge and glowing with passion for
action, come fast to me and I shall sing of your glory in
truth close to your ear. O master of the community,
eliminate hate, enmity, adversity and close-heartedness.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 48 777


[Names: Mota]
veh.


Do not uproot the trees such as the banyan which
provide shelter to the poor innocent birds, but do remove
the revilers and deplorables. The strong must not hurt
the weak and their supports like the hunters who catch
birds by the neck.






[Names: Drteriva, Acchidrasya]
Lord giver of nourishment and sustenance, let
your friendship be non-violent, and unexploitative.
[Names: Immaculate]
fulfilled, and you command immense plenty, prosperity
and impeccability.



[Names: Paro, Pusan, Pusa]
pura.

Pusha, giver of nourishment and sustenance, you
are highest among mortals by nobility and grace, equal
to the brilliant in nature and humanity in generosity.
Watch us, guard us in the battles of life and protect and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Vami, Devasya, Maruto, Jyavah]
O Maruts, tempestuous heroes, movers and
shakers in action and holy creative performers, let the
policy, programmes and acts of the people be noble and
graceful, inspired and directed by truth and
righteousness, promotive for all, whether the person is
a priest and yajaka.






[Names: Sadyascid, Savo, Suryah, Surya]
The ruler, whose action is instant, constant and
ever true, whose people, leaders and warriors command
sure, brilliant and yajnic force and power of the highest
order to dispel darkness, evil and wickedness, rises and
shines like the bright sun across the heavens.





[Names: Sakrddha, Prsnya, Jayate]
The sun is born one and once unique, the earth
is born one and once, unique, the skies and stars, milk
and waters all are one, born once and unique. None else
is born after exactly the same. That other, the creator is


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 7719




Mandala 6/Sukta 49






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Rjishva, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Stuse, Sruvantu, Varuna, Agnih, Agni]
With latest words and fresh voice, I honour and
admire the man committed to duty and discipline, Mitra,
the friend, and Varuna, the man of judgement and clear
vision, both givers of peace and pleasure of well being.
May they come here, I pray, and listen, They command
the wealth and honour of the admirable social order,
Mitra, Varuna and brilliant blazing Agni, all three like
sun, ocean and fire.






[Names: Visovisa, Divah]
I admire and adore Agni, leader of light and fire,
honoured and worshipped in every community, calm
and delighted in yajnic projects of love and non-
violence, free from illusion and infatuation, generated
by youthful parents, i.e., sun and earth, child of cosmic
energy, symbol and column of yajna, and crimson red


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




like the dawn which is brilliant and soothing. I pray
may Agni come and join us at our yajna.






[Names: Arusasya, Mithastura]
Two daughters of the glowing fire, the night and
the day, different in form, one adorned with stars, the
other lighted by the sun, move on alternating with each
other. Both of them, pure, purifying and sanctifying,
adorable and adored, pervade the world, and may they,
we pray, inspire our thought and mind. (So may men
and women be complementary to each other.)






[Names: Vayumaccha, Dyutadyama]
O venerable scholar of vision and imagination,
dedicated to in-depth research with ambition for the
honour and glory of success, with your brilliant and
far-reaching intelligence and application, you study and
plan to harness the abundantly rich and powerful
universal energy of the divine wind and its carrier forces
of energy, immensely useful to drive the chariot over
the paths of light in space. Venerable scholar, honour
the visionary seer, his vision and learning.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 781


(Swami Dayananda applies this manta also to
the control of breath, pranic energy and mind for flights
of the soul in samadhi for the achievement of supra-
sensuous experiences of universal nature.)






[Names: Same, Yena]
That brilliant chariot of the Ashvins,
complementary currents of universal energy of divine
nature, directed by the mind, may, I pray, vest my body
and mind with light and energy, the chariot by which
leading lights of humanity dedicated to Truth and
Divinity go by the path of righteousness in search of
enlightenment for themselves and their children.






[Names: Parjanyavata, Jinvata, Satyasrutah]
O generous and showerful winds and clouds,
move the vapours of water from the earth and the
firmament. O men of vision and imagination, established
leaders and scholars of the world dedicated to truth and
the voice of truth, listen to the scholar by whose words
of knowledge you discover the world and work for its


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Paviravi, Sarasvati, Gnabhiracchidram, Saranam, Sarma]
Gracious Sarasvati, mother harbinger of
knowledge and sacred speech, wondrous of form and
life energy, spirit of purity and sanctity inspired and
protected by omniscient and omnipotent Lord, may, we
pray, bring us knowledge and wisdom in words of divine
revelation and, loving and kind as the mother is, may
she bless the celebrant with faultless haven and home
of peace and well being free from fear and violence.





[Names: Pathaspathah]
Let the supplicant inspired by love and
reverence offer homage in holy words to adorable Pusha,
giver of health and sustenance and guardian of people
in all paths of life, and may that lord grant the supplicant
invigorating herbs and brilliant life saving drugs. Pusha
matures our mind and intelligence and gives us success
in action and achievement.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 783



[Names: Prathamabhajam, Hota, Agnis]
Let agni, generous yajaka, join and offer
abundant homage and service to Tvashta, maker of
forms and institutions for humanity. Who is freely
sociable, and first to be invited, famous and adorable,
giver of health and long age, expert of hand in action,
and openly accessible and responsive to the brilliant






[Names: Bhuvanasya, Rudram, Rudra, Brhantam, Rudramaktau]
With all these words of homage by day and in
the night, adore and exalt Rudra, guardian sustainer of
the world and destroyer of suffering and disease.
Inspired and exhorted by the wise poet of vision, let us
all in truth and sincerity invoke and adore Rudra,
dispenser of justice and punishment, great giver of
advancement, unaging and blissful giver of peace and




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Maruto, Acitram, Angirasvat, Come, Maruts, Marut]
and adorable yajakas vibrant as winds, and listen to the
exhortations of the celebrants: you are leading lights of
nature and humanity, messengers and harbingers of the
breath of life, reaching everywhere, advancing yourself
and raising all thus, you revitalise even the less than
ordinary lands and rejuvenate worse than terminable
cases of suffering and bless them with new life.


fad: nen




[Names: Srutasya]
Reach the brave, the courageous and the instant
destroyer of suffering and darkness, and, like a shepherd
leading the flock home, let your words of prayer and
adoration rest there, and just as the sky is decked and
adorned by the stars, so the listener is touched at heart
by the words of the prayerful man of the revealed Word.


[Names: Tasya, Sarmann]
O lord all pervasive, Vishnu, who have created


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 49 785


the three regions of the universe for humanity and
sustain the three to save us from the limitations of
suffering and darkness, we pray that with the abundant
and expansive gifts of health and wealth we may live
and enjoy life in this vast home given by you.






[Names: Tanno, Tadosadhibhirabhi]
That blessed home of ours, Lord of the deep
caverns of the clouds formed in the sky, may sustain us
with showers of waters and rays of the sun. That home,
the mountain and the lord creator, Savita and sun may
sustain and bring gifts of food for us therein. And the
same, the lord abundant giver of wealth, power and
honour and sustainer of the world, Bhaga, may promote
and vitalise with herbs for us to live in plenty and




[Names: Nuno, Puruviram, Puruvira, Ksayam]
O lord creator and generous giver, give us the
commonwealth equipped with chariots, good for all


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




people, blest with many heroic children and warriors,
great and protector of the truth and law of the world in
existence. May the lord giver give us an unaging home
land and shelter by which we may face and overcome
the impious rivals contesting against us and build a
nation of brilliant and God fearing people so that both
the simple and the sophisticated people may live well.


Mandala 6/Sukta 50






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Rjishva, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Huve, Varunam, Varuna, Abhiksadamar, Mitramagnim, Mitramagni]
For your happiness and felicity I invoke, invite
and honour with reverence and hospitality the
Vishvedevas, powers and people of generous and divine
nature : the brilliant mother scholar, the lady of exalted
nature and character, and indestructible Aditi, Mother
Nature, Varuna, udana energy of vitality and the man of
elevating wisdom, Mitra, pranic energy and the friend
dear as breath of life, Agni, fire and the man of passion
and purity of action, Abhikshada, the generous person
who is a spontaneous giver and fighter against adversity,
Aryaman, the person who guides with judgement and
discrimination between good and evil, the person
committed to selfless service of the community, all noble
and brilliant powers and people who help as saviours
and path finders, Savita, giver of light and inspiration
as the sun, Bhaga, lord of universal wealth and power,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 50 787


and the man who counts for the honour and excellence
of humanity.






[Names: Sujotisah, Surya, Dvijanmano, Agnijihvah, Agnijihva]
O man bright as the sun, if you want to maintain
your simplicity, innocence and freedom from sin,
approach, honour and exalt the generous and brilliant
seniors of parental nature who command the holy light
of knowledge, expertise of action and greatness of
character, who are nobly born and divinely educated,
who are true to the bone and unshakably committed to
nothing but the truth and the law of Dharma, and who
enjoy perfect peace of mind with an open door
hospitality but have a tongue of fire that brooks no
nonsense and burns double dealing with a whiff of air.






[Names: Saranam, Mahaskaratho]
And O heaven and earth, give us the strength of
a mighty social order, O magnetic and electric energy
of the earth and firmament, great givers of peace and
comfort, provide us a vast home of comfort and joy. O
noble and generous divinities of nature and humanity,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




great things as you do, give us the best of wealth and
competence for our life on earth so that our home and
family may be free from sin and violence.






[Names: Rudrasya, Rudras, Yadimarbhe, Maruto]
May the off-springs of Rudra, lord of justice
and nature’s vitality, come down to us, invited they are
today. Modest yet invincible, brilliant and vibrant as
winds they are, givers of home and comfort, and since
they are appointed to fight out adversaries in battles






[Names: Mimyaksa, Srutva]
O Maruts, vibrant warriors of nature and
humanity with whom the energy and generosity of
heaven and earth is joined and whom Pusha, vital energy
of nature and humanity, blesses with reverence and
recognition, go quick in response to the call and meet
the purpose. And when you proceed in response to the
call and march on the path, all those who inhabit the
earth tremble on the route of your advance.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 50 789




[Names: Sravadiddhavamupa]
O celebrant of nature, divinity and the best of
humanity, sing in praise of that mighty adorable Indra,
commander of glory and power, with the best and latest
of your songs of celebration. And the great Indra, sung
and celebrated thus, would closely hear the song and
prayer and would grant you food and sustenance and
fast progress and victories in the battles of life.






[Names: Omanamapo, Yuyam]
O waters of purity, Apah, O leaders of humanity
pure at heart like holy waters, you are a bliss for
humanity. Bear and bring nourishing, protective and
unsullied food for our children and for our youth and
bring about a state of peace free from sin and evil. You
are the most motherly harbingers of health, the best
physicians. You are the makers of a new generation for
all the moving and non-moving world. Pray stay
constant and friendly as you are.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Usaso]
May the divine and refulgent Savita, creator,
preserver and generator of golden handed charity, loving
and adorable, come and bless us, he who, all giving,
opens up treasures of wealth for the generous giver like
the first lights of the dawn.






[Names: Syamaham]
O light and fire of life, Agni, off-spring of divine
strength and vitality, in this yajnic programme of love
and non-violent creation of an enlightened society, let
the divine values and virtues of nature and humanity
turn and come our way and flow on. O lord of brilliance,
let me stay established for all time in the bliss of your
generosity and, under your protection and guidance, let
me command the heights of heroism with the brave.




[Names: Atrim, Atri]
And may the Ashvins, those two complementary
currents of nature’s energy, the teacher and the preacher,
leading lights of the world, vibrant benefactors dear as


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 50 791


breath of life, both committed to truth and eternal law,
come in response to my invitation with gifts of
intelligence and competence for holy action, protect me
as Atri, the man free from physical, mental and spiritual
ailments, save me from deep darkness and release me
from sin and evil all round prevailing.






[Names: Dasasyanto, Puruksoh, Purukso]
O divine powers of nature and humanity, learned
and wise teachers and scholars, be you all givers of rich
gifts of wealth, light, speed and success, human
resources and food for sustenance. And may all the
divinities celestial, terrestrial, spatial and aqueous bless
us with peace and felicity.






[Names: Rudrah, Rudra, Sarasvati, Rbhuksa, Vayuh, Vayu, Parjanyavata]
May Rudra, lord of justice and punishment,
Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and speech, Vishnu,
omnipresent spirit of the universe, Vayu, the winds,
[Names: Rbhuksha]
law giver, clouds and winds, all virile and friendly, bring


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


us food and energy and give us peace and felicity.


WAS: UB




[Names: Utasyadevah, Tvasta]
And that refulgent Savita, the sun, Bhaga, pranic
energy, Apam-napat, unfailing electric energy born of
waters, Tvashta, maker of forms with brilliant generative
powers, the heaven with all its lights, the earth with the
seas, may all these together, friendly and supportive,
generously giving and fulfilling, protect and promote
us in life.







[Names: Visvedeva]
And the deep cloud in the firmament, the unborn
Spirit of the universe, the sole divine support of
existence, the earth, the sea, all the divine forces of the
universe which prove and maintain the eternal law
invoked and adored, and Veda mantras taught by seers,
may all these listen to our prayers and protect us.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 793




Thus do we bearers of science and power and
our descendants and disciples offer homage with
thoughts, words and actions of devotion and pray that
the Vishvedevas, universal creators and unifiers of
nature and humanity, and their potentials, invoked and
admired, free and fearless, may continue to be providers
of peace and shelter for all for ever.


Mandala 6/Sukta 51






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Rjishva, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Mitrayoran, Mitrayora, Rtasya, Suci]
Lo! the sun, that glorious eye of the universe,
darling of the day and night, rises up undaunted, and
like the pure, resplendent, golden face of heaven
unveiled shines from the regions of eternal light.


(The sunrise is a metaphor which may be applied
to the rise of any great light - giving power, say a great
leader, giver of enlightenment, a teacher, a reformer, or




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Veda]
The lord of light who is all wise, too, knows,
reaches and pervades three orders of the world, i.e., the
earth, the middle regions of the skies, and the highest
regions of the light of heaven; three fields of life, 1.e.,
jnana or knowledge, karma or action, and upasana or
prayer and meditation; and three departments of the
social order, 1.e., teaching and research, governance and
administration, and dharma or values of life, law and
justice. He also knows the birth and life of these
Vishvedevas, 1.6., the divinities of nature and humanity.
And watching the simple and straight paths and
performances as well as the tortuous and crooked
movements of the mortals, the potent master reveals
where they reach in consequence.






[Names: Stusa, Mitram, Mitra, Aryamanam, Varunam, Varuna]
Happy and blest, I admire and celebrate in words
of song all of you, Vishvedevas, great observers and
protectors of the eternal law of Truth and righteousness:
Aditi, indestructible mother nature, Mitra, sun and
brilliant friend, Varuna, ocean and venerable judge,
Aryaman, universal guide and discriminative path
maker, Bhaga, lord of honour and excellence,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 795


universally known, dauntless, intelligent and wise






[Names: Risddasah, Yunah]
I reach, admire and celebrate Aditi, mother spirit
of nature, and the offsprings of Aditi, destroyers of evil
and protectors of the good and true, irresistible great
rulers, givers of peaceful homes, ever young and
unaging, makers of great social orders, well established
leaders of light and all refulgent suns. I approach them
with prayers for blessings, they love the supplicants.






[Names: Dyauspitah, Dyauspita, Visva, Aditya, Adit]
compassionate, free from hate and anger, O fire, O
brother, givers of shelter and protection, give us peace
and felicity. O children of mother Infinity, O Mother
Nature, all ever our own, loving friends, pray bring us a
homely settlement of joy and all round prosperity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Mano, Yuyam]
Adorable friends and unifiers, divinities of
nature and humanity, throw us not to the wolf and the
thief nor to the rule of the sinner, nor relegate us to
seizure, deprivation and exploitation. Pray stay you
constant as our guide in matters of body, health and
action and in the working of our social institutions, and
be the carrier medium of the word and voice of the






[Names: Visvasya]
O Vasus, givers of peace and settlement,
dispensers of the laws of nature and humanity, let us
not suffer your dispensation’s punishment for the sin
and crime committed by others, nor let us do that act
which you hate and prohibit. You are the rulers of the
world and dispensers of justice and punishment, O
divinities of nature and humanity. Let the hater and the
evil doer be the instrument of his own self-infliction.






[Names: Nama, Namo]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 797


Namas, the thunder of omnipotence and
universal law, is mighty. Reverence on the human plane
too has power. I respect law and reverence. Law and
reverence sustain the earth and the sun. I offer reverence
to the nobilities and the divinities. The power of the
Divine and reverence for life rule the actions, good as
well as evil, of all these people. I accept the power and
value reverence with humility and submission to the






O great divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity, I, moving forward by the chariot of law and
reverence, bow with homage and surrender to you all,
powers strengthened and sanctified by the law of eternal
truth, invincible presences in human homes, who are
vastly watchful guardians of all the people and their
actions in the world.






[Names: Sresthavarcasasta, Suksatraso, Agnir]
They alone are Vishvadevas, men of highest


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




excellence, they alone lead us over and across all evil
and suffering of life, and they alone are the right rulers
and managers of the social order, who are men of
wisdom, right judgment and discrimination as Varuna,
universal ruler, unifying sustainers and saviour friends
as Mitra, the sun, and pure and purifying agents of action
as Agni, the fire, who are committed in thought, word
and action to universal truth and eternal values of life,
and who have the courage of the conviction to speak
the truth in matters of governance and administration
in the political order of the world state.






[Names: Tena, Indrah, Indra, Susarmanah, Aditih, Aditi]
May those divine powers of nature and
humanity, cosmic energy, the firmament, the earth, the
protected and well guided, be our saviours and






[Names: Bharadvajah, Asanebhiryajamano]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 51 799


O divine powers, the bearer of knowledge who
invokes the divinities and serves the nobilities in yajnic
programmes is blest with divine peace and settlement
and enjoys wisdom and divine guidance. The yajamana
in pursuit of wealth and excellence, sitting with inspiring
and adorable yajakas, obtains the vision of rising
divinities in his life.



[Names: Davisthamasya]
Agni, O divine leader, cast away that crooked
thief, that strenuous enemy, far from the path of the
aspirant. O protector and promoter of the good and the
true, make it easy for him to follow the course simple
and straight.


[Names: Gravanah, Soma, Jahi]
O Soma, giver of peace and inspiration, our holy
ones generous as clouds and strong as granite love peace
for divine favour and friendship. Throw away the ogre
of crooked behaviour, he is a wolf only.



[Names: Indrajyestha, Karta]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




O Vishvedevas, bounties of nature divine and
leading lights of humanity, stay you all generous as ever,
shining as the sun on high above all. Make our march
of progress simple and manageable, and protect our
hearth and home.






[Names: Yena]
And also, let us move on by the path which is
faultless, auspicious, sinless and inviolable, which leads
to noble attainments with peace, and by which holy
brave people remove all hate, jealousy and enmity and
realize all wealth and self fulfillment.


Mandala 6/Sukta 52






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Rjishva, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Ubjantu]
I believe the enthusiastic performer of yajna
would not be forsaken by heaven or earth, nor would
he be deprived of the rewards of his yajna or of all these
noble actions. I pray may the showers of generous clouds


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 52 801






[Names: Maruto, Tapumsi, Socatu, Maruts, Marut]
despises our wealth and piety, or deprecates our acts
and holy programmes in progress, must have his
tortuous paths exposed by the blazing light of truth. Let
the loving and brilliant wise men subject the hater of
nobility and eternal values to disapproval until he feels






[Names: Kimanga, Soma, Kimanga]
O dear lover of peace and joy, would they not
call you protector of the honour and wealth of humanity?
O friend, shall we not call you protector of our honour
and reputation? O leader, dear as breath of life, don’t
you see our detractors and maligners? Pray strike the
blazing thunderbolt upon the hater of nobility and
universal values of spirituality.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Avantu, Avantu]
Let the rising dawns inspire me. May the
swelling seas raise and promote us. Let the steadfast
mountains, deep clouds and generous warriors defend
me. May the paternal powers of nature and humanity
protect and advance us in our holy programmes of
advancement in values and culture.






[Names: Visvadanim, Surya, Tatha]
May we always be happy at heart and see the
sun rise and sojourn in space higher and higher. May
the lord protector of health and wealth and honour come
with all modes of protection and progress, call upon us
to rise and raise us to the heights of brilliance and


fara ie ॥





[Names: Indro, Sarasvati, Parjanyo]
Let Indra, the ruler, come closest to us with
modes of protection and progress. May Sarasvati,
mother of knowledge and dynamic speech swelling with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 52 803


streams and showers of culture and refinement, come
and bless. Let Agni, adorable leader of light and fire of
action, responsive to our invocation, blissful like a father
and guardian, come with herbs and comforts for health,
honour and advancement.






[Names: Visve, Edam]
O eminent brilliancies of the world, learned and
generous presences, come, listen to this invocation of
mine and grace this holy seat of our yajnic programme
of study and development.





O generous and brilliant scholars and leading
lights of the world, whoever the person that invites you
and honours you with homage of yajna seasoned and
refined with fragrant materials overflowing with ghrta,
come to him and bless him with light, sweetness and
advancement in knowledge, honour and wealth of life.






[Names: Sumrlika]
May the Vishvedevas, eminent brilliancies of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




humanity, children of immortality and creators of the
language of immortality in knowledge, come and listen
to the prayers of the seekers and be givers of bliss to us.
May the children listen to the voices of the immortals
and be givers of joy to us.






[Names: Jusantam]
May the leading lights of the world, sages and
scholars, generous and brilliant, expanding the bounds
of knowledge and universal law in truth and
development, listen to our invitation, love, honour and
bless the liquid and milky investments in the yajnic
programmes of research and progress according to the
seasons of time and social requirements.






[Names: Stotram]
May Indra, gracious ruler, leading group of
dynamic people consisting of expert makers and
designers, Mitra, expert of vision and future
possibilities, brilliant and universal friend like the sun,
and Aryama, pioneer of the paths of progress with
judgement and directive control, accept, love and honour
these offers of holy yajnic investments for us.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 52 805




[Names: Imam, Cikitvan]
Agni, leading light and majestic ruler, generous
giver and highpriest of the yajnic order of humanity
approved and honoured by enlightened people, you
know the enlightened people and the peaceful non-
violent order. Pray take over, rule and administer this
order of ours according to the people’s performance and
the law.




[Names: Visvedevah, Agnijihva]
O Vishvedevas, leading lights and generous
bounties of nature and humanity, listen to this invocation
and invitation of ours, you who abide and operate in
the middle region and the highest region of light, who
have the tongue of fire and light of truth. You are lovable
and adorable. Come, sit on this seat of holy grass in this
yajna, rejoice and let us rejoice with you.








[Names: Srnvantu, Vishvedevas]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




protective like both earth and sky, the fire divine, listen
to my thought and word. Never shall I speak any words
against your life sustaining powers and science worthy
of universal celebration. Pray let us rejoice at the closest
with you in comfort and joy of all aspects of life.






[Names: Yekecajma]
And whatever great powers of divine nature
born on the earth and in the regions of firmament waters
born of the sun, all these divine powers of nature and
humanity may bring us universal life energy and happy
days and nights for our sustenance and enlightenment.






[Names: Agniparjanyadvavatam, Ilamanyo]
May the vital fire energy of light and electricity
and the clouds of vapour in space protect and augment
my intellect, and in this yajnic business of life promote
our honour and fame in response to our invocation and
invitation to yajna. One of these, the fire divine,
generates and inspires our speech, and the other, the
vapours, generate the cloud which fertilises earth and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 53 807


produces food. May the two bring us food, energy and






[Names: Stirne, Asmin]
O Vishvedevas, holy bounties of nature and
humanity, the sacred grass is strewn on the vedi, the
fire is kindled and rising with the holy chant of mantras
and oblations of fragrant homage of havi. Today in this
our yajnic programme, O adorables, accept and enjoy
our offer of homage and hospitality and let us rejoice
with you.


Mandala 6/Sukta 53






[Names: Pusha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Vayamu, Dhiye, Pusann, Pusan]
O Pusha, lord giver of food and energy and guide
and director over all our paths of life, for the sake of
vision and wisdom and to reach the goal in our mission
of life we take to you as one rides a chariot piloted by




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




[Names: Vamam]
Take us to a plentiful home and gracious master,

a brave leader of men and generous giver of the gifts of






[Names: Aditsantam, Pusa, Panescid]
Pusha, generous lord of light and grace, motivate
the non-giver to give in charity and soften the heart of
even the mean and miserly.


[Names: Sadhantamugra]
O resplendent leader and master of life force,
select and secure for us the paths of advancement to
energy and success, cast off the obstructions, and lead
our plans and programmes of action to success.

[Names: Pari, Athemasmabhyam]
O lord of vision and creativity, smite the hearts


of the callous niggards with a goad, and subdue them
to correction and maturity for the sake of us all.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 53 809






[Names: Pusannaraya, Pusannara]
Pusha, lord giver of life, nourishment and
inspiration, smite the callous, calculating and miserly
in the heart with the pangs of affliction, wish him well
for love and season him in the crucibles of remorse for
our sake.






O creative lord of vision and foresight, write
out the balance sheet of life’s hagglers and bargainers,
touch their hearts, let them mature all round and let us






[Names: Taya]
Pusha, lord of light and grace, giver of food and
growth for life, you command that analytical intellect
which discriminates between truth and untruth and
inspires the mind to have the vision of divinity. With
that inspiring intelligence, imprint the settled mind with
holiness and let it expand with ideas.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.





[Names: Tasyaste]
Lord of creative knowledge and development,
that versatile vision and expertise of yours which
develops cattle wealth and builds vast dairies and
veterinary institutions, we love, and we pray for the gifts
of that vision for comfort and well being.



[Names: Utano, Nrvat]
Lord of light and life’s development, give us
the gift of that knowledge and intelligence which may
develop the wealth of cows and horses and create modes
and means of success and prosperity. Give us that
intelligence inspired with love for people so that we
may live in peace and joy.

Mandala 6/Sukta 54






[Names: Pusha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Pusan, Pusa]
Pusha, giver of food and nourishment for body
and mind, take us forward truly with that scholar who


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 54 811


teaches us of truth with confidence and definiteness,
saying: This is what it is, and it is not otherwise.






[Names: Samu]
Let us go forward in life with that teacher, giver
of nourishment for body, mind and soul, that family
physician, who rules the home and governs home life,
saying with confidence and definiteness: This is it, this
way and not otherwise.






[Names: Pusnascakram]
The wheel of Pusha, lord of life and provider of
growth and sustenance, never slackens, nor does it
violate anything. His treasury never depletes, and his
knowledge and arms of defence never hurt anything
positive.






[Names: Prathamo]
Pusha, lord ruler and giver of nourishment and
growth, does not hurt or challenge him who offers
homage with creative and constructive projects in


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




honour of him. Indeed, the first and original inventor
and maker of basic things wins rewards of wealth for
the invention.





Let Pusha, patron sustainer and promoter of
artists, approve and support the development of lands,
cows and words of knowledge. Let Pusha protect and
promote horses and other modes of transport. Let Pusha
create and provide food, energy and wealth of all kinds
for us.






[Names: Pusannanu, Asmakam]
Pusha, giver of sustenance, acknowledge,
protect and promote the developed lands, cows and
words of knowledge of the yajamana and also of ours
who are the celebrants of this yajna of development.






[Names: Makirnesanmakim, Atharistabhira]
anyone. Let none throw anyone into the pit of darkness


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 54 813


and nothingness. O lord of nourishment and growth,
come, bless us with everything whole and unhurt, with
inviolable acts and unchallengeable policies.



[Names: Srnvantam, Pusanam, Pusana]
edasam. Isanam raya imahe.

Pusha, lord of nourishment and growth, is
listening, inspiring and all round ruler and guardian of
indestructible wealth and knowledge. We pray to the
lord for wealth and honour of permanent nature.





[Names: Stotarasta]
Lord of life, we are your devotees, celebrants
here in life. Let us never suffer in the observance of
your laws and discipline.





[Names: Pari, Punarno]
May Pusha grant us the perfect umbrella of his
right hand all over and help us recover the losses and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 6/Sukta 55






[Names: Pusha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Rathir]
Come resplendent spirit of freedom
indestructible, be our guide and saviour as master and
pilot of the chariot on the path of eternity and divine
truth and we shall be ever together.






[Names: Rathitamam, Rayah]
We adore the highest chariot hero of flying hair,
our friend and saviour, great ruler and ordainer of the
wealth of existence and pray to him for wealth and
power for advancement in life.






[Names: Rayo, Dhivatodhivatah]
O resplendent lord unborn and eternal, riding
the waves of light, you are the treasure house of wealth
and happy settlement, and you are a ceaseless flow of
honour and excellence, a happy friend for every person
blest with intelligence and wisdom.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 56 815






[Names: Pusanam, Pusana, Svasuryo]
We honour and adore the sun, Pusha, giver of
vitality and potency, rider of the eternal chariot flying
like a courser in space which steals away the dawn, its






[Names: Matur, Bhratendrasya]
I speak of the sun, sustainer of the earth mother,
lover of its own creation, the dawn, brother of electric
energy of the cosmos, and my friend and companion for
life. May the sun be close to us and respond to our prayer.






[Names: Ajasah, Devam]
May the radiations of the sun, waves of light
energy firmly yoked in its chariot bearing life and lustre
for humanity, bring the divine light and life into this

Mandala 6/Sukta 56




[Names: Pusha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Pusanam, Pusana]
If one were to describe this Pusha, the sun or
the universal chemistry of nourishment and vital energy,
and say: It is from the solar suction of waters from earth
and all space, or that, on the level of the individual
human, it is from oat meal cooked with milk, then by
this the divine process is neither to be defined nor to be
determined nor, yet, to be exaggerated.






[Names: Indro]
In fact, that fastest energy, Indra, heroic ruler of
the chariot, supportive of the positive forces of nature
and humanity in combination with friendly powers such
as electric energy, breaks the clouds of darkness and
want and thus remains the protector, promoter and ruling
controller of natural truth.






[Names: Utadah, Nyairayad]
And that mighty hero, solar energy in
combination with electric energy, at the fastest chariot
like velocity, sets in motion the golden circuit of
developmental evolution in the fierce rays of the sun,
in the battles of life and in the fiery communication of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 56 817






[Names: Yadadya, Purustuta]
O universal destroyer, preserver and promoter,
most perceptive and conscientious, universally adored
Pusha, lord giver of life, whatever we speak to you or
wish to day, we pray, fructify and accomplish that
thought and plan of ours.






[Names: Imam, Arat, Pusannasi]
And this body of thought and speech of our
socio-economic plan, pray, lead to completion and
success. O lord, you are renowned far and wide as giver
of success and onward progress for the achievement of
wealth and honour.




6. A te svastimimahe are aghamupavasum.


[Names: Adya]
We pray for your gifts of happiness and well
being of the perfect order for all for today, for tomorrow
and for all time for the elimination of sin and evil and
for the attainment of wealth and excellence in a state of
peace and harmony.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Mandala 6/Sukta 57






[Names: Indra, Pushanau, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Indra, Pusana, Huvema]
We always invoke and call upon Indra, lord
commander of power, honour and excellence, and
Pusha, giver of nourishment energy and intelligence,
for the sake of friendship and all round joy and well
being and for the achievement of success and victory in
the battles of life.






[Names: Somamanya, Somaman, Karambhamanya]
One of them, Indra, abides in the middle region
between earth and heaven and drinks the soma distilled
there, i.e., it catalyses the vapours of the clouds into
rain through electric charge, while the other, Pusha,
loves karambha, i.e., the sun sucks up the vapours of
water and herbal juices and turns them into soma clouds.
Thus the two sit together and act.






[Names: Tabhyam]
The carriers of one, Pusha, are the sun beams


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 57 819


while those of the other, Indra, are positive and negative
currents of electricity, and thereby the duo, Indra and
Pusha, work together and break the clouds, and
humanity gets the boons of food, energy and wealth.





[Names: Yadindro, Tatra]
When most generous Indra moves and brings
about heavy showers of rain, then Pusha too is the
corporate power of natural energy. (Thus making and
breaking, consumption and creation are simultaneous
processes of natural metabolism in life.)



[Names: Indrasya, Indras]
That immanent will and wisdom of Pusha,
divine nature’s creative and promotive power, and that
catalytic power of Indra, natural electric energy, we love,
join and apply at our level to have results like extensive
branches of the tree.



[Names: Pusanam, Mahya, Indram]
Just as a charioteer joins, holds and controls the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




reins of his horses, and just as the supreme charioteer
of the universe holds and controls the activity of natural
forces such as radiations of the sun and exudations of
the earth or the gaseous vapours and electric charge, so
do we join Pusha and Indra, study and apply
complementary forces and processes for the earth and
for the great happiness and well being of her children.


Mandala 6/Sukta 58






[Names: Pusha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Sukrari, Visva, Pusanniha]
O Pusha, giver of nourishment for body, mind
and soul, you are the light of the world as the sun. Two
are the forms of your beauty and glory, both different
yet alike like the twin forms of the day: one is bright
and inspiring, the other is soothing sweet adorable as
the night. Lord of your own essential might, you
animate, inspire, preserve and promote all intelligence,
energy and powers of the world community. We pray,
may your gifts of generosity be good for all in this world.





[Names: Ajasvah, Astram, Sithiram]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 58 821


Conducted by radiating beams for horses as
motive power, protector of animal life, giver of plentiful
homes, inspirer of intelligence and wisdom, the brilliant
sun, generous light of life dedicated to the entire world,
moves on and on watching the regions of the world and
inspiring and elevating general intelligence and
unambitious minds to initiative.






[Names: Yaste, Pusannavo, Tabhiryasi, Suryasya, Suryas]
O sagely scholar and realised soul, Pusha, giver
of nourishment for body, mind and soul, golden are your
vessels moving over the sea and in the sky. By these
vessels you go round the world with love and desire for
further food for knowledge and acting as messenger of
the sun for the world.






[Names: Pusa, Suryayai]
Pusha, giver of nourishment, is a noble friend
and brother of all from earth to heaven, master of holy
speech and light, possessing power, honour and
excellence, and commanding extraordinary brilliance.
A realised soul inspired with love and desire, mighty
strong and self-cultured, the divinities dedicate him to


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Surya, dawn of a new day.


Mandala 6/Sukta 59


[Names: Indragni, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Hataso, Indragni]
yuvam.


Indra and Agni, electric and heat energies of
nature and their parent sources, I celebrate deeds of
wondrous order you have performed in the yajnic
creations of the world of nature. Gone are the opposite
forces, and you two are alive and active.


[Names: Balittha, Samano]
Indra and Agni, great and true and most
admirable is your might and majesty. Your father, source
of generation, is one and the same, you are twins, and
your mother is right here, Nature, Shakti of the Supreme
[Names: Spirit, Okivamsa, Indra]
Indra and Agni, wielders of the thunderbolt,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 59 823


homogeneous powers in this business of life and nature,
voracious consumers, like stormy war horses and
creators, we, enlightened yajakas in developmental
yajna, invoke, invite and develop you with all your
protective and promotive powers right here.






[Names: Josa]
Indra, lord of power and energy, Agni, lord of
light, bold speakers of truth, observers and promoters
of the law of truth, whoever honours and adores you in
creative yajnic acts of life, you respond to him in words
of truth and favour loud and bold. The divines never
speak words void of value.





[Names: Visuco]
Indra and Agni, energy and power of heat and
electricity, who is the mortal man in this world that
knows both of you divines and who, using the all
pervasive fire and electricity like horses moving in all
directions, solely travels in a uniformly structured
systemic chariot all by himself?




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


[Names: Hitvi, Siro]
Lightning and fire divine, this light of the dawn,
shaking up its locks of hair and proclaiming its rise with


its flames, radiates before life on the earth is on wheels,
and moves on thirty steps of time and space.






[Names: Mano]
Indra and Agni, cosmic energy and heat of life,
leaders and best of humanity, stretch their bows between
their arms. In this great battle business of life, pray do
not forsake us in the heat of action in which light and
fire must be integrated as life and inspiration.





[Names: Suryadadhi]
Indra and Agni, lords of existence, enmities and
sinful negativities of life heat up and consume me.
Throw off all hate and enmities and keep them away
from the light of the sun.






All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 60 825


but also the wealths and honours of the earth and heaven
and bless us with full life and health distilled from the
world of nature.






[Names: Visvabhir, Somasya, Somas]
Indra and Agni, light and energy of the spirit of
life, carriers and harbingers of songs of adoration,
listening close by to the invocations and celebrations
of the yajakas, come with all words of appreciation and
praise and all voices of commendation and elevation to
our yajnic performance and to taste the nectar sweet of


Mandala 6/Sukta 60






[Names: Indragni, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Snathad, Agni, Irajyanta]
One who honours and adores challenging and
victorious Indra and Agni, vibrant, stormy and fiery
electric forces of nature and humanity, conquers
restraining opposition and wins food, energy and wealth
of life. Both are most courageous and enduring
commanders of power and victory, givers of honour and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




excellence, ample peace and settlement and harbingers
of the glory of success and fulfilment.






[Names: Indra, Disah, Indra]
Indra, lord of power and excellence, Agni, lord
of light and vision, like lands and waters, sun and dawns
joined together, defend and fight for lands and waters,
words and wondrous actions to expand to the quarters
of space, and shine and join the sun and the dawns.
Indra, O controller, you join the sun and dawns, and
Agni, O ruler, you control the lands and waters, words
and actions.






[Names: Susmairindra, Yuvam]
teacher and citizen, both destroyers of evil and darkness,
come hither to us with defensive, positive and protective
forces and with ample measures of food, energy and
advancement. O Indra, O Agni, both of you, pray, be
ours, wholly for us all, with the best of unlimited and
commendable means of success and progress.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 60 827




I invoke, admire and celebrate Indra, cosmic
energy, and Agni, cosmic heat and light, both
manifestations of divine vision, will and action, by
whose power and operation this whole universe has
evolved as of eternity. The two do not hurt, injure or





[Names: Ugra]
We invoke, invite and develop Indra and Agni,
divine and blazing powers of nature’s energy and light,
both destroyers of adversaries and life’s negativities.
May they protect us and bless us with peace and
prosperity in this world of our action and existence.





[Names: Hato, Hato]
Indra and Agni, divine powers of omnipotent
will and vision, of holy nature, character and action,
defenders of Truth and Law, destroy evil, darkness and
want, destroy pain, suffering and slavery, destroy and
eliminate all hate and enmity.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Anusata, Pibatam]
Indra and Agni, powers of will and vision of
action in nature and humanity, these songs of adoration
celebrate you. O givers of peace, prosperity and well
being, drink of the nectar of this joy and bliss distilled.



[Names: Purusprho]
Indra and Agni, leading powers of humanity,
come to the generous giver and celebrant yajaka with
all those gifts and powers of yours which are loved and
cherished by all.



[Names: Tabhira, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Indra and Agni, leading lights, with those
cherished gifts and powers come and join this yajnic
session to drink of the soma of joy distilled.






[Names: Tamilisva, Krsna]
O celebrant, love and adore that power of
divinity which with its refulgence pervades all rays of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 60 829


the sun, moves all floods of water, and envelops all
forests and makes them green with its radiations.






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Dyumnaya]
Whoever the mortal that honours and adores the
favour and grace of Indra when the fire is burning for
the sake of excellence, the waters of his life and the
flow of his actions would be blest with fulfilment.


[Names: Tano, Indram, Agnim]
May the two, Indra and Agni, electricity and fire,
give us food and sustenance full of energy and
excellence and provide us with modes of travel and


transport. Let us too develop the fire and electricity,
energy for transport and communication.








[Names: Ubha]
I invoke you both, Indra and Agni, lords of
cosmic electricity and fire energy, to develop both heat


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and electricity in order to celebrate both with honours
and wealth of success. And I honour and adore you both,
beneficent givers of food, energy and wealth, for the
winning of victory in life’s battle for excellence and




[Names: Sakhayau]
havamahe.


Indra and Agni, come you both to us and bring
us the wealth of cows, horses and homes, lands and
graces of speech and knowledge, travel, transport and
communications, peace and prosperity of settled homes.
Come friends, brilliant divine givers of good and well
being for friendship and bonhomy. Pray come, we
invoke, invite and adore you both.






[Names: Vitam]
Indra and Agni, scholars of fire and electric
energy, listen to the invitation and adoration of the
yajamana and institutor of the yajnic programme of
creative development. Accept the invitation and offers
of homage, come, and taste the honey sweets of the
pleasure of somaic achievement distilled from natural


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 61 831


Mandala 6/Sukta 61






[Names: Sarasvati, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Iyamadadad, Divodasam, Divodasa, Sarasvati]
Sarasvati, this perennial stream of divine
awareness, which stabilizes a permanent, all protective
and adorable perspective dedicated to the light of
Divinity, gives to the generous man of yajna blest with
expansive mind and senses the zeal for action dedicated
to fulfilment of obligations, a dynamic spirit which leads
the man to freedom from all debts of life. These are thy
brilliant gifts, O mother, to humanity.






[Names: Iyam, Paravataghnim, Sarasvatima]
This stream of divine awareness and knowledge,
with fierce blows and powerful waves of light and
inspiration, breaks through the height of mountains and
depths of clouds covering darkness and concealing
treasures and opens them out like one who digs up and
out the roots of lotus flowers. Let us adore and serve
this brilliant mother stream, Sarasvati, breaking over


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




the banks of floods, with sincere thoughts and holy
actions and let us root out darkness and ignorance from
life.




O Sarasvati, mighty stream of light and
inspiration, uproot the maligners of divinity and divine
knowledge, take over the children of the wise givers of
enlightenment across the world, adopt lands and nations,
and let the streams of knowledge and culture flow for
all peoples of the earth.






[Names: Dhinamavitryavatu]
May Sarasvati, bright mother of divine light and
knowledge, overflowing with streams of wealth, honour
and spirit, protector and promoter of intelligence, will
and enlightened action, save us from darkness and evil
and advance us into the light of life.






[Names: Yastva, Indram, Indra]
O brilliant and generous Mother Sarasvati,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 61 833


whoever calls upon you like one who calls upon Indra,
omnipotent ruler, for the destruction of the demon of
evil at the time when the battle is raging at the door,
you listen, come and save the supplicant.



[Names: Tvam, Rada]
O brilliant and generous mother of divine vision
and wisdom, dynamic giver of knowledge, strength and
energy in the struggle of life, remove the veil from our
intelligence, give us nourishment like the earth and light
of discrimination like the sun, and then draw out the
plan of our destiny.



[Names: Vrtraghni]
And may that Sarasvati, awful breaker of the
clouds of darkness, come by the golden paths of light,
listen and, with love and grace, acknowledge our song
of praise.





[Names: Yasya, Amascarati]
Whose radiation of light and dynamic flow of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




speech moves on and on endless, straight and upright,
roaring across the ocean of space, that is the Mother
92125011.


[Names: Atannaheva, Suryah, Surya]
And may that flow of speech, warding off all
hate and enmity, bearing truth like the light of dawn,
lead us to other, different, sister streams of knowledge


like the sun moving to other successive days, the same
yet new.






And may Sarasvati, dynamic stream of light,
knowledge and speech, dearest among seven lovely
sister streams of knowledge, word, and mind and senses,
loving and blissful, be adorable and remain favourable.


[Names: Apaprusi]
Pervading the objects of earth, the vast skies,


the middle regions and the particles of nature, may the
divine awareness and enlightening speech protect us


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 61 835
against hate and enmity.






[Names: Trisadhastha, Vajevaje]
Existent and all pervasive in three regions of
the world, sustained in seven, five elements, ahankara
and mahat tattva, produced by five pranic energies,
rising and expanding, Sarasvati, fluent speech and






[Names: Ratha]
She that is distinguished as great by her grandeur
in these things and regions, appears different and
exceptional to different people by her light and lustre.
She is most dynamic in the dynamics of existence, vast
and expansive as space, created for the glory of Infinity
by the lord creator, adorable by the celebrant: that is
Sarasvati, dynamic spirit of omniscience.


TAU





[Names: Sarasvatyabhino, Jusasva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Sarasvati, perennial harbinger of divine gifts of
enlightenment and prosperity, pray bring us all that is
lovely and excellent more and ever more. Pray do not
spurn us, don’t cast us away, nor let us be consumed by
excess of exuberance and power. Help us with love and
friendship, and let us never fall off from you into lands
forlorn and void of joy.


Mandala 6/Sukta 62






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Ashvin, Stuse]
I praise and celebrate the Ashvins, leading lights
of heaven pervasive in this world, and worshipfully
invoke them with holy chant of mantras.
Complementary powers of nature’s circuitous energy
and fertility, they always conduct the rays of the sun at
dawn and fill the earth from end to end with choice
things of excellence.





[Names: Puru, Continuously]
Operations and augmenting the yajna with purest


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 62 837


splendours, they light up the light of this beautiful world
on the move with showers of mist and energies. Creating
many gifts and waters of measureless value, they pass
over and across regions of space yet untraversed.






[Names: Manojavebhir, Sayadhyai]
They are the divinities vibrant and blazing as
wind and lightning that reach the yajna by unfailing
radiations of energy fast as mind and sensitive as
thought. They inspire the mind and will of the mortal
man otherwise groping in the pathless woods of action
and raise the generous yajnic giver so that he may cross
the hurdles and rest in peace with a perfect sense of






[Names: Subham]
They bless the mind and fructify the intentions
of the new celebrant in search of knowledge and power.
Ever young and energetic as wind and lightning, using
seven currents of nature’s centrifugal and centripetal
energy, they bear and bring excellent gifts of water, food,
energy and psychic determination. Let the learned
yajaka, then, free from hate, jealousy and pride, dedicate


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




himself to the youthful powers with faith and






[Names: Purusakatama, Samsate, Sambhavistha]
With the latest words of homage, I celebrate and
glorify the twin Ashvin divinities: graceful, destroyers
of want and suffering, most versatile of power, ancient
and eternal powers of the divine, who may, we pray, be
good and blissful to the devoted celebrant and bring an
immense variety of wondrous gifts for the yajaka.




[Names: Arenubhir]
I celebrate and glorify the twin Ashvins,
protectors and sustainers of life, who raise by radiation
usable products of nature’s energy from the waters and
the seas by the regions of light, and who by forces of


gravitation bring down by dustless usable paths of space
energy from the depths of spatial waters.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 62 839




[Names: Dasasyanta, Sayave]
Ever anxious for all round victory and riding
the chariot of waves of energy, you top the mountain
and reach the cloud. Generous givers of showers, you
perceive the invitation of the productive earth and the
expansive skies. Mighty strong, you promote the earth
and prompt the voice of her people so that they may be
at peace, and, ever vibrant on the move, nourishing and
sustaining, you inspire the mind with noble thoughts
and will for holy actions.






[Names: Tadaditya]
O heaven and earth, O light of the world,
howsoever great be the anger of the holy ones and of
the average mortals, that same anger, O Adityas, seasons
of time, Vasus, shelter homes of life and sustenance,
Rudras, powers of natural justice and dispensation, all
that sin and sufferance, bear on and reserve for
correction of the negative forces of hate and enmity.






[Names: Gambhiraya, Varunasciketat]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


840


Let Mitra, man of love, and Varuna, man of
judgement and discrimination, who fully knows and
serves the Ashvins, pervasive and dynamic lights and
rulers of world regions, according to the seasons of time,
wield and duly order their power and force in respect
of the inscrutable, the demoniac, the malignant as also
for the latest word of praise or calumny.






[Names: Antarais, Sanutyena, Sirsa]
O brilliant lords of humanity and nature, come
by the chariot of internal wheels of the social order with
leading lights of the people, making new paths for the
coming generation with inspiring message of selfless
performance of duty and also take off the heads of the
terrorist forces of destruction.






[Names: Drlhasya]
Ashvins, complementary ruling powers of love
and judgement of the nation of humanity, creators and
givers of wondrous gifts of plenty, come here by the
highest, middling and lowest order of cooperative
participants in the social order and open the doors of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 63 841


the fixed as well as of the movable treasures of the nation
for the celebrant.


Mandala 6/Sukta 63






[Names: Ashvins, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Ashvin, Puruhutadya, Puruhutad]
Where are the handsome twin divines,
universally adored, today? Let the song of adoration
reach them like an humble messenger so that the divines
ever true come here and abide as the dearest divinities
celebrated in song.






[Names: Aram, Pari]
Come well and happy in response to this
invitation of mine and, revered and adored, drink the
nectar sweets offered. Pray come by the path and to the
home where no adversary far or near within may hurt us.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Akari, Uttanahasto]
Most excellent foods and drinks have been
prepared for you and the softest grass carpet has been
spread for you. With raised hands the high priest
welcomes and adores you with love and reverence, and
the devotees wait to honour and anoint you like the
clouds of rain approaching.






[Names: Udhrvo]
Brilliant leaders ever true, in honour of you both,
up goes the fire in flames in the creative acts of love
and non-violence. The abundant overflowing ladle of
powerful ghrta moves forward with the oblation. And
the zealous dedicated priest with faithful mind calls upon
you to come and bless the yajna.


[Names: Sriye, Suryasya, Suryas, Puru, Satotim]
Just as the dawn, off spring of the sun, rides the


radiant chariot of light with a hundred gifts of beauty
and grace, similarly, O twin divines of nature, leaders


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 63 843


of humanity, sustainers of many, lords of vision and
power, come hither with all your gifts of light and graces
and be inspirers of humanity in the life of revered
performers of sacred acts of yajnic creation.






[Names: Yuvam, Sribhir, Suryayah, Suryaya]
Ashvins, twin divines of nature’s dynamics,
generous, devout and bold, with these open and gracious
radiations of the light of dawn, you bring inspiring
rejuvenation for the good of humanity, and then, like
birds on the wing, excellent hymns of thanks and praise
rise and reach you to do honour to your grace.






[Names: Anu]
bring you to the food and fragrance of our yajna, and
may your chariot of nature’s energy radiations faster
than mind create food, energy and delicacies to our
heart’s desire as of all time for our yajnic libations for


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Purubhuja]
O sustainers of all, great are your gifts. Pray
give us and increase the food and gifts of the cow, the
earth, the knowledge and the language of knowledge
beyond challenge and deterioration. Celebrated are the
songs of adoration in your honour, and honey sweet the
flavours of your gifts which are all appropriate and
enjoyable in respect of your generosity.






[Names: Sando]
In the simple, straight and bountiful social order
of the pioneer ruler, let all the small and sophisticated
rights and duties toward all simple and sophisticated
projects be mine in a hundred ways, and let the giver of
peace, freedom and refinement give me great, focussed,
obedient and efficient assistants and co-workers directly
responsible to me, in tens and hundreds of strength.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 64 845




[Names: Sata, Bharadvajaya, Purudamsasa]
Ashvins, ever true and indestructible powers of
divinity, let the brave pioneer of your manifold path
give hundreds and thousands of your motive forces to
the celebrant and the man of science and energy with
directions for noble policy and communication in correct
language and then, O givers of a thousand gifts, the
wicked and the destroyers shall be eliminated of their




Ashvins, pioneer lights of Divinity, let us ever
abide in the peace and well being of the highest order
under your protection along with the wise and the brave.

Mandala 6/Sukta 64


[Names: Usha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Sriya, Usaso, Krnoti]
Bright and blazing, the lights of the dawn arise
like waves of the sea for the beauty and glory of the


earth. It brightens all noble paths of the world and makes
them easy for us to follow. Bearing treasures of wealth


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and energy, let it be generous for the people of the world,






[Names: Bhadra, Socirbhanavo, Avirvaksah, Sumbhamanoso]
Excellent and blissful you look and shine along
the wide earth, the pure bright rays of light rising to
heaven. O refulgent lady of morning divinity, graceful
with the beauty and dignity of holiness, you reveal the
heart and love of your bosom by the light apparel you
wear.



of Vahanti simarunaso rusanto gavah subhaga-




[Names: Apejate, Suro, Satrun]
Bright red and crimson rays of light conduct the
glorious dawn expanding over the earth, the sun takes
her over as a smart bride-groom leads away the bride,
and, as a brave warrior shoots away the enemies like an
archer, it dispels the darkness of the night.






[Names: Sugota]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 64 847


O self-refulgent dawn, holy and easy are your
paths over the clouds and mountains over which you
radiate across the calm oceans of space without a stir of
the wind. O glorious child of the light of heaven,
commanding wide expanses of the universe, bring us
the wealth, honour and excellence of the world for
complete fulfilment of our heart’s desire.






[Names: Tvam]
O dawn, you who rise with the love and
excellence of your heart’s desire freely without the
obstruction of even a whiff of air, come and bless us
with the virilities and fertilities of the world. You, O
child of heavenly light, brilliant and generous, be comely
and gracious with all your glory at the first invocation
of the day’s opening yajna.





O brilliant dawn, at the rise of the day, birds
and men leave their dwelling to work for the day and
enjoy their family dinner in the evening. O generous


and brilliant lady of the morning light, you bring ample
gifts of a happy home and delicious dinner for the mortal


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




man of yajnic generosity abiding with you in love and

Note: Swami Dayananda interprets the dawn as
the bride and the sun as the groom coming together in


marriage by choice and beginning a new day of their
life.


Mandala 6/Sukta 65






[Names: Usha, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi]
Lo! there is the dawn, born daughter of heavenly
light awakening and shining up our human habitations.
Shining by the light of the sun, it is perceived shooting
her rays of light across the darkness of the nights.






[Names: Agram]
The dawns proceed by the golden chariot of
bright crimson rays of the sun and wonderfully
illuminate the world of humanity. Leading the yajnic
business of the wide world, they dispel and stem away
the darkness of the night.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 65 849






[Names: Sravo, Usaso, Maghonir]
knowledge and the message of divinity for the generous
mortals, your lights descending like brave powers of
heaven, bear and bring protection, advancement and the
jewel wealth of life for the celebrant devotee.






[Names: Usasah, Usasa, Yaduktha]
O dawns, here and now is the jewel wealth for
the servant, for the brave, and for the generous giver.
Here it is for the wise sage and for the worshipper. Here
is the word of worship as before, pray bring the wealth
of life as before for the celebrant like me.






[Names: Angiraso, Vyarkena]
Here and now itself, O dawn of the light of
heaven riding the heights of clouds, the sages of science
and wisdom sing and celebrate in praise of you with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




chant of the Veda and offer of yajna and worship and
break open the treasures of knowledge divine and
secular. May the people’s yajna and worship be true
and fruitful at the call of the divinities.






[Names: Uccha, Suviram]
O dawn, child of the light of heaven, harbinger
of light and glory, shine as ever before and let us shine
too like the celebrated sage of knowledge and power and
servant and celebrant of the dawn of divinity. Bestow
love and care upon the worshipful admirer, bless the
supplicant with wealth and noble progeny, and favour
us with honour, fame and excellence of universal order.


Note: Swami Dayananda interprets this hymn
as a metaphor of the virtues of women. He says that the
birth of a girl child and the bride’s coming to her new
home is like the dawn of a new day which brings light,
grace and prosperity to the family.


Mandala 6/Sukta 66




[Names: Maruts, Devatah, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Marut, Vapurnu, Martesvanyad]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 66 851


For the man of vision and wisdom, the motherly
form of nature is equal and similar by one name, Dhenu,
mother cow. One on earth abounds with milk among
the mortals to nurse her children, the other is Prshni,
the middle region, mother of Maruts, winds or pranic
energies, which simultaneously feeds the cloud with the
purest soma of life energy.






[Names: Sosucannidhana, Arenavo]
They, the Maruts, vital pranic energies, pure and
shining like fires, grow double and triple. Non-particle
and golden are their forms and conductors carrying
simultaneously both bio-energy and intelligence for life






[Names: Rudrasya, Rudras, Vide]
These Maruts are children of Rudra, virile
spiritual energy, and the mother is there to receive, hold
and nourish them in her womb. For the reason of
conceiving and bearing ‘the great ones, the mother is
known as the great’, the Mother, the mother cow, the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




mother earth, the holy and the noble, the one who bears
and gives birth to life.






[Names: Niryad, Sucayo, Sriya]
The Maruts neither hurt nor forsake their
nativity, nor do they neglect any creature by their ethics
and policy, but being noble, pure and shining in the midst
of life, purging away weaknesses and perfecting virtues,
vitalising and refining their body and personality with
beauty, virility and splendour according to their love
and ambition, they absorb the essences of nature, distil
the soma and give showers of joy.






[Names: Maksu, Marutam, Maruta]
There is none among them but instantly moves
forward with showers of generosity. Bold and vibrant,
they bear the name of children of the winds. They move
not like thieves and sluggards by virtue of their might
and grandeur, and only the generous man of holiness
can approach and pacify these blazing heroes.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 66 853




[Names: Adha]
Shining and blazing by strength and superior
power, commanding mighty forces of nature, they join
the beautiful heaven and earth by their presence. And
when these forceful presences pervade heaven and earth,
therein abides the self-refulgent electric energy like light
and splendour itself.






[Names: Aneno, Maruto, Anavaso]
O Maruts, vibrant powers of nature and
humanity, let your course and chariot be free from sin
and error. Let it be powered without horses and let it be
driven without the driver. Let it be protected without
external forces, moving without food and fuel, without
reins, dispelling waves, clouds and the dust of earth
and space, and let it go by paths of heaven and earth,
fulfilling the ambitions of humanity.






[Names: Nasya, Toke]
O Maruts, in the serious warlike business of life,
whoever you protect and promote for the sake of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




children, grand children, or lands and cows or waters,
defeat and destroy. Indeed he will be the breaker of new
paths and open new treasures and then cross through
the skies to the bounds of the regions of light.






[Names: Marutaya]
O men of learning, bear and offer unique and
wonderful songs and presentations of reverence for the
adorable, vibrant, prompt and forceful band of heroes
of their own essential power and excellence, those who
meet the challenges of life and confrontations by their
own strength and courage. O brilliant sage, Agni, the
earth itself vibrates and shines by the holy and mighty
exploits of the Maruts, heroes of the winds.






[Names: Tvisimanto, Arcatrayo]
Bright and blazing, flames of a great yajna of
love and non-violence, instantly moving to action and
adorable, brave warriors born of light and fire,
intrepidable heroes of the winds are shakers of the earth
like the heroes of heaven. Such are the Maruts.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 67 855






[Names: Divah]
With homage and reverence I adore and serve
that rising and exalting hero of the winds and the blazing
lance of action who is a very child of Rudra awful divine
power of force and justice, whom, for the sake of
celestial power, the pure, immaculate heroes of fire and
conscientious intelligence envy and emulate.


Mandala 6/Sukta 67






[Names: Mita, Varunara, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Visvesam]
Mitra and Varuna, complementary pranic
energies, holy powers of love and justice, I adore and
exalt you both, highest of the divinities of the world,
with the best of my voice and words, you both, unique
and incomparable, most self-controlled controllers of
humanity who guide and lead the people on the right
path with your own hands, holding them by the reins
and the light rays of their own inner mind.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.








[Names: Iyam, Yantam, Mitravarunayv]
Mitra and Varuna, dear, loving and just teachers
and preachers, the holy grass is well spread for you on
the vedi, and this sincere address and invitation from the
core of my heart reaches out to you with homage and
humility. O generous masters of holiness and knowledge,
come and bless us with your gifts of the peace and
happiness of a comfortable home free from fear.




[Names: Mitravaruna]
Mitra and Varuna, holiest loving and just powers
of nature and humanity, dear as our own, invoked and
invited with homage and humility, come and receive
our prayer and adoration, you who, like parents of
children, inspire obedient people keen for nourishment
by your own action and greatness to rise together.


ater: usu



[Names: Asva]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 67 857


Fast, strong and bright as heat and light all
pervasive, akin to the purity of brotherly relationship,
embodiments of truth and law of the universe, mother
nature bears you for eternity, O Mitra and Varuna, who
ever move forward as greater than the great ones,
emerging, rising and blazing as terrible to the enemies
of mankind from birth itself.






[Names: Visve, Pari]
Since you pervade over and across the wide
earth and heaven by your presence, the brilliant and
generous great powers of the world, rejoicing by virtue
of your grandeur and majesty, loving and cooperative
together, hold sway over the social order of the earth
and rule, intelligent and enlightened, undaunted and
perceptive all over like watchful eyes and ears of the
nation.






[Names: Anu, Drlho]
Indeed, you hold the wealth of the nation, and
you sustain and expand the bounds of world order day
by day like the sun, for example, expanding the bounds


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of light over the world. It is through you that the
refulgent lord of the universe expands and lights the
world of heaven and earth in existence by the food and
energy of life.






They bring the heave of passion and they bring
the food too to quench the fire of that passion, and thus
they sustain the wise with the food they aspire for, they
who also lead the bearers of holy materials to fill the
house of yajna and to feed the fire. And just as the
sparkling sacred streams bear the waters of life, and
unmarried maidens bear life-giving vitality, but they are
never neglected and never injured in any way, so the
wise and the sustainers of the wise must never be





Mitra and Varuna, givers of ghrta and food for
the fire, whoever the disciple, intelligent, faithful and
true, established in truth and the law of truth by virtue
of your voice of truth in this house of yajna, let that be


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 67 859


your gracious gift of achievement. And we pray throw
out all sin and crime for the sake of the giver in this
holy programme of moral culture.






O Mitra and Varuna, divinities of love and
justice, those holy persons, who emulate and follow the
rules and injunctions loved and ordained by you, and
never violate them by their power and potential, are like
your children by their karmas. On the other hand, those,
who envy and are jealous, who violate the principles
and institutions dear to you, who are not good and
generous people, and in spite of their power and
potential are mortals of inferior calibre without the love
and performance of noble acts, deserve to be neither






[Names: Samsanti]
The wise ones bear and offer words of praise in
honour of you. Some others, thoughtful and faithful,
offer songs of celebration. Then we too chant and
address hymns of adoration to you. Joining with all holy


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




ones by your grace and grandeur, there is none you hurt






[Names: Avorittha]
Mitra and Varuna, thus under your care and
protection and in matters of family peace and prosperity
of the home gifted by you, the beneficiary feels great
and grateful. And in the battle business of life which is
exciting and delightful, you engage the brave, generous,
simple and straight man of truth and honesty celebrated
in words of praise and adoration all round.


Mandala 6/Sukta 68






[Names: Indra, Varuna, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Srusti, Indravarunavise, Indravarunavis]
Indra, glorious lord of power, and Varuna, lord
of justice, peace and excellence, this yajna of evolution
and advancement, kindled, conducted and jointly
sustained by people in your honour, is for the union
and cooperation of men dedicated to yajnic development
and progress of the world community. Let it go on today
and for ever onward for the growth of abundant food,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 68 861


energy and sustenance and for a high order of peace
and excellent well being of life as a whole.





[Names: Srestha, Suranam, Savistha, Maghonam]
You are the best and holiest, dedicated to the
divine scheme of evolution, development and progress,
being most vigorous, bravest of the brave, commanding
highest power and excellence among the excellent and
powerful, most high spirited by dedication to truth and
the law of truth, breakers of the darkest clouds for
showers of vitality. Indeed you are the leaders and
commanders of the total forces of nature and humanity
on the paths of universal progress.


fad: usu




[Names: Vajrenanyah, Ssavasa]
Honour and celebrate the two, Indra and Varuna,
lords of peace, power and justice, with reverence and
homage. Brilliant with strength and power, over-flowing
with vitality and generosity, they are loving and kind.
One of them, Indra, like the sun, breaks the clouds and
destroys the enemies with the force of thunder, and the
other, Varuna, cool as water and vibrant as the winds,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




follows to bless humanity with strength and energy on
the paths of life.






[Names: Gnasca, Praibhya, Indravaruna, Dyausca]
All the holy voices, men and women, leading
lights of humanity and the holiest of the holy for the
world, grow on by their own vision and performance in
the course of nature. For all these who grow thus, O
lords of power and peace, vision and wisdom, be good,
kind and generous by your own grace and grandeur like
the light of heaven and the wide expanse of mother earth.




rayim rayivatasca janan.


He that is liberal, self confident and upright in
matters of truth and divine law, and in his very soul
does honour to you, shall, with his resources, conquer
his opponents and enemies and, with his generosity,
achieve wealth and power and win over men of wealth
and power to his side for support and cooperation to
give and share.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 68 863




[Names: Asme, Indravarunav, Puruksam, Puruksa]
Indra and Varuna, lords of brilliance, power and
wisdom of justice, that wealth and power which you
bear and bestow upon the liberal yajaka of love and
non-violence may, we pray, be for us too so that we
share the honour and excellence which silences and
shatters the calumny and criticism advanced by the






[Names: Yesam, Susmah]
And for us, O lords of power and justice, for
the wise and brave whose force of arms and intelligence
challenges the enemy and wins the victory in battles of
life, let there be that common wealth of nations and
that ruler who protects the protectors, defends and
supports the wise and brilliant, and, as a superleader,
wins wealth, honour and excellence for humanity always
in the struggles for progress.





[Names: Ittha]
Indra and Varuna, brilliant and generous lords


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




of nature and humanity praised and adored by all, bless
us with abundant wealth for honour and excellence of
life so that grateful and worshipful, celebrating the
power and glory of your grace and grandeur, we may
cross over the difficult problems, evils and negativities
of the world as we cross the seas by boat.






[Names: Ayam, Varunaya, Socisa]
Offer the dearest homage and sincere adoration
in full self-knowledge and awareness to the refulgent,
generous and mighty benevolent ruler of the world, this
lord Varuna who is vast as earth and shines by his glory
and universal law, and illuminates the world by his holy
action and light of glory blazing as refulgence beyond
the rule and order of time and age.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Yuvo]
Indra and Varuna, rulers of power and justice,
dedicated to your own law and discipline, protectors
and sustainers of your own creation, come and drink of
this exhilarating nectar of joyous celebration distilled


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 69 865


for you. Your chariot moves to the constant self-
sustaining yajna of love and non-violence every day so
that you may drink of the soma in the company of
divines.






[Names: Somas, Idam]
Generous Indra and Varuna, give us abundant
showers of the most exhilarating honey sweets of soma.
This nectar of devotion is distilled and seasoned for
you. Come, sit on the holy grass and rejoice with us and
for us.


Mandala 6/Sukta 69






[Names: Indra, Vishnu, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Jusetham]
Indra, lord commander of energy and power,
Vishnu, lord provider of sustenance, whole heartedly I
call upon you with food and energy and with action to
take us successfully to the end of this programme of
work and development. Join and enjoy the yajnic
programme, create and bring wealth and honour. Indeed,


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




you are pilots of the nation to lead us on by paths of
freedom without fear and danger.





[Names: Sasyamana, Somadhana]
Indra and Vishnu, you are creators and producers
of all things of the world. You are inspirers of the mind
and intelligence of all people. You are the treasure
caskets of wealth, honour and joyous excellence of the
world. May our voices of invocation and invitation and
our songs of adoration full of appreciation, praise and
homage reach you with our reverence and holy






[Names: Indravisnu, Somam, Soma, Sasyamanasa]
Indra and Vishnu, ruler of power and sustainer
of life, you are creators and protectors of the joy of life.
Come and join the joyous celebrants over a drink of
life’s soma of excellence and ecstasy, and bring the
wealth and honour of human values for us. And may
the songs of our leading intelligent people full of
homage and service exalt you by day and by night with


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 69 867
a chant of Vedic mantras.






Indra and Vishnu, leaders of the world vibrant
as wind and brilliant as light of the sun, may the greatest
and fastest challengers of want and enmity escort you
to the joyous fellowship of the world. There share the
offers, invitations and common wealths of the peoples of
the world, and then listen to my voices of exhortation
too.






[Names: Indravisni, Somasya, Somas, Akrnutam]
Indra and Vishnu, lord omnipotent and lord
omnipresent of generosity, admirable is that act of yours
by which, in the ecstasy of creation, you conceive, create
and expand the excellent middle region of the universe
between heaven and earth, and then for the sustenance
of our life you create and expand other regions of earth
and space.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Ghrtasuti, Somadhanah]
Indra and Vishnu, you are exalted by the
oblations of sacrificial havi and thereby you exalt all
others. First receivers and consumers of food and
homage, you give back every thing finer in return for
others. O lords, receiving oblations of ghrta and blessing
others with the best of things, bear and bring the wealth
and honour of life for us. Be like the sea full of jewels,
be like a cask of soma and the ecstasy of life.


Anew




[Names: Indravisniu, Srnutam]
Indra and Vishnu, destroyers of want and
suffering, drink of the honey sweets of this soma and
quench the hunger and thirst of body, mind and soul.
Both of you together, receive the exhilarating food and
drinks of life, acknowledge our offers of homage, and
listen to my voice of invocation and celebration.







[Names: Ubha, Indrasca]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 70 869


Both Indra and Vishnu are ever victorious. They
are never defeated. Neither of them is ever vanquished
or deprived. Indra and Vishnu, when you act together
and contend with others, you stabilise your thousand
forces, threefold raise their power and potency, and
reduce the adversary to the lowest degree of efficiency.


Mandala 6/Sukta 70






[Names: Dyava, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Ghrtavati, Dyavaprthivi, Varunasya, Varunas]
Radiant and fertile, beauties of the worlds, vast
and abundant, extensive, replete with honey sweets, the
sun and the earth are sustained by the laws of nature
with the immanent will of Varuna, centre-hold of the
universe. Undecaying they are, immensely creative and
exuberant with the waters of life, beautiful, blissful.






[Names: Asascanti, Sucivrate, Rajanti, Both]
streams of liquid vitality, they are holy in action and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




pure of purpose and discipline of the divine law, and
they give us ceaseless showers of milk and water.
Shining over and illuminating this world, O sun and
earth, let streams of vitality, virility and fertility flow
down to us for the good of humanity.






O heaven and earth, sustainers of life and
illuminators of mind and intelligence, whoever the
mortal that dedicates himself to you and abides by the
laws you manifest for the sake of simple, straight
guidance in the natural course of his life, wins success
and honour and advances in life with his progeny higher
and higher in the observance of Dharma, since it is from
you that the diverse forms of life proceed alongwith the
laws and manners of their species.





[Names: Ghrtena, Urvi]
Heaven and earth are surrounded by cosmic
waters, they are brilliant in beauty by waters, they are


joined and grow in and by waters. O vast earth and
heaven, wise sages serve and pray to you for the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 70 871


fulfilment of their desire and attainment of happiness,
you being foremost in their selection of the highpriest
who would lead them to honour and success.






[Names: Madhi, Dadhane, Sravo]
May heaven and earth create and provide for us
the honey sweets of life. They shower the sweets of
honey and honeyed pleasures of life and they are
dedicated to the holy laws and purposes of nature for
us. Divine they are, great and generous, they conduct
nature’s yajnic cycle of life, they hold the treasures of
the world for us, wealth and honour, knowledge and
progress, and the virility and fertility of life’s continuity
for us.




[Names: Urjam, Dyausca, Samrarane, Sambhuva]
Let the light of heaven and fertility of the earth,
divine source givers of all achievement and performance


of good works like father and mother, create, radiate
and increase food and energy, knowledge and science.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




May they, abundant earth and heaven together, brilliant
and joyous givers of comfort and happiness, both
sources of bliss, bring us wealth and honour and
fulfilment in togetherness.


Mandala 6/Sukta 71






[Names: Savita, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Ghrtena]
That refulgent and generous Savita, creator,
generator and inspirer, ruler of the world, lord of holy
action may, we pray, raise his golden hands and bless
us with will and wisdom to perform creative and
productive actions for common good. With showers of
waters and grace, the lord of generous and adorable
hands blesses the world regions and their people, as he
is holy, creative, youthful, generous and perfect in
various specific fields of action.






[Names: Devasya, Sresthe]
Let us be established with dedication in the


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 71 873


highest generosity, prosperity and abundance of the
refulgent and gracious lord Savita’s dynamic creation.
You, O lord, are absolute and omnipresent in the
creation, generation, evolution and sustained
development of the multitude of humans and animals
of the wide world of peace and settlement for all.






[Names: Sivebhi, Hiranyajihvah]
Savita, ruling lord of inspiration, protect and
promote our home, our people and our wealth and
honour by benevolent and inviolable modes of defence,
peace and development. O lord of golden word and
voice, bless us with the latest forms of protection,
progress and well being. Let no thief or sinner dare rule






[Names: Ayohanuryajato]
That brilliant and generous lord Savita of yajnic
action, inspiration and advancement, golden generous
of hands and honeyed sweet of animating voice, wearing
a steel helmet, rises like the sun every day after night
and abides by us, and blesses the generous giver and


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




yajaka with abundant wealth, honour and graces of life.
A friend and protector of the home and family, no one






[Names: Divo]
Savita, refulgent illuminator and ruler of the
world, glorious in form, raises his golden gracious arms
like a rousing orator, ascends the heights of heaven,
and sets in motion, conducts, directs and enjoys the great
systemic business of the earth over day and night.






[Names: Vamamadya, Vamasya]
O Savita, lord of illumination and inspiration,
great creator and ruler of the world, create the best and
most beautiful, the most satisfying and blissful,
intentions, actions and results today and tomorrow in
endless succession. O lord generous and refulgent, bless
us with bright intelligence and spirit of holy action so
that by virtue of that intelligence and action we may
abide in and enjoy the peace and well-being of a home
of great comfort, peace and grace divine.


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 72 875


Mandala 6/Sukta 72




[Names: Indra, Soma, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Indrasoma, Yuvam, Suryam, Surya]
nidasca.


Indra, lord of cosmic energy, and Soma, spirit
of cosmic vitality, the greatness of your lustrous
grandeur is this that you have done the first elemental
grand acts of creation: you fashion forth the sun, you
create the regions of light and the peace and paradisal
bliss of existence, you dispel the darkness and ignorance
of life, and you ward off the malice and negativities of
the earthly community.






[Names: Usasamut, Jyotisa]
Lords of cosmic energy and universal bliss of
life, you light up the dawns and lead the sun on course
with its light. By the balance of forces you hold up and
sustain the regions of light, and you unfold and sustain
the earth in her motherly expense and variety of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Indrasomavahimapah, Prarnam, Anu, Puruni]
Lords of cosmic lightning energy and vibrating
winds, you break the dark clouds of vapour up on the
high skies and release the closed up waters, and as the
skies are clear, the heavens acknowledge your grandeur
with cheer and thankfulness. You set the floods of rivers
aflow and fill the wide expanses of boundless seas in






[Names: Jaghrbhathur]
Lords of sun light and vital energy, you infuse
the unripe forms of vegetation with ripe herbal juice,
the udders of cows with delicious milk, the flowing
streams with energising waters, and you concentrate the
unbound energy of sun rays and put this shining vitality
into these various and wonderful forms of existence.






[Names: Srutyam]
Indra and Soma, lords of energy and life’s
vitality, both dear as breath of life and bright as sun and
moon, give us the light of knowledge worthy of


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 73 877


remembrance that may save us from want and suffering
across the present and future generations of our children.
Interweave for all people strength and power worthy of
leading heroes with which we may face and win all our
battles of life against the adversaries of life and human


Mandala 6/Sukta 73






[Names: Brhaspati, Devata, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Dvibarhajma, Angiraso]
Breaking the clouds and shattering mountains,
first self-manifested among things born, the very
embodiment of universal law and the truth of existence,
Brhaspati, lord creator, ruler, protector and promoter of
the expansive universe is the very essence of the life
and breath of existence who wields and governs all
matters and materials of the world. Lord and master of
the earth by virtue of knowledge and power of action,
illustrious with the light and fire of life, he is our father
generator who, like the mighty thunder, proclaims his
power and presence across heaven and earth.






[Names: Janaya, Ghnan]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Brhaspati, lord ruler of all, is he who, for the
people in need, creates and gives a world of beauty and
plenty when they approach him in the mood and spirit
of supplication and prayer. When people invoke the
divine lord, he breaks the thickest clouds of darkness
and suffering, shatters the strongholds of exploitation
and slavery, and challenges and wins over enemies and
adversaries standing up in arms against humanity.






[Names: Brhaspatih, Apah]
This divine and illustrious lord of the universe,
Brhaspati, overcomes the enemies, wins wealth and
happiness, and reveals mighty treasures of lands and
light of knowledge. Ruling over the dynamics of waters,
energies and the karmic flow of nature’s law and light
of heaven and bliss of life, himself unseen and
confronting humanity by the strikes of his thunderbolt
of justice and punishment by law.


Mandala 6/Sukta 74




[Names: Soma, Rudra, Devate, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Rshi, Somarudra, Damedame]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 74 879


O Soma and Rudra, lords of health and well
being and of the health and vitality of life, ruler of the
land and powers of health services, you maintain the
balance of nature and environment and the health and
vitality of the community so that the desired results of
social welfare be achieved to your satisfaction. Bearing
seven-fold jewels of health and prosperity, bless the
inmates of every home so that our people may be happy
and healthy in peace and joy, and our bipeds and
quadrupeds too may be healthy and happy.



gayam-avivesa. Are badhetham nirrtim paracair-


O Soma and Rudra, lords of peace and vitality,
uproot sickness, ill health, disease and epidemics such
as cholera and others which spread to our homes and
affect our children and institutions. Ward off want and
adversity and keep it far away so that they never recur
and we enjoy good health, well being and abounding







All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




Soma and Rudra, lord of health and vitality, ruler
and physician, bear and bring all those herbs and
medicaments for our body’s health and mental and
spiritual strength by which you may throw off and
eliminate from us whatever pollutes our body system
and whatever sin or trespass or indiscretion has been
committed by us.






[Names: Tigmayudhau, Somarudrav, Varuna]
Soma and Rudra, lords of health and total well
being, bearing weapons of blazing efficacy and
shattering blows of thundering strength, givers of peace
and joy, bless us with health of body, mind and soul and
lasting well being. Release us from the snares of Varuna,
bondage of sin and disease by the laws of nature. Happy,
kind and gracious, protect and promote us in life against
sin, disease and indiscretion.


Mandala 6/Sukta 75









[Names: Varma, Dhanu, Artni, Ishudhi, Sarathi, Rashmayah, Ashvah, Ratha, Rathagopa, Ishavah, Pratoda, Hastaghna, Sangramashishah, Brahmanaspati, Aditi, Kavacha, Soma, Varuna, Deva, Brahma, Devatah, Payu, Bharadvaja, Rshi]
All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 881




[Names: Jimutasyeva, Anaviddhaya]
When a warrior in armour advances to the battle
front of war he looks like a mighty rain cloud. Go
forward with your body unhurt, win the battle, and may
the grandeur of your armour protect and defend you in
war and peace.






[Names: Dhanvana, Dhanuh]
Let us preserve and win lands and cows by the
bow and reach our targets by the bow. Let us fight out
the fiery passions by the bow and arrow of concentrated
meditation. The bow and arrow thwarts the evil designs
of enemy forces within and without both. Let us advance
in all directions by the bow.






[Names: Vaksyantiveda, Yoseva]
Like a maiden embracing her dear lover and
this string of the bow, its ends like loving hands clasping
the ends of the bow, is stretched to the archer’s ear, rings


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




and seems to say: Shoot, advance and make way through
the opposite ranks.






[Names: Satrun]
Just as a young mother holds the baby in her
lap with both hands, so may the two ends of the bow
operative together in balance hold the string at both ends
and shoot the arrow upon the enemies and thus scatter
the unfriendly forces out of gear.





[Names: Bahvinam, Isudhih, Like]
care, the quiver borne on the warrior’s back holds many
arrows and rattles as the warrior enters upon the battle.
The warrior with the bow and arrows in the quiver
emerging on the battle field scatters all the enemy forces
and wins all the battles of life.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 883




[Names: Rathe, Abhisunam]
An expert driver on the steer of the chariot
directs and leads the horses forward wherever he wants.
Know this and admire the great importance of the bridle
strings. As the driver controls the horses so does the
mind control the senses. Control the strings of the mind
and the senses would follow in your conduct of the
chariot of life.



[Names: Tivran, Avakramantah, Satrunr]
Rushing on with the chariots, the warriors of
mighty arm and war horses roar with awful war cries
and, crushing the unfriendly forces with their advances
without ever retreating, they eliminate the enemies.






[Names: Rathavahanam, Tatra, Sagmam]
Where the chariot war materials of this warrior
are collected and deposited, and where his arms and
armour which routed the enemy are secured and
guarded, there let us find our chariot of peace and well


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




being for all time, planning and designing as we are
always for the peace and joy of the mind.






[Names: Svadusamsadah, Saktivanto, Citrasena]
Those who abide in the home or sit in the
assembly with peace and joy at heart, who are senior
parental people, advanced and experienced in age,
observing Dharma without fluctuating from peace and
rectitude even in crises, commanding strength and depth
of wisdom, leading wonderful armies, having full forces
of arms and armaments but never violent and
destructive, brave heroes of truth and honesty, many,
mighty and magnanimous, observers of self-chosen
discipline and law of conduct, let such be our friends,
ideals and leader guardians for a life of peace and





[Names: Brahmanasah, Sive, Pusa]
Sagely scholars, parental seniors, men of peace
and good will, holy and blissful sun and earth which
hurt no one, protective and promotive powers of nature


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 885


and humanity, all observers and protectors of truth and
law, may, we pray, protect us from sin and evil and
defend us against violence. May no evil and violent






[Names: Suparnam, Yatra]
The sun wears the beauty of a divine bird and
flies. The earth, its mountain tops illuminated by sun
rays, moves on, urged and energised by the sun. On this
earth where men run around together yet scattered, may
the arrows of defence and protection and the light of
the sun provide us a home of peace and stability.






[Names: Ryjite, Somo, Sarma]
O ruler, let natural honesty and rectitude protect
and promote us. Let our bodies be adamantine strong.
Let soma, nectar juice of herbs, inspire us with its
message of good health and rejuvenation. Let mother
earth bless us with peace and comfort in a happy home.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.






[Names: Asvajani]
O inspirer of the brave like a goad, inspire the
wise and brave warriors of the earth who break down
the forces of these enemies of humanity and strike down
the saboteurs and terrorists in the battles of life.






[Names: Ahiriva, Hastaghno, Vayunani]
Wrapped round the arm of a warring man of
action like the coils of a snake, like an arm guard
protecting the shooting arm against the strike back of
the bow string after the shot of an arrow, or against the
recoil of a gun, the man of knowledge well versed in all
the ways of life and the world should protect the man
of bold action all round.






[Names: Alakta, Idam, Parjanyaretasa]
Poison-tempered with head like a doe’s and a
mouth of steel, generous and abundant like a rain cloud
is the brave ruling queen of arrows. For the lady of
divine velocity, unbounded praise and homage of a


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


MANDAL - 6 / SUKTA - 75 887




[Names: Avasrsta, Saravye, Gacchamitran]
canocchisah.


O sharpest and fastest of missiles, tempered and
tested by the best of defence scientists, shot and released,
fly far, reach the target and fall upon the enemies. Spare
none of them whatsoever even at the farthest distance.






[Names: Aditih]
O ruler, where the young soldiers with shorn
hair fall upon the enemy and showers of missiles rain
down upon the targets, there let the controller of nation’s
wealth provide us total security and let the mother earth
provide us a safe and comfortable shelter, a shelter of






[Names: Marmani, Somastva, Urorvariyo, Varunaste, Varunast]
O warrior of the bow, I cover the vital limbs of
your body with armour for protection. Let the ruler
Soma, immortal spirit of life’s vitality, give you close


All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.




cover against death and mortality. Let the wise and
judicious commander of the forces provide you the best
and most abundant food and maintenance, and let the
excellencies of the nation rejoice with you when you
win the battle.




[Names: Yonah]
taram.


non-fighting, or far off and low, that hurts and violates
us deserves that the best and enlightened of the nation
punish him to nullity. For me, the Lord Almighty and
the divine knowledge and awareness within me is my
best armour for protection.




All rights reserved with publisher. Not for commercial or non-commercial distribution.


| AUM ॥






[Names: Original, Sanskrit, Text, Transliteration]
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda)


English translation by


[Names: Tulsi, London]
(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer)


Sanskrit Text as per publication of














[Names: Paropakarini, Sabha, Ajmer, Publisher, Vijaykumar, Govindram, Hasanand, Delhi, Edition, First, Price]
RIGVEDA Vol. III by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D.


Cv)




[Names: Particulars, Page, Ziccctervscshccsenacnsnuaviasientaaciasamesstans, Abia]
(vi)


DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION


[Names: Vowels]
उ ou ऊ u We r ऋ 7
ए € ae) ai aT 0 ओ au

() fi


[Names: Consonants, Guttural]
Palatal






[Names: Lingual]
sa
~~
Ou
‘Du
>
d
=






[Names: Dental, Labial]
(5) “23 am


MANDALA 7


Mandala 7/Suktal




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Agnim, Agni, Duredrsam]
yum.


O leading lights of yajna, let the people produce
fire by the heated friction of arani woods done with the
manual motion of hands. Fire is an admirable power
seen from afar and shining far and wide, sustaining home
life like a guardian but otherwise silent, implicit in
nature and non-violent. Further create this domestic
energy by your acts of research and intelligence.






[Names: Tamagnimaste, Daksayyo]
The energy of fire and electricity, scholars of
basic science and original vision produce for domestic
purpose or for communication and transportation
somehow from something they know best. It is of
versatile use for defence and protection, universal in
nature and character, and an all purpose asset in the
home for any service.








[Names: Preddho, Tvam, Sasvanta]
O fire divine, ever youthful power and presence,
well kindled and raised, shine on, radiate and illuminate
us, constantly, through the continuous channel of
nature’s dynamics. All things in constant motion reach
you and flow on in the cosmic cycle.






O light divine, brighter and stronger than flames
of fire are those vibrant radiations of yours, all
illuminating, purifying and sanctifying, which arise
when leading lights of yajnic vision and action, well
educated and holily cultured, sit together on the vedi
and kindle you to join the cosmic circuit of intelligence.




mavan.


O mighty fire and light of divinity, with
luminous intelligence and noble action give us that
honour and excellence of life and that brave, admirable
and seasoned progeny worthy of us which no force


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 1 3
would be able to violate or overcome.






The creative vitality of Agni is active and
operative day and night: the youthful maiden approaches
her versatile lover and stays with him in marriage for
life, the yajna ladle overflowing with ghrta reaches the
kindled fire of the vedi, the rich dark night looks up to
the moon and terminates with the sun, the virgin nature,
divine lord’s own consort, with the passion for creation,
joins him for ever and creates the living world.






[Names: Visva]
O divine fire, burn off all the negativities and
adversities of the world with those flames of light with
which you burn, eliminate the ailments, sickness and
disease from the very roots, and recreate life anew.






O divine fire of life, Agni, destroyer, purifier
and recreator, haven and home of the living world and
blazing ruler, let your power and forces which shine all




round shine on and illuminate our life, and, with all
these our songs of praise and prayer, stay with us as
protector and promoter and strengthen us for our self
defence and protection.






[Names: Purutra]
Agni, light of life and fiery power, many are the
mortals, leading lights, good and kind as parents,
dedicated to you and serving your powers and forces of
existence. With all these be kind and gracious at heart
toward us here in life and now.





All these leaders of the world, best and bravest
in the battles of life against evil, who approve and
admire my work and intelligence consecrated to you,
are unchallengeable. The wiles and tactics of the wicked
would be dull and ineffective before the brave dedicated
to you, O light and leader of the world.






[Names: Prajavatisu]
Agni, lord of light and fire, may we never sit


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 1 5


idle in a state of depression or in a state of swollen pride.
[Names: Among]
O lord sustainer of happy homes, let there be no trace
of cowardice among the happy communities settled in
happy homes wholly dedicated to you.






[Names: Yamasvi, Svajanmana]
Agni, lord of life, ruler and sustainer of happy
homes and settled communities, give us a blessed home
bubbling with the joy of noble children and the presence
of happy people, rising and advancing with our own
posterity, a happy place for yajna blest by daily visit
and constant presence of Agni, lord of sun rays.





[Names: Pahi]
Agni, lord of all power and inexhaustible energy,
save us from monsters void of love, loyalty and
friendship. Protect us against the wicked, violent and
sinful. With you as friend, ally and protector, let me
face and overthrow even whole armies of adversaries.








[Names: Sedagniragninratyastvanyan, Sahasrapatha]
That Agni, vision, power and energy, excels
other forms of power and energy where the energy, like
an offspring, fast and strong a thousand ways of
application as working power of hands, is joined with
the imperishable source and flows therefrom therewith
like water.






[Names: Sedagniryo, Sujatasah]
That Agni, power and energy, is real agni which
promotes the supplicants and protects them from the
violent, which saves the kindler and augmenter from
sin, and which the brave, cultured and enlightened
leaders, well educated, serve and promote for a common
cause.






[Names: Ayam, Agnirahutah, Agnirahuta, Pari]
This is that Agni, light and fire of existence for
the sake of life, served and honoured universally, which
the lord ruler of the universe commanding the creative
resources of existence lights and raises, and which the
yajaka with all his resources invokes all round in yajnic
acts of service and development for the common cause
of love and non-violence.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 1 7




[Names: Ubha]
Agni, light of life, with all the resources at our
disposal we always offer you abundant materials in
yajna, promoting thereby both the priest and the host in
the holy act of love and non-violence for development.






[Names: Prati]
Agni, life of life, universal power, carry well
these cherished, holiest and most expansive oblations
offered to you in honour of the divinities and, in
consequence, let the sweets and fragrances of nature
come to us from all sides.


wear: eeu




[Names: Mano]
Agni, refulgent lord and ruler of life, give us
not up to a state of cowardice and impotence. Reduce
us not to a state of rags and destitution. Subject us not
to such indigence and intellectual imbecility. Reduce
us not to hunger. Throw us not to the evil and the wicked.
O lord observer and protector of truth and law, lead us
not astray in the home and in the forest.








[Names: Ratau]
Agni, brilliant and generous lord of
enlightenment, you are the divine reservoir of learning
and the laws of Dharma. Teach me and the commanders
of power and prosperity the laws and values of Dharma.
We pray let us both, the priest and yajamana, ruler and
ruled, high and low, abide in the orbit of your generosity.
And may you both, teacher and preacher, and the divine
power promote us with peace, prosperity and well being






[Names: Tvamagne]
Agni, lord of light, invoked with love and
eagerly responsive, blissful of form and bright of flame,
born of omnipotence, you shine and illuminate. Let not
the devotee, always dedicated to you in holy work for
the child’s sake, be consumed by the fire of evil. Let the
noble and brave son never be indifferent and callous


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 1 9






Agni, child of omnipotence, lord generous and
brilliant, devoted as we are to you in all these yajnic
fires kindled by holy ones, pray do not condemn us to
indigent living and poor maintenance. Let not your
displeasure, O bright and generous lord, even by mistake
ever touch us.






[Names: Samarto]
Agni, lord of light and life, noble of flames and
potent of forces, blest is that mortal with wealth of life
who offers holy libations to the immortal fire of yajna.
The immortal lord bears immense wealth and honour
of life to gift the man of enlightenment who calls upon
the lord in a mood of prayer and supplication.








[Names: Maho, Yena]
Agni, lord of light and life, you know our great
desire and prayer. Pray bring us abundant and expansive
wealth and enlightenment for the brave by which, O
lord of power, we may live and enjoy a long life with
lustre and noble progeny without hurt, waste or






Agni, lord of light and wealth of life, brilliant,
generous and divine, give us more and more of food
and plenty of wealth for the dedicated men of honour
and power and enlighten us how to live with honour
and joy. O lord, we pray let us all, givers and receivers
both, abide in the bliss of your grace and generosity. O
leaders of power and enlightenment, always protect and
promote us on the path of peace, plenty and total well


Mandala 7/Sukta 2
[Names: Apra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
is Jusasva nah samidhamagne adya soca brhad


[Names: Suryasya, Suryas]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 2 11


Agni, light of the world, accept our homage of
yajnic fuel today, let the sacred flames and fragrance
rise illuminating and purifying the wide space, touch
the heights of celestial skies with the holy chant of
mantras upto the pinnacles of purity and expand with
the rays of the sun.






[Names: Narasamsasya]
With yajnic acts of holy offering, we honour and
celebrate the grandeur of this sacred Agni, light of life,
adored by humanity in the midst of the enlightened
divinities, performers of creative actions, who are pure
and purifying, intelligent in heart and mind, and who
accept and taste both kinds of yajnic offerings for the
development of both mental and physical faculties.






[Names: Ilenyam, Manusvad, Agnim, Agni]
Let us always and for all of you honour and exalt
the adorable, inspiring, efficient and generous Agni
operative like a human ambassador between heaven and
earth, between body and spirit, true of speech like a
superman, enlightened and inspired by the wisest of




humanity for the sake of creation and development with
love and non-violence for progress of the world. (Agni
here is the leader of humanity brilliant as light and
inspired with will and enthusiasm like fire.)






[Names: Saparyavo, Ajuhvana, Worshippers]
sacred grass and fragrant materials, offer the preliminary
oblation of holy grass and ghrta with reverence into the
fire. O priests invoking and raising the fire burning
bright with flames of ghrta as rain from the cloud, feed
the fire with holy oblations of havi and thereby purify
the hearts of the worshippers.






[Names: Svadhyo, Purvi, Sisum]
Devout thinkers and dedicated scholars
committed to yajna and the divinities move at the speed
of chariots in holy works, wide open the doors of
heavenly bliss and beautify them for all in the battles of
life. Loving and bold they are like young mothers to
the child and advance forces for the ruler.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 2 13




[Names: Usasanakta, Barhisada, Puruhute, Puruhut, Srayetam]
And may the holy and divine night and the dawn,
both celestial maidens of the universe abiding in spaces
between heaven and earth, abundant with beauty and
power, universally invoked and adored, worthy of
worship, come and bless us in life for happiness and
well being, like the mother earth, like the generous
mother cow, and like the infinite speech of divine
revelation.






[Names: Vipra, Urdvam]
O scholars and scientists, artists and craftsmen,
you know all the facts, values and requirements of the
world around. I honour you in the yajnic programmes
of humility and invite you to participate in the creative
programmes of development. Pray take the challenge
and raise our corporate programmes of love and non-
violence to the heights of achievement. May you all
create, acquire and bring in the cherished objects of
value for the noble humanity.







[Names: Sarasvati]
May Bharati, goddess of world speech,
knowledge and culture come. May Ila, goddess of divine
speech, knowledge and grace come. May Sarasvati,
mother dynamics of universal speech, knowledge and
culture come. May the three divinities, loving, kind and
gracious, come with the enlightened daughters of the
earth, men and divines of enlightenment, and dedicated
scholars of eternal and historical knowledge, come and
grace our sacred seats of yajna. May Agni, lord
omniscient, come and bless us in the soul.






[Names: Tannasturipamadha, Yato]
O Tvashta, brilliant maker of forms and shaper
of men, generous and joyous giver of all round
nourishment, physical, mental and spiritual, give us that
vitality and that virility, that perfection of form,
education and culture without delay from which is born
the brave hero of action, expert scientist and
technologist, specialist of clouds and rain dedicated to
divinity as well as to noble humanity.



[Names: Vanaspate, Sedu]
devanam janimani veda.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 3 15


Giver of life and nourishment to the woods, lord
of light and sun rays, take up the fragrance and reach it
across to the generous powers of nature and humanity.
Agni, fire of yajna, has catalysed and refined the holy
materials in the vedi for diffusion. Agni, that’s the yajaka
of nature, ever true and more which coexists with the
divine elements of nature from their origin, joins them,
and refines and intensifies them for the common good
of nature and humanity.






[Names: Barhirna]
Agni, fire of life, light of the sun, brilliant
scholar and teacher, come to us right here, burning,
blazing, shining and illuminating, with Indra, light and
power as that of thunder and lightning. Come by chariot
across the spaces with the divines and forces of instant
action, sit on the holy grass, and let Aditi, mother earth
and nature, with her children of virtue and the immortal
divinities all be happy and give us joy in truth of word
and deed.


Mandala 7/Sukta 3






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Agnim, Agni]
O learned scholars and scientists, in your yajnic
programmes of corporate endeavour for human
purposes, light and produce that adorable agni, energy,
from various forms of heat and sunlight, which is
brilliantly useful and universally helpful and which acts
as a messenger between region and region and earth
and space. It is permanently present in all forms of
mortal creation, abides by the laws of nature, is vested
with heat and power at the highest, consumes finest food
and it is fiery and purifying.








[Names: Prothadasvo, Adasya, Anu]
Roaring and consuming its food like a horse
exulting in grass, it rises from its source and moves like
Currents of wind and energy follow the rise of its power.
O fiery energy, attraction and repulsion, that’s your path
of motion.




oF Ud yasya te navajatasya vrsno’gne carantyajara


[Names: Accha]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 3 17


arise, new and undecaying, the radiant waves traverse
the heights of heaven in space, and thus you move like
a messenger to the divinities of nature at the one end
and to the brilliant scholars at the other.






[Names: Seneva]
Your power and force spreads in and all over
the earth instantly as you consume the inputs by the
jaw-like motion of your flames and release the energy.
The radiation of energy moves like a fighting force
forward on the advance when, O mighty power, you
receive the materials and convert them into energy as
grain is converted into vitality.







[Names: Tamid, Agnimatyam, Agnimatya, Socirahutasya]
O leading lights of science and technology, as
riders groom a race horse for better performance,
similarly strengthen and sharpen the power of this
radiant and most youthful, unaging, Agni, serving and
and increase the light and speed of this abundant treasure




of energy fed with greater inputs at source, and let it
shine at night and at dawn and let it radiate more and
ever more.






[Names: Susamdrk, Divo, Susmascitro]
Radiant Agni, commander of noble ensign,
power and force, beautiful is your form when, close at
hand, you shine like radiant gold. The light of your
power radiates and blazes like lightning from the sky,
and you display your splendour like the wonderful sun.






[Names: Yatha, Tebhirno]
Agni, refulgent ruler of the world, as we offer
homage and yajna to you in truth of word and deed with
fragrant materials soaked in ghrta and exalt you with
streams of holy songs without reserve, you too, we pray,
in gracious response, protect and promote us a hundred-
fold with great unbounded golden citadels of steel
security, prosperity and culture.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 3 19






[Names: Tabhirnah]
Or what we know are your divine voices, loud,
bold and unchallengeable, gifted to the generous yajnic
giver, by which you protect your people who comprise
the best men and women, by them, O child of
omnipotence, Jataveda, present with every thing in
existence, protect and promote us and the learned brave
celebrants of divinity.






[Names: Niryat, Jyaya]
Agni, refulgent ruler of the world, emerging like
fire from its mother source of arani woods or like heat
and light from earth and heaven, arises from the land
and her people and goes forward blazing like a
thunderbolt of crystal, pure and purifying, bright by the
grace of his body and mind, illuminating, sanctifying,
dedicated to the service of divine nature and noble








[Names: Visva]
These are our good fortunes, O fire divine, O
lord of light. Shine and illuminate these so that we may
attain noble intelligence and will to do good works. O
lord, let all these riches be for the celebrant and servant
of Divinity too. O children of the earth, O divine powers,
protect and promote us always all round with peace and
joy of well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 4





[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
For your strength and vitality and for your light
and wisdom, bear and offer purified fragrant oblations
and songs of praise to Agni, refulgent spirit of Divinity
which, with its light and awareness, inspires and
enlightens all human and superhuman manifestations
of life within.





[Names: Agnis]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 4 21


Let that Agni, spirit of life, be young, ever fresh
and progressive since it is the youngest born of Mother
Nature. As fire abides with the woods for food, so does
the spirit abide with sun rays for food and energy, and
as one consumes food with pure white teeth so does the
fiery youth always consume lots of food for energy and
growth in the physical form.






[Names: Asya, Agnir]
The grandeur of this brilliant lord of light, the
mortals perceive and realise in his splendid assembly
and in the blazing armies of his power. He defines
spiritual excellence as the very embodiment of it in
manifestation and shines as an unassailable hero for






[Names: Ayam]
This Agni, intelligent, brilliant and a poetic
visionary among the unwise and unintelligent, pervades
and shines, the immortal spirit among the mortals. O
lord most potent and patient, forsake us never, never
abandon us to the wicked in the world, let us always
enjoy your good will, love and grace.








[Names: Tamosadhisca]
That Agni, universal spirit, which by his creative
yajna resides in the cosmic home created by divine
powers of Prakrti in association with the supreme lord,
and which redeems the immortal souls in mortal forms
to freedom, the same cosmic creator and sustainer, the
herbs, the trees and the earth bear at heart in seed form
in the state of existence as the principle of growth and
sustenance of the universe.




pari sadama maduvah.


Agni, lord of light and life, commands abundant
gifts of nectar-like food and immortal values, and he
commands the gifts of wealth, honour and excellence.
O lord of power and patience, we pray, let us always be
with you but not as cowards, not without progeny, not
without obedience and service in faith, not in a state of
ugliness and gracelessness.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 4 23




[Names: Parisadyam]
Wealth, but without debt and fight, is to be
sought for. Let us be masters of wealth of permanent,
undiminishing character. The child born of another is
not your own as wealth earned by another is not yours.
O lord Agni, pray do not vitiate the paths of the simple
and ignorant, protect the innocents.






[Names: Nahi, Adha]
The child born of another even though well
disposed is but distant and not ideal for adoption because
ultimately he is drawn to his native home by nature. O
lord, bless us with our self-born, patient and intelligent







[Names: Tvamgne]
Agni, brilliant commander of knowledge and
power, protect the supplicants from the violent. O lord
of power and patience, protect us from sin and evil,




jealousy and calumny. May food and wealth of honest
imperishable nature flow to you with noble and most
desirable honour and excellence.






[Names: Visva]
These are the glories and good fortunes of life,
Agni, which, pray, give us, shine and refine so that we
may achieve the holiness of yajnic action and divine
awareness. Let all these be the share of supplicants,
singers and celebrants of life and divinity. O divinities
of nature and humanity, may you all protect and promote
us with the gifts of honour, excellence and the prosperity
of well being all round.


Mandala 7/Sukta 5






[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Pragnye]
Bear and offer words of praise and thankfulness
in honour of mighty Agni which, ever active without
rest at the heart of heaven and earth and all things beyond
destruction, is the living light and life of the world,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 5 25


Vaishvanara, and rejoices with all those that are awake
and keeps them alive and growing.


Note: Vaishvanara Agni is the divine fire
and vitality of the earth and the terrestrial sphere, Vayu
is the electric energy of the middle region, and Aditya,
Taijas is the light and life of the heavenly solar region
of the universe.






[Names: Prsto]
The divine fire is pervasive in the heaven and
over the earthly sphere. It is the mover of rivers and
showerer of rains. It shines among all the human
communities and inspires them to action. This is
Vaishvanara Agni growing with the expansive world
by its own divine glory.






[Names: Tvad, Vaisvanara, Sosucanah]
By virtue of your awe and pressure of law,
human communities move forward, each in its own way,
leaving behind the sufferance of their experiences. O
Vaishvanara Agni, shine on illuminating the people as
you have ever been shining and eliminating the


sufferings of mankind.






[Names: Tava, Tvam, Socisa]
O Vaishvanara Agni, lord omnipresent and
leading light of the universe, the heaven and earth and
the threefold Prakrti (Nature) of Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas, that is, mind, motion and matter, all these observe
and move by your law. You pervade and enliven heaven
and earth and the middle regions with your self-
refulgence, shining, illuminating and purifying the
world by your eternal heat and light.





[Names: Tvamagne, Patim, Usasam, Usasa]
You, O fire divine, Vaishvanara Agni of the
universe, the resounding quarters of space, eloquent voices
of poets, roaring winds and silence of the nights, all adore


you, protector of humanity, end and aim of all wealth and
honour, glory of the dawns and the blaze of days.






[Names: Mitra, Jyotir]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 5 27


The Vasus, abodes of life such as earth, abide
by you, find life energy in you, and while they join your
universal yajna of life’s creation and sustenance, they
find their end and aim in you as the greatest friend and
sustainer. O light divine, Agni, you reach the ignorant
and their abodes and you create the vast light of life for
the noble and the wise.






[Names: Vayurna]
O Jataveda, lord omniscient of created existence,
self-manifested in the highest heaven of space you
create, and universal breath of life like Vayu, you all
time sustain fire, water and earth, thus creating and
perfecting all regions of the world and providing
everything for the children of creation.






[Names: Tamagne, Yaya]
Agni, leading light of life, lord omniscient all
adorable, bring us that illuminating food and energy
for body, mind and soul by which you perfect and sustain
the means of success, and unbounded honour and
excellence for the generous mortals dedicated to yajnic








[Names: Puruksum, Puruksu, Srutyam]
Agni, giver of light and life, for us, for our men
of honour and excellence, create, provide and manage
food for all, energy, wealth and honour and honourable
success. O Vaishvanara, leading light of life, Agni, fire
divine, give us a great home full of love and peace, in
association with Rudras, pranic energies of nature, and
the Vasus, generous life sustainers such as earth.


Mandala 7/Sukta 6


[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
fare i




[Names: Indrasyeva]
I speak in honour of the universal Vaishvanara,
leading artist and light of the world : I honour and
celebrate the glory of the self-refulgent, generous, virile,
beloved hero of the nations like the exploits of mighty
Indra, the sun, joy of the world.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 6 29




[Names: Kavim, Purandarasya]
Poets invoke and celebrate the omniscient, self-
manifested, life sustaining light and blissful ruler of
heaven and earth. The same Agni, omnipotent lord
breaker of the clouds and mountains, I adore, and I sing
and celebrate his great eternal laws and acts with the
holiest words of praise.






[Names: Nyakratun, Prapra]
Agni, highest ruler of the world, reforms,
removes, or reduces to nullity the saboteurs, misguided
reactionaries, selfish exploiters, wicked and antisocial
elements of society.




[Names: Tamisanam, Agnim]
I glorify Agni, that highest and dauntless leader
of humanity, lord ruler of world power and wealth who,


with his noble words and actions, converts the powers
wallowing in dark negation to brilliant and progressive




forces of the world and subdues the stubborn powers






[Names: Agnir]
Agni, ruler of the world worthy of homage and
support, controls the lawless by the force of justice and
punishment and brings about the dawn of new days and
new protections for the noble people. Observant of the
law, dedicated to truth, the great Agni energises the
people and, with his power and patience, enlightens the
people to pay homage and in turn be the beneficiaries.






[Names: Yasya, Sarmannupa, Vaisvanaro]
By Agni’s house of peace and protection all
people abide, by virtue of knowledge, virtue and karma,
sharing the common good will and natural intelligence.
Vaishvanara Agni abides between heaven and earth, in
the bosom of the parents.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 7 31




[Names: Suryasya, Suryas]
Brilliant Vaishvanara on sun rise takes away the
darkness and gives us the wealth of light through the
space and sky. Similarly from the lower sky and the
farther space he takes away the darkness and gives us
the light of the earth from the solar region. (Such is
Agni, leading light of the world, this is Vaishvanara,
Agni, brilliant ruler, leader of all.)


Mandala 7/Sukta 7






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Bhava]
Citizens of the world, for you all, just as a rider
spurs on the war horse on the course to achieve his goal,
so do I, with homage and adorations, invoke, invite and
inspire Agni, brilliant, generous and brave leader of the
world, dynamic and warlike achiever, and I say: O lord
all knowing, well known for your wisdom and
observance of the laws among the nobilities, be the
messenger and leader of our yajnic social system of
peace, non-violence and all round progress for all.
Conscientiously be so, and move at a measured pace.








[Names: Anu, Susmairnadayan, Come]
forceful as lightning, happy and rejoicing, to your own
people, eager for the love and friendship of noble people
who love and value the paths of rectitude. Come on top
of the world, proclaiming loud and bold your knowledge
and power and illuminating the thickest forests of
darkness with the radiations of your light.






[Names: Pracino, Agnirilito]
The yajna is organised right here in front. The
holy seats of grass and fragrant materials of yajna are
laid. Agni as the ruling high priest invoked, anointed
and initiated, is happy with a sense of fulfilment. O
brilliant high priest and ruler, Agni, invoking the
blessings of your twin mothers, heaven and earth, and
serving them here, you arise as the most youthful
favourite child of heaven and earth.






[Names: Sadyo, Visamadhayi]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 7 33


Agni, high priest and ruler of the social order,
whom people of discernment and wisdom create and
initiate as the leader of leaders in the yajna without delay,
is happy at heart, sweet of tongue and observant of the
laws of truth. He is the ruler and protector of the people
and is held in high esteem in the heart and home of
these people who have elected him to the office.






[Names: Asadi, Agnirbrahma, Dyausca]
Agni, light of life, living fire and passion of the
world, elected and adored, abides in the heart and home
of the people, carrying the burdens of society, radiating
all round in the world of humanity, ruling and
conducting the business of living as the presiding power
and vision. That is the universal power and presence
whom heaven and earth advance and whom the yajaka
honours and adores in yajna.






[Names: Srosa, Those]
across the world with all honours and excellence who
conceive and fashion forth the rule of law to the purpose




of Agni, light and lord of life. And those people too
cross over the seas of existence who listen and spread
the light of the truth of this song of mine.






[Names: Isam]
Agni, light of life, manifestation of
omnipotence, ruler and ordainer of the wealth and
honours of the world, we, the people, happily settled
adore you: pray bless the celebrants and leading lights
with honour and sustenance. O leading lights, pray
always protect and promote us all with peace, comfort
and total well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 8






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indhe, Naro, Agniragra, Usasamasoci]
The spirit of life, Agni, which the ruling leader
challenging the battle of life kindles with faith,
reverence and fragrant oblations, feeding its physical
symbol, the yajnic fire, with ghrta, honour and dignity
of life, the leading lights of the nation take over, augment


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 8 35


it and celebrate it with the best offers of yajna, and then,
just as the light of the sun earlier obstructed by nightly
darkness rises and shines with the dawns in advance of
the day, so does the spirit of the nation earlier suppressed
arise on the clarion call of yajna.






[Names: Ayamu, Agnih]
This is Agni, that ruling spirit of life felt and
known, that great and good arouser and yajaka, happy
and joyous, human and mighty over all,
unchallengeable, who brings out the lights of life from
within, wielding great powers and forces, creating and
making new things and institutions, and ruling over the






[Names: Kaya, Kada]
Agni, self-refulgent lord ruler of the world, what
is the method and manners of life by which your grace
would shine upon us? What is the song of adoration,
what fragrance of yajna you love by which we would
adore and celebrate your majesty? O generous lord giver,




when shall we be masters, producers and sharers of rare
excellent wealth, power and honour for ourselves and






[Names: Praprayamagnir, Bharatasya, Bharatas, Purum, Puru, Susoca]
This Agni always listens and attends to the
bearer and sharer of the wealth of life when he shines
with vast splendour, like the sun. He stands by the ruler,
commander and supporter of the people in all battles
and problems of life, shining bright, divine, welcome






[Names: Asannit, Stutascidagne]
Agni, light and spirit of life, good and gracious
at heart, all these many adorations and oblations of the
earth with all powers and splendours of the world are
for you and abide in you only. And when you are thus
adored and celebrated, you listen, absorbed approvingly
blissful. Listen then, O nobly born and self-manifested,
wax with joy, and let your light of glory shine more and
more on us.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 9 37






[Names: Idam, Janiststa]
This song of adoration full of a hundred
thousand-fold power and virtue of both knowledge and
humility is created in honour of Agni so that, for the
enlightened celebrant, there may be peace and well
being full of light, freedom from ailment, and protection
against evil and wickedness.






[Names: Isam]
We people happily settled in peace and plenty
earnestly adore you, Agni, giver of patience and fortitude
and ruler of wealth and power. Pray bring us cherished
knowledge and enlightenment for the devoted celebrants
and people endowed with wealth and honour. And may you
all, men of knowledge, wealth and power, always protect
and promote us with the gift of peace and well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 9






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Abodhi, Dadhati]
See, the holy fire of morning sun is risen from
the lap of early dawn, the sun having stolen away the
darkness of night. It is the morning yajaka, delightful,
and the most poetic symbol of divinity. It radiates light
to reveal the identify of both coming and going living
forms, carries our oblations to the elements and bestows
wealth upon the noble performers.






[Names: Hota, Purubhojasam, Purubhojasa]
He is the noble performer of action who opens
the doors of divinity for the celebrants, blesses and
sanctifies light and food, giving protection and
nourishment for all, performs yajna, gives delight,
controls and ogranises people with discipline, removes
darkness of the nights and appears blissful.





[Names: Amurah, Aditirvivasvant, Citrabhanur, Usasam, Usasa]
mother nature, refulgent, noble in assembly, friend,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 9 39


welcome as holy guest, giver of peace and prosperity,
light of wonder ahead of the dawns, seed of cosmic
dynamics, inspirer of life, he emerges and manifests in






[Names: Ilenyo, Susamdrsa]
The adorable one going on through the battles
of existence for ages, the one omniscient and
omnipresent with all that is born in the world, who
purifies, sanctifies and enlightens you all humans with
the blissful light of life and knowledge, and the refulgent
one to whom the earths, planets, satellites, and the rays
of light respond with brilliance, that is Agni, that is the
sun, that is the Enlightened One.






[Names: Agne, Sarasvatim, Maruto, Sarasvati]
Agni, light and radiance of nature and humanity,
go, radiate and reach for communication and
natural or human powers. Go well by the body of means
created by nature or by words of divine language. Go




by the flow of correct language, winds and currents of
energy, the stars, the waters and other noble powers of
means and men to bring about here all the jewel wealth
of the world.






[Names: Tvamagne, Purunitha]
Agni, light and fire of life, the celebrant settled
in peace and prosperity enkindles you. Bright and
blazing, all knowing all present, burn off the dead wood,
develop the living resources of nature and the cities for
the sake of wealth. Extend the creative and productive
programmes. And you all, Agni and other enlightened
ones, always protect and promote us with happiness and


Mandala 7/Sukta 10
[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Vrsa]
Like the lover of the light of dawn, the sun, Agni,


commands and diffuses light on a vast scale, blazing,
illuminating, burning and purifying, giving abundant


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 10 41


showers of rain, eliminating want and suffering, pure
and immaculate, shines with light, inspiring the mind,
intelligence and will, and exhorts men of passion and
will to awake and rise for action. (Such is Agni, such is
the scholar, sagely teacher and the leader.)






[Names: Svarna, Agnirjanmani]
Like the light of dawn and splendour of the day,
Agni shines and radiates the light of life as inspired
priests enact the yajnic business of the morning and
expand the thoughts of the day. Thus Agni, knowing
and pervading the origin of things, most generous
messenger and carrier of nature’s bounties, radiates all
round conducting and distributing the vitalities of life.






[Names: Accha, Susandrsam]
All holy voices of prayer, all acts of thought
and will of the people dedicated to the bounties of
divinity, seeking their share of the world’s wealth and
honour move and converge on Agni, blissful of sight,
noble in manifestation, easy of access and attainment
and the fastest carrier of oblations and relentless




harbinger of the cherished fruits of the yajnic actions
of mankind.






[Names: Indram, Indra, Rudram, Rudra, Adityebhiraditim]
Agni, lord of light and life, generous, loving
and kind to all, pray bring us, lead us, to Indra, cosmic
energy with the wealth and abundance of earth and other
supports of life, to Rudra the soul, with pranic energies,
to Aditi, infinite and eternal time and space, with a vision
of the suns and origin of the universe, and to the
universal lord and spirit of existence with divination
into the original revelation.






[Names: Mandram]
In their acts of vision, creation and development,
with love and non-violence, people of the world inspired
with love and faith invoke, kindle and adore Agni, light
and life of the world of existence, most youthful, blissful
and generous giver of every thing. He alone presides
over the deep night before the dawn of creation. He
alone, ever free from inertness and sleep, is the prime
mover and harbinger of wealth, honour and excellence


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 11 43


to bless the noble souls in life.


Mandala 7/Sukta 11






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Mahan]
Agni, prime high priest of the cosmic yajna of
creation, come by the chariot of nature itself with all
the divine powers of existence and grace our vedi here.
Great you are, the very soul and spirit of yajna. Not
without you do the immortals rejoice.






[Names: Tvamilate, Yasya]
People of the world with offers of homage and
havi always invoke and adore you, unaging and
immortal Agni, for the sake of radiation and
communication. When you come and grace the seats of
yajna with the powers of nature’s divinity, whosoever
be the man, all the days of life turn into days of good
fortune for him.








[Names: Triscidaktoh, Manusvadagna]
The wise know that there are three fold valuable
gifts in you for the general mortal in the day and night.
Come here like a human power, Agni, meet the brilliant
wise, contact the powers of nature and be like a
messenger to protect us against calumny and






[Names: Agnirise, Agniris, Kratum]
Agni rules the great yajnic programmes of
development without violence. Agni conditions and
controls the entire yajnic materials of the world. The
Vasus such as earth and other life supports take to the
creative action of Agni for sustenance. Among the wise,
scholars of the Vasu order of twenty four year’s study
specialise in Agni’s gifts. And thus the generous and
the wise all depend on this harbinger of life sustaining
means and materials.






[Names: Agne, Imam]
Agni, scholar of the first order, light and fire of


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 12 45


life, bring us the delicacies of yajnic production for the
brilliant people so that they may taste them with delight
and rejoice with the ruler on top. Take this yajna to the
heights among the divinities. O holy ones, scholars and
scientists, protect and promote us all time with gifts of
peace, prosperity and all round well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 12






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Aganma, Citrabhanum]
With profound homage and reverence, let us
move and rise to the most youthful Agni, light, fire and
electrical energy, which shines well kindled in its own
region, is wondrously bright and forceful between the
vast heaven and earth, and when it is well invoked it
moves in all directions for all.






May that Agni, self refulgent lord of cosmic
energy, omnipresent percipient of every thing in
existence and destroyer of all negativities and evils by
his greatness in the world on prayer, save us all, devotees




and celebrants blest with wealth, power and excellence,
from sin and scandal.






[Names: Tvam, Varuna]
O lord of light and life, Agni, you are the judge,
you are the friend. Devotees and celebrants blest with
settlement and prosperity exalt you with their will and
wisdom. May those who repose their love and faith in
you enjoy the gifts of your generosity. And may you all,
scholars and leading lights, protect and promote us with
peace, prosperity and all round well being of life.


Mandala 7/Sukta 13






[Names: Vaishvanara, Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Pragnaye, Bhare]
To Agni, purifier of the world, inspirer of the
mind and soul, and destroyer of evil and darkness, bear
and offer all your thought, will and action in dedication
as I, happy at heart in the assembly house of social yajna,
dedicate mine to the leading light of the world, selfless
guide and pioneer of action and endeavour for humanity.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 13 47






[Names: Tvamagne, Sosucana, Tvam]
Agni, bright purifier of the world with light and
inspiration, rising in action you fill the heaven and earth
with light and purity. O spirit all pervasive and all
knowing, leading light of humanity, with your might
and majesty, protect the noble people from pride,
calumny and imprecation.






[Names: Jato, Vaisvanara]
Agni, rising, manifesting and moving all round
every where freely, you shine and fill all regions of the
world with light and inspiration, and, as a shepherd looks
after, protects and guides his flock so, O leading light
of humanity, all knowing and all pervasive, find ample
appreciation and comfortable settlement for the scholar
and teacher of the universal Vedic knowledge of
existence. O scholars and leading lights of humanity,
always protect and promote us with peace, prosperity
and all round well being of life.




Mandala 7/Sukta 14






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Samidha, Havirbhih]
Bearing holy fuel for the fire and fragrant
materials for oblations, chanting divine words of
invocation and invitation, and bowing in profound
reverence, we offer homage in yajnic service of love
and non-violence to Agni, self-refulgent lord of light,
pure and potent giver of life and the universal vision
and knowledge of life in the Veda.






[Names: Vayam, Vayam]
Agni, light divine and fire of life, we offer you
service with holy fuel for the rise of living flames. O
lord adorable, most sociable, we offer you hymns of
praise and worship. O lord high priest of the cosmic
yajna of love and creation, giver of light and purity of
well being, we offer you service and worship with ghrta
and fragrant oblations of self-surrender to your glory
of self-refulgence.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 15 49





[Names: Tubhyam]
Agni, giver of light and purifier of life, listen to
our prayer of the sages, accept our service and oblations
and grace our life’s yajna with the bounties of divinity.
We pray, may we ever abide in your service and divine
favour, creating, producing, giving selflessly. O lord and
all wise lovers of divinity, protect and promote us always
with your gifts of peace and well being all round.


Mandala 7/Sukta 15


[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Upasadyaya]
Let us offer the best of havi, holy food, into the
holy fire, and homage to Agni, most generous, potent
and generative power sitting next to us, a very closest
of friends with an open door, ready with the best we
need and desire.








[Names: Kavir]
To Agni, who abides with and stabilises the five
orders of society in every household from door to door,
the wise visionary, master protector and promoter of
the home and family, youthful spirit and power of the
light and fire of life and pranic energy.






[Names: Sano, Utasman]
May he protect our wealth and knowledge and
our family all round and also guard us against all sin
and sinners.






[Names: Navam, Syenaya, Vasvah]
I create a new song of adoration for Agni. who,
like an angel of heaven, wise and great, begets us the
wealth, honour and excellence of the world.


[Names: Sparha, Sriyo, Agre, Socatah]
Like the wealth, honour and magnificence of a
chief of heroic brave, the flaming splendour of Agni is


glorious to the sight when it shines first and foremost
of the graces of yajna.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 15 51






[Names: Semam, Agnirjusata, Yajistho]
May that friendly and most adorable Agni,
receiver of oblations and disseminator of fragrance,
accept with pleasure this offer of service and oblations
of ours and accept with love our words of celebration
and submission.






[Names: Suviramagna]
Agni, loving and accessible protector and ruler
of the people, brilliant and generous chief of heroic
brave, universally honoured and invoked, we love and
enshrine you in our heart and home with faith and
reverence.






[Names: Ksapa, Suvirastvamasmayuh]
Shine forth, beatify the night and brighten up
the day with the light of sun rays, and by virtue of your
brilliance let us shine too like holy fires. Chief of the
youthful brave you are, our own, always for us.







[Names: Upaksara]
Leading lights of humanity and holy sages
approach you, meditate on you, for the acquisition of
wealth of wisdom, you who are imperishable giver of a





[Names: Sukrasociramaryah, Sucih]
wickedness. Immortal, purifying, adorable, the lord
blazes with dazzling refulgence of fire and the sun.





[Names: Bhagasca]
And that ruling power, a very image of patience,
fortitude and omnipotence, may, we pray, bring us the
best of means, materials and modes of success, and may
the lord of power, honour and excellence bring us all
we cherish and value in life.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 15 33



[Names: Tvamagne, Ditisca, Deva, Savita]
creative power of inspiration, Bhaga, commanding
power of wealth and excellence, Diti, law and ethics of
universality, you bless us with honour and magnificence
with noble progeny of our choice and ambition of the
best order with freedom from suffering.





[Names: Agne, Tapisthairajaro]
Agni, fiery ruler and generous lord of
enlightenment, save us from sin, protect us from the
sinful and the destroyers. Lord eternal and unaging, with
your blazing law, justice and discipline, burn out evil,
evil deeds and evil doers.





[Names: Purbhava]
And O lord redoubtable, let the earth, the land,
and the governance of the state, firm as adamant and
strong as steel, be like a mother city of a hundred-fold
defences for the protection, promotion and progress of
the people.








[Names: Tvam, Diva]
O lord undaunted and unchallengeable against
the violent, the saboteur and the terrorist, save us and
protect us from sin, inequity and violence in the day
and at night.


Mandala 7/Sukta 16






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Priyam, Agnim, Agni]
O people, for your sake, with food, homage and
self-surrender, I invoke and serve Agni, giver of light
and fire of life, product as well as the source of unfailing
energy, strength and power, cherished and valuable
friend, most enlightened and constant agent of the
holiest programmes of love and non-violent
development, and imperishable carrier and messenger
of world communications.





[Names: Subrahma]
That Agni, leading power of nature and
humanity, uses bright natural elements of universal value


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 16 55


such as sun rays, fire and water, like horses harnessed
to the chariot, and, when invoked and raised, would
move at the fastest speed. He is the master of natural
knowledge and natural materials, adorable, noble and
potent worker, and the accomplisher of means, materials
and projects of humanity for common success and




[Names: Udasya, Ssocirasthadajuhvanasya]
narah.


High rises the radiant glory of this fire of Agni
fed on holy food while the flames and fragrance soar
and touch the skies, when people light and raise the fire
with profuse oblations of ghrta offered to the bountiful
power.






[Names: Visva]
We light, raise and develop the holy fire as
messenger and harbinger of excellent gifts of life’s light
and fragrance. So do we elect, adore and anoint you on
the highest and most glorious office of the nation. Bring
us the divine nobilities and brilliancies of the world of
nature and humanity together and give us all the
cherished blessings of life for which purpose we love




and adore the fire and you, O lord of power and honour
manifest and embodiment of excellence.






[Names: Tvamagne, Tvam]
Agni, fiery and enlightened ruling power of
nature and humanity, you are the protective and
promotive head of the family and the home land. You
are the receiver and giver of every thing in the loving
and non-violent business of the nation’s governance and
administration. You are the purifier, sanctifier and giver
of enlightenment universally adored. You organise,
accomplish and pervade the yajnic business of life and
living together by choice and common will.






[Names: Krdhiratnam]
O presiding power of holy actions in life, bestow
the jewels of life upon the yajamana as you are the lord
ruler and disburser of the world’s wealth. Shine, sharpen
and inspire us to do well in the truth and law of the
world of nature and humanity and advance the person
whoever commands honour and excellence and rises as
expert performer in the universal yajna of evolution and
progress at the social level.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 16 57




[Names: Yantaro]
gonam.


Agni, ruling light of the world, invoked with
reverence and adored, let those brave leaders and
eminent scholars commanding wealth and power be dear
and closer to you who move forward, and lead, control
and protect the defenders and promoters of the people,
lands and cows.






[Names: Yesamila, Tanstrayasva, Sarma]
Patient and potent lord ruler of light, strength
and power, protect from jealousy and malignity those
good people in whose home sweet and sacred speech
and manners, like a gracious lady of generosity with
sweetened hands perfumed with ghrta and holy water,
reigns and resides and, O lord of wide reputation and
long experience of the voice of divinity, give us the home
abounding in peace and comfort, love and courtesy.




[Names: Agne]
ca sudaya.




Agni, leading light and fire of life, most
pervasive power ever on the move, all aware and self-
conscious, receiver of the inputs into the fire of
consumption and disseminator of the fragrances for the
living system of existence by charming flames, pray
refine and intensify the holy inputs of havi and bring
higher returns of honour, excellence and generosity for
those who manage the wealth and power of humanity
for the common good.






[Names: Satam]
are those generous souls who, of their own will and
desire, provide all possible and attainable means and
materials for successful living, food and energy, wealth
and power, and great honour and reputation for
excellence. O lord, protect them from sin and evil,
promote them with a hundred safeguards and




[Names: Devo]
ohate.


Agni, self-refulgent lord giver of wealth, honour
and excellence, loves to have your fire of yajnic action


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 17 59


sprinkled with overflowing ladle of ghrta and the highest
refined action. Serve him closely, feed the fire to the
full, let the flames rise, and the generous lord refulgent
would lead you to the heights of prosperity and






[Names: Dadhati]
Let the brilliant, noble and generous leaders of
humanity choose, sanctify and anoint that intelligent
all-aware person as Agni, leader, ruler and high-priest
of the yajnic social order of love, peace and non-
violence, who would create and bear the jewel wealth
and values of life and high power and prestige of the
noblest order for generous self-sacrificing people
dedicated to the yajna of the social system.


Mandala 7/Sukta 17


[Names: Agni, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Agne, Agni]
divine of yajna, be kindled with the holy fuel offered,
and let the heat and light and fragrance of life spread
over the wide earth, the skies and the vast spaces.




vaheha.


And let the doors of love and ecstasy be thrown
open, and let the divinities inspired with the light and
love of holy ambition enter. O leading light, bring them
in hither.




jatavedah.


Agni, light and fire of life and intelligence, all
knowing, all reaching, go to the bounties of nature and
brilliancies of humanity, join them with the light and
fragrance you bear by the oblations of havi received,
and win their favour of blessings for our yajna of the
business of life and living.






[Names: Svadhvara]
Jataveda, all knowing, all reaching power of
nature and humanity, yajna fire and teacher,
communicates with the undecaying bounties of nature
and the immortal souls of enlightened humans and
seekers of enlightenment, renders them favourable to
the yajnic programmes of peace and non-violent
development and thus gives them fulfilment.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 61




[Names: Vamsva]
O man of knowledge and enlightenment, acquire
and disseminate all the cherished gifts and virtues of
the world so that all our hopes and ambitions for a full
living may be truly fulfilled here and now.




[Names: Tvamu]
a napatam.


Agni, light and fire of life and humanity, all
divinities of nature and humanity acknowledge, take
over and advance you for their life’s fulfilment, you
being the source of infallible hope, energy and karma
and bearer as well as harbinger of the divine invitations
to live.






O great one, as you come, you bear and bring
for us the jewel wealths, honours and excellences of
life. We pray may we too with gratitude be servers and
givers in honour of the generous and brilliant light and
fire of life.


Mandala 7/Sukta 18


Indra (1-21) and Sudasa Paijavanasya Dana stuti (22-








[Names: Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indra]
Indra, lord of power, splendour and beneficence,
ruler of the world, all beauties and graces of life which
our parents and sustainers pray for and achieve, all fertile
cows, lands and lights with high yield, all horses and
fast communications are there for them because you are
there. All wealth of home, habitat and materials, you
alone give to the devotee who prays for the favours and
light of divinity.





[Names: Rajeva, Pisa]
Like a brilliant prince you live with the people
[Names: Being]
and visionary, inspire us, your admirers, with your lights
of wisdom, and refine our voices of admiration with
gentle forms and manners. Lord of wealth, power and
honour, sharpen our plans and initiatives with the
development of lands and cows, horses and transport
for our assets and prosperity.






[Names: Arvaci, Sarman]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 63


Indra, glorious ruler, these are the people and
our voices of admiration, earnest and joyous, vying with
each other in love and reverence on this occasion, which
may, we pray, reach you and be accepted. May your
modern ethics and policies lead us all to wealth, honour
and excellence. May we always abide in peace and
prosperity in a happy home under your care and






[Names: Dhenum, Tvaminme, Indrah]
As a shepherd goes to the cow in a rich pasture
for good milk, so the man of peace and enlightenment
approaches you seeking fulfilment and creates songs
of appreciation in praise of your policy and performance
as a ruler. Indra, O lord ruler of the world, the whole
world calls you the preserver, defender and promoter
of the earth and her social order for me, and I pray you
enjoy the favour and goodwill of the people for our sake.





[Names: Arnamsi, Sudasa, Sardhantam]
Indra, brilliant ruler, rising anew like the sun,




controls and bounds overflooded expansive waters into
fordable limits for comfortable movement of business,
converts the violent to peaceable beneficence, silences
the imprecations of the vociferous and controls the
erratic behaviour of the rivers and the seas.






[Names: Purola, Turvaso, Srustim]
The ruler is chief of all, all controller and instant
achiever, keen yajaka and sociable with open doors,
sharpest reacher to the target like fish in the ocean, for
economic and social progress. Men of economic
ambition, science and wisdom do him honour, enemies
cower before him, and as a friend he saves and supports
the friend of versatile genius.






Men of ripe age and experience, vibrant experts
of yajnic material, nobly born and cultured, graceful
and highly sagacious, who bring about peace and joy
for all, approve and glorify the ruler who leads and
guides members of the council who manage the
governance and administration of the land for the noble


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 65


people and organise the defence forces to deal with the
violent, destructive and lawless elements from within
and without.






[Names: Duradhyo, Aditim, Aditi, Mahnavivyak]
Thoughtless men of evil disposition try to fail
his policy of universal and inviolable values and grab
lands of fertility. But Indra, a man of vision, all round
perceptive, saving the land and policy frustrates their
designs and maintains national integrity and rests in
peace and fearlessness.






[Names: Tyurartham]
When Indra, generous ruler and commander
equipped fully with assistant forces, overcomes
unfriendly powers and evil voices rampant in society
and thus reaches his target of correction and
achievement in the daily business of life’s governance
and administration including the optimum means of
sustenance and development, the people too realise the
ends of his universal policy and achieve their goals of
life in definiteness without any delay.








[Names: Prsnigavah, Mitram, Mitra]
Just as cows free from the cowherd rush to the
master from the pasture, as friends rush to meet a friend,
as people having performed good actions by nature and
law advance to receive their prize, and as the sun rays
radiate across space and sky to meet the variegated earth,
so do the forces of Indra, whether organised in battle
order or resting off duty, and the people at peace rally
and rush to Indra, the ruler, for service immediately on
the clarion call.






[Names: Ekam, Sravasya, Dasmo, Sisati]
The ruler, personally resigned and socially
committed as a trustee, commanding power and
brilliance as Indra, dedicated to the elimination of want
and suffering, creates and ministers a senate of twenty
and one reputed people over a variety of views and
opinions and thus, brave and brilliant as he is, organises
the nation into a dynamic social order like a high priest
organising and energising the vedi in the house of yajna.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 67






[Names: Adha, Vrnana, Anu]
The lord of thunder power and justice engages
the scholar, the teacher, the senior and even the jealous
critic and opponent into the thick of social action,
choosing some positively and others to weed out
negativity. Thus they too, O ruler, opt for you, some
opting for you as a friend for friendship, and others to
be with you and around, but all in order to be happy
and joyous in consonance with you.






[Names: Vyanavasya, Purum, Puru]
Let the ruler with his enlightened forces always
and at the earliest rule out and destroy the sevenfold
citadels of these outmoded enemies, and let him serve
and support the home and institutions of values anew
for the rising people of free thought and action. Let us
always realise and win the values of the eternal and
liquid flow of the holy voice in our yajnic business of








[Names: Nigavyavo, Sastirviraso]
All the wondrous deeds of the world are
accomplished by Indra, since sixty-six of his brave
watriors devoted to their lord, all fervent, new and
ferocious fighters dedicated to the land and light, send
to eternal sleep sixtysix thousand of his enemies.






[Names: Indrenaite, Durmitrasah, Sudase, Sudas]
There furious warriors overwhelming the enemy
like turbulent waters rushing down hill are the creation
of Indra, and they, over-coming and cutting to size the
enemies and strategists camouflaged as friends, are
prepared to renounce all comforts for the sake of their
devotion to the generous master and ruler.






[Names: Ardham, Indro]
Indra, ruler of the earth, inspires and promotes
the person who promotes the brave, prepares ripe inputs


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 69


for yajnic development, and challenges and eliminates
want and dishonour from the world. Being the destroyer
of pride and anger, he reduces the proud and angry to
zero, and promotes, defends and serves the paths of
rectitude and processes of law and justice.






[Names: Adhrena]
By patience, fortitude and stabilized power,
Indra, destroyer of evil and enmity, unites and
consolidates the world into one socio-political order.
With limited but committed powers of love and
creativity, he defeats the tigers of violence and
destruction. With pointed advance like the penetration
of a needle, he routs deep formations of hostility and
opposition. And thus he provides all sustenance and
peaceful comfort and prosperity for a happy and







[Names: Sasvanto, Satravo, Martan]
Indra, lord destroyer of division, opposition and




relentlessly. Let the persistent purveyors of division and
dissidence be brought to justice. And whoever does evil
and violence to the supportive and celebrative people
among humanity, strike the sharp and instant bolt of






[Names: Avadindram, Ajasasca, Sigravo, Ssirsani]
Let the powers of justice, keepers of law and
order and defence guards provide security cover for
Indra, ruler of the social order. Let the ruler eliminate
all elements of division, dissension and secession from
this one, united and universal order of governance and
human welfare. And let the weapon launchers,
and cooperative yajnic powers of the system bear and
offer him the highest loyalty and conduct fastest services
of defence and communication for him.







[Names: Nata, Devakam, Usaso, Jaghantha]
Indra, lord ruler of power, honour and
excellence, like the beauty, blessedness and grandeur


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 18 71


of the dawns old and new, your knowledge and wisdom,
ethics and policies and your wealth and excellence
cannot be described, since you achieve the adorable light
of divinity, shatter the pride and pretence of simulated
brilliance, and by your innate power and splendour break
the greatest and deepest clouds to bring down showers
of rain.






[Names: Turvasisthah, Turvasistha]
By virtue of your blazing glory and showers of
generosity, the sage who dispels evils, the warrior who
goes forward with a hundred and faces many hundreds,
and the host who provides the best shelter and hospitality
like mother earth, all who rejoice in the home as well as
outside, would never neglect, forget or forsake the
kindness and friendship of yours who are the ruler and
protector of the world community. And we pray may
happy days ever shine upon these brave, learned and






[Names: Sate, Arhannagne, Sudasah]
Two hundred cows and two chariots drawn by
double motive powers are the gifts of the generous




yajamana, grand child of a dynamic, pious and
progressive God-fearing yajaka. O Agni, lord and leader
of the light and fire of the corporate life of humanity,
happily acknowledging, singing and celebrating the gift
of the man of peace and progress, I go round the house
of yajna with reverence like the high priest and the






[Names: Catvaro, Rjraso, Sravase]
Four-fold gifts of the generous yajamana, grand
child of the pious progressive yajaka, golden majestic
and moving straight on the right course in life in the
most stable manner without jolt or deviation on the earth,
bear me like a child of divinity to my grand child for
the achievement of honour and excellence.






[Names: Yasya, Sravo, Sirsnesirsne, Saptedindram]
^ ° ^ ~




One whose honour and fame rings in the skies
and over the wide earth, whose gifts of generosity are
distributed over from person to person of eminence,
whom the seven fluent regions of heaven and earth


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 19 73


celebrate and glorify like Indra, lord of light and fire
and power, and who fights out a war monger in battle
close at hand as one would eliminate a disease, such a
person and power is fit to be the ruler.




25. Imam naro marutah sascatanu divodasam na


[Names: Avistana]
O leading lights of humanity and vibrant people
of the world in general, join, support and celebrate this
generous giver of light and life like the father creator of
the generous yajaka and high priest of world yajna, and
there by join and integrate with the divine and
undecaying social order which is the irresistible will
and creation of the gracious lord of peace and


Mandala 7/Sukta 19




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Yastigmasrngo]
Indra, lord commander of weapons sharp and


blazing as rays of light, virile, generous and yet fearsome
as a bull, is the one supreme who guides, controls, rules




and inspires the world community, and he is the one
who always is the supporting power of the house and
children of the indigent who cannot afford to pay for
education and development. O lord, you are the guide
and giver of wealth and knowledge to the man dedicated
to the yajnic development of humanity.






[Names: Tvam, Kutsamavah, Kutsamava, Dasam, Siksan]
Indra, brilliant ruler, you govern and strike your
thunderbolt of justice and punishment, listen to the voice
of the people in the battle business of life and protect
the sagely man of judgement and discretion with your
force when you fight the demon of drought, punish the
selfish exploiter and food polluter and help and arrange
for the education of the children of noble mothers all
for our sake.






[Names: Sudasam, Sudasa, Purum, Puru]
O bold and determined ruler, with all your power
and determination and with all your methods and tactics
of defence and offence, protect and preserve the assets
of the nation acquired, support the commander of
services, guard the wielders of high class weapons and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 19 75


protect their families, defend the powers of law and
order against crime, and in the battle against want and
darkness and for victory in the battle field of defence
and development, protect the supply line and citizens
of the land.






O leader and commander equipped with
transport, communications and armoured fighting
forces, cherished and honoured ruler of the heart of the
nation, in the battle business of the protection and
advancement of the divinities of nature and humanity
you fight out and eliminate the cumulated forces of
darkness and destruction with the assistance and
cooperation of the leading people. You lay to sleep and
totally destroy the violent criminal, the thief and the
terrorist in order to suppress and root out the forces of
negation and destruction.






[Names: Tava, Satatamavivesira]
O wielder of the thunderbolt, those frightful
forces of yours which instantly destroy nintynine
citadels of want and darkness and hundreds more for




the entry of light and justice, pray demolish the
unbreakable walls of the forts of impenetrable
ignorance, superstition, prejudice, hatred and violence.






[Names: Sana, Vrsne, Sudase, Sudas, Purusaka]
Indra, lord of light and power, those permanent
gifts and protections of the world of existence you have
created and granted for the oblation bearing yajaka, for
the generous man of charity, and for the commander of
the protective forces of humanity, and those mighty
motive forces of life’s power and generosity which I
harness in your service may, O lord of all ruling power,
we pray, bring us all voices of Divinity, all means and
modes of sustenance, and all success and progress in
our life.






[Names: Trayasva]
O lord of peace, patience and justice, ruler of
dynamic powers and people, in this social order of your
governance, let us not be exposed to a state of throw
away sin and crime. Save us by virtue of the company
of non-violent, best and wisest protective people. Let
us abide among your dearest favourites and loved ones,


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 19 77
among the brave, the wise and the virtuous.






[Names: Priyasa, Sisthya, Turvasam, Turvasa, Samsyam]
Lord of wealth, honour and excellence, let us
all, leaders and friends of yours, abide and rejoice as
your dearest in the protective shelter of your love and
good will for our desired aims. Inspire and refine the
nearest settled neighbour as well as the traveller on the
move, raising the generous host in honour and praise
for hospitality.






[Names: Sadyascinnu]
O lord of light, honour and excellence of
generosity, select us for dedication to that holy work
which, under the protection of your love and goodwill,
leading scholars and interpreters of the Divine Word
relentlessly pursue, reciting and teaching the Vedic
songs of divinity and, by recitation and exhortation,
converting even hard headed businessmen to generous
givers of charity in the service of Divinity.








[Names: Tesamindra, Sivo, Suro]
These songs of adoration offered to you, O
highest leader of the leaders of men, in fact, come back
to us, giving wealth, honours and excellence of life. O
lord, in these people’s battle against darkness, want and
injustice, be their friend, wise protector and kind


TEU UU




Indra, wise and brave leader and ruler of the
world celebrated in song, exhorting the brave,
commanding the defence and protection and the wealth
of power, prosperity, food, energy and divine wisdom,
grow in body, mind and soul by your body politic, and
help us grow as a united commonwealth blest with
honour, excellence and prosperity, and let there be no
alliances of opposition and enmity against humanity. O
lord and leaders of the world, protect and promote us in
a state of honourable peace, prosperity and all round
well being for all time.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 20 79


Mandala 7/Sukta 20






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ugro, Jagmiryuva, Indra]
Indra, the ruling soul, a great performer blest
with innate powers, rises bright and blazing to do great
heroic deeds when he undertakes the manly acts he plans
to do. Youthful and bold, he goes to the house of the
people with his powers of protection as a saviour of us
all from great sin and transgression.






[Names: Hanta, Karta, Sudase, Sudas]
Growing and rising, Indra is breaker of the
clouds and destroyer of want and darkness of ignorance.
The youthful hero protects the dedicated celebrant with
his powers of protection. He is the creator of a beautiful
world for the man of service and charity and he is the
giver of wealth again and again to the generous man of
charity and gratitude to Divinity.








[Names: Yudhmo, Surah, Vyasa, Indrah, Satruyantam, Veteran]
victorious, Indra is unconquerable by nature. In the face
of tumultuous conflicts he blazes with holy splendour
and destroys all hostility from the earth.






[Names: Ubhe]
Mighty Indra with his splendour and irresistible
forces pervades both earth and sky by the strength of
his presence felt all round. Wielding his thunderbolt of
justice, protection and correction, commanding
humanity and mixing with the people by perceptible
celebrations, he maintains his dialogue with them.






[Names: Vrsa]
Him the omnipotent generous father begets, and
him the supreme creative mother nature bears and
nurtures as the mighty, virile and generous leader for
the battle of humanity for a full joyous life on earth, the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 20 81


mighty ruler Indra who then rises as the commander of
armies and glorious protector promoter of the world
community: brave and true, seeker of truth and the
divine Word of nature, the ruler irresistible for the






[Names: Yajnairya]
Never does that person waver or go astray, never
does he fail or face disaster, never does he hurt anyone,
who obeys and serves the venerable thought and will
of this awesome master. Whoever reposes his trust and
prayers by love, self-sacrifice and yajna in him abides
in peace for the achievement of wealth, honour and
excellence, serving truth and rising in stature in truth
and divine law.






[Names: Yadindra, Siksannayajjyayan, Amrta]
What the former generation teaches and
bequeathes to the next, and what the elder generation
may learn and obtain from the younger one as a valuable
gift, and that immortal wealth of life far out of sense,
experience and time, O lord sublime, that sits eternal,
O lord of omniscience and omnipotence, Indra, bear




and bring us, that wondrous, super existential wealth
and vision of life.






[Names: Yasta]
Indra, lord ruler of the world over clouds and
mountains, whoever the person that pays homage to you,
may he be dear to you as a friend in the open honest
business of living. In this social order of goodwill and
human welfare of the lord of love and grace free from
violence, let us live in peace at home blest with
sustenance and security in comfort and divine grace.






[Names: Rayaskamo, Sakra, Sako]
O lord of wealth, honour, power and excellence,
this song of adoration vibrates with prayer for your
attention and the celebrant prays for your grace. May
your gift of wealth and fulfilment flow to the celebrant.
O lord of power dear as breath of life, make it possible
for us to win all wealth, honour and excellence we pray
for.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 21 83






[Names: Sana, Vasvi, Sakti]
Indra, lord giver of energy and vitality, sustain
us and those who join you vitally and spiritually for the
gift of energy and pranic vitality in contact with
universal energy. May your universal vitality be the
harbinger of universal wealth, honour and excellence
for the celebrant. O lord and divinities, all time protect
and promote us with success, prosperity and good


Mandala 7/Sukta 21






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Asavi, Bodhamasi]
Distilled is the spirit of life, divine, brilliant,
the very essence of earth and nature’s energy. Let Indra,
the ruling lord of life, by his very nature and origin,
join and address the assembly and make it resound. O
lord of instant powers and faculties, we invoke and invite
you by our yajnic adorations. Join us in the ecstasy of
our celebration and inspire our congregation to awake








[Names: Somamado]
Lovers of soma ecstasy march forward to join
the yajna of the social order, their shouts of joy
resounding to the skies. The brave and generous leaders
of the nation move forward from the home, with
resounding proclamations bearing vibrations of their
characteristic home and fame, to join the assembly.






[Names: Tvamindra, Sura, Tvad]
And you Indra, leader and ruler, set aflow the
natural voice and energies of the nation otherwise
withheld from expression by diffidence, fear and
darkness of ignorance. Freed by you, the energies of
the nation flow freely into action like words of
eloquence directed to a definite purpose like streams
flowing to the sea and chariot horses directed to a
destination, and then all artificial creations of fear




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 21 85




[Names: Bhimo, Indrah]
Indra, formidable scholar and fearsome warrior,
enters with his weapons of offence and defence and
inspires all the will and actions of the people which are
in the interest of humanity and which are humanly
possible. Happy and rejoicing, wielding the thunderbolt
of power and justice in hand, he shakes to naught the
strongholds of evil, sin and crime with his grandeur.






Indra, lord most potent, let not the wicked and
violent approach and hurt us. Let them not affect our
holy works in spite of their tactics worth knowing
though they be. O noble lord, control and nullify the
various and disorderly people. Let not the sensual and
licentious sex slaves vitiate our moral conduct and
rectitude.






[Names: Svena, Savasa, Satrurantam]
Indra, lord of splendour, by your own strength




overthrow the enemies of humanity on earth. They do
not know the greatness and glory of your powers. By
your innate powers you destroy the demon of darkness,
want and ignorance. O mighty warrior, the enemies do
not realise the expanse of your power and grandeur.






[Names: Devascit, Indro]
Indra, ruling power of the world, brilliant
divines, scholars and scientists of veteran eminence
value your courage and bold actions in the field of
energy and spirituality for the development, prosperity
and well being of the social order. Having faced
challenges with patience and fortitude, Indra commands
and shares powers, privileges and prosperity, and the
people invoke and support him for leadership in their
struggle for peace, prosperity and progress. Therein lies
honour and victory.






[Names: Kirisciddhi, Satamute]
For protection and advancement, the devotee
calls upon you, Indra, lord ruler and giver of abundant
power and prosperity, honour and excellence. O lord of
a hundred protective powers, be the guardian, protector


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 21 87


and saviour of our abundant power and prosperity. And
our guardian and protector against the challenging






[Names: Sakhayasta, Vanvantu, Savamsi]
O saviour triumphant, while we worship and
glorify you daily with greater and greater love, faith
and strength of loyalty, pray let us be your friends for
ever. O lord and master of the people, let us all be close
to you and, under your protection, let us all win and
enjoy freedom from fear and strength worthy of the
seekers of Divinity.






[Names: Sana, Vasvi, Sakti]
Indra, lord of life and majesty, hold us all, sustain
us all, all the blessed souls who by their sincere devotion
enjoy the glory of your favour and grace so that we
may continue to enjoy the strength and success granted
by you. May your power and grace be the source of
wealth and excellence for the celebrant. All you
divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote




us for all time with all freedom and security.


Mandala 7/Sukta 22






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Piba, Somamindra, Soturbahubyam]
Indra, lord ruler and controller of the dynamic
forces of the world, drink this soma of ecstasy which, I
am sure, would exhilarate you. The cloud, generative
power of nature, has distilled it and showered on you.
And just as a horse well controlled by the hands and
reins of the driver moves to the right destination, so is
this soma generated by the hands of the creator meant
to exhort you to take the dominion to its destination.






[Names: Yaste]
That beauty and joy of the governance of your
dominion which is agreeable, inspiring and worthy of
support and participation, and by which joy, O controller
of the dynamic forces of the people, you break the
negative forces of darkness, sin and crime, want and
ignorance like the sun breaking dark clouds for showers,
may that joy, O sovereign lord of power for settlement
and prosperity, give you the real pleasure of creative
governance and administration.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 22 89






[Names: Bodha, Jusasva]
O lord of honour, power and magnificence, pray
know well this voice of mine which the sage well settled
at peace offers you in adoration of your glory. And
accept, honour and apply these holy words of vision
and wisdom in practice in the assembly house of the
wise for governance and administration.






[Names: Srudhi, Krsva]
Listen to the cloud shower of exhortation from
the vibrant sage, joyous participant in the congregation,
know the thought and will of the wise scholar in
adoration of your honour, and honour these prayers,
most sincere and intimate, in action.






[Names: Sada, Suryasya, Suryas]
Never shall I forget your words, instant and
mighty of action as you are, nor shall I, knowing your
power and potential, ever neglect your appreciation and
adoration. I value and appreciate the significance of your


name and your innate honour and excellence.






[Names: Mare]
O lord of honour and excellence, many are your
acts of generosity and magnificence in the world of
humanity. Many are the acts of adoration the dedicated
wise offer to you. O lord, never let these be alienated
from us.






[Names: Tubhyedima, Sura, Tvam]
O lord of honour and excellence, wise and brave,
all these yajnic acts of service and adoration are for
you. All these acts of holy creation and development
for progress I do, are for your honour and majesty. You
are the ruler and sustainer of the world, accepted and
adorable for the leading people of the world.






Indra, lord of blazing splendour, destroyer of
suffering and darkness, adored by the world, the people
of the world acknowledge your grandeur but they
comprehend it not, much less equal and surpass. Nor


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 23 91


and potential or your munificence.


AUS




[Names: Asme, Ssivani]
All the songs of adoration and acts of homage
and worship which the veteran seers of ancient wisdom
and new scholars of modern vision and wisdom create
and offer to you, mighty ruler of the world, may they all
be friendly and blissful for us all. O seers and scholars,
O lord Indra, pray always protect and promote us with
all modes of protection, promotion and all round well-


Mandala 7/Sukta 23






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Savasa]
O brilliant sage of divine vision settled in peace,
raise your voice and sing songs of celebration in honour
of Indra, mighty ruler of the world. In the battle business
of life, glorify him who pervades the wide worlds by
his might, and as I approach him he listens close by so


that my words of prayer reverberate across the spaces.






[Names: Ayami, Nahi]
I come, lord Indra, the sound of prayer rises like
a battle cry with the divine waves of nature, charming,
mastering, the notes resounding in the tumultuous roar.
No one knows the thread of his span of life in humanity.
O lord, cleanse us of those sins which pollute us to






[Names: Yuje, Jujusanamasthuh]
I ride the chariot of worship in pursuit of the
light of truth harnessing the two carriers of mind and
intellect alongwith the senses. My prayers reach the lord
of love who accepts the supplicant with grace. The lord
pervades both heaven and earth with his might, prevents
evil, and destroys the demons of sin and darkness which
we cannot even perceive with our human eyes of




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 23 93




[Names: Apascit, Yahi, Vayurna]
Indra, lord of light and action, just as waters
flow and rays of light radiate over darkness, so let your
celebrants, men of holy action, rise and attain to the
light of truth. O lord of the cosmic chariot, come like
the wind to your servants of action with grace since
you bless us with mercy and with gifts of intelligence,
vision and the light of divinity.






[Names: Susminam]
Indra, lord of might, mercy, magnanimity and
giver of all round success, may the devotees blest with
joy and vision of action win your pleasure and favour
for the gift of strength and power, sure success and
excellence in all fields to bless the celebrant. You, the
one adorable lord, bless the mortals with love and mercy.
Come and share our celebrations of yajnic ecstasy with
us in this session.






[Names: Evedindram]
Thus do the brilliant poets of vision and heroes




of action settled and settlers at peace with homage and
adorations celebrate Indra, lord ruler and commander
of world forces, giver of showers of joy and wielder of
thunder arms for the world order. The lord commands
forces of the youthful brave and prosperity of the world’s
commonwealth. Praised and celebrated thus, may the
lord protect and promote us. O lord, and O men of vision
and potent action, protect and promote us all time with
all modes of happiness and well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 24


[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
ara: neu


[Names: Yonista, Puruhita]
mamadasca somaih.


Indra, lord ruler and commander of the world,
the holy seat for you is created and reserved in the house
of nations. Elected and invited by all equally, pray come
and take it with the leading lights of humanity in the
manner that you may be our saviour and protector for
advancement, receive and disburse the means and
materials of life’s wealth and comfort, and be happy
and celebrate the joy of life with the soma of the world’s




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 24 95




[Names: Grbhitam, Somah, Soma, Visrstadhena]
Indra, brilliant lord, accepted is your mind
wholly, both wish and will, ideas and intentions,
philosophy and policy, ethics and action. The soma of
joy and celebration is distilled and ready. The honey
sweets are exuberant and overflowing. The general will,
single voice and enthusiastic resolution of this generous
land initiates, invites and anoints you in your seat.






[Names: Somape, Somap, Vahantu]
Indra, mighty lord of natural simplicity and
grace, lover of joy, come to this holy seat of ours from
wherever you are, from the regions of heavenly light or
the dark green earth to drink of the soma of celebration
for the land. May the leading personalities of the nation
well conduct you to receive our felicitations with us
here.







[Names: Varivrjat]
Indra, friendly ruler, lover of divinity and the
best things of life, commanding the best of assistants,
blest with a gracious personality, come to us with all
the means of protection and progress for us, bringing
showers of strength, honour and excellence for the
nation and warding off all opponent forces, come
supported by the wisest veterans of the land.






[Names: Sromatam]
This inspiring song of felicitation and this
vibrant institution of governance is created and offered
to Indra, great and brilliant lord ruler and sustainer of
the world, like the leading power of the nation’s chariot.
O lord Indra, this supplicant and celebrant prays to you
for the gift of wealth, honour and excellence for the
nation. Pray raise our honour and fame to the regions
of bliss over the sky and light of the sun.






[Names: Isam]
Likewise O lord of excellence, Indra, destroyer
of suffering, bless us with abundant good fortune of the
choicest order. Grant us the great favour of your love


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 25 97


and good will. Protect and promote the honour, energy
and sustenance of the nation blest with youthful brave
for the noble people. O lord and veterans of the world,
protect and advance us with the peace, prosperity and
all round well being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 25






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Patati]
Indra, blazing lord of glory and illustrious
commander of the forces of defence and protection,
when your armies impassioned by ardent zeal march
forward, the thunderbolt in your hands, O magnificent
leader of humanity, flashing and blazing, falls upon the
spaces otherwise, would never ramble from us but hit
the target.




martaso amanti. Are tam samsam krnuhi ninitso-


Indra, lord destroyer of want and suffering,
strike upon the strongholds of the enemies and break
down the hostilities of mortals that afflict us with




violence and disease. Throw out far off that curse and
calumny of the malevolent and bring us fulfilment with
abundance of health, wealth, honour and excellence of
life.




[Names: Satam, Sudase, Sudas, Jahi]
O lord of golden helmet, hundreds be your
favours and protections for the man of generosity,
thousands your blessings and gifts of grace. Destroy
the weapons of death in the hands of the violent mortal
and vest us with that wealth, honour and excellence of
life which is the supreme jewel of existence.






[Names: Tvavato, Sura, Visvedahani]
Indra, mighty lord beyond fear, in submission
to your will, I abide in holy action and pray for the gift
of your protection and grace. O lord illustrious of blazing
power, pray dwell in my heart for ever. Forsake us not,
O lord of tempestuous forces.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 25 99




[Names: Kutsa, Satra]
All these arms and armaments of thunder power,
all the sagely people who have come to peace and power,
patience and fortitude inspired by divinities for the
attainment of honour and excellence: all these are
dedicated to Indra, lord ruler of vibrant powers and
people of the world. O lord giver of freedom from fear
and violence, make it easy for us to dispel the evil and
darkness of life. Let us be victors of light over ignorance
and darkness and cross over the seas to the realms of






[Names: Isam]
Thus O lord Indra, bless us with honour and
excellence of our choice in abundance. Let us have the
divine bliss of your love and good will. Sustain and
promote food, energy and knowledge for the noble
people blest with youthful and brave warriors of
freedom. O lord, O noble people, O saints and sages, O
youthful brave, protect and promote us with all modes
of good fortune and well being for ever.




Mandala 7/Sukta 26






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indramasuto, Soma, Tasma]
Undistilled soma does not please Indra, lord of
humanity. Nor do distillations of soma unsanctified by
divine chants of Veda satisfy the lord of power and
divinity. Therefore I create and compose the latest song
of adoration with Vedic vision with the distillation so
that the lord may listen and accept our homage of soma
with pleasure.






[Names: Uktha, Indram, Yadim]
With every chant of song divine, the soma
pleases Indra. At every stage of adoration, at every step
of the song, the draughts of soma exhilarate the lord.
For this reason, surely, eager supplicants, equally
proficient, invoke and offer homage to the lord for
protection and progress like children approaching
parents with love to have their blessings.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 26 101




[Names: Cakara, Janiriva, Indrah]
What the sages and scholars say and proclaim
in matters of science and development of soma, let the
pursuant follow and do even more, and just as the ruler
protector and sustainer looks after the people and the
father looks after the children by himself equally well,
so should Indra first and foremost look after and refine
the development of knowledge and all the pursuers.






[Names: Srnva, Mithastura, Utayo]
Only Indra they celebrate in holy words. Only
of him do we hear, that he is the giver of all power,
progress, honour and excellence and he alone is the
saviour and protector. Instant and unfailing are his
powers and forces of protection and defence,
unbreakable as ever. May all dear and cherished good
things of life come to us by the lord’s kindness and grace.







[Names: Indramutaye, Indramutay, Sahasrina]
Thus does the ardent sage settled in peace and
wisdom celebrate Indra, the soul and generous ruler of
the world and leading lights of humanity for the sake of
defence and protection in the social order of the lord’s
creation. May the lord bring us a thousand fold honour
and excellence in food, sustenance and knowledge. O
lord and leaders, protect and promote us with all your
gifts of good fortune and all round well being as ever.


Mandala 7/Sukta 27






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Suro, Savasascakana]
Leading people call upon Indra, lord ruler of
the world, in their serious struggles of life and pray for
those concentrative faculties of mind and intelligence
by which they can join the divine presence and win their
goal. The lord is the brave, generous and fearless leader
of humanity in their corporate life, lover of strength
and inspirer of heroic souls. O lord, give us the grace of
your divine presence and lead us in our development of
lands and cows and in our plans of education,
enlightenment and our vision of the divine Word.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 27 103




[Names: Susmo, Siksa, Puruhuta]
Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence, that
strength and power of yours for which you are invoked
by all humanity, pray give us, your friends and leaders
of a free world. O lord of honour and majesty,
unshakable lord of universal vision and knowledge,
remove the cover of darkness and open out our potential






[Names: Indro, Tato]
Indra is the sovereign ruler of the moving world
and her people on the earth. Whatever various and
manifold wealth there is on the earth, he alone is the
master ruler. And therefrom he gives profusely of wealth,
honour and excellence to the generous man of charity,
inspires our potential strength and success, and when
he is closely adored in meditation, he reveals his
presence to our direct vision and experience.







[Names: Anuna]
Surely Indra, lord of honour and glory, is the
generous and instant giver on invocation and prayer.
He gives sustenance, protection and progress, and he
controls and guides our advance to victory in life.
Boundless is his grace which ever inspires and promotes
our will and action, and it is freely available to people
who seek his love and friendship.






[Names: Gomadasvavad]
Indra, generous lord of munificence, we turn
ourselves to you seeking your love and kindness to
achieve the honour and treasures of life. Pray open the
paths of advancement for us to wealth and victory of
lands and cows, horses and chariots of the good life. O
lord, O leading lights, be gracious and protect and
promote us with all good fortune and well being for
ever.


Mandala 7/Sukta 28




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Brahma, Visve]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 28 105


Indra, lord omniscient, all pervasive in the
world, come, listen to our prayer, let the horses
harnessed to your chariot be directed hitherward to us.
All people of the world without exception invoke you.
Pray listen to our prayer and bring us the gifts of





[Names: Divinity, Havam, Savasinn]
O lord of might, since you protect and preserve
the voice of the seers of divine vision, your grandeur
vests in the holy voice and holy projects of humanity.
Awful lord of blazing lustre, when you wield the
thunderbolt in hand in a state of divine passion for action
you rise invincible for any power of the world.





[Names: Tava, Mahe, Jajne]
Indra, by your ethics and policy you guide the
leading lights of humanity and those called upon to duty
as you light up the earth and space, and thus surely by
nature and character you rise to the mighty power of
the governance of the great social order. Truly the mighty
and the dynamic govern and guide the weak who need








[Names: Ebhirna, Indrahabhir, Prati]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, in these few days
bless us that the evil in friends be purged and they
become good citizens. O lord, if the man of judgement
and discrimination were to see untruth and false conduct,
then he, Varuna, with justice and power, may cause it to
be reduced to half and then purged off.






[Names: Vocemedindram]
We speak and sing, thus, of Indra, this lord of
power, honour and excellence who gives us great wealth
and further capacity for success and victory and who
accepts homage as the most loving protector of the
worshipper. O lord, may you and your divine forces
protect and promote us with all gifts of good fortune
and well being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 29






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 29 107




[Names: Ayam, Soma, Piba]
I extract and distil this soma juice for you, Indra,
lord of honour and power. Commander of the dynamic
forces of the world, abiding in that house of majesty,
come and drink of this juice distilled and seasoned
delightfully, and while coming bring us the wealth,
honour and excellence of life.






[Names: Brahman, Asminnu]
O mighty Indra, ruler of the world and master
of universal knowledge, lover of the lord’s creation,
come here straight to us driven fast by dynamic forces,
join this yajnic programme of our life, be happy and
rejoice with us, and listen to those celebrative chants
and prayers of ours.






[Names: Visva]
What is the honour and pleasure we can do by
our songs of adoration to your grace? O lord of glory,
what can we offer and when in homage to you? All
thoughts, imagination and songs we offer are but an




extension of your grace in adoration of your honour.
So, O lord, only listen to these songs of adoration and






[Names: Purusya, Purus, Adhaham, Indrasi]
And all songs and adorations of the seers of all
time which you graciously listen and accept are but
human adorations of the visionaries in your honour. I
too, O lord of universal knowledge, vision and glory,
offer the same song of invocation and adoration. O lord
and master, Indra, you are our teacher, protector and
provider like the father.






[Names: Vocemedindram]
Such is Indra, glorious lord of knowledge and
power whom we celebrate in song. He gives us the
grandeur and abundance of wealth, honour and
excellence and the competence for higher and higher
success. And he loves and accepts the homage and
adorations of the celebrant supplicant of divinity. O lord,
O visionaries, poets and teachers, protect and promote
us with all modes of honour and well being for all time.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 30 109


Mandala 7/Sukta 30






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Savasa, Susmin, Indra, Mahe, Sura]
Indra, lord divine, generous and most potent
ruler, come to us with strength and power and be the
promoter of this commonwealth. O lord ordainer of
humanity, heroic wielder of the thunderbolt of defence
and order of law and justice, come for the rise of this
great social order, for wealth and splendour and for the
manly character, courage and vigour of the nation.






[Names: Havanta, Tvam, Suryasya, Suryas]
In their discussions, debates or differences of
opinion, in matters of language and education, in their
heart of hearts and in all organisational bodies of the
common wealth, and in their struggles for light,
enlightenment and brilliance of the order, brave and
fearless leaders of the nation call upon you, the real
adorable leader. You are the leader and commander
among all powers and forces of humanity. O leader and
commander, Indra, expose all strongholds of darkness
and negation, eliminate all evil and wickedness, for there




is no evil too difficult for you to destroy.






[Names: Nyagnih]
Indra, lord ruler, leader and commander of the
nation, when the days of enlightenment and good
fortune shine and you bear the banner of light and
victory in battles of progress, symbol of the nation’s
excellence, then Agni, brilliant leader and light giver,
having called up the wise and brave, sits at peace among
them at the head of yajna as the priest giving life and
energy for further good fortune and higher progress.






[Names: Vayam, Yaccha]
Indra, generous lord ruler of glory, brave and
fearless leader of the nation, we are yours and we stand
for you, and so are all those who praise and celebrate
the giver and creator of wealth and excellence for all.
Pray give to the learned and the wise a good home,
sustenance and security worthy of them, noble seniors
they are in their own right, moving on forward to a whole


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 31 111






[Names: Vocemedindram]
We sing and celebrate the honour and glory of
this Indra, lord of magnificence, leader and ruler of the
nation, who creates and gives us great wealth and honour
and all means and materials of success and victory for
life’s fulfilment, and who loves and accepts, protects
and promotes the homage and adoration of the devotee.
O lord, O learned and wise leaders, protect and promote
us with all good fortune and all modes of well being for


Mandala 7/Sukta 31




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indraya, Indra, Sakhayah, Somapavne, Somapavn]
O friends, sing exciting songs of celebration in
honour of Indra, your leader, commander of dynamic
forces who loves the nation’s honour and excellence
and thirsts to celebrate the grandeur of it.








[Names: Samseduktham, Cakrma]
Say adorable words of praise for Indra, generous
giver, and sing heavenly songs for him as leading lights
of the nation do. Let us too do the same honour to him,
the great accomplisher of truth.





[Names: Tvam, Satakrato, Tvam]
Indra, glorious ruler, you are giver of peace and
settlement, you are accomplisher of a hundred yajnic
acts of truth, you are giver of victory and progress to
us, you are lover of the land and culture and you are
creator of golden wealth, honour and excellence.






[Names: Viddhi]
Indra, generous and valorous lord ruler, giver
of settlement, peace and progress, we are your admirers,
and we stand for you. O lord, know this of us, for us
and for the nation.






O lord ruler of the nation, leave us not to the
reviler, malignant scandaliser, and the selfish miser. My


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 31 113


strength, intelligence and action sustains in you and
flows from there.





[Names: Tvaya]
You are the celebrated armour of defence and
all round protection, front rank warrior, destroyer of
evil, darkness and want: committed to you in covenant,
I say so and bind myself.






[Names: Mahan, Mamnate]
You are great and glorious, Indra, and
accordingly your courage and fortitude is great. The
abundant heaven and fertile earth both acknowledge




[Names: Marutvati, Naksamana]
The voice of admiration, expression of your
essential nature and power, raised by vibrant humanity,
reaching you incessantly with the light and truth of your
power and performance, may ever abide around you.







[Names: Urdhvasastvanvindavo]
People of the world together in unison bow to
you in homage and subsequently joyous voices of
admiration rise for you, mighty lord destroyer of
enemies, like mists of soma unto the heights of heaven.






[Names: Visah]
Bear and bring homage, assistance and
cooperation and offer positive thoughts and advice to
Indra, your leader and ruler. Great is he, promoter of
great people and the common wealth, and a leader wide-
awake with deep and distant foresight. O leader and
ruler of the land, be good to the settled ancient people
and take care of the farming communities and other
professionals so that all feel happy and fulfilled without






[Names: Uruvyacase, Tasya]
To the great Indra, the ruler widely perceptive
and all aware, vibrant people of the land, the learned
and the wise with a sense of dynamism, all offer homage,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 115


generating new forms of sustenance and energy, and
creating new forms of appreciating and realising the
eternal spirit. And they, people of constancy and settled
mind, never violate the laws and discipline of the lord’s






[Names: Eternal, Indram, Anuttamanyum, Anuttamanyu, Haryasvaya]
pin.


All voices of the people, all sessions of yajnic
programmes of action, uphold and support only the
brilliant ruler, Indra of constant vision and passion, in
order to maintain the social order of governance without
obstruction. O friends and citizens of the land, exhort
your people in support of Indra, leader of the dynamic
nation of humanity.


Mandala 7/Sukta 32






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Arattaccit, Srudhi]
Let not your worshippers be far away from us,
nor let them detain you. Come to our house of
celebration from the farthest distance even, and when
you are here, listen to our songs of celebration and divine


adoration.






[Names: Indre]
When the celebrants have distilled and seasoned
the soma of homage and worship for Indra, ruler of the
social order of governance, they sit together like bees
clustering round honey. The celebrants dedicated to the
honour and prosperity of the ruling order place their
trust and faith in Indra, the ruler and the law of
governance, like travellers who place their foot on the
step and ride the chariot to reach their goal.




[Names: Rayaskamo]
pitaram huve.


Dedicated to the honour and prosperity of the
human nation, and keen to realise the excellence of life
for myself too, I invoke generous Indra, lord ruler of
the world, wielder of the thunderbolt of defence and
protection in hand as keeper of the law and justice of
the order of governance. I invoke him like a child
yearning for the father for his generosity.






[Names: Indraya]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 117


These somas of the nation’s honour and
excellence energised by the ferment of inspiration and
enthusiasm have been distilled to celebrate the dignity
and majesty of the land and the ruler Indra. O lord
wielder of the thunderbolt, come to our hall of fame for
the joy of a drink of them. Come fast by the chariot
drawn by horses of the winds.






[Names: Sravac, Sadyascid, Sata]
The lord has a keen ear to listen to the supplicant.
He listens, therefore he is approached for the gift of
wealth, honour and excellence. May the lord never
ignore our prayers, may he, instead, soften and sanctify
our supplications. Indeed, instant giver of a hundred
thousand gifts of good fortune as he is, no one can
withhold him when he extends his hand of generosity.






[Names: Yaste]
He who approaches you, does your behest and
performs the serious assignments given by you, O
destroyer of evil, he goes forward bold and unshaken,
and, exhorted by leading men, rises under the protection
of Indra.








[Names: Bhava, Sardhatah]
O lord of power and glory, be the shelter home
and all round protector of those who wield, control and
rule the wealth and honour of the nation — you who
impel and inspire the bold and daring, and humble the
defiant. Let us share the knowledge and learn from the
painful experience of those who have been punished
by you. O lord indestructible, bless our home and give




[Names: Sunota, Somapavne, Somapavn, Soma, Pacata]
mayah.


Extract, mature and prepare the nectar of life
for the lord, Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice
and punishment and destroyer of evil, who loves the
soma spirit of life’s beauty and joy. Ripen and perfect
the drinks and drugs for health care and protection of
life, and create the state of comfort and well being,
giving success and fulfilment for those who work for
the joy and fulfilment of all in general.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 119




[Names: Taranir]
Relent not, O makers of soma. Hurt not the
lovers of soma. Perfect the nectar for life’s grandeur,
strengthen the makers for the beauty and glory of life.
Work on and on for the growth of life and for the strong
defence of life’s vitality. The one that runs wins the race,
lives in peace as well as provides for peace and security,
grows and contributes to growth. The brilliant and
generous are not for the lazy, the miser and the selfish.






[Names: Nakih, Indro, Sudaso, Maruto]
No one can counter turn the chariot of the
generous nor stop it for rest or entertainment. The rider
whose patron is Indra, destroyer of obstructions, and
Maruts, vibrant defenders of life, stops not until he
reaches the goal where abides the treasure of his love
and ambition.






[Names: Gamad, Asmakam, Sura]
Indra, lord of light and life, the mortal whose
guardian protector you are runs the race and reaches
the victory post of enlightenment. O lord of might and




fearlessness, take care of us too, enlighten us and be
the guardian protector of our chariots and our people.






[Names: Udinnvasya]
High rises the victor’s share of excellence as
his wealth of life increases when Indra, guardian
protector of the brave, vests his love of victory and
soma-sublimity with the will and expertise of yajnic
living. And then no enemies can ever defeat and destroy
him.






[Names: Mantram, Purviscana]
Offer perfect, well structured and graceful
mantric thoughts, adorations and actions to the divinities
in yajnic programmes of creativity and development.
Then even the oldest bounds of will and passion take
the yajaka across the seas who dedicates his actions to
the service of Indra.




[Names: Kastamindra, Sraddha]
sisasati.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 121


Indra, lord ruler of the world, who can assail
that mortal who wholly lives under the shade and shelter
of your protection? O lord of the wealth and power of
existence, whoever reposes his faith and dynamism in
you as the sole saviour and pilot while he is in action
receives his share of victory in the light of divinity.




[Names: Maghonah, Tava]
tarema durita.


O lord commander of world forces, in the battles
against darkness, want and evil, inspire those leaders
of wealth, honour and power who contribute to world
service in the manner dear to you. O ruler of the
dynamics of nations, we pray, may we, along with the
wise and the fearless, cross over all evils of the world
under the guidance of your ethics, morals and policy in
matters of universal values.






[Names: Tavedindravamam, Satra]
Indra, you protect, promote and rule over the
lower orders of wealth of the world. You promote and
rule over the middle order of the world’s wealth. And
you rule and shine over wealth of the highest order of
the world. You are the true and the eternal power. No




one can resist you among the lands and lights of the
world. Who would not accept you?






[Names: Tvam, Tavayam, Puruhuta]
You are the wealth giver of the world,
universally heard and acclaimed, universally invoked
in all battles of the world that there are, since the whole
humanity on earth in search of protection looks up to
you and prays for sustenance and progress.




[Names: Yadindra, Stotaramid]
rasiya.

Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of wealth

and excellence, as much as you grant, so much I wish I

should control and rule. I would hold it only to support

the devotees of divinity and would not spend it away
for those who indulge in sin and evil.






[Names: Sikseyaminmahayate, Nahi]
Every day I would wish to give wealth and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 123


support for the person who seeks to rise for
enlightenment wherever he be. O lord of wealth, power
and honour, there is none other than you worthy of love
and attainment as our own, as father indeed.






[Names: Taranirit, Indram, Puruhutam]
Only the saviour, a person of dynamic will and
action joined in the soul with a controlled and dedicated
mind, would share wealth and knowledge with the
people and distribute it over the deserving. With words
of prayer I bow to Indra, the ruler invoked by you all
and draw his attention to you just like the carpenter
bending flexible wood round as felly of the wheel. (The
lord is flexible too, his heart melts with sympathy for
the people.)






[Names: Susaktirinmaghavan]
By protest and violence the mortal does not win
the wealth of life. Nor does wealth oblige the inactive
and malevolent. O lord of honour and excellence, right
competence dedicated to Divinity is your gift for a
person like me which is good on the day of the cross
over.








[Names: Isanam]
O lord almighty, we adore you and wait for your
blessings as lowing cows not yet milked wait for the
master. Indra, lord of glory, you are ruler of the moving
world and you are ruler of the unmoving world and your
vision is bliss.






There is none other like you, neither heavenly
nor earthly, neither born nor yet to be born. O lord of
power and glory, we invoke you and pray for veteran
scholars, dynamic scientists and technologists and the
light of the divine Word of knowledge.






[Names: Puruvasurhi]
Indra, lord of honour, power and excellence, you
are the eternal lord of universal wealth and shelter home
of all existence, invoked and worshipped in all


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 32 125


challenging situations. Pray bring us the knowledge and
experience of that essence of ultimate reality which is
smaller than the smallest and greater than the greatest.






[Names: Para]
Lord of wealth, honour, power and excellence,
treasure home of glory and grandeur, throw off the
enemies far away. Give us the wealth of life. Give us
the knowledge and awakenment for good living. Be our
saviour and protector in the strife of existence which is
otherwise too great for us. Be the promoter of all friendly
forces.




[Names: Indrakratumnadabhara, Siksa]
mahi.


Bring us the divine vision, will and intelligence
as father does for his children. O lord universally
invoked and worshipped, instruct us as a teacher at this
present time so that we, ordinary souls, may have the
new light of life and living experience of Divinity.








[Names: Tvaya]
O lord almighty beyond fear, let not the ignorant
and unknown, crooked intriguers, evil designers, and
malevolent opponents in ambush attack us on way to
you. May we, guided, directed and protected by you,
cross the universal streams of life rushing down the
slopes of time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 33






[Names: Indra, Vasishtha, Devata, Maitravaruni, Vasishtha, Putrah, Rshis, Svityaiico, Uttisthan]
Celibate disciples of the first order of scholars
wearing locks of hair on the right side, settled for studies
to collect knowledge for intellectual advancement come
from far to study under my care and give me delight. I
arise from my seat of grass, speak to them and speak of
them as leading lights of the future.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 33 127




[Names: Durdd, Indram, Pasadyumnasya, Somat]
From far off and in view of their achievement
in preference to others’, they invite and bring over Indra,
pioneer of knowledge and power and strong supporter
of people settled in peace, and Indra agrees and accepts
the invitation of the aspiring scholars in recognition of
the progress and prosperity of the producers of wealth,
scholarship of the learned and the governance and
justice of the organisers.

(The mantra points to the free movement of
scholars and specialists across the globe for
advancement of knowledge and culture on the






[Names: Evannu, Evennu, Sudasam, Sudasa]
This way, for sure, Indra, leader of knowledge
and power, crosses with ease any river of difficulty by
virtue of these scholars. This way too he easily
overcomes difference, division and disunity. This way,
again, O scholars and leaders settled at peace, by your
vision, wisdom and mantric formulae, he defends and
promotes generous rules for the advancement of good
government and administration.








[Names: Justi, Yacchakvarisu]
O leading lights of the nation, by your vision,
wisdom and active homage, the tradition of the ancients
is preserved and happily advanced. Therefore, never for
any reason, obstruct the relentless wheel of the nation
and never disturb the inviolable equilibrium of forces
which, O leading lovers of peace, by your reverberating
words and heroic action in the great battles of humanity,
you vested in the nation and its governance as the centre
of stability.






[Names: Vasisthasya]
The leading lights of the nation, selected and
duly appointed, thirsting to cross over the hurdles of
life, shine and glorify the generous ruler like the sun
for the advancement of the liberal order for the people.
Let Indra, enlightened ruler, listen to the leading lights
and scholars and create vast and brilliant channels and
possibilities for the defence and developmental forces
of the nation.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 33 129




[Names: Danda, Bharata, Abhavacca]
Let the pioneers and bearers of the burdens of
social order be straight and strong like the sceptre of
authority, eloquent and progressive in language,
education and culture, definite and judicious in law and
policy and youthful in energy. Let the leader of these,
wise and stable in mind, be ever first and foremost in
the advance specially of the people and of the defence
and development forces.






[Names: Trayah, Jytiragrah, Trayo, Usasam, Usasa, Anu]
Three vital fires, of earth, sky and the sun,
generate life energy in world regions and life forms.
Three are the people’s classes dynamic and enlightened.
Three vital fires, heat, light and electricity, serve the
dawn, and the enlightened scholars know all of them.






[Names: Suryasyeva, Vatasyeva]
Let the rise of these leading lights be like the
splendour of the sun, their grandeur as profound as the
depth of the sea, their drive like the wind, and let their




organisation and its magnitude be impossible for anyone
else to follow or rival.






[Names: Yamena]
Leading scholars and sages by the reflections
of divine light of their heart sojourn over the mystery
of the thousand branched tree of existence, going round
and round across, and by the bounds of this web of life
woven by the cosmic law giver and by their imagination
rise up to the wonders of heaven in the clouds.






[Names: Vidyuto, Mitravaruna]
O holy sage of knowledge, peace and power,
sun and moon, heat and air, virility and fertility, pranic
energies, receive and bear you when, as light of life
you leave your sojourn in nature. That is one birth of
yours. Then Agastya, the teacher scholar free from sin
and stain brings you back to the community of people
(as a complete and finished human being, 1.e., dvija).




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 33 131




[Names: Utasi, Drapsam]
Vasishtha, sage and scholar, living soul, you are
a child of sun and moon, born of the heart of Mother
Nature nurtured by mother knowledge. Like a drop of
distilled soma, all divine powers of the world nourish
you in the lotus cradle on celestial wealth of food for
vitality and light for knowledge.






Vasishtha, man of enlightenment, scholar of
both heaven and earth, blest with a thousand gifts, and
giver of a thousand gifts traverses the very bounds of
the web of life woven by the mover and law giver of
the world and rises over the winds and clouds.






[Names: Satre, Tato]
Inspired teachers and scholars risen to eminence
over yajnic sessions of teaching relentlessly feed the
disciples with gifts of vital knowledge, and from that
rises the faithful scholar and sage whom they call


Vasishtha, brilliant seer and visionary.







[Names: Ukthabhrtam, Upainamadhvam]
O men of noble mind and heart, the brilliant sage
who bears the knowledge of Rgveda and Samaveda and
who commands the secrets of yajna relating to the clouds
and mountains for rain, and who proclaims the
knowledge to dispel the darkness of ignorance, comes
to you. Receive him, and welcome him for your good.


Mandala 7/Sukta 34
[Names: Vishvedevah, Ahirbudhnya, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Sukraitu]
May divine intelligence of pure and brilliant


order come to us like the dawn riding a wonderfully
crafted chariot drawn by flying horses.




[Names: Viduh]
Those who listen to words of knowledge as earth
receives the showers of rain know the cause and creator


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 34 133
of heaven and earth.




[Names: Apascidasmai]
The showers of rain nourish the earth and her
progeny for this Indra, social order of humanity, and in
the battles of life the blazing brave bow down in honour
to it.




Like Indra of the thunderbolt and golden hands
of charity, rally the fastest forces and harness them to
the centre pole of the earthly order in the service of
Indra, the ruler.




hinota.


Like the dawn go forward to the yajna of the
day and, like the pilgrim of divinity, advance on the
way with self-confidence and enthusiasm.






[Names: Tmana]
Advance the yajna in the battles of life
conscientiously and keep the flag of victory flying high
in the service of humanity.






[Names: Uadasya]
And the sun rises by its own essential power
and bears the burden of the earth, so does the earth bear
the burden of her children, so let us be like the sun and
the earth.






[Names: Hvayami]
Agni, lord of light and life, I invoke the divinities
of nature and humanity, living life by the practice of
truth and eternal law, and I acquire the wisdom of life
and action from the teacher dedicated to peace and non-
violence.






Acquire and maintain your intelligence and
wisdom of the order of divinities and speak the language
worthy of noble sages.



[Names: Gsam, Varuna]
Just as the refulgent sun, lord of a thousand eyes,
watches and reveals the course of the streams of water,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 34 135


so does the brilliant sage of the Word and wisdom
commanding a thousand streams of speech oversee the
flow of holy speech and communication.




[Names: Raja, Anuttam, Anutta]
If the ruler of nations, Varuna, of a thousand
eyes, be of the form of flowing streams, dynamic and
fluent in speech, policy and action, his order of
governance would be better than the best, 1.e.,
permanent, of universal sway over the world.






[Names: Avisto, Samsam]
Give us safety and security among people of
the world, black out the envy and malignity of scandal
mongers, and turn criticism into appreciation.



[Names: Vyetu]
tanunam.

Let the flaming arrow and pernicious ill will of


the jealous be thrown off far away. Eliminate all the
ailments, ill health and infirmities of our body.








[Names: Avinno, Agnir]
May Agni, light of life, dearest ruler, consume
and eliminate negativities, protect and preserve us with
good food and health care, and accept our song of praise
and prayer in appreciation.






[Names: Sajur, Sivo]
Be friends with Agni, fire and the sun, which
creates the indestructible waters of space and the
firmament, along with other nature’s divinities, so that
there may be happiness and well being in our life.




[Names: Abjamukthairahim]
With songs of praise adore the sun which creates
the cloud born of waters and which, while abiding in
high space, also abides in every particle of river waters.






May the yajnic governance and administration
of this ruler dedicated to truth and eternal law never
rule us with the motive of hurt and exploitation. So may
also the cloud in the firmament never hurt us by excess
or drought of rain.






[Names: Utana, Sravo]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 34 137


And may the ruler and governors generate and
consolidate food, sustenance and prosperity among
these noble people and move forward on way to honour
and excellence, strengthening the devoted faithfuls and
overcoming the envious rivals and hostile forces of






[Names: Tapanti, Satrum]
Leaders and commanders of mighty forces, they
mortify and purge or defeat and destroy the enemies by
these forces. Let us then be happy as in heaven on earth.






And when wives come and meet us, may
Tvashta, lord destroyer of suffering and dexterous maker
of graceful forms, bless us with brave and handsome






[Names: Pratinah]
May Tvashta, creator and ruler of world forms
and institutions, accept our praise and prayer and, lord
of vision and intelligence as he is, may he be the giver
of wealth, honour and excellence for us.








[Names: Varunant, Varutribhih]
May the heaven and earth, generous and
judicious givers of gifts, overflowing with liquid wealth
and energy, listen to our prayer and give us peace and
comfort in a settled state of life. May Tvashta, creator
and maker of forms, with all modes of protection and
promotion be our shelter home, and may he, generous
giver of the best things of life, bring us wealth, honour
and excellence.






[Names: Tanno, Vanaspatibhih]
That wealth, honour and excellence of ours, the
clouds and mountains, the waters, the liberal givers, the
herbs, the solar region, the dear motherly earth with her
trees and forests and both heaven and earth protect,
preserve and promote for us all round.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 34 139




[Names: Anu, Indrasakha, Maruto, Anu]
May the wide earth and heaven be kind and
favourable to us and procure for us the wealth, honour
and excellence of life we pray for. May the refulgent
sun, the ocean, the friendly powers of the ruling lord
Indra, and all the winds of space and vibrant heroes of
the world who command both challenging force and
fortitude be favourable so that we may be able to hold
and manage the wealth, honour and excellence of life
which the divinities of nature and humanity have
given us.






[Names: Tanna, Agnirapa, Sarmantsyama, Marutamupasthe, Marutamupasth]
May Indra, ruling lord of the world, Varuna, the
ocean and the world’s powers of judgement and
discrimination, Mitra, the sun and our brilliant friends,
Agni, cosmic fire and the leaders, Apah, spatial waters
and our people of holy action, and the herbs and trees
of the earth, all brilliant and inspiring, be favourable
and generous. May we, we pray, live close under the
protection of the best of human world and nature. O
divine powers of nature and humanity, protect, preserve
and promote us with all good fortune and well being of




Mandala 7/Sukta 35






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indragni, Indra, Samindrasoma, Varuna, Indrapusana]
May cosmic energy and fire with all means of
protection and advancement be for our peace and
happiness for the good life. May solar energy and waters,
givers of all good things of life be for our peace and
joy. May life energy and the herbs be for our peace and
honour for well being. May pranic energy and vital
nourishment be for our peace and joy in our striving for
the ultimate victory.






[Names: Samu, Purujato]
May our honour and glory and our praise and
approbation prevailing around be for our good and well
being. May our law and order for social sustenance and
our wealth and honour be for peace and well being.
May our honour and respect for true Dharma and law
and for the proper pursuit of Dharma and law in effective
governance and administration be for our joy and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 35 141


prosperity for the good life. And may our law and justice
of universal value and fair application be for our good
and well being in peace.




3. Sam no dhata Samu dharta no astu $am na uruct


May the lord creator, ruler and sustainer be good
and gracious and give us peace and joy of well being.
May the extensive space and the wide earth be good
with gifts of sustenance for our peace and well being.
May the great firmament, and the regions of light and
the cloud and the mountain be for our good, peace and
joy. And may our invocations and adorations of the
divinities of nature and humanity be good and bring us
peace and joy.






[Names: Mitrava]
May the fire and the light and splendour of life
be good for our peace and well being. May the prana
and udana energies and the circuitous dynamics of
nature be for our good and joy of well being. May the
noble works of good artists and great men be for peace




and happiness for us, and the ever blowing winds blow
and inspire us for peace and joy.






May the heaven and earth invoked since eternity
in the first yajna, and the middle regions so charming
to see be good for our peace and joy. May the herbs
instilled with the vitality of sun rays be for our peace
and joy of good health, and may the victorious lord of
life on earth and in distant regions be good and bring us
peace, prosperity and happiness.






[Names: Samdaditye]
May the self-refulgent sun with life sustaining
planets be good for peace and happiness in our life.
May the ocean so adorable be good for our peace and
joy all the year round with the sun in Zodiacs. May the
lord of nature’s life energy, Rudra, with pranic energies
warding off pain and suffering be good for our peace
and well being, and may the lord maker of forms,
Tvashta, with his fires of evolution and new structures
be good and gracious for our peace and happiness and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 35 143


listen to us here itself.




[Names: Sart]
vedih.


May the moon give us peace and joy. May the
lord supreme with gifts of sustenance bless us with
peace. May the clouds bring us peace. May the yajnas
give us peace. May the pillars of the vedi and Vedic
chants structured to sensitive measure bring us peace.
May the vedi bring us peace. May the newly sprouting






[Names: Surya]
May the sun of universal eye rise for our peace
and joy. May the four directions with their subdirections
be for our peace and joy. May the mountains be stable
and undisturbed to give us peace. Let the seas be calm
and peaceful, and let all forms of water be for us and
our peace and joy.








[Names: Aditirbhavatu, Marutah, Maruta, Samvastu, Vayuh, Vayu]
May the indestructible nature mother with her
laws and mother earth be peaceful for us. May the holy
and adorable winds and vibrant humanity of brilliant
virtues be for peace and joy for us. May Vishnu, lord
omnipresent, be gracious and give us peace and joy.
May nature’s nourishment be for our peace and
happiness. Let the future possibilities be for our good
and happiness of well being. Let the air be for our peace
and happiness. Let all laws and disciplines be for peace.






May lord creator Savita, generous saviour and
refulgent giver of guidance, grant us peace and
happiness. May the glorious dawns shower us with
peace and joy. May the cloud of rain be harbinger of
peace and joy for the people. And may the lord of peace,
sustainer of the world, master of our field of action and
cultivation, be gracious and give us peace and happiness.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 35 145






[Names: Sarasvati, Samabhisacah]
May the generous divines of the world be good
and gracious to us at peace. May Sarasvati, eternal
mother knowledge and divine speech with universal
intelligence, be for our peace and well being. May the
Overpowering yajnic energies and all generous
tendencies be for our good and peace of well being.
And may all the divinities of heaven, earth and ocean
give us peace and joy.






May the keepers and observers of truth be at
peace for our good and well being. May our horses and
transports be at peace, may our lands and cows be at
peace for our peace and well being. May our wise
veterans, noble artists and expert craftsmen, be at peace
for happiness and comfort for us. And may our seniors
be at peace and give us peace at our programmes of
holy action when we call upon them.








May the generous and self-refulgent lord unborn
and eternal, sole sustainer of the universe, be gracious
and give us peace. May the cloud floating in the sky be
at peace and give us peace. May the ocean be at peace.
May the boats and ships to cross the seas be at peace
for us, and may the space and colourful sky sustaining
divine generosities be at peace and give us peace and






[Names: Aditya, Adit, Rudra, Srnvantu]
May the Adityas, cosmic lights, Rudras, catalytic
agents of nature, and the Vasus, sustaining abodes of
life, receive this song divine of homage being sung at
the latest and be at peace for us, and may the divinities
of heaven and earth born of nature and the holy Word
sung in divine voice, and those who are venerable sages
dedicated to yajna be at peace and give us peace and




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 36 147




Those who are most venerable of the venerable
divines of brilliance honoured by the wise, immortal
knowers of truth and divine law, may bless us with
sages and natural powers of divinity, protect and
promote us with peace and joy for happiness and well
being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 36






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Agnih, Agni]
Let the knowledge of existence arise from the
divine centre of universal truth : the sun radiates light
with its rays and illuminates the earths, the wide earth
moves on with her peaks of mountains, and fire rises
and blazes over the vedi, symbol of cosmic yajna.






[Names: Imam, Mitravaruna, Janam]
O Mitra and Varuna, sun and cosmic energy and




intelligence, both givers of life energy to the living
world, I offer this new song of adoration as homage to
you. One of you, Varuna, is resistless, all pervasive and
coexistent with every stage of life’s evolution, and the
other, Mitra, the sun, as a friend enjoins humanity to
the life of activity proclaiming its rise as direct presence.




na sudah. Maho devah sadane jayamano’-


The currents of sportive wind play around like
abundant cows yielding milk, and the mighty cloud
laden with vapour, born of the great regions of heaven,
roars in its house of mid skies.






[Names: Gira, Indra]
Indra, all powerful ruler of the world, I pray, let
me come to have the benefit of the power and presence
of Aryama, chief power of justice, holy in action, who,
with his order and invitation deploys the noble and
efficient forces that run the chariot of your social order,
who controls and punishes the violent deeds and corrects
the violent attitudes of the negative and destructive
forces.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 36 149




oF Yajante asya sakhyam vayasca namasvinah sva


[Names: Rudraya, Rudra]
In their own house of truth, justice and yajna,
devotees with reverence and homage pray for life energy
and the friendship and company of this Rudra, destroyer
of suffering and injustice, and giver of pranic energy.
Loved and adored by the people, he releases for them
nourishment and energy in abundance. This cherished
homage and adoration is offered to Rudra.






[Names: Sarasvati]
Sarasvati, the eternal stream of life, of cosmic
waters, and of speech and sacred knowledge, the seventh
over the streams flowing through five senses and the
mind, through five elements and the stuff of mind and
intelligence, and through the poetic streams of the Veda,
all these streams which flow abundantly, exuberant,
magnificent, roaring with splendour, all of them ever
growing and rising with their own flood of water: may
all these continue to flow together gloriously for us.








[Names: Maruto]
And those happy and joyous Maruts, vibrant
scholars and sages, leaders of the nation, pioneers of
science, manners and traditions, protect and advance
our rising generation and our knowledge, intellect,
imagination and culture. May the eternal mother stream
of light and knowledge continuously flow for us and
never forsake us. And may the Maruts augment and
consolidate our wealth, honour and excellence for use
and future progress.






[Names: Pusan, Pusa, Bhagam]
O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and brilliant
scholars, sages and leaders of humanity, create, cultivate,
increase and consolidate a high order of intelligence,
nutrition and health care, a force of the brave to face
the warlike business of life, a high standard of honour
and excellence, protection for our order of knowledge,
culture and tradition, and a generous and abundant state
of this stable polity equipped with instant powers of
defence and advancement.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 37 151




[Names: Acchayam, Sloka, Marutah, Maruta]
O Maruts, vibrant forces of divinity in nature
and humanity, may this song of celebration reach you
well and gracefully. And so may it reach Vishnu,
protector of the initiated dedicated to Dharma, who
protects us with all methods of protection and
advancement. We pray bring us life energy and a full
span of good health and age for the celebrant and the
people. O divinities, protect us always with all means
of protection and advancement for our well being all


Mandala 7/Sukta 37






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Rbhuksano, Somairmade, Somairmad]
O Rbhus, high spiritual experts of science and
technology, equipped with noble visor and helmet, come
and join this celebration of ours to enjoy yourselves on
abundant thrice distilled and seasoned drinks of soma
in our yajnic meets. Let your strongest, fastest and
[Names: Regale]
yourselves and refine the yajna to perfection.








[Names: Yuyam]
O scholars of science and technology,
visionaries of light, you bring jewels of imperishable
wealth for men of power and excellence. O commanders
of food, sustenance and power, drink the soma of success
in the yajnas of corporate programmes, and with your
research and intelligence create the infrastructure for
the development and success of our nation.






[Names: Uvocitha, Ubha]
Lord and master of wealth, you take delight in
charity and love to give and share, whether the giving
and distribution involves a large or a small amount. Both
your hands are full of plenty, your voice of truth from
the heart overflows with generosity and nothing ever
restrains your hands from giving.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 37 153




[Names: Tvamindra, Rbhuksa, Vayam]
Indra, enlightened and generous ruler and
commander of wealth, innate honour and wisdom,
manager of experts and manpower in general, you are
good, versatile and efficient in function like food,
energy, speed and success itself, you come home to
people like the sun on the day’s completion. We pray
let us be beneficiaries of your grace, generous like
yourself, creator of food and wealth in the spirit of piety
and well established in charity.






[Names: Sanitasi, Indra]
Indra, lord commander of manpower, speed and
success, you are the giver of overflowing wealth to the
generous man of charity. O lord, we pray, when would
you bless us with that wealth, honour and excellence,
that practical intelligence and expertise, and that security
and protection by which you prevail over the world of
nature and humanity.








[Names: Vasayasiva, Astam]
Indra, giver of settled security and peace,
intelligent and dedicated devotees as we are, when
would you listen to our voice of prayer as to people
settled in peaceful homes? O lord of dynamic forces,
commander of speed, power and success, visit our home,
bless us with divine vision and wisdom and bring us
wealth, honour and excellence, food and energy and a






[Names: Indram, Saradah]
The lord whom the divine earth glorifies from
the depth of her being, to whom the seasons of the year
abundant with food and flowers look up and resort, to
whom the friend and brother in bond with three worlds
and humanities attains, to that lord and spirit of unending
age without his own essential form comprehended in
matter, thought or time, the mortals look up and pray.





[Names: Sada]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 38 155


O Savita, glorious lord of generation, sustenance
and resolution, may all means and materials of life come
to us for success and self-fulfilment, may all forms of
wealth, honour and excellence come to us so that we
adore and amply glorify you through the gifts of the
clouds of abundance. O Vishvedevas, divines of the
world, pray you protect and promote us with all modes
of peace and security for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 38






[Names: Savita, Vajinah, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Nunam]
Let us rise and attain to that golden glory of
divinity which the self-refulgent Savita radiates —
Savita, lord of splendour and treasure-hold of universal
wealth who truly rules and gives the jewel glories of
existence. The lord alone is to be worshipped by





[Names: Vyurvim]
O Savita, lord creator of the world and giver of




light with golden hands of infinite generosity, arise and
shine at the dawn of the light of truth in the heart and
listen to the prayer of this soul in mortal body. You create
the wide wide earth of golden beauty and you generate
the food for mortals for the sake of living humanity on






May Savita, lord refulgent and generous, be
praised and celebrated, the lord whom all learned saints
and sages worship and adore. May he, worthy of homage
and obedience, accept our songs of celebration and
prayer and protect and promote the learned brave with
all modes of protection and advancement.






[Names: Mitraso]
The holy mother, divine earth and indestructible
nature, all adore lord Savita, enjoying and celebrating
the generous lord’s creation. So also do brilliant rulers,
men of choice merit, friends of life and humanity, and
the lord of justice and dispensation, Varuna, all enjoying
and appreciating the lord’s creation, adore and worship


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 39 157


him.





[Names: Ahirbudhnya]
We are the supplicants all together who seek
and pray for the grace and gifts of generous heaven and
earth. May the lord creator, original cause of the universe
all pervasive in space, listen, and may the divine mother
protector and giver of vision protect us with all those
virtues which converge and focus on a single thought,
voice and decisive action.






[Names: Anu, Bhagamugro]
Let the ruler and protector of the people know
and believe that whatever the jewel wealth for life he
receives from Savita, self-refulgent lord giver of light
and life, all that is for the people, for all of us, so that
whatever honour and prosperity the man of passion and
ambition invokes and achieves, the same after all, the
man of peace and dispassion who receives in








[Names: Jambhayanto]
Let the war-like leaders of knowledge, arms and
creativity, brilliant, balanced and dedicated to divine
service in action, be for our peace and prosperity in the
battles of life, crushing the surreptitious, thievish and
demoniac forces of society and removing all ill health
and evils from us.






[Names: Vajevaje, Asya]
strength of arms and production in matters of eternal
truth and law and the science of yajna, protect and
promote us at every stage in the battles of life. Drink of
the honey sweets of this celebration of the organised
system of life, celebrate joyously and, self-fulfilled here,
go forward by the paths of divines.


Mandala 7/Sukta 39
[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Urdhvo, Agnih, Agni, Bhejate]
hota na isito yajati.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 39 159


The fire on high radiates light inspiring pleasure
and enlightenment. The dawn as veteran lady of the
house goes forward to offer homage to the divinities.
The yajamana and his wife together move forward as
by chariot on way to yajna to adore the lord, and the
priest offers to join the yajna like one inspired.






[Names: Visamaktorusasah, Vayuh, Vayu]
The yajna of these people proceeds, richly
provided with holy materials. Vayu and Pusha, wind
and life-giving sun, like guardian rulers and protectors
of the people, move across the skies as if riding a chariot
drawn by horses at the sacred call of night and dawn to
yajna early for the good of humanity.






[Names: Jmaya, Subhrah, Arvak, Srota]
Let the Vasus, life giving energies of nature, and
enlightened people settled at peace in learning, abound
and rejoice here on earth. Let radiant purities of divine
refulgence from yajna rise to the vast sky and purify
the atmosphere. Let divine energies of vast extension




receive and respond to this yajnic code of our
participation in nature’s dynamics and converge on this
way to our earth.






[Names: Srustt]
All those divinities of the world, adorable and
conjoined in nature’s dynamics of cosmic yajna, are
catalytic agents of protection and promotion keenly
concentrative toward life’s evolution and advancement.
O generous yajamana, O bright fire, keen and passionate
as they are in yajna, join them in yajna right away: join
Bhaga, universal treasure of wealth, honour and
excellence, Nasatya, constant complementarities of
nature and natural law, and Purandhi, keeper and
protector of habitations and institutions.






[Names: Agne, Varuna, Mitram, Mitra, Aryamanamaditim, Maruto, Sarasvatit]
O sage and scholar, bring us the knowledge and
the language of the knowledge of heaven and earth.
Bring us the gifts of Mitra, sun and pranic energy,
Varuna, water and air, Indra, electric energy, and Agni,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 39 161


fire and light, of Aryaman, cosmic gravitation, Aditi,
[Names: Vishnu]
intelligence, so that Sarasvati, corresponding language
of their expression may grow and children of the earth
may rejoice with enlightenment.






[Names: Rare, Dhata]
Let us offer oblations of holy materials to Agni
with the thoughts and words of adorable sages so that
the desires of mortals bound in love may be fulfilled.
May the lord ruler of the world bring us imperishable
wealth of universal value, and may we join with brilliant
people worthy of association.






[Names: Yacchantu]
Thus heaven and earth are adored and celebrated
by brilliant sages. May Varuna, Mitra and Agni, lords
of truth and law, justice, love and light, grant us gifts of
exemplary beauty, bliss and brilliance. O Vishvedevas,
pray always protect and promote us with all modes of
peace, progress and all round well being.




Mandala 7/Sukta 40






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Srustirvidathya, Yadadya]
Let instant perception and active response
worthy of our yajnic social system come to us in peace
for every group and class of people, vibrant and really
fast, and let us internalise it in every detail so that
whatever the refulgent creator and ruler, Savita, inspires
and creates today, right now we may share and, in
participation together, be beneficiaries of this lord’s
jewel gifts of life.






[Names: Mitrastanno, Didestu, Vayusca, Mitra, Varuna]
of earth and space, the heaven and the earth and sky,
Indra, lord ruler of energy, power and excellence, and
Aryama, lord of justice, give us heavenly gifts of
divinity. And may Aditi, imperishable generous Mother
Nature, Vayu, the wind, and Bhaga, lord of power and
glory, bestow upon us what they produce, promote and
preserve for us.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 40 163






[Names: Sedugro, Marutah, Maruta, Utemagnih, Sarasvati]
Surely that person would be strong and brilliant
whom the Maruts, great commanders of the power of
fire, wind and water, protect and promote. Indeed, none
would be able to counter his power and prosperity whom
Agni, brilliant leader of divinities, and Sarasvati, spirit
of knowledge and speech, inspire, energise and
motivate.






[Names: Ayam, Suhava]
And this leader of the yajnic social order of truth
and dynamism of society and supportive ruling powers,
force Aryama, and self-directive brilliant and
indestructible spirit and policy, Aditi, all adorable
powers faithfully invoked and invited, may, we pray,
guide and direct our actions and purge us of evil, sin
and crime without hurt or violence.








[Names: Asya, Vide]
Of this generous, self-refulgent, creative and
omnipresent lord Vishnu, all divinities and varieties of
existence are extensive manifestations like branches of
a tree, in this well sustained system of the universe by
virtue of the homage they offer and the sustenance they
receive. Rudra, lord sustainer of the good and scourage
of evil, alone knows the mighty majesty I adore, and I
pray may the Ashvins, sun and moon and twin divine
complementarities of nature’s energy, come by the paths
of divine bounties and bless us.






[Names: Matra, Pusannaghrna, Mayobhuvo]
O Pushan, refulgent lord giver of health and
sustained growth, worthy of attainment as you are, pray
sustain me here and sustain all that what Mother Nature
and divine speech and generous givers of society give
us. May the universal givers of peace and well being
protect and promote us. May the winds blowing all
round for all alike bring us showers of rain and bliss.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 41 165




[Names: Yacchantu, Agnih, Agni]
Thus are the heaven and earth adored and
celebrated by sages of enlightenment settled at peace
in divine bliss. May Varuna, lord of justice and universal
choice, Mitra, lord of universal love and light, and Agni,
lord of leadership and enlightenment, all sustainers of
truth and law, shower us with exemplary gifts of beauty,
bliss and enlightenment for maintenance of piety. O
Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, pray
protect and promote us with all modes and means of
progress and well being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 41


Agni and others. Bhaga, Usha Devatah, Vasishtha




[Names: Maitravaruni, Rshi, Prataragnim, Pratarbhagam, Mitravaruna, Somamuta, Rudram, Rudra]
huvema.


We invoke Agni, the holy fire, early morning.
[Names: Indra]
invoke Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, early morning.
We invoke the Ashvins, twin divines of nature’s energies
of prana and udana, early morning. We invoke Bhaga,
spirit of grandeur and glory, Pusha, spirit of nourishment
and vitality, and Brahmanaspati, lord supreme of the
universe and the Divine Word early morning, and we




invoke Soma, herbal energy, and Rudra, lord of justice
and freedom from evil and ailment in the early morning
as we begin the day.






[Names: Pratarjitam, Adhrascid, Early, Bhaga]
lord and spirit of glory, child of indestructible mother
Infinity and sustainer of all regions of the universe,
universally acknowledged and adored, to whom the
weakest as well as the most powerful and brilliant ruler
prays and rays: O lord, give me the glory and the grace






Bhaga, lord of power and glory, you are the
leader. Lord of light, you are the giver of victory in the
field of truth. Lord omniscient, protect and promote this
wisdom and intelligence of ours, giving us more and
ever more of it. Lord of universal prosperity, promote
us with lands, cows and the light of knowledge and with
speed and success in the field of transport,
communication and achievement. O lord of life and
humanity, let us be blest with leaders and manpower of


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 41 167






[Names: Utedanim, Utodita, Suryasya, Suryas]
And let us be happy and prosperous now at this
very time and at the end of the day, and also at the middle
of the day through the seasons. And also, O lord of power
and glory, let us enjoy the good will and kindness of
the divinities at the rise of the sun.






Bhaga, lord of glory, is really the lord of glory.
By virtue of his grace, let us too be masters of power,
prosperity and excellence, brilliant and generous. O lord
of universal power and grace, all life and humanity does
you homage and obeisance. O lord of power, prosperity
and excellence, you alone be our guide, pioneer and
leader here in life.








[Names: Samadhvarayosaso, Sucaye, Arvacinam]
As the dawns arise and bless our morning yajna
with holiness, as the sun inspires us to rise to the highest
and purest divine attainment, as the motive forces of
energy drive the chariot and lead the master to the
desired destination, so may the Vajins, scholars, sages
and warlike leaders lead us and thus bring us the latest
and highest honour and excellence overflowing with
the wealth and values of life.






[Names: Asvavatir, Usaso, Ghrtam]
May the blessed and blissful dawns, vibrant with
energy and light of the sun, full of inspiration for the
bright and brave youth, showering milk and honey all
round with hands overflowing with generosity, arise and
bless our home with light and prosperity. O dawns of
light and knowledge, O youthful ladies of the home
bright as dawn, pray you all protect, promote and
advance us with all life’s modes of peace, progress and
protection for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 42




[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Angiraso]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 42 169


Let the sagely scholars of Veda and the vibrant
scientists dear as life breath come and join the yajna all
round, let the chant of hymns and fragrance of yajna
rise to the skies, let the fertile cows, overflowing streams
and vaulting voices celebrate divine generosity, and let
the clouds and mountains take the blessed form of yajna
full of peace and prosperity.






[Names: Sugaste]
Agni, lord of light and fire, master of divine
knowledge, simple and straight is your path of motion
and radiation, ancient, known, pursued and followed in
this world of the lord’s creation. Join the forces of nature
and divinity wide as quarters of space, fluent as streams
of water and passionate as flames of fire, which lead
the brave to the house of yajna wherein, sitting and
meditating, I sing and celebrate the origins of the
divinities of nature and humanity.






[Names: Samu, Yajasva]
Together and holily they sing, celebrate and
glorify your yajna with reverence and homage while
close at hand the happy and meditative yajaka and




generous priest excels in faith and generosity. O lord of
manifold forces, Agni, join the divinities of nature and
humanity and keep on the holy and yajnic vision and
wisdom of the life divine for us without relent.






[Names: Yada, Suprito, Agnih, Agni]
When Agni, brilliant and blissful honoured
guest, is welcomed in the house of the brave and
prosperous host, then Agni, happy, well provided and
comfortably rested at home, gives to the host and his
people the gifts of knowledge and wealth they desire.






[Names: Imam, Marutsvindre, Marutsvindr, Mitravaruna]
Agni, venerable and brilliant guest of the house,
accept and enjoy this yajnic hospitality of ours for the
sake of the people and our social order and thereby
enhance our honour and virtue. For the night and day,
grace the yajnic seat and join the people who respect
you, for the advancement of love, friendship and sense
of justice in society.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 43 171




[Names: Evagnim, Isam]
Thus does Vasishtha, the brilliant sage settled
at peace in love with the pursuit of life’s wealth and
excellence, adore Agni, omnipresent inspirer of life
forms with fire and passion alongwith moral stability
and spiritual constancy, Agni that creates, expands and
gives us food and energy, wealth and honour, and speed,
success and progress in social and cultural life. O
divinities, protect and promote us with all round good


Mandala 7/Sukta 43






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Yesam]
In your yajnas of science and research, let
vibrant scholars dedicated to the pursuit of divinity study
heaven and earth with reverence and homage for self
fulfilment so that their exceptional adorations of
universal knowledge rise and spread all round like
branches of the universal tree.








[Names: Strnita]
Let the yajna expand and rise like a tempestuous
flying horse, and you, altogether of one mind, fill the
ladle full, raise it and offer the oblation into the yajna
of love, peace and non-violence to cover the sky with
fragrance. Let the bright and blissful flames rise high
to the divinities.






Just as children in the mother’s lap rest blissfully,
so let the conductors and organisers of yajna, all noble
and brilliant souls, rise and reach the heights of skies.
And then let universality of values adorn and sanctify
our yajnic policy of governance and administration so
that, O lord of light, fire and power, Agni, no one may
violate us in our divine programme of development and




[Names: Jyestham]
And let those divinities of nature committed in


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 44 173


love and accord with you, all of them abundant and
adorable, harbingers of rain and revelations of nature’s
truth, come and bless you. O people of the land, thus
may the first and highest of the wealth of existence come
to you, and thus may you abide, all with one mind, in
your common programme and yajnic commitment.






[Names: Raya]
Thus O lord of light, fire, power and constancy,
Agni, bless us along with all peoples of the earth so
that, O lord of challenge, patience and fortitude,
committed as one with you and blest with wealth, honour
and excellence, we may live happy and abide healthy
and unhurt in the land and her yajnic order. O divinities
of nature and humanity, pray protect and promote us all
round with all good fortune for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 44








[Names: Mantrawise, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Dadhikram, Agnim, Agni, Indram, Indra, Adityan, Aditya, Pusanam, Pusana]
For your protection and progress, I invoke and
adore Dadhikra, original divine energy which moves,
sustains and energises all movers and sustainers of
existential forms, Ashvins, the sun and moon, the dawn,
the burning fire, and Bhaga, honour and glory of life,
[Names: Vishnu]
Pushan, cosmic vitality and nourishment, Brahmana-
spati, cosmic Soul, Adityas, Zodiacs of the sun, heaven
and earth, the cosmic waters, and eternal happiness and






[Names: Dadhikramu, Ilam]
Awakening cosmic motive energy with
reverence and homage, rising and moving to the yajna
with full knowledge, sanctifying the holy grass on the
vedi with holy speech, we invoke and invite the ready
and instant moving Ashvins like the sagely teacher and
the preacher to guide and conduct our yajnic business
of life.






[Names: Dadhikravanam, Agnimupa, Bradhnam, Suryam, Surya, Usasam, Usasa]
Knowing full well the all-motive cosmic energy,
I specifically speak of fire power, and I celebrate the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 44 175


dawn, the sun and the earth, and I speak of the great
integrative and sustaining power of the cosmic oceans
of waters, and I pray that these natural energies may
ward off all evils and ailments away from us.






[Names: Dadhikrava, Samvidana]
That cosmic energy is the primary intelligent
dynamic force which moves at the fastest velocity, and
that energy is basically the first motive and transportive
power of everything in motion, like a horse in front of a
chariot, whether it is in relation to the dawn or the sun
or motion of the sun in orbit through the Zodiacs or the
abodes of life such as earth or the pranic energy forms
of nature and life.






[Names: Srnotu, Agnih, Srnvantu]
May the cosmic forms of energy and may the
supreme mover of cosmic energy adorn, illuminate and
sanctify our path and our movement over the path of
truth and eternal law so that we may safely tread the
holy paths of living. May Agni, lord omniscient, listen
to our prayer and be favourable to our brilliance and




divine gift of strength and power. May the mighty sages
of the world listen to us and favour us with gifts of


Mandala 7/Sukta 45






[Names: Savita, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Haste, Puruni]
May the self-refulgent Savita, giver of light and
life, come and bless, bearing jewels of life, radiating
through the sky, carried by light rays, bearing in hands
manifold treasures for humanity, suffusing and
fertilising the earth with life and vitality. We pray we
too may be brilliant and generous like the sun.






[Names: Udasya, Nunam, Anu]
Mighty are his hands and arms, vast and
extensive, golden generous, reaching unto the bounds
of heaven. Truly that grandeur of his is adorable. May
the brave refulgent sun inspire us with will and passion
for initiative and action.


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 46 177






[Names: Visrayamano]
May that refulgent creator and inspirer Savita,
mighty and friendly, lord and master of wealth, radiating
his wide expansive glory, provide vital food and energy
for the mortals.


AUS



[Names: Citram]
These celebrant voices adore and glorify Savita,
life giver and inspirer, bright and benedictive of light
and flame, generous of hands full of blessings. May the
lord bear and bring us universal health and life full of
wonderful wealth and value. O lord Savita, O brilliancies
of nature and humanity, protect and promote us with all
modes of good fortune and well being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 46








[Names: Rudra, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Rudraya, Rudra, Asalhaya, Bharata]
Offer these words of adoration and prayer to
Rudra, brilliant destroyer of evil and injustice, wielder
of the unshakable bow, shooting flying arrows of
lightning speed. He bears his own essential power and
sense of justice, irresistible is he, unconquerable, a
challenger with unfailing fortitude, all knowing and
equipped with blazing arms and armour. May the lord
listen to us and accept our call.






[Names: Avannavantirupa]
He is known by his own divine refulgence and,
by the same exceptional brilliance and by close
proximity of his presence and residence among the peace
loving people of his blessed dominion, he proclaims
himself and enlightens the people while he is perceived
and glorified by them. O Rudra, protecting, sustaining
and promoting our defence forces, be at the doors of
our settlements by your presence and power among our
people, and ever be giver of freedom from ailments and
evil.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 47 179




[Names: Sahasram]
The blaze of your lightning power released from
heaven prevails over earth which may, we pray, spare
us and not uproot us. O lord of refreshing winds,
thousands are your rejuvenations and medicaments. Pray
strike not upon our children and grand children, refresh,
nourish and strengthen them to full maturity.






[Names: Mano]
O lord of justice, punishment and good health,
strike us not, forsake us not to alienation. Let us not fall
into the snares of your anger. Be with us on the vedi
over earth and spaces for the joyous celebration of life.
O lord ruler and physician of health, protect and promote
us with all good fortunes of well being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 47


[Names: Apah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indrapa, Sucima]
vanema.




O cosmic waters, seers and sages in pursuit of
divinity, we love and yearn for that pure, divine,
delicious and honey sweet primordial thrill of the ecstasy
drink of yours which you distilled from the Cosmic
Word, original nature and the earth for the taste of Indra,
the human soul, at the dawn of creation.






[Names: Tamurmim, Yasminn]
That sweetest of honey thrill of joyous ecstasy
of existence in which Indra rejoices with the wealth,
honours and excellences of life may, we pray, the holy
fire, infallible extension of cosmic waters, protect and
promote. That same thrill and ecstasy, we pray, may we
too in our pursuit of divine joy attain here and now.






[Names: Satapavitrah, Indrasya, Indras]
The holy and ecstatic waters, hundred ways pure
and flowing with their innate inspiring vitality, move
on and converge to the divinities, centre yajna of the
cosmos. They do not violate the divine laws of Indra,
lord of existence. O men and women, offer oblations


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 48 181
with ghrta for augmenting the rivers and the seas.






The vapours and waters which the sun expands
with its rays in space, the showers of rain for which
Indra, cosmic electricity, breaks the clouds of vapour
to fall and flow, and the currents of water which dig out
the river beds on earth, may all those oceans, seas and
rivers bear and bring us treasurefuls of choice food,
energy and wealth to sustain and support us. O cosmic
waters, sun and showers, rivers and seas, protect and
promote us with the best of good fortune for well being
for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 48






[Names: Rbhavah, Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Rbhuksano]
O great scientists, leaders of humanity
commanding power and excellence, rejoice and let us
rejoice in the excellence of our science, power and




culture. Come to us and let the Kratus, expert workers
of holy will and resolution, as the Vibhus, artists and
technologists, turn your chariot worthy of the human





[Names: Rbhur, Rbhubhir, Savasa, Savamsi, Vajo]
Let us be scientists with the great scientists, let
us be experts with the experts and command powers
and forces with the power and knowledge of the
scientists and technologists. May the warriors of power
and speed protect you and us in the battles of life’s
freedom and success in excellence. And let us join Indra,
lord of power and excellence and cross over evil,
darkness and want to light, freedom and prosperity.





[Names: Sasa, Indro, Rbhuksa]
They, the Rblus, eternal presences, surely excel
and advance the borders of knowledge and power by
discipline, being attached to their master with loyalty
in all battles for progress. And Indra, the ruler vested
with power, having settled eminent scientists, artists and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 49 183


craftsmen, and, having scattered out all enmities in
conflicts, they develop new wealth and prosperity for
the nation.






[Names: Samasme, Rbhus, Rbhu]
artists and craftsmen of the world, creators of wealth
and providers of settlement at peace, create the best of
comfort and prosperity for us. Loving and cooperative
all, be for our safety, security and progress. Eminent
masters of knowledge and expertise, provide the best
of food, energy and sustenance for us. O Rbhus, O Vasus,
pray always protect and promote us with all the good
fortune for life’s well being all round, all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 49






[Names: Apah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Samudrajyesthah, Indro]
The divine waters, chief of which is the ocean,
arise from the heart of cosmic energy as a surge of
liquidity and ceaslessly flow, purifying, sanctifying
everything they suffuse. Indra, the sun and electric




energy of the firmament, power of thunder and
generosity, creates the channels for their flow. May those
streams of waters inspire and impel me too with the
initiative and drive of life for initiative and action here
in the world and protect me against evil and sloth.






[Names: Samudrartha]
May those divine streams of water and cosmic
energy which flow in channels made by man and those
which flow their own way and rush to join the sea, all
of which are pure and sacred, purifying and sanctifying,
may all those streams protect and promote me onward
here in the world of dynamic activity.






[Names: Yasam, Madhuscutah]
Those liquid streams of waters and divine energy
in the currents of which the cosmic ruler of universal
law, Varuna, vibrates with universal judgement and
omnipotence, watching the truth and untruth of the
people’s actions within the rules of divine law, the
streams which are replete with the honey sweets of life’s


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 50 185


joy, pure and purifying, may all these streams of divinity
protect, inspire and promote me here in this world of
action.






[Names: Yasu, Vaisvanaro]
Those streams of water and cosmic energy in
which Varuna, self-refulgent ruler, pervades, in which
Soma, peace and life’s vitality and joy, resides, in which
all divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity find
their breath of life and rejoice, in which Vaishvanara,
vital heat of earth life, resides and inspires her children,
may those divine streams of the waters of existence
inspire, protect and promote me here in this world.


Mandala 7/Sukta 50




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Agni, Vishvedevah, Nadyah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Mitravaruneha, Ajakavam]
May the sun and waters, curative and preventive




insidious or infectious disease come to me. Let me keep
off all diseases that spread through animals and insects,
all those that spread through germs and viruses difficult
to see with naked eye. Let all those ailments be off which
arise from external contact or from internal weakness
such as lack of resistance, depression or self-guilt.






[Names: Agnistacchocann]
Let Agni, heat treatment and fire element, burn
away and keep off all tumours or rheumatic disease
corresponding to the joints and bone density, pain which
swells and burns ankles and knees and reaches up to
the hips and stomach. Let no surreptitious disease
beginning with the feet and creeping up by infection
touch me.





[Names: Yacchalmalau, Visve]
Whatever poison there be in the cotton plant or
silktree or in the streams of water or what is produced
by herbs and trees, let the scholars of science and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 51 187


medicine of the world isolate and eliminate from there
as antibiotic. Let no surreptitious ailment from external
or internal causes come and afflict me.






[Names: Anudakasca, Siva]
All streams of water, wind and energy, rushing,
flowing, rising, on mountains, slopes and valleys or
plains with abundant or lean content, may be for us full
of nourishment, health giving, blissful and sparkling


Mandala 7/Sukta 51






[Names: Adityah, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Aditya, Adityanamavasa, Sarmana, Samtamena, Anagastve, Adititve, Adititv]
May we join the Adityas, eminent sagely
scholars of knowledge and science, and benefit from
their latest modes of protection and promotion and from
the peace of a blessed home. May they, swift and




powerful of action, listen to our prayer and conduct this
social yajna of ours in a state of sinlessness and




[Names: Aditir, Asmakam, Somam, Soma]
We pray, may the Adityas, brilliant sages and
the seasonal phases of the sun, Aditi, mother nature and
the ethics and policy of universal values, Mitra, the sun
and the friendly ruler, Aryama, leader and pioneer,
Varuna, chief of law and justice, all straight powers of
rectitude, rejoice, be protectors of our social system and
give us a life of joy. May they too join us today and
share the taste of life’s ecstasy and excellence for further






[Names: Marutasca, Adit, Indro, Agnirassvina]
All the Adityas, refulgent powers of nature and
humanity, all the Maruts, winds and heroic men, all
devas, brilliancies of nature and humanity, Rbhus, all
artists and craftsmen, Indra, ruling power and electricity,
Agni, fire and the brilliant leader, Ashvins,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 52 189


complementary currents of natural energy and teachers
and preachers, all happy, adorable and appraising, may
protect and promote us with all good fortune and well
being for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 52






[Names: Adityah, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Aditya, Adityaso, Sanema, Mitravaruna]
O Adityas, dynamic unassailable lights of the
world, may we too be brilliant and unassailable. O Vasus,
shelter homes of life, let us be servants of divinity and
servants of humanity, shelter and comfort for all, holy
as the city. O Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, joining
and serving you, let us acquire depth and brilliance. O
earth and heaven, trying to be like you, let us be generous
and free and blest beyond all bonds of lower existence.






[Names: Mitrastanno]
May Mitra and Varuna, protectors like friends,
the sun and the vast ocean, promote the peace and joy
of our hearth and home to honour and glory for our
children and grand children. O Vasus, shelter homes of
life, let us not suffer afflictions born of sin committed




by others, nor should that, O children of the earth, affect
you, and may the karma you do and accumulate never
be that sinful.






[Names: Turanyavo, Pita]
Men of initiative, swift in thought and action,
zealous as life energy, study, meditate on and attain the
jewel gifts of Savita, refulgent and generous lord creator
and inspirer. That adorable lord creator, our father and
sustainer, and all brilliant sages and scholars of the world
working together with one united mind may, we pray,
give us that bliss of divine gifts and grandeur.


Mandala 7/Sukta 53






[Names: Dyava, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
Challenged by difficulties on the way forward,
I invoke high heaven and mother earth with offers of
homage and adoration. Vast and abundant they are, close
friends and generous givers, divine sources of hope and
energy, whom noble men serve and exalt with songs.
To these, for sure, celebrant poets and visionaries of all


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 53 191


time look up and these they adore for inspiration with
offers of homage and adoration.






O noble men and women of the world, in the
house of the yajnic study of the laws of nature and
advancement of light and waters, flow, adore the ancient
fatherly sun and motherly earth with the latest words of
research and knowledge, and let the highest light of
heaven and the great abundance of the earth come to
your homes with the holiest and most brilliant people.






[Names: Puruni, Asme, Sudase, Sudas]
O sun and nature, fatherly sun and mother earth,
generous givers of all time, yours are the jewel treasures
of life for the generous giver, whatever they are. Bear
and bring us whatever be the finest and most abundant
gifts of your eternal jewels. Pray preserve, protect and
promote us for all time with peace, happiness and well




Mandala 7/Sukta 54






[Names: Vastoshpati, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Vastospate]
O Vastupati, master architect and guardian of
the home, know us for certain and approve what we
want, be for us the provider of a happy and comfortable
home free from pollution and disease. Be pleased to
give us the facilities we ask you to provide, and let there
be peace and well being for humans and for animals.






[Names: Ajarasaste, Jusasva]
O master and guardian of the home, giver of
peace and bliss, be our saviour and protector all round,
promote the homestead and the inmates along with the
cows and horses. In love and friendship with you, let us
be free from disease and ravages of age. Pray love and
protect us and promote us as father for the children.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 55 193




[Names: Sagmaya, Pahi]
Master architect, maker and guardian of the
home, the family and the nation, may we, by your
kindness and favour enjoy a settled home in peace,
comfort, joy and good fellowship and prosperity with
you and the nation’s assembly. Pray protect and promote
us in the preservation, acquisition and advancement of
our wealth and excellence in the best manner. O
guardians and protectors of the human nation, all time
protect and promote us with the best of happiness and


Mandala 7/Sukta 55
Vastoshpati and Indra Devate,






[Names: Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Amivaha, Sakha]
Vastoshpati, father and guardian of the abode
of life (111 body, family and the nation), destroyer of
pain, suffering and disease, in all forms of life and its
organisation your power and presence is reflected. Pray
be our friend and saviour, giver of peace and bliss free
from strain.








[Names: Yadarjuna, Viva]
Lord of purity and blazing power, creator and
controller of values and the essence of things and
institutions, handsome and versatile in form and
performance, you raise, wield and control your weapons
of defence and offence, devouring missiles target
oriented in readiness in defence labs beaming like a trail
of light in the sky, and thus you may rest in peace and
security in the state of readiness.






[Names: Stenam, Stotrn, Indrasya, Indras]
Lord of wealth and glory, lover of values and
essence of things in life, keep on pursuing the thief and
the smuggler and bring them to book. And don’t you
appreciate and encourage those who support and
augment the wealth of the nation and the ruling order
and assure that we are safe against evil and the
negationists? You do. If so, you may thus rest in peace
and security in the state of readiness.






[Names: Tvam]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 55 195


Promote with incentive the forces of positive
action and let the forces of good action promote you
and the social order. You advance the supporters and
admirers of the order and you protect us against
saboteurs and evil doers for sure. In such a state of
vigilance and readiness you may rest in peace and






[Names: Sastu, Sasantu]
In the ideal state of order, let the mother sleep
in peace, let the father rest at peace, let the watch guard
be sure of peace and security, let the head of the
community rest at peace. And let this nation of humanity






[Names: Tesam]
The person who sits and works in an appointed
place, the one who is always on the move on tours, and
the one who is appointed to watch us all round, of all
these we centralise the orbits of movement and activity
as this house is, which is the centre and capital of the






in Sahasrasrngo vrsabho yah samudradudacarat.


[Names: Tena]
Thousands are his rays of light and peaks of
achievement, profuse his showers of peace and generous
favours, as he, ruler of the order like the sun, rises and
rules over earth, sea and the sky. By virtue of his might
and courage, patience and fortitude, we provide for the
peace and comfort of the people.





[Names: Prosthesaya, Striyo]
The women who sleep in large homes and open
court yards, who sleep while on the move in travel, who
sleep in comfortable beds and those who are fragrantly
dressed with perfumes, for all these we provide for peace
and safety to sleep in security.
Mandala 7/Sukta 56





[Names: Maruts, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Rudrasya, Rudras]
What for sure are these individual, specified,
kindred, mortal and human life forces of Rudra, cosmic
vitality, the soul, the commander, the destroyer of
suffering, forces which ride noble steeds like currents
of wind?




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 197




[Names: Nakirhyosam, Janitram]
and places of birth except that they together manifest in
action and reveal their origin and generative power.






[Names: Syena, Roaring]
they rival each other and generate energy and vitality
of life by their essential purity of character and action.





[Names: Etani, Yadudho]
The wise and resolute scholar knows these

mysterious forces, he who knows how the sun and the


starry sky hold the earth, and the earth, like the cow,
holds the milky food for life.






That nation commands the brave which
maintains its stout and vibrant people by its constant
values and policy of action, which observes hard
discipline patiently to challenge the enemies, and which
strengthens and sustains its manliness of character.








[Names: Yamam]
The Maruts, warriors of the nation, are unfailing
marksmen shooting to the target straight, most decent
of manners and courtesy, graceful with culture and
chivalry, and blazing with heroic splendour.


is Ugram va ojah sthira Savamsyadha marudbhir-


Your vigour is bright and passionate, your
courage and valour is constant and inviolable, and your
republic is strong and invulnerable by virtue of the






[Names: Subhro, Susmah, Sardhasya]
O nation of Maruts, redoubtable challengers of
the enemy, blazing white and pure is your strength and
courage, righteous and passionate, your minds are alert,
agile and thoughtful like that of a sage and your power
is invulnerable.






[Names: Sanemyasmad]
Reject the outmoded weapons, always take to
the bright and blazing ones. Keep off from us, citizens,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 199


the old as well as the new and bright ones. Let not evil
thought and intention ever vitiate and damage you or
us.




[Names: Priya]
vavasanah.

O Maruts, bright and instant warriors, fast
workers, noble leaders and eminent scholars of the
nation of humanity, dear and lovable is your name and
title which I admire and invoke, the name which is
elevating and deeply satisfying, keen and dedicated as
you are to the targets of action.






[Names: Svayudhasa]
Wielders of wondrous weapons, anxious
creators of food and energy, noble and meticulous in
matters of wealth and vitality, and keeping your form
and personality in top condition of dignity and grace,
that’s what you are.



12. Suci vo (रवादं marutah Sucinam sucim hino-


[Names: Rtena]
O Maruts, mortals, pure are your yajnic




transactions, clean your gifts, receipts and dispensations.
I invoke and augment the pure and non-violent yajna of
and love and creativity of the pure for the sake of pure
and sacred people who, committed to truth, advance
the truth by observance of truth and divine law of
rectitude. Bright and pure is your birth and origin, pure
you are and sanctifying.






[Names: Amsesva, Marutah, Maruta, Anu]
shoulders you wear deadly weapons which, bright and
blazing, decorate your chest. Thus wielding and whirling
your weapons in keeping with your innate strength and
chivalry, in your yajnic endeavours of development and
progress, you shine like flashes of lightning with
showers of rain.






[Names: Sahasriyam, Maruto]
Adorable Maruts, admirable advancers of the
bounds of progress, your fame and glory rises to clouds
over the vast skies. Go forward and win the battles. Play
this part of yours with love and faith worthy of the home


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 201


like a fragrant yajna of thousand possibilities.






[Names: Yadi, Maksu]
O Maruts, vibrant workers and vibrant yajakas,
if thus you know and remember the holy yajnic
programmes of positive value enacted by dynamic and
progressive people, then create and give us abundant
wealth of highly productive and progressive order at
the earliest lest others and uncreative forces take over
and sabotage the plans and programmes.




The Maruts ever on the move by themselves like
never resting forces of nature, mortals pure and graceful
like those who go to meet the divines, they are ever


bright and happy like innocent children of the palace of
majesty and playful like sucklings of the cow.






[Names: Dasasyanto]
rodast sumeke. Are goha nrha vadho vo astu


May the Maruts, leaders and pioneers serving
and replenishing the beautiful heaven and earth, be kind
and gracious and bring us peace and joy. May the butcher
and the murderer be far from us. May the weapon of
death be far from you and from us. O givers of peace
and settlement in joy and prosperity turn to us with
happiness and well-being.






The yajaka settled on the vedi invokes you, O
Maruts, praising and praying for your blissful generosity
which is the harbinger of truth and life of real value. He
is the protector of the dynamic and the generous. He is
free from double dealing and he invokes and celebrates
you with the right works of truth and sincerity.






[Names: Samsam]
They sustain and strengthen the fast moving


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 203


progressive forces and bend the might of the mighty.
They protect the prayer of the supplicant and advance
the song of the celebrant against the violent and they
bear and maintain deep opposition to the jealous and
the wicked.






These vibrant Maruts, leading lights of wealth
and settlement, inspire the settled prosperous as they
encourage the migrant seeker and explorer on the move
since they command the sources of wealth and
production. O generous powers, shut off all forms of
darkness and sloth, bear and bring us dynamic children
and grand children ranging over the vast world of
possibilities and achievement.






[Names: Asti]
O Maruts, dynamic explorers, creators and
distributors, masters of the chariot, never shall we stop
you from giving and never must we be left behind in
sharing and distribution. O generous powers, whatever




your wealth of desirable value worthy of life and settled
peace, let us share it with you.






[Names: Adha]
If people with rage and passions join together
and strike and kill, then O Maruts, brave heroes of the
line of Rudra, saviour with drugs and medicaments and
with justice and punishment, you be our saviours and
defenders and defend the ruler and master of the land
in the strifes and contests of life extending to the people
and great herbs and forests.






[Names: Bhuri, Sasyante, Marudbhir]
O Maruts, vibrant leaders and pioneers of
humanity, many are your deeds and songs in honour of
the forefathers which have been sung and celebrated
since times immemorial. It is by virtue of the Maruts
that the haughty warrior wins the battles, and it is by
the Maruts that the sharer gets his food and the
contesting horse wins the race.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 56 205






[Names: Susmyastu]
O Maruts, let our young hero be strong and
powerful who, vibrant as energy itself, may defend and
sustain the people, and by virtue of whom we may cross
the seas of life for the achievement of success on earth
and live free in our own home as friends with you.






[Names: Tanna, Agnirapa, Sarmantsyama, Marutamupasthe, Marutamupasth]
May that success, freedom and happiness, Indra,
power and energy, Varuna, night and peace, Mitra, sun
and the day, Agni, light and fire, Apah, waters and
dynamic progress, Oshadhis, greenery of nature and
good health, vanins, herbs and forests, may, we wish
and pray, support, augment and share our happy home
which may be in close vicinity with the Maruts, vibrant
heroes and energising winds. O divinities of nature and
humanity, protect and promote us always with all
happiness and well being all time.




Mandala 7/Sukta 57






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut, Madhvo, Savasa]
O Maruts, cosmic winds of vitality, admirable
is your name and action worthy of the life force and
humanity which worshipful yajakas invoke and
celebrate with strength and enthusiasm in yajnic
programmes. When the raging winds blow they shake
the heaven and earth, swell the cloud and shower the
earth with life giving waters.




[Names: Nicetaro, Maruto, Asmakamadya]
You are inspiring guardians of the celebrant and
leading lights for the mind and vision of the yajamana
devotee. Come today right now for our good and grace
our seats in our yajnas rising to the skies, happy,
rejoicing, and inspiring us with joy and enthusiasm.


PANU


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 57 207




[Names: Naitavadanye]
No other powers are like them, nor can anyone
else do as much as they do, shining in body with
weapons of golden radiance, pervading heaven and
earth, wearing blessed brilliance and soothing
comeliness equal with the beauty and grandeur of nature
to enhance their innate grace.






[Names: Fists, Rdhak, Purusata]
O Maruts, best of the human world powers, may
that beauty and brilliance of your policy and
performance be ever distinguished and true. Even
though out of our human frailty we may transgress your
law or commit sin, O venerable heroes of the yajnic
social order, let us not fall out of favour with you. Let
that goodwill of yours still stay constant for us with
love and grace.







[Names: Krte, Ssuca]
O Maruts, irreproachable, pure and sanctifying
powers of nature and humanity, heroic in action, in this
yajnic order of positive action, abide in joy. O friendly
powers of joint yajnic creativity, protect and promote
us with love and good will and noble laws and policy in
the company of noble people and, for the sake of good
health and all round progress, lead us across the world
of action to perfection.






[Names: Dadata]
O Maruts, leaders and pioneers of humanity,
sung and celebrated with all words of praise and
appreciation, receive the best of honours and
presentations of the social order. Give us wealths of the
immortal order for the people and create the values and
prosperity of the highest order of truth and Dharma.






[Names: Jigata]
O Maruts, vibrant powers of nature’s energy and
admirable leading lights of the world, come well with
all your powers and methods of protection and
promotion and, in the universal service of life and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 58 209


humanity, go and exhort those brave pioneers of
knowledge and action who sincerely work for our
advancement in a hundred ways. O Maruts, O brave
scholars, teachers and scientists, producers and
administrators, pray you all protect and promote us for
all time with the best of happiness and well being in
life.


Mandala 7/Sukta 58






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Marut]
Honour the group of vibrant forces and leading
heroes which arises mighty from the very light of
heaven, creatively works together for progress, and
reaches unto the very heights of divinity. Heaven and
earth reverberate with the music of their honour and
fame and they rise to celestial bliss of the spirit even
across a state of adversity and denial of familial








[Names: Januscid, Marutas, Maruta]
and nature is vested with splendour. Fearsome of mien,
overwhelming in passion, you are like dynamites in
action. You are instantly proclaimed by your grandeur
and majesty, and the world that looks up to the sun and
the skies looks at you with awe on way to the higher
life.







[Names: Brhad, Gato]
O Maruts, leading lights of life, accept our
homage and praise and bring us long life and vast
possibilities of achievement for the noble people. The
path you follow and show hurts no one living, help us
to go forward in life with the ways of protection, and
advancement worthy of the noble ones’ love and desire.






[Names: Yusmoto, Marutah, Yusmotah]
O Maruts, vibrant powers of nature and
humanity for action, the sage and scholar under your
patronage rises to a hundred achievements. The dynamic
leader and pioneer protected by you wins a thousand
races, victories with patience and fortitude. The noble


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 58 211


ruler under your aegis destroys enemies and dispels
forces of darkness and ignorance. O mighty movers and
shakers, may that gift of yours, of that protection and




[Names: Rudrasya, Rudras]
rava tadena imahe turanam.


I honour and adore those Maruts, offsprings of
Rudra, lord of the showers of success, power and justice,
who come and inspire us again and again in many ways.
And if for reasons of discourtesy, overt or covert, they
feel angry we shall expiate for that displeasure of the
dynamic powers of instant punishment for correction.






[Names: Araccid, Maruto]
This song of adoration of the mighty glorious
powers is expressed in holy words. May the Maruts
accept it with pleasure. O generous benefactors and
protectors, cast off far from us all hate, anger and
jealousy. O scholars and sages, dynamic Maruts, pray
protect and promote us with all good and well being of
life without relent for all time.




Mandala 7/Sukta 59
Maruts and Rudra Devata, Vasishtha Maitravaruni Rshi




[Names: Tasma, Varuna, Mitraryaman, Mitraryama, Marutah, Maruta]
yacchata.


O divine Maruts, vibrant, brilliant and generous
leading lights, givers of enlightenment, whosoever you
protect, defend and save and whosoever you lead at
every step in every way by word and deed, for him, you
all and, O Agni, sage and scholar giver of light, Varuna,
man of judgement and discrimination, Mitra,
enlightened friend, and Aryaman, man of justice and
rectitude on the paths of life, you give a happy home,
firm settlement and peace of mind.




[Names: Yusmakam]
varaya dasati.

O vibrant powers of light and justice, by virtue
of your patronage and protections, the man of yajnic
action, who works for the growth and progress of society
and performs holy acts of creativity in good time,
overcomes all adversaries. The generous man who gives
abundantly in terms of lands, food and energy in word
and kind to people in your honour for the good of all
expands his house and dominion and rules out all waste,


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 59 213
impairment and decay.




[Names: Nahi, Asmakamadya]
kaminah.


O Maruts, vibrant givers of light and energy,
leading lights of humanity, the celebrated sage best
settled and giver of settlement mentally and spiritually
does not ignore or neglect even the last of you but
honours you all. O lovers and benefactors of the nation,
come today now itself, join and enjoy the delicious taste
of our achievement in your honour in the structure and
order of a great society.






Never does your protection and patronage in the
battles of life forsake the man whom you, O leading
lights of humanity, favour, mature and protect. Let the
latest and most developed vision and noble policy of
yours be on the move constantly while, O leaders,
thirsting for defence, protection and progress, you hasten
to wherever the nation calls upon you.










[Names: Maruto]
O Maruts, mighty and munificent accomplishers
of the means and materials of achievement in life, go
forward to enjoy the taste of success and prosperity of
society. I offer these gifts of homage and song of success
to you. Pray neglect us not, go not elsewhere.






[Names: Acano, Asredhanto]
O Maruts, leading lights of the nation, come and
sit on the holy seats of our house to protect us and,
without hurting and destroying anything, to give us the
wealth and honours we love and desire. Come and enjoy
the honey sweets of the most soothing soma of life
offered with sincerest word and deed.






[Names: Sasvasciddhi]
Gracious in body and bearing yet unrevealed in
modesty, the Maruts, leading lights of the nation like
hansa birds of blue beauty of the plume, rejoicing in
unison like leaders of the congregation, they descend


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 59 215


with dignity and sit around me, the very strength and
power of the world.






[Names: Jighamsati, Druhah]
O Maruts, leading lights and givers of wealth,
honour and peaceful settlement, whoever is evil at heart
toward us and seeks to damage our dignity and identity,
let him be forced to withdraw his snares of hate and
enmity back to himself and strike him with an unfailing
weapon of punishment which scorches his enmity to
smoke and naught.




[Names: Santapana, Marutas, Yusmakoti]
O Maruts, leaders of the world and vibrant
energisers, chastened in the fire of discipline and
subduers of the violent by your methods of law,
protection and defence, accept our homage and


cooperation offered in obedience to law and discipline
of peace.








[Names: Grhamedhasa]
O Maruts, guardians of the home and family as
a sacred institution of social yajna, come, stay not away,
constant, O generous givers of prosperity, joy and






[Names: Theha, Suryatvacah, Suryatvaca, Yajnam]
O Maruts, commanders of innate strength and
power, creative visionaries of the highest order,
illustrious as the refulgent sun, come here right now, I
invoke you and choose you as the high priests of my
yajna in the programme of social cohesion, creative
production and universal benediction.






[Names: Tryambakam, Urvarukamiva]
We invoke and do homage to lord Tryambaka,
creator and protector of the three worlds, whose
immanent fragrance of energy and bliss enhances the
life and joy of existence all three times. O Rudra,
destroyer of evil and suffering, giver of bliss, release
me from the bonds of mortality like the ripe fruit falling
off from the stalk and redeem me into the infinite


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 60 217


presence of Immortality.


Mandala 7/Sukta 60








[Names: Surya, Mitra, Varuna, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Yadadya, Mitraya, Mitra, Surya, Vayam, Varunaya, Varuna]
O sun, while you arise today, purify us and
proclaim to Mitra and Varuna, presiding powers of day
and night and upholders of earth, sky and heaven, that
we are free from sin. O Aditi, immortal mother earth
and Infinity, O Aryaman, lord of justice and the paths
of rectitude, dedicated as we are to the divinities,
celebrating and glorifying them, hold us dear as
dedicated to you.






[Names: Mitravaruna, Visvasya]
Mitra and Varuna, this is the sun that pervades
both gross and subtle worlds, watcher and light giver
of humanity, which rises across the sky over the earth
and witnesses both the simple and the crooked ways of
action among the mortals. It is the protector, life giver


and promoter of the moving and the unmoving world.






[Names: Ayukta, Dhamani, Suryam]
The sun, like a charioteer harnessing his horses,
radiates seven rays of light which from the solar region
carry the energy of light and cosmic waters and bring
about the nights as they withdraw. The sun, also, joining
and pervading various regions, the prana and udana
energies of life and the origins of causal entities,
of which it is the centre.






[Names: Yasma, Aditya, Adit, Varunah]
For you, O men and women, the friendly cloud
and the vast skies replete with honey sweets abide on
high and the sun raises vitalising oceans of vapour, the
sun for which the Adityas, months of the year, Varuna
and Aryama, Adityas all together, prepare the paths
across the zodiacs, Mitra.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 60 219




These Adityas, Mitra, Varuna and Aryama,
loving friend, discriminative judge, and the path maker
of rectitude, give us the sense and awareness of right
and wrong, of falsehood as distinct from truth and
correctness, in all varieties of situations. And they
persist, and they augment the order of truth and right in
the house of divine law, children of mother Infinity as
they are, happy at peace, loving and kind, yet dauntless
and unchallengeable.






These powers of love and friendship, judgement
and rectitude and universal truth and law are rare and
undaunted, and with their intelligence and expertise of
method, they awaken even the stupid and ignorant to
sensitivity and wisdom. Further, inspiring the man of
noble mind and holy action, they protect him from
crookedness and sin and lead him on by the path of
truth, goodness and beauty to higher attainment.








[Names: Pravraje]
The ever vigilant powers of light and love,
judgement and discrimination of right knowledge and
right action, know of heaven and earth and constantly
guide the ignorant to wake up and move on the right
path. Even in the depth of rivers in flood, there is ground
to stand on, a ford to cross. May Mitra, Varuna and
Aryama take us across the deep seas of existence by






[Names: Tasminna, Sudase, Sudas]
When, like the lord ruler of the earth and
protector of her children, Aditi, Mitra and Varuna,
mother nature and her law, and divine powers of love,
friendship and judgement provide a blessed home of
peace, plenty and joy for the generous man of noble
action and charity, then in that state of good fortune
we, all dynamic and enthusiastic fast achievers, in the
joyous company of our children and grand children must
not do anything to affront our sages, seniors and scholars
or to violate the sanctity of the divinities of nature and




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 60 221




[Names: Pari]
One who dishonours and desecrates the vedi of
yajna with unholy chant and stingy insulting libation of
holy offerings suffers. What sin and suffering does he
not face when he is shaken by Varuna, power of justice
and discrimination? May Aryama, divine guide and path
maker, keep him away along with the jealous and the
hostile, and may Mitra and Varuna, liberal givers, create
and award the generous yajaka with a happy home and
vast freedom of spirit in an age and environment of bliss.






[Names: Sasvasciddhi, Yusmad]
The nature, character and policy of these divine
powers of love and friendship, justice and
discrimination, and thought and action in rectitude is
mysteriously integrated, brilliant and blazing. They
move and act with patience, fortitude and irresistible
force. O generous powers, shakers of the jealous and
the enemies with fear, save us and let us prosper in peace
and joy with the grandeur of your power and force.








[Names: Siksanta]
Whoever applies his holy and faithful mind for
the vision of Divinity and for the achievement of food
and energy and supreme wealth, honour and excellence
of life, the generous divine powers energise his righteous
passion and bless his action, and they create a vast house
of joy and prosperity for him and award him golden
wealth and irresistible vitality.





[Names: Mitrava, Visvani]
O divine Mitra and Varuna, powers of love and
judgement of nature and humanity, this homage of
reverence is created and offered in your honour in the
congregations of academic and socio-economic yajna.
Pray protect us, promote us, help us cross the hurdles
of life with action and bless us with complete fulfilment.
O generous powers, save us, defend us and let us
advance with all round peace and security for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 61






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 61 223




[Names: Suryas, Surya]
O Varuna, up rises the sun, bright and beautiful
eye of you both, Mitra and Varuna, divine pranic
energies of the universe, spreading the light far and wide
over spaces. It illuminates and reveals all regions of the
world, and awakens and inspires all mortals’ love for
life and living.






[Names: Yasya]
O Mitra and Varuna, divinities of nature and
humanity, your hymns of knowledge and power, that
vibrant sage and scholar, a veteran reader and long time
listener dedicated to truth and the laws of nature, studies,
proclaims and extends by application. O powers of
divine action, inspire, strengthen and protect his studies
and fulfil his mission with intelligence and revelations
as you fulfil the seasons of the year with natural
evolution of their spirits.









[Names: Prorormitravaruna, Spaso]
O Mitra and Varuna, light and life of the
universe, generous love and intelligence of nature and
humanity, you transcend the wide earth and the vast
heaven by your dynamic power and sublimity. You vest
life energy and distinct form in herbs and trees and
specific identity in people and their communities while
you preserve and protect the truth of law and the
pursuers of truth with relentless vigil.






[Names: Samsa, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Ayan]
Study and meditate on the origin and abode of
Mitra and Varuna, pranic energies of nature and human
virtue of love and friendship, light and enlightenment,
and justice and discrimination. By virtue of their great
universal power and force they hold and sustain the earth
and heaven together and yet apart. The time, months
and years of those who do not perform yajna, corporate
acts of social and environmental value, pass by without
the joy of children. On the other hand, those who serve
Divinity, nature and humanity with their heart and soul
cross the paths of life and reach the ultimate freedom of





[Names: Moksha, Amura, Druhah]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 61 225


O wise and generous powers of the world, Mitra
and Varuna, these words of adoration are for you and
your divine gifts to humanity, in which there is nothing
that is not marvellous and nothing that is not divinely
consecrated. Only the jealous and hostile among
humanity indulge in scandal and falsehood, and even
your smallest favours are too deep for the ignorant to
perceive and appreciate.






[Names: Samu, Mitravaruna]
O Mitra and Varuna, I invoke and join your great
yajna of universal grandeur with homage especially
when I am faced with challenges and limitations. Your
latest thoughts, visions and revelations are created,
structured and gifted to us for the advancement of
knowledge and wisdom in relation to the highest reality
of existence.


[Names: Iyam, Visvani, Varunavakari]
O divines, Mitra and Varuna, this song of


adoration is offered to you in your holy congregations
of yajnic creation. Pray reduce our difficulties and help




us cross them to success and fulfilment. O saints and
sages, scholars and teachers, come you all and all time
protect and promote us with all happiness and well


Mandala 7/Sukta 62








[Names: Surya, Mitra, Varuna, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Puru, Samo]
The cosmic Sun, self refulgent life of the
universe, rises and radiates his vast and mighty abundant
rays of light, constantly shining day and night and
revealing the birth and evolution of all people of the
world. Sung and celebrated, adored and worshipped by
holy performers of yajna, he himself is the cosmic yajna
by virtue of his manifestive creation, the supreme
yajamana as well as the presiding Deity.






[Names: Mitraya]
O Sun, self refulgent lord giver of light and life,
come in response to these songs of adoration and
specified waves of thought energy stimulated by our


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 62 227


songs. Let the light arise in our heart and mind, and
speak to Mitra, Varuna, Aryama and Agni, powers of
love and friendship, judgement, discrimination and
integration, guidance and leadership with rectitude, and
energy and enlightenment in our human community.
Speak to us so that we may maintain a state of purity
and freedom from sin and crime.






[Names: Yacchantu, Agnih, Agni]
May they, Varuna, Mitra and Agni, happy and
beneficent, healers and destroyers of suffering, keepers
of divine laws of truth and nature in word and deed,
when properly celebrated and appreciated in nature and
character, give us a thousand forms of peace, power
and joy, bless us with unique light of knowledge, and
grant us complete fulfilment of our desire and ambition.


[Names: Sill, Dyavabhumi, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
O sun in high heaven and noble earth, both


dynamic, inviolable and sublime life giving powers,
protect us with your creative and rejuvenating powers.




Fortunately born and educated as humans, we know your
energy and efficacy. Give us the energy and resistance
so that we may never suffer the disorder of prana and
aparna vitalities of wind and respiration, dearest to
humans in the health system.






[Names: Sravayatam, Srutam, Mitravanuna]
O Mitra and Varuna, loving and discriminative
pranic vitalities of our health system, extend your power
and energy like helping hands for our life and health
and sprinkle the vital movement of our senses and mind
with liquid rejuvenation and replenishment of energy.
O youthful powers of rejuvenation, vest our people with
the glow of health and light of intelligence in response
to my invocation and input of pranayamic exercise for
the pranic energy system.






[Names: Suga]
Thus O Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, powers of
cosmic as well as earthly love and friendship, reason
and discrimination, justice and advancement in order,
guiding everything from the smallest particle to the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 63 229


cosmos and from the individual human to the world
community, bless us with the best of life’s gifts for the
enlightenment of our soul and the continuation of our
race. Let all our paths of life and living be simple and
straight, noble and easy to follow. O powers of health
and enlightenment, protect and promote us on our way
onward with all modes and means of happiness and well
being all round for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 63








[Names: Surya, Mitra, Varuna, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Udveti, Caksurmitrasya, Varunasya, Varunas]
The glorious Sun, self-refulgent sovereign lord
of the universe, rises high and higher, watching the
world, giving light and intelligence to humanity in
general. The lord that gives light to the day and depth
to the ocean dispels all darkness and confusion as the
storm disperses leaves of dry grass. (The mantra refers
to the rise of the light of Divinity in the soul of the
individual human being during meditation. The Light
blesses any one who practices meditation under the
instructions of a teacher and continues the practice with








[Names: Samanam, Suryasya, Suryas]
High rises the progenitor and inspirer of
humanity, supreme light of omniscience, inexhaustible
ocean of omnificence, keeping the chariot of the sun
and the wheel of time constantly moving, omnipotent
motive force at the centre of the moving universe.






[Names: Vibhrajamana, Usasam, Usasa]
Self-refulgent and all illuminative since the
origin of eternal dawns, the light of Divinity rises,
inspiring and enlightening, when sung and celebrated
by worshipful devotees. May this lord of cosmic light
bless me with spiritual fulfilment, the lord who never
frustrates his loved celebrant and never remisses on his
own majesty nor compromises with his own generosity.






[Names: Divo, Nunam]
The self-refulgent lord of heavenly light all-
watching, all-saviour, present far and wide everywhere,
emerges and shines in the heart of people when they,
inspired and reborn into self-consciousness by the light


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 63 231


of divinity, follow the meaningful paths of life and
perform their karmic acts with piety.






[Names: Yatra, Prati, Mitravarunota]
Where the immortals have carved and shown
the path for this mortal humanity to reach this divine
source of eternal light, to that lord giver of immortal
bliss the same path leads as by the speed of light. O
Mitra and Varuna, light of day and peace of night, sun
and cosmic ocean, sage and scholar, giver of knowledge
and leader to judgement and rectitude, when the rising
light emerges and the mind is awake, we honour and
serve you with homage and reverence and with
presentations of yajnic fragrance.






[Names: Suga]
Thus the loving light of life, the leading light of
judgement and discrimination, and the path maker to
the divine destination of eternal truth and bliss may, we
pray, bless us with the best gifts of life for our soul and
the continuance of our race. May all our paths of life
and progress be simple, straight and easy to follow. O




saints and sages, scholars and teachers, protect and
promote us by the paths of rectitude with all modes and
means of happiness and well being for all time without


Mandala 7/Sukta 64






[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Divi, Havyam]
O Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, the vapours
of your potential waters of soma abiding in the solar
region and the mists and vapours abiding in the earthly
atmosphere and the sky form into clouds and give us
showers of purifying and vitalising waters. May Mitra,
the sun, Aryama, the carrier wind, Varuna, cosmic
vitality, and the ruler of the social order nobly born and
justly appointed join and share our offers of holy
materials into the rain yajna for well being of the social
order and bring us life giving waters and peace and





[Names: Ilam, Mitravarunota]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 64 233


O rulers and keepers of the law of truth of the
great social order, O controllers and protectors of the
rivers and the seas, O defenders and ordainers of the
people and the land, come forward and join us, offer
homage and oblations with us so that Mitra and Varuna,
sun and the cosmic ocean, both liberal givers in instant
response, may bring rain, protection and nourishment
to the earth from the high regions of light.






[Names: Mitrastanno, Bravad, Sudasa]
May the teacher, Mitra, giver of light, the
discriminative judge, Varuna, and the brilliant ruler,
Aryama, all lead us by the paths of rectitude with all
good means of life and living, just as the lord supreme,
self-refulgent and generous, would speak and illuminate
the path of progress for the man of generosity so that,
under the protection of the lord supreme and the brilliant
leaders, we may enjoy and celebrate the gifts of life all
together with plenty and prosperity.







[Names: Uksetham]
O Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and love, lord




of judgement, discretion and discrimination, whoever
may, with meditative mind and soul, realise your
profound revelation and define the meaning and purpose
for the self, raising his intelligence and imagination high
to heaven and stabilising it there, pray bless him with
showers of peace and bliss. O rulers and ordainers of
in a happy home in a land of freedom and joy.






[Names: Somah, Soma, Avistam]
This song of homage and adoration I offer to
you, O Varuna, lord of profound judgement and
generosity, and to you Mitra, lord of infinite love and
light, the song pure and exhilarating as soma, and it is
for Vayu too, the dynamic force of cosmic order. Pray
inspire our mind and will and enlighten our rulers and
intelligentsia. O generous and refulgent lords, protect
and promote us with all modes and means of happiness
and all round well being all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 65




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Prati, Mitram, Mitra, Yayor]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 65 235


Early at the dawn of sun rise, with songs of
adoration, I invoke and worship Mitra, lord of infinite
love and universal friendship, Varuna, lord of omniscient
wisdom, judgement and justice, lords of pure
omnipotence whose life giving energy and power is
boundless and imperishable, first, foremost and highest,
and when invoked and realised, it is all victorious in
the battles of life.






[Names: Mitravaruna]
Mitra and Varuna, manifestations of the
Supreme Lord’s generous love and justice, are the best
and highest of nature’s bounties. They strengthen and
energise our lands and people and make them fertile
and creative. O Mitra and Varuna, may we receive your
favours whereby the earth and heaven, both exuberant,
may promote us day and night.



[Names: Rtasya]
nava durita tarema.


Many are their bonds and chains, bridges to
cross over untruth and sin, which are difficult to
approach and cross for the mortal man of enmity and




jealousy. O Mitra and Varuna, we pray, let us cross over
sin and evil by your divine path of truth and law just as
we cross the seas by the boat.






O Mitra and Varuna, Supreme Lord’s mani-
festations of cosmic love and justice in the integrative
and analytical forces of nature’s bounties working in
the centripetal and centrifugal operations of world,
enforce and energise our yajnic inputs of creative
production and let our programmes of land, language
and knowledge development soar high by the vitalities
of liquid energies and inspirations of new visions of
divinity and faith in action, ethics and policies, and may
you, in response to our yajnic performance, grant us
the best of your gifts of blissful light and dynamic energy
for our people.





[Names: Somah, Soma, Avistam]
This yajnic homage and song of celebration, O


Mitra and Varuna, is for you, pure and exhilarating as
soma, and I offer it for the divine energy of Vayu too,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 237


the dynamic force of cosmic order. Pray protect and
promote our mind and will, and enlighten our rulers
and intelligentsia. O generous and brilliant powers of
nature and humanity, protect and promote us with all
modes of happiness and all round well being all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 66






[Names: Devatah, Mitra, Varuna, Adityah, Aditya, Surya, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Susyah, Varunayoh, Varunayo, Mitrayor, Namasvan]
May this peaceful yet powerful song and yajna
of ours in praise of Mitra and Varuna, unborn and
distinctive yet integrated manifestations of the Lord
Divine’s potent love and justice vested in nature, go
forward full of energy and reverential gratitude and
stimulate the consequential process in nature for the
prosperity of humanity and the environment.






[Names: Asuryaya]
Generous saints and sages, brilliant scholars and
teachers, hold on to Mitra and Varuna, love and justice
of the Supreme Lord, omniscient, omnipotent and father
protector of the wise experts and scientists, for the
attainment of knowledge, power and courage.








O Mitra and Varuna, love and justice of the
omnipotent lord of our choice, protectors, promoters
and sanctifiers of the health and home of grateful
celebrants and all mortal humanity, pray inspire,
promote and accomplish our mind, intellect and will to
the state of perfection.






[Names: Yadadya, Suvati]
Whatever wealth of energy and blessed light of
wisdom today at the dawn of sunrise the lord immaculate
and sinless Mitra, universal love and friendship,
Aryama, guide and judge on the path of rectitude, Savita,
inspirer and generator, and Bhaga, omnipotent and
glorious, generate and radiate, that we pray may come
and bless us.





[Names: Supravirastu]
O self-refulgent Adityas, immortal powers of
light, generous givers of wisdom and vision, who protect
us from sin and darkness, may that home, homeland


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 239


and dominion of ours be protected, protective and full
of peace throughout our paths of onward progress.






[Names: Maho]
And the self-refulgent Adityas, self-governing
and great imperishable ruling powers of nature, and
mother Infinity, who observe and maintain the great law
of existence and disciplines of life, may guide us and
protect us over the paths of progress.






[Names: Prati, Varunam, Mitram, Aryamanam]
O self-refulgent and self-governing protectors
and light givers, in grateful response to your light and
protection, at the dawn of sunrise I praise and celebrate
Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, lord Infinite’s love, justice
and divine light of guidance, all destroyers of sin and


[Names: Raya, Savase, Iyam]
O saints and sages of dynamic will and wisdom,


let this golden wealth of divinity, this intelligence and
the song of praise be for the growth of holy strength




free from sin, and for the accomplishment of yajnic acts
for human progress and prosperity.






[Names: Isam]
O lord self-refulgent Varuna, lord of justice,
Mitra, just friend of humanity, give us the will and
wisdom that with all our wise and brave we be dear and
dedicated to you and we meditate to achieve the strength
and bliss of Divinity.






[Names: Bahavah, Trini]
Many are the leaders and pioneers, with vision
bright and pure as light of the sun and speech as flames
of fire, who extend the bounds of truth, law and selfless
service of life through yajnic creativity and, with their
wisdom, will and commanding action, lead and conduct
the three basic institutions of research and education,
governance and economy, and human culture and values
of life through beauty, goodness and truth with gratitude
to Divinity for the world.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 241




[Names: Anapyam]
They, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, brilliant
leaders and rulers with dedication to Dharma and justice,
love and friendship, and the right sense of action and
direction in the light of universal knowledge and eternal
values, conduct the yajnic governance and
administration of the social order through years and
months, days and nights, relentlessly holding on to the
Vedic vision of eternity. They achieve what has not yet
been achieved and thus extend the possibilities of the
good and happy life in the united world order.






[Names: Yadohate]
Today at the rise of dawn, with Vedic hymns
and meditation, we think and deliberate upon that social
order which is desired and which is to be achieved. For
that we call upon Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, leaders of
justice and order, love and light and the universal laws
of rectitude and direction. That we pray for, O lords,
since you command the chariot of the laws of truth,
action and progress on the right path.






[Names: Rtavana, Tesam]
ye ca surayah.


O brilliant scholars, rulers and all those who are
redoubtable leaders, lovers and seekers of truth by
knowledge and action, born in truth and extending the
bounds of the values of truth in the social order, terrible
in action with no tolerance for untruth and social evil,
let us abide in law in your good will and in the felicity
of a happy home in peace and security.




[Names: Yadimasurvahati]
aram.


And now (when we are at peace), the glorious
vision of Divinity arises on the horizon of consciousness
when the divine frequency of the illuminative mind with
the divine communicates it to the consciousness
instantly in response to meditative concentration for the
man of universal vision.





[Names: Sirsnah, Sirsno, Sapta, Suryam]
By virtue of the highest human intelligence in


respect of person and practice, seven dynamic faculties,
i.e., five senses, mind and intellect, carry the light of


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 66 243


Divinity to the soul at the right time for its good during
its meditative sojourn in the vehicle of this beautiful
body. This is the light of the self-refulgent Sun, creator,
sustainer and ordainer of the moving and non -moving
world from the particle to the entire universe through






[Names: Taccaksur, Pasyema, Saradah]
That Light Divine, pure and potent, universal
eye that watches all and blesses noble humanity, rises
and radiates for all time. May the Lord bless us that we
may live a hundred years watching it full for all the


[Names: Kavyebhir, Mitrasca, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
May Varuna, blazing lord of fearless justice, and
Mitra, fearless, loving and enlightened friend, come with


saints and sages to protect and promote our soma yajna
and join the celebration.








[Names: Devo, Pibatam, Somamatuji]
O Varuna and Mitra, powers of love and
judgement free from hate, malice and jealousy, come
and drink of the soothing and exhilarating soma at the






[Names: Mitravarund, Patam, Somam, Soma]
Come Mitra and Varuna, leaders and pioneers
of light and judgement, delighting in our yajna and
oblations of soma, protect our yajna, drink of soma and
advance the law of truth and rectitude.


Mandala 7/Sukta 67






[Names: Ashvins, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Prati]
O rulers and protectors of the people, wise and
bold, harbingers of light to the inauguration of the
morning yajna, to celebrate your chariot of the ruling
order and do honour to your yajnic rule with a mind
dedicated in homage to the order, like a son doing
honour and reverence to the father, I compose and offer
a song of celebration which would reach you as a
messenger and stimulate your love and favour.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 67 245






[Names: Aceti]
The fire of morning yajna is kindled and shines
for us, and the end of darkness is seen close at hand.
The sun is rising in the east like an honour flag of the
glory of the dawn, daughter of heaven.


TATU BU




[Names: Purvibhir]
Ashvins, twin harbingers of light dedicated to
truth of the ruling order, for sure the host and performer
of the inaugural session of the yajna of social order,
speaking words of truth and piety celebrates you and
your light in songs of adoration. O prophets of the light
of heaven commanding the wealth, honour and
excellence of the world, ascend your chariot and come
by the eternal paths of universal truth and rectitude.









[Names: Avorvam]
O sweet and kind twin divine powers of nature
and humanity, Ashvins, harbingers of a new dawn for
the social order of the world, dedicated to your means
and modes of preservation, defence and progress, and
desirous of advancement in the wealth, honour and
excellence of the nation, I invite you to take over the
conduct of this great yajna of the ruling order. May
seasoned and strong sages, scholars and experts of the
nation lead you hither. Come, share and promote for us
all the honey sweets of our yajnic planning and






[Names: Pracimu, Visva, Sacipati, Sactbhih]
O brilliant and generous Ashvins, commanders
of the twin powers of nature and humanity, inspire my
simple, ancient and progressive intelligence and will,
strengthen it and make it inviolable in the pursuit of
higher wealth, honour and excellence. In all our battles
of life, protect our mind and will and, with all the powers
and potential at your command, strengthen us to move
forward and rise higher and higher.




[Names: Avistam]
naso devavitim gamema.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 67 247


Ashvins, divine powers of creation, preser-
vation, recuperation and procreation, protect us in all
our acts of thought, will and action for achievement.
May our creative and procreative vitality remain intact
and inviolable for our posterity. By virtue of your
inspiration and invigoration for the sake of children and
grand children, let us be blest with jewels of posterity
and let us rise to the company of the divines.






[Names: Ahelata]
Ashvins who command the honey sweets of
knowledge and culture, this gift of homage as a treasure
trove already committed to you is offered for the sake
of company and friendship with you. Come forward,
join us here with a joyful mind free from hate and anger,
be among the human community of the earth and share
with us the sweets of good fellowship in faith and love.






[Names: Ekasmin]
Ashvins, responsive givers of fulfilment, pranic
energies of nature and mind, dedicated to a common
purpose with humanity, the radiant inspiration of your
spiritual power as a carrier of vision goes past the




fluctuations of the five senses, mind and intellect. The
seven, which otherwise involve the soul with
fluctuations of the mind, when converted, inverted and
converged on to the spirit of your vision at the centres
of consciousness, no longer distract the soul, instead
they become the carriers of consciousness to the divine
goal of spiritual bliss.






[Names: Asascata]
Never forsake the generous : Be inexhaustible
sources of incentive and encouragement for those who
support charity with means and materials, those who
help out friends and relatives in distress, and those who
give liberal gifts of lands, cows and knowledge and
things the needy love and desire.






O youthful Ashvins, complementarities of nature
and humanity, listen to my prayer and invocation: come


home to the house of liberal donor in yajna, bear and
bring the jewels of life for the givers, honour and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 68 249


appreciate the wise and bold, and thus protect and
promote us all time with all happiness and well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 68


[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Havyani]
O riders of noble steeds, Ashvins, youthful
heroes of the human nation, illustrious warriors and
marvellous achievers, listen to the voices of your friends


and admirers, come, join us and enjoy the sweets and
delicacies of our yajnic hospitality.






[Names: Tiro]
Delightful delicacies are here laid out for you.
Come straight to partake of our holy offerings. Throw
off the enemies, root out distress, listen to our call and






[Names: Asmabhyam, Suryavasu]
Fast moves your chariot at the speed of mind
across the spaces, it is equipped with a hundred means




of defence and victory whereon you ride with the dawn
of a new day for us.








[Names: Ayam, Somasud]
When this divine chariot of yours, dedicated to
the moon for peace and joy roars over mountains and
clouds, then the eminent scholar and the yajnic scientist
turns it for you with new inputs.





[Names: Citram]
Whatever your food that may be special or
surplus, keep that in reserve exclusively for people for
the time of distress. They would love you for that
because they honour the protector dear to them.






And let that insight, incentive and experiment
of your help for people in need be for the weak and
elderly, for those on the move such as the deprived, the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 68 251


fallen, uprooted and refugees, and let it be for those
who give in charity for the sake of charity. That is the
philanthropic role you take on for the protection of




[Names: Nirim]
yuvakuh.


And be friends with the man who was once
affluent but now is in distress since jealous friends and
associates deserted him and cast him insolvent into the
sea of misfortune. Save him, take him across the sea, he
is loyal and looks up to you for help.






[Names: Vrkaya, Srutam, Sayave, Yavaghnyam]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and energy of a new
day, against the wolfish thief and the aggressor, for the
powers of law and punishment against exploitation, and
for the lazy and the backward, bring force and counsel
whenever the situation calls on you to act. You who
command the competence for correction and
rejuvenation with your powers can revitalise old cows
and waste lands and make them overflow with milk and
honey like abundant streams of water.








[Names: Usasam, Usasa]
Thus does the divine poet, wakeful in advance
of the rise of dawn, with holy mind and faithful
intelligence, celebrate in song the divine Ashvins, twin
harbingers of new life to nature and humanity. May the
inviolable Mother Nature and Infinity advance him in
life with vision, will and energy. O saints and scholars,
ruler and administrators, O Ashvins, protect and promote
us with peace, happiness and all time well being in life.


Mandala 7/Sukta 69






[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ghrtavartanih]
O harbingers of light and fresh life for the dawn
of a new day, let your golden chariot traversing heaven,
earth and the skies by powerful forces on blazing wheels
across the cosmic waters come to us loaded with
nourishments and inspiring energies and be the guide
and protector of humanity for higher victories. (The
mantra is an address to the brilliant powers of social
governance and management for the protection and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 69 253


progress of the people. These powers should act as
harbingers of fresh life and energy with the light of a
new sun at the rise of a new dawn every day.)






[Names: Viso]
Let this chariot structured on five-fold body
bound by three bonds come to us evolving day by day.
It is structured on a five-fold chassis fixed by three bonds
in an ascending order and it moves forward as controlled
by the mind. By this, O Ashvins, you come to the people
and radiate light and energy to those who are in search
of divinity. On way, you choose your own stages of rest
and travel for further progress.


(This mantra is a metaphor of the human body
in which the ruler is soul, the controller is mind, and
motive forces for perception and volition are senses.
The body is made up of five elements: earth, water, fire,
air and space, and characterised by three conditioning
qualities of nature: sattva, rajas and tamas which are
intellectual, sensual and material qualities of personality.
It is through this body-chariot that the Ashvins,
circuitous complementarities of divine nature radiate
and inspire light and energy to the human being and to








[Names: Svasva]
speedy motive forces, destroyers of jealousy, enmity and
suffering, come hither to us and share the honey sweets
of the human world. Let your chariot heading to the
destination with your associates reach the bounds of
heavenly space by its whirling wheels.





[Names: Yuvoh]
The youthful dawn, daughter of the mighty sun,
by choice takes on to your grace and splendour as her
mate over and across the soothing night, since while
you protect and promote the devout with your energies,
your power with its potential circumambulates the light
of the sun.






[Names: Tena]
And that which is the master of your chariot


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 69 255


and, wearing the splendour of the sun, rides it and goes
about on the ways of life over the paths of existence
and comes home to human habitations, by that very
divine light and grace, O charioteers of Divinity, at the
rise of dawn, bring in the peace and bliss of life to this
our universal yajna of the world’s social order.






[Names: Nara, Purutra]
O leaders of humanity, pioneers of light, eager
like a planet drawn by the sun, come today to our yajnic
social order and bring in the dawn of a new day. The all
time seekers of Divinity through eternity have invoked
you with the best of their thought, will and action. Let






[Names: Yuvam, Patatribhirasr]
O leaders and pioneers of the world, harbingers
of light and power, you retrieve the ruling powers sunk
in distress, recover the resources of wealth and joy
hidden in the oceans, and you take them across the
oceans of water and space to the shore to the wanted
destination by unfailing, indefatigable and inviolable
floating and flying machines created by your marvellous




knowledge, power and skill.








Listen to my call, O youthful Ashvins, twin
powers of nature and humanity, leading lights of the
nation, go to the basic sources of wealth and knowledge
over land and sea and across the skies, bear and bring
the jewels of life, appreciate, honour and admire the
brilliant and the brave, and protect and promote us with
all time peace and prosperity of well being.


Mandala 7/Sukta 70






[Names: Ashvins, Devath, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ashvin, Sunaprstho]
Ashvins, world heroes of universal choice, come
to our yajna. The seat on the earth vedi is fixed, reserved
and proclaimed for you and stays like a war horse at
rest after victory. That you would occupy without
disturbance as in your own home and there be firm as
the pole star.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 70 257






[Names: Sisakti]
Ashvins, O complementary currents of nature,
the yajnic process in song and action with holy offerings
of fragrant havi reaches you and serves you. The fire of
yajna is burning in the house of the yajamana, which,
like the radiations of sunlight, activates the catalysis of
heat and water in nature and fills up the streams and
seas with rain.






[Names: Yani, Whichever]
on top of mountains or clouds, you carry food and energy
from the regions of light and vest it in great forests,
herbs and trees and communicate it among people of
the world for the man of yajnic generosity.






[Names: Canistam, Puruni, Anu]
Divine Ashvins, life giving powers of natural




and human complementarities, whatever appropriate
gifts of food and energy worthy of the sages you radiate
and vest into herbs and waters, bearing jewels of eternal
value, give us too in continuance at the present time as
you have been doing for ages immemorial, as you






[Names: Susruvamsa, Purunyabhi, Prati]
Ashvins, learned scholars of knowledge and
practical application of knowledge, speak to us of the
earlier and eternal knowledge and formulations of the
seers of Divinity and nature. Come and grace our yajna,
and may your knowledge and wisdom be appropriately
good and beneficial for our people.






Ashvins, observers of truth and law in theory
and practice, this yajna of adoration and liberal havi
presided over by Vedic scholars and conducted with
Vedic hymns for you in honour of Divinity is dedicated
to the unity and victory of humanity over want and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 71 259


suffering. Come and join this holy programme of
brilliance, peace and settlement for all. These words of
song are chanted for you and radiate for you in living






[Names: Iyam]
O generous and brilliant Ashvins, divine and
human givers of success and fulfilment, come and join
this thoughtful programme of yajna, this song of
adoration, this divine praise and prayer. These sacred
words of adoration and acts of homage are offered in
your honour. O saints and scholars, divine powers of
nature and humanity, listen, and protect and promote
us with all time peace, prosperity, happiness and well


Mandala 7/Sukta 71




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Asvamagha, Sarumasmad]
The night takes leave of her sister dawn,




darkness departs and clears the path for the light of day.
O harbingers of light and wisdom, pioneers of action
and achievement, masters of plenty and prosperity,
Ashvins, we invoke you at this hour of the dawn, pray
come and bless us, and dispel all sin and evil, darkness
and ignorance, inaction and poverty far off from us day
and night relentlessly.






[Names: Upayatam, Yuyutam]
Ashvins, harbingers of anew dawn of sweetness
and light of culture and prosperity, come by your chariot
laden with riches of beauty and bliss for generous
mortals, ward off from us sufferance and disease, and
protect and promote us day and night relentlessly.






[Names: Syumagabhastim]
On the rise of the new dawn when darkness is
cleared, O devout, generous, gracious and powerful
pioneers of light and wisdom, turn and guide your
chariot towards us. Ashvins, harbingers of light and joy,
steer your chariot laden with wealth, controlled by reins
of sun rays and powered by the wise dedicated to the
truth of divine laws, come to us and bless all.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 71 261






Ashvins, protectors of humanity dedicated to the
truth and law of nature and Divinity, may your chariot
laden with wealth and wisdom, inbuilt with three-fold
bonds of physical, mental and spiritual discipline, going
by the light of sun, transport you hither to us. Come by
this chariot to us following the paths which the lord of
universal vision and eternal wisdom reveals to you.






[Names: Yuvam, Niramhasas]
You exempt the active and dynamic from the
decay of age, raise the relentlessly progressive
commonwealth to higher achievements in no time, you
save the man of threefold freedom of body, mind and
soul from sin and ignorance, and you rejuvenate the
optimist back to inner light and strength when he feels








[Names: Iyam]
Ashvins, leaders of light and action, generous
givers of fulfilment, this reflection and prayer, these
words of adoration, this act and song of homage offered
to you, pray accept with pleasure. May these holy
tributes reach you. May you, saints and scholars, leaders
and pioneers, harbingers of light, freedom and progress,
protect and promote us with happiness and well being


Mandala 7/Sukta 72





[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Purus, Puru, Sriya]
O saints, scholars and scientists, dedicated to
truth and the law of nature and divinity, handsome of
form and person with enviable grace and splendour,
come to our yajna by your swift, scientific and brilliant
chariot. All your admirers and allied cooperative powers
wait for you.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 72 263




[Names: Yuvorhi]
Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge
and wealth of the world, dedicated to truth and law of
nature and divinity, come to our yajna by your chariot
in the company of divine sages and brilliant scholars,
with all your strength of mind and soul. Your friendship
and ours and our ancestral traditions and also our
fraternity, pray know of this and give us the benefit of
this commonalty.






[Names: Avivasan]
And the songs of praise in honour of the Ashvins
and the hymns of adoration in honour of their sister
dawn awake, inspire and arouse all, and they reverberate
and fill the vast heaven and earth. O brilliant Ashvins,
the vibrant devotee chants these well in faith with love
for the brilliant lights of truth.






[Names: Usasah, Usasa, Urdhvam]
Ashvins, harbingers of light, wisdom and wealth




of life, when the dawns arise and shine, poets and priests
sing hymns of praise in your honour, the lord creator
Savita in the glory of self-refulgence sends up the orb
of sun for the day, and the fires of yajna fed on holy
fuel rise in flames to glorify the light of Divinity.






Ashvins, holy harbingers of the light of truth
and law of eternity and permanent values, pray come
from behind, come from front, come from below, come
from above, come all round from all directions of the
world with the wealth of life for all the people of the
earth. O holy powers of light and wealth of excellence,
protect and promote us with all time peace and well
being for all people.


Mandala 7/Sukta 73




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Atarisma, Purudamsa, Purutama]
The voice of the worshipper invokes and
celebrates the Ashvins, harbingers of the light and bliss


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 73 265


of divinity, most versatile in generous action, most
ancient, original and immortal. Offering songs of praise
in homage to divinity in meditative search for the life
divine, we cross over this darkness and ignorance of






O light and love of life divine, Ashvins,
harbingers of bliss, the person who joins the divine
consciousness in concentration, worships the lord of
bliss and surrenders his carnal self in communion, gets
settled in the peace of samadhi. Come close into the
heart, O light of divinity and radiations of super life,
suffuse this spirit in the honey sweets of bliss, so says
the yajamana in union to you in the sessions of yoga



[Names: Ahema, Srustiveva]
O mighty generous powers of the divine circuit


of light, harbingers of energy and enlightenment, we
extend the possibilities of yajna and follow the path of




achievement wider and wider from the individual to
society on the physical, mental and spiritual level. Listen
and accept this homage and invitation to join us. The
most enlightened high priest celebrating divinity with
hymns of adoration is awake and, as on the waves of
thought, comes and exhorts you.






[Names: Samandhamsyagmata, Sivena]
You are destroyers of evil and negativities, you
are abundant and open minded, and strong of hand in
charity. You are harbingers of joy and energy for all.
Exhilarating delicacies abound all round. Come and join
our people with all possibilities of peace and fulfilment.






[Names: Pray]
O mighty generous powers of divinity in nature
and humanity, dedicated to truth, come from the back,
come from front, come from below, come from above,
come from all quarters of the world and bring the wealth
of life for all our people, whatever their class or social
status. O saints and sages, scholars and scientists,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 74 267


divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote
us all time with all round peace and fulfilment.


Mandala 7/Sukta 74






[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Ayam, Sacivasu]
Brilliant Ashvins, these yajakas dedicated to life
divine invoke and call upon you for light, and I too, O
versatile commanders of the wealth of knowledge,
power and vision, invite you and pray for protection
and advancement since you visit and bless every
individual and every community.






[Names: Yuvam, Arvagratham]
O leading lights of humanity, you provide
wonderful food for the body, mind and soul, provide
inspiration and incentive for the man of truth and
rectitude. With an equal mind with us all, bring up your
chariot, add to the joy of the community and share the
honey sweets of peace and pleasure.








[Names: Dugdham]
Ashvins, creators as well as harbingers of light
and inspiration, come hither to us, add to the power and
grace of our corporate programme and share the honey
sweets of our achievement. O creators and winners of
wealth, honour and excellence, brave and generous,
enjoy the showers of milk and nectar. Pray come, do






[Names: Asvaso, Maksuyubhirnara]
Ashvins, leading lights of nature and humanity,
the transports which bear you to the house of the
generous yajamana radiate and shine and illuminate the
hall of yajna. O brilliant and powerful lights of humanity,
twin divines, come by the fastest powers of sun rays
and grace our yajna.






[Names: Adha]
And now, Ashvins, leading lights of the truth
and law of nature and humanity, brilliant sages and
scholars are on the move and come to join you in pursuit


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 75 269


of knowledge. To them, grant honour and fame with
the wealth of achievement, and bless us with a happy
and peaceful home.






[Names: Savasa, Susuvurnara]
Those who are simple, honest and non-violent
saviours and protectors of the people go forward shining
as by royal chariots. They, leaders and pioneers, rise by
their own strength and find a happy home in the
promised land of their own choice.


Mandala 7/Sukta 75






[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Vyusa]
The dawn arises from the light of heaven,
revealing the awful splendour and majesty of Divinity
by the law of eternity, dispelling the odious darkness,
hate and jealousy, and illuminates the paths of daily
activity with inspirations of highest freshness of life
energy for humanity.








[Names: Mahe, Citram, Sravasyum]
O dawn, light of divinity, at the rise of this new
day inspire us to rise to higher faith and greater good
fortune and lead us forward to achieve greater happiness
and well being. O divine harbinger of new life and
vision, bless us with wondrous wealth, honour and
excellence and awaken mortal humanity to self-
recognition and the human condition with gratitude to





[Names: Divinity, Usaso, Janayanto]
These are radiations of light divine at the break
of dawn, wonderful, sublime and immortal that come
and inspire, creating a deep sense of awareness of the
ways and disciplines of life divine. They radiate through
the cosmic spaces out and vibrate in the space within in
the heart and abide in the soul.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 75 271




[Names: Jigati, Abhipasyanti, Vayuna]
This is that light divine, child of heaven arising
at dawn from afar, which instantly and always awakens
and illuminates all children of the earth, whatever their
class or status, and unites the human soul with the divine.
It watches the ways and karmas of people and sustains
and inspires life across the universe.






[Names: Vajinivati, Suryasya, Suryas, Rsistuta]
The youthful light of the rising sun, inspiring
and energising sustainer of life, commands the wealths
of the world and rules the life and homes of people on
earth. Studied and celebrated by sages and seers, seeing
the devout rise in age and experience, the magnificent
dawn shines on, adored by the yajakas when the fires
of yajna are kindled early morning.





[Names: Prati, Yati, Subhra]
The radiations of light carrying the glorious
dawn shine in splendour of various and wondrous rays
and appear like steeds of the celestial chariot by which




the heavenly maiden goes forward on her journey of
light dispelling darkness of the world and bears and
brings the jewels of wealth for the people.






[Names: Satya, Rujad, Usasam, Usasa]
Ever true, served by the truthful, ever great
honoured by the great, ever glorious adored by the
brilliant sages and devout yajakas, the dawn destroys
strongholds of darkness and gives freedom and energy
of morning radiations to those who love and wait for
the rise of a new day of divine awareness.






[Names: Purubhojo, Purusata]
O light divine, give us jewels of the wealth of
lands and cows and brilliance of speech and knowledge,
swiftness of transport and achievement, food and
prosperity for all, and a heroic line of descendants. Let
none malign our manliness and house of yajna. O saints
and sages, protect and promote us all ways all time with
all happiness and well being.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 76 273


Mandala 7/Sukta 76






[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
Self-refulgent Savita, leading light of the world
and inspirer of life, radiates universal and immortal light
for the benefit of humanity. The sun, eye of the divinities
of nature and humanity, is risen by the cosmic yajna of
divinity and the light of dawn illuminates and reveals
the entire world to view.






[Names: Abhudu]
The paths of divinity are clearly visible for me,
blissful, unobstructed and unobstructing, showing the
order of stars and planets. The morning light of dawn,
symbol of divinity, is risen in the east and spreads







[Names: Tanidahani, Yatah, Suryasya, Suryas]
Many and intense are those resplendent lights
of the divine sun arisen long before antiquity from where
the dawns are seen rising like fire but never seen






[Names: Gulham, Usasam, Usasa]
They alone share communion and union with
divinities in the house of meditative yajna who,
dedicated to divine truth and law, are veteran visionaries
and creative poets, who are sagely father figures and
realise the mysterious sublimity of light divine, and who,
having realised and mastered the activating mantra,
recreate and reveal the light of divinity in spiritual
vision.






[Names: Samana]
Men of vision dedicated to common and equal
programmes of vast significance join together not only
in mutual covenant but also in absolute union, and
together endeavour to realise their divine aim without
[Names: They]
the laws and disciplines of truth and divinities, nor do


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 76 275


they violate the conventions and traditions of the wise
and, marching forward by the light of stars and wealth
of Vedic knowledge without violence to any one, they






[Names: Prati, Gavam]
O dawn, lady of light and good fortune, nobly
born of the sun divine, generous sustainer and giver of
inspiration and energy, harbinger of light and controller
of mind and senses, brilliant and celebrant sages of
highest faith and intelligence awake at dawn offer you
homage with songs of adoration: Come, first born, light
of divinity, shine and bring us too the life divine.






[Names: Dirghasrutam]
This light divine of eternal life that arises at
dawn shines and dispels the darkness of the external
and internal world of humanity. It illuminates the mind
and soul of the people dedicated to holy truth and the
divine law of eternity, perfects their faculties and guides
them over the paths and ways of divine pursuits to the
accomplishment of success and glory. It bears and brings




us the wealth, honour and excellence of life we have
heard of since time immemorial and leads us to the
eternal light of divinity. Thus is it celebrated by the most
brilliant sages of knowledge and wisdom. Pray save us,
protect us and advance us with the means and modes of
peace and fulfilment all ways, all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 77






[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Abhud, Agnih, Agni]
Lo, there arises the dawn and shines like a
youthful maiden breathing, radiating and inspiring life
energy and light for the moving world. Let the holy fire
be kindled. When it is kindled, it creates the light and
dispels the darkness of humanity. This too is the holy
fire kindled at the dawn of creation which radiates light
and life for the living beings and dispels the darkness
of the pre-creation state.








[Names: Visvam, Hiranyavarna]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 77 277


the light of glory, bearing the power and purity of
divinity, and thus it beams forth over the world in golden
majesty and blissful beauty as the mother of light and
holy speech and shines as harbinger of days, each anew






[Names: Devanam]
It is the eye of divinities, revealing and radiating
the glory of divinity, bearing light and good fortune,
leading the glorious sun like the white horse of the
universal chariot of existence. Thus appears the dawn
manifested in rays of light in wondrous majesty
prevailing all over the world.






[Names: Antivama, Yavaya]
O lady of light, O dawn of a new day, be close
at hand with wealth and loveliness, let the unfriendly
be far off, pray shine and illuminate the wide world,
and let all our paths of progress be free from fear and
violence. Ward off hate, jealousy and enmity, bring us
the wealth, honour and excellence of life, and inspire
and energise the power, prosperity and generosity of




the celebrant, you who command the wealth, power and
majesty of the world.






[Names: Asme, Sresthebhir, Isam]
O brilliant dawn, blissful light of Divinity, shine
for us with the best and highest values of existence by
the lights of the sun, giving us good health and longevity.
O cherished benefactor of the world, bear and bring for
us food and energy, intelligence and all wealth of life
abundant with lands, cows and brilliant thought and
speech, horses and advancement, and an efficient
progressive social order for our success and fulfilment.






[Names: Sasamasu]
O dawn, nobly born of the sun, child of Divinity,
brilliant sages, poets and scholars adore and glorify you
with holy words, thoughts and actions. O light divine,
bear and bring to bless us excellent wealth, honour and
glory rising and ever rising. O saints, sages and heroes
of humanity, protect and promote us with peace,
progress and all round well being all time.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 78 279


Mandala 7/Sukta 78




[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Rshi, Prati, Srayanto, Jyotismata]
The first flames of the dawn are visible, the rays


of its light rise and radiate upward on the firmament. O
dawn, light of divinity, come hither to us and bring us
the beauty and glory of the wealth of the world by your
great and grand chariot of light.






In response, the kindled fire of yajna honours


the rising dawn while the vibrant priests adore the light
divine with holy thoughts, actions and words of song.
The dawn, brilliant light of divinity, rises higher in
flames and expands with light, dispelling all darkness
of the world and warding off all evil, sin and crime.








[Names: Ajijanantsuryam]
And there in front yonder are seen those higher
radiations of the dawn, lights of flame shining and
illuminating the world. Up rises the sun, the fire of yajna
grows and the flames of the holy fire expand, and thus
all disagreeable darkness goes out, dispelled by the light
divine.






[Names: Aceti, Asthad]
The resplendent and munificent dawn, child of
heaven, is perceived rising on the horizon, riding her
chariot efficient in service, powered by her own energy
and drawn by efficient, well trained and well directed
horses. All people of the world see this brilliant dawn
and feel blest.






[Names: Tilvilayadhvam, Usaso]
You, O Dawn today, people of noble mind, our


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 79 281


own, wealthy, honourable and excellent, and we all,
invoke, admire and adore. O resplendent and
magnificent lights of dawn, inspire us with love and
refinement. O lights of divinity, saints and sages, protect
and promote us with all peace, prosperity and happiness


Mandala 7/Sukta 79








[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Vyusa, Susamdrgbhir]
The lights of the dawn arise, rejuvenating,
revealing the paths of life for the day and awakening
all five communities of the people for their daily chores.
She reveals the birth of the sun by beatific radiations
and as the sun rises it illuminates heaven and earth and
fills them with light.







[Names: Vyanjate, Usaso, Jyotir]
The lights of the dawn radiate their rays and fill
the space from earth to the bounds of heaven. Together
they radiate in succession and act like a divine force in




unison. Constantly those radiations turn out the darkness
and, like the circuitous operations of solar radiation,
they give light and life to the world in sequence.






[Names: Abhudusa, Indratama]
The dawn arises, most potent and regenerative,
wealthy and munificent, and creates and recreates food,
energy, wealth, honour and excellence for the goodness
and well being of humanity. May the divine dawn, child
born of the eternal light of life, bring us the most
inspiring and rejuvenating wealths of life for the good
life and well being of noble humanity.






[Names: Tavaduso]
O dawn of the light of divinity, give us ample
wealth and competence for the good life, as much as
you grant to the devout celebrants who have adored you
since eternity and known you by the roar of thunder,
the shower of clouds, and the bellowing of the bull,
when you open the caves of mighty mountains and
clouds and unveil the folds of darkness from over the
light of the sun.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 80 283






[Names: Devamdevam, Vyucchanti]
Inspiring every noble person for the attainment
of wealth and competence for the good life, radiating
the light of divinity and holy intelligence for us,
enlightening our thought and will with the original
message of divinity for advancement in generosity, O
lights of the dawn, protect and promote us with all modes
and means of success for peace, progress and the good


Mandala 7/Sukta 80





[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Prati, Usasam, Usasa, Vivartayantim]
Brilliant saints and vibrant sages at the very first
dawn of life receive the light of divinity in revelation,
celebrate the dawn of light in inspired songs of
adoration, the same light of dawn that illuminates and
enlightens all regions of the universe within the bounds
of heaven and earth every revolution of the day.








[Names: Jyotisosa, Agra, Suryam, Surya]
This is the dawn bearing and bringing new life
and energy, that deep and sublime light of divinity which
enlightens ignorance with knowledge and informs even
darkness with light. It goes forward first before sunrise,
youthful, bold, enlightened, unrestrained and free, and
gives light to the sun and life to the yajna fire.





[Names: Asvavatir, Usaso, Ghrtam]
May the blissful dawns every morning,
abounding in light and dynamism, energy, fertility and
procreation of the race in heroic generations, illuminate
and energise our home and family, give us showers of
water, milk and honey, and bless us with total fulfilment
from all quarters of the world. O lights of dawn, protect
and promote us with all peace, progress and happiness
of the good life always all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 81




[Names: Usha, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Pratyu]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 81 285


The great and glorious dawn, child of the light
of divinity, is seen rising, dispelling mists and darkness,
and illuminates with light the world of our actions,
brilliant guide as she is for the day.






[Names: Udusriyah, Suryah, Surya, Taveduso, Suryasya, Suryas]
And then the sun, friend and associate together,
takes over and, blazing with splendour, sends forth
radiations of light and illuminates the planet earth. O
dawn, in your original revelation of light divine and in
the solar radiations, we pray, let us abide and act with
faith and delightful experience of the illumination.




[Names: Prati, Puru]
mayah.


O dawn, daughter of heaven, receiver of divine
light and giver of inspiring radiations, who bring us
cherished gifts of eternal and infinite blessings like the
jewels of life for the generous man of charity, we pray,
may we be instant and faithful recipients of your light
divine, peace and joy, every morning.








[Names: Ucchanti, Tasyaste]
Generous and divine dawn, great and glorious,
who with your splendour enlighten the world to have
the vision and awareness of divinity, we pray that we
too may experience that vision and share those jewels
of life, and thus abide in life like favourite children of
the divine mother.






[Names: Taccitram]
O light of dawn, bear and bring for us that vision,
wealth and competence of life, wonderful, various,
versatile and infinite, heard over the longest time and
widest space which, O light of self-refulgent heaven, is
your gift to mortal humanity as food for the body, mind
and soul. Give us that wealth of food for our benefit
and enlightenment.






[Names: Sravah]
O dawn, inspirer of the wealthy and powerful,
commanding the light and truth of existence in action,
bring immortal food and wealth, honour and fame to


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 82 287


the wise and brave. Bring food and energy and the
wealth of lands and cows for us all, and ward off all sin,
error and enmity from us, shine and give us settlement
in peace.


Mandala 7/Sukta 82






[Names: Indra, Varunau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indravaruna, Sarma, Dirghaprayajyumati]
Indra, lord of ruling power, and Varuna, lord of
justice, you both together for our people in general
provide a very home and comfortable security of life so
that they may do their creative and productive work in
peace without fear and violence and, in our joint
ventures for the nation, we may defeat, better win over,
the person who out of hate and malevolence injures or
violates the peace of a citizen engaged in continuous
work for the nation.







[Names: Samralanyah, Visve]
O Indra, lord ruler, and Varuna, lord of justice,




grand powers of the common wealth, one of you is called
‘Samrat, sovereign ruler of the nation as one collected
person’, the other is called ‘Swarat, autonomous ruler
of the judiciary as a sub-system of the sovereign state’.
O brave and generous lords, may all the brilliant sages
and scholars of the nation and all the divinities of nature
in this vast sovereign common wealth of humanity vest
you with dignity and power.


to the two extreme ends, though both mutually balanced,
of the sovereign social order, whether the order is a
nation or the entire human world on earth. One is
‘Samrat’ the total sovereign system with one supreme
head, the other is ‘swarat’, the autonomous individual,
the citizen with his or her freedoms and loyalty to the
national law, and the balance of rights and duties of the






[Names: Anvapam, Suryam, Surya, Indravarunad]
With your light and lustre, O Indra and Varuna,
sovereign ruler and lord of independent judgement, state
and the individual, general will and collective power
and individual will and autonomous judgement, together
you break open the flood gates of waters and national
energy in social dynamics. You raise the social brilliance
in the regions of culture and enlightenment to the highest


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 82 289
degrees of freedom and sovereignty.


O lords of power and judgement, together in
the joy of this wonderful ruling order, you replenish the
dry streams of life to flow with fresh energy and energise
our bored will and intellect with new vision, ambition
and resolution all round.






[Names: Yuvamid]
Indra and Varuna, ruler and preserver of both
the citizen and the state for earthly as well as for higher
values, men of fiery passion and action call upon you
in their joint struggles for advancement and fresh
acquisitions. Men of settled vision and judgement seated
on firm ground call upon you in their efforts for peace,
preservation and stability. Creators of the wealth of the
nation thus, we all call upon you in our battles for both
yoga and kshema, progress and preservation in balance,
constant watchers and instantly responsive as you are.






[Names: Ksemena, Varunam, Varuna]
Indra and Varuna, with your strength and vision




you rule and advance and thus serve all these children
of the earth. Mitra, power of love and friendship with
warmth of passion for peace and stability serves and
supports Varuna, judgement and discrimination for the
collective good, and the other, Indra, power and passion
for advancement, with all his storm troopers fast as
winds fights for the defence and advancement of the
good of all.






[Names: Mahe, Varunasya, Varunas, Ajamim]
For the greatness and rising prosperity of the
social order of peace and progress, Indra and Varuna
augment its power and lustre and preserve and increase
what its basic and consolidated national asset is. One
of them, Indra, overthrows its unfriendly and hostile
opponents who try to sabotage and arrest its progress,
and the other, Varuna, even with minimum but







[Names: Yasya]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 82 291


crookedness can ever touch or disturb that mortal man,
that ruler of the social order, whose yajna of individual
freedom of action and loyalty to the social order and its
laws, O Indra and Varuna, lord of omnipotence and lord
of justice and mercy, glorious and generous rulers of
the universe, you bless, visit, lead and guide.






[Names: Arvan, Yuvorhi]
O Indra and Varuna, leading lights of nature and
humanity, lords of power, justice and mercy of the social
and natural order, since I enjoy your love and friendship,
come hither to me with protection and promotion, listen
to my call, and bear, bring and give me the benefit of
your friendship and whatever is peaceful, blissful and






[Names: Asmakam]
Indra and Varuna, ruling powers of the people
and the social order, be the front leaders and warriors
in every battle of ours since the leading lights of both




the people and the ruling services invite you in their
struggles for the progress of their children and grand




[Names: Asme, Avadhram, Slokam]
mahe.


May Indra, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, lord of
power, justice and generosity, love and friendship, and
guide and lord ruler of the world order, bless us with
honour and excellence and give us great good peace
and prosperity ever increasing. We pray for the kind
and beneficial light of mother Infinity and celebrate the
glory of the self-refulgent Savita, lord creator, inspirer
of life and protector of the truth and law of this expansive


Mandala 7/Sukta 83


[Names: Indra, Varunau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
AAT UW ९ ॥



[Names: Yuvam, Dasa]
Indra and Varuna, O warrior and tactician of the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 83 293


commanding order, the bold and brave front rank
leaders, seeing your power and performance, march
forward and join you with large axes in hand and reach
you as leaders with an open door. O fighters, having
destroyed the forces of darkness and sabotage, with all
your forces protect and promote the noble, the generous
and the dedicated people of society.






[Names: Yatra, Yatra, Indravarunadhi]
Where the leading brave of the nation meet with
banners in hand, where there would be but little good
in battle or in contest, where the people of the earth
quake with fear though they see the light and joy of
heaven otherwise, of that, O Indra and, Varuna, speak
to us.




[Names: Asthur]
Indra and Varuna, destroyers of the evil and the
violent, look to the ends of the earth, let the clang of
arms and roar of battle rise to the sky, let the people’s
enemies stand at the door and face me, and in any crisis,




as you hear the signal and the clarion call, come forward
with all the defence forces.






[Names: Indravaruna, Brahmanyesam, Sudasamavatam, Sudasamavata]
Indra and Varuna, leading warrior and enemy
destroyer and saviour and rebuilder, facing and breaking
the difficult enemy lines of offence with fatal weapons,
protect the generous ruler of the land. In this strife of
battle, listen to the earnest voices of the priests engaged
in yajnic development of the nation, and let the priest-
like prophecy and expectations of the people seeking
peace and freedom come true.






[Names: Indravarunavabhya]
Indra, lord of power, Varuna, lord of justice and
mercy, the evil deeds of the violent and the adversities
caused by the saboteurs torment me all round. You alone
rule and order the power and prosperity of both
terrestrial and celestial worlds. Protect us on the earth
and lead us to the light and joy of freedom beyond the
bounds of earth.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 83 295






[Names: Geng, Varunam, Varuna]
Both the people and the leaders call upon you
in battles, O Indra and Varuna, for victory in battle and
regaining of success and prosperity. They call upon you
in battle where you defend the generous ruler against
tens of tormenting dictators and, alongwith the ruler,
you save three orders of scholars and sages in three fields
of arts, sciences and universal values of Dharma and





[Names: Sudasamindra, Satya]
Indra and Varuna, spirit of life and sense of
judgement victorious over evil and impiety, even ten
brilliant but impious and impulsive forces together
cannot fight against the versatile and generous ruler of
the self and society. The prayers of holy men dedicated
to divinity in the house of yajna and charity come true
and the divinities of humanity and nature both join the
invocations of these holy men in their acts of piety and








[Names: Dasarajne, Sudasa, Svityanco, Varunavasiksatam, Varunavasiksata]
Indra and Varuna, you come to the help of the
liberal man of charity and the benevolent ruler
surrounded by hostilities all round, and you join his
house of yajnic discipline and ruling order where
intelligent and pious sages help the priestly performers
with offers of oblations and thoughts of wisdom.





[Names: Vrtranyanyah, Havamahe, Sarma]
Of Indra and Varuna, one destroys evil and
darkness in the battles of life, the other always protects
the laws and observances of pious people’s holy
disciplines. O generous and divine lords of power and
wisdom, we invoke you and offer you homage with
adorations and holy presentations. May Indra and
Varuna give us a happy home of peace and prosperity.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 84 297


[Names: Asme, Avadhram, Jyotir]
manamahe.


May Indra, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama bless us
with power, justice, love and friendship, and passion
for progress, honour and excellence with settlement in
life of truth, observing the eternal law of Dharma
operative in nature and humanity. We pray for the
blissful light of mother Infinity and celebrate in song
the glory of Savita, lord giver of the light of life and
inspiration for the True, the Good and the Beautiful in


Mandala 7/Sukta 84






[Names: Indra, Varunau, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indra, Varuna]
Indra-Varuna, self-refulgent rulers of life,
Supreme Lord’s power and justice, light and rectitude,
law and freedom, reward and punishment, I pray, let
me turn to you and abide there. I invoke you with
salutations and homage worthy for divinity in this yajna
of life full of love and free from violence. The ladle in
all universal forms overflowing with ghrta held in hands




spontaneously moves to you to make the offer of total
surrender to the sacred fire.






[Names: Yuvo, Pari, Varunasya, Varunas, Indrah]
The mighty heaven of light feeds the vast social
order under your rule. You join, you bind, with bonds
without snares. May the displeasure of Varuna and
consequent suffering be far off from us. May Indra bless
us and create a vast expansive world of light for us.






[Names: Krtam]
Indra- Varuna, pray raise our yajnic acts in the
business of life to beauty and grace. May you vest our
songs of adoration and gratitude with love and faith
among the wise and brave of the community. May
wealth, honour and excellence of life inspired by
divinities come to us. May you, Indra-Varuna, help us
cross the seas of life with cherished means of protection
and progress.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 85 299




[Names: Asme, Indravaruna, Puruksum, Puruksu, Suro]
Indra- Varuna, pray bear and bring for all of us
wealth, honour and excellence of universal order in
plenty, full of the world’s riches. The lord of light that
frustrates and destroys untruth is the lord of power and
gives boundless forms of wealth, joy and peaceful






[Names: Tyamindram, Varunamasta, Suratnaso]
Let my voice of adoration reach Indra and
Varuna at the earliest and bring protection and progress
for our children and grand children at the fastest. Let us
all blest with the jewels of life reach the house of yajna
and attain the blessings of Indra and Varuna. O divinities
of nature and humanity, saints and sages, protect and
promote us with all modes and means of safety, security
and all round well being of life for all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 85






[Names: Indra, Varuna, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Punise, Somam, Soma, Ghrtapratikam, Varunaya, Varuna, Usasam, Usasa]
I dedicate and sanctify the song of adoration
free from evil, enmity and malice, and offer it to Indra
and Varuna, having made a presentation of holy soma
to the ruler warrior and the chief of justice. It is soft and
sweet and brilliant, full of power like the divine dawn.
May Indra and Varuna come and inspire us to shine in
our battle of life against evil with full divine protection.






[Names: Spardhante, Yuvam, Indravarunava, Sarva, Mitran, Mitra]
And those who fight and oppose us in this
struggle of the social order, and in those battles in which
the enemy weapons fall upon our flags of honour, all
those enemies and crooked adversaries, O Indra and
Varuna, pray frustrate and destroy with the force and
justice of the social order.






[Names: Apasciddhi, Krstiranyo, Varunam]
Intelligent and brilliant people in their own right
of quality and social prestige select, appoint and
consecrate Indra and Varuna, brilliant and noble
authorities, in their offices and assemblies. One of them,
Varuna, manages the different orders of people, the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 85 301


other, Indra, destroys forces of darkness and enmity who
refuse to be managed otherwise.






[Names: Savasa, Aditya, Adit, Avavartad]
Surely that individual is a good citizen of noble
action, a true yajaka, dedicated to universal values of
truth and law, who, of his own free will, with his power
and potential and high degree of endeavour and
application, turns to you, O brilliant Indra and Varuna,
with sincere loyalty and homage for the sake of
protection and advancement. And surely he deserves
all round happiness and well being.






[Names: Iyamindram, Varunamasta, Suratnaso]
May this earnest and vibrating voice of homage
and prayer reach Indra and Varuna for the protection
and progress of our children and grand children. May
we, blest with the jewels of life, reach and join the noble
assembly of the enlightened and participate in the yajnic
business of the nation. O Indra and Varuna, O
enlightened citizens and leaders of humanity, protect
and promote us with all safeguards and securities and
all modes of happiness and well being all ways all time.




Mandala 7/Sukta 86






[Names: Varuna, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Dhira]
Firm in balance are the creations of this Varuna,
light of the universe, by virtue of his greatness as he
holds and stabilises the heaven and earth and indeed
the expanding universe. He energises and impels the
high heavens of bliss and the distant stars and lights
them both day and night, pervading the vast world of
existence. Only the wise and brave know this.






And when would I, by my own individual self,
commune with the lord? When would I join the
innermost presence of Varuna? Would he accept my
homage and prayer with pleasure? When would I, with
peace in the mind, experience the bliss of that presence
and power?




MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 86 303




[Names: Prcche, Samanaminme]
O Varuna, I ask myself what sin is. Keen for the
vision of divinity, I go and meet the wise, and freely I
ask what sin is. And the wise sages all say the same
thing to me: This Varuna feels displeased only for your
sake, to save you from sin.






[Names: Kimaga, Jighamsasi]
Varuna, what is the greatest sin or crime for
which you punish your friend and celebrant? Speak of
that to me, O lord rare to be attained, self-refulgent and
[Names: Save]
post haste I come to you with homage, prayer and





Loosen and free us from weaknesses inherited
from the forefathers. Save us from the sins and evils
committed by ourselves in person. O sovereign ruler,




free us from animal passions, like the thief from jail,
and relieve the earnest celebrant from passions and
slavery, like the calf set free from bonds of the tether.






[Names: Asti]
It is not our own essential virtue, competence
and expertise that is the cause of evil and the fall. It is
liquor, anger, gambling and infatuation, ignorance and
loss of good sense that is the cause of evil. It is also the
company of the wrong senior with the junior and the
dreams of unrealistic ambition that tempt a person to
fall a victim to falsehood and evil.






[Names: Aram, Acetayad]
Let me, an innocent person free from evil, do
unreserved service and offer sincere prayers like a
dedicated servant to Varuna, refulgent and generous lord
giver of sure and complete fulfilment. He, brilliant and
generous lord of all, wiser than any one else, omniscient
master, enlightens the ignorant and inspires the holy
and intelligent, and leads them to honour and prosperity.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 87 305






[Names: Ayam, Samu]
Varuna, self-existent lord of omniscience and
omnipotence, may this song of adoration reach your
heart and be graciously accepted. Let there be all good
and full protection for what we have achieved, and all
good grace and advancement for what we may further
achieve. O lord, O divinities of nature and humanity,
pray protect and promote us with all happiness and well
being all ways all time, bless us with yoga and kshema
in peace.


Mandala 7/Sukta 87






[Names: Varuna, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Radat, Varunah, Varuna, Suryaya, Surya, Sargo]
The universe is a mighty explosion of thought,
energy and matter let free like a cosmic horse on course:
Varuna, lord of supreme power, intelligence and
imagination, carving out orbits for the self-refulgent
stars, setting cosmic oceans into floods of rivers heading
for the sea, structuring mighty moving galaxies and great
planets and satellites from the stars, all moving in


observance of the cosmic law.






[Names: Atma, Antarmahi]
Your spirit, O Varuna, sets the currents of energy
in motion like winds and energises the cosmic particles
anew, once asleep all, now rushing restless for food for
existence like a horse moving for grass. O lord immanent
and transcendent, all this great expansive universe of
heaven and earth, all these abodes of existence, are
homes of life dear to you, dear to the living forms.






[Names: Pari, Varunasya, Varunas, Rtavanah]
Currents of cosmic intelligence which are
observant forces of Varuna appointed to their task,
together watch both heaven and earth and they also
observe and inspire to thought and imaginative creation,
poets, intellectuals and devotees constantly dedicated
to yajna all of whom observe the laws of eternal truth
and Dharma and celebrate the divinity of Varuna.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 87 307




[Names: Uvaca, Vidvan, Siksan]
Varuna, vibrant lord of cosmic intelligence,
supreme teacher, spoke to me, dedicated faithful
disciple, that divine nature, divine speech, divine earth
and sacred cow, each inviolable, bears thrice seven
names. Enlightening the scholar approaching the teacher
with homage and reverence, the omniscient lord speaks
of the supreme state of freedom and bliss as the mystery
of existence.


[Names: Tisro, Grtso, Varunascakra]
Three heavens of light are contained in the
presence of this lord Varuna and there are three orders
of the earthly globe over which there are six variations.
The all - wise refulgent omnipotent ruler Varuna created
all this universe including the vibrant and glorious sun
in the blissful heaven high up for light of the world.









[Names: Sveto, Gambhirasamso]
Varuna places the sea below as the heaven
above, the lord immaculate who, as a drop of crystal, is
mighty powerful as the lion, supreme adorable, creator
of space and stars, sovereign of the mighty universal
order, sole ruler and law giver of this world of reality.






[Names: Anu]
O Varuna, lord who save even the sinner, bless
us that we may be sinless, observing the laws of mother
Infinity’s discipline. O lord, O saints and sages, teachers
and rulers, protect and promote us with peace, progress
and all round well being all ways all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 88






[Names: Varuna, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Varunaya, Varuna]
Holiest sage and brilliant scholar, develop pure,
purifying and transparent intelligence of the dearest
order and offer reverence and yajnic homage to Varuna,
potent and generous lord inspirer of life, who creates,
energises and brings us the great adorable sun and the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 88 309


expansive and deepening cloud of showers bearing a
thousandfold wealth of life.






[Names: Adha, Svaryadasmann, Varunasya, Varunas]
Meditating on the blissful presence of Varuna,
lord of light and wisdom, when I feel the flames of fire
and divine exhilaration, then, I pray, the lord of bliss
and sovereign of the world may reveal to me his divine
presence as it is so that I may experience it in the inner
being and live the ecstasy of life divine.






[Names: Varunasca]
And when I ride on the wings of Ananda
samadhi with the presence of divine Varuna, I float
through the boundless ocean of his infinite
omnipresence, and when I fly over the world of karmic
existence and all that goes with it, I transcend it with
the divine presence and roll in the infinite ecstasy of
pure bliss above the world of existence.








[Names: Vasistham, Stotaram, Yadusasah, Yadusasa]
Varuna, lord of love and omniscience, helps the
man of vision and enlightenment to rise to the plane of
bliss and salvation with great good actions, leads the
dedicated celebrant through the holy light of his days
of meditative actions to the dawn of light divine, and
extends the dawn to the continuous light of a heaven of





[Names: Brhantam]
O lord, where are those days of dawn, that flight
of bliss, that friendship and intimacy we lived together
ever before without violation? What happened? O
Varuna, lord of absolute power and bliss, let us come
home with you, to that very state of bliss open a thousand
ways, that grace abounding and infinite.





Varuna, lord of judgement and love, if some one
who is always your devotee, ever a friend dear to you,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 89 311


by remiss indulges in sin, let him not do so. O lord
adorable let us not live this life in sin. O lord of love,
omniscient power, bring a home of peace, the bliss of
light for the devoted celebrant.






[Names: Dhruvasu]
Living in these settled homes in these peaceful
lands of mother earth, we pray, may Varuna release us
from the bonds of sin and sinful existence. Enjoying
peace and protection received from the lap of inviolable
earth and mother Infinity, O saints and sages, protect
and promote us with all modes of peace and well being


Mandala 7/Sukta 89


[Names: Varuna, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Varuna]
Varuna, refulgent ruling lord of the world, just
and merciful, let me not be destined to go to the house


of clay. Be gracious, O holy lord of the world order,
give me peace and joy.








[Names: Yademi, Mrla]
If at all I go blown about as a leaf or floating
around as a cloud of dust in mere existence, even then,
O gracious ruler of the order of existence, be kind, save
me and give me joy.



[Names: Kratvah]
O lord of holy action and magnanimity, if by
weakness or error I go astray or move into the opposite
direction, then, O noble ruler, be gracious and kind and
save me.


[Names: Apam]
I stand stranded in the midst of waters, but still
thirst torments me, the celebrant. I stand rooted in the


heart of karma, yet ambition overwhelms me, the
devotee. O lord of magnanimous order, save me, bless me.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 90 313




[Names: Acitti]
O Varuna, in the midst of noble humanity
out of ignorance or negligence, whatever code of
Dharma we violate, be not angry because of that
trespass. O lord of grace, save us, bless us.


Mandala 7/Sukta 90







[Names: Vayu, Indra, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Sucayo, Vaha]
Vayu, vibrant source giver of wind energy, come
hither, bring all the appointed forces, pure honey sweets
of food and drink distilled by specialists of the art are
prepared and offered for you. Come and taste of the
purest foods for the inspiration and motivation of the





[Names: Isanaya, Somam, Soma, Sucipastubhyam, Krnosi]
Vayu, ruler, controller and giver of energy,




whoever the person makes an offering to you with yajna
for energy and serves you with pure soma of delight,
you raise him to honour and fame among mortals and,
O protector, promoter and lover of purity and energy,
he grows stronger and more powerful as he emerges in
one manifestation and birth after another.






[Names: Raye, Adha, Vayum, Ssvetam]
Vayu is the brilliant and generous power of
energy which the heaven and earth generate for the
production of wealth, the light of which the divine voice
of omniscience, Veda, holds and bears for the knowledge
of humanity. This pure and brilliant power, treasure hold
of wealth and prosperity, Vayu, its own companion
forces serve, and bear it to fight out want and poverty
where they prevail.






[Names: Ucchannusasah, Gavyam]
Pure and immaculate lights of dawn arise and
shine to bring in the happy day. Shining they collect
and radiate vast light for the world, and, brilliant with
beauty and living energy, they uncover and reveal the


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 90 315


wealth of the earth and vast sky. Consequently the lights
of dawn lead to radiations of light from the sun and the
day’s activities follow and proceed.






[Names: Indravayu]
They, Indra and Vayu, electric and wind
energies, kindled, energised and developed by sincere
application of the scholar’s mind and, together
augmented with homogeneous means and materials,
give power, by yajnic combustion, to the chariot for
transport of the brave. O scientists of wind and
electricity, ruling the field of energy, all friends,
associates and colleagues in the field join you in kindred






[Names: Isanaso]
Indra and Vayu, scholars and scientists of wind
and electric energy, those leaders, pioneers and rulers,
who bear and bring us peace, prosperity and joy with
lands, cows and holy speech, horses and other means
of transport, and golden wealths of the world, are brave
heroes. They attain full health and longevity in the world
for themselves and others, and win in the battles of life




over enemies and negativities by virtue of warriors
provided with fast and efficient means of transport and






[Names: Arvanto, Vajayantah]
Noble and brilliant scholars, fast and dynamic
in their search for honour, fame and prosperity, warriors
fighting for victory and success in the battles of life,
and citizens for the sake of peace, protection and
progress in life, all of us with songs of praise and
appreciation call upon scientists and engineers of energy
and power of wind and electricity with the exhortation:
you all protect and promote us with all means and modes
of happiness and well being all ways all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 91






[Names: Vayu, Indra, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Kuvidanga, Usasam, Usasa]
Often indeed the veteran scholars of old who
were brilliant and admirable beyond reproach and
question, working with reverence and dedication for
the advancement of knowledge and for giving new


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 91 317


inspiration and vibrant motivation to humanity in crisis,
kindled the yajnic fire at dawn and ushered in a new era
with the rise of the sun.






[Names: Usanta, Saradasca, Indravayu]
Indra and Vayu, leaders of power and vibrancy
of passion motivated like prophets, you are not for
oppression but for the defeat of oppression. You are
protectors of humanity and pioneers over paths of
progress for many many months, seasons and years. O
harbingers of power and progress, our song of adoration
addressed to you seeks compassion and prays for a new
rise in wealth and well being.






[Names: Pivo, Svetah]
Leaders and pioneers of holy intelligence and
yajna augment foods, they augment wealth, which the
sun like a white orb of heaven favours as it energises
the grace and power of the yajnic acts of pioneers with
the light of its rays. The Dedicated Scholars together of
one mind and resolution for the inspiration and
motivation of the people stay strong and, being leaders
of the world, they execute holy programmes leading to


nobler generations of the future.






[Names: Yavat, Sucim, Somam, Soma]
Indra and Vayu, leaders of light and power, as
long as life and health continues, as long as honour and
and intelligence, so long abide by this house of
advancement in knowledge and power and, O protectors
of truth and purity, participate and promote our soma
yajna of peace, purity and prosperity in holiness.






[Names: Niyuvana, Idam]
Indra, universal power and presence of all
human action, Vayu, universal inspiration and
motivation for progress, loved and revered heroes of
universal life, users and supporters of all human energy,
the entire humanity takes recourse to you. Come hither
to us with your wealth of knowledge, action and
advancement. This best of the honey sweets of our yajnic
achievement is reserved and first offered to you. Pray
take it and, pleased and loving, release us from the snares
of sin and evil.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 91 319






[Names: Satam, Abhiryatam]
Indra and Vayu, leading lights of knowledge and
action, heroes of universal faith and choice, hundreds
are your supporters, thousands indeed, who join and
support you. With these, come hither to us by propitious
paths with blissful gifts and, O leaders and pioneers,
accept the honey sweets of our homage of abundant
soma.






[Names: Arvanto, Vajayantah]
Flying on the wings of vision and imagination
like riders of the skies, motivated and ambitious for
honour and fame, aspiring for power and victory,
brilliant sages and scholars and all of us invoke and
invite you, Indra and Vayu, lords of knowledge and
power, inspiration and motivation, with songs of
admiration for the sake of protection and progress. O
saints and sages, Indra and Vayu, pray bless us and
advance us with all means and modes of peace,
prosperity and all round well being all ways all time.




Mandala 7/Sukta 92


[Names: Vayu, Indra, Devatah, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi]
1. Vayu, lord of inspiration, motivation,
action and achievement, lover and protector of truth and
purity, commanding love, reverence and choice of the
world, come and grace our house of yajnic action where
your supportive devotees await in thousands. I bring
you inspiring food for presentation which you, O lord
divine, you regard as your first priority and which, pray,
please to accept.





[Names: Somamidraya, Somamidra]
2. The active press and the soma maker stand
ready in holy yajnas of love and non-violence to offer
hospitality to Indra and Vayu, masters of knowledge
and enlightenment and action and advancement. O Indra
and Vayu, holy yajakas seeking the favour of divinity
with their best and holiest actions prepare the best and
sweetest soma and keep it for you as homage with
reverence.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 92 321






Vayu, lord of knowledge and motivation, come
by superfast transport with supportive knowledge and
expertise with which you proceed to the house of the
liberal host of yajna for the fulfilment of his desired
aim. Bless us with delicious food and wealth for
comfortable life, brave generation of youth, plenty of
lands and cows, horses and transport, and the success
mantra to attain what is possible further on.






[Names: Indramadanasa, Ghnanto]
Those who offer reverence and homage in honour
of Vayu, who admire and celebrate Indra, respect the
noble and brilliant people and destroy the enemies of
the generous and brilliant, with all such brave and far
sighted people, heroic warriors and leaders, let us take up
the challenges and destroy the enemies and wipe out the
demons of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty.








[Names: Vayo]
O Vayu, leader and giver of stormy inspiration
and motivation, come with your forces of a hundredfold
and thousandfold calibre to our yajna of non-violent
production and progress and celebrate the glory of the
social order in this session. O Indra, O Vayu, O heroic
wise, protect and promote us with all means and modes
of happiness and all round well being all ways all time.


Mandala 7/Sukta 93






[Names: Indra, Agni, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Sucim, Ubha]
Indra and Agni, leaders of power and
enlightenment, destroyers of darkness, ignorance,
injustice and poverty, accept this song of purity newly
created in your honour and come to our yajna session. I
invoke you both, who, readily responsive to the call,
instantly grant food, energy and success to the faithful
devotee inspired for action.




MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 93 323




[Names: Savasana, Savasa, Susuvamsa, Ksayantau]
Universally adored and victorious, you rise
together, mighty with force and power. You command
treasures of boundless wealth and grandeur. Pray grant
us abundance of stable strength, sustenance and
inviolable power for success and victory.






[Names: Arvanto, Indragni]
When men of vision, courage and faith proceed
to join the yajna of social order, and vibrant sages
desiring super intelligence and wisdom proceed with
lightning speed to reach the climax of their ambition,
then they invoke you, Indra and Agni, and they rise to
be the leaders of humanity with their intelligence, will
and actions.






[Names: Girbhir]
The vibrant visionary, the poet, seeking super
intelligence and wisdom, celebrates you, Indra and Agni,
with songs of adoration and prays for wealth and honour
of the first and universal order. Indra and Agni, lords of




light and action, destroyers of darkness with thunderbolt
in hand, grant us the latest gifts of light, wealth and
honour and help us cross the seas of life.






[Names: Surasata, Adevayum, Somasuta]
When two great forces, contesting against each
other in the battle of the brave, fight with their bodily
might and lustre, then, O warrior, devoted joining with
the forces dedicated to divinity in the strife, destroy the
impious power with righteous arms. Save the devotees
of soma and divinity with your knowledge and
application of knowledge in action.






[Names: Imamu, Somasutimupa]
Indra and Agni, lords of action and light of
knowledge, come and grace this soma yajna of ours for
the joy and fulfilment of our heart. After all you accept
us as your own and never neglect us. Therefore I
constantly invoke and invite you with homage and yajnic
gifts of never failing order and value.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 94 325




[Names: Mitram, Mitra, Indram, Varunam, Varuna]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, thus adored
and kindled, pray speak to Mitra, Varuna and Indra,
friend, judge and ruler, that whatever trespass we have
committed, they be gracious and ward off with
sympathy, and may Aryama, lord of rectitude, and Aditi,
mother nature, loosen the bonds of negative snares.






[Names: Mendro]
Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we, your
devotees, reaching you in earnest with ardent desire,
pray that we may have the favour of fulfilment with
knowledge and power and win strength and success in
our battles of life, and may Indra, lord omnipotent,
Vishnu, lord omnipresent, and Maruts, energies and
inspirations of all moving Vayu, never forsake us. O
lords of light, power and inspiration, O saints and
scholars, pray you all protect and promote us with all
means and modes of well being and fulfilment all ways

Mandala 7/Sukta 94




[Names: Indra, Agni, Devate, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Iyam, Indragni, Abhrad]
Indra and Agni, lords of action and enlighten-
ment, this principal and ancient song of adoration for
you from the celebrant flows spontaneously like rain
from the cloud.


[Names: Srnutam, Isana]
Indragni, lords of action and enlightenment,
listen to the celebrant’s song of adoration, accept and
appreciate the words, O sovereign lords, and refine and
energise his thought and imagination to flow into
expression and action.





Indragni, leaders of humanity, pioneers of
progress and enlightenment, deliver us not to the sinner,
not to the tyrant, not to the reviler. Let us be free.






[Names: Indre, Dhiya]
Salutations and high honour to Indra and Agni,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 94 327


leading lights of action and advancement with
enlightenment. Let us offer them high praise and
gratitude in the best of words with the best of thoughts.
We need protection, and they are protectors and guides
in our course of progress.




[Names: Sabadho]
Beset with difficulties, saints and sages, scholars
and pioneers always look up to them and thus pray for
protection and guidance to move further and win their
goal.





[Names: Medhasata]
With songs of praise, bearing homage and havi
for the holy fire, we invoke and invite you to our yajna
in search of higher initiative and further self






O lords of light and action, Indra and Agni,
leaders of the people with patience and spirit of




challenge, destroyers of hostilities, come to us with
protection, guidance and the prize of victory. Let no






[Names: Sarma]
Let no violent man’s evil design ever touch and
injure us. Indra and Agni, pray give us the peace and
felicity of a happy home.






[Names: Gomaddhiranyavad]
Indra and Agni, whatever gifts of lands, cows
and the language of enlightenment, whatever wealth of
gold and gracious manners and culture, horses,
transport, initiative and achievement we ask of you and
pray for, help and guide us that we may win the desired
goal.





[Names: Soma, Saptivanta]
When the soma is pressed out and distilled in
yajna and the leading performers with full faith offer it
to you in homage, then O Indra and Agni, guides and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 95 329


pioneers of light and action for success, pray accept the
call and come post haste to join and enjoy the


[Names: Ukthebhir, Angusair]
O greatest destroyers of evil and darkness, when
with the holy chant of Vedic hymns and songs of
adoration in words of faith and sincerity you are invoked


and invited, then come rejoicing and enlighten the yajna
with grace.







[Names: Tavid, Abhogam]
Destroy with a fatal blow the despicable and
disreputable mortal, the negative scholar who abuses
knowledge, the demonic destroyer and the rapacious
ogre. Churn the sea of evil with heat and burn it up with


Mandala 7/Sukta 95








[Names: Sarasvati, Sarasva, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Sarasvati, Prababadhana]
This Sarasvati, perennial stream of living waters
and dynamic knowledge, is a treasure fortress of gold
that holds all wealth of the world of knowledge. It is a
constantly running stream that flows with waters, ever
rushing and ever refreshing, towards the infinite ocean
of omniscience wherefrom it arises and where it
terminates. It goes on and on like a chariot on course in
race, collecting and comprehending all other streams
of world knowledge by virtue of its all inclusive majesty
of character.






[Names: Ekacetat, Suciryati, Rayascetanti]
Sarasvati is the one stream of streams which is
crystalline pure, receives her content from the eternal
ocean, emerges from the mountains and flows to the
ocean, collecting on way reflecting and revealing the
wealths of this great existential world and yielding water,
milk, honey and the cream of enlightenment for





MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 95 331


That human wealth of knowledge revealed by
the eternal stream grows for humanity. It is inspiration
in the divine hymns of the Veda, holy fire in the yajna
vedis, destroyer of ignorance, and the shower of rains
for the yajnic priests of the world of business. It bears
and brings passion and ambition for the people of
honour and excellence and strengthens and refines the
body, mind and spirit for success and victory in the
battles of life.






[Names: Mitajnubhir]
And that perennial living stream, Sarasvati,
loving and gracious, overflowing with wealth, honour
and excellence, may come, we pray, and listen to us in
this yajna of life. When approached by the yajnics of
discipline with reverence and homage, she showers her
favours full of wealth higher and ever more on her






[Names: Tava]
Sarasvati, eternal stream of the waters of life,
these adorations presented to you with homage and
reverence, we pray, accept and cherish at every yajna.




Enjoying your gift of peace and a happy home, let us
abide under your divine shelter and sustenance as birds
nestle on the tree.






[Names: Ayamu, Vardha]
Sarasvati, crystalline stream of the life and light
of eternity, this sagely scholar in search of brilliance
opens the double doors of truth, Rtam, the eternal law
of the dynamics of existence, and Satyam, the world of
existence living constant under the law at the levels of
matter, energy and mind enveloping the spirit. O divinity
of purity, power and excellence, grow and rise to
manifest in the mind and spirit for the celebrant. You
give the ultimate wealths and victories of the world.
Pray come, arise and bless with the perennial flow. O
Mother stream, O saints and sages, teachers and
preachers, protect and promote us with all means and
modes of happiness and well being all ways all time.


Mandala7/Sukta 96






[Names: Brhadu, Surya]
O brilliant sage, sing and celebrate in lofty song


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 96 333


Sarasvati, most powerful stream of heaven and earth
among streams of life, glorify her in holy poems by
homage and reverence in yajnas.






[Names: Ubhe, Marutsakha]
O divine stream of crystalline power and purity,
by the grandeur of your light of knowledge devoted
celebrants of all time receive both material nourishment
and spiritual enlightenment, and thereby achieve both
worldly honour and ultimate freedom. O saving spirit,
protective mother, companion of the vibrations of
divinity, awaken us and inspire in us the power and
potential of eternal wealth and grandeur implicit in us
and raise it to realisation and perfection.






[Names: Bhadramid, Grnana]
Gracious Sarasvati does good, opposes the evil,
and, radiant as light celebrated by the fiery sage and
celebrated by the brilliant poet, she enlightens all for
success and victory.








[Names: Janiyanto, Sarasvantam]
Wishing for marriage, or looking forward to
good progeny, liberally giving in charity, or meditating
to realise the light of divinity, we pray for the living
flow of the waters of Sarasvati, radiating light of
divinity, the eternal ocean whence flow the light and
the waters of life.






[Names: Tebhirno]
O divine ocean of the eternal flow of existence
and the cosmic light of omniscience, be our light giver
and saviour with waves of the honey sweets of nectar
and the radiance of light divine.






[Names: Pipivamsam, Bhaksimahi]
O lord, let us live and enjoy life with food,
energy, knowledge and enlightenment unto the ultimate
freedom, drinking the divine nectar at the overflowing
ocean source of eternal life, the sovereign who watches
and governs everyone, everything, of the universe.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 97 335


Mandala7/Sukta 97








[Names: Indra, Brhaspati, Brahmanaspati, Brhaspati, Devatah, Yajne, Indraya, Indra]
Where in the yajna in the house of assembly,
leading lights of humanity from the earth and leading
lights of life from heaven join and rejoice in pursuit of
divinity, and where the exhilarating essences of soma
are distilled for celebration in honour of Indra, lord of
the world, there let us join and pray, and may the lord
arrive in the first and foremost manifestations of divinity
for young and old.




[Names: Yatha]
yo no data paravatah piteva.


And there, O friends, let us pray for the
protection and blessings of divinity, and may Brhaspati,
lord of the mighty universe, exalt us in the spirit so that
we grow 3111688 in the eyes of the generous lord of life
and vitality who alone is our generous giver and supreme
saviour as father for children.








[Names: Tamu, Indram]
The same lord supreme of the universe, merciful
protector and saviour, I adore with humility, reverence
and offers of homage, and may this song of divine
adoration reach the great lord Indra who rules this world
of divine creation and reveals the divine Word of the






[Names: Veda, Kamo]
May that dearest lord of supreme love, creator
and ruler of the mighty universe and giver of eternal
knowledge of the Veda, who is the universal choice and
sole object of adoration and prayer for the world, bless
our house of yajna and manifest in our heart, give us
fulfilment of our heart’s desire for wealth, virility and
noble progeny, and wash off our sins and ailments which
pollute us, and thus may the lord cleanse us of our




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 97 337




[Names: Tama, Sucikrandam]
That self-refulgent adorable Brhaspati, lord
sustainer and ruler of the vast world, loved and
worshipped for the attainment of the immortal state of
bliss, may these Sages of primeval and original vision
reveal to us and bring us close to it. That same Brhaspati,
incomprehensible supreme lord all loving and enemy
to none, celebrated in the purity of divine hymns of the
Veda, sole object of the worship and yajnic homage of
our citizens in our homes, we invoke and adore.





[Names: Sahascid]
The powerful red rays of the rising sun in their
united majesty, wearing the glorious mantle of his
sublime form expansive as space, and bearing at heart
the message of his omnipotence immanent in the
universe like the treasure of Infinity, reveal, express and
communicate the presence of Brhaspati, sustainer and
ruler of the world of existence.







[Names: Satapatrah, Sirisirah, Brhaspatih]
That lord, Brhaspati, is pure, purifying and
sanctifying, infinitely manifest in the countless leaves
of the cosmic tree, golden sweet of word and voice in
the Veda, ever dynamic in nature and ever rejoicing in
the self. He is easy of access, being immanent in the
universe and beatific, creating abundant peace,
prosperity and joy for the devotees.






[Names: Devi, Daksayyaya]
Divine earth and heaven manifest Brhaspati and
glorify him by the revelation of his greater glory. O
friends, glorify the boundless lord of omnipotence who
reveals the Veda for our knowledge of the vast reality
of existence and makes the path to divinity through the
ocean easy to follow.






[Names: Tyam, Avistam]
O Brahmanaspati, lord sustainer and protector
of the vast reality of existence and its law and divine
knowledge, this holy song of adoration is addressed to
you and Indra in honour of the might and majesty of
your glory and divine protection against darkness and
evil. Pray listen, and protect our mind and action,


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 98 339


awaken the rulers and protectors of our social order,
fight out and destroy the enemies and oppositions of
the devotees.






[Names: Brhaspate, Dhattam]
Brhaspati, lord of this vast universe, and Indra,
you are lords omnipotent of the glory and majesty of
the world, you rule and order the light of heaven and
the wealths of the earth. Pray bear and bring the light of
divinity and wealth of the world to bless the celebrant
and the worshipper. O lords and divinities of nature and
humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and
means of peace, prosperity and excellence all ways all
time.


Mandala7/Sukta 98




[Names: Devate, Adhvaryavo, Gaurad]
O devotees of creative yajna, at the dawn of the




fiery sun, offer refined and energised soma and milk
into the fire of yajna in honour of Indra, generous
omnipotent ruler of the worlds. Having received
exhilarating soma inspiration from the sacred vedi of
light, Indra, the ruler, the scholar, the human soul,
proceeds to the day’s activity with passion for






[Names: Soman, Soma]
Indra, since you have received and internalised
the exhilarating soma of the mission of life at the vedi
in earlier days, and love to live the taste and message of
it every day, then, loving the soma by heart and soul
and passionately anxious for action, take the soma
offered, and inspire and exhort these yajakas for the
appointed tasks of the day.






[Names: Jajnanah, Somam, Endra]
Aware of the self, knowing your tasks in life,
recognising your powers and potential, dedicated to your
yajna and your yajnic performers, you drank the soma
of initiation for the realisation of your power, patience
and passion, and Mother Nature spoke to you and


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 98 341


dedicated you to the Infinite and Omnipotent. You
fought with courage and fortitude, achieved wondrous
peace and prosperity with your warriors for noble
humanity, and rose to the skies with honour and fame.






When you fight against those who attack,
believing they are great, we shall fight out those violent
enemies with arms even in hand to hand fight. And when
in formation with your warring heroes around, you
engage in contests, then with you we shall win that
contest with honour and fame.






[Names: Prendrasya, Yadedadevirasahista]
Let me thus proclaim and celebrate the exploits
of Indra, those accomplished earlier and the latest which
the illustrious hero has achieved when he challenged
and frustrated the evil designs of the crafty enemies and
became the sole winner of the soma of honour and fame.








[Names: Tavedam, Gavamasi, Suryasya, Suryas]
Indra, yours is all this living wealth around
which you see under the light of sun. You are the sole
master, possessor, ruler, protector and promoter of lands
and cows and the lights of knowledge and culture of
this earth. We ask of you and solicit wealths of the world
for ourselves, because you are the giver.






Brhaspati, lord of the vast universe, Indra,
omnipotent and illustrious ruler, you are the lord of the
beauty and majesty of the light of heaven and wealths
of the earth. You alone rule and order these. Pray bear
and bring light and wealth to bless the celebrant and
the worshipper. O lord and divinities of nature and
humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and
means of peace, prosperity and excellence all ways all
time.


Mandala7/Sukta 99


[Names: Vishnu]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 99 343




[Names: Paro]
by the expansive world forms of mother nature, no one
comprehends your greatness and majesty. We apprehend
both your worlds from earth to heaven but, O lord self-
refulgent, you know and are the ultimate beyond these
too. (You are immanent and transcendent.)





[Names: Udastabhna]
Vishnu, self-refulgent lord immanent and
transcendent, no one born either in the past or at present
can reach the ultimate bounds of your grandeur and
majesty. You uphold the high heaven of boundless glory
and divine beauty and joy, and you hold the expanse of
the directions of universal space.







[Names: Travatit, Vyastabhna]
O heaven and earth full of food and energy, milk




and honey, herbs and rejuvenation, givers of food,
energy and light of knowledge, both of you are generous
for humanity. Vishnu, omnipresent and omnipotent,
upholds these heaven and earth worlds and stabilises
the earth all round by solar radiations of cosmic energy.






[Names: Urum, Dasasya, Agnim, Agni, Suryam, Usasam, Usasa]
Indra- Vishnu, lord omnipotent and omnipresent,
leader and maker of the world, creating the sun, dawn
and fire you make up this vast world for yajna, evolution
and expansion of things at the level of nature and
humanity. You also destroy the wiles and crookedness
of negative powers even though they be strong and well
armed, in close battles among human forces.






[Names: Indravisnu, Satam]
Indra-Vishnu, lord of unrivalled might and
universal presence, you break through the nine and
ninety fortified strongholds of the dark and expansive
citadels of hoarded treasure and destroy a hundred, even
thousand, of the brave warriors together even before
the unique evil power is up for defence and offence.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 99 345






[Names: Iyam, Rare]
This resounding song of thoughtful and
conscientious adoration exalting the grand, versatile and
mighty Indra- Vishnu, I offer in honour of the lord. Indra-
Vishnu, pray exhort our power and exalt our honour
and excellence in our yajnic battles of life on the paths
of progress.


Pat A: Wien




[Names: Vasat, Sipivista, Vardhantu]
Vishnu, lord omnipresent of unbounded power,
this holy song of adoration I sing and offer to you
directly. O lord of blazing lustre, pray accept this homage
of mine. May the holy words of my adoration please
and exalt you. O lord, O divine powers of nature and
humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and
means of happiness, prosperity and well being all ways




Mandala7/Sukta 100




in Nu marto dayate sanisyan yo visnava urugdydya


That mortal for sure finds success and fulfilment
who, while he loves Vishnu, lord omnipresent, gives in
charity in service to the lord, and who, with concentrated
mind, meditates, worships and exalts the lord of such
universal love of infinite measure.






[Names: Tvam, Parco, Puruscandrasya, Puruscandras]
Vishnu, lord omnipresent and omnificent, who
fulfil the aspirations of all humanity, bless us with such
intelligence, understanding and faith in values of pure
and universal character by which we may achieve our
target of untarnished happiness and plenty of universal
wealth of honour, beauty and complete fulfilment of




MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 100 347




[Names: Trirdevah, Satar]
This self-refulgent and self-potent generous lord
Vishnu has made and set in motion the three dimensional
world of matter, energy and mind by virtue of his own
essential power and has vested it with the light of
countless stars. Immanent in the world, mighty Vishnu
manifests mightier and mightier. The very name of this
lord beyond motion is ‘Lord of Light.’






[Names: Dhruvaso]
Vishnu, this lord omnipresent, with the desire
to give humanity a place of birth and a home for dwelling
and sphere of action, made this wide earth and set it in
motion. Poet celebrants of this lord, men with constant
mind, celebrate the glorious manifested maker and sing
that he it is that made the wide earth for their dwelling
and place of action.





[Names: Vayunani]
O lord self-refulgent, you that have made this




wide world, I adore today, celebrate and glorify your
name: You are the master, lord omniscient of the ways
and laws of existence. You are the mighty power, all
pervasive far and wide in the moving world, and you
are transcendent even beyond.






[Names: Kimit, Sipivisto]
Vishnu, can that manifestive form of your
in the Veda that you are self - refulgent. Pray do not
hide off that form of yours from me, nor the other one
which manifests in the divine wrath and punishment in
the existential battle between good and evil.






Vishnu, lord omnipresent, I do honour to your
presence in song and offer it to you as homage in words.
O lord of universal light of life, pray accept this offer of
homage. May my words of celebration exalt your
presence in manifestation. O lord, O divinities of nature
and humanity, pray protect and promote us with all
means and modes of peace, prosperity and all round


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 101 349




Mandala7/Sukta 101








[Names: Parjanya, Kumara, Agneya, Parjan]
Chant aloud three voices of the divine Word,
Rk, Sama and Yajush verses of the four Vedas headed
by the light of Divinity symbolised by the eternal Name:
AUM. (They comprise the knowledge, action and
prayerful gratitude of total human endeavour, the three
being ‘jnana, karma and upasana.) With yajna they distil
from the cosmic ocean the milky essence of liquid
vitality, soma, elementary form of the cloud, parjanya.
That parjanya produces the fiery electric current (here-
in called the calf) which then gives rise to the seed of
vegetation in the form of cloud laden with living rain
i.e., the cloud, upon the instant roars and thunders, rains
and fertilises the earth with the seed of vegetation.


Note: An extension of this knowledge of the
evolution of life on earth is found in the science of
‘Panchagni’, five fires, in Chhandogya Upanishad 5, 4-
9, and in Brhadaranyaka Upanish 6, 2, 9-14.
Chhandogya Upanishad is an explanatory extension of
parts of Sama Veda, and Brhadaranyaka Upanishad is a




similar work on parts of Yajur Veda. An indication of
this science is given in Kathopanishad 1, 1, 12-19.
Kathopanishad is an explanatory footnote to Yajur- Veda.






[Names: Saranam, Sarma]
He that generates and augments the vegetation
and generates the waters and the power that orders and
rules over the entire moving universe may, we pray, give
us three fold health and peace of body, mind and soul
and bless us with threefold shelter against heat, cold
and rain, and give us threefold light of earth, heaven
and the middle regions for our well being all round.






[Names: Stariru, Pituh]
By virtue of you the heifer becomes fertilized,
from you this soul assumes the body form it takes
according to its latencies, the mother receives the shower
of fertility from the father, by which, again, the father
receives extension of the self and the off spring grows
in body.


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 101 351






[Names: Yasmin, Trayah]
(What is the ultimate parjanya, source of life
and its joy?) That in whom abide all regions of the
universe, all three heavens, 1.6., highest, middle and the
lower, or the earth, the sky and the heaven of light, in
whom the three currents of air, light and water energy
flow, or the three grades of karma operate, i.e., sanchit
(past), kriyamana (present) and prarabdha (conditional)
rule the soul, and in whom three body-forms of the soul,
(subtle body) and sthula sharira (gross body) overflow
with energy and shower the honey sweets of pleasure,
enlightenment and the ecstasy of ananda upon the soul
in abundance: that is the ultimate cloud from whom life






[Names: Idam, Parjanyaya, Mayobhuvo]
This song of adoration, spontaneous flow of love
from the heart, in honour of the self - refulgent sovereign
cloud, lord infinite, supreme source of life, may the lord
accept and cherish to the very core of divine being, and




may the imprint abide in our heart too. May the showers
of rain be full of peace and abundance for us. May the
herbs and trees be profuse in fruit, give life and
protective health to noble humanity and be protected
and promoted by noble humanity.






[Names: Tanma, Satasara]
That lord is the infinite reservoir of the seeds of
existence, mighty abundant and generous, from whom
flows the eternal cycle of life. Therein abides the very
soul of existence in motion and stabilised in motion.
May the lord sustain, protect and promote the abundant
flow of truthful life in action for me for a full span of
hundred years. O lord, O clouds, O showers of rain,
protect and promote us by all modes and means of
happiness and well being all round all ways all time.


Mandala7/Sukta 102








Sing in praise of the mighty generous and virile


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 102 353


Parjanya, the cloud that gives us showers of life and
joy. It is the child of light and saviour of the brilliant.
May the cloud, that bearer and harbinger of life and
joy, give us lovely food for body, mind and soul.






[Names: Parjanyah, Purusinam, Purusina]
Celebrate the Parjanya, cloud of the showers of
life and existence, who generates the Golden Egg,
Hiranyagarbha, the seed of moving stars and revolving
planets, herbs and trees, cows and horses and the
humans, and the cloud which then brings the showers
of living waters and vests the seeds of life in earth for
vegetation and all that moves and achieves and all the
human race for the continuance of life in existence.






[Names: Tasma, Tlam]
To him, the omnipotent omnificent Parjanya, life
bearing cloud, offer the sweetest oblations into the fiery
mouth of the yajna vedi with selfless surrender of love
and non-violence so that he may keep and help us keep
the unity and integrity of the earth and environment well
in order and maintain the integrity and harmony of
humanity and culture in a state of creativity and
progressive continuity of a familial order.




Mandala7/Sukta 103








[Names: Mandukah, Samvatsaram, Sasayana, Vacam, Parjanyajinvitam, Parjanyajinvita]
Devoted Brahmanas dedicated to Brahma,
supreme spirit of the universe, observing the sacred
vows of discipline in silence for a yearly session,
spontaneously burst into the chant of divine hymns,
inspired by the cloud of divine showers and celebrate
the divine spirit, the divine voice and the divine shower
with enthusiasm.






[Names: Divya, Sayanam, Gavamaha]
When the heavenly waters shower upon these
celebrants, like rain on frogs who have been hybernating
in a dry pond like empty leather bags, they revive with
exhilaration, they burst into chant, and the chant of these
celebrants seems like the eager lowing of mother cows
for their calves or like the excitement of the heart on
the reflection of a new revelation on the imagination.




MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 103 355




[Names: Yadimenan, Akhkhalikrtya]
And when the rainy season has set in, then, if
the cloud showers rain upon these longing celebrants
of life, thirsting for the divine waters of life, one goes
to meet another, chanting and shouting hilariously like
the child going to meet the father.






[Names: Anyo, Manduko]
On the fall of divine showers they seize upon
each other while both experience the ecstasy of meeting
and the rain. When the celebrant is soaked in the rain,
the spotted versatile one springs forward and
communicates with the green one in concentration in
the language of intimacy.






[Names: Yadesamanyo, Sarvam]
When one of these speaks to the other, they seem
to repeat each other’s language like pupils repeating
the words of the teacher. While communicating like this
they jump and play on the water, their bodies swell with


joy and the pride of being.






[Names: Gomayureko, Samanam, Puru]
One of them croaks like a cow, another like a
goat, one of them is spotted, another is green. Of
different voice and colour, they bear the same one name,
the “manduka”, the celebrant, but they seem to
communicate in many different languages.






[Names: Brahmanaso, Samvatsarasya]
O Brahmanas, devotees of supreme Brahman,
at the end of the annual session when the last night is
over, then, at the time before dawn, abide as in
meditation and yajnic celebration just like the frogs who
play, rejoice and celebrate around the overflowing lake
when the showers of the season begin.







[Names: Brahmanasah]
MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 103 357


Brahmanas engaged in the yearly soma yajna
for peace and harmony conduct the yajna in honour of
the Supreme Brahman and chant the Vedic mantras at
the end of the first year. The priests facing the fire and
soaked in sweat emerge as if from seclusion in the cave.






[Names: Devahitim, Samvatsare]
These Brahmanas, leading lights of the yajnic
by the divinely ordained twelve month seasons and the
discipline and observances prescribed. At the end of
the year when the rains set in they emerge seasoned
and tempered in the heat of yajnic fire and attain their






[Names: Gomayuradadajamayuradat, Gavam]
All those that speak and sound like nature in
motion give us something; all those that speak and sound
like nature and spirit unborn and eternal give us
something; all those that speak and sound like the
spectrum of colours in various forms give us something;
all those that speak and sound like the dark and green
in life and nature give us something: all these give us




wealths of the world. Indeed all that speak and sound
and celebrate nature and the eternal spirit of nature give
us hundreds of wealths and values of existence on the
move, advance us and give us full health and age in the
thousandfold business of creative living and lead us to
fulfilment and ultimate freedom. (Such is the gift of
nature in the rainy season.)


Mandala7/Sukta 104



[Names: Somau, Devah, Gravana, Marutah, Prthirvi, Antarikshe, Maruta]
fact: wee




[Names: Indrasoma, Para, Ssisitam, Atrinah, Atrina]
Indra-Soma, O lord and commander of power,
peace and justice, O lord and master keeper of love,
peace and harmony, subject the evil and wicked to the
heat of discipline and correction or punish and reduce
them to nullity. O generous and virile lord and ruler, let
not the forces of darkness grow, keep them down, let
not the misguided rise and spread out, shut these down
and far off. Let the hoarders, grabbers, ogres and
devourers be subjected to law and punishment, destroy
the exploiters, stop them and let their fangs be blunted
and rooted out.


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 359




[Names: Brahmadvise, Agnivan, Agniva]
kimidine.


Indra-Soma, lord and master of peace and
power, love and justice, let the sinner and the criminal,
the supporter and admirer of sin and crime along with
the sin and crime, and the tormentor of the good and
innocent go to the fire of discipline, punishment, or
elimination like a handful of dirt meant for the fire.
Never compromise with the enemy of nature, divinity,
humanity and the wisdom of humanity. Rule out the
cannibal and the carrion eater, the man of hate and evil
eye, the sceptic, the cynic and the negationist. For them,
have the disdain they deserve and either correct them




acchavah.


Indra-Soma, fix the evil doer and throw him into
a deep dungeon of darkness without remission so that
by reason of that punishment no one again may raise




his head for evil doing. That power of yours full of
patience, fortitude and courage, that righteous passion
of yours be for the destruction of evil and sabotage
against life and social harmony.






[Names: Prefer]
Indra-Soma, from heaven and earth, from
thunder and lightning and the showers of clouds, from
the light of idealism, love and generosity and down to
earth realism, bring unfailing laws of punishment and
correction against sin and crime, acts and policies
against poverty, disease, unemployment and wilful sloth,
and against the supporters of sin and crime as well as
against compromisers with negativities and negationists
of evil. Enact law of incentive and encouragement for
the generous, and blazing prohibitions for the
adamantine evil so that you nip and burn off rising crime
and evil in the bud.







[Names: Tapurvadhebhir]
MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 361


Indra-Soma, lord of power and force, lord of
peace and harmony, turn all round, revolve your search
lights and from the skies shoot out your weapons of
defence and offence, and with fiery, thunder-tipped,
fatally destructive, irresistible and inviolable weapons
fix the voracious ogres, strike them on the precipice
and throw them into the abyss, running off into silence
and oblivion without uttering a sigh of pain or voice of






Indra-Soma, leading powers of governance and
peace, like mighty forces in harness ruling the nation,
may this prayer of mine, which, with the best of my
intention and understanding I address to you as an
exhortation, reach you and inspire you and guide you
all round, and may you, like the protector and ruler of
the nation as you are, make these words of prayer,
exhortation and adoration fruitful.









[Names: Prati]
And remember, be watchful and alert against
the malignant, evil and treacherous forces, ward them
off and eliminate them with the fastest interceptors and
destroyers at the very outset. Indra-Soma, let there be
no peace, nothing easy, for the evil doer whoever any
time may try to injure, sabotage or enslave us out of






And while I live and act and behave with a
mature mind of purity and truth, if someone malign me
with false words, let him be caught up like water in the
hand grip and evaporate in the heat and, O lord Indra,
ruler and law giver of power, let him be reduced to






[Names: Ahaye]
O Soma, lord of peace and justice, if there are
those who with their smartness and fast actions malign,
lacerate and deprive the man of purity, truth and
immaculate honour and spotless reputation, or with their
powers and prestige denigrate the man of goodness and
charitable action and bring disgrace upon him, deliver


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 363


such men to the sufferance of darkness and the pain of
remorse or let them suffer the fangs of deprivation






[Names: Ripuh]
Whoever pollutes the flavour, taste and vitality
of our food and injures or impairs the vigour and power
of our horses, cows and our bodies, let such an enemy,
the thief, the robber and saboteur, O lord of light and
vitality, Agni, be reduced to nullity and himself suffer
debility of body and even deprivation from self-
extension and further growth.






[Names: Parah, Susyatu]
O divinities of nature and humanity, he who
wants to injure and destroy us in the day and in the
night, must stay far off by his personal presence and
also by the progeny of his evil tendencies and even fall
lower than all the three orders of earthly existence, i.e.,
lower far than the good, the bad and the indifferent. His
honour and reputation would dry up and evaporate to




zero and there would be none even to remember him
after. Let it be so with such a person.






[Names: Suvijnanam, Tayoryat]
Words of truth and words of untruth rival and
contend with each other. Of these, the one that is true to
the extent it is true and that which is simple and natural,
this Soma, lord of peace, harmony and the goodness of
life, preserves and protects, and the untrue, he destroys.
This simple and straight natural knowledge, the lord
reveals for the man who has the desire and ambition to
know the truth and reality of life.






[Names: Hanti, Sayate]
Soma, lord of truth, peace and harmony, does
not call forth the crooked to the distinction between
truth and untruth, nor does he impel the selfish kshatriya,
ruler administrator, who parades his power and valour
in a false manner, nor does he incite the two toward the
untrue. But he does destroy the evil and the wicked and
also the one who speaks the untruth, since both the evil
and the liar end up in the bonds of Indra, lord of justice
and power.


MANDAL - 7/ SUKTA - 104 365






[Names: Kimasmabhyam]
If I were a worshipper of falsehood as my divine
ideal, or if I adore the lord and divinities falsely,
deceiving them as if, then O lord of light and truth, Agni,
you would be angry with me. But I have not been thus,
then why would you, knowing everything born in
existence, feel angry with us? Not at all, because only
the speakers of falsehood would suffer your wrath and






[Names: Adya, Vayusta, Adha, Purusasya, Purusas]
If I were a demon on the move, and if I
tormented any person in life, then let me suffer death
today just now. But I am not such, nor have I done so.
Then let that man be forsaken of all his ten faculties of
power and prana who falsely proclaims that I am a
demonic tormentor of others.








[Names: Indrastam, Indrasta]
Whoever says that I am a devil even though I
am not a devil, and whoever says that he is innocent
and immaculate even though he is a devil, may Indra,
lord of power and justice, punish such a person with
his mighty thunderbolt. May such a falsifier fall to the
abyss as the worst of all living beings.






[Names: Vavran]
And she that goes about at night, hiding her
person like the spirit of hate and violence, a she owl as
if, let her fall into the bottomless deep of darkness where
the stones of evil and darkness itself would destroy her
with a clang.







[Names: Maruto, Vayo]
O Maruts, vibrant social powers of vigilance and
action, stay among the people, keenly watch for the


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 367


forces of evil and violence, and there, grab them and
crush them all that fly about like birds over the nights
and cause disturbance and violence in the divine
morning yajnas of love and non-violence for creative
production and advancement.






[Names: Somasitam, Somasita]
^° ^~




Indra, lord of power and justice, from the light
of heaven and wisdom of the sages, bring up and strike
the thunderbolt of justice and correction tempered and
sharpened with soma for peace and progress, and refine
and enlighten the noble people dedicated to peace and
happiness. From front and back, up and down, seize
the wicked and the destroyers and punish them with the


[Names: Svayatava, Sisite]
These miscreants with the mentality of street
curs roam around, pull people down, and try to damage


Indra, the ruler, who is otherwise indomitable. Indra
then, commander of power and force, sharpens the




thunderbolt, the edge of justice and punishment, for
these crafty saboteurs on the prowl and strikes the fatal






[Names: Indro, Abhidu, Sakrah]
Indra is the lordly power that throws off the
upcoming saboteurs who damage the inputs and
infrastructure of yajnic development, he does so for the
peace and progress of the human community. He is
mighty powerful just like what the axe is for the wood,
breaking down the evil and wicked destroyers like pots
of clay whenever they raise their head.






[Names: Ulukayatum, Ssvayatumuta, Suparnayatumuta]
Indra, refulgent and potent ruler of the world,
crush the evil and the wicked like pieces of clay with a
stone: the fiend in the garb of an owl or an owlet or a
dog or a wolf or a hawk or a vulture. They are covert,
stealthy, clever, jealous and growling, cruel destroyers,
cunning and voracious.


MANDAL - 7 / SUKTA - 104 369




23.






[Names: Prthivi]
Let no wicked demonic forces harm and destroy


us. Let the darkness of tormentors harming us either by
joint force or by doubt and scepticism be off. May the
earth protect us against earthly sin and crime. Let the
sky protect us against dangers from above.


24.






[Names: Vigrivaso]
Indra, punish and eliminate the man demon.


Punish and eliminate the woman demon who destroys
by deception and crafty design. Let the stranglers of
life who play with life and death lose their own throat
and let them never see the rising sun.


20;






[Names: Raksobhyo]
Indra and Soma, lord of power and peace, justice




and governance, love and majesty, watch everything that
happens and enlighten us too. Shine, reveal and proclaim
what is happening and warn us too. Keep awake and let
us rise too into awakenment. Shoot the arrow upon the
demon destroyers, strike the thunderbolt upon the covert



371


MANDALA 8


Mandala 8/Sukta 1








[Names: Indra, Danastuti, Asanga, Devatah, Pragatha, Ghaura, Kanva, Medhatithi, Medhyatithi, Asanga, Playogi, Shashvati, Angirasi, Rshis, Samsata, Indramit, Samsata, Indra]
absolute, omnipotent and infinitely generous, and when
you have realised the bliss of the lord’s presence, sing
songs of divine adoration spontaneously, profusely,
again and again.






[Names: Avakraksinam, Vidvesanam]
Worship Indra only, who most spontaneously
rushes to the devotee for protection and upon the evil
for punishment, correction or destruction. He is
profusely and potently generous, free from age and




decay, patient and forbearing giver of peace and
nourishment to people like the meek cow and motherly
earth, saviour from hate and jealousy, most adorable,
giver of both material well being (abhyudaya) and
spiritual freedom (nihshreyas), most munificent and
majestic, and lord ruler and protector of both nature
and the soul.






[Names: Yacciddhi, Asmakam]
Although these many people invoke you and
pray for protection and progress for themselves in many
different ways, yet, we pray, our adoration and prayers
and all this wealth, honour and excellence bestowed
upon us by you be dedicated to you and always, day
and night, exalt your munificence and glory.






[Names: Pururupama]
O lord of might and majesty, the wise, the noble
and the vibrant leaders of the people, by your grace,
cross over all obstacles of their struggle for life and
success, whenever they face any. Pray, come lord and
give us instant energy of versatile form for our protection
and victory at the earliest.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 373






[Names: Mahe]
O lord of infinite wealth, power and majesty,
wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment,
breaker of the clouds and mountains, bless me that I
may never give up my devotion to you for the greatest
material return, not for a thousand, not for a million,
not even for the boundless wealth of the world.






[Names: Vasyan, Indrasi, Mata]
You command greater wealth, power and
prestigious settlement for me than my father, you are
closer to me than my indifferent brother. Only my mother
and you are equal to provide me solace and protection,
O shelter of the universe, for my wealth and celebrity
in success (my mother as individual mother and you as




[Names: Kveyatha, Alarsi, Purutra]
sisuh.


Where do you move and reach? Where do you




reside and abide? No one can say. Your mind and
presence is everywhere, universal. O lord of the warlike
dynamics of existence, pivot and churner of the universe,
breaker of the citadels of darkness and ignorance, come
and bless us, the celebrants and singers of Gayatri hymns
invoke and adore you.






[Names: Prasmai, Yabhih]
O celebrants of Indra, lord of the thunderbolt,
sing hymns of adoration in Gayatri music in honour of
Indra who is breaker of the strongholds of darkness
which oppose and oppress the lord’s devotees, so that,
pleased by these adorations, the lord may reveal his
presence and grace the mind and vedi of the enlightened
sages and break through the citadels of darkness to bless
the devotees.




[Names: Asvaso]
tuyama gahi.


Indra, breaker of the citadels of darkness and
ignorance to light, come post haste to us with all those
lightning powers and forces of yours which are vigorous
and generous, radiating into all the ten directions in a
hundred and a thousand ways.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 375






[Names: Indram]
Today I invoke Indra, I invoke the motherly
spirit of the universe, giver of total fulfilment of the
heart’s desire, pleased and stirred by the chant of Gayatri
songs of adoration, omnipotent and omnificent,
generous as Mother Nature, giver of ample gifts beyond
the earth and the earthly cow, harbinger of showers of
the cherished nectar milk of life, all blissful and






[Names: Vahat, Ssatakratuh, Kutsam, Kutsa]
Indra, lord immanent, omnipresent and all
energiser, gives the initial stroke of motion to everything
on the move such as the sun and the cloud by the waves
of cosmic energy. Thus the lord of countless actions of
cosmic yajna brings the thunderstroke of cosmic energy
to move the sun, wielder of the earth, and he brings the
thunder stroke of lightning to break the cloud into rain.
(Indra thus is the unmoved, all immanent, original mover
of the universe.)








[Names: Yarte]
Indra is that vibrant immanent lord of
unbounded natural health and assertive life energy who,
without piercing and without ligatures, provides for the
original jointure of the series of separate vertebrae and
collar bones and then, later, heals and sets the same back






[Names: Mabhumanistyad, Vanani]
Indra, lord almighty, maker and breaker of
clouds and mountains, free from anger and fear we adore
you and pray: Give us the grace that we may never be
like the lowest of human species with nothing to be
proud of, let us never be like the indifferent and the
depressed, let us never be reduced to the state of forsaken
thickets of dead wood.






[Names: Amanmahidanasavo, Sakrt, Sura]
Indra, omnipotent lord, destroyer of darkness
and ignorance, we pray that, gently and at peace without
anger or impatience, we always worship and meditate
on you and, by virtue of your grandeur and glory, we
should celebrate and exalt your honour and rejoice with


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 377
exciting songs and yajnic sessions.






[Names: Yadi, Ssravad, Indramin, Indrami, Tirah]
And if the lord omnipotent, Indra, listen to my
song of divine celebration, then may the offers of
homage and oblations of soma, quick and fast,
augmented by holy waters, reaching the pure and
immaculate lord, please and exalt him and delight us
with success.






[Names: Upastutir]
O lord, pray come and accept the joint praise
and adorations of your friends and devotees. And may
the spontaneous and heart felt prayers and adorations
of the wealthy and powerful also reach you today. And
now it is my time and desire to offer my song of
adoration.








[Names: Sota, Somam, Soma, Gavya]
O friends and celebrants of Indra, lord
omnipotent, extract the soma with grinders, mix and
stir it in waters. Then leading lights of yajna, refining it
like the concentration of sun rays, offer it into the fire
and milk out waters in showers from space for the


Note: This mantra is a metaphor of meditation
and spiritual realisation also. When you churn the world
of your sense experiences, thought and memory, extract
the essential value and offer it into the fire of meditation,
then the light of divinity descends on you and your life
is changed. It is then that the light of divinity flows into
the channels of your thought and action.






O lord refulgent and omnipotent, whether on
earth or in the regions of light or even beyond the
expansive light of heaven, be pleased and exalted by
this refined and radiating voice of adoration and, O lord
presiding spirit of yajna, bless us and our children with




[Names: Sakra]
vajayum.


O celebrants of Indra, seekers of spiritual
perfection, for the attainment of holiness of thought,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 379


karma and vision, extract the choicest, most exhilarating
soma from life and offer it to Indra, spirit of the universe,
and the lord omnipotent would bless this seeker of
fulfilment calling upon the lord with universal
intelligence and will for a life of perfect action.




[Names: Matvasomasya, Bhurnim]
1sanam na yacisat.


O lord, always beseeching you for one thing or
another with my words of prayer as with each drop of
soma offered to you, I pray, I may not provoke you to
anger in yajna, you who are infinite giver and sole ruler
of the universe like a lion of the forest. Listen, O lord,
who doesn’t ask of the ruler and the munificent?




[Names: Madenesitam, Savasa, Visvesam]
dadati nah.


When the lord is pleased with our devotion, then
he grants us the most exciting joy along with brilliant
strength and power which we love and pray for with
enthusiasm and which eliminates all pride of the ego
and helps us cross over all challenges of life.








[Names: Sevare, Puru]
In the treasure hold of yajna, the self-refulgent
lord universally adored keeps wealth and excellence of
choice for the generous mortal which he, acknowledged
and adored even by adversaries, gives to the celebrant
and the worshipful lover of soma for homage to the




[Names: Endra, Saro]
ram.


Indra, lord of glory, come with various
wondrous forms of wealths of the world and let us
rejoice in the bliss of your presence. Like the universal
reservoir, fill our vast world of existence with exciting
and soothing wealth, honour and excellence for




[Names: Satam, Brahmayujo]
pitaye.

May the hundreds and thousands of forces of
nature and humanity harnessed to the golden chariot of
the universe, radiant with light and dedicated to divinity,
invoke and invite you hither into the heart so that we
may experience the bliss of divine presence.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 381




[Names: Siti]
pitaye.

May the vibrant forces of divine energy, joined
to your golden chariot of the universe with rhythmic
majesty like the peacock’s feather tail and mighty power
with circuitous motion of energy currents, radiate your
presence here so that you may acknowledge and accept
our love and homage and we experience the bliss of






[Names: Piba, Pariskrtasya]
Like the eternal lord of love fond of the
celebrant’s homage, come and accept the devotee’s love
and faith distilled from life’s experience. The flow of
the ecstatic celebrant’s clairvoyance pure and sweet is
full of ananda and radiates from the heart for spiritual








[Names: Gamat, Sipri]
He is one, unique and incomparable, great by
his omnipotence and action, refulgent and supreme by
his laws and observance. May the lord, like the light of
grace, descend on us, may he never be away, may be
ever respond to our call and come to our yajna and never






[Names: Tvam, Tvam, Anu]
With fatal strokes of arms, you destroy the forces
of evil and exploitation on the rampant, you are the light
of life and bless the lights of life in action, and thus you
are doubly adorable and worshipped in two
complementary aspects, as destroyer and as preserver,
O lord omnipotent and self-refulgent.




[Names: Mama, Mama]
sata.


O lord of the universe, shelter of life and
existence, at the dawn of sunrise let my prayers and
songs of exaltation reach you. At the middle of the day
when the sun is on the high, let my prayers and songs
of adoration reach you. And when the day is over and
night is fallen and the stars shine, let my songs of prayer
and peace reach you.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 1 383






highway, O guest, O host, pray to Indra, adore him, and
these too around you, all richest of the rich and mightiest
of the mighty, should adore him: omnipresent, faster
than the fastest, instantly moving all round over paths
of infinity, commanding the rule and dispensation of
the highest wealth and power of existence.





When I control the outgoing senses and mind
and look within riding as if the body chariot with faith,
then in that state of experience whoever is refined and
watchful knows the inner secrets of this beautiful world
of existence.






[Names: Yarjra]
Who gives me dynamic and powerful gifts of




life with a golden cover and thus does me honour may
be blest with the highest good fortunes of the world
and may this devoted man go forward in life by a






[Names: Adhoksano]
Agni, omnipresent light of life, the dedicated
man of charity conducting yajnic and spiritual projects
in science and spirituality exceeds others by tens and
thousands especially when he gives to me ten highly
brilliant and creative gifts rising like lotus from a lake.






[Names: Anvasya, Sasvati]
The gross form of the universe is seen emerging
from the infinite transphysical spiritual reality. The
eternal Mother Nature watches and says: O lord of
gracious charity, you alone hold the blessed food for
the life of mortal humanity.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 385


Mandala 8/Sukta 2


[Names: Indra, Danastuti, Devata, Medhatithi]
Kanva and Priyamedha Angirasa (1-40), Medhatithi






[Names: Kanva, Rshis, Idam, Anabhayin]
O lord of the world’s treasure of wealth, honour
and excellence, here is this exhilarating soma nectar of
love and devotion distilled from the heart and soul. Pray
drink of it to your heart’s content. We offer it to you,




[Names: Nrbhirdhitah, Asvo]
Stirred by best of men, crushed and filtered by
men of adamantine character, purified and guarded by
best of the brave, it is sparkling like sun rays reflected
on the river waters.





That sparkling soma drink of devotion seasoned
with barley, mixed with milk and cream, we, blenders,




having prepared it, offer to you in this house of






[Names: Somapa, Antardevan]
Among ordinary mortals and among divines of
wisdom and vision, Indra, the karmayogi, alone is the
protector of soma, Indra, the man of knowledge and
dedication, alone is the valuer of the worshipper’s
devotion and homage as he alone has the world vision.






[Names: Apasprnvate]
Neither the most sparkling soma of devotion nor
the most sophisticated and aromatic, nor the most
delightful, ever satiate the lord infinite of the holiest
heart and love.






[Names: Gobhir, Abhitsaranti]
Multitudes of people other than us approved him
and try to inveigle him with creamy entertainment and
sweet flattering words of adoration just like a hunter


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 387






[Names: Traya, Indrasya, Indras, Somah, Soma]
For self-refulgent and generous Indra who is
fond of the soma dedication of devotees, there are three
sessions of soma distilled and offered in homage in the
devotee’s own home of yajna and prayer, at dawn, at
mid-day and in the evening before night fall.





[Names: Trayah, Samane]
In the same one session of yajna, there are three
vessels of soma dripping with the nectar and three ladles
of ghrta overflowing with homage for the fire in honour
of the lord.





[Names: Sucirasi, Purunihsthah, Purunihstha, Daghna]
Celestial soma, divine devotion of the dedicated,
you are pure and potent, dedicated to the joy of many
and the lord eternal, and seasoned in the process with
milk, cream and curds. Surely you are the most delightful
love of the heroic brave.




[Names: Somastivra, Sukra]
These are for you, Indra, soma oblations of the
most potent order distilled by us. Pure and powerful
they are, offered in homage with prayer and hope for a
share of the celestial bliss of faith and love.

[Names: Somam, Revantam, Srnomi]
Indra, lord of glory, come and join this soma
celebration of milk and barley delicacies with joy. You
command the wealth, honour, excellence and glory of
the world, I hear. I believe, I share and celebrate.



[Names: Artsu, Udharna]
Draughts of soma create exhilarations in the
heart unlike intoxication and illusions of wine, and the
celebrants adore the spirit divine as the ocean of ecstasy.






[Names: Revan, Predu]
Indra, master and commander of dynamic
forces, may the celebrant of the brilliant, bountiful and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 2 389


renowned like you be brilliant, prosperous and
celebrated. That is but natural.






[Names: Uktham, Sasyamanam]
Indra, lord of power and piety, the man attached
to divinity in faith and opposed to doubt and disloyalty
knows the words of praise spoken by a man of doubtful
faith as much as he knows the songs of adoration sung
by a man of faith (and makes a distinction between the





[Names: Mana, Siksa, Sacivah, Sacibhih]
Indra, lord of refulgent power, give us not away
to the scornful abuser nor to the wild tyrant. With your
laws and powers, pray discipline, rule, instruct and






[Names: Vayamu]
Indra, we too have the same aims and objectives
as you. We are your friends and admirers. We know and
wish to achieve, and with all words of praise and




do.






[Names: Tavedu]
Indra, lord of thunder and justice, in the
beginning of a new plan, action or programme of
holiness, I adore none else but only you. I know only
one song of adoration and that is for you alone.






[Names: Icchanti, Yanti]
Divines of brilliance and holy action love those
engaged in creative actions of piety. They care not for
dreams and love no dreamers. Active, wakeful and
realistic beyond illusion, they achieve the joy of success
in life.


[Names: Mahan]
Come along with us with all your strength and
enthusiasm without hesitation or embarrassment, and


go forward like a great hero inspired by a youthful
maiden.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 2 391



Invincible and unconquerable, come to our
yajnic celebrations today, delay not till the last hour, of


[Names: Vidma, Trisu]
We know the mind, noble intentions and
generous liberty of this brave hero, Indra, who is risen


high in life’s three active fields of thought, energy and





[Names: Savasandt, Satamuteh]
O man, with the nectar of soma, regale Indra,
who commands wisdom and the wise and a hundred
ways of defence, protection and progress. Indeed for
reasons of his heroism and grandeur we know no one
else more honourable and renowned than he.








[Names: Jyesthena, Sakraya, Bhara]
O maker of soma, bring and serve a drink of
prime soma first for Indra, brave, brilliant and manly
leader of men, and see that the lord accepts.






Among men of yajnic love and non-violence,
he is the most venerable on the vedi, harbinger of wealth
and success for the celebrants and giver of nourishing
food and energy full of milk and honey of the land for
the singers of hymns.


[Names: Panyampanyamit]
O makers of soma, to Indra, offer the drink of


soma, brave, ecstatic and heroic, and let each draught
be more and more delicious and adorable.






[Names: Pata, Satamutih]
May the connoisseur of distilled soma, destroyer
of darkness, dishonour and destitution, come and never


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 393


be far away from us. The lord who commands a hundred
forces of defence, protection and progress rules all,
friends and foes.






[Names: Ehahari, Girbhih, Srutam]
Let the brave veterans of knowledge and yajnic
karma, dedicated to Veda Brahma and humanity, with
holy songs of divinity, invoke the most venerable and
celebrated lord here on the vedi as our friend and





[Names: Svadavah, Siprinnrsivah]
Indra, hero of the visor, commander of wisdom

and powers of nature and humanity, patron of poets and
sages, come and have a drink of delicious soma, come
and enjoy the seasoned and matured soma with the
celebrant’s devotion. We invoke and invite the leader,
friend of the hall of celebration.





[Names: Stutasca]
Indra, adoring and exhilarating you as the great




achiever, honoured by songs of praise, the devotees
celebrate and exalt you for the sake of greatness, wealth
and excellence of life and their songs glorify you.




[Names: Girasca, Satra]
O lord of voice divine and lover of holy song,
your words of the holy Veda and the songs sung in your


honour, all these together inspire and exalt the grandeur
and glory of life divine.






[Names: Evedesa, Sanadamrkto]
Only this lord omnipotent of universal karma,
the one lord of thunder and justice in hand, inviolable
and imperishable, gives us food and energy, success and





[Names: Hanta, Puruhitah, Puruhita]
Destroyer of darkness and evil by his power and
versatility, Indra is universal and universally adored and
celebrated. great is he by his glorious majesty, sublime
by infinite possibilities.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 2 395


[Names: Yasmin, Anu]
He in whom entire humanity of the world, and
all powers and forces and expansive victories abide and
are sustained, surely he is the giver of happiness and


competence to humanity for wealth, honour and





[Names: Vajadava]
This Indra does all these wonders, the lord who
is celebrated all over the world and who is the giver of
power and prosperity to men of honour and excellence.





[Names: Prabharta]
The one who sustains and supports all and
protects the chariot of life moving on course from the
unforeseen is the lord who is also the bearer and
harbinger of the world’s wealth.








[Names: Sanita, Satyo]
The one that commands knowledge, power and
energy with commitment is the generator and harbinger
of wealth by dynamic forces. He is the destroyer of
darkness and harbinger of light. He is brave and
commands the brave. He is ever true to himself and the
world and he is the protector of those who are dedicated
to work.






[Names: Yajadhvainam, Indram, Somaih, Somai]
O lovers and performers of yajna, honour and
serve this Indra by homage and yajnic devotion together
with heart and soul, he really feels honoured and exalted
by the soma of love, devotion and commitment.





[Names: Gathasravasam, Purut, Kanvaso]
O men of knowledge and wisdom, sing in praise
of the lord celebrated in song, defender of truth and the
truthful, lover of honour and excellence, versatile in
form and spirit and instantly victorious in action.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 2 397




[Names: Yarte]
Indra is a friend and mighty commander of
forces and, without visible motion or lure of office, gives
the gift of speech and powers of perception and
intelligence to people who surrender their desires and
ambitions to him and act selflessly, depending on him
for success.






[Names: Meso]
Thus, O lord commander of the clouds and
mountains, do you reach and guide the celebrant sage
of the line of the wise and bless the honoured guest,
being a very shower of peace and pleasure of soma.





[Names: Asta]
Indra, destroyer of the fortresses of evil, enmity
and poverty, thus teaches and gives his celebrant forty
and eight thousand powers and potentials to fight his
battles and win.








O heaven and earth, givers of the liquid energies
of life, sustainers of the excitement of the battle of
existence, I pray for your favour of generating those
powers of sustenance and advancement.


Mandala 8/Sukta 3








[Names: Indra, Danastuti, Devata, Medhyatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Piba, Indra, Apirno]
Indra, resplendent and mighty, karma yogi, great
performer, come and have a drink of our delicious festive
soma distilled and mixed with milk and cream, share
the ecstasy, enlighten us, your own people, for progress
and prosperity, and may your thoughts and wisdom
protect, promote and guide us in life.






[Names: Bhuyama, Asman]
In your guidance and goodwill may we be
prosperous and progressive with vibrancy. Hurt us not
lest we fall a prey to an enemy. Protect us and advance
us to all kinds of success with fulfilment of our
aspirations, and lead us in a life of happiness, refinement


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 3 399
and grace.




[Names: Puruvaso, Pavakavarnah]
nusata.


O lord of universal wealth, O shelter home of
the world, may these words of my divine adoration
please you and exalt you. The saints and sages of vision
and wisdom and fiery heat and purity of light adore you
with songs of celebration.





[Names: Ayam, Satyah]
This Indra, adored and exalted by poets and
sages a thousand ways to power and glory, rises like
the sea. Ever true and inviolable is he, and I celebrate
his might and grandeur expanding in the yajnic
programmes of the dominion of the wise.






[Names: Indramid, Indram]
We invoke Indra for our programmes of natural




and environmental development. We invite Indra when
the yajna of development is inaugurated. Lovers and
admirers dedicated to him, we pray for his grace in our
struggles of life, and we solicit his favour and guidance
for the achievement of wealth, honour and excellence.





[Names: Indro, Indrah, Indre, Suryam, Surya]
6. Indra, by the power and abundance of his
omnipotence, expands and pervades heaven and earth.
Indra gives the radiance of light to the sun. All regions
of the universe and her children are sustained in life
and order in Indra, and in the infinite power, presence
and abundance of Indra flow all liquid energies of life’s
evolution to their perfection and fulfilment.




[Names: Samicinasa, Rudra]
7. Indra, men in general, learned experts of
vision and wisdom, illustrious powers of law and order,
and fighting warriors of defence and protection all
together, raising a united voice of praise, prayer and
appreciation, with songs of holiness and acts of piety,
invoke and invite you, ancient, nearest and most
excellent lord of power and lustre, to inaugurate their


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 3 401


yajnic celebration of the soma session of peaceful and
exciting programme of development.






[Names: Asyedindro, Adya]
In the ecstasy of this soma success of
achievement through the yajnic programme, Indra
augments the strength and enthusiasm of this host and
master of the programme, while now as ever before,
the people appropriately adore and exalt the greatness
of this lord.






[Names: Yena]
O lord resplendent, I come to you and ask for
that vigour and wisdom, that knowledge of reality and
divinity, that prime acquisition and awareness of values
by which, when the battle rages and money and materials
are called for, you provide for the retired holy men,
scientists, technologists and the inventors and by which
you protect the man of advanced special knowledge.








[Names: Savah, Sadyah]
Indra, lord omnipotent of creation, I pray for
the knowledge and experience of that overwhelming
power and potential of yours by which you create the
mighty waters and the oceans to roll and flow. That
mighty power of this lord is not easily to be realised,
the heaven and earth obey it, and when they move they
celebrate it in the roaring and resounding music of stars
and spheres.






[Names: Sagdhi, Sagdhi]
Indra, first and leading power of the world, give
us the vigour, wealth and power we ask for. Give us the
strength of the first order for the advancement and
victory of the dedicated and law abiding, and bless him
who celebrates your glory in song.






[Names: Sagdhino]
Give us the strength and power by which you


protect the citizen for this yajamana, the intelligentsia,
and the obedient workers, the strength and power by


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 3 403


which you protect and promote for advancement the
brilliant, the poor, the weak and disabled and the leading
men of the nation on way to common joy and prosperity.




[Names: Kannavyo, Nahi]
anasuh.


Who among mortals, even the most ardent of
constant celebrants, can offer a new song of homage
and adoration? Even those who have been singing in
praise of Indra have not been able to comprehend his






[Names: Kadu, Kada]
Who is the seer and scholar among those who
adore you, honour you by yajna, or do homage to your
refulgence, that can deliberate on you and understand
you? When would you, O lord of honour and glory,
Indra, respond to the call of the sage who presses the
soma for you? When would you grace the yajnic home
of the celebrant?








[Names: Satrajito]
The sweetest of honeyed songs of praise and
vibrations of homage rise to you flying like victorious,
unviolated and invincible chariots laden with gold
heading for higher destinations.






Brilliant scholars and sages as well as brave
heroes of the human nation and loving and intelligent
citizens of the land, praising and exalting Indra in one
vaulting voice, rise and reach the presence of the lord
in a world their own like rays of the sun filling the world
of space they know.




[Names: Yuksva, Arvacino, Somapitaya, Somapita]
gahi.


O greatest destroyer of darkness, Indra,
omnipotent lord of glory and majesty, blazing ruler and
controller of the world, take to the chariot, harness the
fastest vital forces of radiance and come from the
farthest to us right here and now, with brilliant and
indefatigable powers of light, wisdom and bravery, to
join us in the soma celebrations of our yajnic victory.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 3 405




[Names: Srnudhi]
Indra, lord of power and glory, these scientists,
designers and workers, vibrant and intelligent all, love
and honour you and shine with their intellect and
expertise. O lord adorable of all, listen to our prayer
like a lover and admirer of your own celebrants and
receive their homage on the success of their yajnic




[Names: Nirindra, Nirarbudasya]
ga ajah.

Indra, even from far and wide regions you
destroy the forces of darkness and evil, free helpless
victims of the mighty violent and crafty demon, set in
motion showers of the cloud and open out treasures of
the mountain.






[Names: Niragnayo, Soma, Nirantariksadadhamo]
When you broke the mighty cloud in showers
from the sky and destroyed the evil from earth, the fires
of earth shone and rose bright, the sun shone in glory
and the soma juices for the celebration of Indra, lord of




might and majesty, flowed from the herbs. That was a
great deed of prowess worthy of the lord.


(Similarly when Indra, lord almighty, and also
the individual soul, throws out the evil from the heart
and mind, then the inner light shines bright, the fire of
good life is kindled and rises, and the soma spirit of
divine joy flows and rolls in the heart. That indeed is a
mighty deed of the lord’s prowess, and of the individual
soul too.)






[Names: Marutah, Maruta, Visvesam, Sobhisthamupeva]
The light of knowledge and spiritual
enlightenment which Indra, self-refulgent lord, and
vibrant saints and sages have given me is stable, mature
and universally dynamic, it is the brightest of all wealths
of the world in the spiritual essence, and it shines within
like the sun coursing in the spaces of light as a divine






[Names: Rohitam, Adad]
Indra, lord of divine and inviolable power, has
given me a chestnut horse, a rising sun of crimson hue,
the mind, and a smooth axled and strongly built chariot,
the body, and wealths of the world, intelligence,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 4 407
awareness and enlightenment.




[Names: Yasma, Astam]
And to me he has given ten others, carriers
which carry me forward like birds or sun-rays bearing
a mighty king to his royal home. These are ten senses
of perception and volition, and the ten pranic energies.





[Names: Atma, Turtya]
The individual self is but filial manifestation in
reflection of the father, giver of the soul’s dwelling in
body, giver of light and lustre, purifier and sanctifier,
divine destroyer of evil, giver and cleanser of mind and
its colourful fluctuations. I celebrate the holy father of
purity and sanctity, giver of food and energy for the
world of stability.


Mandala 8/Sukta 4










[Names: Indra, Pusha, Danastuti, Devatah, Devatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Yadindra, Sima, Puru, Turvase, Turvas]
Indra, illustrious lord of the world, ruler and
commander of human forces, karmayogi, when you are
invoked by people anywhere east or west, north or south,
up or down, then, O lord of excellence, you feel highly
impelled by those many and come and act as the
destroyer of many evils for the people of reverence and






[Names: Kanvasastva]
And since, O lord Indra, you go to the celebrants,
illustrious, child-like innocent and the humble and kind
alike, sit with them, socialise and enjoy, so the dedicated
admirers and learned men of vision and wisdom offer
homage and reverence, exalt you with sacred hymns
and say : Come, O lord, and accept our tributes and
homage.




[Names: Yatha, Apitve]
piba.


Just as a thirsty stag in the desert rushes to a
pool full of water so, O friend in family of the wise,
come morning, come evening, come fast and drink the
soma of love and reverence in joy.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 4 409






[Names: Mandantu, Amusya]
Indra, lord of power and glory, may these soma
drinks exhilarate you for the bestowal of wealth and
honour upon the dedicated lover of the soma of honour
and enlightenment. Having won over the soma of victory
prize in the contests of competing parties, you drank of
the soma of ecstasy of the highest order and for that
reason you command the courage and confidence of
the victor.




[Names: Visve]
yemire.


Indra, with courage and confidence you fight
out challenges and win victories. With your light and
lustre you break down anger and arrogance. O mighty
one, all your contestants and adversaries stand








[Names: Sahasreneva, Putram]
The youthful warrior who pays you homage and
does honour and reverence to you, and the one who
gives in charity, in service to you, with holy chants and
humility receives the strength of a thousand heroes and,
under the guidance and care of the lord, renders his
progeny unconquerable and exclusive in merit and






[Names: Mahat, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu]
Let us never feel afraid, let us never tire or feel
depressed under your kind care and friendship,
commander of blazing lustre. Admirable is your action
and prowess, mighty generous lord. We celebrate you
and pray we may see that our people and our progeny
be industrious and high achievers.






[Names: Savyamanu, Madhva]
The joyous world of soma in relation to the earth,
you illuminate and rule with a fraction of your prowess.
Whoever plays his part well and renders his share to
the refulgent ruler never regrets nor displeases the ruler
ever. Come fast, O lord, rush in and drink the soma
mixed with sweets of honey and seasoned with milk.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 4 411






[Names: Asvi, Svatrabhaja]
Indra, lord of light and ruling power, your
devoted friend ever blest with the powers of life’s
progress onwards like a chariot hero of war, enjoying
grace of person and culture, wealth of knowledge and
riches of the earth, has his full share of good health,
full age and gifts of existence, and he goes forward to
the assembly of people like the full moon among stars.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Nimeghamano, Anu]
Just like a white antelope thirsting for water,
come to our yajna and have a drink of soma to your
heart’s content. O lord of power, prosperity and
blessings of grace, like a cloud of showers you bear
and bring the most lustrous courage, patience and
fortitude day by day to face the challenges of life.








[Names: Adhvaryo, Somamindrah, Somamindra]
Hasten, O master of ceremonies, let the soma
be prepared and flow forth for service. Indra is thirsty,
he has harnessed his mighty chariot forces, indeed the
thunderous breaker of clouds has arrived.






[Names: Svayam, Somasya, Somas, Idam]
Indra, the devout yajamana regards himself as
divinely blest when you visit and drink the soma of
hospitality. Here is the soma fit for you, matured and
poured, pray accept it and drink.






[Names: Rathesthayadhvaryavah, Somamindraya]
O performers of the yajna of love, loyalty and
non-violence, prepare the soma offering of devotion for
Indra, lord of the chariot of the world. On the heights of
space, the mighty lord’s thunder and clouds of rain are
seen pouring forth showers of bliss on the devout
yajamana’s love and loyalty of yajnic service.






[Names: Indram, Arvancam]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 4 413


Across heights of the firmament, mighty
currents of divine energy transport Indra, love and power
of the spirit of divinity. O lord, may the swift currents
of divinity radiating your light and love to the fire of
yajna bring you hither to us and bless us in the act of
homage.






[Names: Pusanam, Pusana, Puruvasum, Puruvasu, Sakra, Siksa, Puruhuta]
For our loyalty and the lord’s favour of
friendship, we choose to do homage to the lord of
universal wealth and bliss of health and nourishment.
May the lord almighty, giver of freedom from fear and
sin, universally invoked and solicited, enlighten us with
intelligence and bless us with the spirit of action for the
attainment of freedom, victory and prosperity.






Timely sharpen us and temper us, our intellect,
will and action, like the sword in the hands of a warrior,
give us the freedom and wealths of life, O lord deliverer
from sin and slavery. In you lies all that well-known
easily and freely available radiant wealth of life which
you set in motion for humanity to achieve.








[Names: Vemi, Pusannrnjase, Pusannrnjas]
I know you, lord giver of health and
nourishment, for the sake of favour and success. I know
you, lord adorable, for the sake of worship and
brilliance. I know no one else, none else delights me. O
lord of world’s wealth, shelter of the universe, I offer
homage to the divinity, adorable, omnipotent and






[Names: Para, Asmakam, Pusannavita]
O lord of light and immortality, our cows go far
and wide for pasture, let that wealth of ours be always
constant and imperishable. O lord most potent giver of
health and generous nourishment, be our protector and
saviour, and our source of peace and well being for the
sake of ultimate victory.





[Names: Sthuram, Rajnastvesasya]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 4 415


In our love of flight into the regions of light for
success of the distinguished man of scientific ambition
in his brilliant plans and programmes, and among the
most generous gifts of the refulgent and powerful ruler
of the earth, one unique among men of ardent action,
we acknowledge the strongly built and perfected
hundred horse power flying chariot as the object of






[Names: Dhibhih, Sastim]
By virtue of the achievements of the intellectual
pursuits of the vibrant man of exceptional intelligence
and by the visions and conceptional imagination and
reflections of the lovers of united programmes of yajnic
research, the sage received sixty thousand streams of
pure knowledge of life into his awareness and






[Names: Vrksascinme]
On my attainment of the streams of knowledge,
the selective, the indifferent, even the critics, burst into
applause. Abundent are the streams of knowledge they
have got, abundant the body of technology they have
achieved!




Mandala 8/Sukta 5








[Names: Ashvinau, Danastuti, Devatah, Brahmatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Duradiheva]
The bright red dawn from far off, which yet
appears so close, wraps the world in crimson glory and
then spreads it over with the light of the sun.






[Names: Nrvad, Sacethe]
The Ashvins, wondrous charming divine
currents of complementary energies, the yajamana and
the participants, the yogi dedicated to knowledge and
karma, devout men and women arise and move by the
vast and strong chariot of the mind and spiritual energies
and go forward to share the divine glory of the dawn






[Names: Yuvabhyam, Vacam]
O Ashvins, commanders of wealth and energy
on way, the chants of adoration in your honour you seem


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 417


to hear, and I, too, like an appointed messenger, send
up my voice of adoration to you and the dawn and I
wait to hear the divine voice in response.





[Names: Purupriya, Purupri, Purumandra, Puruvasu, Stuse]
Ashvins, dear and favourite with many, givers
of joy to many, commanding great wealth of the world,
we of the family of the learned and the wise admire and
praise you for the sake of our protection and




[Names: Mamhistha]
Ashvins, you are great and generous, givers of
nourishment and energy, loving and inspiring, promoters
and protectors of good, you visit and bless the homes
of the generous yajakas. As such, we adore you.

[Names: Ghrtair]
For the generous yajaka dedicated to divinity,


we pray, bring noble intelligence of the saving order
and sprinkle and energise his path of progress with


inspiring waters and sparkling ghrta.



[Names: Syenebhir, Yatam]
Ashvins, fly to our congregation of yajna and
divine adoration at the earliest on the wings of celestial
eagles upon the instant, hasten to us by flying horses.

[Names: Yebhistisrah, Trinraktun]
Come by those eagles and horses by which in
three days and three nights you traverse over the farthest
regions of light and beauty across the universe.



And bring us food and energy and inspiration
with lands and cows and the light of knowledge, and
bring us possibilities of victory, and clear our paths of
progress free from difficulties.






[Names: Volham]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 419


Ashvins, bring us wealth of lands and cows,
brave progeny, fast chariots and progress, and bring us
nourishment, energy and advancement with motive
forces of the highest order of attainment.






[Names: Vavrdhana, Pibatam]
Rising and exalting, protectors and promoters
of good, destroyers of enmity, moving by golden paths
of advancement to victory, drink and enjoy the honey
sweets of soma, peace and progress.





[Names: Asmabhyam, Chardir]
And, O harbingers of wealth, victory and
progress, bring for us and for the leading lights of power,
honour and excellence spacious and peaceful homes free
from fear and pressure.





[Names: Nisu]
Come soon to the yajna of the people and protect
and promote their creative development, but please
neglect not the others too, nor offend and grieve them.







[Names: Asya, Madhvo]
Adorable Ashvins, bold and resolute harbingers
of a new dawn, drink of this charming, exciting and
honey sweet soma offered by us as a tribute of love and





[Names: Asme, Satavantam, Puruksum, Puruksu]
Bring us a hundredfold and a thousandfold
wealth of universal value in abundance for all humanity
which would sustain the world in a stable state of peace
and progress.






[Names: Vaghadbhir]
Learned men, thinkers and leading lights of
humanity all over the world invoke and invite you many
times in many ways. Ashvins, pray come by supersonic
transports at the earliest.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 421




[Names: Janaso, Yuvam]
Ashvins, the people in top form of readiness,
having prepared the hall of yajnic reception in top gear
with provisions of homage, invoke you and call upon
you to come.



[Names: Asmakamadya]
Ashvins, may this song of our invocation,
adoration and yajnic prayer be most touching for you at
heart and impel you to respond and come.



[Names: Tatah]
Ashvins, the soma cask of honey sweets
installed in the chariot and the pathway is full.





[Names: Therefrom, Tena, Vahatam]
And thereby, O lords of power and wealth, bring
us abundant and ever growing food, energy, wealth and
peace for our children, our animals, our lands and cows,




and for our knowledge and culture, and let all that grow





[Names: Utano]
And, O harbingers of a new day, while you bring
us heavenly food and energy in plenty, open the floods
of streams and rivers and control the flow as by doors.



[Names: Kada]
O leading lights of life, some day the powers
jettisoned or installed on the sea would glorify you when
your chariot flying by wings would rescue them or take
off from there.


[Names: Sasvad]
Ashvins, observers and protectors of truth
without fail, you always provide protection for the
oppressed man of knowledge and wisdom in his home.



MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 423
[Names: Tabhira]
O generous lords of wealth and power, come to
us with those most modern and most admirable means
and methods of protection whenever we call upon you.



[Names: Yatha, Atrim, Sinjaram, Atri]
Come the same way as you protect and save the
man of knowledge and wisdom, the celebrated
intellectual and the sage loud and bold who has broken
off all his three snares of body, mind and soul.






[Names: Yathota]
Come the way you protect and promote the
earnest beginner in matters of possible success in
business, the man of moral values in matters of self-
control, and the man of charity and social awareness in
matters of social success.






[Names: Etavad, Grnantah]
O virile and generous harbingers of wealth and




power, Ashvins, thus do we so far and even more,
celebrating your glory, pray for your favour and good
[Names: Ratham]
Ashvins, you ride a chariot of golden structure
and golden control which flies and touches the borders
of the regions of light on high.

[Names: Hiranyayi, Ubha]
O travellers of the skies, golden is the chassis
of your chariot, golden the axle, and both the wheels
are golden too.



[Names: Upemam]
O winners of wealth and victory, by that golden
chariot come from far, from the farthest wherever you
be, and accept this holy song of mine in praise of you.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 5 425
Immortal Ashvins, winners and harbingers of
ancient sources of wealth, you bring us food, energies
and wealths of tremendous positive value from farthest
places and since times beyond memory.


[Names: Sravobhira, Puruscandra]
Ashvins, observers and protectors of truth, blest
with grace and glory of universal character, come to us
with lights of knowledge, honour and wealth of





[Names: Accha]
May carriers consuming combustible fuel for
energy transport you here on flying wings and you join
the holy man at his yajna of love and non-violence.





Your chariot which moves on fuel and energy
and the wheel of your progress thereby, no one can








[Names: Hiranyayena, Dhijavana]
Ashvins, ever truthful and imperishable powers,
flying at the speed of thought by a golden chariot
running by the power of revolving hands (like pistons,
cranks or turbines and motors), no one can obstruct your
course of progress.






O generous and virile leading lights of the day,
you take delight in hunting the hunter on the wake (not
in ambush). Similarly join the wealth of victory with
the taste of food and season it with the sweets of honey.




[Names: Tame, Satamustranam]
dasa gonam.


Such as you are, Ashvins, harbingers of the
sweets of life, please know the newest and most
favourite gifts I love just as the perceptive ruler knew
when he granted me a hundred camels and ten thousand


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 427






[Names: Adhaspada]
Similarly that ruler knew who gave me ten
estates of real beauty and value like gold. All people
are under control of the wise ruler and men in armour
stand round in readiness to serve and obey.



[Names: Makirena]
No one else goes by the path by which the wise
people go. And no one else is as brave as they, no one
excels them in charity and generosity.


Mandala 8/Sukta 6
[Names: Indra, Dana, Devata, Vatsa, Kanva, Rshi, Mahan, Stomairvatsasya]
Great is Indra by his power and splendour like
the cloud charged with rain and waxes with pleasure in


the dear devotee’s awareness by his child like hymns of
adoration.







[Names: Prajamrtasya, Vipra]
When the forces of nature carry on the laws of
divinity and sustain the children of creation through
evolution, and the enlightened sages too carry on the
yajna of divine law of truth in their adorations, Indra,
immanent divinity, waxes with pleasure.






[Names: Indram, Jami]
When the wise sages with their adorations rise
to Indra and surrender to him as their yajnic destination,
they exclaim: Verily the lord of thunder is our brother,






[Names: Samasya, Samudrayeva]
The people, in fact the entire humanity, bow in
homage and surrender to this lord of passion, power
and splendour just as rivers flow on down and join into
the sea.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 429




[Names: Ojastadasya, Indrascarmeva]
When Indra, lord almighty, pervades and
envelops both heaven and earth in the cover of light,
the light that shines is only the lord’s divine splendour
that blazes with glory.





[Names: Sataparvana, Siro]
And when the lord of might and munificence
with his thunderbolt of a hundred potentials shatters
the head of Vrtra, terror striking demon of darkness,
drought and despair, the bolt is nothing but the blazing
omnipotence of the lord.





[Names: Agneh]
These hymns of ardent adoration like rising
flames of radiant fire, we among the front ranks of
vibrant sages offer are homage and surrender to the lord








[Names: Guha]
Hymns of adoration which abide in the depths
of the heart, wise sages let flow and shine forth
spontaneously with the overflowing streams of natural
truth and law divinely embedded in the soul.






Indra, lord of light and power, pray let us realise
that wealth and honour of earthly character overflowing
with motherly generosity and superfast achievement
which is the prologue to perfect realisation of the nature
and divinity of the ultimate reality of Brahman.



[Names: Ahamiddhi, Aham, Surya]
I have received from my father super
intelligence of the universal mind and law, I have realise
it too in the soul, and I feel reborn like the refulgent
sun.



[Names: Yenendrah]
With the realisation of ancient and eternal
knowledge I sanctify and adorn my words and voice in
song like a wise sage, and by that, Indra, lord of light


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 431
and power, vests me with strength and excellence.




[Names: Mamed]
There are men who do not adore you, and there
are sages who adore you, (both ways you are
acknowledged and adored by praise or protest). O lord
thus adored by me and pleased, pray accept my adoration
and let us rise.



[Names: Yadasya, Apah]
When the lord’s passion rises and roars, breaking
the dark cloud stage by stage, showers rain and rivers
flow to the sea.



[Names: Susna, Vrsa, Srnvise]
Indra, when you strike the mighty thunderbolt
on the devil of drought and cloud of denial, then you
are celebrated as the lord of showers and divine passion.








[Names: Indramojasa]
Neither heavens nor the middle regions nor
earths with all their lustre and power can violate,
comprehend or even contain Indra, lord of the
thunderbolt of omnipotence, justice and punishment.





[Names: Sisnathah]
Whoever chooses to hold up and stand in the
way of the mighty flow of your waters, will and action,
you pierce and break open like the dark cloud and make
him flow with the flow into the channels of nature, the






[Names: Tamobhir]
That nature, Prakrti, which comprehends these
great heavens and earths together, that same you cover
and hide in deep darkness when this universe is






[Names: Pralaya, Mamedugra]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 433


scholars of disseminative knowledge who cleanse
themselves of negativities, all who adore and celebrate
you, while you listen to all, among them, O lord of
blazing resplendence, listen to my invocation, adoration
and prayer.





[Names: Imasta, Enamrtasya]
Indra, these spotted cows of yours, various
earths, starry skies which yield and shower honey sweets
of milk and life giving soma are augmenters of the divine
yajna of universal evolution.



[Names: Pari, Suryam]
All these stars and planets are fertile and
creative, and all round, like the nature and action of the
sun, they suck up vitality in by the divine mouth and
hold the seed of life for new birth.



[Names: Tvamic, Tvam]
O lord of universal power and potential, wise




sages with their hymns of adoration exalt only you, and
so also the distilled soma offers of initiated devotees
exhilarate you alone.



[Names: Tavedindra, Yajno]
Indra, in all matters of right ethics, morals,
policy and social conduct in the world, it is your glory
only that inspires, it is all a version of your universal
yajna, lord mover and ruler of the world.



Indra, bestow upon us abundant food and high
quality energy as well as a great city for habitation, rich
in cows, culture and excellence and bless us with a noble


[Names: Agne]
Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent, give us
that dynamic energy and refulgent power strategy for


sure and certain targeted achievement which you
bestowed upon earlier people of the world committed


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 435


to the pursuit of truth and rectitude in the social struggle
between good and evil, positive and negative, and
between love and hate.





[Names: Yadindra]
For when you are kind, O lord of light and
power, you switch on the light for us and reveal the
target close at hand in sight and you mark the way too
by which we must reach our aim and object of love.



[Names: Yadanga]
Indra, lord of life and love, dear as our very
breath, when you shine and blaze ruling over lands and
people, then you reveal your grandeur, you are
incomprehensible by virtue of your self-refulgence.



[Names: Urujrayasam]
People with most exhilarating offers of soma in
hand for homage invoke and adore you for protection
and advancement, lord omnipresent and ever vibrant in
the expansive universe.







[Names: Upahvare, Dhiya]
In seclusion over mountain slopes and in the
caves and on the confluence of rivers, the vibrant
presence of the lord within reveals itself by illumination
in the self.





[Names: Atah, Yato]
Thence the enlightened devotee rising over the
ocean of existence watches how and from where the





[Names: Adit, Paro]
And then the devotees see like day light the self-
refulgence of the eternal lord and source of life who
shines above and beyond the day through the night of




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 437

[Names: Kanvasa, Savistha]
Indra, lord most potent, all the learned sages of
the world celebrate and exalt your omniscience, creative
power and universal generosity.





[Names: Imam]
Indra, just and merciful lord, pray accept this
hymn of adoration for my sake and protect me from
evil, and bless me that my intelligence and awareness
may grow and rise in piety.






Indra, highest and eternal lord of thunder and
justice, we, enlightened sages dedicated to divinity with
piety, offer these hymns of prayer and adoration for the
sake of our life and advancement.






[Names: Anusata]
Wise sages offer prayers to Indra and, like
streams of water flowing and reaching the sea, the




prayers rise and reach the lord almighty with love and
adoration.






[Names: Indramukthani, Anuttamanyum, Anuttamanyu]
Hymns of adoration and prayer and yajnic
performances exalt Indra, unaging and eternal lord
beyond anger and agitation, just as rivers augment the






[Names: Imamindra]
Indra, come hither to us to join our yajna even
from the farthest borders of the universe by brilliant
vibrations of natural presence and illuminating rays of
light divine and accept this distilled soma of our prayer
and adoration.






[Names: Tvamid, Havante]
People, dedicated celebrants, seated on the vedi
with homage in hand, invoke and adore you, lord most
potent destroyer of darkness and evil, and they pray for
victory in their struggle of life for advancement.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 439






[Names: Anu, Anu]
Just as a chariot wheel turns and moves in
correspondence with the horse so do both heaven and
earth and all other soma transactions of life turn and
move in obedience to your will and law.






[Names: Mandasva, Saryanavati, Matsva]
And Indra, O lord of love and power, in the
regions of the earth and its environment close to the
middle regions of space where violence is possible, pray
bless the people with joy and feel exalted by the pious
thought and will of the yajnic humanity.






[Names: Vavrdhana, Vrtraha, Somapatamah, Somapatama]
Exhilarated and exalted, in the heavens over the
middle regions of the skies, the virile and munificent
wielder of thunder, Indra, roars in response to the yajnic
acts of humanity. He is destroyer of darkness and evil,
drought and despair, and the greatest lover of peace and
the soma of success.






Indra, you are the omniscient poet and visionary
of the universe, all seer, eternal and first manifestation
of existence in creation, sole one and absolute ruler of
the universe by your might and majesty, and you love
to give wealth, honour and excellence with highest joy
to humanity.



[Names: Asmakam, Satam]
Indra, may the hundreds of your festive forces
travelling like light rays transport you hither to our
distilled soma and delicious foods offered in homage.



Learned sages by chanting hymns and
performing yajna exalt the glory and efficacy of this
ancient science of yajnic action which augments the
honey sweets of water, ghrta and all other delicacies
for universal nourishment.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 6 441




[Names: Indramid]
Mortals of the highest order of humanity choose

Indra for honour in yajna, and the seeker of wealth and
power too invokes Indra for protection and





[Names: Arvancam, Purustuta, Somapeyaya, Somapeya]
O lord of universal adoration and worship,
natural vibrations of divine energy loved and honoured
by the devotees of social yajna transport you hither to
the heart to accept the sweets of our love and homage.

[Names: Satamaham, Radhamsi]
Thousands of gifts of intellectual value and
means of practical success I have received from Indra
to give away to help others and for the destruction of
darkness from humanity.



[Names: Trini, Satanyarvatam, Daduspajraya]
Three hundred horses and ten thousand cows




the lord has given to the celebrant of Sama Veda. (Horses

and cows are symbols of achievement and generosity.)



[Names: Udanat, Sravasa]
Having given four bullocks or camels in charity
and raised a class of intellectuals, a prosperous devotee
rises to divine heights of honour and fame.


Mandala 8/Sukta 7






[Names: Marutah, Devata, Punarvatsa, Kanva, Rshi, Maruta, Maruto]
O Maruts, warriors of the nation, when the
vibrant controllers of the nation’s finances in yajnic
streams, physical, mental and spiritual, then you rise to
the clouds and shine.






[Names: Yadanga, Maruts, Marut]
when you detail your vehicles on parade for action, then
even mountains shake with fear and awe.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 443


[Names: Udirayanta, Vayubhir, Dhuksanta]
Children of earth and heaven chanting holy
songs with the winds, the Maruts bring down streams
of food and energy from the skies.



[Names: Vapanti, Vayubhih, Vayubhi]
When the Maruts take to their vehicles with the
winds, they shoot out showers of rain and shake up
mountainous strongholds of energy.






[Names: Mahe]
Out of fear and awe of your motion and power
which is opposed to their strength and character,
mountains hold back and rivers pant and flow.



[Names: Yusman, Yusman]
We invoke you at night for peace and protection,




in the day for action and advancement, and in the
beginning of yajna for completion and fulfilment.
[Names: Vasra]
And those ardent red wonderful stormy troops
of heroes fly by their chariots roaring over mountain
tops and over and across the skies.

[Names: Srjanti, Suryaya, Surya]
By their might and lustre they carve bright paths
for the radiations of vital energies of the sun and stand
guard all over the places by their strength and the beams
of light.



[Names: Imam, Imam]
O Maruts, warriors of exceptional order, listen
to this voice of mine, accept this poetic tribute and
cherish this invocative call of mine.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 445




[Names: Trini, Utsam]
Mothers of the Maruts distil the nectar drink of
life for them from three reservoirs: the solar region of
light or the sattva element of nature, the cloudy sky or
the rajas element of nature, and the earth or the tamas
element of nature’s balance and firmness, and they feed
their children on the light of knowledge and culture,
energy of the winds and generosity of rain showers, and
the sweetness and stability of the earth.






you for the sake of peace, progress and prosperity, pray
come fast from the heavens through the skies close to






[Names: Yuyam, Rbhuksano, Rudra]
You are generous, uncompromising agents of
justice and punishment, highly intelligent and scholarly.
Stay that in your element in the field of peace and
discipline, and in a state of exhilaration keep your soul
and your brains about you.






[Names: Puruksum, Puruksu, Iyarta]
O Maruts, bring us from the light of heaven
wealth, honour and excellence full of joy for all and
amply sufficient for the sustenance of world life.

[Names: Adhiva, Suvanair]
Heroes of the wind, radiant and pure, when you
harness your chariots to ride over the mountains, then
with the showers of soma you rejoice and move the
world to rapture.



[Names: Etdavatascid, Adabhyasya]
To these warriors of the winds of this high order
of indomitable powers, let mortal man pray for peace
and joy with thoughts and words of full awareness of
the giver and the supplicant.






Milking the imperishable cloud of space oceans
like the cow, they sprinkle heaven and earth with rain


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 447


like showers of elixir.






Children of the winds, heavens and the skies
emerge and advance from their abode with winds and
roars by chariots to the accompaniment of songs of
jubilation.






[Names: Yenava, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu, Raye]
Of the Maruts, we solicit that wealth and power
by which they protect the man fighting against violence
and the wise sage who too prays for wealth and honour
in the world.






[Names: Imauvah, Vardhan]
O warriors of charity and generosity, we pray
that these animations, inspirations and exhortations of
ours which, like ghrta, feed the fire of life and rise in
flames, may, exalt you by the thoughts and prayers of
the wise sage.








[Names: Brahma]
Generous Maruts, where are you now rejoicing,
seated on the holy grass? And who is the high priest
conducting the yajnic celebration for you?

[Names: Nahi, Sardhan]
O Maruts, isn’t it true that seated on the holy
grass you have been augmenting the power and efficacy
of the yajna of truth by your exhortations ever before?



[Names: Samu, Suryam]
Those Maruts support and hold together in
cosmic balance the mighty floods of water, the earth,
the sun, and the force and power of thunder stage by






[Names: Cakrana]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 449


Doing acts of mighty vigour and splendour they
break the clouds of darkness and evil and split open
cavernous mountains step by step and bring light and
showers of rain.



[Names: Anu, Anvindram]
They reinforce the powers of life struggling for
positive forces fighting against three negativities of
body, mind and soul, and they support and reinforce
the ruler in his battle against evil and darkness.


[Names: Vidyuddhasta, Subhra, Sriye]
Thunder in hand, all round refulgent, wearing
golden helmets on the head, they shine bright and pure
for the beauty and glory of life.





[Names: Usana, Dyaurna]
Impassioned for action when the virile Maruts
rush to a region of low pressure in the sky from afar,
the cloud, as the higher regions, roars under fear and





[Names: Devasa]
O divinities of power and generous splendour,
to augment and energise our yajna, pray come by motive
forces of golden hoof and golden wheel and bless us in



[Names: Yadesam, Yanti]
When the fiery force drives the Maruts in their
chariot towards regions of abundant water or to the
clouds laden with vapour, then these heroes go forward
bright and pure splitting and flying off the vapours and




[Names: Susome, Saryanavatyarjike, Yayur]
The leading Marut forces proceed to beautiful
regions of peace and joy on higher altitudes and to the
simple natural planes without vehicular medium by
direct currents of energy.



MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 7 451




[Names: Kada, Mardikebhir]
O Maruts, when would you thus reach the
vibrant scholar who calls you to yajna and awaits, and
carry gifts of prosperity to the supplicant?





[Names: Kaddhanunam]
Does a friend of constancy ever forsake Indra,
the ruler? Who thinks twice on the value of friendship
with you? (No one forsakes you, everyone loves to be
friends with you.)





[Names: Saho, Agnim, Agni, Stuse]
O sages and scholars, I praise and celebrate
Agni, fiery leader and enlightened ruler along with
of the nation. Let us all praise and celebrate them.





[Names: Vavrtyam]
For the sake of latest forms of happiness,
prosperity and well being, I turn to the virile and




generous, most adorable and wondrous versatile
warriors of the winds and abide by them.

[Names: Girayascinni, Parvatascinni, Mountains]
peaks pant and turn into chasms and clouds change their
course under the force of Maruts.





[Names: Aksnayavano, Dhatarah]
Chariots flying at the speed of eye-light over
the paths of space transport the Maruts, harbingers of
food, energy, health and full age for the celebrant.






Agni, earliest ruling light of the world, came
into existence with self-refulgence like the sun and the
music of Vedic voice, and the Maruts manifested and
ever abided by rays of the sun and flames of fire.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 453


Mandala 8/Sukta 8






[Names: Ashvinan, Devate, Sadhvansa, Kanva, Rshi, Ashvina, Dasra]
Ashvins, twin powers of natural and human
action, destroyers of evil, travellers by paths of light on
golden chariots, both of you come to our yajna with all
your means and modes of protection and promotion,
appreciate our devotion and have a drink of our honey
sweets of soma.






[Names: Suryatvaca, Bhujt]
Ashvins, lovers of life and living, far sighted,
imaginative and creative thinkers and makers, come sure
to our yajna by your radiation oriented, gold coated and





[Names: Pibatho]
Ashvins, come here from the world of humanity,
from the skies, with the best of light, knowledge and
technique you have collected, accept and enjoy the soma




sweets of the scholars’ creations achieved and perfected
in their joint programme, and assess the taste of soma.






[Names: Putrah]
O lovers of the earth and humanity, come to us
from the heavens and from the skies. The son and
disciple of the scholar has distilled for you the soma
sweets of honey. (Pray take that and bless him to proceed






[Names: Somapitaye, Somapitay, Svaha]
Ashvins, harbingers of complementary
revelations, come and listen closely to what we have
conceived and imagine and say. Come to have a taste of
this soma of our making. By the truth of your divine
reflections, words and actions you extend the
possibilities of our holy achievements. O leading lights,
visionary creators, come with your thoughts, ideas and
imaginations for our advancement.






[Names: Yacciddhi]
Ashvins, whenever the ancient sages called


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 455


upon you for encouragement and advancement, you
came and listened. O leading lights of vision and
imagination, come and listen to this prayer and adoration
of mine too.






[Names: Divascid, Dhibhir]
Visionaries of the light of omniscience,
committed in conscious covenant with dear ones,
responsive to the devotee’s call, come to us from the
heights of heaven with refulgence, knowledge, expertise
and action.






[Names: Kimanye]
Ashvins, harbingers of the light of heaven, do
people other than us adore you with hymns of prayer?
The sagely son and disciple of the wise scholar and
devotee, dear as a child, exalts you with hymns of prayer.






[Names: Aripra]
Ashvins, twin harbingers of heavenly light, the
vibrant devotee invokes you here for protection and




progress with hymns of adoration. O sinless divines,
highest dispellers of the clouds of sin and darkness,
come here and be for us light givers of universal peace
and happiness.


Ashvins, when the youthful dawn of a new day
ascends your chariot with you, then, O divine harbingers
of wealth and energy, you reach all that what the world
thinks of for self-fulfilment.


[Names: Atah, Vatso]
For this reason, Ashvins, come by the chariot
bearing a thousand beauties of wealth and divine bliss.
The poet’s poet, a darling admirer of yours, adores and
glorifies you with honey sweets of his sacred words.






[Names: Purumandra, Puruvasu, Stomam, Anusatam, Anusata]
Ashvins, harbingers of universal peace and joy
for all, creators and dispensers of wealth, honour and
excellence, bless this song of mine with divine grace,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 457


you being the burden bearers and hallowed leaders of
the world to higher regions.






[Names: Krtam]
Ashvins, lead us to all bold, abundant and
creditable honours, wealth and competence of the world,
make us yajnic workers and observers of natural laws
according to the seasons of time and place, and never
let us fall to the violence of scandal, shame and






[Names: Yannasatya]
Ashvins, ever dedicated to truth and laws of
divinity, whether you are in far off space or in the skies,
come form there by your chariot of thousandfold beauty
and sanctity.




[Names: Tasmai]
tam.


Ever true and relentless observers of the laws
of divinity, to the poet sage, your darling celebrant who




exalts you with his words of song, bear and bring food,
energy and vision of wisdom vibrating with divine
illumination and grace.






[Names: Prasma]
Ashvins, presiding powers of divine dispen-
sation and charity, whoever adores you for peace and
well being and prays for wealth, honour and excellence,
to him, pray, give energy and power of will overflowing
with inner light and brilliance of grace.






[Names: Purubhuja]
Leading lights of life and nature, counter powers
of violence, and harbingers of universal prosperity,
come, listen to our adoration, assess our yajnic
achievement, bless us with the beauty and graces of life,
and give us all these and competence for the desired
peace, progress and self-fulfilment.






[Names: Rajantavadhvaranam]
Ashvins, all the ruling lights of yajnic


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 8 459


performances and programmes of creation and
production, lovers and devotees of solemn ceremonies,
at all stages of their mission, invoke you with all your
means and modes of protection and promotion of the






[Names: Sambhuva]
Ashvins, harbingers of peace, pleasure and well
being in prosperity, lovers and admirers of joyous
programmes, come both of you to us who, your darling
celebrants, exalt you with our words, thoughts and




[Names: Yabhih, Yabhir]
no’vatam nara.


Ashvins, harbingers of health and energy,
leading lights of life and nature, come, protect and
promote us with all those powers, potentials and
efficacies by which you protect the sagely scholar and
his wisdom and promote his hospitality and good
fellowship, by which you protect and strengthen the
body, physical abode of ten senses and ten pranic
energies, and by which you rejuvenate and advance the
invalid who has lost his sense faculties and suffers from







[Names: Yabhirnara, Trasadasyum, Trasadasyu, Tabhih]
Ashvins, leading lights of law and defence of
humanity, come with all those powers and potentials
by which you keep the law and order and shatter the
forces of violence and terror for the economic and social
advancement of humanity. With those very powers and
potentials, protect us too for the achievement of success
in our struggles.






[Names: Pravam, Purutra, Purusprha]
Ashvins, protectors and promoters of life and
humanity, greatest destroyers of the forces of darkness
and destruction, may our hymns of adoration composed
in the choicest words, finished in finest form and sung
in the sweetest notes and accents, please and exalt you.
May you ever be the darling heroes of universal love
and admiration of humanity.


[Names: Trini, Kavi]
Three stages of the Ashvin’s advent hidden deep
in the cave of mystery, namely, the victory of progressive


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 461


forces of good against the negative forces of evil,
maintenance of peace against violence, and law and
justice against lawlessness are thus revealed. May the
Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge, justice,
peace and prosperity, come by the paths of rectitude,
divine law and the process of yajnic action for the good
of living beings all over the world.


Mandala 8/Sukta 9




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Shashakarna, Kanva, Rshi, Prasmai]
yuyutam ya aratayah.


Ashvins, harbingers of light and peace, for sure
now come for the protection and progress of your loved
people and provide for them a spacious peaceful home
free from violence and insecurity and ward off all forces
of malice, adversity and enmity.






[Names: Yadantarikse, Anu, Nrmnam]
Whatever manly strength and wealth there be
in heaven and mid space worthy of five classes of
people, Ashvins, bear and bring for us.







[Names: Evet]
Ashvins, whatever your actions and
achievements which the scholars have known and
thought over, reveal the same to the modern scholar
too.






[Names: Ayam, Ayam]
This is the yajnic fire of the season, Ashvins,
which is dedicated and exalted in your honour with the
chant of hymns, and this is the soma sweetened and
seasoned for you, O heroes of the battle for wealth and
victory, by which you would know and dare the enemy,
the demon of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty.






[Names: Yadapsu, Purudam, Puruda, Tena]
Ashvins, heroic powers of nature’s
complementary forces, the power and vitality which you
have vested in the waters, herbs and trees is multifarious.
Pray, with that same vitality and power, bless and protect
me too and let me advance.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 463




[Names: Yannasatya, Jyathah]
Ashvins, harbingers of energy, health and
replenishment, ever true unfailing agents of natural law
and life’s growth, when you vibrate, radiate and
energise, when you nourish, heal, resuscitate and revive
things to live and grow, this conscientious darling seeker
of your power and presence understands you not by
observation, analysis and thought, in your entirety,
because you reveal yourself only to the faithful who
come to you with homage. (Life is a mystery. You can
know the secret of this mystery only by being what it is,
by identifying with it in meditation.)






[Names: Somam, Soma, Somam, Soma]
In truth, the visionary sage has realised the song
and story of the Ashvins, radiations of life energy, in
every detail from inception to completion by faithful
intention and relentless application of mind, and he has
fed the fire of his yajnic search and research with the
sweetest and most vibrating soma of his life’s passion
into the vedi.








8. Ashvins, take to the fastest chariot now and
come by the shortest straight path. These hymns of
adoration burst forth from me like an explosion in space,
reach you like the sun and draw you hither.




[Names: Yadadya]
9. Ashvins, ever dedicated to the divine truth
of nature’s law, when we invoke you with hymns of
adoration or by yajnic sessions or by words of yajakas
today, pray take it that the call is the conscientious voice
of the visionary sage in search for the light of his





10. Ashvins, when the cavalier or the
pedestrian or the sagely seer or the long time plodder
or the ruler or the intellectual calls on you to the yajnic
session, you listen. Hence, pray listen to our call too
and come.




[Names: Yatam, Vartistokaya]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 465


Come, be protectors of our home and family, be
protectors of others too, be protectors of the world and
protectors of our body’s health and social structure.
Come home to us for the sake of our children and grand






[Names: Yadindrena, Vayuna, Yadadityebhir, Rbhubhih, Rbhubhi]
Whether you move with the cosmic force on the
same chariot or abide with the wind in the same region,
or you move across the sun’s zodiacs or with the cosmic
makers, or you move and abide with the vibrance of the
omnipresent, wherever you be, pray come to us too.






[Names: Yadadyasvinavaham]
When I call upon the Ashvins, defenders of
humanity and protectors of life, for the sake of victory
in our struggle for existence, or I call on them against
the enemies in our conflicts with negativities, they
would come, because their courage and force for the
defence and protection of life is highest and best.








[Names: Somaso, Turvase, Turvas]
Come, Ashvins, for sure without fail. These
presentations, adorations and offerings of hospitality
are reserved for you whether they are in the house of
the stormy warrior or dynamic intellectual or artist or
citizen or the sagely seer, they are for you and you alone.




yacchatam.


Ashvins, versatile powers of health and
remedies be there far or near, by that without fail, O
masters of knowledge and expertise, provide a home of
health and peace for the dear devotee free from the pride
and arrogance of drugs and intoxication.





[Names: Abhutsyu, Vyavardevya]
I am awake by the divine voice of the Ashvins.
O divine dawn of light, open the human mind to the
light and freedom of reason and give the gift of wisdom
to mortal humanity.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 9 467




O divine dawn, great lady of truth and leading
light of a new day, awaken the Ashvins, harbingers of
new knowledge and awareness, and O inspirer of the
day’s yajnic activity, relentlessly exhort men and women
to work for the joy of life and win great prosperity,
honour and fame.






[Names: Yaduso]
O dawn, harbinger of a new day, when you rise
with the first sun-rays and then join the sun and shine
together with it, then the Ashvins’ chariot rolls on on its
usual course of the day which preserves and promotes
humanity in life and leads it to advancement.






[Names: Yadapitaso]
When the stout stalks of lotus receive their drink
of green vitality from the sun as cows draw and receive
their milk with the udders from nature, and just when
the stalks yield pranic energy as cows yield milk, and
when the voices of humanity rise in adoration of the
Ashvins in prayer.








[Names: Savase, Ssar]
Then for wealth, honour and excellence, for
strength and courage and joy and prosperity for the
peace and protection of humanity and achievement of
dexterity and competence. O harbingers of light and






[Names: Yannunam]
Adorable Ashvins, when with your thoughts and
acts of the day you go back and sit in the parental home
with all rest in peace, then come again and bless us with
peace and prosperity of an active life.


Mandala 8/Sukta 10





[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Pragatha, Kanva, Rshi]
Wherever you abide, in lofty halls or in the light
of the high heaven, or rest in the sea or space or in an
ornamented palace, wherever you are, come to us,
Ashvins, harbingers of light and inspiration.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 10 469






[Names: Brhaspatim, Indravisnu]
If you sprinkle the yajna of the learned man of
thought with ghrta and feed it with havi compounds,
know, value and sprinkle the yajna of the children of
the sages too the same way. Ashvins, I invoke Brhaspati,
lord of the cosmos and cosmic knowledge, all learned
men of the world, Indra, ruler of world powers, and


[Names: Vishnu, Yayorasti]
I invoke the twin Ashvins, great and generous
achievers, who are committed to receive our homage at


yajna and whose friendship and love for us is on top of





[Names: Yayoradhi]
The Ashvins’ yajnas are specially performed
even in the lands of the agnostics where they shine




boldly and brilliantly. They are specialists of the yajnic
programmes of creation and production without
violence and they come in response to invocations and
yajnic offerings and drink the sweets of soma.



[Names: Yadadyasvinavapag, Turvase, Turvas]
gatam.


Ashvins, commanders of the wealth of
victorious forces, today whether you are in the west or
in the east, in the areas of hate, opposition and conflict,
among the fast achievers or ordinary citizens, I invoke
and call upon you, pray come to us.






[Names: Yadantarikse, Purubhuja, Anu]
Ashvins, commanders of manifold wealth,
power and popularity, whether you fly in the firmament
or across heaven and earth, or you stay in your chariot
with self-contained powers and provisions, from there
come in response to our call.


Mandala 8/Sukta 11




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vatsa, Kanva, Rshi]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 11 471


[Names: Tvamagne, Tvam]
Agni, self-refulgent lord giver of light, you are
preserver and protector of karmic laws, moral
commitments and sacred vows among mortals. Hence
you are adored and worshipped in yajnas.






[Names: Tvamasi, Agne]
Agni, you are adorable in sacred congregations,
the one patient, challenging and victor power, and
pioneer and leader of non-violent yajnic programmes
of creation and production in humanity.






[Names: Adeviragne]
O jataveda, omniscient over everything in
existence, ward off from us all forces of hate, jealousy
and malignity and all impiety and selfish meanness.



[Names: Anti, Nopa, Jataveda]
bless the yajna of an enemy of humanity even if the




yajna and the performer is said to be close to divinity






[Names: Marta, Vipraso]
O lord immortal and omniscient, we mortals,
dedicated sages, know and adore your many many divine
names which describe your multiple roles in the
universe, (names such as Agni, Vayu and Aditya and so
on).





[Names: Vipram, Uutaye, Agnim]
With songs of adoration, we, mortal sages,
invoke and exalt Agni, lord all knowing, self-refulgent
and generous, for our protection, progress and well





The dear dedicated sage adores you and with
words of love and faith prays for your attention from
the highest heaven of light.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 11 473






[Names: Purutra, Anu, Samatsu]
You are the universal eye watching the entire
humanity of the world as master and ruler. As such, O
lord, we invoke and call upon you in our battles of life.






[Names: Samatsvagnim, Vajesu]
We, seekers of strength and fighters for victory,
invoke and adore Agni, omnipotent power of wondrous
munificence and achievement, for protection, defence
and advancement in our struggles and contests of life.






[Names: Pratno, Svam]
Agni, eternal and blissfully adorable lord,
worshipped in sacred congregations since time
immemorial, presiding over yajnas as the most youthful
performer and deity ancient and latest at the newest
occasions, carry on the cosmic yajna, nourish and
augment the universe as your own physical
manifestation, and bring us all good fortune and well
being of life.




Mandala 8/Sukta 12






[Names: Indra, Devata, Parvata, Kanva, Rshi, Indra, Somapatamo, Yena]
Indra, lord most potent, highest protector and
promoter of the beauty and joy of life, that ecstatic
passion of yours which universally pervades, manifests
and reveals your might and glory and by which you
destroy the negative forces of life, we adore and pray for.






That omnipotent passion and ecstasy of yours
by which you protect and promote the individual soul
working with ten faculties of perception and volition,
the unchallengeable wind and electric energy, the solar
radiation which shakes and vibrates, and the ocean of
water on earth and in space, that we adore, that we pray
for.






[Names: Panthamrtasya]
That power and passion of ecstasy by which you


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 475


energise and move the river and the sea, the earths and
waters like rolling chariots to flow and follow the path
of the divine law of nature, that we adore, that we pray
for, to follow the path of truth and yajna ourselves too.






[Names: Imam]
Lord of clouds and mountains, commander of
adamantine will and power of ecstasy, pray accept this
song of adoration, radiant and pure like sanctified ghrta,
by which we adore and pray for that power and ecstasy
by which, through your splendour and glory, you reveal
yourself in manifestation for ever.





O lord adorable and worshipped, accept and
cherish this song of homage and celebration which rolls
and rises and swells you too like the sea, and you too, O
lord omnipotent, manifest in glory higher and higher
with all modes of protection and promotion.






[Names: Divo]
The lord self-refulgent, to extend the grace of




his love and friendship to us, waxes from heaven and
blesses us like intense showers of abundant rain from
the regions of light.






[Names: Vavaksurasya]
The banners of his manifestation and the
thunderbolt in his hands exalt his glory as the sun
illuminates and glorifies heaven and earth.





[Names: Yadi, Adit]
O lord exalted, protector and defender of truth
and positive reality, when you strike down hundreds of
evils and great calamities, then your glory and the
grandeur of your creation rises beyond measure.



[Names: Indrah, Suryasya, Suryas, Agnirvaneva]
When Indra with sun-rays kills antilife agents
such as disease carrying bacteria in the atmosphere, he
rises victorious and exalted like fire over forests.



MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 477




[Names: Lyam, Saparyanti, Purupriya, Purupri]
O lord, this ever new divine intelligence of yours
constantly operative in nature according to time and
seasons is universally sympathetic, loving and
honoured, serves life and the environment, and
continues to create and cover new forms of life and
nature.






[Names: Garbho, Anusak, Stomair, Indrasya, Indras]
The devotee of Indra and lover of divinities of
nature and humanity, enactor of yajna as well as shaped
by yajna, continuously performs holy actions with
sanctity and faith, creates new forms of holy actions
and rises in life by divine songs and tributes in honour
of Indra.






[Names: Sanir, Somasya, Somas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Pract]
Indra, friend and benefactor of humanity and
all loving beings, rises in omnipresent glory to watch
and protect the beautiful world of his creation, and, like
the prime voice of the Veda, reveals new forms of truth
for the dedicated maker of yajnic soma.








[Names: Ghrtam]
Indra is the lord whom vibrant sages and people
in general all adore and exalt, singing hymns of worship
in his honour, and I too offer songs of adoration while I
offer oblations of ghrta into the vedi of yajna.






[Names: Indraya, Aditih, Aditi, Puruprasastam, Puruprasasta]
And mother Prakrti, inviolable Nature, too
bursts into songs of adoration in honour of self-refulgent
Indra, which, being all elevating and inspiring, moves
him to protection and advancement of the world of his






O lord, the sages who conduct the yajna of divine
adoration, and nature’s powers which conduct the yajna
of world creation, sing songs for adoration of divinity
and for protection of life. O lord divine, let not these
conductive powers ever relent in the creative process
which is the dynamic course of existence, cosmic yajna.


16.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 12 479




[Names: Somam, Soma, Marutsu]
Indra, the soma nectar which you infuse in the


sun and in the three worlds of experience, 1.e., earth,
heaven and firmament and which you infuse in the winds
and enjoy to the last drop, we pray for.


7;






[Names: Sakra, Asmakamit]
And which, O lord of power, you infuse and


energise in the far off sea and in this soma distilled by
us and enjoy to the last drop - we pray for.


18.






[Names: Ukthe]
And you, O lord protector of eternal truth, who


lead the yajamana maker of soma to progress in his yajna
and songs of adoration and enjoy the soma homage to
the last drop, we pray for.


19;








[Names: Devamdevam, Indramindram, Indramindra, Adha]
O dedicated performers of yajna, for the sake
of your protection and progress in your acts of homage
and adoration, may all these soma joys of life reach you
to every generous and brilliant yajaka, to every yajaka
of power and prominence, for the elimination of all
obstructions in the way of corporate action.





[Names: Yajnebhir, Somapdata, Hotrabhir, Indram]
And may all participants in corporate action join
in unison and adore and exalt Indra, greatest protector
and promoter of the joy of soma and the united action,
with homage, with offers of soma and oblations of havi
into the sacred fire of joint and creative living for the





[Names: Mahirasya, Visva]
And may the eternal lights of this lord Indra’s
splendour and guidance come to bless the generous
yajaka with all wealths and honours of the world.






Saints and sages honour and adore Indra as their


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 481


first and foremost leader and guide for the destruction
of darkness and evil, and their songs of homage and
prayer too adore and glorify Indra for the attainment of
light and splendour.






[Names: Mahantam, Arkair]
With highest songs of adoration and offers of
homage we worship omnipotent Indra who listens and
responds to our call and prayers and we bow to him for
the attainment of strength and splendour.





[Names: Amadidasya]
Neither heaven nor earth nor the middle regions
comprehend the lord of thunderous power, nor do they
shake or disengage him. Indeed the universe shines and
vibrates by the one and sole power of this lord of






[Names: Yadindra]
Since the learned sages have accepted and
followed you as front leader for the attainment of victory




in their struggles of life, we pray, may your radiant
currents of divine energy reveal your presence and bring
us the vision of divinity for our illumination.






[Names: Yada]
O lord of the thunderbolt, as with your divine
might you destroy the negativities of darkness and
drought which obstruct the flow of the waters of life,
we pray may your divine currents of light and will reveal
your power and presence to us.





Since the sun, by virtue of your might and
refulgence reaches and illuminates the three worlds of
existence, we pray, your radiations of light reveal your
presence and illuminate our soul.






Since the radiations of your dynamic forces
expand day by day, the entire worlds of the expansive
universe are sustained in order in obedience to your law.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 12 483






[Names: Marutir]
Since the entire world of vibrant winds and
humanity bow to you in obedience to the divine law,
the entire worlds of existence are sustained in the order
of the divine law.



[Names: Sukram, Suryam, Surya]
Since you have sustained that sun, radiant light,
pure and powerful, the entire worlds of existence



[Names: Jamim]
Indra, glorious lord of existence, the vibrant sage
raises his voice and directs this joyous hymn of
adoration and prayer to you in sincerity of thought, word
and deed, which rises as if step by step in Holy
Communion of yajna to you as to his own friend and








[Names: Yadasya, Nabha]
When in the favourite hall of this lord Indra,
the congregations on the yajna vedi, exuberant with
soma and fragrance, raise the voice of adoration and
prayer in unison aspiring for the milky gifts of yajna—



[Names: Suviryam, Hoteva]
Then O lord omnipotent and self-refulgent, like
a generous host of cosmic yajna, bring us the wealth of
prosperity and progress and a brave and honourable
progeny as the first gift and attainment of the yajna.


Mandala 8/Sukta 13


[Names: Indra, Devata, Narada, Kanva, Rshi, Indrah, Indra, Vide]
When a special yajnic programme for the
realisation of special knowledge, power and expertise
in a particular field is completed with hymns of thanks
and praise to divinity, then Indra, lord omnipotent and
omniscient, sanctifies the joint endeavour of holiness
and blesses the programme with success. Great is he.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 485




[Names: Suparah]
At the first expansive manifestation of space, at
the centre of all divine mutations of nature, he is the
efficient cause of nature’s evolution, supreme pilot, most
abundant and most glorious, omnipotent victor over
conflicts and negativities in the way of evolution of
nature and humanity in relation to will and action.





[Names: Tamahve, Susminam, Indram, Bhava]
That Indra, potent and abundant, I invoke for
victory in the race for life, for growth and fulfilment. O
lord, be our friend, our innermost centre of conscience
for our progress, peace and all round well being.






[Names: Tyam, Mandano]
O lord adorable and adored, Indra, this abundant
generosity of yours who create and enact this soma yajna
of the universe rains in showers and flows free, in which
you rejoice, shine refulgent and rule over the yajnic vedi
of nature in evolution.








[Names: Nunam, Rayim]
Indra, lord of power and potential, bless us with
that wealth and prosperity, abundant and versatile, bear
and bring us that power and potential full of strength
and light of joy which we ask of you and pray for in our
joint yajnic efforts of creation and cooperation.




[Names: Stota, Vaya]
When the celebrant, perceptive, loud and bold,
sings his songs with passion, then, as the songs are
accepted and cherished, they rise in response to the
acceptance and approval like branches of a tree.





[Names: Pratnavajjanaya, Mademade]
Indra, listen to the celebrant’s call, create and
speak in appreciation as before and, with every
delightful song, give holy recognition to the man of good
word and action.






[Names: Krilantyasya]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 487


The divine words of this lord, Indra, sparkle and
flow like streams down the slopes, Indra who is
celebrated as the lord and master of the regions of light
and joy.






[Names: Namovrdhair]
And lord and master he is called, of the people
also, the one and only master, controller and sustainer.
O lord, delight in the soma, songs and acts of homage
created, sung and performed by devotees who exalt you
with homage and obedience and aspire for sustenance
and protection.





[Names: Stuhi, Gantara]
Praise the lord who is wise and all watching and
whose glory resounds all over the universe, and whose
overwhelming gifts of blessings flow and reach the
house of the obedient and generous giver of charity.



[Names: Tutujano]
O lord instant mover and omnipresent, mighty




wise, pray come to our yajna by the fastest radiations of
light draped in beauty and majesty. Peace be with all






[Names: Ssavistha, Sravah]
Indra, lord omnipotent, protector of truth and
promoter of the truthful, vest the celebrants with wealth
and wisdom and bring honour and fame and riches of
immortal value for the wise, bold and brilliant





[Names: Have, Jusana]
Indra, lord of refulgence, I invoke you at the
rise of the sun, at the middle of day from the heights of
heaven. O lord loving and kind, come by instant
radiations of light and take us on with divine blessings.





[Names: Tantum]
Come lord instantly, take us on at the yajna, be
kind and gracious, let the flames of fire rise with the
joyous music of Vedic hymns and oblations of the gifts


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 489


of earth. Extend the eternal link of life so that we join
you, we join the cosmic yajna, and we join with the life
link of our fore-fathers and mother earth, so that we
may know that link and live it too with our future






[Names: Yacchakrasi]
O lord omnipotent, destroyer of darkness and
obstruction, who are far off in space and closest at hand,
in the sea and in the skies, wherever and everywhere
you are the protector of life and of the food for life.





[Names: Indre]
Let our songs of adoration exalt the lord
omnipotent. Let the soma essences of our yajnic
performance in unison do honour to the lord. Let the
citizens of the world bearing homage of self sacrifice
in hand rejoice in the gifts and glories of Indra.






[Names: Tamid]
Vibrant sages, aspirants for protection and




progress of the world, exalt Indra with abundant songs
of praise with gratitude for divine protection. Indeed,
the earths and their children all, like growing branches
of a tree, do him honour and celebrate his glory.






[Names: Trikadrukesu]
Brilliant people and divine forces of nature all
enact and expand the cosmic yajna of the lord’s creation
in all the three worlds of heaven, earth and the
firmament. Let our voices too celebrate the same
omniscient lord of the expansive universe and thereby
rise in meaning and value.





[Names: Anuvrata, Sucih]
The real celebrant is the person dedicated to
the observance of your discipline of divine law , the
one who creates and sings songs of adoration according
to the seasons of time, songs in which the lord of wonder
and majesty is celebrated as radiant and pure who
purifies the celebrant too into radiance and sinlessness.






[Names: Rudrasya, Rudras, Mano]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 491


That same omnipotence of Indra as Rudra, lord
of natural justice, is ever awake and shines in the ancient
regions of the universe wherein the wise and wakeful
sages concentrate and stabilise their mind through
meditation in thought experiments.






[Names: Yadi, Yena]
then save this blind-folded world of ignorance, save
this soma vitality of life’s positivity too by which we
may win over all the forces of hate and enmity in the





[Names: Kada, Kada]
Indra, lord adorable, lord of all adorations, when
would your celebrant settle in perfect peace? When
would you establish us in the stable wealth of lands,
cows and the holy voice, horses, advancement and the
ultimate wealth and aim of life?






[Names: Ajuryasya]
O lord beyond age and suffering, mighty




adorable forces of nature, gravitation and radiation draw
your cosmic chariot. We adore and pray for the favour
of such lord of universal joy.






[Names: Tamimahe, Purustutam, Purustuta]
We worship that universally adored, omnipotent
lord with his universal modes of protection and progress
who is both just and merciful, promoter and restrainer
and who pervades the beautiful world of cosmic
existence and watches over the cosmic yajna.





[Names: Vardhasva, Dhuksasva]
Help us advance and prosper, lord universally
adored and celebrated by sages, protect us with all help
and bless us with abundant nutriments for body and





[Names: Rtadiyarmi]
Indra, lord omnipotent, controller of clouds and
mountains, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and
punishment, you are the saviour and protector of the
celebrant who thus adores you. I concentrate and direct


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 13 493


my thoughtful intelligence with controlled mind arisen
from meditation on the laws of universal truth and divine
law to you.






[Names: Ihatya, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Hart]
forces of cosmic dynamics working in centrifugal and
centripetal complementarity and creating the world’s
wealth and joy with you, pray come here, shine on top
of our joint endeavour of creative production and bless






[Names: Rudrasah, Rudrasa, Marutvatirviso]
And let your enlightened celebrants dedicated
to the wealth of beauty, grace and culture with love and
justice, and all the vibrant communities engaged in
creative production come and join this delightful yajnic
endeavour for the common good in a state of prosperity
and progressive stability.






[Names: Nabha]
All these dynamic communities dedicated to this




lord of glory know the highest rung of the existential
ladder to attain that state of joy which is in the light of
divinity, they join together here on earth on the holy
seat of universal yajna and eliminate negativities so that
they may attain the state of enlightenment and eternal






[Names: Ayam, Mimite, Anusag]
This power of universal vision and potential in
advance of the cosmic yajna of creative evolution
instantly and simultaneously measures and projects the
cosmic plan so that it can be watched and assessed on a
long term basis from the beginning to the end.






[Names: Vrsayamindra, Vrsa, Satakrato]
Indra, this cosmic chariot of yours moving on
and on is exuberant and generous, the natural forces
which carry it on are mighty, you, lord of infinite actions
are generous and inexhaustible, and the homage and
prayer offered to you is highly effective and infinitely






MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 14 495


Abundant and mighty are your clouds of
showers, powerful is your excitement and joy, abundant
is the beauty and power of this soma you have created
in the world of existence, mighty and far reaching is
the beauty of the cosmic dynamics you have enacted
and energise, and mighty is the order and command of
your invitation to life.




[Names: Vavantha]
and powerful too by your grace. Lord of thunder and
clouds, [invoke you who command inexhaustible power
and generosity along with your wonderful protections
and modes of advancement. You listen and you love
and bless the songs of adoration and prayer, and the


invocation and prayers addressed to you are powerful
and rewarding.


Mandala 8/Sukta 14




[Names: Indra, Devata, Goshuktyashvasuktinau, Kanvayanau, Rshis, Yadindraham, Stota]
Indra, lord of universal knowledge, power and
prosperity, if I were, like you, the sole master of wealth,
wisdom and power in my field, then pray may my




dependent and celebrant also be blest with wealth and
wisdom of the world. (Let all of us together be blest
with abundance of wealth and wisdom under the social
dispensation of our system of government and






[Names: Savipate, Yadaham]
O lord and master of world power and
prosperity, Indra, if I were master of knowledge and
controller of power, I would love to share and give
wealth and knowledge to this noble minded person of
vision and wisdom.





[Names: Dhenusta, Gamasvam]
Indra, the divine voice of your omniscience,
omnipotence and bliss overflows with universal truth
and rectitude of the law of existence and showers the
abundance of prosperity and advancement upon the
dedicated yajamana who distils and creates the soma of
joy for the world.






MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 14 497


Indra, when you are pleased to bless the
celebrant with power, prosperity and excellence, then
neither mortal nor immortal can restrain the abundant
flow of your grace and generosity.





[Names: Yajna, Indram, Cakrana]
Yajna, joint creative endeavour which protects
and replenishes the earth and environment, pleases and
elevates Indra, the ruler, and creates a place of bliss in
the light of heaven for the doer.



[Names: Vavrdhanasya, Utimindra]
Indra, we pray for your power and protection,
the lord whose glory rises with the expansive universe
and who rule over the entire wealth and power of the
worlds of existence.



[Names: Vyantariksam, Somasya, Somas, Indro]
When Indra, lord omnipotent and blissful,
eliminates all obstructions and negativities from our
paths of progress, then we see the entire space in




existence shines with light and overflows with the joy
of soma bliss.






[Names: Arvancam]
When the lord shakes up our psychic energies
to the depths and throws out our darkness and
negativities, then he sharpens our senses along with
pranic energies and opens out our spiritual potential
hidden in the cave of the heart.





[Names: Indrena, Sthirani]
The bright and beautiful, blessed and blissful
stars and planets of refulgent space, expansive, firm and
constant by virtue of the omnipotence of Indra, no one
can shake or dislodge from their position of stability.


[Names: Apam, Indrajirayate, Indrajirayat]
Like exulting waves of the sea, this hymn of
adoration rises and reaches you, and the vibrations of


your joyous response too emanate and pervade




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 14 499




[Names: Tvam, Indrasyukthavar, Stotrnamuta]
By you the songs of praise and adoration thrive


and exalt, by you the songs of celebration and prayer
vibrate and fructify. Indeed, you do all the good to the


i,






[Names: Indramit, Somapeyaya, Somapeya]
Radiations of light with expansive vibrations,


herbs and trees with branches, leaves and filaments carry
the spirit of divinity and nature’s energy to the creative
centres of life’s bounty.


13;






[Names: Sira, Visva]
When you fight out the adversaries of life and


humanity, you crush the head of the demon of drought
and famine with the sea mist and the cloud.


14.








[Names: Mayabhir]
With your mysterious powers and tactics, you
destroy the crafty thieves and saboteurs roaming around
even if they have risen to the heights of clouds.


[Names: Asunvamindra, Somapa]
Indra, protector of the creative joy and
prosperity of life and humanity in a state of peace, you
being the better and higher of all others, you frustrate,


dismiss and dissolve the factious assembly which has
failed to be creative and cooperative as a corporate body.


Mandala 8/Sukta 15




[Names: Indra, Devata, Goshuktyashvasuktinau, Rshis, Tamvabhi, Puruhutam, Puruhuta, Purustutam, Purustuta, Indram, Indra, Indra]
and praised, the lord who blazes with light and power,
serve him with words and actions and let him shine forth
in your life and achievement.



[Names: Yasya, Gririnrajran]
Glorify Indra, who sustains the cosmic yajna in


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 15 501


the two worlds, your life here and hereafter, whose
cosmic potential sustains heaven, earth and the middle
regions, who moves and controls the mighty gusts of
winds and motions of mountainous clouds, and who
gives us heavenly showers of rain for joy and vital






[Names: Purustutan, Sravasya]
Indra, universally praised and celebrated, you
rule and shine alone, one, unique, without an equal, to
destroy darkness, ignorance and adversities, to control
and contain what is won and to manage what is heard
and what ought to be heard.






Indra, lord of adamantine will and generous
disposition like clouds of rain, we celebrate and glorify
that power and heavenly joy of yours which is virile
and generous, heroic in battles and steadfast against
challenges, creative in the worlds of existence and
gracious in advancement and gifts of bliss.








[Names: Yena, Mandano]
We celebrate and adore that power and divine
joy of yours by which you reveal the light of life to the
mortals from generation to generation and, exalted by
which, you shine and rule over the yajnic dynamics of
this universe.






[Names: Tadadya, Vrsapatnirapo]
That divine power and joyous generosity of
yours, today, saints and scholars of the holy Word and
song sing and celebrate as ever before. O lord, conquer
and control the waters of space collected in the mighty
clouds and let them flow day by day.






[Names: Tava, Vajram, Ssisati]
That grandeur and majesty of yours, that power
and potential, that continuous act of divine generosity,
that adamantine will and force of natural justice and
dispensation of the thunderbolt which overwhelms our
will and choice commands our sense of discrimination,
and we glorify it, we sharpen it, we accept it with
adoration.






[Names: Tvamapah]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 15 503


The light of heaven glorifies your blazing power,
the earth augments your honour and fame, and the
rolling floods of water and mighty mountains of majesty
do awesome homage to you.



[Names: Tvam, Varunah, Varuna, Tvam, Marutam, Maruta]
Vishnu, cosmic dynamics of nature’s expansive
sustenance, Mitra, loving and life giving sun, Varuna,
soothing and energising oceans of the universe, and the
power and force of the showers of cosmic energy all
exalt you and receive their life and exaltation from you.

[Names: Satra]
Most generous and omnificent Indra, in the heart
of humanity you arise as the greatest and highest paternal
power and presence who sustain the worlds of existence



[Names: Nanya, Indrat]
O lord universally adored, you alone dispel and
destroy all the strong holds of darkness, ignorance and




evil. There is no one else other than Indra who can
exceed your power and performance either now or later.





[Names: Yadindra, Asmakebhir]
Since all people in all their different lands and
places invoke and adore you for protection and self
fulfilment according to the voice of their own
conscience, O lord, be gracious to our people here on
earth and let them win the divine gift of eternal joy.




[Names: Aram]
For peace and settlement of the perfect order,
and for honour, dignity and excellence for all of us here
on earth, and for our final victory of self fulfilment in
ultimate bliss, meditate on the lord’s manifestations,


identify with his omnipresence, adore him as the lord
of omnipotence, and win the pleasure and grace of Indra.


Mandala 8/Sukta 16




[Names: Indra, Devata, Trimbithi, Kanva, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Naram]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 16 505


With songs of celebration glorify Indra,
refulgent ruler of humanity, worthy of adoration, leader,
destroyer of evil people, the greatest and most


[Names: Yasminn, Sravasyd, Apamavo]
Unto him all songs of adoration return, to him
all honours and fame of the world reach, in him they
rejoice like streams and rivers reaching and rejoicing
in the sea.

[Names: Jyestharajam, Maho]
Him with songs of adoration I glorify as the first
and highest ruler, constantly active in cosmic dynamics,
and the greatest warrior and winner for the celebrant’s
good.



[Names: Yasyanuna, Harsumantah]
Faultless are his joyous exploits, deep and grave,
vast and wide, saviours across the seas of life and givers
of victory in the battles of the brave.







[Names: Tamid, Yesam, Indras]
When the call is given and the battle rages,
people invoke him for defence, and they win who enjoy
the favour and protection of Indra.


[Names: Tamic]
Men of vision and wisdom celebrate him with
inspiring songs and noble actions while average people
please him with usual performance of their daily duties.


This lord Indra is the creator, controller and dispenser
of wealth and rewards.





[Names: Indro, Puru, Puruhutah, Puruhuta, Mahan]
Indra is Brahma, great and omniscient, the all-
watching seer, invoked, adored and worshipped by all,
universally in many ways. He is really great,
magnanimous by virtue of his great actions.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 16 507




[Names: Ekascit]
He is adorable with songs of praise, worthy of
invocation and homage, eternal, ever true, and by his
essential nature he is omnipotent, all creator, all maker
of forms, and all alone by himself, he is the power






[Names: Tamarkebhis]
and exalt Indra, with inspiring verses of Rgveda, with
sweet songs of Samaveda and with the exhilarating





[Names: Pranetaram, Sasahvamsam]
All people, communities and nations adore and
exalt Indra who brings wealth, peace and prosperity to
humanity, creates light and hope for their battles of life,
and challenges and destroys enemies by fighting them
out.








[Names: Puruhitah, Puruhita]
He, Indra, lord of deliverance and giver of
fulfilment, invoked and adored by all, pilots us across
the seas of life by the boat of divine guidance and saves
us against all jealousies, enmities and negativities of
the world.


[Names: Accha]
Indra, lord of power and giver of fulfilment, by
gifts of science and energy and with noble acts and


persistent endeavour, lead us well by noble paths to
peace, prosperity and well being.


Mandala 8/Sukta 17






[Names: Indra, Vastoshpati, Devata, Irimbithi, Kanva, Rshi, Indra, Somam, Soma, Edam]
Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we
hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service.
Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to
you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect
and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life.






MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 17 509


Let the radiant waves of cosmic energy engaged
in the service of divinity bring you here. Pray listen to
our songs of prayer and adoration.


Dedicated to divinity and the divine voice,
meditating on the divine presence with concentrated
mind and soul, living in truth the beauty of life and ex-
pressing the ecstasy of soma, we invoke and wait for
Indra, original maker and lover of soma, to come and






[Names: Brahmanastva, Somapamindra, Sutavanto]
O lord of cosmic beauty, come to us, listen to
our song of adoration and drink of the soma distilled by
us with intense love and devotion.



[Names: Piba]
I create and pour the soma into the body spaces
of your creation, taste the sweets with your tongue and
let the exhilaration of honey radiate to every particle of
the cosmic body.








[Names: Grbhaya]
May the soma be delicious to your taste, O
connoisseur of soma, may the honey sweets be
exhilarating to your body, and may the soma bring peace
and joy to your heart.






[Names: Svaduste, Somah]
O lord of cosmic vision, let this soma distilled
and seasoned, radiate to you from sense to the spirit,
inspiring, soothing and beatifying like a bride on top of
her beauty and virgin grace.




[Names: Ayamu]
In the ecstasy and exhilaration of soma, Indra,
lord mighty of head and arms joined at the neck and
vast of cosmic belly space, destroys the dark forces of
life.





[Names: Tuvigrivo, Indro]
Indra, ruler and ordainer of the world by your
power and splendour, come to us and, O dispeller of
darkness, go forward, destroy the evils and adversities


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 17 511
of ignorance, injustice and poverty.





[Names: Vrtrani]
Indra, ruler and ordainer of the world by your
power and splendour, come to us and, O dispeller of
darkness, go forward, destroy the evils and adversities
of ignorance, injustice and poverty.






[Names: Dirghaste, Yajamanaya]
Let your arms of law and order be long and far
reaching by which you protect and provide peace,
prosperity and security for the self-sacrificing performer
of yajna who creates soma for the common good.





[Names: Ayam, Ehimasya]
Indra, this soma pure and sanctified on the holy
grass of yajna vedi, is dedicated to you. Come fast, you
would love it, drink and enjoy, and protect and promote
it for the good of all.






12. Sacigo Sacipujana’yam ranaya te sutah.


[Names: Akhandala]
Lord self-refulgent creator of stars and planets,
glorious adorable, this cosmic soma of the universe of
your creation is for the joy of life. Therefore, O lord
imperishable, you are invoked and adored with love and





[Names: Yaste, Srngavrso, Nyasmin]
O lord, the sun on high which neither falls nor
allows others, planets and satellites, to fall is your
creation and it is the protector and sustainer of the vault
of heaven and the firmament. On this we meditate and






[Names: Vastospate, Drapso, Sasvatinam]
O lord of human habitations, creator of the
cosmic home of life, may the centre column of our house
be firm. May the lord be the protective armour of the
makers of soma. May Indra, lover of soma to the last
drop, be destroyer of the strongholds of evil which
nevertheless persist through time, and may the lord be
friends with the sages.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 18 513






[Names: Prdakusanur, Bhurnim, Somasya, Somas]
Challenger of poisonous negativities, adorable,
giver of earthly prosperity and words of vision and
wisdom, Indra by himself alone eliminates many evils.
Let the devotee with inspired adoration invoke the
refulgent omnipresence of Indra before his inner vision
to bless his consciousness and to protect and promote it
to universal awareness of the divine presence.


Mandala 8/Sukta 18






[Names: Adityah, Aditi, Ashvinau, Aditya, Agni, Surya, Anilah, Devatah, Irimbithi, Kanva, Rshi, Idam, Adityanam, Adityana]
Let mortal humanity ask for unique favours of
these Adityas, brilliant children of Mother Nature, that
is, nature’s powers of light, energy and peace, seek for
wealth, honour and excellence of life in a state of peace
and progress, and live under the inspiration and
guidance of nature, her forces of thought, energy and








[Names: Anarvano, Adabdhah]
Irresistible are the paths and laws of these
brilliant powers of nature, undaunted are they, protectors
and promoters, and they increase the peace and
prosperity of life (if you presume not to challenge and






[Names: Sarma, Savita, Bhaga]
inexhaustible wealth and power of divinity, Varuna,
oceans of space and divine generosity, Mitra, divine love
and warmth of life, and Aryaman, divine laws of the
motions of stars, planets and galaxies, guide and lead
us to that peace and prosperity which we pray for and






[Names: Devebhir, Samt, Purupriye, Purupriy, Imperishable, Infinity]
loved and adored, self-refulgent divinity, giver of
security in prosperity against adversity, pray come and
bring us best of life’s happiness and well being along
with brilliant powers of generosity, intelligence and


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 18 515






[Names: Ambhoscid]
Those children of divinity, sages, scholars and
redoubtable warriors, pure at heart and great performers
of boundless possibilities, know how to remove
jealousies, fight out enmities and eliminate sin and
crime.






[Names: Aditirno, Aditir, Aditih, Mother, Nature]
energy and stability, preserve, protect and promote our
cattle, property and perception day and night. May the
light of divinity, always promotive of positivity, save
us from sin.


[Names: Samtati]
May that beneficent intelligence of the light of
divine Mother Nature come to us day by day with her


protective faculties, do us good and ward off errors,
obstructions, negative values and misbeliefs.








[Names: Yuyuyatamito]
And may nature’s complementary powers of all
round protection and growth bring us good and peace
and keep off all sin and evil of body and mind from us.






[Names: Samagniragnibhih, Suryah]
May Agni, divine fire of life, with its radiations
of heat and light, do us good. May the sun shine warm
for the good of all in peace. May the wind blow fragrant
and free and bring us the breath of life for all in peace,
and may all the divinities of Mother Nature drive away
and keep off all negativity and adversities from






[Names: Apamivamapa, Adityaso]
May the Adityas, powers of light and life in
nature and humanity, drive away all disease of body
and mind and keep off negativities of thought and
intelligence from us. May the children of imperishable
divinity keep us safe, far away from the onslaughts of
sin and adversity.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 18 517






[Names: Yuyota, Adityasa, Rdhagdvesah]
May the Adityas, divine harbingers of light and
life, drive away from us all forms of violence and enmity.
May they ward off all those stupid fools who lack
understanding and refuse to think positively. May the
pioneers of enlightenment who know the world and all
its ways eliminate hate and malignity from the world of






[Names: Enasvantam]
O Adityas, children of the light of life eternal,
holy givers of the best of life, thought and action, bring
us that peace and joy which gives us freedom, that
freedom which saves and liberates even the worst of
sinners from sin and evil.





[Names: Yonah, Svaih]
Let the mortal who of his own evil nature seeks
to injure us by his evil design perish in consequence of
his own evil actions. Let such a man be off from us.








[Names: Samit]
Let the sin itself consume and wholly destroy
that sinner, evil designer, maligner, mortal enemy of
humanity who is a treacherous double dealer and seeks
to destroy us.






[Names: Pakatra]
O Vasus, brilliant and benevolent providers of
peace and settlement for humanity, stand by those who
are simple, honest and innocent. In your heart of hearts
you know the nature and character of mortal humanity
and closely discriminate between the double dealer and
the person who is not a double dealer. Stand by the pure






[Names: Dyavaksamare]
We pray for the peace and protection of the
mountains and the clouds. We pray for the peace and
protection of the running waters. May heaven and earth,
divine intelligence and holy mother, keep off sin and
evil, suffering and disease from us. (Our choice and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 18 519
prayer is freedom from sin and suffering.)






[Names: Sarmana]
O Vasus, providers of settlement, peace and joy,
Adityas, holy powers of light and life in nature and
humanity, we pray, be our guides and pilots and, by your
saving ark of life and destiny, lead us over the sins and
sufferings of the world with the peace and felicity of
the life divine.






[Names: Adityasah]
O Adityas, refulgent lords of light and mighty
masters of life giving energies, for the joyous living
and longevity of our children and their off-spring, create
and bring the holy gift of good health and long life of
peace and felicity.






[Names: Yajno, Adit, Yusme]
O Adityas, mighty masters of refulgence and
teachers of the secrets of good health and long life of
felicity, the yajna, holy act of creativity, is your love




and inward inspiration. That act we have performed
close to you. Pray know, appreciate and be kind and
happy with us. We are yours, we abide in your light,
and we are of the same order of humanity as you, one
with you.






[Names: Brhad, Marutam, Maruta, Mitram, Varunam, Varuna, Mitra]
For the sake of a long life of peace and felicity,
we approach the brilliant and benevolent lord of the
winds of life and life’s energy, the protective and saviour
forces of life, the Ashvins, complementary forces of the
dynamics of development, Mitra, powers of love and
friendship, and Varuna, powers of judgement and justice,
all in nature as well as in humanity, we pray for
inspiration and enact as a holy performance of yajna a
vast home of peace and freedom for humanity on the
earth and her environment.






[Names: Aneho, Mitraryaman, Mitraryama, Trivarutham, Maruto]
O Mitra, powers of universal love and
friendship, Aryaman, guides and pioneers of humanity,
and Varuna, powers of universal judgement and justice,
and all ye peoples of the world, unite, create and give
us a happy home on earth blest with threefold freedom
from ignorance and darkness, injustice and violence,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 521


and poverty and inequality, admirable as free from sin
and evil and the scourge of fear and terror.






O Adityas, powers of light and life, givers of
enlightenment, human as we are, all kindred of the fact
of death, pray give us the longest span of life for the joy
of living and then help us cross over to the life beyond


Mandala 8/Sukta 19








[Names: Agni, Adityah, Trasadasyu, Aditya, Devatah, Sobhari, Kanva, Rshi, Devatra]
Praise the self-refulgent lord giver of heavenly
bliss whom the divinities of light and enlightenment
hold and reflect in all his glory, Agni, the lord adorable,
all pervasive yet uninvolved, whom the noble and
learned people perceive, realise and worship as the one
worthy of worship.








[Names: Vibhutaratim, Agnimilisva, Asya]
O vibrant scholar, worship Agni, lord of light
and enlightenment, infinitely giving, awfully wondrous
and self-refulgent, and the sole leader and controller of
the world. Worship Him, the lord eternal, O generous
man, in order that you may participate in this yajnic
system of the lord’s universe which is full of love
without violence and overflows with the blissful joy of
soma, an inspiring invitation to live and act as the child
of divinity.






[Names: Yajistham]
We choose to worship you, Agni, most adorable,
worthy of worship, self-refulgent lord over the divinities
of existence, imperishable and eternal creator of the
yajna of this universal order of the world.






[Names: Urjo, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
We worship Agni, protector and promoter of
energy and men of energy, lord of grandeur and glory
and the holy refulgence of nature that shines bright with
the highest flames of fire and light. In the light and fire


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 19 523


of cosmic yajna, He is the giver of joy in the light of
day and the bliss of peace in the night, and He is the
giver of the nectar of pleasure in the liquid flow of water
and the dynamics of karmic flow.






The mortal man who performs yajna, creative
activity without violence, and offers homage by giving
in honour of Agni with holy fuel or with havi in ghrta
and fragrant materials with the chant of Vedic verses
enjoys the peace and bliss of life day and night.






[Names: Tasyedarvanto]
His horses speed on at the fastest and hasten
him to victory. His honour and fame shine the brightest.
Whatever he does in honour of the divinities or in service
to mortal humanity, sin and pride never touch him nor






[Names: Svagnayo, Agnibhih, Agnibhi, Suviras]
O lord creator of energy and master controller




of strength and power, let us, by yajnic experimentations
of various forms of heat and light, all your gifts, be
masters of fire energies and light radiations. You are
the bravest holy power. Pray be ours, close to us as
master giver and power divine.




[Names: Prasamsamano]
raja rayinam.

Agni is worthy of praise and admiration as a
friendly guest of honour and worthy to be known as a
saviour like a chariot leading to cherished destinations.
Abiding in you and strengthened by you, O lord,
dedicated practitioners rise to be men of perfect success
in peace and bliss since you are the ruler and controller
of all forms of the wealth of existence.






O lord of universal wealth and grandeur, Agni,
we pray, may the mortal come to sure success and good
fortune who gives in charity and performs acts of yajnic
creativity with love and without violence. May such a
man be worthy of praise and appreciation with holy acts
of intelligence and may he be rich in acquisitions and
liberal in dispensations of charity.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 525






[Names: Yasya, Surah]
The man for whose acts of yajna you rise high
and stay constant is blest with brave progeny and
achieves all round success in life. He is blest with horses
and incoming wealth and honour. Surrounded by the
wise, he is blest with praise and high appreciation.
Supported by the brave, he achieves fulfilment in
whatever he does and whatever he wants to do.






[Names: Yasyagnir, Havya]
Blest is the man in whose house Agni, lord of
universal acceptance with faith and reverence, through
the divine fire form of yajna, receives oblations of holy
food and Vedic songs of praise and the fire sends up
yajnic food to nature’s divinities. He achieves total
fulfilment in every field of life through the bounties of
divine nature.




[Names: Viprasya]
vividuso vacah.




And O child of strength born of yajnic
endeavour and sustainer of vitality in human affairs, O
Vasu, all pervasive divine fire, living shelter of all,
convert the song of the vibrant scholar celebrant to super
mortal prayer and raise it to reach the heights of divinity.




[Names: Yoagnim, Gird, Socisam]
One who lights the versatile yajnic fire and
thereby whole heartedly serves the fire divine of
imperishable flames with oblations of sacred havis,
reverence and holy words of prayer never falls, never
fails in life.


[Names: Samidha, Visvet]
The mortal who serves Aditi, immortal fire of
mother Infinity, with blazing fuel within the radiance
of its own laws is blest with the wealth and splendour
of all orders of intelligence, honour and fame and


surpasses all people of the other order like a captain on
the helm crossing the stormy seas.






[Names: Tadagne, Manyum]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 527


Agni, lord of light and life, give us that
splendour of spirit and intelligence which may challenge
and overcome any voracious friend at the door, in the
heart and home, and counter the wealth of any evil
minded person anywhere in life.






[Names: Yena, Vyam, Savasa, Indra]
Agni, lord of light and life, we worship, pray
for and try to acquire that light of vision and
discrimination of intelligence of yours by which Varuna,
man of judgement and justice, Mitra, man of love and
friendship, Aryaman, guide and pioneer of society, the
Ashvins, complementary agents of development and
progress, and Bhaga, man of power, fame and honour,
envision things in unison, discriminate right from
wrong, and declare for all to see and follow the right so
that thereby, O Indra, ruling lord and power version of
Agni, we all, most keen to know the paths of progress
and follow them, may advance with the power of our
will and knowledge under your guidance and protection.






[Names: Vipraso]
Agni, self-refulgent lord of life, vibrant presence
of the universe, surely they are the wise and holy men




and they are the blessed men of noble thought and study
worthy of reverence who hold on to the light of your
presence in the heart and meditate on the presence as
the lord observant of humanity and as the high priest of
the cosmic yajna.






[Names: Taid]
Lord of glory and divine grace, Agni, they alone
in reality organise the yajna vedi, they really offer the
oblations into the sacred fire, they in truth endeavour to
distil the soma of joy in the light of divinity, they in
ultimate terms win the wealth of life by their struggle
of life, who concentrate their hopes and ambitions in
you and attribute and dedicate all their success, honour
and fame to you.






[Names: Bhadro, Agnirahuto, Bhadra]
Lord of beauty and glory, may the yajna fire with
offers of oblations be auspicious for us. May our charity
be auspicious. May our yajna and all other acts of
kindness and love free from violence be auspicious. And
may all the appreciation and praise of our acts and
behaviour be auspicious and fruitful.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 529






[Names: Bhadrammanah, Ssardhatam]
Agni, leading light of life, turn the mind by
which you challenge the adversary in battles and win
for us to gracious goodness in the victory over the forces
of darkness. Reduce the many strongholds of the violent
adversaries to nullity so that by your kindness and
favours we may win what we desire in peace.






With words of praise I celebrate Agni, sacred
fire energy, benefactor of humanity whom brilliant
scholars honour and elevate as messenger, speedy
ministrant, most valuable and adorable, and bearer of
oblations to the divinities of nature.





[Names: Tigmajambhaya, Agnir]
O yajaka, you sing and celebrate Agni and offer


libations of holy food to the flaming, ever youthful and
brilliant fire of yajna which, when fed on ghrta and sung




in sacred song, gives you strength and vigour in return
for the homage.






[Names: Yadi, Bharata, Asura]
When the fire of yajna fed on ghrta rises in
flames with a crackle up and down, then it displays its
form and power like an earthly version of the sun






[Names: Vivasate]
Agni is the divine power which receives and
carries the holy materials to the divinities by its fragrant
vedi-mouth of fire. It is the benefactor of humanity and
gives the choicest good things to all. It is the agent of
good action and illuminator of the paths of piety. It is
the high priest of universal yajna and an immortal divine
power.






[Names: Yadagne, Mitramaho, Sahasah]
Agni, light and life of the world, child of


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 531


omnipotence and creator of the mighty cosmos, mortal
as Iam, if I could worship you and were to become like
of the world of existence.




na papaya.


Agni, light of life, haven and home of humanity,
let me not worship you for the sake of something
despicable. Lord adorable, nor must I pray to you for
something evil. Let not my own admirer, say my son or
my disciple, be stupid and dull, nor malignant, nor sinful.


[Names: Piturna]
no havih.


Just as the son is cherished in the father’s home
and then the son looks after the parents, similarly Agni
is cherished in the house of yajna and may Agni carry
our oblations to the divinities.





[Names: Tavahamagna, Sada]
Agni, light of life all pervasive, shelter home of
humanity, mortal as I am, I pray, may I, by the closest
protections of the power divine always enjoy the love


and favour of the lord.






[Names: Tava, Tvamidahuh]
By virtue of your mercy and grace, let me love
you with yajnic life of holy action. By virtue of your
acceptance, appreciation and generosity, let me serve
you with all that you have given me. The wise say that
you are the wisest, most high, and foremost leader and
guide, O shelter of humanity. O lord, be pleased and
generous to bless me that I may offer and sing praises
in honour of your glory.





Agni, lord of universal love and friendship, he
whose love and friendship, devotion and dedication, you
and promotion and advances in life with noble and
heroic progeny, moving from victory to glory.





[Names: Tvam, Usasam, Usasa]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 19 533


Agni, giver of the showers of joy in life, the
world of your creation flows on like drops of soma from
the press, colourful, crackling voluble, exciting and
fresh through the seasons, bright and beautiful,
passionately lovable. You are darling of the glory of
dawns and you shine ever in the glimmerings of the
dusk and reflect in the ripples of water.






[Names: Tamaganma, Samrajam]
Blest with wealth and knowledge and bearing
gifts of homage, for ultimate protection and further
advancement, we have come to the lord almighty of a
thousand forces of light and arms, object of universal
love and adoration, blazing ruler of the universe and a
scourge of the evil destroyers.






[Names: Vipo]
Of you, Agni, lord and light of the universe, on
whom do other lights such as the sun depend like
branches of the tree, I sing like a poet and, celebrating
your ruling orders of the people, I enjoy the honour and
pleasures of the world of your creation.








[Names: Yamadityaso, Maghonam]
O Adityas, generous givers of light and life free
from malice and jealousy, of all the people of wealth,
honour and power, whoever the mortal you guide and
lead across the world of karma and consequence, he is
the man of good fortune.






[Names: Yuyam, Vayam, Varuna, Mitraryama, Anu]
Adityas, powers and givers of light and justice,
rulers of the bright order over people, punish whoever
does evil and violence toward the law abiding citizens.
O Vauna, ruling power of judgement and justice, Mitra,
men of love and friendship, and Aryaman, guides and
pioneers of the nation, let us be cooperative participants
to take over the reins of your law and order of the truth
and justice of your vision.






[Names: Adanme, Trasadasyur, Mamhistho]
May the lord sustainer of all life and destroyer
of negativities, protector against the wicked, most
liberal, most respectable defender of truth and goodness,
I pray, bless us with many manly sons in the family and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 535






[Names: Tisrnam]
May the lord omnipresent, master ruler of all
moving things and the three worlds, supporter of all
liberal people, be my ultimate guide, inspiration, and
abode at the end of my life of karma, moving as I am
towards him with concentration on good things in
thought and action.


Mandala 8/Sukta 20






[Names: Marutah, Devatah, Sobhari, Kanva, Rshi, Maruta, Sthira]
Come Maruts, warriors of nature and humanity.
Do not hurt nor destroy the innocent. Already on the
move as ever, pray do not tarry any more far away.
Heroes of equal passion, will and desire to accomplish
your mission, you can bend even the firmest forces of
violence and bring them to reason.








[Names: Vilupavibhir, Rbhuksana, Rudrasah, Rudrasa, Purusprho]
Mighty leaders of will and intelligence, lovers
and protectors of the good, destroyers of want and
suffering, honoured and invoked by all, come right now
at the fastest by blazing chariots of the strongest wheel
with forces of thunder and join our yajnic programme
of creation and development with abundant food and






[Names: Vidma, Susmamugram, Marutam, Simivatam, Visnoresasya]
We know the virile Maruts dedicated to peace
and justice against violence and injustice. They are
harbingers of rain showers of plenty as participative
agents of the cosmic will working in the dynamics of
nature and humanity.






O self-refulgent Maruts, when you in your
blazing armour stir and move, islands sink at their banks,
the evil stand still, both heaven and earth shake and the
deserts rage with flying sands.






[Names: Acyuta, Bhumiryamesu]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 537


At your move to battle, fixed mountains roar,
ancient trees crack and crackle, and the earth shakes
under the force of your pressure.




[Names: Amaya, Maruto, Yatra]
jasah.


O Maruts, for the expansion of your force and
power on the march, the vast skies give way farther and
farther as the heroes of mighty arm put on and display






[Names: Svadhamanu, Vahante]
These mighty heroes, blazing bright in
magnificence, commanding force and power of
excellence, generous with moral rectitude, far from
crookedness and unshakably upright in conduct, wear
and express the grace of culture and behaviour in
keeping with their innate merit and dedication to the
defence of mother earth and her children.








[Names: Gobhirvano, Gobandhavah]
The missile of these protectors, sustainers and
defenders of the earth is shot by the force of sounds in
the golden interior of the carrier chariot. May these
heroes, friends of the earth, nobly born and trained, great
and glorious, stand for our maintenance, food and
energy, comfort, love and cooperation.






[Names: Prati, Sardhaya, Marutaya, Havya]
O generous yajakas, makers of soma, bear and
bring homage in thankful response to the generous and
mighty force of the Maruts led on the march by a great
and formidable generous commander.




[Names: Vrsanasvena, Syenaso]
vitaye gata.


O Maruts, stormy troops of nature and leading
warriors of the human nation, come freely like the
mighty high flying eagle birds and bring us holy yajnic
inputs for development and human progress for our
protection and advancement by your strongly built
chariot drawn by mighty forces, bearing loads of riches
in generous plenty for our spiritual and material well




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 539




[Names: Samanamanjyesam, Davidyutatyrstayah]
The turn out, uniform and movement of these
Maruts is steady and alike. So are their golden badges
on the shoulders, and their weapons too shine uniformly
in their hands.






[Names: Taugraso, Sriyah]
Bold and fearsome are they, vigorous and
generous, strong of arm, so that they don’t have to exert
to defend their bodies and battle formations. Their arms
and ammunitions are safe and strong, ready in position
in their chariots, and in their battles they come out
victorious with credit and admiration.






[Names: Yesamarno, Sasvata, Vayao]
Ever ready and on the move without relent, their
name and fame is unique, wide as the sea and expansive.
So is their courage and patience to be enjoyed like








[Names: Marutastam, Marutasta, Aranam]
Honour the Maruts, celebrate them all closely
and fervently. As the spokes of the wheel are all equal,
so all of these shakers of the evil and the wicked are
equal, none is the highest, none the lowest. Hence also
the gifts of protection and security of all of them are






[Names: Subhagah]
Fortunate is that man, and prospers, O Maruts,
who has been under your care and protection since early
dawns and who for sure remains under your care for
now and all time.






[Names: Yasya]
O Maruts, leading lights of life, movers and
shakers of negativities and opposition, whoever the man
with yajnic gift when you approach to protect and
partake of his offerings, is blest with peace and comfort
and he prospers with honour and fame and wins victories
in the battles for food, energy and wealth with prestige.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 541






[Names: Yatha, Rudrasya, Rudras, Yuvanastathedasat]
As the Maruts, youthful children of Rudra,
cosmic justice, light divine and universal life-giving
intelligence, would wish, so may it be with us and all.






[Names: Atascida]
There are those people who honour the virile
and generous Maruts, warriors and rain bearers of the
nation. There are also those generous and charitable
people who act and conduct themselves according to
the Maruts’ good wishes. For this reason, O youthful
heroes, come and promote us with a very liberal and






[Names: Yuna, Gaya]
As a farmer yokes and exhorts his bulls while
ploughing the land, so should you, O manager of the
nation, appreciate and celebrate the youthful, virile,
generous and purifying Maruts, exhorting them with
exciting words of latest praise and commendation.








[Names: Saha, Vrsnascandranna]
Those who accept challenges of hostile and
formidable forces in battles of the human nation in the
world and, like a veteran celebrated boxer, repulse the
challengers and win, those virile Maruts, generous as
cloud bearing winds, handsome as the golden moon,
and most reputed in humanity, O poet, sing and celebrate
in spontaneous and most exciting words and voice.






[Names: Gavascid, Rihate]
O Maruts, heroes of equal mind bound in
brotherhood, even cows, by virtue of the same species
sit together and love each other under your kind care
even though they may be moving around in different






[Names: Martascid]
Mortals too, O Maruts, singing and dancing
celebrants of life wearing golden corselet on the chest,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 20 543


come to realise their kindred unity under your kind care
and direction. Sing and speak to us over and above us
since our brotherhood with you is always inviolable.






[Names: Marutasya, Marutas, Yuyam]
O Maruts, sojourners of lands and skies, moving
in formations of seven coursers, noble and generous
friends of the community, bring in for us medicaments
of the air for our health and environment.






[Names: Yabhih, Mayo]
O heroes of lands and seas and skies, free from
hate, jealousy and enmity, bring us that tactic and policy
and modes of defence and protection by which you
guard the sea, repulse encroachment, and dig and
construct tanks and wells and give them to people. O
heroes of peace and well-being, be good and kind with
safeguards of all type, safe guards and defences of
auspicious and benevolent kind.








O Maruts, who sit on the holy seat of yajna, bring
us the sanatives and medicaments that are in the rivers
and the seas, in the darkness of caves, in the oceans and
on the mountains.






[Names: Visvam, Ksama]
O Maruts, you watch the world and all that it
contains. You bear and bring all that knowledge and
competence on your person, and with that pray, bless
our physical body system and our body politic. By virtue
of that knowledge and experience speak to us. O heroes
of nature and humanity, cure the weakness, sin and
suffering of our sick and restore to full health and
efficiency whatever is broken and lost.


Mandala 8/Sukta 21






[Names: Indra, Chitra, Devate, Sobhari, Kanva, Rshi, Vayamu, Vaje]
O lord sublime, eternal, first and most excellent,
we, bearing almost nothing substantial but praying for
protection and advancement, invoke you in our battle
of life for food, energy, knowledge and ultimate victory.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 21 545






[Names: Tvamiddhyavitaram]
We approach you for protection and success in
every undertaking. O lord youthful and blazing brave
who can challenge and subdue any difficulty, pray come
to our help. Indra, friends and admirers of yours, we
depend on you alone as our sole saviour and victorious
lord and choose to pray to you only as the lord supreme.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Somapate, Somapat]
Come lord of cows, horses and fertile lands,
giver and protector of the nation and its glory,
knowledge and wisdom and our creative activities, the
somas of our success are for you to appreciate. O lord
of life and life’s joy of soma, come and join the ecstasy
of our achievement and its celebration.






[Names: Vayam, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Bereft of any permanent brotherhood in mortal
humanity, we are drawn by ourselves to you, enlightened




as we are and universal brother as you are in kinship
divine. O lord of universal vigour and generosity, with
all the world regions you command, come with the glory
of all those worlds, join our soma celebrations, accept
our devotion and protect this social order.






[Names: Sidantaste]
Nestled like birds in the nest, in your exuberant,
exciting, honey sweet yajnic world of light and joy
overflowing with delicacies of food and drink, we bow
to you and worship you in thankfulness.






[Names: Accha, Santi]
Profusely with this salutation and homage, we
honour and praise you and pray to you again and again.
Why do you hesitate, in thought? O lord of the moving
world, we have our desires and ambitions. You are the
giver of fulfilment. We are here, our prayers are here,
and we are yours. We have our thoughts and intelligence






[Names: Grant, Nutna, Vidma]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 21 547


O lord of the thunderbolt, mountains and the
clouds, ruler of the world, Indra, it is not that we are
just new to your beneficence, protection and promotion,
we have indeed enjoyed and known your wealth and




gomati.


O lord of might, wielder of the thunderbolt of
justice and power, we know and enjoy your love and
friendship and your liberal provisions of life’s
enjoyment, and the same we solicit of you. And we pray,
O lord of the golden helmet, power and knowledge,
giver of peace and settlement, establish us in this noble
order of lands and cows, food and energy, knowledge
and action and the holy life of freedom and happiness.






[Names: Sakhaya, Indramutaye, Indramutay]
O friends, for the peace, freedom, progress and
protection of you all, I pray to the same Indra, lord
almighty, who has provided this beautiful world of joy
for us since the very time of creation.








[Names: Haryasvam, Satam]
He alone is happy indeed and prospers who
glorifies Indra, lord of the moving universe, protector
and promoter of truth and reality and ruler and justicier
of humanity, who, lord almighty, weaves for us this web
of a hundredfold variety of earthly provision and all
attainable possibility for the celebrants.






[Names: Tvayahasvidyuja, Svasantam, Samsthe]
By you alone as our friend and comrade, O lord
contestant in this settled world order of humanity full
of lands and cows, blest as we are with the light of
knowledge and culture.






[Names: Jayema, Puruhuta, Nrbhirvrtram]
Indra, lord of power and light of life, universally
invoked, let us win over the violent in the struggle of
life, discipline and subject to rule and order the obstinate
and intransigent with reason, dispel darkness and
destroy evil with the help of the leading lights of society,
and thus grow and march forward and higher. O lord,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 21 549


protect and guide our thoughts and actions against
temptations to go astray.






[Names: Abhratrvyo, Yudhedapitvamicchase]
Indra, lord of absolute might by nature, since
birth of the universe, indeed for eternity, you are without
a rival, need no leader, no friend and no comrade, but
in the dynamics of human life you do want that the
human should be your companion in and for his struggle
for self-evolution and social progress.




[Names: Naki, Yada]
dit piteva hiyase.


You do not just care to choose the rich for
companionship, if they are swollen with drink and pride
and violate the rules of divine discipline. But when you
attend to the poor and alter their fortune for the better,
you are invoked like father with gratitude which the
voice of thunder acknowledges and approves.




vatah. Ni sadama saca sute.


Indra, Lord of yajnic evolution and social




and grow to age in years, but let us, in enlightened
friendship with a power like you, sit on the yajna vedi
and grow in knowledge and wisdom.






[Names: Drlha]
Indra, lord giver of lands and cows, knowledge
and enlightened culture, let us never fall from your gifts
of divine munificence. Let us never take anything from
anyone other than you. O lord of the world’s wealth,
bear and bring us your gifts of permanent value. No
one can ever disturb or stop the flow of your gifts of
love and charity to humanity.






[Names: Indro, Sarasvati, Tvam]
Is it Indra, ruling power of the mortal world,
that gives so much wealth to the man of yajnic charity?
Or is it Sarasvati, holy speech, abundant stream and
dynamics of nature that gives so much wealth to the
charitable humanity? Or is it you, Lord Supreme,
sublime mystery of the world of existence, who give so
much wealth to the liberal donor?




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 22 551


[Names: Sarasvatimanu, Parjanya, Parjan]
dadat.


The mysterious divine power immanent and
transcendent is the supreme ruler and ultimate giver.
[Names: Other]
flowing speech or rivers or river benefactors in
consonance with Sarasvati, are but subservient to the
supreme. Just as the cloud soaks the earth all round and
over so does the lord of wonder and sublimity give
thousands and tens of thousands of wealth to humanity.


Mandala 8/Sukta 22






[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Sobhari, Kanva, Rshi, Yamasvina, Suryayai, Rudravartani]
Ah, on this auspicious day I invoke, imagine
and structure that most wonderful and versatile chariot
for protection and progress which the Ashvins, twin
harbingers of the freshness of a new morning, most
welcome invitees, would ascend and come by paths of
love and justice free from violence for the advancement
of life’s light and glory.








[Names: Purvapusam, Purusprham, Purusprha, Sacanavantam]
O Sobhari, scientist and technologist, with your
best of intelligence and intention, design, structure and
perfect the chariot which has supported the life of the
nation since earliest times, which is welcome and
available to all easily, universally acceptable and
enjoyable, first and foremost in the battles of life, friend
of all on land, sea and sky, inviolable and
unchallengeable by the jealous rivals and enemies.






[Names: Purubhutama, Arvacina]
Here on the earth for the sake of protection and
progress of the human nation, with all honours and
reverence, we invoke, appoint and consecrate the
Ashvins, universally acceptable, brilliant and generous
complementary twin powers of the nation such as the
ruler and the governing council or ruler and the
commander of defence forces, who are harbingers of
fresh life, energy and prosperity for humanity, who are
latest in knowledge and competence and freely mix with
the generous citizens at their homes.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 22 993




[Names: Yuvo, Asman]
One chariot of yours is ever on the wheel going
all round and round, the other serves, inspires and flies
you anywhere when you need. O protectors of the
auspicious good fortune of the human nation, may your
good will and benevolence hasten to reach us like the
mother cow rushing to her calf.




[Names: Ratho, Pari, Ssrutastena]
gatam.


Your famous and celebrated three-stage chariot
controlled by golden steers traverses over heaven and
earth. O lovers of truth and righteousness, come to us
by that glorious chariot.






[Names: Dasasyanta]
O twin powers of socio-economic complemen-
tarities, rulers and protectors of the nation’s auspicious
good fortune, you till the land with the plough giving
the people the gift of barley and setting a generous
example of enlightened behaviour of permanent value.
O leaders of eminence and splendour, with sincere




thought, intention and action we celebrate you both this
holy day of thanks giving for the nation.






[Names: Upano, Yebhis, Jinvathah]
Generous and victorious lords of strength and
progress, come to us by those paths of truth and
righteousness by which, O brilliant harbingers of rain
showers of prosperity, you strengthen and empower the
high command of the nation to maintain the splendour
of the nation’s social order and keep down the forces of
violence and terror in peace and submission.






[Names: Ayam, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
O leading lights of humanity, generous
harbingers of the showers of prosperity, this soma of
pleasure and honour distilled with the complementary
forces of our social dynamics is for you. Come to
participate in the celebrations of the nation for the taste
of glory and ecstasy and drink the soma in the yajnic
house of the generous giver and performer of yajna.






[Names: Yunjatham]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 22 555


Ashvins, harbingers of the showers of
prosperity, ascend the chariot, seat yourselves in the
golden interior of the chariot, come and settle us into a
powerful social order of energy and prosperity.






[Names: Yabhih, Tabhirno, Svina]
Ashvins, rulers and administrators of the social
system of health and security, come with those
protections and securities by which you protect and
maintain the healthy veterans of knowledge and
practical action, by which you assist the disabled and
help the support system for the weak and the destitute.
Come fast without delay to sustain the weak and
suffering in a state of emergency and provide them
medical aid.






[Names: Yadadhrigavo, Vayam]
We men of the mantra in need, celebrants of the
irresistible Ashvins, powers of wind and electric energy,
ministrants of succour and security, invoke them with
voices of praise at this time of the day to come and help us.








[Names: Tabhirad]
Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, virile
harbingers of showers of health and life’s joy, listen to
my manifold and persistent invocation expressive of
universal love and devotion and come. Most generous
and exceedingly rich all round universal presences,
come with those foods and medications for recuperative
energies by which you revive and strengthen the man
fallen into utter depression. With those protective and
promotive sanatives, pray, come in response to my call.






[Names: Tavida]
At this time of the day every morning, saluting
and celebrating the twin powers of human and natural
complementarity, the Ashvins, I speak to them
intimately, and this is how with homage and prayer we
invoke them to come and bless.






[Names: Tavid, Subhaspati, Usasi, Rudra, Rudravati]
Those two lords of auspicious good fortune
moving by paths of rectitude, justice and punishment,
we invoke and celebrate at night, early morning at dawn


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 22 557


and all times of the day. May they, lord commanders of
wealth and victory, scourge of evil and violence, never
forsake us to the mortal enemy, never throw us far off
to the hungry wolves.






[Names: Huve]
Like my father rich in knowledge and
enlightenment, I invoke the Ashvins, twin, inseparable
powers of complementarity in unison, in the morning
to come by chariot as they please and to bring riches
and joy for the devotee praying for riches and joy.


[Names: Manojavasa, Arattaccid, Purubhojasa]
O Ashvins, complementary harbingers of
showers of joy, moving at the speed of mind to provide
sustenance and pleasures of life for all, come and be at
the closest to us for our protection and progress by


instant modes of defence and security as you have ever
been since the earliest times of creation.








[Names: Ashvins, Ashvin]
powers of humanity in the social order, leading lights
of life, commanding wealth of cows and horses, lands,
culture and advancement, givers of success in high
attainment, greatest protectors and promoters of the
honey sweets of life and golden wealth of the world,
come and bless us with the wealth we pray for.





[Names: Supravargam, Asminna]
Ashvins, lords of wealth, power and victory,
may we, upon this happy arrival of yours receive, value
and meditate upon all the beauties and treasures of the
world of distinguished wealth spontaneously given,
creative and energetic, highly lovable and unchallenge-
able even by the demonic strong as our prize possession.


Mandala 8/Sukta 23


[Names: Agni, Devata, Vishvamana, Vaiyashva, Rshi, Carisnudhumam]
Study, celebrate and by yajna develop the fire
divine, immanent and omnipresent energy, versatile
power whose smoke rises freely and whose light of


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 559






[Names: Damanam]
And watching the world of existence and
thinking and meditating at heart on its dynamics of
evolution, I adore Agni with the holy voice of faith,
lord and power, that giver of chariots for onward
movement to those who vie with one another for
progress in various ways.






[Names: Yesamabadha, Upavida]
Those seekers whose inputs of food and energy,
the all powerful Agni, adored and served with Vedic
formulae, receives, consumes and directs within the
dynamic laws of nature, through their investigations
receive new wealth and knowledge.


[Names: Udasya, Socir, Tapurjambhasya]
And the radiance of this burning, flaming,


high, unaging and imperishable, adding to the wealth
and glory of all classes of people.








[Names: Abhikhya]
O Agni, light and fire of life, adored and served
with yajnic service of love and non-violence, rise high
by the laws and grace of Divinity, shining ever bright
with wider and higher light, power and magnificence.


exhortation to the person dedicated to yajna.)






[Names: Agne, Anusak, Yatha]
Go, Agni, with the hymns of adoration,
constantly receiving, returning, and transmitting the holy
materials of yajna to the divinities as, like a messenger,
you are the carrier of fragrance of the havi offered into
the vedi.





[Names: Agnim, Tamaya]
O devoted people, for you I invoke Agni, eternal
power and universal high priest of humanity. By this
song of adoration, I worship Agni and exhort you too
to adore the universal light and power of divinity.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 561






[Names: Yajnebhir, Mitram, Mitra]
Agni showers his love and grace on people who
follow the path of rectitude and light, serve and exalt
the lord of marvellous action with yajnas as a benevolent






[Names: Rtavanam]
O men of yajna and followers of the paths of
universal truth, with songs of holiness, in the house of
yajna, love, exalt and closely serve this Agni, lord of
universal truth and eternal law and the end and aim of
the perfection of yajna.






[Names: Acchd, Angirastamam, Angirastama, Hota]
May all our yajnas and other yajnic actions well
life breath of existence and most honourable high priest
of yajna among people, who is the ultimate end and
aim of the perfection of yajna.




[Names: Asva]
O unaging and imperishable Agni, those blazing
flames of expansive brilliance, generous and virile like
solar radiations, are reflections of your supreme power
and glory.

[Names: Prava]
Agni, lord protector of universal energy, pray
bear, bring and bless us with manly vigour, and in the
battles of life protect us and our children and grand

[Names: Sitah, Visvedagnih]
When Agni, presiding spirit of human life, is
animated, energised and sharpened by yajna, then, active
in the human settlements, it counters and dispels all evil
influences and forces of negativity.



[Names: Srustyagne]
Mighty brave Agni, lord of the people, saving


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 563


spirit of life, hearing my new song of praise and prayer,
burn off the destructive wiles of the evil forces with
your heat.






Whoever offers homage to Agni with sacred
oblations into the holy fire is safe, no mortal enemy
even with the worst of his fraudulent power or sorcery






[Names: Vyasvas, Maho]
The sage in search of dynamic energy and
showers of the wealth of knowledge and bliss adores
and serves you, giver of the world’s wealth and
knowledge. We too light you well in the correct manner
for the attainment of the same great wealth of life.





[Names: Ayajim]
The lover with passion and the poet with
paternal vision attain to you, Agni, high priest of the
real cosmic yajna and immanent and omniscient


presence in existence for the good of humanity.






[Names: Srusti]
All the brilliant sages and scholars of the world
in unison with love accept you, Agni, as the messenger
of Divinity, and, being the fastest carrier, O brilliant
and generous power, you become the first adorable
yajaka of existence.






[Names: Imam, Pavakam]
Let the brave mortal accept the imperishable and
immortal Agni as the messenger of Divinity and medium
of the dynamics of existence, purifier, agent of cosmic
gravitation and sustenance and the mightiest natural
power.





[Names: Visam]
We invoke Agni and, holding ladles of ghrta and
havi, feed and serve the divine fire blissfully shining
bright in flames, unaging prime power adorable for the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 565





[Names: Bhuri]
The mortal who, with faith and reverence,
dedicates himself to this Agni and offers oblations into
the fire divine with holy fragrant materials receives the
blessings of ample health and nourishment, honour and
fame and the gift of heroic progeny.



[Names: Prathamam, Prati]
To Agni, first and prime power immanent in
everything born in existence, every ladle full of holy
materials moves with chant of faith, reverence and
selfless service in yajnas.


[Names: Abhir, Mamhisthabhir]
With these oblations and the chant of highest
and most powerful hymns, let us, like the sage of perfect
discipline of mind and sense, offer service and
submission to Agni, yajnic power of purest flame.







[Names: Nunamarca]
Holy sage of mental and moral discipline, like
a yajaka of eminence and unshakable faith, offer honour
and reverence with songs of adoration and selfless
service to Agni, presiding power of the home and infinite
presence of the universe.




[Names: Vipra]
Sages and scholars worship Agni, primeval
presence of the universe, life giver of herbs and trees
and honourable like a welcome guest in people’s homes
for the sake of protection and progress.




Great Agni, you pervade everything in existence,
you sanctify all yajnic materials of mankind and,
honoured with reverence and oblations of havi, you
vibrate on the holy grass and illuminate the heart of the
yajamana.






[Names: Vamsva, Puru, Purusprhah, Purusprha, Suviryasya]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 23 567


Give us the gifts of our choice in abundance.
Give us wealth and honours of the love and desire of all
mankind, give us abundance of brave progeny, honour,
excellence and fame.






[Names: Tvam, Sada, Sasvate]
Agni, most youthful light and life of existence,
worthy of the first order of love and reverence for us,
pray grant your gracious favours of wealth and
generosity to mankind. Lord giver of wealth and peace
and comfort of a settled life, inspire the celebrants
through continuous generations to sing songs of
gratitude for your generosity.




Agni, you are the holy giver, you are the giver
of food, energy and victory, and abundant wealth of
lands and cows, culture and enlightenment. Give us
liberally of our share of wealth and grandeur and
promote our possibilities of progress.







[Names: Mitravaruna, Rtavana]
Agni, you are great and glorious. Pray bring us
Mitra and Varuna, rule of love and friendship, reason
and justice, through scholarly Brahman as and brilliant
Kshatriyas, men of rectitude, brilliant will and intellect
and purity and excellence of culture and enlightenment
in their field.


Mandala 8/Sukta 24






[Names: Indra, Danastuti, Devata, Vishvamana, Vaiyashva, Rshi, Sakhaya, Stusa]
Come friends, let us for your sake sing a song
of adoration in honour of Indra, lord of power, wielder
of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment in order to
glorify the noblest leader of resolute will and inviolable






[Names: Savasa, Sruto, Maghair, Sura]
O heroic leader and ruler, by virtue of your
strength and will you are renowned as the destroyer of
evil for having eliminated evil, want and suffering. You
are famous as the lord magnanimous of glory for your
wealth and generosity because your generosity exceeds
the expectations of the richest generous people.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 569






[Names: Nireke]
Such as you are, O lord of glory and
magnanimity, sung and celebrated for your munificence,
bear and bring us wealth and honour of the highest
renowned order of excellence since, O ruler and
controller of the dynamics of life, you are the sole giver
of wealth and peace and prosperity in a state of good
life beyond all doubt and question, suspicion and fear.






[Names: Dhrsata]
Indra, lord of glory, give us a vision of the
commonwealth of humanity of the dearest and most
eminent order and, O lord of resolute will and action,
sung and celebrated as such, bring us that wealth and
order with the spirit of your will and resolution beyond
doubt and question, fear and suspicion.






The forces of negativity and destruction cannot
stay your left hand of generosity nor can they resist your
right hand. Nor do preventive forces stand in the ways




of your progress and evolution, O lord controller of the
dynamics of existence.






O lord of clouds and mountains, wielder of the
thunderbolt, like a cowherd reaching the stalls along
with the cows do I come to you with my songs of
adoration. O lord, fulfil the desire and prayer of the
celebrant and bless my mind with peace and divine love.





[Names: Visvani, Ugra]
O greatest destroyer of evil and darkness,
blazing bold and irresistible leader of the world, lord
giver of wealth and peaceful settlement, pray sanctify
all our thoughts and acts, well wishers of the world of
humanity as we are, and inspire us with divine wisdom.





[Names: Vayam, Vasoh, Puruhuta]
O destroyer of evil and darkness, bold and
resolute hero universally invoked and adored, pray let
us know and obtain the latest, most lovable and effective


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 571


forms of your wealth and honour, peace and progressive
modes of life.






[Names: Savah, Amrkta]
Indra, lord and leader of humanity, just as your
power and force is irresistible and indestructible, O lord
universally invoked and adored, so is your charity and
magnanimity to the generous devotee unrestricted and






[Names: Drlhascid]
O greatest of the great, supreme guide and leader
of life, for the greatness and glory of humanity on earth,
shower your munificence of knowledge, will and action
on us and, O lord of honour and grandeur, for our honour
and progress break down the strongholds of evil,
darkness, ignorance and inertness.






[Names: Maghavanchagdhi]
O lord of glory, wielder of the thunderbolt of
justice and retribution, our hopes and prayers have never




wandered elsewhere, to anyone other than you. Pray
strengthen our will and action with your modes of
protection and promotion for advancement.






[Names: Nahyanga, Raye, Savase]
O lord watcher and controller of the dance of
creation, dear as breath of life sung and celebrated in
songs of adoration, I find none else other than you for
inspiration and action for the sake of competence and
success, wealth and power, honour and excellence, and
strength and moral courage.






[Names: Endumindraya]
Prepare, offer and regale Indra with the nectar
drink of faith and performance. He values, enjoys and
promotes the honey sweets of peace, pleasure and
progress and inspires the people with will and
competence and ambition for progress and excellence.






[Names: Nunam]
I reach the lord protector and controller of the


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 313


moving worlds, the omnipotent who enjoins the soul
with the world of nature, and I closely whisper in prayer:
Listen to the celebrant devotee who is keen to move
from humanity to divinity and deserves to be accepted.






[Names: Naki]
Pray listen, Indra, dearest lord of life, true it is
that no one born ever before or after was greater or
mightier than you, none by wealth and power, none by
competence and advancement, none by songs of prayer
and adoration, none like you.






And O high priest of the creative yajna of love
and non-violence, offer the most delightful and ever
exhilarating of honey sweets of the soma of faith and
devotion to Indra, since thus is how the mighty hero is
served and worshipped.






[Names: Udanamsa]
Indra, glorious lord president of the moving




worlds of existence, no one ever by might or by
commanding adoration has been able to equal, much
less excel, the prime worship offered to you.






[Names: Aprayubhir]
O people we, seekers of honour and fame,
invoke and adore the protector and promoter of your
food, energies and victories, by assiduous congregations
of yajna and thereby exalt the splendour and glory of
the lord supreme.





[Names: Krstiryo]
Come friends all together and let us adore Indra,
lord and leader worthy of joint worship and exaltation,
who, by himself alone, rules over all peoples of the





[Names: Agorudhaya, Ghrtat]
Sing delightful songs of adoration in words more
delicious than the taste of ghrta and sweetness of honey
in honour of Indra, heavenly lord of light, who loves


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 575


sweet speech and never feels satiated with songs of






[Names: Yasyamitani, Jyotirna]
Let us sing in adoration of Indra whose
wondrous deeds of divinity are unbounded, whose
potential is unrestricted, and whose generosity radiates
over the world like the light of the sun.




[Names: Stuhindram, Aryo]
Like the sage of perfect mental and moral
discipline, worship Indra, constant lord of eternity
energy, controller and guide of the evolution of the


universe, omnificent lord giver of a prosperous
household to the generous devotees of yajna.





[Names: Suvidvamsam]
O child of the holy sage of mental and moral
discipline, verily worship Indra only, the lord ever new
though eternal, worshipped as the tenth supreme over




all among humans, lord omniscient solely worthy of
the worship of dynamic humanity.






[Names: Aharahah]
O lord of the thunderbolt of justice and right
action, you know and wield the counter-active measures
against adversities just as the sun, purifier of nature’s
impurities, has the capacity to counter them day by day.






[Names: Tadindrava, Kutsaya, Kutsa]
Indra, wondrous lord of beauty and glory, bring
us that protection and immunity by which you protect
the active sage of holy action against negativities and
destroy the twofold mental and physical ailments of
humanity. We pray, O lord, inspire and activate those
internal and natural defences of good health.






[Names: Tamu]
O lord of highest beauty and sublimity, for our
acquisitions as well as for our freedom from acquisition
we worship you only, the same lord of protection and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 24 577


defence, ever new though constant and eternal. You as
the same lord are our friend and protector, and the
destroyer of all our enemies of the world.






[Names: Yarksadamhaso, Vadhar]
To Indra, who saves from sin and violence, and
releases the waters of life into the seven seas of
existence, we bow and pray: O lord of the world’s wealth
and power, honour and glory, strike down the fatal
weapon of the saboteur and the destroyer.





[Names: Yatha, Vyasvebhyah]
Just as the lord supreme, choice of the wise for
worship and service, brings wealth and honour to the
Sama celebrants and supplicants, so may you, O lady
of good fortune possessed of food, energy prosperity of
life, and divine intelligence, bring wealth of honour and
knowledge to the sages of mental and moral discipline.






[Names: Sthuram]
May the gifts of soma celebrants and generous




lovers of mankind reach the dynamic sages of mental
and moral discipline who may also get gifts of
permanent assets in hundreds and thousands.






O seeker of the where and why of active life, if
someone were to ask you where the yajaka of love and
non-violence is, then say: This man of yajnic dynamism
is gone and lives in the region of lands and cows, culture
and enlightenment.


Mandala 8/Sukta 25




[Names: Mitravarunau, Vishvedeva, Devatah, Vishvamana, Vaiyashva, Rshi, Rtavana]
I join you and adore you both, Mitra and Varuna,
protectors of the world, brilliant and generous divinities
of sacred power, adorable among the adorable divines


and observers of the paths of rectitude and universal
law.


(In Swami Dayanand’s tradition, Mitra and
Varuna in this Sukta are interpreted as Brahmanas,
intellectuals, teachers and researchers, and as
Kshatriyas, rulers, administrators and the defence


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 25 579
forces.)






[Names: Mitra, Sanat]
Mitra of the noble chariot, and Varuna who too
is a noble performer of yajnic actions, both are leaders
like charioteers of the nation who develop and expand
the socio-cultural wealth and vision of humanity. They
are nobly born and brought up and trained, children of
humanity for all time dedicated to the sacred laws and
discipline of life.


[Names: Suryaya, Surya, Mahi, Great, Aditi, Nature]
embodiment of infinite divinity and divine law operative
in existence, brought forth these two mighty refulgent
pioneers of life, knowing and commanding the world
for the realisation of their innate vision and power.





[Names: Mahanta, Mitravaruna, Rtavanavrtama]
The great Mitra and Varuna, mighty refulgent
rulers, are generous and divine, commanding the vision




and vitality of spiritual life and vigour. Dedicated to
the law of eternity, in their life they define and proclaim
that universal law in the living form of yajnic action.






[Names: Napata, Srpradanu]
Protectors and supporters of great strength, they
never allow a break down of the strength of law and
order. Being products of strength and efficiency
themselves, they are protectors of the same strength and
efficiency. Dedicated to holy action, creation, production
and expansive generosity, they live in the very house of
plenty and prosperity of food, energy and advancement.





[Names: Nabhasvatira]
You hold, control, expand and direct the
generous gifts of earthly and heavenly foods, energies
and nourishments, so we pray that your showers laden
with vapours from the sky may serve you, rain down
and bless us.






You who observe the life below on earth from


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 25 581


the vast skies, life like hosts of people and herds of
cattle, then you, brilliant generous rulers who maintain
the laws of eternity, are invoked and invited for the
presentation of homage and yajnic service.






[Names: Dhrtavrata]
Committed to the universal law of eternal truth,
dedicated to the laws and discipline of governance,
performing every action from the yajnic point of view
of social value, the Kshatriyas, rulers, administrators
and commanders of the defence forces, ought to take
on to the sovereign social order and occupy the seat of
governance for the glory of self-governing humanity in
the spirit of Mitra and Varuna, that is, universal love
and justice.





[Names: Aksnascid]
With open eyes and distant vision, they know
and watch the paths of social development better than
the eye itself and, ever alert and vigilant, they can
perceive, judge and decide things in the twinkling of an
eye.








[Names: Utano, Urusyantu, Maruto]
May Mother Nature divine and the mother
power of humanity of inviolable strength protect and
promote us. May the Ashvins, ever true, complementary
powers of natural and social dynamics protect and
promote us. May the Maruts, distinguished people of
veteran strength and power protect and promote us.






[Names: Arisyanto]
May they all, nobly generous and giving, protect
our ships day and night, and may we all, unhurt and
unviolated, ally and cooperate with our protectors.






[Names: Aghnate, Srudhi]
Let us all, unhurt and unviolated, work for the
unassailable and generous Vishnu, universal ruling spirit
of the nation of humanity, who knows everything in
advance. O lord of self-judgement and independent
action, generous as the sea, pray listen to our prayer
and protect us.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 25 583




[Names: Mitro]
We elect to choose that wealth and protection
which is the best and most promotive and which Mitra,
Varuna and Aryama, Brahmana, Kshatriya and Vaishya,
communities of vision, judgement and determination,
and positive creativity, value and secure for us.






[Names: Indro]
And that wealth and security, we pray, may the
ocean of waters and vapours, Maruts, winds and the
stormy troops of the nation, Ashvins, complementary
forces of nature and humanity, sun and moon, and Indra
and Vishnu, universal energy and omnipresent divinity,
all loving, cooperative and generous, protect and
promote for us.


[Names: Tigmam]
All of them, adorable leaders of life, blazing
brilliant and irresistible, counter and shatter any enemy


as a mighty flood shatters and washes off the firmest







[Names: Ayameka, Pururu, Tasya]
O people of the world, this one Integrity of the
two, Mitra and Varuna, lord ruler and promoter of the
people, thus watches the vast and various wealths of
the world for protection, and for your sake we observe
and follow his rules and laws of discipline.



[Names: Anu, Mitrasya, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitras]
We observe and follow the rules and laws of
the discipline of Mitra and Varuna, lord of universal
glory, in accordance with the internal statutes and
ancient traditions of the sovereign social order.


[Names: Pari, Ubhe]
Mitra, Brahmana, is the brilliant scholar who,
like the sun, with his vision reaches and measures the
bounds of heaven and earth and with his knowledge
and grandeur traverses both earth and heaven.





[Names: Sarane, Suryah, Agnirna]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 25 585


19. And that sun upto the regions of heaven
radiates the light and, shining pure and bright, is
invoked, invited and honoured as the holy fire.





[Names: Vaco]
Mitra, the Brahmana, rules the Word in the vast
house of yajna, and the yajamana who is master of the
wealth of lands and cows and prospers in food, energy
and social achievement, as he also, rules over the food
which is pure and poisonless and which is meant for





[Names: Suryam, Bhojesvasman]
That sun of light and knowledge and both
heaven and earth, I adore day and night and pray that
the lord may establish us in a prosperous state of food
and enjoyment.





[Names: Rjramuksanyayane, Ratham]
Blest with the grace of the lord of mercy, we
receive the gift of efficient mind and senses, from the




lord destroyer of darkness and suffering, we receive the
light of knowledge, and from the lord of celestial
Samans, we receive the versatile chariot of the human



[Names: Tame]
Among the gifts of dynamic achievables, let the
mind, senses and knowledge be destroyers of darkness
and suffering, and among the organs of will and action,
let the human body be the chariot of passage to salvation
across the world.


[Names: Smadabhisu, Maho]
From the highest lord of glory I have achieved,
by grace, the gift of twin faculties of vibrant senses and
mind for thought and will, equipped with the latest
knowledge and intelligence, fast and achieving, spurred
by enthusiasm and controlled and directed by
discrimination.

Mandala 8/Sukta 26


[Names: Ashvinau, Vayu, Devate, Vishvamana, Vaiyashva, Vyashva, Angirasa, Rshi]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 587




[Names: Yuvoru, Aturtadaksa]
O generous and virile Ashvins, commanders of
inviolable power and dexterity, harbingers of a new day
of showers of bounteous wealth, I call for your noble
chariot to bring you hither for your joint felicitation
among distinguished men of knowledge and power.


[Names: Swami, Dayananda, Ashvins, Ashvin]
divines who drive in the dawn of a new day, are
interpreted as the ruler and the ministers council who
are supposed to bring in a new day of freshness, light
and prosperity in the corporate life of the social order.)





[Names: Yuvam, Avobhiryatho]
O virile and generous Ashvins, harbingers of
showers of wealth and enlightenment, ever true and far
from untruth, you go forward with your protections and
promotions for the good and exhortation of the Sama
celebrants and men of great and expansive philanthropy
(who work for the advancement of society).


[Names: Purvirisa]
Ashvins, lovers of food and energy and total
well being of a life of universal values, harbingers of




new victories in the advancement of power and
prosperity, at this hour of the dawn when the night is
gone, we invoke you with offers of the sweetest
fragrances of homage and yajnic service.






[Names: Sriye]
Ashvins, harbingers of light and grace, let your
strongest chariot of renown come and transport you here
to us where you may, we pray, listen and appreciate the
ardent devotee’s songs of adoration and bless them with
the honour and dignity of life.



[Names: Juhurana, Rudra]
And Ashvins, harbingers of generous showers
of prosperity, know, examine, understand and fix the
crooked antisocial elements. You are the Rudras, agents
of justice and award. Cleanse the jealous and punish
the enemies.



[Names: Dasra, Dhiyamjinva]
Wonderful in person and marvellous in deeds,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 589


promoters of men of action and intelligence, sweet of
disposition, protectors of all that is good, you always
fly all over the world by the fastest modes with prompt
forces and safeguard the safety and security of the




[Names: Maghavana]
Noble Ashvins, mighty brave and infallible
heroes, come close to us with wealth and nourishments
for the health and advancement of all people of the
world, powerful and munificent as you are.





[Names: Deva]
Ashvins, lords of power who shun untruth, come
in response to my prayer and adoration, O brilliant and
generous companions in utmost harmony, come with
other divinities and protect and promote the thoughts
and actions of devotees.






[Names: Vayam, Sumatibhirupa]
Like the holy sage of mental and moral




discipline, we invoke and invite you, lords of the
showers of generosity. Come to us, O vibrant powers,
with holy thoughts and intentions and with the sages of





[Names: Asvind, Nediyasah]
O sage, celebrate the Ashvins in profuse
numbers, they would listen to your eulogy, come closest
and punish and eliminate the niggards and evaders of





[Names: Vaiyasvasya, Srutam, Sajosasa]
O leaders of the nation, listen to the song of the
holy sage and acknowledge and respond to this song of
mine. O Varuna, Kshatriya dispenser of justice, Mitra,
loving and friendly Brahmana, and Aryama, Vaishya
producer and distributor pursuing the path of rectitude,
all together in unison and cooperation, listen to me.






[Names: Yuvadattasya, Aharaharvrsana, Ssiksatam]
O devout and benevolent harbingers of the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 591


showers of prosperity, of that which you have created
and given to the nation and that what you have brought
in, let me learn day by day and share through the wise
and brave leaders.



[Names: Saparyanta]
Ashvins, like a bride covered in sacramental
robes, one who is robed in the fragrance of yajna
performed in your honour, him you requite with
fulfilment and establish him in the good life.



[Names: Vartirasvind]
Ashvins, lovers and benefactors of ours, one
who reserves and assigns a spacious hall comfortably
good for distinguished congregations of yajna in your
honour, you oblige and visit his home in recognition.





[Names: Asmabhyam, Visudruheva]
Lords of the yajnic showers of prosperity, come
straight like an arrow, visit our hall of yajna dedicated
to the good of humanity and guide and upraise our yajna



with the holy chant of Vedic voice.



[Names: Vahistho, Yuvabhyam]
Ashvins, rulers and leading lights of the nation,
may the song of our invocation to you be the instant
and most effective messenger to you and bring you here
to the yajnic hall.






[Names: Yadado, Srutaminme]
Whether you are up above in the region of light
or surfing in the sea or enjoying yourselves in the house
of entertainment, listen to my call and come, immortal
ones.






[Names: Svetayavari, Sindhurhiranyavartanih]
And of the fluent media of communication, the
most effective is that transparent, unpolluted, stream of
thought, discrimination and judgement, the intelligence,
Buddhi, golden stream of the speed of mind.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 26 593




[Names: Smadetaya, Vahethe]
And well by this glorious and highly reputed
transparent stream of intelligence, Ashvins, travellers
of holy paths, you move and conduct the business of
the nation of humanity.






[Names: Yuksva, Anno]
O Vayu, vibrant motive power of nature and
Vasu, giver of peaceful home and settlement with
security, yoke them to social good. Come, join our
corporate yajna of social development, taste and
celebrate the joy of our achievement.


(This mantra may be applied to the head of the
forces of law and order for internal security and the
commander of defence forces for security against





[Names: Tava, Avamsya]
O Vayu, protector and keeper of the universal
law of truth and wonderful valuer and refiner of the
creations of Tvashta, maker of all fine and gross things
of life and destroyer of dangers internal and external,




we opt for and choose all your plans and modes of peace,
defence and security.






[Names: Tvastur, Sutavanto, Vayum]
For the achievement of wealth, honour and
excellence, we, the people dedicated to yajna and the
soma of life, adore Vayu, ruler of the world of existence
and protector and refiner of things made by the universal
maker.



[Names: Vayo, Siva, Vahasva]
Vayu, blissful power of defence, security and
refinement, come from the regions of light, yoke the
great transportive forces to your chariot and bring us
the best things we ought to obtain.



[Names: Tvam, Gravanam]
Vayu, blissful of form, strong and renowned all
round by your own strength and grandeur, we invoke
and invite you to people’s halls of yajna, power adorable
as a rock in its place, position and function.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 27 595






[Names: Satvamno, Krdhi]
O Vayu, such as you are, brilliant and generous,
happy and joyous at heart, always in the forefront of
defence and advancement, pray develop our resources
of food and water, energy, power and progress, and
extend the possibilities of the reach of our science and


Mandala 8/Sukta 27


[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Manu, Vaivasvata, Rshi, Agnirukthe, Agnirukth, Maruto]
In the yajna of love and non-violence, Agni,
prime light of life, is the first adorable, then the holy
fire, the priest, the soma stone and the holy grass are
cherished. Therefore with the chants of Rks I invoke
the Maruts, cosmic energies, Brahmanaspati, giver of
the Veda and the vedic scholar, and other venerable
divinities for protection and promotion of our choice.








[Names: Visve]
O yajaka, you sing of animals, the earth, herbs
and trees, day and night. And may all the powers which
provide us with shelter and comfort, present all over
the world, be the protectors and promoters of our
thoughts and actions.






[Names: Adityesu, Marutsu]
May our yajna of universal order join the fire
and rise to the divinities of nature, the sun in progressive
Zodiacs, the oceans of earth and space in the fixed order
of cosmic law, and all the light radiations of the universe
across the suns.






[Names: Aristebhih]
May all the divine powers of the universe,
destroyers of negativities, be for the protection and
progress of mankind. May all the divinities of the
universe in possession of wealth, power and knowledge
along with modes of protection free from hurt and injury
bring us a peaceful home on earth free from sin and
crime.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 27 597




All powers of love and friendship of the world
with equal mind may come in to us in our great halls
and homes in response to our Rks, hymns of adoration,
come all Maruts, friends and brave associates, great






[Names: Aditi, Mitra, Varunastura, Adityasah, Adityasa]
O Mitra, O Maruts, sun and winds, friends and
brave associates, come and bring us all your dear and
lovely gifts worthy of presentation and prize possession.
O Indra, lord of power, thunder, lightning and rain,
Varuna, waves of cosmic energy and justice in human
affairs, and Adityas, solar radiations of the universe, all
leading lights of nature and humanity, come fast and
bless our homes and seats of yajna.






[Names: Vayam, Anusak, Sutasomaso, Varuna]
O Varuna, lord of light and justice, day and night,
and other divine powers of nature and humanity, like
men of love and faith we invoke and adore you now as
ever. The grass carpets are spread and occupied, the




sacred fires are lit, the fragrant havis is ready for
offering, and the soma is pressed and distilled for the






[Names: Pusan, Pusa, Indra]
Come forth to us, O Maruts, stormy forces of
nature and humanity, Vishnu, all pervasive ruling power,
Ashvins, complementary powers of natural and social
dynamics, and Pushan, powers of health, nourishment
and growth, come in response to my prayers and acts of
yajna. Indra, lord of showers who are destroyer of evil
and darkness, first and foremost power, come with the
first and best associate powers, I adore you and pray.






O brilliant and generous divinities of nature and
humanity, Vasus, lord of wealth and providers of home
and security, free from jealousy and enmity, pray give
us a faultless home, a place of security which no power
from far or near might dare to violate or attack and hurt.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 27 599




[Names: Asti]
O divinities of nature and humanity, destroyers
of negativities and enmities, there is a kinship among
yourselves and between you and ourselves. There is a
natural affinity too among yourselves and between you
and ourselves, a friendship and alliance. Pray enlighten
us about our ancient welfare and prosperity and lead us
as ever to anew phase of prosperity and well being, the






O divinities of the world who know and
command all wealth and honours of life, just now I,
searching for new attainments and cherished joys of life
with all reverence and humility, compose and offer to
you this sincere song of latest adoration like a new
stream of spontaneous creation.






O noble divinities of holy thought, intention and
policy, when the lord of light and life, the sun, which is
the love and choice of all, rises high up in heaven, then




the humans, animals and birds all go about in pursuit of





[Names: Devamdevam, Devamdevam]
Every one of you, divines, for the sake of
protection, every one of you, holy ones, for our
cherished aims and objects of well being, every one of
you, divinities, for advancement and victory in life, we
invoke and adore, singing and praising with holy
thoughts, words and actions.






All divinities of the world in nature and
humanity, all together with gifts of wealth, knowledge
and excellence, with equal mind and intention, have
been generous to men of holy thought and noble purpose
in search of divinity. May they be, today and ever in
future, givers of the best of life’s wealth for us and our
future generations in peace and plenty.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 27 601




[Names: Pravah, Samsamyadruhah]
In the house of prayer and adoration, I exalt you,
Vishvedevas, free from jealousy and enmity. O Mitra,
loving friend, O Varuna, lord of judgement and wisdom,
no fraud, no mischief, no damage can be done to the
mortal who dedicates himself with the strength of his
body, mind and soul to your light and grace.






He thrives in his home and abounds in plenty of
wealth, honour and excellence, who gives in charity in
obedience to you, Vishvedevas, for the sake of progress.
He rises higher and higher with his progeny and friends
in Dharma and, unhurt by sin and violence, grows
stronger and higher in life.




[Names: Aryama, Varunah]
sajosasah.


Without fight and struggle, he achieves, he wins
everything, and he goes further forward by simple and
straight paths of honesty without obstruction whom
Aryama, guide and pioneer of the ways of life, Mitra,




enlightened friend, and Varuna, lord of judgement and
wisdom, all generous and affluent, in love and unison
together, favour protect and exhort to rise and advance.






[Names: Ajre, Sasre]
Even the simple path you make simpler for him,
and the difficult one, easy to follow and cross over. Let
the thunder arm go far off from him and fall away
ineffective and be destroyed.






[Names: Yadadya, Surya, Yannimruci]
Omnipresent Vishvedevas in command of the
world’s wealth, honour and knowledge, whether it is
the time of sun-rise or sunset or the early dawn or middle
of the day, hold on to the law of universal truth. You are
the committed lovers of strength.






MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 27 603


The devotee having offered service in worship
of truth and divine law, morning, evening or any time,
you bless the man of charity with a peaceful home, then,
O harbingers of pranic energy, and commanders of the
world’s wealth and givers of peace and shelter, pray
may we too abide in your midst close to you under your
protection and care.






[Names: Vamam]
Since at sun-rise or at mid-day or in the evening,
that is, any time, O powers of world knowledge and
world’s wealth, you bear and bring cherished wealth
and fulfilment to the man of holy karma, knowledge,
wisdom and discrimination, we pray to be in your






Just as a child asks the father for manifold gifts
of food and joy, so we choose to ask of you, O brilliant
and generous rulers, the same boon of versatile nature:
We who offer yajnic service pray, O lords of light and
grace, Adityas, let us obtain that holy gift of favour by
which we may realise whatever wealth, honour and




excellence we cherish in life.


Mandala 8/Sukta 28






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Manu, Vaivasvata, Rshi, Vidannaha]
May thirty three divine powers come and sit on
the holy grass of yajna vedi to join my yajna, know and
secure for me twofold gifts of material and spiritual


[Names: Thirty]
‘gods’ are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas,
Indra and Prajapati. Swami Dayanand enumerates and


[Names: Vasus]
and the stars. They are Vasus because they are the abodes
and sustainers of life.




[Names: Rudras, Rudra]
12 Adityas: twelve phases of the sun in the
zodiacs.


One Indra, cosmic energy, and one Prajapati,
creative energy of nature which creates life and its




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 28 605




[Names: Varuno, Patnivanto]
May Varuna, the ocean, Mitra, the sun, Aryama,
the cosmic law, and the vital fires with their creative
energies for life sustenance, all givers of the cosmic
wealth of life energy, invoked and served with yajnic
food, arise, join the yajna and help us with material and


(At the individual level, we may interpret Varuna
as our sense of justice, Mitra as our sense of love and
friendship, Aryama as our sense of judgment and will,
and fires as our vitalities working with our will to live.)


[Names: Purastat]
Be they our protectors with all their vital powers
from the west, north, south, east, above and below.





[Names: Yatha, Arava]
Whatever these bounties of divine nature wish
and desire, the same does come about. No one can resist






[Names: Saptanam, Sapto, Sriyo]
Seven are the potencies of seven, seven are their


glories and over and above, seven are the graces they


(These seven may be interpreted as the five
senses, mind (mana) and intelligence, (buddhi). They
[Names: Maruts, Marut]
forces.)


Mandala 8/Sukta 29







[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Manu, Vaivasvata, Kashyapa, Maricha, Rshi, Babhrureko]
One is alert and active, all inspiring and
versatile, youthful leader, joyous and true, wrapped in
golden hue. (The one is interpreted as Soma, moon, and
the mind.)




[Names: Yonimeka]
Another, seated in its own place, wise and
illuminant is venerable among the divinities. (This
divinity is interpreted as Agni, the eye, and truth.)






[Names: Vasimeko]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 29 607


Another, constant and unshakable among the
divinities holds an iron axe, shaper of things. (This has
been interpreted as Tvashta, divine shaper, maker and
refiner of things, or the ear or Kratu, performer of holy






[Names: Vajrameko, Jighnate]
Another holds the thunderbolt, wielded firmly,
by which he destroys evil and dark forces of ignorance,
want and suffering. (This is Indra, cosmic energy, or
soul, or Daksha, omnipotent will and action.)






[Names: Tigmameko]
Another holds a razor edge weapon in hand,
being pure, brilliant and terrible, and controls healing
powers of medicine and immunity. (This is Rudra, also
inner happiness, which is the essential and primary force
of good health.)




[Names: Patha]
Another watches and guards the paths of life
like a sensitive watchman as it knows the secrets of the
sources of life’s wealth. (This is Pushan, health energy,
or the protective arm of the individual and society.)








[Names: Trinyeka]
And one of universal fame worthy of homage
pervades and covers all three regions of space whereon
all the divinities rejoice. (This is Vishnu, omnipresent
dynamic spirit of life which wards off stagnation in the




[Names: Vibhirdva]
vasatah.


Two with flights like desire and ambition move
around with one, intelligence, and reach wherever they
choose to distant places like travellers. (These are the
Ashvins, twin divinities of nature’s dynamics, or, at the
individual’s level, ambition and ego which fly on the
wings of imagination.)




[Names: Sado]
And two of royal magnificence in closest
proximity receive and enjoy oblations of ghrta and take
their position in the regions of heavenly light. (These
are Mitra and Varuna, sun and ocean, heat and cool of
nature, or love and judgement, or sunlight and air in
human life.)






[Names: Arcanta, Surya]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 30 609


Some of them sing great hymns of Sama and
glorify their lord and thereby light the sun. (These are
the Adityas or universal powers free from threefold
suffering, or the ten pranas which strengthen the soul
for worship of the supreme lord of life and thereby
enlighten the soul.)


Mandala 8/Sukta 30




[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Manu, Vaivasvata, Rshi, Nahi, Visve]
O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and
humanity, none of you is a child, none an adolescent.
All of you are equal and great.





[Names: Manordeva]
Three and thirty Vishvedevas thus sung and
adored are destroyers of sin and suffering, and therefore
you are lovable and adorable by humanity in all their




paravatah.




Such as you are, pray save us, protect and
promote us, speak to us and enlighten us. Let us not
stray out far from the right path of our ancestors or the
right path of humanity.






[Names: Asma]
All the divinities of nature and humanity who
are here or who are anywhere in the world as leading
lights of humanity may, we pray, give us a spacious and
comfortable home for the advancement of our
knowledge and culture and for our working potential,
success and progress.


Mandala 8/Sukta 31


Yajna Yajamana (1-4), Dampati (5-9), and




[Names: Dampatyashisha, Devatah, Manu, Vaivasvata, Rshi]
1. Yo yajati yajata it sunavacca pacati ca.


[Names: Brahmedindrasya]
The yajamana who performs yajna himself or
has yajna performed by a priest, presses and prepares
the soma himself or has it prepared through a priest
pleases Indra and obtains the knowledge of Divinity
and Veda.






MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 31 611




[Names: Purolasam, Somam, Soma, Padit]
Whoever offers food to the fire and to the
deserving poor in honour of this omnipresent lord, Indra,
and offers him oblations of soma mixed with fragrant
havis, the lord almighty saves him from sin and evil.






[Names: Tasya, Susuvat, Visva]
His chariot would shine with wealth and lustre
and he, inspired by divinity, would rise in life with
wealth and knowledge, honour and social prestige,
removing obstructive difficulties and adversities from
his path of progress.




[Names: Asya]
Ila, constant mother stream of total prosperity,
flows inexhaustible into his home, blessing him with
progeny, cows, culture and enlightenment, honour and
excellence, day in and day out.







[Names: Devaso]
The couple who, with dedicated mind, perform
yajna in unison, give in charity, and thus cleanse
themselves and their soul, the divinities always bless
them with sweets of milk and honey.




[Names: Prati]
Together in love and respect they sit on the holy
grass, perform yajna and receive divine gifts of delicious
food and drink in plenty, and never do they fail in their
battles of life for progress.





[Names: Sravo]
Never do they neglect the divinities nor do they
minimize the gifts of their favour and good will, and
thus indeed do they shine bright in glory and exalt the
gifts of divinity.





[Names: Putrina, Ubha]
They live a full happy life blest with sons and
daughters and golden means of living in prosperity and
decency.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 31 613






[Names: Vitihotra, Smudho]
Performing yajna with generous hospitality,
creating wealth and giving in charity, contributing to
the peace and comfort of all in general for the sake of
divine gifts of immortality, blest with milch cows and
woolly sheep and goats, they live the good life doing
reverence to the divines and enjoying the liberal gifts
of divinity.


[Names: Sarma]
Living in the presence of Vishnu, all pervasive
and protective Spirit divine and universal friend of all
life, we pray for the Lord’s gift of the peace, protection,


freedom and comfort of the rivers, mountains and the






[Names: Aitu, Ururadhva]
Come Pusha, lord of health and nurture, Bhaga,
gracious lord of wealth and power, wielder and
controller of all power and prosperity for happiness and
well being, and may our path of progress be wide open


for all round happiness and well being.






[Names: Aramatir, Adityanam, Adityana]
The world’s obedience and service to irresistible
divinity rendered sincerely with mind and soul and the
grace of the Adityas gives freedom from sin and






[Names: Yatha, Varunah, Varuna, Suga]
Since Mitra, lord of love, light and friendship,
Aryama, universal guide and path maker, and Varuna,
lord of judgement and justice, are our protectors, may
our paths of advancement and rectitude be simple,
straight and easy.






[Names: Agnim, Agni, Saparyantah, Mitram, Mitra, Purupriyam, Purupriya]
With sincere word and thought I serve and adore
Agni, eternal and gracious lord of wealth and prosperity.
You too serve the same lord of universal love as a friend,
the lord giver of fulfilment to us in our existential state


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 31 615
of being.






[Names: Maksu, Devanam]
The chariot of the man of reverence to divinities
moves fast forward, and the hero himself, who, with
sincere mind and action, performs yajna and offers
service to the divinities, goes far forward in the battles
of life and surpasses the uncharitables who perform no
yajna in the service of humanity and divinity.






O man of charity and yajnic service to humanity
and divinity, you will never suffer wrong or damage, O
creator of soma dedicated to yajna to the divinities, you
will never be hurt and never fail in your life’s mission.
The yajamana who, with sincere mind and actions,
performs yajna in service to the divinities of nature and
humanity surpasses the uncharitables who never
perform yajnic service in the field of creative fellowship
and cooperation with others, human and divine.








[Names: Nakistam]
The yajamana who with sincere mind and action,
serves the divinities, no one can equal by action, much
less destroy. Nor does he forsake his own path, nor can
[Names: Indeed]
those who are uncharitable and perform no yajnic
service to divinity and humanity.




[Names: Asadatra]
May there be heroic power and prowess, fast
victory and life’s fulfilment for him who performs yajna
in service to the divinities of nature and humanity with
truth of mind and action, and may he surpass all those


uncharitables who perform no selfless service in creative
action to divinity and humanity.


Mandala 8/Sukta 32


[Names: Indra, Devata, Medhatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras, Made, Somasya, Somas]
O poets of wisdom and imagination, joyous
lovers of life and action, in the soma ecstasy of the


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 32 617


beauty and grandeur of life, sing and celebrate the
wondrous works of Indra, ruler, power, energy and
inspirer of life in nature and humanity in the world.






[Names: Vadhidugro]
The awful lord of might and action stems the
rising wicked, subdues the bullying exploiter, restrains
the greedy devourer, cracks the senseless saboteur and
the crooked deceiver, and having destroyed the negative
forces, releases the free flow of waters and freedom of
action, development and progress.






[Names: Nyarbudasya, Krse]
Indra, cosmic power of nature, you break the
stronghold of the cloud of showers from the tip of vast
heaven and thus accomplish that wondrous feat of divine
power.





[Names: Prati, Srutaya, Huve]
O people, for your protection and promotion, I
invoke and call upon the victorious Indra of the glorious




helmet who brings a flood of waters from the heights of
the cloud in response to prayer and promise.






[Names: Sura]
Indra of such fame and prowess, heroic leader,
happy and joyous, you open the gates of knowledge
and victory in action and attainment, as you open the
stalls of cows and horses and the gates of a fortress for
the performers of soma yajna.





[Names: Yadi, Aradupa]
If you take delight in the soma distilled by me
and feel the ecstasy of my song of homage, then come
from far and come from near and, by your own divine
nature, take me on for the food of life you hold for me.





[Names: Vayam, Tvam, Somapah, Somapa]
Indra, lord celebrated in song, your devoted
celebrants as we are, O lord protector and promoter of
the beauty, honour and excellence of life, pray give us
the food and fulfilment of life we love and aspire for.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 619






[Names: Maghavan]
And, O lord of the power, honour and glory of
the world, all joyous and generous, bring us the food of
life inexhaustible. Infinite is your wealth and boundless
your munificence.






[Names: Tlabhih]
And make us rich in lands and cows, knowledge
and culture, make us masters of the golden glories of
life. Advance us with horses and victories of high and
higher attainments in honour and excellence. And lead
us to exert ourselves in unison with songs of adoration
and libations of homage and gratitude with holy words
of joy.



[Names: Brbaduktham, Sadhu]
We invoke the lord divine and master ruler who
is highly adorable, of long and supple arms of generosity,
and always does good for the protection and promotion
of all.








[Names: Jaritrbhyah, Puruvasuh, Puruvasu]
We invoke the lord adorable who does a hundred
great favours to the man at peace and, dispelling the
darkness in the mind and heart, sublimates the soul too
with the spirit of a hundred good works of piety. Indeed,
the lord is of infinite wealth, honour and bliss for all his
devotees and destroys their evil and ignorance.


[Names: Sanah, Sakrascida, Sakad, Indro]
The Lord Almighty strengthens us, is generous,


and enriches our inner self with vision and love and
with all strength and modes of protection and progress.





[Names: Indram]
Sing in honour of Indra, that mighty lord and
ruler who commands the wealth, honour and excellence
of the world, is universal protector and preserver,
saviour of his devotees and friend of the lovers of soma
and yajna.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 621




[Names: Ayantaram, Bhurer]
Honour and adore the lord and ruler who is great,
controller of the world and its law, constant in the
dynamics of existence wherein he is the sole conqueror
of honour and glory and who, with his power and
grandeur, is the ruler of the vast riches of the world.




[Names: Nakirasya, Sacinam, Nakirvakta]
None is the controller of his mighty acts and
powers universally pleasant and true, and there is none
who can ever say: He has failed to give and bless.





There is no recompense due from men of
divinity, from the guests and those actively working for
yajna and the extraction of soma. The creator of soma,
the giver of knowledge and the social worker do not
drink for nothing (they pay with service).








[Names: Panya, Brahma]
Sing in honour of adorable Indra, recite your
hymns of praise in honour of admirable Indra, create
your orations to celebrate the glorious Indra.




Indra, potent lord who commands supreme
power and, unobstructed, breaks down a hundred and a


thousand adversaries, strengthens and exalts the
devotees of yajna.





[Names: Visucara, Anu]
Go forward, Indra, in response to the invitation
to yajna of the people and drink of the soma extracted,
distilled and offered by them.






[Names: Utayamindra]
Drink of the joy and exhilaration of your powers
and perceptions which is all associated with your own
performance, the super-power that’s you and yours.
Indeed, it is all your own power and glory.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 623






[Names: Imam]
Ignore the man who offers yajnic soma in a
mood of anger, frustration and protest. Ignore the man
who offers yajna and soma but in a joyless and
conflictive mood. Accept this soma of homage distilled
and offered in a state of delight, love and faith.





[Names: Dhena, Indravacakasat]
Indra, come from far, cross over the five classes
of people to exhaust the possibilities of their life,
transcend the three versions of knowledge, action and
prayer, and listen with love and approval the sole one
voice of my soul.


[Names: Suryorasmim, Nimnamapo]
Just as the sun radiates the rays of light over
Space, just as waters flow down swift and straight, so
may the voice of my soul reach you.






[Names: Adhvaryava, Siprine, Somam, Soma, Bhara]
O organiser and performer of yajna, offer the
soma of devotion profusely to Indra, mighty lord of the
helmet, and fill the vessel of your heart with divine love
and pranic energy to enjoy life to the full.



Indra breaks the clouds of rain, releases the
waters for the rivers to flow down to the sea, and
provides mature milk in the cows, knowledge and
wisdom in the words of language and ripe grain in the
fields of earth.



[Names: Ahan, Himenavidhyad]
The refulgent sun breaks the heavy cloud of
vapours moving around like a crooked snake, in the
middle regions of space.






[Names: Pravaugraya, Devattam]
O celebrants and yajakas, sing the most heavenly


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 32 625


song of praise worthy of divinity in honour of refulgent,
impetuous, invincible and ever enduring friend, Indra,
leader and commander of the ruling and defensive forces
of nature and humanity.






Celebrate Indra, soul and ruling spirit in nature
and humanity, who, in the excitement and ecstasy of
the taste of food and soma, awakens in humans and
divines the awareness of all the rules and laws of
discipline and commitment to the vows of discipline in
life.

[Names: Volhamabhi]
Here in life on earth, those two golden and
refulgent motive powers of nature’s circuitous energy,
jubilant and festive co-workers for the chariot of Indra,
lord ruler of nature and humanity, may, we pray, bring
in holy food for health and energy for the good of all





[Names: Arvancam, Purustuta, Somapeyaya, Somapeya]
Indra, lord universally sung and celebrated, may
the two motive powers of your chariot, loved and adored
by scholars dedicated to yajnic pursuit of knowledge
and wisdom, bring you here to join us and share the
ecstasy of soma celebration with humanity.


Mandala 8/Sukta 33




[Names: Indra, Devata, Medhatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Vayam, Pavitrasya]
asate.


Indra, destroyer of evil, darkness and suffering,
we, your celebrants, having distilled the soma, spread
and occupied the holy grass, we, sit and wait on the
vedi for your presence in the flux of life as holy
performers, while the flow of pure immortality continues
all round in the dynamics of existence.




[Names: Svaranti, Kada]
sagah.


Indra, Vasu, giver of peace and security in self-
settlement, while the soma of faith and love has been
distilled in the heart and the devotees sing and celebrate
your honour in hymns of praise, when would you, keen
to join us at the celebration, come to the yajnic hall


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 33 627
thirsting to meet the people you love and admire.






[Names: Kanvebhir, Pisangarupam]
Indra, lord of universal vision, resolute will and
irresistible action, ruler and commander of the world’s
wealth, power and force, we pray, conceive, plan and
bring about for the intelligent people of action and
ambition a social order of golden beauty and progressive
achievement, full of a hundred-fold prosperity of lands
and cows, education and culture, and invincible will,
strength and advancement free from indecision and
delay in action.






[Names: Pahi, Indraya]
O man, you are a visitor and respectable guest
on this earth of a golden order of beauty, prosperity and
culture. Observe the rules of this order, advance the
beauty and prosperity of it, and in the pleasure and
ecstasy of its plenty of soma hospitality, sing and
celebrate the glory of Indra, lord ruler of vision and
action united, commander of the nation’s forces,
dynamic and creative, friendly and cooperative, wielder
of the thunderbolt of justice and retribution, burden




bearer and pilot of the golden chariot of humanity.






I sing and celebrate the glory of Indra who is
generous with both hands right and left, magnificent,
holy in action, treasure home of a thousandfold riches,
who commands a hundredfold power, honour and
excellence and who breaks down the strongholds of evil,
darkness and suffering. Indeed he is glorious and




[Names: Smasrusu, Sritah, Vibhutadyumnascyavanah, Purustutah, Purustuta]
gauriva Sakinah.


I celebrate the glory of Indra who is bold and
resolute, unbounded irresistible, wears the marks of
manly vigour, commands honour and excellence, is an
inspirer, mover and shaker, universally respected for
his acts of piety, and who for the men of mighty
dynamism is generous as earth, gracious as holy speech
and loving as mother cow.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 33 629




[Names: Ayam]
Who would for certain know Indra in this
created world of beauty and glory, how much power
and force he wields while he rules and sustains it, Indra
who wears the helmet and breaks down the strongholds
of negativities with his lustrous might, the lord who
shares and enjoys the soma of his own creation?






[Names: Dana, Purutra, Nakistva]
Indra is generously giving, preventive, counter-
active and invincible like a lion, and holds and rules
the world of immense variety in motion. O lord of
grandeur and majesty, as you move around everywhere
by your might and lustre, pray come, bless our yajna
and taste the soma of our creation. No one can restrain






[Names: Yadi]
Indra who is blazing strong, uncountered and
irresistible, constant and unshakable, is ever in perfect
harness for the human’s battle of existence, and if he




hears the call of the celebrant, the lord of might and






[Names: Satyamittha, Vrsa, Srnvise, Srutah]
True it is thus you are virile and generous
yourself and an inspiration and driving force for the
virile and the brave, unbound, uncountered, brave and
illustrious, harbinger of the showers of peace and joy
and known as omnificent and sublime all over the world
far and near.






[Names: Vrsanaste, Satakrato]
Indra, lord of the power, wealth and glory of
the universe, agent of infinite acts of creation in the
world of existence, strong and golden are the reins of
your cosmic chariot, golden is the goad that maintains
and controls the speed of its motion, strong and laden
with riches is your chariot, strong and virile the motive
powers, and you yourself are all potent and generous.


of the human soul in its own individual sphere provided
that it is self-controlled and free from external forces
which bind it in the fetters of worldly interests of a
selfish and transitory nature.)


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 33 631




rinam.


O lord of omnipotence and omnificence, may
the brave and generous yajaka prepare the soma juice
of devotion for you. O lord of the law of truth and lover
of the rules of rectitude, bring us the showers of peace
and prosperity in rectitude. O lord controller and keeper
of world forces in order, the generous yajaka receives
the showers of your blessings and holds them in trust
actively in the streams of existence for yajnic offers to
your honour for your service.






[Names: Endra, Nayamaccha]
Indra, lord most potent, come to taste the honey
sweets of soma. Unless you come and bless with grace,
this man of power and earthly honour, though devoted
to good actions, would not well listen otherwise to songs
of devotion and the voice of Veda.








[Names: Vahantu, Tirascidaryam]
May the motive forces which power and drive
your chariot, we pray, bring you hither, O lord of infinite
acts of grace, destroyer of evil and dispeller of darkness,
past the acts and voices of others without faith in divinity
and prayer.






[Names: Asmakamadyantamam, Asmakam, Samtama, Somapah, Somapa]
O lord of heavenly light, greatest of the great,
lover and protector of the soma pleasure and grandeur
of life, accept our most intimate prayer and praise today
and grant that all our acts of homage in your honour
and service be for the peace and dignity of the life we
live.






[Names: Nahi, Sastre]
The mighty one who has brought us under his
order of law does not accept with delight your decree


(Indra, the soul, is the ruler and controller of
the mind and senses. It is not ruled and controlled by
the mind or the senses or anyone else.)




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 33 633




If Indra, the husband, were to say: “The mind
of woman is not controllable” and, also, “that her
thought and intellect too is inferior’, (then it is less than
half the truth).






[Names: Sapti, Eved]
If the two ardent horses of Indra’s chariot
together draw the burden of the home-state, then the
shaft of the chariot is better and stronger.






[Names: Adhah]
O man, O woman: Keep your eyes down on the
earth, not up on the sky. Walk on with both the feet
together (as the two wheels and the two horses draw
the chariot together), Let your lower feet be not bare
and exposed (cover them). Let woman be the high priest
of the home yajna.


(The last three mantras describe the home-
state of the social order. The husband and the wife
together run the home. The husband is, or may be, the
greater burden bearer, still the wife is the chief home




minister, and the husband ought to realise this in love,
in courtesy, in chivalry, or at least in practical wisdom.
Arrogance, pride, anger, passion, all this on either’s part
must be subjected to reason and respectful cooperation
with mutual recognition.)


Mandala 8/Sukta 34


Indra Devata, Nipatithi Kanva (1-15) and Sahasram






[Names: Vasurochisha, Angirasa, Rshis, Endra, Divo, Sasato]
Indra, ruler of the world, come with all your
powers and perceptions to the sage’s adoration and
instruction, and from the light and exhortation of the
elevating sage, O seeker of enlightenment, go and rise
to the heights of divinity.






The maker of soma, creator of the joy of a new
life, would welcome you here with a loud proclamation
and exalt you with the voice of thunder, and from the
light and power of the sage’s revelation, O lover of light,
go and rise to your own essential heaven of freedom.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 34 635




[Names: Atra]
Here the very edge and foundation of these sages
of knowledge and wisdom would shake you and reveal
you to yourself as thunder shakes the earth and lightning
lights it up all over. And then from the light and thunder
of these commanders you would rise, liberated, to your
own heights of heaven, O lover and ruler of the light of
day.






The sages call you here for the art and science
of defence and protection and for the victories of peace
and progress. And from the light and wisdom of the
enlightening sages, O lover and ruler of the light of day,
rise to the light and heaven of your own imagination.






[Names: Dadhami]
As the sun vests vapours of rain in the cloud of
showers, so do I vest in you the first, original and eternal
knowledge, protected, protective and enjoyable, of the
prime order distilled by sages from experience and
vision. Then from the light of this knowledge of the
sages of universal law and command, O lover of light,
rise to the heaven of light on earth.








[Names: Smatpurandirna]
Indra, enlightened with the thought and wisdom
of universal order, equipped with the power and
competence of a ruler of cities, come and take over the
reins of government for our protection and
advancement, and from the light and wisdom of the
sages of vision and command, O lover and giver of a
rule of peace and enlightenment, rise to the light and
heaven of your imagination.






[Names: Satamagha]
Come to us Indra, lord wise and great,
commander of a thousand forces of protection and
progress, ruler of a hundredfold wealth and power of
the world, and from the light of the ruling master of this
world of knowledge and wisdom, O lover of the light
of heaven, rise to the supreme light of existence.






The host yajaka, yajamana, well wisher of
humanity, respectable among the noble and generous,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 34 637


worthy of reverence, invites, exhorts and exalts you.
Come, and from the light of the world of rule and order
here, O lover of light and wisdom in peace, rise to the
heights of heaven.






And may the mighty transportive powers
stronger than all obstructive forces of pride and
arrogance, transport you here to us like the powerful
wings of the eagle flying the king of birds to his
destination, and may you, from the light and power of
this world of rule and order, O lover of light and peace,
rise to the light and peace of heaven.






[Names: Somasya, Somas]
O lord ruler of the world, come to us to join the
soma celebration of this social order offered with
sincerity of thought and word in action, and from the
light and joy of this world of rule and order, O lover of
light and peace, rise to the light and peace of heaven.








Come close to us, listen to our songs of adoration
of divinity, and enjoy the holy celebrations, and from
the light and joy of the earthly world of rule and order,
O lover of the light of divinity, rise to the light of
heavenly peace and freedom.






[Names: Sarupaira]
Vested with the fullness of a dynamic personality
with sensitive perceptions, conceptions and
apprehensions, come to us with colleagues and
companions of equal calibre and take over the reins of
leadership, and from the light and wisdom of the earthly
order, O lover of light and heaven, rise to the heavenly
light of love and benediction.






Come from the mountains and the clouds, come
over the seas and hasten from the farthest regions of
the globe, rule, and from the light of this order of rule,
O lover of light and giver of peace and settlement, rise
to the light of heaven.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 34 639




[Names: Sura]
Give us a thousand riches of lands and cows,
culture and enlightenment, O brave ruler, give us and
develop communications and transport, and from the
light and rule of this earthly order, O lover of heavenly
light, rise to the light of heaven and eternal joy.






[Names: Anah, Satani]
Bring us, give us, riches, powers and excellences
in hundreds, thousands and lacs, even more, unbounded
all, and from the light and culture of this order of earthly
rule, O lover of peace and light of heaven, rise to
heavenly light and eternal joy.




[Names: Ojistham]
Let us all, and Indra too, lovers of peace, wealth,
honour, power and excellence, win a thousandfold
wealth of brilliant progress and advancement.







[Names: Yarjra, Bhrajante, Surya]
Those who follow straight paths of truth and
rectitude, advance vibrant like the winds, love brilliance
without violence and move forward at the shortest wave
length of speed, shine like stars.






[Names: Paravatasya, Tistham]
O lord of light and power, let me be established
among the generous and profuse gifts of the farthest
Spaces, moving at the fastest in the dynamics of the
whirling wheels of time, ultimately at peace somewhere
at the centre of eternal truth, goodness and beauty of


Mandala 8/Sukta 35






[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Agninendrena, Agninendr, Rudrair, Sajosasa, Usasa, Somam, Soma]
Ashvins, complementary powers and forces of
nature and humanity working in circuit, associated with
[Names: Agni, Indra, Varuna, Vishnu, Adityas, Aditya]
Rudras, pranic energies, and Vasus, earth energies, in
union with the dawn and the sun, absorb, protect,
promote and bring the soma joy of life for the benefit


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 35 641
of humanity.






[Names: Visvabhir]
Mighty and dynamic Ashvins, complementary
powers of humanity, associated with the twin forces of
attraction and repulsion of nature and the world, the
regions of light in space, the earth, clouds and
mountains, and united with the sun and dawn, receive,
protect, promote and bring the soma energy and joy for
the benefit of humanity.






[Names: Visvair]
Ashvins, associated with all the thirty three
brilliant, plentiful and generous divine powers of nature
and humanity, scientifically energised liquids, vibrant
pilots and controlled winds, intellectuals and scientists
who dispel the darkness and ignorance of society, and
in union with the dawn of a new sun in life, receive,
preserve, develop and bring the soma energy for the
peace and joy of humanity here and now.






[Names: Jusetham]
devau savanava gacchatam. Sajosasa usasa


Divine Ashvins, twin harbingers of nature and
humanity, listen to our call, know our purpose, come
and join all our sessions of yajnic creation and, equally
in tune with the soothing glory of the dawn and blazing
intensity of the sun, bring us food and energy here and
now.




[Names: Stomam]
devau savanava gacchatam. Sajosasa usasa


Divine Ashvins, twin complementarities of
nature and humanity, generous brilliancies, listen and
cherish our song of adoration as youthful lovers listen
to a lovely brilliant maiden’s, come to our sessions,
understand our purpose, and united with the dawn and
the sun, transmit to us food and energy in plenty here
and now.






[Names: Giro]
Divine Ashvins, listen to our song and
understand, join and cherish our yajnic project of non-


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 643


violent creation, come to all our sessions, O generous
harbingers of food, energy and wealth and, united with
the dawn and the sun, bring us plenty of food, energy
and all round advancement to our heart’s desire here
and now.






[Names: Haridraveva, Sajosasd, Ashvins, Ashvin]
bird flies to water and, like a veteran scholar, you
understand and recognise the nectar sweet soma that
we have distilled from our yajnic project and you
anticipate the future possibilities too. O divine twin
powers of the circuitous energy of natural and social
dynamics, in unison with the sun and dawn, come to






[Names: Hamsaviva]
Ashvins, just as two hansa birds fly to water
and as two thirsty travellers rush for a drink, so do you
two like veteran scholars fly to our soma results of yajnic
projects, understand and assess the positives and
negatives of merits and anticipate the possibilities. O
twin divines, in unison with the sun and the dawn, come


thrice in the day and help us advance forward.






[Names: Syenaviva]
Like falcons you fly carrying holy gifts to the
generous yajaka. Like veteran scholars you fly to assess
the merit of our soma distilled in yajnic experiments
and to anticipate its future possibilities. O twin divines
united with the sun and the dawn, come thrice in the
day, visit our sessions and help us to advance.






[Names: Pibatam, Sajosasda]
Ashvins, come, drink the soma, satisfy
yourselves about the taste and value of it. Go to the
people and carry wealth, strength and power for them.
O twin divines, come, bring us energy and advancement
in unison with the sun and the dawn of a new day.






[Names: Jayatam]
Win the victories of life, O divinities of the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 645


nation’s morning, thank and adore the Lord Supreme,
protect the people, bear and bring wealth, strength and
power for them and hold it too. O twin divines, come
and bring us energy and advancement in unison with
the sun and the dawn of a new day and hold on.






[Names: Hatam, Satrun]
Eliminate the adversaries, adversities and the
negativities, exercise and advance the friendly forces
with love for cooperation, sustain and maintain the
people in a state of happiness, bear, bring and hold
wealth and power with assets for the nation. O twin
divines, come and bring us energy and advancement in
unison with the sun and the dawn of a new day, hold on
and relent not.






[Names: Mitravarunavanta, Marutvanta, Jaritur]
Ashvins, complementary powers of the nation’s
social dynamics in balance for the march ahead, blest
with Mitra, people of love and friendship, Varuna,
distinguished people of judgement and discrimination,
Maruts, vibrant youth and pilots of the nation, all




holding on to Dharma, duty in the law of universal truth,
listen and rise to the call of the celebrant. O twin divines,
come with the Adityas, the sun in progressive zodias,
and in unison with the sun and the dawn of every new
day.






[Names: Angirasvanta]
Blest with Angirasas, continuous freshness of
life breath and vital energy, Vishnu, omnipresent vision
and power of divinity, Maruts, vibrant force and velocity
of the winds, rise instantly to the call of the celebrant,
Ashvins, and come with the Adityas in progression like
the sun’s in the zodiacs and in unison with the sun and
the dawn at the rise of every new day.






[Names: Rbhumanta, Jariturgacchatho]
Ashvins, generous divinities of humanity, blest
with the Rbhus, engineers, technicians and craftsmen,
[Names: Vajins, Maruts, Marut]
vibrant forces of defence and protection, rise to the call
of the celebrant and go forward with the Adityas,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 647


visionaries of the nation, children of mother earth, in
unison with the sun and the dawn of every new day.






[Names: Brahma]
Animate and energise the visionaries of
universal values, animate and energise the intellectuals,
animate and energise the people in general, destroy the
evil and destructive forces, fight out diseases and create
the soma of good health and joy in unison with the sun
and the dawn of every new day.






[Names: Ksatram]
Animate, energise and develop the defence and
administrative forces, sustain and inspire the people in
general whosoever they are, destroy the evil and the
violent, eliminate ill-health and disease and in unison
with the sun and the dawn of every new day create new
soma of joy and life’s excitement.








[Names: Dhenurjinvatamuta]
Ashvins, complementary powers of the nation’s
development and progress, develop the animal wealth
for milk, develop and energise the agricultural, industrial
and commercial classes, destroy evil and the saboteurs,
eliminate all negativities and, in unison with the sun
and the rise of every new day, create and recreate the
soma of new joy and enthusiasm for life.






[Names: Atreriva, Syavasvasya]
Ashvins, who humble the arrogance of the
proud, just as you listen to the universal adorations of
the sage of threefold freedom of body, mind and soul,
so pray listen to the appeal and adorations of the scholar
of solar energy, and, in unison with the sun and the dawn
of every new day, provide for the people’s security for
the night at the close of the day, and thus create another
new joy for the people.






[Names: Sargan]
Ashvins, breakers of pride and arrogance, listen
to the prayer and exhortation of the scholar of solar rays
who creates something new toward the improvement
of life and, in unison with the sun and the dawn, support


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 35 649


and augment his invention like a new creation completed
the day before.






[Names: Rasminriva, Ssyava]
Ashvins who shatter the pride and arrogance of
evil forces, take over the yajnic programmes of the
scholar of solar science and promote them like radiations
of the sun and steer them by controls in unison with the
sun and the dawn to advance them further than the last
stage completed till the last day.






[Names: Arvag]
Ashvins, divine twin powers of the social order,
direct the chariot hitherward, drink the honey sweets of
soma distilled by us. Come, go round and come again.
Praying for protection and support for advancement, I
call upon you: Come and bring the jewel gifts of life
for the generous yajaka.








[Names: Namovake]
Ashvins, complementary leading powers of
humanity, the yajna of love and non-violence with words
of reverence and homage is begun, the soma is
refreshing and overflowing, pray come to drink the soma
and join the celebration. Come and come again. Praying
for protection and promotion, I call upon you to come
and bless the generous yajaka with the jewels of life.





[Names: Svahakrtasya]
Ashvins, twin and complementary divinities of
nature and humanity, come, drink of the soma offered
with selfless homage and reverence to your satisfaction.
Praying for protection and promotion I call upon you to
come and bless the generous yajaka with the jewels of life.


Mandala 8/Sukta 36





[Names: Indra, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Avitasi, Somam, Soma, Satakrato, Indra, Marutvan, Marutva]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 36 651


Indra, omnipotent lord of existence, omnipresent
in wide wide space, commanding over cosmic waters
and winds, winner of all the universal battles of
evolution and doer of a hundred acts of divinity, you
are the ultimate protector of the maker of soma, the
devotee on the vedi waiting for the emergence of divine
consciousness. O lord, arise in the heart and drink the
soma of his devotion to your satisfaction, most
exhilarating and reserved for you.






[Names: Prava]
Indra, lord of the wealth and power, honour and
excellence of the world of existence, pray save the
celebrant, he is the protector too of your presence in the
heart. Arise in the consciousness and drink the
exhilarating soma of his devotion, the share he has
reserved for you, O doer of a hundred acts of grace.
You are the ultimate winner of all the battles of
existential evolution, lord of wide space, commander
of cosmic waters and winds, sole lord and master ruler
of the world of reality.







[Names: Urja]
Indra, you protect the divine forces of existence
and vest them with energy, lustre and grandeur, and
thereby they reflect your presence and protect you for
our perception therein. O lord, rejoice with them in the
divine presence in nature and humanity and, through
their ecstasy, drink the exhilarating soma of divine
celebration, the share they have reserved for you in
devotion, lord and doer of a hundred acts of majesty.
You are the ultimate conqueror in all battles of existence,
omnipresent in wide space, rolling in cosmic waters,
blowing in wind shears and solely presiding over the
worlds of reality.






[Names: Janita]
Indra, lord omnipotent, you are the generator
of the regions of light and happiness. You are the
generator of the earth. O lord of a hundred great acts of
creation, accept, enjoy and protect the exhilarating
portion of devotion and ecstasy of the celebrants which
they have dedicated to you, and let the ecstasy move
their hearts too to your satisfaction. You are the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 36 653


conqueror in all battles of the world between good and
evil forces. You are the immanent presence in the
expansive space and beyond. You are the life and energy
in cosmic waters and in the mighty storms of winds, O
lord of truth and justice and master saviour of the good
and holy people.





[Names: Janitasvanam]
You are the generator of the horses. You are the
generator of cows. O lord of a hundred acts of divinity,
accept the soma of the ecstasy of your creations who
celebrate the joy of their being to the extent that they
reflect your kindness and grace in their love of life. You
are the conqueror in all world’s struggles for existence
and survival, immanent in expansive spaces and beyond,
the life of cosmic waters and the breath of mighty winds,
lord of truth and reality of existence.







[Names: Atrinam, Atrina]
Indra, lord generator of the suns, breaker of
clouds and mover of mountains, wielding the
thunderbolt of justice and retribution, accept and exalt
the happy sage’s song of adoration, enjoy the
exhilarating soma of devotion to the last note of the
song and bless them, O lord of a hundred acts of love
and kindness, to the utmost extent of their capacity. You
are the victor in all the battles of existence, lord
immanent in and transcendent beyond the expansive
space, rolling in cosmic waters and blowing in
tempestuous winds, O lord of the truth of existence and
saviour of noble humanity.






[Names: Syavasvasya, Trasadasyumavitha]
Indra, mighty lord of humanity, listen to the
prayer of the sage creator of soma and his songs of
ecstasy created with a disciplined mind and sense as
well as with disciplined will and imagination, just as
you listen to the songs of the sage of threefold freedom
doing acts of service to humanity and divinity. You
protect the sage fighter against evil, tyranny and
exploitation all by yourself in the battles of humanity,
thereby exalting the songs and actions in honour of
divinity. Won’t you listen to me?


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 37 655


Mandala 8/Sukta 37






[Names: Indra, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Predam, Madhyandinasya, Indra, Somasya, Somas]
Indra, lord of song and acts of bravery, saviour
of poets and warriors in the battles against darkness
and evil within the personality and without in the
objective world, with all your modes and methods of
protection and promotion, protect and exalt this holy
song and the creator of the song and soma for the
betterment of life. O lord of the thunderbolt, destroyer
of the demon of darkness, evil and suffering, impeccable
beyond reproach, come, join us and taste the joy of
creative soma of the mid-day session of our yajnic
action.





[Names: Sehana]
Indra, lord of blazing might and glory of word
and action, challenger of the forces of jealousy and
enmity, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and




punishment, destroyer of the demon of darkness and
evil, want and suffering, adorable beyond reproach,
come with all your modes and means of protection and
promotion and taste the soma of our mid-day height of






[Names: Ekaralasya, Sacipata]
Indra, lord of holy word and great action, with
all your protections and promotions you shine and rule
over the one earthly world of existence. O lord of the
thunderbolt, destroyer of darkness and evil, adorable
beyond criticism and calumny, come and taste the soma
of our success at the mid-day session of our yajnic






[Names: Sasthavana]
Indra, ruler and master of tactics and power of
parties from clashing all by yourself by your strength
and protective and promotive policies. O lord of
adamantine power, decision and action, destroyer of


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 37 657


evil, darkness and demonic exploitation, adorable
beyond criticism and calumny, come and taste the
sweetness of our soma at the peak of our day’s






[Names: Ksemasya]
Indra, mighty ruler presiding over the nation,
master of divine eloquence and decisive action, with
all your safeguards, precautions and tactical actions you
govern and promote our consolidated assets,
investments and acquisitions safely and positively. O
lord of thunderous power, implacable law and inevitable
justice, O destroyer of evil, suffering and poverty,
adorable beyond question and criticism, come and taste
the pleasure and progress of our yajnic programme at
the peak of the day’s success.




[Names: Ksatraya]
Indra, lord of sacred word and irresistible action,


with all your methods and policies of protection and
progress you deploy your forces for the defence and




advancement of the nation, not for your own personal
security. O lord of awesome power and justice, destroyer
of demonic violence and exploitation, come and taste
the pleasure of our soma of peace and progress at the
peak of our day’s achievement.






[Names: Syavasvasya, Srnu]
Indra, ruler of the world, listen to the eulogies
of the dynamic scholar and poet as you listen to the
exhortations of the man of action and threefold freedom
of body, mind and soul. O lord, you alone by yourself
protect and exhort the hero who destroys ogres and
saboteurs and exalts the defence powers in the national
meets of leaders and pioneers among people.


Mandala 8/Sukta 38






[Names: Indra, Agni, Devate, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Yajnasya, Indragni]
Indra, wielder of power and justice, ruler of the
nation, Agni, enlightened sage and scholar, high priest
and leading authority on the values of the system of
governance, be firmly joined together in the cleanest


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 38 659


programme of government in all decisions, actions and
developmental plans and their completion for
advancement, and know it well that this is the purpose
of governance and the social order. You are two leading
participants in this sacred yajna. Know this and abide
in your position.






[Names: Tosasa]
Ruling to the satisfaction of the people, going
by chariot and reaching fast wherever needed,
destroying the evils of darkness, ignorance, want and
demonic injustice and exploitation, never frustrated or
defeated but always victorious, Indra and Agni, ruler
and enlightened sage and scholar, know this purpose
well, follow and never relent.






[Names: Idam]
Indra and Agni, ruler and enlightened leader,
the people, leading lights and all, create these
exhilarating honey sweets of soma with mountainous
efforts to felicitate you. Know this, recognise it, and








[Names: Jusetham, Somam, Soma]
Indra and Agni, come to the people’s house of
yajna, honoured ruler and leader, join us and enjoy the
honey sweets of soma distilled for you so that we may
all realise the aim and purpose of the social order the






Indra and Agni, leaders of the nation’s
enlightened rule and order, come, join the yajnic sessions
of the social order and accept the holy offerings with
the powers by which you reach out to the people and
give them the facilities they need.


[Names: Imam]
Indra and Agni, leaders of the world order, come,


listen and accept this exhilarating gayatri homage of
mine in your honour.






[Names: Prataryavabhira, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 38 661


Indra and Agni, victorious creators of wealth
for the nation, come with the early morning divinities
and leading lights of generosity to join the yajna and
have a taste of the soma of the nation’s honour and






[Names: Syavasvasya]
Indra and Agni, listen to the call of the dynamic
scholar and poet who offers the soma of yajnic homage,
and honour the call of the leaders of thrice won freedom
of the body, mind and soul so that you may enjoy the
soma celebration of the nation at the yajna vedi.






Indra and Agni, leaders of the nation’s light and
fire energy, just as holy scholars and sages invoke you
for protection and promotion, so do I invoke and call
upon you to come and join us at the soma session of our





[Names: Aham, Indragnyor, Sarasvativator, Yabhyam]
I choose and opt for the protection of Indra and




Agni who value and honour the knowledge and
enlightenment gifts of eternal and constant revelation
of divinity by which the dynamism of human culture
and grace and the honour and excellence of humanity
is defined and celebrated.


Mandala 8/Sukta 39






[Names: Agni, Devata, Nabhaka, Kanva, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Agnimila, Agnirdevan, Agnirdeva]
I worship Agni, lord of light and fire of life,
giver of enlightenment, adored in Rks of the Veda. I
invoke and adore Agni to join me at yajna for
advancement and pray that it may inspire and bring us
the benefit of other divinities of nature and humanity.
The poet, creator, omniscient power at yajna, traverses
between both heaven and earth and communicates
between body and spirit like a messenger, an inspiration,
and while Agni is at work all adversaries and negativities





[Names: Nyagne, Samsamesam, Nyaratir]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 39 663


Agni, lord of light and fire, by this new word of
adoration may the negativities of thought and emotion
in the personalities of these yajakas, frustrations of the
bountiful, all adversaries and adversities, all stupidity,
violence and enemies go away and vanish from here.






[Names: Agne, Sivo]
Agni, lord of yajna, as I offer charming oblations
of ghrta into the fire I offer hymns of adorations to you.
Pray know and accept these among and with other
divinities. You are the oldest, eternal and gracious
messenger of the sun. May all negativities and






[Names: Tattadagnirvayo, Urjahutir]
Agni bears, brings and bestows upon the
supplicant all the food, energy, health and joy as it is
asked for. Agni is the giver of plenty of energy, peace,
happiness and freedom from suffering and disease for
liberal service in honour of all the divinities of nature
and humanity. May all negativities and adversities










Agni 1s known by his powerful and marvellous
actions. He is the initiator and original high-priest of
the eternal yajnas of the cycles of creation. Self-
provided, generosity incarnate, universally chosen and
adored, he comes to bless whoever reposes faith in him
with prayer. May all negativities and adversities vanish.






[Names: Agnirjata, Agnirveda, Agnih, Agnirdvara]
Agni knows the origin of immortal divinities of
nature. He knows the secrets and mysteries of the
mortals. Agni is the treasure giver of universal wealth,
power, honour and excellence. Invoked and served with
latest researches into light and fire energy and its
applications, Agni opens the doors of immense
possibilities of wealth and power. May all negativities
and adversities vanish.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 39 665






[Names: Baie, Agnirdevesu, Puruvisvam, Puruvisva]
Agni pervades the divinities of nature and
humanity as vitality, energy, plenty and generosity. He
resides in humanity specially among those who are
dedicated to yajna and creativity. As the earth nurtures
and sustains the entire world life on it, so Agni nurtures
and sustains all living beings with joy and inspiration
for celebration in song. He is indeed the chief adorable
divinity among divinities. May all negetavities and






[Names: Srito, Tamaganma]
The Agni which pervades and vitalises the seven
yajakas, 1.e., five senses, mind and intelligence, and also
the seven pranic energies, among humans, which
energises the rolling oceans and flowing rivers of the
world, which pervades the three regions of earth, skies
and the regions of light in the universe, which sustains
and inspires the wise and dedicated people and which




destroys the violent, to that Agni, first and foremost
adorable power in yajnas, let us attain in worship. May
all negativities and adversities vanish.






[Names: Agnistrini]
Omnipresent and omniscient Agni pervades
three regions of the universe wherein reside three
realities worth knowing, i.e., Prakrti (nature), soul, and
the Super Soul, Parameshvara. Here in He, the one by
of life, feeds and vitaslises thirty three divinities of
nature and sustains us with all that we need and desire.
May all negativities and adversities all vanish.






[Names: Tvam, Tvamapah]
Agni, ancient and eternal power of existence,
you alone among humanity and among divinities rule
the entire wealth and power of existence. All around
you the dynamic energies of life unfold and flow by
themselves, provide vitality of life as messengers of
Agni to forms of existence, and ultimately merge with


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 40 667


you. May all negativities, adversities and contradictions
vanish from our life for all time.


Mandala 8/Sukta 40






[Names: Indra, Agni, Devate, Nabhaka, Rshi, Indragni, Yena]
Indra, lord of power and honour, Agni, lord of
light and knowledge, commanding lightning and fire,
patience and endurance, strength and courage, give us
that positive and irresistible wealth of life by which we
may face, resist and throw off strong and violent
adversaries as fire fanned by winds destroys forests.
May negativities, adversities, alienations and enmities






[Names: Nahi, Savistham]
We do not shrink from you, Indra and Agni, nor
do we in any way neglect you both. Indeed we invoke
and invite Indra, strongest leader of the strong, to be




with us. When, for sure, would the lord come to us,
come with Agni at the speed of lightning to inspire us
with strength for struggle and victory, to bless us with
piety, wisdom and intelligence for corporate action with
the spirit of yajna? May all negativities, adversities,
alienations and enmities vanish.






Both Indra and Agni like fire and lightning
reside and rule at the heart of life struggles. May they,
we pray, leading lights, prophetic voices and patriarchal
spirits for the loving and friendly, invoked for guidance
and answers to questions and mysteries of life, come
and, with their vision and wisdom, resolve our doubts
and questions to settled certainties of decisive action.
May all negativities, adversities, frustrations and
enmities vanish from the world.


Basi oo

[Names: Abhyarca, Yayor]
same.


O man, with a voice friendly and inviting, like


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 40 669


a missionary eager to eliminate the negativities and
adversities of life, invoke and adore Indra and Agni,
lord omnipotent and the leading light of omniscience,
in whose treasure hold of nature are held, controlled
and protected for promotion and progress this entire
world, the moving expansive universe, the heaven, the
middle regions, the great mother earth and unbounded
wealth, power and excellence for the children of divinity.
May all negativities, adversities, deprivations and
alienations vanish from the face of the earth.






[Names: Indragnibhyam, Indragnibhya]
Like the sage eager to throw off the veils of
ignorance, send up your prayers to Indra and Agni, lord
omnipotent and omniscient who, ruling the world of
existence with their lustre and majesty, open up the
seven fold ocean of obscure and tortuous nature to
evolution and reveal the seven stage treasure of
mysterious knowledge across fivefold evolution of
nature to biological and spiritual stages of knowledge.
May all ignorance, frustrations, and alienations vanish.






[Names: Vayam]
same.


Also prune, cut off and throw out like the dead
wood of a tangled creeper the hoarded wealth, unethical
power and outmoded knowledge of the exploiter and the
antisocial luxury of the selfish consumer, and control and
eliminate the fiendish force of the evil so that we may
share and enjoy renewed and refreshing wealth, power
and knowledge reorganised and recollected into living
forms by Indra. May all poverty, superstitions, alienations
and enmities vanish from progressive humanity.






[Names: Yadindragni, Asmakebhir]
When these our people, with one persistent
voice and relentless exhortation, invoke and call upon
Indra and Agni who command irresistible power and
unquestionable knowledge, then with our dynamic
people we would face and fight out all violent
oppositions and defeat destructive forces. May all
violence, destruction, terrorism and sabotage vanish
from progressive society.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 40 671


[Names: Svetavavo, Indragnyor, Anu]
same.


Whoever Indra and Agni, commanding ruling
power and light of knowledge, raise from lower regions
of ignorance and darkness, and take them to the higher
regions of knowledge and culture, and the seas which
they release from bondage, all of them, thus raised and
guided, observe their divine laws and live a dynamic
life of freedom and enlightenment. May all darkness,
ignorance, superstition and slavery vanish from the
world, giving way to freedom and progress.






[Names: Purvista, Vasvo]
O Indra, commanding lord of perceptive and
communicative powers of enlightenment, inspirer and
rejuvenator of the celebrant, first, foremost and universal
are your gifts of generosity, ancient and universal are
your acts and songs of adoration. The grace and
beneficence of the almighty are givers of settlement
which may, we pray, inspire our mind, senses and actions
and lead us to fulfilment and salvation. May poverty,
suffering, pride and frustration vanish giving way to
universal joy and freedom.






ser




[Names: Sisita, Susnasyandani]
With hymns and holy actions adore and glorify
Indra, resplendent lord who commands the purity and
truth of reality, who is adorable, who with his power
and brilliance, dries up and roots out the origins and
products of drought, greed and exploitation and sets
aflow the liberal streams of joy and prosperity. May all
poverty, exploitation, greed and unhappiness vanish
from the world of humanity.






[Names: Susnasya]
Adore and glorify the lord of love, non-violence
and holy yajnic action, who is ever true and eternal,
who rewards acts of truth and piety and inspires us to
think and meditate on piety and divinity, who breaks
down the roots and fruits of impiety and exploitation
and conquers the streams of joy and prosperity to set
them aflow. May impiety, illiberality, untruth and
exploitation, all vanish from the world.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 41 673






[Names: Evendragnibhyam, Tridhatuna, Sarmana, Angirasvad]
Thus do I sing a new song of adoration in honour
of Indra, lord ruler of power, and Agni, lord giver of
light and knowledge, as I would sing to glorify the father,
the giver of honour and enlightenment, and the lord
giver of the breath of life. May Indra and Agni protect
and promote us with the joy of threefold gifts of truth,
action and stability, and may we, I pray, be masters,
protectors and promoters of the wealth, honour and
excellence of life on earth.


Mandala 8/Sukta 41


[Names: Varuna, Devata, Nabhaka, Kanva, Rshi]
aan




[Names: Asma, Varunaya]
For progress and prosperity in life, honour, adore
and glorify Varuna, this lord supreme, ruler and
dispenser of justice who, with his powers, judgement
and actions, protects and promotes humans, animals,
birds, etc., just as he protects and regulates stars, planets
and satellites, all like the sacred cow. Honour and adore




scholars and vibrant youth and warriors also and then
and enmities would vanish.




[Names: Tamu, Nabhakasya]
same.


Him you adore and glorify with sincere mind,
holy voice, songs of forefathers and hymns of sages
risen above the problems of lower world. Adore the lord
at the heart of things, at the head of the seven streams
of existence and at the beginning of the rise of creative
evolution of the seven oceans of Prakrti across five gross
elements, subtle elements and the spiritual and
intelligential world. Do that and all oppositions,
contraries and contradictions would disappear.






[Names: Tasya]
He joins and pervades the nights, super-glorious
sun as he is, and with his might holds and sustains the
world. All people of the world do homage to him in
obedience to his law and glorify him through three


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 41 675


phases of the day and time, morning, evening and mid-
day, past, present and future. May all phases of
contraries, contradictions and enmities vanish from the


Aas




[Names: Varunasya, Varunas]
Glorious, he holds and maintains the bounds of
space over the earth. He is the original mother source
of existence, he is the ultimate protector and sustainer,
the highest adorable worthy of service for the knowledge
and attainment of that eternal state of divine existence
when and where all contraries, contradictions and






[Names: Puru]
Glorify Varuna who is the holder and sustainer
of the galaxies, solar systems and worldly regions of
the universe, who knows the nature, forms and names
of sun rays, mysteries and even the deepest secrets of
existence. He is the omniscient poet and with his creative
vision inspires the mind and imagination of poets for




creation as he energises and sustains the heaven of light.
May all contraries, contradictions, oppositions and






[Names: Yasmin, Srita, Tritam]
In him originate, abide, and centre all the
imagination, wisdom and poetic creations of the world
as in the nave centre all spokes of the wheel. Serve and
adore the lord of three worlds and reach him without
delay as cows hasten to the stall or as you hasten to
yoke the horses to the chariot. May all distortions,
dislocations, contradictions and enmities vanish from
our life.






[Names: Pari, Anu]
Varuna is the one who vibrates at the heart of
all these people and pervades all things born, immanent
in and transcending over all regions of the universe.
Indeed the divinities of nature and humanity stand ready
in harness before the presence of Varuna, all committed
to his law and their duty in the law. May all negativities


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 41 677


and enmities vanish from the world.






He is the bottomless ocean womb of existence,
and at the heart of everything, superfast, instant reacher,
like the light of heaven all expansive, and when he vests
these people with the spirit of action rising to the heights
of heaven, he dispels evil and craftiness with the touch
of divine refulgence. May all darkness, evil and enmity
be eliminated from life.






[Names: Yasya, Triruttarani]
The refulgent glory of Varuna who rules over
everything illuminates the three worlds of earth, skies
and heaven and rises over the three higher heavens.
Indeed he pervades and rules over the constant universe
of sevenfold order and illuminates it with light and
beauty. May all darkness, ugliness and enmity be
eliminated.


678


10.







[Names: Anuvrata]
Varuna, who creates the beautiful world of white


and black, light and dark, and the living beings of white
and dark character, creates the worlds as ever in
accordance with the rules and vows of the law of
Dharma and Dharma in action in the earlier life of human
beings and others. Thus he, the unborn, maintains the
world as he does heaven and the middle regions by his
constant might. May all darkness and evil vanish
from life.


Mandala 8/Sukta 42








[Names: Varuna, Ashvinau, Devatah, Nabhaka, Kanva, Archanana, Atreya, Rshi, Astabhnad, Asidad, Varunasya, Varunas]
Varuna, lord of light and energy, omniscient and


omnipotent ruler of the universe, makes and sustains
the heaven of light and the wide earth. The glorious


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 42 679


lord and ruler rules all regions of the universe and they
all observe the laws of Varuna, infinite they are, beyond






[Names: Varunam]
Thus worship and adore Varuna, great and
infinite, worthy of reverence, undisturbed, protector of
the laws of Dharma. May the lord provide us the
threefold world of earth, heaven and the skies as a home
of peace and security in freedom and joy. May the
heaven and earth hold, protect and caress us as their
darling children in their lap.




[Names: Imam, Yayati]
Varuna, self-refulgent lord of vision and
omniscience, a seeker of light and wisdom as I am, pray
sharpen, energise and confirm my intelligence, will and
expertise by which we may ride on the efficient ark of
navigation and cross over all the evils and difficulties
of the world.








[Names: Nasatya, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Ashvins, complementary powers of vision and
action, teacher and ruler, dedicated to truth and truth
alone, to you repair the scholar and the maker of soma
with their intelligence, will and wisdom so that they
may have a taste of the soma of knowledge and wisdom,
and piety. May all fears insecurities and enmities be
eliminated.






[Names: Yatha, Nasayta]
Ashvins, powers dedicated to truth and
rectitude, as the vibrant sage, who loves and values
threefold freedom of body, mind and soul, calls upon
you in holy words of freedom and discipline for the
protection and promotion of the honour, excellence and
joy of life, pray see that all fear, insecurity and
adversities are eliminated.






Ashvins, lovers of eternal truth and the laws of
existence, harbingers of peace, progress and happiness
for mankind, just as sages and scholars dedicated to the
yajnic advancement of corporate life call upon you for
protection and promotion, so do I invoke you for peace


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 681


and protection and invite you to share the soma
celebration of hymn achievement. May all contraries,
contradictions and adversities disappear, may peace,
harmony and happiness prevail over the earth.
Mandala 8/Sukta 43




[Names: Agni, Devata, Virupa, Angirasa, Rshi, Girah]
These swelling notes of the songs of adoration
in honour of Agni, light of life, sung by the vibrant,
learned and dedicated sage of indefatigable faith and
yajnic service resound in space all round.



[Names: Asmai, Agne]
This holy song of worship, Agni, all-knowing,
all pervasive lord of light, vision, and love, I raise to
you, hoping your grace would accept and respond.






[Names: Aroka, Dadbhirvanani]
3. Like the light of the sun, surely, the brilliant
showers of your grace and splendour, with your gifts,


illuminate and intensify the beauties of life.






[Names: Harayo, Yatante]
The fire, the sun, the lightning and the falling
stars moved around by cosmic energy, all receptive and
transmissive in their own orbit on earth, in heaven and
across the skies, all giving the light and shade and
fragrance of their nature and character in their own way,
roam around in space as versions of Agni.






[Names: Usasamiva]
All these versions of Agni, lit up, shining,
blazing, all in their own way, appear beautiful as ensigns
of dawns, lights and glories of Agni.






[Names: Krsna, Agniryad]
Shaded, coloured and black turn the particles,
clusters and spheres of solid materials in the way of the
movement of Agni, omnipresent in things born in
existence when fire travels in and on the earth or earthly


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 683






[Names: Dhasim, Agnirna, Punaryan]
Conducting itself into herbs and trees, making
them as if a dwelling for itself, energising them and, as
and takes on to new budding ones on and on. (The life
cycle of birth, death and rebirth, growth, decay and






[Names: Jihvabhiraha, Agnirvanesu]
Burning and blazing with its flames of fire and
light, subjecting things to its force and power, Agni
shines in the forests and the beauties of life.





[Names: Apsvagne, Garbhe]
Agni, your home is in the waters, you dwell in
the herbs and trees, you abide in the womb of nature
and you are born again and again, ever youthful in








[Names: Udagne, Nimsanam]
Agni, that flame of yours fed and served with


ghrta rises and shines, having received its beauteous
energy from the ladle in yajna.





[Names: Uksannaya, Somaprsthaya, Somaprstha, Stomairvidhemagnaye]
With songs of adoration, let us offer honour and
worship to Agni and develop the science of fire and
energy which provides life and sustenance to the cow
and the sun and all dependent forms of life in existence
and bears and brings the soma of health and joy for all.






Agni, lord of great divine action worthy of
choice, high priest of cosmic yajna, we offer you service
and worship with holy fuel and homage of humility and



[Names: Angirasvaddhavamahe]
Agni, invoked and invited for honour and


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 685


service, pure and unsullied by nature, like brilliant
scholars and scientists who burn off superstition and
dispel darkness, like dedicated humans, and like lovers
of the breath of life and soma of joy, we invoke and
invite you for the gifts of light and life.





[Names: Tvam, Agnina, Sakha]
You rise and shine, O lord of light and life, as
fire with the fiery, as vibrant scholarship with the vibrant
scholar, as holy spirit with the holy people, and as love
and friendship with the friend.


[Names: Satvam]
So generous and responsive as you are, Agni,
give a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence for


the vibrant scholar and generous yajaka, give him life
sustaining food and energy and generations of brave






[Names: Imam]
Agni, sustainer of the world as a brother and




master, mighty creator and performer, rider of the red
flames of fire and the sun, lord and protector of the
unsullied laws of nature, pray accept this holy song of
mine with love and respond with the gift of your grace.


[Names: Gostham]
Agni, lord of generosity and infinite plenty, may
my songs of adoration reach you as cows hasten to the


stall for the lowing calf eager to receive the motherly
grace of sustaining milk.


[Names: Tubhyam, Angirastama]
Agni, lord of highest light and giver of the breath


of life, all people of the entire world pray and approach
you, all for the fulfilment of their ambition and desire.


[Names: Agnim, Admasadyaya]
Thoughtful intellectuals, men of yajnic actions
and wise sages all with their thoughts, words and actions


invoke, invite and call upon Agni for the common
welfare of the world.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 687






[Names: Vahnim]
Agni, holy men of action, extending various and
versatile forms of yajna in all their projects of social
development without waste, violence and bloodshed,
invoke and pray to you, lord of light and giver of
universal wealth, source of knowledge, progress and
prosperity, guide and burden bearer of the world, and
high priest of the cosmic yajna of existence.






[Names: Purutra, Anu, Samatsu]
Agni, universal presence, lord and ruler of all
people, giving equal care and attention to all nations
and regions, in all the battles of our life we invoke you
and pray for justice and success.


[Names: Tamilisva]
Worship him who, lord of light and omniscience,
invoked and served with ghrta and fragrance, shines


and rises in the vedi and the heart. May the lord listen
and accept this song of invocation for us.


688


23%






You, Agni, we adore who are listening,


omnipresent and omniscient, destroyer of the jealous
and violent adversaries.


24.






[Names: Visam, Agnimile, Sravat, Agnimil]
I adore and worship the ruler of the people,


wonderful power, lord protector and controller of
Dharma and laws of the earth. May the lord listen to


poe








[Names: Saptim]
magnetic force that is our well wisher and giver of
energy and success in life.


26.






[Names: Ghnan]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 43 689


Eliminating violent enemies and jealous
adversaries, always burning off the evil, Agni, shine
and energise this land with flames of fire and blazing






Agni, light and power dearest as life breath,
whom people kindle, raise and adore as a friend of
humanity, pray listen, acknowledge and appreciate the
truth and sincerity of my word and prayer.






[Names: Yadagne]
Agni, whether you manifest in heaven, or in the
waters or shine in acts of universal divine power, we
adore, worship and invoke you in the holiest words.






Those people far away and all these people
settled here, all in their own ways, offer you homage as
their haven and home for the gift of their own food and




[Names: Tarantah]
Doing good works in your service, always
watching all the people around, may we become


breakers of the most difficult oppositions and cross over
the challenging seas of life.






[Names: Siram, Purupriyam, Purupriya, Hrdbhir]
With songs of heartiest love and joy, with
enthusiasm, we invoke and adore Agni, blissful giver
of happiness, dear to all people, omnipresent in existence
and pure refulgent sanctifier of life.






[Names: Sardhan]
Agni, self refulgent giver of light, wealth,
honour and excellence, rising like the sun with the rays
of your splendour and growing in strength, you dispel
and destroy the darkness of evil, ignorance, want and




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 691




[Names: Tvadagne]
Agni, lord of strength and life’s challenges,
omnificent giver, of you we pray for that gift of generous
wealth, honour and excellence of our choice and
heartfelt preference which never diminishes, never fails.


Mandala 8/Sukta 44


[Names: Agni, Devata, Virupa, Angirasa, Rshi, Samidhagnim, Asmin]
Feed the sacred fire with holy fuel, awaken and
arouse it with ghrta, offer fragrant food worthy of the
divine, and serve it as an honoured guest who visits at


[Names: Agne, Prati]
Divine Agni, leading light of life, accept my
adoration and rise, by this conscientious eulogy, listen


in response to our songs, grow higher and let us rise
and grow higher too.





[Names: Agim, Devam]
I place the divine fire in front of me, speak
closely to the sacred bearer of oblations and pray that it
may bring the divinities with divine blessings here to
join us.





[Names: Sukrasa]
Agni, lord of light and fire, kindled, fed and
rising, your lofty and expansive flames, shining and
blazing, pure, powerful and purifying, go on rising
higher and higher.



[Names: Aghe]
Agni, lord of beauty and bliss, let my ladles
overflowing with ghrta rise and move close to you. Pray
accept and enjoy our oblations and our songs.



[Names: Mandram, Agnimile, Sravat, Agnimil]
I adore Agni, lord of light and fire, blissful,
generous yajaka, high priest of regular seasonal yajna,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 693


wondrous illustrious, blazing brilliant lord of wealth
and honour, and I pray may the lord listen and bless.






[Names: Pratnam, Agnim, Adhvaranam]
I adore Agni, ancient and eternal, generous giver,
worthy of reverence and celebration, loved and
worshipped, poetic visionary of holy action and gracious
performer of yajnic projects of love and non-violence
for corporate development.


[Names: Jusano, Angirastamema]
Agni, dearest life of life, constantly loving and


cherishing the sweets of celebration and yajna, pray
guide and extend the yajna according to the seasons.






[Names: Samidhana, Cikitvan]
Excellent and benevolent Agni, bright and
gracious of pure and powerful flame, all knowing and
illuminating, pray bring here on the vedi pious people
of divine generosity and intellectual brilliance.






[Names: Vipram, Yajnanam]
With prayer and adoration we honour and
approach Agni, omniscient lord vibrant in existence,
giver of fulfilment, free from jealousy, rising in flaming
fragrance, universal lord of light, wealth and honour,
and symbolic ensign of yajna.






[Names: Bhindhi]
Agni, self-refulgent lord of universal generosity
and power, protect us from the violent and, O lord
creator of the mighty universe, break down the jealous
and the enemies.





[Names: Agnih, Kavirviprena]
Agni, omniscient visionary of existence,
gracious and refulgent by virtue of ancient and eternal
light of knowledge and age-old songs of the poet, is
exalted along with the celebrant.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 695


[Names: Urjo]
In this noble yajna of love free from violence, I
invoke and celebrate the unfailing master and protector
of energy, blazing with holy light and fire of purity.



[Names: Sukrena, Socisa, Mitramahas, Mitramaha, Devaira]
Agni, greatest friend of humanity, with pure and
purifying flames of fire, you sit on our holy seats of
grass on the vedi alongwith the divinities. (All our senses
and mind are suffused with the presence of divinity.)






[Names: Tasma]
Whoever the mortal that offers devotion to self-
refulgent Agni within his yajnic home of the body, the
lord would bless him with the wealth of spiritual


[Names: Agnirmurdha, Apam]
This Agni is the highest lord and master of all
on top of heaven and earth and gives energy and




sustenance to the seeds of life in the waters of the





[Names: Udagne, Tava]
Agni, light and life of the world, your fires and
flames, lights and lightnings, pure, white and undefiled,
shine and radiate all over spaces.



[Names: Stota, Sarmani]
Agni, you are the lord and protector of the peace
and bliss of heaven. You rule over the wealth, honour
and excellence of the world. I pray that I may adore and
celebrate your divine glory and abide in heavenly peace
and joy under your divine protection.


[Names: Tvamagne, Tvam]
Agni, the intellectuals with their thoughts and
imaginative creations move and exalt you. May our
voices of adoration delight you and exalt your glory.



MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 697




[Names: Adabdhasya, Agneh]
We choose, claim and pray for the love and
friendship of Agni, indestructible and benevolent,
inherently powerful, bearer and dispenser of energy,
light and wisdom, and omniscient lord of speech.




[Names: Suct]
Agni is the purest uncompromising lord of law
and discipline, lord of purest unclouded knowledge and
wisdom, master of purest transparent creative vision and
imagination, and he shines ever pure, unsullied, invoked
and worshipped.





Agni, lord of united existence, may all my
thoughts, words and actions adore, exalt and glorify you
day and night. O lord of humanity, pray acknowledge
and ever remember and maintain our bond of love and
friendship with you.








[Names: Yadagne, Syuste]
Agni, lord of love and life’s bonding, if and
when I were you and you were me, then would your
love and blessings for me be truly realised.






[Names: Vasurvasupatirhi, Syama]
Agni, you are the shelter home of all, lord
protector and ruler of the world’s wealth, blissful,
refulgent lord of kindness and love. We pray let us be
under the protection of your goodwill.






[Names: Giro]
Agni, lord of light and life, our yearning voices
of love and adoration for you flow free and reach you,
lord ruler and keeper of the laws of nature in existence,
as rivers flow to join the sea.






[Names: Yuvanam, Puruvepasam, Puruvepasa, Sumbhami]
With my words, thoughts and reflections in
meditation, I adore, adorn and exalt Agni, self-refulgent
lord and leader of life, youthful creator who joins the
soul and prakrti in living forms, rules and protects


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 44 699


humanity, is the one universal poet of cosmic
imagination, performs actions of infinite variety and
ultimately withdraws the entire world of existence unto





[Names: Stomairisemagnaye]
With songs of adoration we love to celebrate

and exalt the glory of Agni and reach him who, like a
charioteer, is the foremost guide and high priest of all
yajnas of creation, evolution and development, rolls his
mighty jaws of justice and judgement, and is the highest,





[Names: Ayamagne, Tasmai]
Agni, lord of light and life, may this celebrant
be spontaneous and profuse in praise of you and, O fiery
purifier, may you too be kind and gracious to him.






[Names: Dhiro]
Agni, you are magnanimous as a vibrant sage
at peace, ever awake in the heart’s core in the soul, and




you shine refulgent on the highest heaven in the






[Names: Puragne]
Agni, cosmic poet and creator, haven and home
of humanity, before the onslaught of sin, before the
bloodshed of violence, pray exalt our life to fullness
and completion with success.


Mandala 8/Sukta 45


[Names: Indra, Agni, Devata, Trishoka, Kanva, Rshi, Agnimindhate, Agnimindhat, Yesamindro]
Blessed are they for sure who kindle the fire of
yajna, Agni, and spread the seats of grass open for all in
faith and love and whose friend is Indra, the mighty
youthful soul who brooks no nonsense and delay.






[Names: Brhannididhma, Sastam]
Great is their fuel and fire, profuse their praise
and song of adoration, expansive their yajna and high
their ensign whose friend is Indra, youthful soul, their


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 45 701


ruler and defender.




[Names: Ayuddha, Sura]
Unequalled is Indra, irresistible, even when
there is no war. The mighty hero by the very force of
his presence and character throws off the enemy
supported by brave warriors all round. Blessed are they
whose friend is Indra, the mighty youthful heroic soul.






When the mighty soul, destroyer of evil, born
to self consciousness, takes to the bow and arrow,
blazing, fearsome, breaker of foes, he asks the mother,
spirit of higher vision and discrimination: Who are the
enemies renowned to be terrible and irresistible?






[Names: Prati, Savasi, Yaste, Satrutvamacake]
Indra, lord of power and excellence, to you then
the mighty mother, divine intelligence, would say:
[Names: Whoever]
fight against you like a seductive sorceress on the magic







Now then, O lord of power, wealth and
excellence, listen: Whoever asks of you something he
desires, you bear and bring for him. Whoever you
strengthen, he becomes strong. Are you not real mighty



[Names: Yadajim, Rathi]
And remember: When Indra goes to battle,
fiercely armed and well provided with noble steeds, he
is then the mightiest of chariot heroes.


[Names: Bhava]
O wielder of the thunderbolt, fight out the
enemies the way you uproot them so that you become
the most renowned among us.





[Names: Asmakam, Indrah]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 45 703


of body and the body politic to the heights of the first
and foremost order of strength and excellence for the
achievement of success and victory in the battle of life
so that no enemies can violate it.




[Names: Vrjyama, Sakra, Gamemedindra]
Indra, we would wholly give up those who are
contrary and opposed to you, and surely in matters of
your cherished love and charity, blest with lands and
cows, literature and culture, we would come close to
you.





[Names: Sanaiscid, Vivaksana]
Advancing at a steady-pace, O lord of the
clouds, mountains and the thunderbolt, we would be
thriving with horses and a hundredfold attainments of
new wealth and power and, free from sin and evil, we
would come closer to you.






[Names: Urdhva, Jaritrbhyo]
Your kindness and generosity rises day by day




a hundredfold and a thousandfold, higher and higher,
and as it rises, it blesses them.






[Names: Vidma]
We know you, Indra, as our very haven and
home, winner of wealth, honour and excellence, strong
and firm, destroyer of evil and breaker of the strongholds
of darkness, superstition and misery.






[Names: Kakuham]
While we pray to you, generous lord, and ask
for what we want, O cosmic poet and visionary, may
our yajnas and soma celebrations please you, most high
and supreme lord of power, justice and award.






[Names: Tasya]
If a man is rich and yet neglects and fails to pay
to you, generous one, wielder of power, what is due for
social causes, in that case make up from his money or
property what is required for our sake, 1.e., for the sake
of society.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 45 705






[Names: Imautva, Pustavanto]
Indra, these friends, celebrants of soma and
holiness, holding offerings of precious homage, look
and wait for you as the seeker waits for the sight of his




[Names: Srutkarnam]
utaye. Duradiha havamahe.


And from afar we invoke and call upon you for
protection and progress. You are everywhere, your ears
are sensitive and you are eager to hear the call of the
seeker.






[Names: Yacchusruya, Bhaverapirno]
As you hear this call of ours, take it as
unforgettable and be our closest and ultimate friend and







[Names: Yacciddhi, Goda]
And also, when we approach you in our mind
and, like supplicants in distress, remember you and pray,
then attend to us and be generous. You are the giver of
cows, lands and light of knowledge.






[Names: Savasaspate, Usmasi]
O lord commander of power and prosperity, as
weaker folks take to the staff for support, so do we
depend on you for succour and sustenance and invoke
your presence in our hall of yajna.





[Names: Stotram, Indraya, Purunrmnaya, Purunrmna, Nakiryam]
Sing songs of adoration and prayer in honour
of Indra, lord of world’s power and wealth. Who can
ignore and neglect him in the battle of life?


[Names: Trmpa]
Lord of generous and creative power, when the
yajna is on and soma is distilled, I prepare the cup and


offer you the drink. Pray accept, drink to your heart’s
content and enjoy the ecstasy of bliss divine.


22,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 45 707




[Names: Makim]
Let the fools and scoffers never get round you,


even if they profess that they are keen to please you, for
protection and support. Never support the negationists
of knowledge, piety, existence and divinity.


24.






[Names: Saro]
Here may the lovers of cows entertain you with


milk and soma for the achievement of great competence
and success so that you may drink like the thirsty stag
drinking at the pool.


23.






Whatever gifts of wealth or titles of honour old


or new, Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness, you grant
far off or near, all those, announce in the assemblies.


26.








[Names: Apibat, Atradedista]
In the thousand armed dynamic battles of the
elements in evolution, Indra, as the sun, drinks the soma
of the earth and therein shines the potent majesty of the




[Names: Satyam, Turvase, Turvas, Vyanat, Sami]
Knowing the truth of the daily behaviour of the


simple man of rectitude, Indra clears the path of peace
and goodness in his battle of life.




[Names: Taranim, Samanamu, Samsisam]
I constantly praise the lord saviour of you,
people, and the protector of your earthly wealth, power,
progress and freedom.





[Names: Rbhuksanam, Rbhuksana, Indram]
When the soma is distilled and seasoned and
the hymns are sung in the yajna, then to win the company
and favour of mighty Indra, I adore the mighty lord, a
friend and protector of the strength and power of the


aU.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 45 709




[Names: Gobhyo]
I adore Indra who makes and breaks the cloud,


womb of waters, and the mighty mountain for the
humanity of threefold purity of nature, character and
behaviour and who makes the paths for rivers to flow










and desire, whatever you give, why not for me? O lord,
pray be kind and gracious.


a2:






[Names: Dabhram, Jigatvindra]
Just a little done by someone like you or


someone protected by you resounds on the earth. O lord,
I pray, may your gracious attention turn to me also.


23;








[Names: Tavedu, Yadindra]
Indra, if you were kind and gracious to us and
we were happy, all the graces would be your renown,
they would be reflections of your glory.





[Names: Mana, Vadhirma]
O lord of magnanimous glory among the great
heroes, not for one trespass, not for two, not for three,
not even for many, uncountable, pray, hurt us not, and


[Names: Bibhaya, Dasmad]
I would feel fear and awe for a person like you,


illustrious, destroyer of the evil, magnificent and scourge
of the challengers of truth and law.






[Names: Sunama, Avrtvad]
I pray I should never suffer want of friends,
never be deprived of children. O lord of wealth, honour
and grandeur of the world, let your mind turn to me
with kindness.


a7.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 45 711




[Names: Jaha]
O people, which friend without provocation


would revile a friend, who would forsake a friend in
distress, who runs away from us like that?


38.






[Names: Evare, Svaghniva]
Generous and virile Indra, come to the yajna


and the soma celebration, youthful, insatiable like a
player going to the hall of contest, and give us
inexhaustible food and energy.


ao,






[Names: Yadim]
I receive the word-controlled motive powers and


steers of the chariot which fly you on high on liquid
fuel, the ones you have given to the scholarly sages.


40).








[Names: Bhindhi, Vasu]
Break off all the jealous adversaries, remove all
obstacles, eliminate the enemies and violence and fill
the world with cherished wealth, honour and prosperity.





[Names: Yadvilavindra]
Whatever wanted wealth hidden in solid
mountains, concealed in secret and trust worthy sources
or covered in caverns and deep in the clouds, bring that
out in the open for the society.






[Names: Yasya]
That immense wealth discovered by you and
collected, of which the people of the world know, bring
that cherished treasure into the open and fill the world
with it for all.


Mandala 8/Sukta 46








[Names: Indra, Prthushravah, Kanita, Danastuti, Vayu, Devatah, Vasho, Rshi, Tvavatah, Puruvaso, Smasi]
Indra, shelter home of the world, leader of


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 713


humanity, presiding over mutually sustained stars and
planets in motion, we are in bond with you and so shall
we remain.






[Names: Tvam, Vidma]
Lord of the thunderbolt, we know you are eternal
and constant, ever true, giver of all foods and energies,
and we know you are the giver of all kinds and forms of
wealth, honour and excellence.






[Names: Satakrato, Girbhirgrnanti]
Lord of a hundred forms of protection, high
priest of a hundred forms of cosmic yajna, we know
you whose majesty poets and artists celebrate with songs
of adoration.






[Names: Sunitho, Maruto, Mitrah, Mitra]
True it is that that man is morally right, well
guided and secure whom the Maruts, vibrant powers of
defence and protection, Aryama, power of right conduct
and justice, and Mitra, power of love and enlightenment,




all free from hate and jealousy, lead and protect on the






[Names: Dadhano, Sada, Purusprha]
Inspired and energised by Aditya, lord of light
and enlightenment, blest with cows, lands and culture,
horses, advancement and achievement, bearing courage
and creative vitality of high order, he grows and goes
forward with cherished wealth, honour and excellence.





[Names: Tamindram, Isanam]
We pray to Indra, omnipotent and fearless lord
ruler of the world, for the gift of wealth, honour and




[Names: Tasmin, Tama, Puruvasum, Puruvasu]
sutam.


In him centre and abide all protections free from
fears of the world, integrated. That same lord of world’s
wealth and peace, the waves of cosmic energy and
vibrations of the mind may, we pray, awaken in our


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 715


consciousness which is in tune with the lord’s
omnipresence for spiritual joy.






[Names: Yaste]
That spiritual joy, Indra, which is our highest
choice, which is the highest destroyer of moral and
spiritual darkness, which is the giver of heavenly peace
and which is ordinarily unattainable by people in mortal
struggles, that joy, that ecstasy, that bliss of yours we
ask of you.





[Names: Sravayyo]
Indra, lord omnificent of the world, omnipotent,
haven and home of the universe, that divine joy, Ananda,
which is difficult to attain, most renowned and profuse,
ark of success over the seas and struggles of life, that
Ananda, O lord, come and bring us, which may we attain
in Our yajnic sessions of meditation at the centre of our
personality wherein the mind and senses converge and
merge with spiritual consciousness.








[Names: Gavyo, Varivasya]
Lord greatest of the great, Indra, come now as
ever before and bring us wealth of lands and cows and
discipline of the mind and senses, wealth of horses,
progress and meaningful attainments, and scientific
transports and spiritual adventures of the soul in
meditation and yajnic sessions.






[Names: Nahi, Sura]
O lord generous and brave, I do not find the
end and bounds of your gifts of wealth and competence.
Lord of wealth, wisdom and excellence, wielder of the
thunderbolt of justice and power, grant us the gifts of
material, mental and spiritual wealth, and protect and
promote our mind and senses with speed and energy
for progress in action and attainment.






[Names: Sravayatsakha, Purustutah, Purustuta]
The lord sublime who is universally worshipped
is a friend and promoter of the celebrants and knows
the origins of the entire forms of existence. That same
lord illustrious and refulgent, Indra, the entire people


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 717


of the world with ladlefuls of ghrta in hand always
invoke, adore and worship.






[Names: Warnes, Puruvasuh]
That lord Indra, haven and home of the world,
ever present everywhere, we need and invoke. That
commander of wealth and power, dispeller of darkness
and destroyer of evil, may, we pray, be our protector
and promoter in the material, moral and spiritual
struggles of our life.






[Names: Indram, Srutyam]
In the ecstasy of your soma celebration, with
the best of word and voice, sing in praise of Indra,
mighty brave, highly knowledgeable and wise,
renowned of name and versatile in power and






[Names: Dadi, Puru, Nunamatha]
Indra, lord universally invoked and adored, give
us health for our body, give wealth, give us power and




speed in our battles of life, and give us all this soon and
for sure.






[Names: Visvesam, Krpayato]
Sing in praise of Indra, ruler and promoter of
the wealth and beauty of this world as it is and as it
might be in future. He is challenger and vanuisher of
the enemies.






[Names: Mahah, Yajnebhir, Marutamiyaksasi, Anusam, Anusa]
For the sake of ample food and energy for you
all, O people, we adore, with holy yajnic hymns, the
great, generous, all round mover and obliging visitor,
Indra, loved of all people in general and vibrant divines
in particular. You love to be with us, O lord, and I
celebrate and felicitate you with hymns and homage.






[Names: Yajnam]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 719


We celebrate the roaring and tempestuous
winds, Maruts, who, with their power and force, shake
the clouds and streams down these mountains, give us
gifts of yajnic well-being and joy in our creative and
developmental programmes of love and non-violence.






[Names: Prabhangam, Ssavistha, Rayim]
Indra, lord most potent, bring us the intelligence
and other means to break down the negative and anti-
social thoughts and actions of adversaries. O lord
inspirer of right thinking, bring us the mind and
materials usable in constructive thinking and planning
and bring us the best and highest thought and
competence, O lord inspirer of rational and scientific






[Names: Sanitah, Prasaha]
wonderful, most conscientious and attentive, most
truthful, tolerant and courageous, supreme ruler, bring
us the mind and material, power and force which is
patient and courageous, challenging, useful and of




[Names: Yatha]
Come that sage and scholar of human virtue,
just human, not a god, who has received the feel of full
and universal spirit of divinity, just as the man in the
clutches of karmic sufferance experiences the bliss of
divinity in the twilight and beauteous glory of the dawn
of universal light and renown.


[Names: Sastim, Dasa, Syavinam]
hundred camels, and ten hundred dark brown, ten
hundred tawny red, in all ten thousand cows.


[Names: Syava, Mathra]
Ten fleet dark brown horses with straight long
tails instantly rushing to the target turn the whirling
wheels of my chariot and beat the opposing forces.



MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 721




[Names: Danasah, Ratham]
The gifts of generosity of the supreme giver
universally renowned, sublime and bountiful, giving a
golden chariot to the devotee, earn him the tributes of
being most glorious and spread his fame as the most






[Names: Vayam]
O Vayu, lord of mighty motion, come for the
great expansion of the speed and power of our yajna.
Lord of high generosity, we adore you always and glorify
you as a great, liberal and universal ultimate giver.





[Names: Ebhih, Somasudbhih, Somasudbhi, Somapa, Sukraputapah]
Come he who travels by radiations of cosmic
energy, vested in and carrying thrice seven of seventy
rays of the sun, he, protector of the pure and holy,
protector of soma joy, come with these somas of bliss,
with the makers of soma for giving us the gifts of joy.






[Names: Yoma, Aratve]
tuh.


He who by himself rejoices in giving me this
wonderful gift of light and yajnic expansion, the same
lord of holy action rejoices in giving more to enhance
higher charity of the grown up man of holy deeds in




[Names: Ucathye, Sunesitam]
nu tat.


Vayu, refulgent ruler of the world of purity,
decency and generosity soft as consecrated in ghrta, in
this beautiful life of admirable nature and character,
whatever you give for social achievement, emotional
satisfaction and spiritual realisation is the same as you
have given to me.


[Names: Adha, Asvanaminna]
And Ihave received sixty thousand gifts of value


dear to the strong and ambitious, like horses of the most
virile breed dear to the warriors.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 46 723




[Names: Gavona]
As cows join the herd for protection and support
so the weaker people come to me for sustenance and
support, yes the needy come for succour and support.





[Names: Satamustran, Svitnesu, Sata]
And then the blessed man calls for a hundred
camels and twenty hundred from amongst the white
herd, all out of the active and working ones, for giving
away to the needy.




[Names: Satam]
devagopah.


The man of power and prosperity has given
away a hundred, the vibrant sage and saviour has
protected and supported by Indra, the generous, rejoice,
celebrate and exhilarate you.








[Names: Adhirukma]
Now then that youthful maiden, great and
glamorous in golden finery, is led forth to the seasoned
bachelor of her love and desire on the wedding vedi.


Mandala 8/Sukta 47






[Names: Adityah, Aditya, Ushah, Devatah, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Mahi, Varuna, Mitra, Yamaditya]
O Varuna, Mitra, powers wise, just and loving,
choice and love of all, great is your protection, noble
ones, for the generous man of charity. O Adityas,
brilliant powers of light and enlightenment, children of
indestructible mother life, whoever you protect from
the jealous and the malignant, no sin ever touches.
Sinless are your protections, noble and holy are your
protections (free from jealousy, anger and violence).





[Names: Vida, Paksa, Sarma]
O divine powers of light, love and justice, you
know how to remove sin and cleanse us of evil. As birds
shade their young ones with wings, so give us shelter


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 47 725


and protection all over. Sinless are your protections,
noble and holy are your protections.






[Names: Vyasme, Visvani]
All round, all over us, spread your cover of
protection like birds. You know and command the
wealth and powers of the world. We pray for shelter,
peace and protection. Sinless are your protections, free
from evil, noble and holy are your protections, free from
jealousy, anger and violence.





[Names: Yasma, Manorvisvasya, Adit]
Whoever these Adityas, powers of light, most
wise, provide a peaceful shelter home for a comfortable
living, that man’s wealth, power and honour they
overwatch, control and rule for protection. Sinless are
your protections, noble and holy your safeguards.










[Names: Pari, Syamedindrasya, Sarmanydadityanamutava]
Just as charioteers avoid difficult and impossible
roads, so let sins and crimes go by, leaving us aside. Let
us be in the homely protection of Indra and under the
protective umbrella of the Adityas. O Adityas, free from
sin and evil are your protections, noble and holy your






[Names: Parihvrtedana, Deva]
Adityas, powers of light and lightning speed,
even though a person might be living in distress, he
raises and expands what you give him and rises to higher
joy and prosperity when you approach him and bless.
Sinless are your protections, holy and noble your
safeguards and securities.







[Names: Adityaso]
Sharpest envy and violent anger do not terrify


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 47 727


[Names: Adityas]
home and wide margin of tolerance. Sinless are your
protections, noble and holy your safeguards and
securities.






[Names: Yusme, Yuyam]
Brilliant and brave Adityas, in you we are safe
like warriors in armour. You save us from heinous sins
and major crimes, you save us from minor faults and
lighter trespasses. Sinless are your protections and holy
and noble your safegurards.







[Names: Aditirna, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Aditi, Mother, Nature, Aditi]
mother of Mitra, prosperous Aryama and Varuna provide
us peace and happiness. Sinless are your protections,








[Names: Yaddevah, Tridhatu]
Adityas, brilliant leaders of the mother nation,
the home that is a restful place to live in, which is
beneficial, which is free from want and ailments, and
three-metalled furniture and appliances, all that is
needed in a good and comfortable home, pray provide,
secure and insure among us, the people of the land.
Sinless are your protections, noble your safeguards,




[Names: Sutirtha]
Adityas, brilliant leaders of the nation, just as
people stand on the bank of a river above and look below
upon the flowing waters, so look below upon the people
on the march, and just as they take the horses across the
stream by the safest ford, so lead the nation forward by
the safest paths of progress. Sinless are your protections
and safest your securities.







[Names: Neha, Gave, Sravasyate]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 47 729


No good here for friends of evil, no possibility
of escape, no appeasement. But for the cow, the lands,
literature and culture, for the milch cow, for creative
and productive forces, for the brave warriors and
philanthropists of renown, for all these, yes, all good,
all safe, all opportunities. Sinless are your protections,




[Names: Yadavir, Trite]
tadvisvamaptya are asmad dadhatananehaso va


O brilliant leaders of the world, all evil thoughts,
deeds or practices, whether open or covert, which may
be prevalent in the three spheres of body, mind and soul
of the individual and society, all those, pray, ward off,
keep away from us. Sinless are your protections, noble






[Names: Tritaya]
O daughter of the light of heaven, holy dawn,
dream or ambition there be in or in relation to our mind
and senses or in relation to anything else of our life, O




light of the dawn, take away far off from us for the good
of the self and the world of threefold virtue of body,
mind and soul. Sinless are your protections, holy your






[Names: Niskam]
O daughter of the light of dawn, heavenly
revelation of wisdom, descent of divinity, all bad dreams
and ambitions for the maker of gold ornaments or the
maker of flower garlands, or in relation to the pride of
body, mind and soul, we throw off. Sinless are your






[Names: Tadannaya]
For the sake of the man whose food is bad
dreams, whose karma it is, whose entire share of life is
this, for the sake of the man of threefold world of body,
mind and soul, and for the good of the twice born
humanity, O dawn of divine light, take away the bad
dreams far off. Sinless are your protections, holy your


1.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 48 731



[Names: Yatha]
Just as we throw off a dead nail and a dead hoof,


and just as we pay off a bad debt, similarly we throw
off tall bad dreams of our whole world far away. O
Adityas, O dawn of light, sinless are your protections,


18.





[Names: Ajaismadyasanama]
O Adityas, O dawn of light, we have won today,


achieved something great, and become free of sin and
evil. O dawn, the bad dreams which we fear, pray, throw
off. Sinless are your protections, holy your safeguards.


Mandala 8/Sukta 48








[Names: Soma, Devata, Pragatha, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Svadorabhaksi, Visve]
An intelligent and dedicated reader of holy
literature, I have enjoyed the delicious soma food of
higher and holier quality which all divines and mortals
of the world enjoy, saying ‘it is honey sweet and
savoury’, when they meet in sacred gatherings.






[Names: Indavindrasya, Sraustiva]
O soma, reaching the core of personality, you
are internalised, assimilated as one with the body and
creative mind of man, dispeller of divine anger, and
friend of Indra, the soul. O soma, just like willing and
obedient horses of the chariot harnessed and yoked,
inspire us toward the wealth, honour and excellence of
life.





[Names: Apama, Somamamrta]
We have drunk the soma of immortality, we have
become immortal, attained to the light of divinity, have
known the organs of perception and imagination, and
realised the divinities of light, power and excellence.
What can the enemies internal and external do now
against us? O lord immortal, soma, what can the violence
of mortals do against us?


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 48 733




4. Sam no bhava hrda ठ pita indo piteva soma sunave


[Names: Sakheva]
O soma, drink of immortality, be good and
blissful for the heart. O nectar soma, when drunk, be as
good and blissful as father is to the child. Soma,
universally admired, brave and heroic, patient and
constant, as a friend for the friend, give us a long age of
good health so that we may live a full life of joy to our






These soma drinks, protective of honour, may
secure and strengthen my joints as straps secure the
chariots at joints, and inspire me to apply myself to noble
projects as bullocks draw the chariot to good
destinations. These drinks may save me from weakness
of character and protect me from depression and disease.








[Names: Agnim, Agni]
Light and shine me like fire from wood by
friction, give me the eye to see the light and raise us to
be masters of wealth, honour and excellence. O soma,
drink of immortality, in the ecstasy of exhilaration, I
concentrate and meditate on the self in the peace of
divinity like a wealthy man of spiritual profusion. O
bliss of exuberance, stimulate, inspire and raise me well
to perfect health of body, mind and soul.




[Names: Tsirena]
O bright soma, with stimulated and inspired
mind, let us drink at the fount of your exuberant flow
like children enjoying on the wealth of their parents. O
ruling light of soma divine, pray lengthen our life and
rejuvenate our health like the sun lengthening the light
of days.






[Names: Alarti, Anukamam, Anukama]
O soma, ruling light of life, be kind and gracious,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 48 735


give us peace and well being, we are your devotees,
observers of your rules of life in joy, pray know this. O
fluent life of joy, pray know that confidence and
competence and righteous passion is fresh and vibrant
in us, do not forsake us, give us not up to the will and
pleasure of the enemy.


aed: 12




[Names: Tvam]
O soma, you are the protector and promoter of
our body and personality. Watcher and leading light of
humanity, seep in and energise every part of our body.
And if we default on your rules of discipline, even so,
O noble friend, generous power superior, be good and
gracious to us and help us to be happy.






[Names: Rdudarena, Ayam, Indram, Indra]
Indra, O soul and spirit of intelligence, let me
be friends with soma as with a friend of noble nature
and drink it as it would do me no harm. I pray to Indra,
lord omnipotent giver of bliss, that the soma which I
have drunk in may increase and enrich my life.








[Names: Apatya]
Let those difficult ailments subside and go far
from here. Even though they are strong and fearful, let
them be off from here. Potent soma has risen up in vigour
and has energised us, and we have reached where life
increases and delights through age in ecstasy.






[Names: Tasmai, Somaya]
O parents and seniors of wisdom, the soma
which is immortal is consumed and absorbed in the
hearts and spirits of mortals. For that soma of
immortality, we pray with love and homage to divinity
and hope we shall abide in peace, pleasure and a settled
mind, all which is the gift of this drink of immortality.





MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 48 737


O soma, immortal joy and inspiration of
existence, known well and abiding by the ancients and
pranic energies of nature, you pervade over heaven and
earth. O soma, peace, power and joy of the world, we
pray to you for strength and joy with homage and
oblations so that we may be masters, protectors and
promoters of the wealths, honours and excellences of
life.





[Names: Trataro, Vayam, Somasya, Somas]
O brilliant divines, saviours and leading lights
of humanity and life’s joy, speak over to us of the
pleasure and power of soma so that neither sloth and
slumber nor chatter, prattle and inarticulation may
overtake us. We pray we may all time, seasons and days
be favourites of immortal soma of bliss and, wide awake
and brave, we may realise knowledge, wisdom and a
happy well governed order of society.






Soma, immortal spirit of peace, power and bliss,




you are the treasure giver of food, energy and life for
the world. You are the treasure giver of heavenly joy
and watcher and leading light of the people. O soma,
fluent stream of life energy, loving and friendly, with
all your powers and protections, safeguard and promote
us in front, on the back and all round.


Mandala 8/Sukta 49






[Names: Indra, Devata, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Indram, Indra, Puruvasuh, Puruvasu, Siksati]
To the best of your intention and purpose and
for whatever you wish to achieve, pray to Indra, lord of
glory, world power and promotion and means of success,
who gives a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence
to his celebrants.






[Names: Satanikeva, Gireriva, Purubhojasah, Purubhojasa]
Like the commander of a hundred armies, with
his power and force, Indra rushes forward to fight and
win, and he destroys the demons of darkness and want
for the charitable giver. The gifts of this universal giver
of food and sustenance feed and support humanity like


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 49 739
streams flowing down from the mountains.






Indra, celebrated lord of the thunderbolt, may
the songs of adoration presented by the celebrant with
prayers for desired wealth and means of success, flowing
spontaneous like ecstatic streams of soma, please and
exhilarate you to fullness of kindness and grace as
flowing waters, brooks and rivers, fill their original
home, the lake and the sea.






[Names: Anehasam]
Indra, lord of joy and fulfilment, pray accept
the innocent, overflowing, inspiring song of adoration,
enjoy it like a draught of soma sweeter than honey, so
that happy and joyous at heart and soul, ignoring all
minor considerations, you may pour out your gifts of
generosity like showers of mist.








Indra, lord of joy and fulfilment, love and
generosity, come to accept our song of adoration like a
courser urged on and rushing to its destination, a song
created like soma by the pressers which the profuse
voices of the wise and your gifts showered on the
celebrants sweeten all the more and energise.






[Names: Ugram, Udriva]
With homage and adorations, we approach
Indra, illustrious, brave, glorious, lord of inexhaustible
wealth, honour and ultimate shelter. As an overflowing
spring fills a well with water, so do our thoughts and
imagination create the flow of spontaneous praise for
the generous lord’s satisfaction.




[Names: Yaddha]
gahi.

Illustrious Indra, whether you are at some yajna
or somewhere on earth or anywhere else, from there


come to our yajna by the fastest and mightiest forces,
illustrious lord, wisest of the wise.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 49 741




[Names: Ajiraso, Yebhir]
Come by indefatigable forces, fastest and
tempestuous as the winds, by which you reach the
unwavering children of humanity and go round to see
and reveal the light of heaven.






[Names: Etavatasta, Yatha]
Indra, lord of grandeur, glorious as you are, we
pray of you the wealth of the peace and prosperity of
sense, mind and wisdom by which you protect and
promote the man of dynamic intelligence, and the sage
of imagination who dives deep into the mysteries of
life in the struggle to understand the riddles of existence.






Indra, lord of glory, we pray for that generosity
of yours by which you award the wealth of lands and
cows, sense, mind and wisdom, and the golden
excellence of honour and culture, to the wise celebrant,
the opponent of violence and terror, the veteran scholar,
the controller of sense and mind in meditation, the




energiser of perception and intelligence, and the man
of simple and straight paths of truth and rectitude.


Mandala 8/Sukta 50






[Names: Indra, Devata, Pushtigu, Kanva, Rshi]
For the sake of life’s fulfilment, honour and
adore Indra, renowned and mighty master and controller
of the superstructure of existence, who grants desired
wealth, power and honour, and augments it a
thousandfold for the celebrant who seeks and works
for the soma joy and excellence of life with yajnic effort.






[Names: Satanika, Indrasya, Indras, Girirna]
Hundreds of great and invincible forces of this
lord almighty, protective, promotive and overladen with
sustenance, power and prosperity like the pregnant cloud
and abundant mountain, shower gifts of desire and
fulfilment on the seekers of excellence and grace when
the soma creations of the yajnic celebrants please the


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 50 743






[Names: Yadim]
When the flowing drops of yajnic homage of
soma please and exhilarate this dear lord, then, O lord
of wealth, excellence and grace, like the showers of rain
and generous cow, pray bless the invocation, homage
and oblations of the yajna with plenty for the generous
yajamana.






[Names: Anehasam]
O yajakas, to the incomparable lord you invoke
for protection, your thoughts and honey sweet songs of
adoration rise and flow. O lord of wealth, honour and
excellence, shelter home of the universe, the soma
celebrants who call upon you cherish your presence they
feel in the hymns they offer in adoration.




yase havam.


Indra, lord of the holy yajna of creation, come
to our soma yajna, reaching like the constant flow of




joy where soma flows and pleases. O lord most generous
and connoisseur of taste, the songs of praise please you,
and while the soma flows you delight in our adoration.






[Names: Udriva]
I pray to Indra, brave, illustrious, discriminative,
giver of wealth and excellence and all majestic, for
greatness of honour and success. O lord of thunderbolt,
action and justice, like an over-flowing spring of
generosity, you bless the liberal giver with ample wealth
of the world.




[Names: Yaddha, Yujana]
gahi.


Indra, lord omnipotent and omniscient, whether
you are in a far off place or close by on earth or far
above in the light of heaven round the sun, come, lord
of grandeur and divine wisdom, with all your innate
divine powers of cosmic dynamism. O lord most
attainable and sublime, come with instant elevations of
the spirit and bless us.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 50 145




[Names: Rathiraso, Yebhirni]
Instant and omnipresent are your powers of
motion, conduction and integration, creators of the joy
of accomplishment which, unfailing, unerring,
unhurting and instant, swell the mighty motions of the
winds and energise the pranic forces, by which you
silence the violent saboteurs of humanity for our sake
and by which you move across the regions of heaven.





[Names: Etavataste, Yatha]
O lord omnipotent, shelter home of the universe,
adorable and worshipped, thus do we know you, thus
do we celebrate your glory, as you protect the man of
action and advancement when the battle of existence
begins for him, and as you promote the man of self
control to seek fulfilment of his mind and senses while
his life lasts in the human body.






O lord of glory, Indra, as much as you have
granted for the intellectual, for the scholar teacher, for




the yajna, for the long time leader, for the home and for
the man of self control, so much, O lord of the clouds
and mountains, pray grant me too for guidance on the
path to divinity.


Mandala 8/Sukta 51






[Names: Indra, Devata, Shrushtigu, Kanva, Rshi, Yatha, Indrapibah, Indrapiba, Somam, Soma, Nipatithau, Srustigau]
Indra, lord ruler of glory and majesty, just as
you appreciate and protect the soma of sacred
knowledge and wisdom treasured in the mind of the
dedicated thinker, so pray protect, confirm and promote
the knowledge, wisdom and values treasured in the man
of deep introspection and spirituality, the lover of purity
and sanctity of yajnic science, the scholar of physical
and psychological health and advancement and the man
of supersensuous perception and instant action.





[Names: Parsadvanah, Sahasranyasisasad]
When debility of mind and speech took over


the old, unsettled and depressed intellectual, then the
sage, inspired and strengthened by you as a thunderbolt


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 51 747


made him sit in a thousand rays of the sun for treatment
and cure.






[Names: Indram]
He who is not attained by mere words of song,
who knows, and who inspires the sages to know, that
Indra you adore and worship well with sincere mind
and thought in order to experience the lord as one who
never hurts anyone, who always loves and blesses.





[Names: Yasma]
To do honour to Indra, people adore the seven-
rayed sun in high heaven who lights and sustains three
worlds of heaven, earth and the middle regions. He
creates all regions of the universe and thus reveals his
power and generosity.






[Names: Vidma]
We invoke and adore Indra who is the giver of




wealth, honour and excellence to us. We know and adore
the gifts of his love and good will ever new and newer
and pray we may abide in the light of his knowledge
and follow the paths shown by the light divine.






[Names: Yasmai, Siksasi]
Whoever you enlighten, enable and empower
to give in charity, O lord of wealth and shelter home of
the universe, he obtains wealth, sustenance and progress
further and further. O lord of magnificence and majesty,
Indra, most adorable and celebrated, blest as we are with
wealth, excellence and the spirit of homage, we invoke,
invite and adore you and pray bless us with love, charity
and grace.






[Names: Kada, Upopennu]
Never are you unfruitful, never unchari-table,
you are always with the giver, closer and closer, more
and more, again and again, O lord of wealth and honour,
and the charity of divinity ever grows higher and
promotes the giver.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 51 749




[Names: Yaded]
When he had expanded and pervaded the
heavens and firmed the higher regions, seized the cloud
with his blazing might and struck the drought to naught,
then he caused the earthly forms of life to emerge.




[Names: Yasyayam, Tirascidarye]
rayih.


This entire world whether it is dynamic and
progressive, or reactionary and slavish, whether it
guards the wealth of life or destroys it, all this wealth,
directly or indirectly, is circulating within the presence
of Indra, the master, awfully armed, destroyer of
destroyers, to whom it really and ultimately belongs.






[Names: Turanyavo, Asme, Savo]
Dynamic scholars and vibrant sages offer to
Indra the song of adoration replete with honey sweets
and liquid power of exhortation. Let the beauty and
prosperity of life increase among us, let generous and
virile strength and vitality grow, and let streams of




[Names: Soma]
Mandala 8/Sukta 52




[Names: Indra, Devata, Kanva, Rshi, Yatha, Somam, Yatha, Indra]
sacd.


Omnipotent Indra, just as you drink, protect and
promote the soma of the ecstasy of divine vision distilled
and collected in the mind of the brilliant meditative sage,
as you join the divine joy of the devotee who has
achieved threefold freedom of body, mind and soul, so
you join the divine joy and celebration at the heart of
the sage of experience and discriminative vision.





[Names: Prsadhre]
Indra, O divine soul, enjoy soma ecstasy in the
company of the inspired celebrant, the vibrant sage of
cosmic imagination, abundantly fulfilled devotee of
divinity, the realised visionary of the light of knowledge,
and the sage of natural and simple rectitude.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 52 751




[Names: Yasmai, Mitrasya, Mitras]
Who loves and accepts only the pure, original,
un-interpolated hymns of the Veda, who is keen for
victory worthy of the brave and cherishes the joy of
that ecstatic ambition, for whom Vishnu, lord
omnipresent, energises the three orders of earth, skies
and heaven in existence, out of love for him in the
cosmic law, that is Indra, the divine soul.






[Names: Yasya]
In whose hymns of adoration and victorious
deeds you delight, O hero of a hundred grand deeds
and victory, the same we, seekers of sustenance, honour
and fame, invoke, you Indra, and pray for blessings as
milkmen love and treat a generous cow for the gift of






[Names: Ayamann, Puruvasur]
He who is the giver of every thing for us, he is
our father, great, illustrious, ruler and creator of ruling




shelter and treasure home of wealth. May he, we pray,
give us the wealth of lands and cows, knowledge and
culture, and horses, achievements, success and constant






[Names: Vasuyavo, Satakratum]
O lord of wealth and honour, whoever you ask
and inspire to give in charity, rises in wealth, health
and advancement. We, seekers of wealth, honour and
fame, invoke and glorify Indra, lord ruler and protector
of the world’s wealth and grandeur, hero of a hundred
acts of holiness, with hymns of adoration.


[Names: Kada, Turtyaditya]
Eternal lord immanent and transcendent, when
is it you neglect your devotee? Never. You bless both
lives, this here and the next hereafter. Indeed the very


call on you in prayer means honour and glory immortal
which abides in heaven.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 52 753




[Names: Siksasi, Asmakam]
Indra, lord adorable and glorified, eternal
teacher, whoever the generous giver you inspire to give,
and, in response to his charity, you bless, like him and
like the divine response to prayers of the wise, pray
listen and accept our adoration and prayer, respond to
our invocation, O lord of world’s wealth and excellence.






[Names: Astavi, Purvir]
Eternal and adorable song of divine praise has
been presented. Chant that for Indra, the divine soul.
Sing the grand old hymns of divine law and glorify the
lord. Inspire and augment the mind and soul of the






[Names: Samindro, Sucayah, Suryam, Surya, Indram]
Let Indra, divine soul, chant and liberate the
grand abundance of spontaneous divine hymns in
honour of Indra, let the earth and heaven resound, let
the hymns reach the sun. Let the pure, powerful and
sanctified soma abundance of divine celebration please
Indra, lord omnipotent and omnificent.




Mandala 8/Sukta 53




[Names: Indra, Devata, Medhya, Kanva, Rshi, Upamam, Purbhittamam]
misanam raya imahe.

Indra, lord of royal magnificence and divine
glory, for wealth, honour, excellence and magnanimity,
for charity and generosity, we pray to you, prime symbol
of the wealthy, powerful and glorious, first and highest
of the generous and virile, most potent breaker of the
strongholds of want and ignorance, master of the earth
and stars and ruler of the universe.






[Names: Kutsam, Kutsa, Satakratum]
Seekers of food and energy, honour and
excellence, and advancement and success in life, we
pray to you, lord of a hundred great acts of holiness,
commander of the dynamic forces of achievement, you
who give life, thunderbolt of power and justice, and the
spirit of hospitality to people while you lead them on
the path of progress day by day.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 53 755




May the clouds and mountains, and the generous
sages among people, whether far off or close by who
distil for us the honey sweet essence of all the facts of
life, bless us like showers of rain.






[Names: Visva, Sistesu, Soma]
Indra, divine soul, destroy all hate and enmities,
protect the yajamana and others, do good, let all create
all wealth and joys of the world in the heart of the
educated and cultured where you drink and enjoy the
exhilarating draughts of soma.






Indra, closest power divine, come at the earliest
with sure protections of definite resolution of mind. Lord
of supreme peace, come with most peaceful fulfilment
of desire, come, dear friend, with most friendly powers
of protection and progress.





[Names: Ajituram]
punata anusak.


Create among the people and their coming
generations that power, prosperity and grandeur which
gives victory and progress, protects and promotes truth
and the good people, and which is universally good,
positive and creative. With your noble powers and
actions help and save those who are your celebrants
and perform noble yajnic actions in your honour with
love and faith.






[Names: Yaste, Vayam]
Whoever is the most efficient and eligible for
your love and protection, we pray, the same we may be
to achieve in your divine projects and obligations.
Seekers of honour and excellence, with all our
invocations, homage and service to the divinities, we
adore you and pray for protection and advancement.





[Names: Aham, Tvamideva]
O lord omnipotent, you are the master and
controller of the powers and dynamics of the world.
Seeker of strength and victory, always by virtue of your


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 54 757


protections I go forward to any great battle. Seeker of
victory and earthly prosperity, I depend on you only,
first and foremost of the warriors of the world.


Mandala 8/Sukta 54







[Names: Indra, Vishvedevah, Devatah, Matarishva, Kanva, Rshi, Etat, Indra]
Indra, gracious lord of omnipotence, poets and
artists with their holy voices, celebrate and exalt this
virility, valour and heroism of yours. Singing and
celebrating, they obtain energy and self-assurance, and
the people, with their thoughts, actions and meditation
realise joy, ananda, of the highest gracious order.






[Names: Naksanta, Indramavase, Indramavas, Yatha]
Indra, the people, in whose realised strength and
joy you delight, obtain honour and grace by their noble
action. We pray just as you take delight in the acts of
the self-controlled man and appreciate the limitations
of the attenuated, so accept and cherish whatever
homage we are able to offer for protection and grace.






[Names: Vasavo, Maruto, Rudra]
havam.


Let all friends and divinities of the world come
to us and bless. Let all Vasus such as earth, all Rudras
such as pranic energies, come and bless us for our
protection and sustenance, and may the Maruts,
vibrations of divinity and high priests of yajna, listen to
our call and come with gifts of grace.






[Names: Pusa, Srnotu]
May Pusha, sun and other powers of
[Names: Vishnu]
Sarasvati, divine vibrations of cosmic awareness, and
the seven seas attend to my call, honour it and protect
me. May Apah, nature’s flow of liquid energies, Vatah,
the winds, mountains and the clouds, herbs and trees
and the earth perceive my call and help.






[Names: Yadindra, Tena]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 54 759


Indra, lord of highest glory among the powerful,
your munificence and power of accomplishment under
control of your majesty is great. By that power of
majesty, O lord of honour and liberal grandeur, friend
of the house of yajnic celebration, destroyer of evil and
want, enlighten us for advancement and inspire us with
the spirit of charity.






[Names: Ajipate, Viti, Srnvire]
Guide and protector of our struggles and our
people in struggle for advancement, ruler of the human
nation, inspirer of noble acts of charity, you alone
conduct us successfully through our battles for progress.
Seekers of honour and excellence win fame and glory
by cherished yajnic performers and their service and
devotion to the divinities of nature and humanity.




[Names: Santi, Asman]
simisam.


The hopes and ambitions and the health and age
of humanity depend on Indra, lord of the world and
humanity. O lord of glory, pray accept us close to you
for the sake of protection and advancement and bless
us with energy and inspiration to rise high.








[Names: Vayam, Satakrato, Mahi]
Indra, lord of glory, we do homage to you with
hymns of adoration. O lord of a hundred acts of kindness
and magnificence, bless the dedicated sage with great,
lasting, dynamic competence for success which is
creditable and honourable.


Mandala 8/Sukta 55
[Names: Indra, Praskanva, Danastuti, Devata, Krsha, Kanva, Rshi, Bhuridindrasya, Radhaste]
Let me describe in detail the heroic power of
Indra. O destroyer of the violent and wicked, your


strength and competence against the destroyer shines
all round, that’s your bounty and grandeur.






[Names: Satam, Mahna]
Hundreds of brilliant acts of virile generosity
shine like stars in the skies as if with your might and
grandeur they hold up the heavens of light.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 55 761






Hundred clusters of trees, hundred other such
gifts of generosity, hundred shields well polished,
hundred bundles of grass and four hundred fields of
shining fertile land, that’s the gift of generous Indra.






[Names: Sudevah, Asvaso]
Celebrants of knowledge and wisdom, teachers
and students, be good, generous and brilliant, go on
strong and stronger, moving and rising higher and higher
like real men of ambition.






[Names: Adit, Sravah, Anunasya, Anunas, Syaviratidhvasan]
And then do honour to the greatness and glory
of the perfect lord of sevenfold world of existence, Indra.
The man who can cross through the darkest paths of
life can see and attain to the lord even through his own
eyes.




Mandala 8/Sukta 56








[Names: Indra, Praskanva, Danastuti, Agni, Surya, Devatah, Prshadhra, Kanva, Rshi, Prati, Dyaurna]
O scourge of the evil, your power and generosity
is blameless and admirable, and your power and glory,
expansive as the light of heaven is seen shining through





[Names: Dasa, Nityadrayo]
The heroic ruler, scourge of evil and the
grabbers, doing good and blameless actions, gives me
ten thousand gifts and grants from the wealth of his


of Sata me gardabhanam satamurnavatinam.


[Names: Satam]
sheep, and grants me a hundred permanent assistants
and garlands of honour.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 57 763


[Names: Tatro, Asvanaminna]
And therein too, for the sake of greater and
nobler strength and efficiency, the dynamic leader


infused exceptional collective strength and spirit as if
of a regiment of horse.






[Names: Agnih]
Agni is self-conscious, enlightens and, self-
conducted on its own waves of radiation, carries the
fragrance of yajnic havi as well as the light of knowledge
from the vedi all round. Agni, brave and expansive like
space shines with the flames of fire and purity and blazes
with splendour like the sun in heaven.


Mandala 8/Sukta 57




[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Medhya, Kanva, Rshi, Yuvam, Agacchatam]
Brilliant and generous, adorable and sociable




divinities of eternal truth, Ashvins, harbingers of new
knowledge, come with the ancient light and knowledge
collected by forefathers and updated by you. Come fast
as light with beauty and splendour of your powers, join
the third session of our yajna and promote and vitalise






[Names: Asmakam, Somamasvina]
Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge,
thirty-three divinities, eternally true, have revealed to
you the truth of their reality. Friendly and loving,
brilliant as the light and fire of Agni, come to our yajna,
taste, protect and promote the soma of our yajnic
endeavour for further progress than before.






[Names: Panayyam, Sahasram]
Praiseworthy is that performance of yours,
Ashvins, harbingers of new light, which is generous
and rewarding, full of the light of heaven, showers of
the cloud from the sky and generosity of the earth. Pray
now come, assess and advance all those thousands of
advancements we are pursuing in the field of earth
sciences, solar energy and the development of cattle


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 58 765
wealth, all of which are worthy of appreciation.






[Names: Ayam, Pibatam, Somam, Soma, Sacibhih]
Ashvins, harbingers of knowledge, adorable
guides worthy of association and cooperation, this part
of our yajnic pursuit of knowledge and development is
reserved for you. O seekers of truth, committed to truth,
come and listen to what we have to say, share and enjoy
the soma pleasure of the honey sweets of peaceful
advancements in knowledge, and with your powers and
blessed actions protect and promote the generous and
committed yajaka who surrenders to you in faith and
obedience.


Mandala 8/Sukta 58






[Names: Vishvedevah, Rtvijah, Devatah, Medhya, Kanva, Rshi, Yamrtvijo, Anucano]
In the yajna of existence and human life, which
the yajakas, Vishvedevas, natural forces of divinity in
the cosmic yajna, and human senses and mind in the
individual yajna of life, all vital, alert and expert in their




own ways, organise, conduct and carry on harmoniously
in many different participative ways, and in the same
yajna when some pious, intelligent and fortunate soul
in communion is joined with the supreme divinity of
the yajna, then in that state of samadhi what is the nature
and character of this yajamana’s state of knowledge and






[Names: Ekaivosah]
The nature of awareness in communion is this,
and this same is the understanding of an intelligent soul:
Only one Agni, fire, lighted in many ways, only one
sun risen all over the world, only one dawn rising daily
anew, lights this entire world, and only one universal
spirit pervades this entire universe, the entire existence
is one.





[Names: Jyotismantam, Citramagha]
Further: Of you all Vishvedevas, the one that is


centred, blissful, gloriously moving, a seat of bliss, full


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 59 767


of treasure, by the power and inspiration of which the
dawn of light arises and illuminates the world, that
supreme spirit I invoke for you and call you to
experience the absolute bliss beyond the relative.


Mandala 8/Sukta 59






[Names: Indra, Varunau, Devate, Suparna, Kanva, Rshi, Imani, Indravaruna, Yajneyajne, Ssiksathah]
Indra and Varuna, power and judgement of
divinity, these are your contributions to life which in
this grand yajna of human life vibrate in the yajnic
projects of life inspired by you: In every yajna of life
you energise and shine the holy activities when you bless
and inspire the yajamana who creates and contributes
to the joy of life.





[Names: Nissadhvartrosadhirapa]
Indra and Varuna, powers of natural energy and


natural selection for evolution and growth, herbs and
trees, waters and liquid flows attain efficiency and rise




higher in munificence when you cross the paths across
the skies, come and vibrate, and there is no defiling
power in operation to negate your efficacy.






[Names: Satyam, Tabhir]
Indra and Varuna, symbolic powers of love,
judgement and social cohesion, true it is that for you
the sevenfold voices of the dedicated sage distil the
honey sweet vibrations of divine energy in your service
and with these you, protectors and promoters of the good
and auspiciousness of life, strengthen and advance the
generous yajaka who, with sincere thoughts and actions,
without fear, serves and augments you with devotion
and resolution.






[Names: Ghrtaprusah]
Endowed with gifts of goodness and grace, kind
and generous, givers of life energy, seven sisters of
yours, five senses, mind and intellect, O Indra and
Varuna, loving and judicious divine powers of humanity,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 59 769


in this house of truth and divine law of yajna in human
life, are replete with the beauty and splendour of life.
With these, pray bring in the knowledge and wisdom of
divinity and nature revealed by the sages and enlighten
the yajamana.






[Names: Avocama, Asmantsvin]
We speak and celebrate, for the sake of great
goodness and prosperity, the truth, grandeur and power,
honour and excellence received from the mighty and
magnificent Indra and Varuna. O Indra and Varuna,
gracious and benevolent protectors of the greatness and
goodness of life, protect and promote us by the sevenfold
voice of the seven sisters and seven sages at the three
levels of body, mind and soul.




[Names: Srutam, Yani]
Indra and Varuna, divine powers of vigour and


intelligence, judgement and imagination, what words
of knowledge and thoughts of wisdom by virtue of




meditation, study and speech you gave to the sages of
vision earlier, and what orders of discovery and
invention through yajnic extension of research, the
patient, persistent sages achieved later, all these, with
my austere discipline of study and application, let me
see and realise for myself.




[Names: Indravarunad, Prajam]
ayuh.


Indra and Varuna, good disposition, wealth and
advancement free from pride, bear and bring to bless
the yajamana. Progeny, vigorous health, and prosperity,
bring for us, prolong our life for us to enjoy the beauty
of living for as long as possible.


Mandala 8/Sukta 60




[Names: Agni, Devata, Bharga, Pragatha, Rshi, Agna]
rasade.


Agni, universal fire of life, come with other fires
such as the sun. We opt to worship you alone, the cosmic
yajamana. The yajaka people holding ladlefuls of havi
would honour and celebrate you and seat you on the


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 771






[Names: Accha, Urjo]
Agni, creator of energy and power, dear as
breath of life omnipresent, the ladles of ghrta feed you
well in the holy fire of yajna. We honour and adore the
divine fire, prime power, infallible product of cosmic
energy and rising in flames in yajnas.






[Names: Agne]
Agni is the poet of the cosmos which is his
poem. He is maker and disposer of the universe, chief
performer of cosmic yajna, purifier and sanctifier of the
polluted, loving and adorable. O lord of power and
purity, you are blissful, most honourable and
companionable, adored by sages in yajnas with hymns
of love and worship.








[Names: Adroghama]
Most youthful Agni, eternal power and presence,
bring the loving and generous divinities to receive the
homage and bless the innocent and guileless yajaka. O
lord of the world’s wealth, haven and home of all, accept
the most cherished offerings and, adored with our
sincere thoughts and acts of yajna, rejoice yourself.






[Names: Tvamit, Tvam]
Agni, you are infinitely expansive, boundless,
all saviour, eternally right poet of cosmic rectitude,
omniscient creator. Self-refulgent ever, light of the
universe, the wise sages and masters of law and right
action glorify you as the lord supreme.






[Names: Soca, Socistha, Devanam, Sarman, Satrusahah]
Lord most pure and refulgent, rise and shine and
enlighten the world. Bless the people and the celebrants
with peace and goodness. You are great and glorious.
May our wise and brilliant leaders enjoy the goodwill
of the divinities, be keepers of the holy fire and
controllers of hate and enmities.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 773




[Names: Yatha, Mitramaho]
Agni, just as you burn to dust the withered wood
on the earth, so, O greatest friend, pray burn him to
naught whoever hates us and thinks ill of us.






[Names: Asredhadbhis, Sivebhih]
Throw us not to the mortal who is an enemy,
demoniac and a sinner. O lord most youthful, keep us
and protect us with the non-violent, the saviours, good
and peaceful, protectors of the good.






[Names: Pahi]
Agni, save us by the first voice, and by the
second, by three voices, and, O lord of cosmic power,
ultimate haven and home of existence, save us by the
four.


(This is a very simple and yet a most
comprehensive verse. The first voice could be the voice
of average humanity; second, words of the sages; third,
voice of the soul; fourth, the voice of divinity. Another
way to understand: One, two, three or all the four Veda’s




voice. Yet another: voice of the soul in the rising
sequence of the four mantras of Aum as described in
the Upanishads. And then the four stages of language
in the descending order from divine to the human: Para,
Pashyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari)






[Names: Tvamiddhi]
Save us from all evils of the world, from all
selfish grabbers. Protect us in our struggles and lead us
to victory. We approach you and pray to you, closest to
us, our own, for the success of our divine yajna and
rising advancement in life.






[Names: Samsyam, Rasva, Purusprham, Purusprha, Sastaram]
Agni, saviour and purifier of life, closest and
friendly, give us wealth which is admirable and leads to
progress in food, health and age and cattle wealth. Give
us the way of life leading to universally loved wealth,
honour and excellence, renowned and rising.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 7715




[Names: Yena, Sardhatas, Sacivaso]
Give us the wealth of competence by which,
rising in strength and power, moving forward,
countering opposite intentions, designs and plans, we
may defeat our enemies in the battles of life. O lord of
knowledge, power and action, help us advance with food
and sustenance, inspire and enlighten our vision and
intelligence in action so that we may rise to be masters
of wealth, honour and excellence.




[Names: Sigano, Tigma]
yahuh.


Just as a bull whets and brandishes his horns
[Names: Fiery]
is his visor, strong his jaws, mighty his courage, he is






[Names: Nahi, Puru]
Agni when you rise and expand no one can brave
your flaming jaws. Pray accept our homage and make it
fruitful. Give us ample wealth of our choice and desire.






[Names: Sese, Atandro]
rajasi.

You pervade in the forests and in the earth upto
heaven. The mortals light and raise you holily, and,
without sloth or delay, you carry the sacred offerings of
the devoted celebrants to the divinities over earth and
heaven and shine among them.




[Names: Sapta, Bhinatsyadrim, Socisa]
janan ati.

Agni, seven yajakas adore and serve you, all
giver, imperishable and eternal. You cleave the
mountains and expand and evaporate the clouds with
your heat and flames of fire. Pray, Agni, stay among the
people at the closest and rise high.


[Names: Agnimagnim, Agnimagni, Agnim, Sasvatisva]
For your sake, O people of the world, we on the


seats of holy grass invoke Agni, one form after another
of the irresistible universal power of nature and divinity,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 60 777


and having collected our offerings ready, we light and
serve the fire, high priest of cosmic yajna among all the
communities of humanity over the lands.






[Names: Ketena, Sarmant, Isanyaya, Pururupama]
Agni loves to associate with the house of yajna
where Sama hymns are chanted. O lord of light, Agni,
the yajakas wait for you with anxious expectation and
signs of welcome. Pray come with all your love and
desire for us and bless us with the food, energy and
holy ambition of all forms dearest to our heart for our
protection and advancement.




[Names: Aprosivan]
duronayuh.


Agni, universally adored, master ruler and
protector of the people, scourge of the selfish and wicked,
refulgent and generous, supreme protective presence of
the home that never neglects or forsakes the inmates,
you are great protector of happiness and heavens too,
and abide in the heart and home of humanity.








[Names: Mano, Parogavyutyaniramapa]
O refulgent lord protector of world’s wealth, let
no evil force enter our life, let no violence of the
malignant injure us. O lord of light, Agni, cast off
starvation, poverty and all demoniac forces far away
from us.


Mandala 8/Sukta 61




[Names: Indra, Devata, Bharga, Pragatha, Rshi, Ubhayam, Satracya, Savistha, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
gamat.


May Indra, lord omnipotent, master of the
world’s wealth and power, directly listen to our joint
prayer for worldly and spiritual advancement with
attentive ear and sympathetic understanding, and may
the lord of supreme power come to protect and promote
our yajnic programme and prayer and taste the pleasure
of success.




[Names: Utopamanam]
somakamam hi te manah.


That self-ruled, self-refulgent, brave and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 61 7719


generous human character and programme, that human
republic, the heaven and earth vested with divine will
and intelligence conceive, create and fashion forth for
self-realisation of innate glory. O man, among similars
and comparables, you stand the first and highest, and
your mind is dedicated to the love of soma, peace,
pleasure and excellence of life.






[Names: Vidma]
Indra, lord of universal wealth, honour and
excellence, haven and home of all life in existence, give
us showers of the purest distilled soma, food for health
and divine joy. O lord of the dynamics of existence, we
know you, fearless and unconquerable hero in battles.






[Names: Apramisatya, Sanema, Siprinnavasa]
Indra, lord of might and majesty, unchangeable
truth itself, imperishable, as you wish by holy thought
and will, so does everything happen. Pray bless us to
win the victory in our battles for life, O lord of splendid
move on, O lord of clouds and mountains.






[Names: Sagdhyiusu, Sacipata, Bhagam, Sura]
caramasi.

Indra, lord of omnipotent action and infinitely
various victories, with all powers, protections and
inspirations, strengthen and energise us for excellent
works without delay. As the very honour, splendour and
treasure-home of the universe, O potent and heroic lord,
we live in pursuit of your glory to justify our existence
and win our destiny.






[Names: Pauro, Purukrd, Nakirhi]
You are the sole One omnipresent citizen of the
universe, creator of all lands, cows, lights and
knowledges of the world, maker of the motions,
ambitions, advancements and achievements of nature
and humanity, fountain head of universal joy, and golden
or obstruct your gifts to humanity. O lord, I pray, bring






[Names: Tvam]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 61 781


Come to give gifts of wealth and honour to the
devotee so that the people may be happy and prosperous.
O lord of honour and majesty, Indra, bring us showers
of the wealth of cows, lands, knowledge and culture
for the seekers of light, and horses, advancement and
achievement for the seekers of progress.






[Names: Puru, Indram]
Indra, you command and grant many hundreds
and thousands of heaps of wealth for gift to the devotees,
and as many troops of soldiers for defence and
protection. We, poets of holy words of adoration, do
service to Indra, breaker of the strongholds of darkness
and sing in praise of him and exhort him for the sake of
protection and patronage.






[Names: Avipro]
Indra, lord of infinite holy acts of kindness,
commanding irresistible adour and passion, whether one
is a sagely scholar or a simple unlettered person,
whoever offers words of praise and prayer to you is
blest with divine joy by your grace, O lord of the name
“TAM”.








[Names: Ugrabahur, Vasuyavo, Satakra]
If the lord of mightiest arms, breaker of evil
strongholds, divine destroyer, would listen to my
invocation and prayer, we, seekers of wealth, honour
and excellence in life, would adore and exalt Indra,
protector and giver of wealth and supreme lord of
infinite divine acts of grace, hymns of praise in his
honour.





[Names: Yadinnvindram]
We are neither sinners nor uncharitable nor non-

yajakas as we honour and adore Indra, generous lord of


showers of grace, and win his favour as a friend in our
holy acts of creation and yajna.


[Names: Ugram, Veda]
The blazing vibrant lord of existence, we join
in the battles of life from strife upto communion, the


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 61 783


power and presence most bold and courageous,
indomitable, to whom we owe the debt of allegiance.
Whoever approaches him thus as the ever moving spirit
at the closest as a friend, munificent giver, sole controller
of the chariot of life and the universe, the ultimate
warrior and conqueror, realises him, joins him, becomes
identified with him as the self itself.






[Names: Yata, Maghavan]
Indra, lord indomitable, whoever, whatever and
wherever we fear, make us fearless from that. O lord of
might and world power, pray strengthen us with your
powers and protections of the highest order. Eliminate
the jealous, the malignant, the disdainers and






Indra, lord of the world’s wealth, munificence
and achievement, you alone are the protector, and
promoter of the wealth, grandeur, home and honour of
the supplicant worshipper. O lord of all power and
honour, adored and worshipped in hymns of glory, we
invoke, invite and exalt you for the munificence and


grandeur of life you grant, protect and advance.




[Names: Indrah]
patu nah purah.


Indra is all cognizant, destroyer of evil and
universal protector, and him alone we ought to choose
for worship and prayer. May he protect us all, the
highest, the middling and the lowest, and may he protect
us at the far back and the farthest coming up front.




pahi visvatah. Are asmat krnuhi daivyam


Indra, pray you protect us back and front, up
and down, all round. Remove from us all fear of the
divinities, all dangers and strikes from the evil forces.






[Names: Adyadya, Visva]
Day by day every today, day by day every
tomorrow and beyond, lord saviour and protector of the
good and true, Indra, save and protect us, your celebrants
and supplicants, all days, day and night.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 62 185






[Names: Prabhangi, Ubha]
power and universal riches, self-sufficient, virile, joiner
of all with karmic destiny, O lord of infinite good
actions, both your arms are abundantly generous and
hold the thunderbolt of justice, reward and punishment


Mandala 8/Sukta 62






[Names: Indra, Devata, Pragatha, Ghaura, Kanva, Rshi, Ukthair, Bharata, Indrasya, Indras, Indrasya, Indras]
O celebrants, sing aloud and send up your
prayers to Indra who listens and loves them. The soma
yajis with songs of praise exalt the great glory and
magnificence of Indra. Great and good are the gifts of







[Names: Ayujo, Purvirati]
Sole and self-sufficient, unequal, one supreme
among humanity, beyond the power of mortals, he excels
and transcends all those born ever before or at present
or to be born in future, by virtue of his lustre and
magnanimity. Great are the powers and gifts of Indra’s




[Names: Ahitena, Pravacya]
ratayah.


The lord of immense generosity pervades and
rules the world moving on with its own innate law
without external imposition. O lord, that divine
omnipotence of yours and mighty acts of virile divinity
are admirable. Great and good are the gifts of the lord’s



[Names: Yebhih, Sravasyate]
Come Indra, here we sing exalting hymns in
your honour by which, O lord most powerful, you would


love to do immense good for the celebrant. Great and
gracious are the charities of Indra.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 62 787




[Names: Dhrsatascid, Tirvaih, Somaih, Somai]
As you raise the man of courage at heart to a
bolder and more courageous hero, men with homage
and potent soma oblations serve and glorify you. Great
and glorious are the charities of Indra.






[Names: Justvi]
The lord lover of Rks and soma yajna looks
below with love at the yajakas like a thirsty man looking
anxiously at the water below in the well and, happy
with the noble expert soma yaji, he accepts him as friend
and companion. Great and good are the gifts of Indra.




[Names: Visve, Anu, Bhuvo, Purustuta]
Indra, universally celebrated and exalted, ruler
and protector of the worlds of the universe, all divinities
of nature and humanity in obedience and pursuit of your
divine acts bear your generous strength and vitality.
Great and good are the gifts of Indra.






[Names: Grne, Sava, Yaddhamsi, Sacipate]
ratayah.


In praise of that admirable power and grandeur
of yours, Indra, I sing for the pleasure of divine favour,
by which, O lord of mighty noble acts, you destroy the
demon of darkness and want by your force and
splendour. Great and good are the gifts of Indra.






[Names: Samaneva, Vide, Ssruto]
Like men united in assembly or forces united in
battle, he joins people into assemblies and communities
unto himself. That knowledge of art, Indra knows, and
for that he is renowned and celebrated. Great and good
are the gifts of Indra.






[Names: Ujjatam, Bhurigo, Sarmani]
Indra, lord of great wealth and knowledge,
honour and excellence, the celebrants repeatedly sing
and exalt your glory manifested around, they celebrate
you and your holy work under the umbrella of your
protection. Great and good are the gifts of Indra.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 63 789






[Names: Ahamcatvam, Arativa]
Let us both, I and you, destroyer of want and
evil, join for the attainment of wealth and fulfilment. O
lord of might, controller of clouds and breaker of
mountains, even the malignant and niggardly would
agree to our cooperation. Great and glorious are the gifts
of Indra.






[Names: Satyamid, Indram, Mahan]
Let us all worship Indra and adore only truth,
never untruth. There is the terrible thunderbolt for the
impious uncreators, and profuse lights and showers of
bliss for the creators of soma, divine joy and fulfilment
for life. Great and gracious are the gifts of Indra.


Mandala 8/Sukta 63






[Names: Indra, Devah, Devatah, Pragatha, Kanva, Rshi, Yasya]
He, eternal spirit of the universe, love and desire
and indeed the ideal of the great among humanity, is
realised through holy acts of prayer and yajna, by the
doors of whose grace the thinking man, fatherly man
sustainer of life, attains noble knowledge and
competence for action among the divinities of nature
and humanity.






[Names: Divo, Somaprsthaso, Uktha, Samsya]
The mountains overgrown with soma do not
forsake the spirit and presence of divinity since it is
manifested there. Hence hymns of praise and songs of
adoration ought to be sung in honour of divinity.





[Names: Stuse]
That omniscient and omnipresent Indra brought
the earths and stars into existence for the living and
breathing forms of being. Therefore I sing and celebrate
his divine power and love.






[Names: Sivo]
He, Indra, as ever before, strengthens the poets


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 63 791


and promotes and extends the divine speech. May the
lord of peace and bliss, we pray, come and join our yajna
of worship.






[Names: Anu, Svatramarka, Anusatendra]
And then they, the yajakas, in pursuance of the
holy act of chosen yajna offer oblations in truth of word
and deed, and the singers immediately start the song of
adoration in honour of Indra for the gift of wealth and
joy.





[Names: Indre, Yamarka]
In Indra abide all the great works done and to
be done, and the pious sages know him as loving and,
non-violent worthy of worship.






[Names: Astrnad]
When the universal community of five classes
of people join together and raise their voices of prayer
to Indra, then with his might he wards off their enemies
and misfortunes. That same lord of the people,


omniscient and master is the centre of my worship too.






[Names: Tyamu, Anustutis, Anustuti, Pravas]
Indra, lord of glory, this song of worship is for
you. You alone do all those admirable grand works of
valour I praise and you alone protect and direct the orbits
of the moving universe.






[Names: Asya, Yavam]
On receiving the variety and versatility of food,
energy and inspiration from this generous and virile
Indra, life rises and springs forward for the joy of living
as an animal gets the grass for food and energy and






[Names: Taddadhana, Syama, Marutvato]
Bearing that energy in body and that divine
source of energy in mind, let us all, seekers of protection
and promotion, be masters of strength and expertise and
try to be commanders of that energy and ambition to
achieve higher progress in corporate life.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 63 793






[Names: Balrtviyaya, Josamendra]
O mighty lord of energy, ambition and victory,
with resounding hymns of joy in homage we bow to
you, treasure home of life and progress, creator and
promoter of strength and energy through seasonal
yajnas, and we pray that joined to you in body and mind
we may win in our struggles for life and living.






[Names: Asme, Indrajyestha]
Indra, lord ruler of power and progress, for us,
in our fight against suffering, may the Rudras, powers
of justice and desperation, mighty generous clouds of
shower, mountains and great men, all loving and
cooperative, indeed whoever fast and strong may hasten
and advance for the celebrant and worshipper, all the
wisest and seniormost brilliant powers of generosity in
nature and humanity, come and help us in our struggle
for the conquest of darkness, want, evil and ignorance
prevailing in society.




Mandala 8/Sukta 64






[Names: Indra, Devata, Pragatha, Kanva, Rshi]
Indra, lord almighty, commander, controller and
inspirer of clouds, mountains and great men of
generosity, may our hymns of adoration win your
pleasure. Pray create and provide means and methods
of sustenance and progress in life, and cast off jealousies
and enmities against divinity, knowledge and prayer,
our bond between human and divine.






[Names: Pada, Nahi]
Keep off under foot the haves who hoard and
share not. You are great, simply great, the only one.
There is none equal, alike or more.


[Names: Tvamisise, Tvam]
You rule over the creative and cooperative men


of positive action. You rule over the uncreative and
destructive men of negative action as well. Indra, you


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 64 795


are the ruler, the ultimate ordainer of good and evil both.






[Names: Obhe]
Your presence abides in the regions of light and
heaven, in the minds of the enlightened and the divines.
Arise, O divine presence, to heaven and come again.
Let the presence resound among humanity. Your
presence fills and fulfils both earth and heaven with the
light and joy of divinity.






[Names: Tyam, Satavantam]
You break and break open the cloud and the
mountain bearing a hundred and a thousand gifts for
the divine singers, celebrants and dedicated yajakas.






[Names: Vayamu, Asmakam]
We singers, celebrants and yajakas, invoke and
invite you in our soma yajna in the day and in the night
and pray fulfil our prayer and desire for humanity and






[Names: Brahma]
Where does the generous lord of showers, ever
youthful and eternal, of broad shoulders unbent, reside?
Which sage and scholar can ever comprehend and serve
him in full knowledge and competence?




[Names: Kasya, Indram]
Whose yajna does the generous and virile Indra
visit and bless out of love and kindness? And who really
knows Indra, in all fairness?





[Names: Ukthe]
O destroyer of darkness and evil, whom do your
gifts of generosity reach? And whom do your strength
and energies reach? In the chant of hymns and in yajna,
who is your closest friendliest devotee?






[Names: Ayam, Somah, Soma, Purusu, Tasyehi]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 65 797


Indra, this soma yajna is performed and soma is
distilled in your honour in the human communities all
over the world. Lord, come fast, drink, protect and
promote the soma.

[Names: Saryanavati, Arjiktye]
In this mortal body, in this vibrant intellect, in
these fresh and harmonious senses and mind, this lovely
and most exhilarating yajna is being performed.


[Names: Tamadya, Ehimindra]
To that soma yajna being performed for gifts of
great wealth and power, excitement and joy, and the


destruction of negativities, pray come fast and drink
the soma of love, faith and homage.


Mandala 8/Sukta 65




[Names: Indra, Devata, Pragatha, Kanva, Rshi, Yadindra]
Indra, lord of universal power and energy, when

you are invoked and invited east, west, north and south,




front or back, up or down, by people performing yajna,

then come fast by the fastest modes you command.



[Names: Yadva, Yadva]
Whether in the heavenly radiations and cascades
of light or in the middle regions of the sky or on the
earthly regions of food and soma, wherever you rejoice
and rain down showers of joy:


[Names: Somasya, Somas]
Indra, I invoke you, glorious lord immanent in
the vast world, to come and protect the beauty and joy
of your creation and taste the soma of its grandeur, as I
would call the cow to its favourite love of food.





[Names: Rathe]
of transport and communication bear and bring you here
to us with your grandeur and your majesty 111 the chariot.



MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 65 799




Indra, great, blazing brave, ruler and glorifier
of rulers, I adore and exalt you. Pray come, drink the
soma of our achievement and protect and promote the
world of your creation.






[Names: Sutavantastva, Idam]
Dedicated to noble acts of yajna and soma
creation, bearing havi for yajna and food for yajnic
charity, we invoke and invite you to come and be seated
on the holy seats of our vedi and bless our heart and
soul.






[Names: Yacciddhi]
As you bear and sustain the common generality
of people since time immortal and the people bear
common allegiance to you, we invoke and adore you in
all our holy projects of common universal value.








[Names: Jusana]
People have pressed and extracted this honey
sweet of soma with stone presses for you. Happy with
cherished soma in expectation, pray come and drink that
soma of our achievement and divine adoration.



[Names: Visvan, Asme, Sravo]
Indra, you are the ruler and controller of the
world. Pray come soon and watch all the exceptional
sages and scholars of the world, and bring us food,
energy, honour and fame of universal value.

[Names: Data]
Indra is the giver of golden gifts of lands and
cows and he is the ruler and controller of the golden
gifts of divinity. O divinities of heaven and earth, may
Indra never be neglected, and may Indra never neglect
and hurt us.



[Names: Sahasre, Sukram]
Besides thousands and more golden gifts of
lands and cows, I have received beautiful, great and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 66 801
abundant pure gifts of gold from Indra, ruler of the earth.






[Names: Napato]
My honour and renown, unfallen, unmatched
and blest as I am with a thousandfold gifts of divine
munificence, may, I pray, reach and abide with the
divinities.

Mandala 8/Sukta 66




[Names: Indra, Devata, Kali, Pragatha, Rshi, Tarobhirvo, Indram, Indra, Brhad]
na karinam.


In the yajna of love and non-violence where
everything is perfect and soma is distilled, I invoke Indra
like Abundance itself, giver of wealth, honour and
fulfilment. Singing songs of adoration with energy and
enthusiasm for your protection and progress, O
devotees, celebrate Indra who brings wealth, honour
and excellence at the earliest by fastest means.








[Names: Sasamanaya]
Indra whom none can stop in his state of ecstasy
and abundant charity, neither the impetuous, nor the
constant, nor demon nor mortal, Indra who is the giver
of cherished wealth and joy to the celebrant, the creator
of soma and the zealous worshipper with deep reverence
and homage.






Indra who is mighty of action, pure and
purifying, great achiever, and wondrous rich in wealth
and golden grace, who shakes off the erosion of land
fertility and cattle wealth and augments produce and
prosperity, destroyer of want, ignorance and evil as he
15.





[Names: Nikhatam, Purusambhrtam, Purusambhrta, Vajri]
Indra who for the generous giver digs out and
opens up abundant wealth deep buried, hidden and held
in the earth, wields the thunderbolt of justice and award,
and wears a golden vizor, commanding tempestuous
forces, thus by his noble yajnic actions, does for us what
he thinks right and pleases to do.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 66 803




[Names: Yadvavantha, Purustuta, Vayam]
Indra, lord omnipotent universally adored and
exalted, as you wish and want of humanity at the earliest
in the beginning of creation, that we honour, abide and
do without doubt or delay, the yajna, songs of adoration,
word and worship all.




[Names: Saca, Puruhuta, Tvamiddhi, Somapah, Somapa]
Lord all-invoked and adored, wielder and
commander of thunder, clouds and mountains, light of
life in heaven and on earth, connoisseur, protector and
promoter of the soma joy of humanity, join and be with
us in our yajnic creations of soma joy in action.





[Names: Vayamenamida, Tasma, Srute]
Here today as before we have regaled this lord
of the thunderbolt. For him, again, now, all of one mind,
bear and bring the distilled soma of homage, and
worship him who would, for certain for joy of the song,
grace the celebrants.








[Names: Vrkascidasya, Vayunesu, Semam]
The wolf, its counterforce elephant, and the thief
all have to accept and follow the laws of this lord Indra.
May he, loving and cherishing this our song of
adoration, listen and come with gifts of clear and un-
illusive intelligence and understanding.






[Names: Kadu, Keno, Sromatena]
What wonder work is that which is not the
achievement of Indra’s valour? By which person hasn’t
He is the destroyer of evil and darkness by his very
nature.






[Names: Indro]
How great and irresistible are his blazing
powers! How great and invincible is he, the destroyer
of evil and darkness! To the usurers and the exploiters


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 66 805


who count only their days tally he shows the light only
for the day according to their action, not beyond.






[Names: Purutamasah, Purutamasa, Puruhita]
Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness within and
without in the outer world, universally adored, wielder
of the thunderbolt, we, all together, old and young, offer
you in faith new and ever fresh songs of adoration and
exaltation as daily obligation in return as thanks for your






[Names: Purvisciddhi, Tirascidaryah, Savistha]
Indra, lord of infinite acts, shelter home of the
universe, highest and omnipotent, all hopes of humanity,
all protections and progress for them, past, present and
future, rest in you and emanate from you. Hence all
people invoke you and call on you for help. O master
protector, listen to my call and come like radiations of
light to our yajnas of divine adoration and soma creation.








[Names: Nahi]
Indra, we are yours. Sages and celebrants, we
all abide in you. There is none whatever other than you,
lord of power, honour and world’s wealth, universally
invoked and adored, who is kind and gracious as you.






[Names: Tvam, Tvam, Sacistha]
O lord, pray you save us from this ignorance,
hunger and want, and imprecation and calumny. You
give us protection, enlighten us with your unique
wisdom and understanding. O most potent master of
the knowledge of the laws and paths of life, guide us on
the paths of the world.






[Names: Soma, Apedesa]
O budding scholars and sages, let the soma of
hope and joy be distilled and poured for you. Fear not.
This terror and destruction is going away. Self-
destroyed, it is going away, vanishing of itself.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 67 807


Mandala 8/Sukta 67








[Names: Adityah, Devatah, Matsya, Sammada, Manya, Aditya, Maitravaruni, Matsya, Jalanaddhah, Rshis, Tyan, Adityan, Aditya, Sumrlikan]
For the sake of protection and to achieve our
cherished objects, we call upon the Kshatriyas, warriors
of the nation, bright as children of light and firm as
children of Infinity, providers of peace, happiness and






[Names: Mitro, Varunah, Varuna, Adityaso]
To the best of their knowledge and intention,
power and purpose, may Mitra, teachers and preachers,
intellectuals and researchers, universal friends of
and administrators, and Aryama, leaders of law, guides
of the nation, Adityas all, children of light and givers of
enlightenment, protect, promote and defend us against
violence, injustice and ignorance and cleanse us of sin
and crime.




[Names: Tesam, Adityanam, Adityana]
Ample means and materials, wonderful, various
and admirable, vest in the brilliant Adityas, enlightened
powers of governance and administration, for the people
of generosity, and beauty, decency and grace.



[Names: Mahi, Mitraryaman, Mitraryama, Avamsya]
O great Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, great are
your powers of protection and defence. We choose to
ask and do ask for protection and defence by you.





[Names: Jivan, Kaddha]
Wherever you are or happen to be stationed,
pray listen to our call and rush in for our life and
protection before the strike of violence and possibly
death and destruction.






[Names: Yadvah, Tena]
Whatever be your defence, protection and relief
for the worker, producer or creator of soma while he


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 67 809


works to the point of weariness, exhaustion and
retirement, for that plead for us and get us the relief
needed, deserved and allowed.






[Names: Asti, Adit]
Adityas, children of light, rulers and
administrators, generous and unpolluted by corruption,
the relief for the distressed is ample freedom from
distress, and the reward for the sinless is jewel graces
of life.





[Names: Indra]
Let this bond of sin and crime never fetter us.
Let it fall off far from us so that we may be free to do
great. The renowned Indra, lord supreme, is the master
controller and dispenser of reward and punishment.





[Names: Deva]
O protectors and defenders of the people,
brilliant and generous rulers, let not the violence and
calumny of crooked enemies ever smear and injure us.


Pray cover us all round with safety and security.






[Names: Sumrlikam]
And O great, brilliant and sovereign assembly
of the nation, generous and gracious power,
conscientiously I speak to you, pray save us from harm
and injury, help us achieve our heart’s desire and






[Names: Parsi, Makistokasya]
Aditi, mother of brave and blazing Adityas, pray
anoint us, make us immune and help us cross the seas
of violence both deep and shallow, let no enemy,
violence or disease harm and injure our coming






[Names: Aneho, Krdhi]
Sacred and sovereign mother of vast extensive
powers, save us from sin and violence to range over the
earth and strengthen us that not only we but also our
coming generations may live happy and free.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 67 811





[Names: Vrata]
Those who are on top of the average people,
active, bold, unbending, and gifted with innate honour
and reputation in law and personal values of virtue, free
from jealousy and enmity, they maintain, uphold and
protect the laws, values and commitments of the land.
(They are the chosen children of mother earth, Adityas,
worthy of being members of the mother’s household,
council of the nation.)






[Names: Stenam]
Mother Aditi, caught up like thieves, we are in
the jaws of wolves. May the Adityas save us from the
mouth of wolfish exploiters.


[Names: Asmadetvajaghnust]
O Adityas, let this violent force go off from us,
let this evil genius too get away from us, leaving us





[Names: Sasvaddhi, Gditya, Pura]
Adityas, generous givers, by virtue of your
ever before.



[Names: Sasvantam, Devah]
O wise brilliancies, whoever turns to you ever
and any time, even from sin, pray sustain and strengthen
him to live his life to the full.






[Names: Bandhad]
O Adityas, O mother Aditi, we hope and pray
may that ever new strength and sustenance of yours,
which you give us for our good and protection, which
saves us like people fettered in bondage and released,
be extended to us ever as before.






[Names: Nasmakam, Yuyam]
O Adityas, leaders of the human nation, that
power and competence you give us to get over our


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 68 813


problems is not our own, it is yours. Pray be kind and
gracious and keep it up as ever before.



O Adityas, brilliant powers of nature and
humanity, let not the onslaught of time or an artificial
weapon made by man strike us before we have lived
and enjoyed a full age of fulfilment to the last day of


[Names: Visvagvi]
O Adityas, brilliant rulers and leaders of the
nation, totally destroy jealousy and enmity, eliminate
distress and depression, sin and crime, wipe out


organised crime, terror and combined attacks, and
uproot all disease, infirmity and disability from the earth.


Mandala 8/Sukta 68










[Names: Indra, Rkshashvamedhau, Devatah, Priyamedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Tuvikurmim, Savistha, Indra]
Indra, bravest of the brave, protector of the good
and true, just as we turn the chariot, so do we draw your
attention and pray you turn to us and come for our
protection, welfare and enlightenment, lord of infinite
action and conqueror of enemies.





[Names: Tuvisusma, Sacivo]
Lord omnipotent of infinite action, infinitely
helpful, omniscient, with your cosmic power and
grandeur you pervade the whole universe.





[Names: Yasya, Hasta]
Indra who are infinitely great by virtue of your
omnipotence, your hands wield the thunderbolt of
justice and golden grace which reaches everywhere over
the universe.






[Names: Visvanarasya, Evaisca]
I pray to Indra, your lord and father, master
controller of the irresistible powers and forces of the
universe, for divine protection of the people by the


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 68 815
dynamics of his moving powers of nature and humanity.






[Names: Abhistaye, Nana]
I pray to Indra, ever more munificent in human
struggles for light, happiness and welfare, whom people
invoke and adore in many ways for protection and
progress and for the fulfilment of their cherished objects
and ambitions.






[Names: Paromatramircisamam, Indramugram, Indramugra, Isanam]
I invoke and pray to Indra, boundless presence,
lover of hymns of adoration, illustrious, all competent
and master ruler of the wealth and power of the world.






[Names: Tantamid, Indram, Anustutim, Anustuti]
For every great success, for all wealth and high
competence in life and also for the joyous pleasure of it
all, I invoke and celebrate Indra, ultimate leader and
guide of the people who listens to the prayers and
adorations of humanity since time immemorial and rules








[Names: Savasana, Nakih]
O lord of universal power, no mortal has ever
been able to attain equal fellowship with you, then who
can claim to attain equality with your power and






[Names: Tvotasastva, Jayema]
O lord of thunderous energy and power,
protected by you and in close association with you, we
pray, we may discover great wealth in the waters and in
the sun and win far reaching victories in our battles of
life.






[Names: Puruma]
Indra, lord most adorable, we honour you by
yajnas of corporate research and development, and we
adore you in many languages as you guide, advance
and protect the man of knowledge in our human
endeavours for new achievements and further advances.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 68 817






[Names: Yajno]
O lord of the clouds of shower, knowledge and
wealth, delightful is your association, exciting is your
guidance. The yajna of corporate action and advance-






Excellence for our body’s health, rise and expan-
sion for our children and grand children, expansion,
comfort and safety for our home, O lord, grant, grant us
rise and advancement for life’s excellence and joy.






[Names: Urumnrbhya, Devavitim]
Rise and advancement for the people, expansion
and development for lands and cattle, expansion and
improvement of highways for transport, we pray for,
and for that we think and research and plan, and we
seek the favour of divinity.




[Names: Somasya, Somas, Tisthanti]
In the ecstasy of soma joy and exhilaration of
achievement, six in twos come to me, leading lights they
are, abundant and delightful are their gifts and



[Names: Rjravindrota, Asvamedhasya]
I have got two sensitive and dynamic organs of
communication protected and promoted by Indra for
the body form of the spirit and for efficient working of
the body system.

[Names: Surathan, Asvamedhe]
For the body in service of the visiting resident
soul, I get another two fast and controlled organs in
fine shape for the systemic and yajnic working of the



[Names: Salasvan, Saca]
Six organs of perception in this body system,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 819


sophisticated and pervaded by Indra, the soul, with a
partner house keeper, the intellectual faculty, I have
received. They are all friendly participants in the holy
working of the system in divine service.





[Names: Svabhisuh]
In the midst of these simple and straight organs
of sense, fast but well steered, there is one which is
extremely generous and creative, the intelligence, which
holds the whip and the reins both, that is, the acceleration
and the steer and the brakes for proper movement of
the systemic chariot.





[Names: Avadyamadhi]
O brotherly team of dynamic workers and
winners in the battles of life, no mortal even addicted
to malignity and scandal can foist any blame or censure
on you.


Mandala 8/Sukta 69










[Names: Indra, Vishvedevah, Varuna, Devatah, Priyamedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Prapra, Dhiya]
For your progress, offer libations of holy fuel
and fragrance, triple refined and intensified, with
trishtubh hymns of Vedic formulae in the service of
Indra, cosmic spirit of energy and power, happy and
exciting, who inspires the brave and shines you with
versatile creative intellect for the advancement of your
science of yajna for further development.




0. Nadam va odatinam nadam yoyuvatinam.


[Names: Patim]
Indra is the resounding source of fresh energies,
roaring expression of maiden youthfulness, protector
and promoter of sacred sources of production and
nourishment such as cows which must not be killed or
hurt, and he is the relentless inexhaustible keeper of
your arrows for your targets of defence and






[Names: Srinanti, Somam, Soma, Janman]
Just as on the rise of dawn in the divine heaven
of light, the edifying rays of the sun beatify the Indra-
born beauty and freshness of life in the three regions of
earth, heaven and the skies, similarly, on the dawn of
divine vision in the intelligence of the soul, the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 821


revelations of divinity and reflections of omniscience
refine, intensify and edify the energy, power and beauty
of the soma gifts of Indra, this oceanic source of matter,
energy and excellence of life, for the trinity of body,
mind and soul.





[Names: Sunum]
To the best of your knowledge and culture and
with the best of your language, worship and adore Indra,
protector of stars and planets, lands and cows, language
and culture, creator of the dynamics of existence and
protector of its constancy.





[Names: Yatrabhi]
Let the vibrations of divinity, like crimson rays
of dawn which bring the sun to the earth, bring Indra
on to our sacred grass where we humans meet and pray
and celebrate the lord in song together.






[Names: Indraya]
Lands and cows, suns and planets, indeed all




objects in motion, exude for Indra, wielder of thunder,
the ichor of emotional adoration seasoned with ecstasy
like honey sweet milk mixed with soma which he
receives close at hand and cherishes.






[Names: Udyad, Indrasca, Madhvah]
Up let us rise on top of the sun and vast spaces,
reach the abode of Indra, and, having drunk the soma
sweet of ecstasy, let us be together across and over the
thrice seven stages of being in evolution in the purely
spiritual state of the lord’s presence as a friend.


(The thrice seven are the steps of physical,
mental and pychic evolutionary phases of existence in
three qualitative modes of being in the process of
becoming. The seven states of evolution in descending
order from pure being are: mahat, Ahankara and the
five elements, akasha, vayu, agni, apah and prthivi. The
three qualitative modes are sattva, rajas and tamas or
thought, energy and matter. Another way to explain the
perceptive organs and five organs of volition, the
twenty-first is antahkarana or psychic self. When the
psychic self or the soul in the existential state wishes to
rise back to the purely spiritual state, it has to cross the
twenty one stages and then be in the company of Indra,
the cosmic self, and even later, in the transcendental
state of absolute Being, the Spirit, the Brahmic state.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 823


This is set out it detail in the Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta






[Names: Arcata, Arcantu]
O lovers of Yajna, lovers of union and
communion with the divine, adore and worship Indra,
adore and worship again, worship again and again.
Worship along with your children and grand children,
just as the citizens adore and exalt a great city and the
glorious ruler of the celestial city.





[Names: Pinga]
The drum booms aloud, the bow string strikes
the arm guard, the string bells jingle, let the hymns rise
in honour of Indra.





[Names: Apasphuram]
When the dynamic senses of perception and
volition, controlled, unagitating and calmly withdrawn,
concentrate in the inner mind, then you receive the
showers of soma nectar of spiritual ananda for Indra,


the soul.





[Names: Apddindro]
Indra, the soul, seeking honour, fame and power,
loves the soma of ananda. Agni, leading scholar
advancing into the light of knowledge, loves the soma
of ananda. All brilliancies of nature and humanity love
the ecstasy of soma. Varuna, powers of love and justice,
all abide in the ecstasy of soma. All seekers of yajnic
action and divine dedication love the soma of spiritual
ananda of their creation like the mother loving her child.






[Names: Sudevo, Anuksaranti]
Varuna, master scholar and teacher, you are
divinely brilliant and generous whose seven streams of
knowledge and wisdom flow forth in words from the
master’s voice to the seekers, like water flowing from a






[Names: Takvo]
That soul is Indra, man of self control and self


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 69 825


power, who withdraws his scattered powers of senses
and mind, turns them inward and applies them into
meditation for the sake of generosity of the spirit, and
then as their patient master and leader, with the power
and grace of his self-possession, releases and relaxes
them in the state of peace. He is the sovereign soul.






[Names: Afidu, Bhinat]
Indra, the sovereign soul of self-power,
transcends all jealousy, malignity and enmity and, blest
with top handsomeness and grace of the spirit, breaks
open into words the mature knowledge and self-realised
spiritual food for the seekers.




[Names: Arbhako]
tum.


Neither a child nor an adolescent, the man of
mature mind abiding in a healthy body practices
meditation and realises the great, supreme, omnipotent
cosmic soul of universal holy action for the
enlightenment of all about Mother Nature and the father
of creation.








[Names: Adha]
O lord of golden grace, father and sustainer of
the house-hold of the universe, come and seat yourself
in the golden chariot of this human body and, together
as friends and companions, we shall ride this chariot of
heavenly light, thousand wheeled, invincible and
immaculate, moving on the road to peace and ultimate
good.




[Names: Artham]
davane.


Thus do yajnic and meditative souls holding
havis for homage adore and worship self-refulgent Indra
when, in order to realise the nature, character and
generosity, indeed the very presence of the lord, they
turn their self-controlled mind to the Divine Soul in
order to reach him.




[Names: Anu, Purvamanu]
asata.

Of these devotees of yajna and lovers of
meditative communion, those who sit on the holy grass
with a clean mind and offer oblations of spiritual love


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 70 827


in the style of the sages of old as ever achieve union
with the universal presence of the eternal Spirit.


Mandala 8/SuKta 70




[Names: Devata, Puruhanma, Visvasam]
gime.


I adore Indra, lord supreme, who rules the
people, and who is the irresistible and universal mover
by waves of cosmic energy, saviour of all humanity,
supreme warrior and winner of cosmic battles of the
elemental forces and who destroys the evil, darkness
and poverty of the world.




[Names: Indram, Hastaya]
to maho dive na suryah.


O man of universal devotion, exalt and glorify
that omnipotent Indra for protection and progress in
whom, as ruler and controller of the world, both justice
and mercy abide simultaneously, who holds the
thunderbolt of power in hand, and who is great and
glorious like the sun in heaven.








[Names: Nakistam]
No one can equal merely by action, much less
hurt even by yajnas, that person who has won the favour
and grace of Indra, lord divine who is rising as well as
raising his devotees high, who is universally adored,
universal genius, redoubtable and invincibly illustrious.






[Names: Asalham]
Unchallengeable, awful, victorious in cosmic
dynamics, in whose pervasive presence great and
tempestuous stars and planets, earths and heavens, all
in unison move in order and do homage in reverence,
such is Indra.






[Names: Yaddyava]
Indra, lord of thunder, if there were a hundred
heavens, and if there were a hundred earths, they would
not be able to rival you. Not a thousand suns, nor
heavens, earths and skies together would match you at
the rise in manifestation.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 70 829





[Names: Savistha, Savasa, Asman]
O lord of the thunderbolt, master and controller
of world’s wealth, honour and power, most potent and
lord of showers of generosity, with your generous and
creative power and grandeur you pervade the universe.
Pray protect, guide and promote us by your various and
wondrous modes of protection and progress in our
search for development of lands and cows, knowledge,
language and culture.


[Names: Etagva]
Never can an impious, ungodly mortal find that
food and energy in life which that other person can find
who yokes those dynamic energies and powers in his


search for progress which Indra deploys in his creative
and evolutionary programme of existence.






Invoke that great, adorable and friendly Indra




for the gift of power, energy and expertise for your
progress who is invoked and adored in the depth of the
seas, over lands and mountains and in the battles of the
brave for new heights.




[Names: Sura, Sravase]
mahe.


Brave Indra, lord of the wealth, honour and
excellence of the world, haven and home of all living
beings, inspire our will and intelligence for the
achievement of great wealth and competence for success
in life and raise us to great power, honour and excellence
to win high fame across the world.






[Names: Tvamna, Madhye]
Indra, lover and promoter of truth and rectitude,
you fulfil us with your gifts and reduce the maligners
of divinity to deprivation. O lord of boundless wealth
and power, raise us to the heights of the skies in the
midst of heaven and earth, and strike down the violent
and the destroyer with blows of retribution.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 70 831




[Names: Anyavratam, Friendly]
the person committed to destructive values, anti-human
organisation, anticreative and antisocial actions and
antinature and impious plans and programmes, punish
him with deprivation of comfort, self-satisfaction and
social privileges and assign him to sure elimination or
total change. The strong uncompromising ruler should
punish the violent, the terrorist and the killer to an equal
and opposite fate.






[Names: Tvam, Indrasam, Indrasa, Dhananam]
Indra, most powerful ruler and leader, our
benefactor, one of our own, in order to benefit us, pray
take up in hand these assets of wealth just as one holds
roasted rice in hand for distribution, and give it to us.
Take up the wealth again, our own man, and distribute
that too.






[Names: Sakhayah, Upastutim]
O friends, try freely to do good by way of yajna,
else how shall we serve Indra, lord of the bow and arrow,




with worship and adoration? He is the great benefactor
and ruler, light giver, abundant and gracious.




[Names: Bhuribhih, Yadittham]
paradadah.


O lord of grandeur and glory, destroyer of
suffering, ignorance and all difficulties in the way of
human happiness, since thus you give gracious gifts of
cherished wealth, light and joy to dear and holy
beneficiaries, to one and all of them, you are adored by
all sages of the sacred grass on the yajna vedi.






[Names: Karnagrhya, Ajam]
Indra, lord of wealth, power and glory,
benefactor of the brave and holy, holds in his power the
cherished wealth of perceptible knowledge and
awareness which he showers for us from the three
regions of heaven, earth and sky, just as, at our human
level, the master and sagely scholar holds the eternal
Vedic Word for us to hear and enjoy.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 71 833


Mandala 8/Sukta 71




[Names: Agni, Devata, Suditi, Purumidhau, Angirasau, Rshi, Tvam]
Agni, leading light of life, with your mighty
powers and grandeur, protect us against all material,


moral and social adversity and all mortal jealousy and


[Names: Nahi, Tvamidasi]
No wrath of man rules over you, all time dear


friend of humanity, since your very birth you are the
master and ruler of the earth.





[Names: Sano, Rayim]
Ruler of the earth as you are, O lord of infallible

energy and blissful flames of fire, bless us with universal


wealth with all the light, honour and excellence of the







No adversities, no enemies, can deprive that
generous man of his wealth, honour and excellence
whom you protect and promote.





O vibrant power of wealth, honour and
excellence, the man whom you inspire and exhort to
win wealth and to dedicate himself to the service of
divinities goes forward in the acquisition of lands, cows,
and the light of knowledge and culture under your




[Names: Puruviram, Puruvira]
Agni, lead us to wealth, brave happy progeny
and the perfect joy of life for men of charity and



MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 71 835




[Names: Urusya, Duradhye]
All pervasive, omniscient Agni, protect us and


leave us not to the sinner, the criminal, and the man of
evil thought and action.






[Names: Agne, Tvamisise]
Agni, lord of brilliance and generosity, let no


impious man deprive us of your generosity extended to
us. You rule, control and protect the wealth, honour and
excellence of the world.






[Names: Sakhe]
Agni, creator and treasure home of the world,


infinite energy, giver of peace and settlement, universal
friend, give us wealth as well as honour and glory for
the celebrants.


10.






[Names: Accha, Sirasocisam, Accha, Puruvasum, Puruvasu, Puruprasa]
Let all our songs of adoration rise fast to the




refulgent and glorious Agni. Let our yajna with homage
and havi move and reach the universally adored and
universally honoured Agni for the sake of universal






[Names: Agnim, Dvita]
of energy, for the gift of cherished wealth and power.
Agni is the immortal presence who appears among
mortals in both physical and spiritual forms, universal
yajaka, happiest and most blissful, arising in every home
stead of the people.






Adore Agni for all your service of the divinities
of nature and humanity, light agni in the process of every
holy programme, keep Agni in the fore-front in all your
acts of thought and will initially, and in every new
beginning serve and rely on Agni for every plan in the
field of life.



MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 71 837


[Names: Agnirisam, Agnirisa, Sasvadimahe]
tanupam.


May Agni as a friend give us food and energy
for sustenance since he rules over all the wealth and
powers of the world. We always serve and pray to Agni
for our children and grand children, he being the
universal giver of home and settlement as well as the
protector and sustainer of our body’s health.






[Names: Agnimilisvavase, Strasocisam, Purumilha]
Pray to Agni of bright flames with songs and
praise for protection and progress. O generous scholar,
study and serve Agni for wealth, famous among people,
Agni who provides home and happiness for the man of






[Names: Visvasu]
We adore Agni for driving away our enemies
from us and for giving us peace and settlement with
happiness. He is like a protector among people, giver
of home and adored by sages.




Mandala 8/Sukta 72






[Names: Agni, Havis, Devata, Haryata, Pragatha, Rshi, Haviskrnudhvama, Vidvan]
Come, devotees of yajna, celebrants of Agni:
Prepare the havi for oblation, let the high priest come,
he knows the ministration of this yajna, let him serve






[Names: Jusano]
Let the hota, offerer of oblations, come and sit
close to the fire in bright flames, loving and honouring
at heart the friendship of this Agni.






[Names: Antaricchanti, Rudram, Rudra, Grbhnanti]
Dedicated priests and scholars among people,
with the best of their mind and intelligence, try to raise
Agni, mighty fiery power immanent everywhere, and
having raised it, they try to describe and adore it with
words of homage.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 72 839




[Names: Jamyatitape, Drsadam]
Agni, immanent, friendly and rising as the sun,


heats up the sky, bearing health and energy for
nourishment, it rides the vapours of water and with its
catalytic energy breaks the cloud.






[Names: Caran, Veti]
Agni, newly risen, playing as hyperactive and


shining bright, brooks no obstruction and for its
description and assessment needs a celebrant appraiser.






[Names: Dama]
And as its mighty boundless expansion grows


on, intensely bright with sun-rays, its sphere of energy
is seen like the halo of glorious light round the solar
chariot.








[Names: Duhanti, Tirthe]
Five senses of perception alongwith two others,
mind and intelligence (i.e., mana and buddhi), at work
distill the power and glory of Agni, like seven milk-
maids milking one cow on the bank of a sacred river,
and give it expression in the resounding notes of cosmic






[Names: Indrah, Indra, Khedaya]
Just as Indra, electric energy of the sun in the
form of lightning, breaks the cloud and brings down
showers from the sky, so does the divine human soul by
threefold passion of intellect, will and emotion, with
the assistance of ten senses of perception and volition
and ten pranic energies, distill down the treasure glory
of Agni from the sun into threefold wealth of knowledge,
action and prayer committed and dedicated to divinity.






[Names: Pari, Madhva]
Just as Agni rising in threefold flames, white,
red and dark, comes at lightning speed to yajna with
youthful power and the priests anoint and serve it with
homage, so does the light of divinity with revelations
of sattva, rajas and tamas and the values of knowledge,
action and prayer, youthful, bright and vibrant, come to
the mind of the celebrant, and then the yajnic senses,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 72 841


mind and intellect and the pranic energies of the devotee
express the power and grace of Agni in celebration.






[Names: Sincanti, Nicinavaramaksitam]
With homage the devotees serve Agni, radiating
and vibrating on high, pervading all round, full of peace
and joy, just an inverted well, inexhaustible, with release
of showers on the down side for the celebrants.






[Names: Abhyaram, Avatasya]
When the fount of the divine reservoir is
released toward the quiet mind of the devotee, then the
lord of clouds and soma fills the lotus of his heart with
the honeyed ecstasy of divine grace.






[Names: Gava, Ubha]
The psychic base of the devoted seeker of
meditative communion is highly creative. O mind and
senses attended with both knowledge and action of
divine character, rise high and reach close to the
reservoir of divine grace and win the showers of bliss.








[Names: Rasa]
O seekers of communion aspiring for divine
ecstasy, when the communion is achieved, collect and
fill the mind to overflowing with nectar and offer the
oblations of ananda to the heavenly glory of Agni rolling
across and over heaven and earth.






[Names: Mitho]
The aspirants know the one inmate spirit of their
common home and they all abide and move together in
and with the one intimate spirit of their own kind as
children move around attached with their mothers (each
with the one that is his, but all mothers are the same,
the one common Soul).






[Names: Indre]
Agni, receiving, kindling and consuming the
oblations in the flames, turns the havi into light in
heaven as offering in the cup of faith to Indra. (So does
the yogi turn his thoughts through contemplation into
light and joy in the higher personality to offer it as


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 72 843
homage to Indra.)
[Names: Adhuksat, Suryasya, Suryas]
May the lord of faith and power accept the
offering of nourishing food and energy through seven
stages of nature’s evolution, and by seven-rayed
chemistry of the sun turn it into showers of spiritual
fulfilment for the yajaka.



[Names: Somasya, Somas, Mitravarunodita, Tadaturasya]
O Mitra, O Varuna, O lord of love and justice,
may I, at the rise of the sun, receive the heavenly light
and joy of soma, rejuvenating nectar of life for the
supplicant yearning for fulfilment.





And then let the devotee with holy voice
celebrate and glorify this state of divine fulfilment,
promised of Agni, destined for man, unto heaven.




Mandala 8/Sukta 73



[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Gopavana, Atreya, Saptavadhri, Rshi, Udirathamrtayate, Anti]
O Ashvins, harbingers of the new dawn of light
and energy, arise for the man of simple straight paths of
rectitude, harness your chariot and come. May your
power and protection be close to us for us.

Within a wink of the eye, come by the chariot
of instant speed. Let your protections be with us at the



With the cool of comfort and security like snow,
cover the misfortunes of the man bereft of threefold
security for body, mind and soul in life. Let your
protections be with us at the closest.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 73 845




[Names: Kuha, Syeneva]
Where are you staying? Where had you gone
while we called? Where did you fly away like the eagle?
Pray be with us always with your constant protections
at the closest on hand.



[Names: Yadadya]
If now anywhere, in fact any time, you hear our
call, let your protections be instantly with us at the
earliest at the closest.

Openly and instantly approachable Ashvins, I
come to you as my own people at the closest. Let your
protections be instant and sure for us at the earliest and



[Names: Avantamatraye]
Ashvins, for the man of threefold deprivation
of health care, housing and employment, provide a home




of security and maintenance. Pray let your protections
be with us always without delay at the closest.






[Names: Varethe, Agnimatapo]
Ashvins, harbingers of protection and relief for
the deprived and underprivileged in matters of care,
maintenance and education, bring help to the persuasive
supplicants and remove the gusts of scorching heat and
air from their head and heart. Let your protections be
instantly available at the closest.






Ashvins, harbingers of peace and appreciation,
reward and pacify the poet, master of seven metres who,
with his hope and imagination, captures the flames of
fire and passion in poetry and let your protection and
patronage be with us at the closest.






O harbingers of the showers of wealth, honour
and excellence, pray come here and listen to my call


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 73 847


and adoration. Let your protections and exhortations
be with us at the closest in the heart.






[Names: Kimidam]
What sort of talk is this going round about you
in the old outmoded style that you are nothing more
than growing in years? O youthful harbingers of new
light and freshness, let your protections and inspirations
be with us at the closest and newest.



[Names: Samanam]
You are the same class and character as we,
equal, the same brotherhood with us. Ashvins, let your
protections and promotions be with us at the closest at
the same level of class, character and species.


Come by that chariot of yours which goes
around to various regions of the universe and specially


goes over the tracks of heaven, earth and sky. Pray let
your protections be with us at the closest wherever you







Come with a thousandfold wealth of cows, lands
and cultures and horses and achievements of progressive
victories. Let your protections and promotions be ever
closest with us.



[Names: Mano]
With all the thousandfold wealth of lands and
cows and horses and achievements, pray do not leave
us, do not forsake us. Let your protections and
promotions ever remain with us at the closest.



[Names: Arunapsurusa]
The golden glory of the dawn is risen and brings
in the light according to the law divine. Let your
blessings and protections ever be closest to us.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 74 849




[Names: Asvina]
Ashvins, the sun rises and dispels the darkness
as an axeman fells the tree. Let your boons and blessings
ever be with us at the closest.






[Names: Puram]
Brave humanity, whenever you are obstructed
by dark forces, arise and break them down like a fortress
of evil. Ashvins, let your forces and protections be ever
with us at the closest for inspiration and exhortation.


Mandala 8/Sukta 74








[Names: Agni, Arksha, Shrutarva, Danastuti, Devata, Gopavana, Atreya, Rshi, Visoviso, Purupriyam, Purupriya, Agnim, Ssusasya, Agni]
O people of the world, seekers of light and
advancement by every community for every community,
for the sake of you all, with sincere thoughts and
homely friend loved by all for the common good.








[Names: Mitram, Mitra, Prasamsanti]
Adore and exalt Agni whom yajnic people serve
as a friend, with havi in hand and oblations of clarified
butter, and celebrate with songs of praise.





[Names: Panyamsam, Havyanyairayaddivi]
Serve and exalt the adorable Agni, all pervasive,
who rises, strengthens all divinities of nature and
humanity and raises the oblations to the heavens and
heightens their vitality and power.






[Names: Aganma, Agnimanavam, Agnimanava, Yasya]
Let us rise and reach Agni, highest divinity,
greatest destroyer of evil and darkness and friend of
humanity, under whose blessed shelter the great, renowned
and distinguished heroes find inspiration and rise.






[Names: Amrtam, Ghrtahavanamidyam]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 74 851


Let us rise and reach Agni, light of life,
immortal, omnipresent, dispeller of darkness and
ignorance, glorious, giver of delicious delicacies, and



[Names: Sabadho, Juhvanaso]
Let us adore Agni whom all the yajnic people,
in spite of limitations, eagerly invoke and serve with
ladlefuls of havi.



[Names: Iyam, Mandra]
Agni, lord of light blissful, gloriously
manifested, holy and divine in action, wise, majestic
and revered as an honourable guest, this adorable light
of your wisdom, we pray, may be vested in us.






[Names: Samtama, Taya]
Agni, that light and wisdom of yours, most
blissful, most delightful, may be dear to us. And let our
adorations too be dear to you. Exalted by that, arise and
grow and let us grow too.








[Names: Sravasi, Sravah, Dadhita]
That light and power, splendid and boundless
with the might and majesty of divinity, may bear greater
and greater potential closer and closer to us in the
progressive task of the elimination of darkness and evil.






[Names: Sravamsi]
Adore Agni who gives us the wealth of earth
and progressive achievement by chariotfuls of glory.
Worship him, awfully brilliant, saviour and protector
of the good and truthful like Indra, whose renowned
victories and astonishing gifts people praise and
celebrate one by one, one after another.






Agni, light of the world, dear as breath of life,
all purifier, whom the poet visionary of light and the
Word celebrates, pray listen to our invocation and song
of adoration.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 74 853





Agni, O lord of light, whom people adore for
victory and advancement enthusiastically in spite of
limitations, pray enlighten us in the programme of the
elimination of evil and darkness from life.






[Names: Aham, Srutarvani, Sardhamsiva, Sirsa]
For the good of people in general, for the
learned, and for the joy of soma against the intoxication
of pride, I invoke Agni as well as the light and powers
of divinity to come and sanctify the heart and head of
all the four classes of initiated people of the sacred hair.






[Names: Surathaso]
The four fast and smart celebrants of the most
potent Agni riding the holy chariot of life may, I pray,
bring me food and energy as well as the light and vitality
of divine inspiration.







[Names: Satyamit, Nemapo, Savisthadasti]
O divine powers of light and vitality of
perception and imagination, generous and overflowing
with spirit and enthusiasm, I say this true of you and to
you and of and to the dynamics of cosmic intelligence,
there is no mortal power which is a greater giver of
bliss and joy than the most potent and most brilliant


[Names: Agni]
Mandala 8/Sukta 75






[Names: Devata, Virupa, Angirasa, Rshi, Yuksva]
Agni, light and life of the universe, as a master
of the chariot of creation, harness your powers of cosmic
dynamics which carry the divine wealth of life for us
and, as the first and original high priest of creation, come
and grace our hearth and home of familial creative
activity in the service of divinity and observance of





[Names: Dharma, Sradvisva]
And O light of the world, omniscient lord, speak
graciously to us, seekers of light and divinity, and reveal


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 75 855


in truth the facts and processes cherished and valued
on top of everything else for the good of life in existence.






[Names: Tvam, Rtava]
creator of strength and energy, we invoke, you are the
one adorable, giver and keeper of the cosmic law of
truth and rectitude.






[Names: Ayamagnih, Satinaspatih, Murdha]
This Agni is the protector and promoter of a
hundred and thousand forms and degrees of food,
energy, advancement and victories of wealth, honour
and excellence of the world, lord supreme and all time
visionary and omniscient creator and poetic prophet and
teacher.





[Names: Nediye]
Just as craftsmen bend and complete to
perfection the felly of a wheel, so bend in homage to
Agni, feed the fire, giver of vitality, with conjoint action




and oblations, and O fire of yajna, dear as breath of life,
closest friend, pray complete the circuit of yajnic
regeneration for the yajakas.




[Names: Tasmai, Vrsno]
O man of diverse and conjoint forms of action,
with words of eternal voice energise your holy song of
adoration and let it rise to that self-refulgent omnificent
Agni who is the harbinger of regeneration.





[Names: Kamu, Panim]
Shall we overcome and throw out the thief
hiding within our lands and cows by the force of this all
watching Agni of far sighted vision?






[Names: Krsam]
Let the forces of the communities of people
protected by noble and divine powers never forsake us
just as the radiating dawns do not neglect us, and just
as cows too, which must not be hurt do not abandon


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 75 857






[Names: Urmirna]
Let not the malevolent tyranny of the jealous
smite us like billows of the sea striking the ship.





[Names: Namaste, Amair]
Salutations to you, Agni, refulgent lord of
generosity. The people too adore and exalt you. Pray
ward off and throw out the enemies and unfriendly
forces by your laws and powers.






[Names: Kuvit, Urukrduru]
Agni, refulgent lord, give us ample and high
quality wealth for the development and expansion of
our lands and cows, and let us too vastly expand and
highly rise in life.








[Names: Samvargam]
Agni, do not abandon us in this great battle of
Instead, win holy wealth like the yajaka gathering sacred
grass for the vedi to perform the yajna.






[Names: Anyamasmad, Vardha]
Agni, let this evil and calamity fall upon
something else opposed to us and our life and health
and frighten all such things away. Pray promote our
inward strength and courage like our steadfast patience
and vitality.





[Names: Yasyajusan]
Agni loves and joins the yajnic efforts of the
man of humility and generous offerings who, also, shuns
negative and unproductive social acts. Such a man,
indeed, Agni protects, promotes and advances in life.






[Names: Parasya, Yatrahamasmi]
Prior and in preference to the forces of the proud
and high, come and help the humble and the lowly where


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 76 859
I, too, abide better in the spirit than in the pride of power.


[Names: Vidma, Adha]
Agni, lord of light, we know and realise your
universal acts of protection and grace and we pray for


the peace and joy of the blessings of your fatherly
presence for all time.


Mandala 8/Sukta 76






[Names: Indra, Devata, Kurusuti, Kanva, Rshi, Imam, Indram, Indra, Marutvantam, Marutvanta]
I invoke the almighty Indra, omnipotent spiritual
power and presence of existence who commands the
winds and pranic energies of nature and rules them by
his lustrous vigour and vitality, and I pray that he may
over material fluctuations of the mind.






[Names: Ayamindro, Marutsakha, Vajrena, Sataparvana]
This Indra, friend of winds and pranic energies,
with hundred-fold discipline of spiritual power like the




thunderbolt can destroy the dominating shadows of the
evil of darkness and ignorance on way to the soul’s


[Names: Vavrdhano, Marutsakhendro, Srjantsamudriya]
Growing in strength, Indra, the divine soul,
friend of winds and cosmic energies of universal prana,
scatters the clouds of darkness there by releasing the


streams of waters from the sky, and the streams of
ananda from the heart.






[Names: Ayam, Indrena, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
This is Indra, for sure, the soul blest with the
energy of prana, by whom is won this light of heaven
by the grace of divinity for the enjoyment of divine joy.






With various songs of adoration we invoke and
winds and pranic energies, gracious lover of truth and
the truthful, lustrous and sublime.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 76 861






[Names: Asya, Somasya, Somas]
With the ancient voice of divine revelation, we
invoke and worship Indra, commander of cosmic winds
and energiser of pranic energies for the protection of
this world of the lord’s creation of joy and soma ecstasy.





[Names: Marutvan, Satakrato, Somam, Soma, Marutva, Asmin, Purustuta]
Indra, lord of pranic energies and giver of
showers of joy over a hundred divine acts of grace,
universally sung and celebrated, pray protect and
advance this world in this yajna of divine and human
creation.





[Names: Tubhyedindra, Marutvate, Marutvat, Hrda]
Indra, lord of cosmic energies, commander of
thunder and clouds of shower, in your honour only have
these lovers of divine ecstasy enacted the soma yajna
of divine worship where the singers of holy song adore
you with Vedic hymns.







[Names: Pibedindra, Sisana]
Indra, friend of cosmic winds and lover of
tempestuous humans, whetting your thunderbolt with
the light and lustre of justice, protect and promote the
ecstatic creations of the lovers of divinity in their
cherished programmes of progress.


[Names: Uttisthann, Sipre, Somamindra]
Indra, lord of the universe, rising with your
might and majesty, protect and energise both heaven
and earth and promote the soma of life’s vitality created


in both heaven and earth by nature and humanity by





[Names: Anu]
Indra, when you stimulate and energise the soma
vitality of life created by nature and humanity, and when
you rise as the destroyer of the negativities of the
counterforce, then both heaven and earth vibrate and
celebrate your majesty in awe with admiration.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 77 863




[Names: Vacam, Indrat]
I study, measure, develop and pray for language
revealed in eight works, 1.e., four Vedas and four
Upavedas, spoken across four classes of humanity and
through four stages of the individual’s development
from birth to death, developing over nine blooming
branches like flower garlands across nine regions of
the earth, ultimately touching the truth of divine reality,
the Word Imperishable descended from and ascending
to Indra, lord of omniscience across the countless
branches of dialects and structures.


Mandala 8/Sukta 77


[Names: Indra, Devata, Kurusuti, Kanva, Rshi, Jajnano, Srnvire]
Coming to the stage of self-knowledge and
responsibility, let Indra, world ruler, ask the mother
power: Who are the terrible ones? Who are the notorious
ones?






[Names: Adim, Savasyabravid]
Let the mother power that makes him rise to the
office of Indra, she having the full power to create,




advise and decide say: O son, ruler and protector of the
state of humanity, one is the demonic spider-like weaver
of sinister devouring plots, the other is the serpentine
master of crookedness and sabotage, which two you
should counter and eliminate.






[Names: Samit, Pravrddho]
Having known the two, the plotters and the
saboteurs, let Indra, ruler and destroyer of evil and
spokes of a wheel, press them down into fixed holes in
the nave and the rim, work and reel them round to the
point of exhaustion, and thus raising himself and the
rule to higher power, become a successful manager and
destroyer of evil by engagement and application.


[Names: Ekaya, Indrah, Somasya, Somas]
With a single stroke of policy, Indra protects
and promotes thirty centres of exhilarating soma


saboteurs of the nation.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 77 865




[Names: Indro]
For the advancement of the holy and intelligent
people, Indra scatters the selfish forces living purely
for physical and material values on stupid and baseless
planes of existence.

[Names: Niravidhyad]
Indra, the ruler, should break the clouds for
showers of rain, open out caverns of mountains to drive
and expand the armaments for defence.



[Names: Satabradhna, Yamindra]
be hundred pointed and thousand phased but one, united
and integrated, which, O ruler Indra, you take up as the
sole, active characteristic of your rule.






[Names: Tena, Sadyo, Rbhusthira]
O constant visionary of adamantine will and




unshakable action, dynamic and ever new, by that plan
and execution bring food and fulfilment for men, women
and the celebrants.






[Names: Hrda]
All these deeds and enterprises most generous
and creative, planned and executed, you hold firmly in
your mind with a liberal heart.






[Names: Visvet, Satam]
Indra, Vishnu, too, lord omniscient and
omnipotent, as wished and prayed, brings in all these
hundreds of great things, cattle wealth, milky delicacies
and rain laden clouds.





[Names: Tuviksam, Ubha]
Mighty is your bow, shooting far your arrow,


well doing and protecting peace and well being. Safe
and secure is your defence, golden gracious. Both your


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 78 867


arms, internal security and external defence, are fully
trained and civilised, they protect property, safeguard
truth and law, and advance culture and refinement.


Mandala 8/Sukta 78





[Names: Indra, Devata, Kurusuti, Kanva, Rshi, Purolasam, Indra, Sata, Sura]
Indra, lord ruler of life and the world, bring us a
thousandfold gifts of delicious foods and soma drinks
and, O lord potent and generous, bring us hundreds of
cows and more of cattle wealth.





[Names: Saca]
Bring us truth and beauty in manifestation,
literature, culture and progress, and the ornaments of
life, golden gracious for the peace of mind and joy of
the heart.






[Names: Puruni, Tvam]
Lord of life, giver of peace and settlement,
potent and invincible, bring us manifold gifts of life,




sweet to the ear, blissful. We hear you alone are the lord
of wealth, honour and beauty.






[Names: Nakim, Nanyas]
No one augments the beauty and glory of life
other than you, none else the giver, none else is the
sharer, none else, O brave and generous lord, a better
guide and greater leader of the wise.

[Names: Nakimindro, Visvam, Srnoti]
No one can equal Indra in action, no one in
power, he is the powerful, he hears and sees all that is
and all that happens in the world.



[Names: Pura]
Undaunted and invincible, he watches the pride
and passion of mortals, watches and humbles them




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 78 869




[Names: Kratva, Vrtraghnah, Somapavnah, Somapavna]
He is the doer, perfect and ever self-fulfilled is
the passion and desire of the lord who is all conqueror,
all ordainer, destroyer of evil and darkness, and loves
the peace and joy of life’s beauty and ecstasy as soma.






[Names: Soma, Sudatvaparihvrta]
O Soma, lord of peace and joy, in you
concentrate all wealth, honour and excellences of the
from crookedness and ambiguity as you are, simple and






[Names: Tvamid, Tvamasvayur]
My desire for food and fulfilment, for lands,
cows, literature and culture, for gold and the beauties
of life, and for horses, transport, advancement and
achievement, all this concentrates in you, you alone.








[Names: Tavedindraham, Dinasya]
Indra, by virtue of hope and aspiration centred
in you, I take up the sickle in hand to reap the ripe grain
for my portion. O lord of munificence and glory, fill up
my hand with the day’s collection of grain and my mind
with the light of day.


Mandala 8/Sukta 79






[Names: Soma, Devata, Krtnu, Bhargava, Rshi, Ayam, Somah, Soma, Rsir]
This is Soma, lord supreme of peace and joy,
doer, maker and creator of the universe, ruler of the
world in existence, uncomprehended and incomprehen-
sible yet bursting forth to our vision and knowledge by
direct experience of his creative omnipotence. He is all
time visionary watching and creating all, vibrant
omnipresent power reflected and apprehended through
his poetic creation of this world of beauty and mystery.






[Names: Abhyurnoti, Premandhah]
Soma that clothes the naked, cures all the sick
and suffering of the world, gives eyes to the blind to
see and legs to the lame to walk.



MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 79 871




[Names: Tvam]
You, Soma, lead the good to extensive freedom
and protection against waste and exploitation, jealousy
and enmity, and the evil and suffering caused by others.






[Names: Yaviraghasya]
Soma, lover of peace and joy, protector of the
simple and honest people of rectitude, by your divine
love and kindness of heart and your universal potential
of the light of heaven, drive away the jealousy and
enmity of the sinners and criminals from all over the





[Names: Arthino, Vavrjyus]
By the grace and munificence of Soma, the
seekers obtain their object of desire, the needy receive
the gift of the giver, the thirsty satisfy their thirst with








[Names: Vidadyat, Premayus]
By the grace of Soma, the devotee recovers what
he lost earlier, the lord exhorts and exalts the yajnic
performer and observer of the law of truth, and he
increases, strengthens and fulfils the life which the
celebrant has yet to live.





[Names: Susevo, Bhava]
Soma, you are the giver of peace and bliss for
us, merciful, sober at heart and beyond all disturbance
and agitation. O lord, bless us with peace and well being





O Soma, ruler and peace giver of the world,
disturb us not from our state of settlement, strike us not
with fear, torture us not with the flames of passion and






[Names: Rajannapa]
O lord ruler of the world, whatever and wherever
I happen to see the displeasure of divinities in our home,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 80 873


pray ward that off. O generous and virile lord of peace
and good will, throw out the jealous and the enemies,
ward off all the violent and destructive forces from us.


Mandala 8/Sukta 80





[Names: Indra, Devah, Devatah, Ekadyu, Naudhasa, Rshi, Nahyanyam, Satakrato, Tvam, Indra]
True it is, O lord of infinite good action, Indra,
be kind and bless us with peace.





have ever protected us since time immemorial for the
sake of advancement and victory in our battles of life.
Pray be kind and gracious to bless us with peace and
joy as ever before.






[Names: Kimanga, Kuvit]
O lord dear as breath of life, sustainer of the




weak, inspiring protector of the creative and progressive
as you are, would you not strengthen us and bless us
more and ever more?




[Names: Purastadenam]
Indra, lord of thunderous action, pray protect
our chariot of life even if it lag behind and let it move
on ahead for the sake of our survival and advancement.



[Names: Hanto, Upamam, Move]
our chariot on to the front rank, let the honour and prize
of victory be closer at hand.





[Names: Asmantsu]
Protect our chariot racing for victory. Every
thing is easy and possible for you every way, is there
anything beyond? Pray justify our ambition for victory
and make it possible.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 80 875




[Names: Tyam]
works. You are the stronghold of protection and giver
of fulfilment. This conscientious prayer, in truth and
according to time and season reaches you. Pray help us
reach the target.





[Names: Apavrkta]
The path of life is long and wide, the wealth of

life is won. Let no malignity, calumny or dishonour fall


to our share. Let all scandalous malcontents and






[Names: Turiyam, Adit]
The yajnic name that you have won for us is the
best and highest we love and desire in preference to
paternal, maternal or fraternal name, since by that name
only you as our master and sustainer have got us the








[Names: Avivrdhadvo, Tasma]
O Immortal divinities of spirit and nature, O holy
men and women of spotless character and generous
disposition, let the dedicated performer of daily yajna
exhilarate and exalt you with yajna and hospitality. You
too, pray, create and bless him with honourable wealth,
means and materials for success, and may the spirit of
light and intelligence, Agni, visit and bless him every


Mandala 8/Sukta 81




[Names: Indra, Devata, Kusidi, Kanva, Rshi, Indra, Mahahasti]
Lord of mighty arms, Indra, gather by your
expert right hand abundant riches for us which may be
full of nourishment, energy, wonderful beauty and grace





[Names: Vidma, Tuvimatramavobhih]
We know you as lord of universal action, all
giving, treasure hold of unbounded wealth and
boundless in power and presence with your favour and


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 81 877




[Names: Nahi, Sura, Bhimam]
When you give to bless mankind, no one can
just as no one can resist the mighty sun.





Come, let us sing and celebrate in honour of
Indra, lord and ruler of wealth, self-ruler and self-
refulgent. No one would harm us in respect of money,
materials and power.




Let man adore and celebrate Indra, sing in
honour of divinity, hear songs of adoration, and with
all wealth, power and honour thank and praise Indra as
the giver.







Indra, bear and bring and bless us with wealth,
power, honour and protection both by right and by left
hand, and never deprive us of this honour and





[Names: Adasustarasya]
Indra, generous and fearless lord of wealth,
honour and power, come close with divine courage and
force, bring us the honour and excellence of life, and
let it not waste away like the wealth of the uncharitable
and the ungrateful.






[Names: Asmabhih]
Indra, lord of glory, the wealth and knowledge,
honour and excellence that is yours and good for the
vibrant sage, pray bring in for us and let it grow among
05.






[Names: Sadyojuvaste]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 82 879


Your wealth, honours and victories instantly
rising, constantly moving and effective are all radiant
over the world, they come to us without delay according
to your will and order and celebrate and glorify you.


Mandala 8/Sukta 82






[Names: Indra, Devata, Kusidi, Kanva, Rshi, Madhvah]
O destroyer of darkness, evil and ignorance,
come rushing without delay, whether you are far or near,
and join us in this vibrant yajnic economy of the divine
order. (O man in search of the soul, rush in from roaming
around and join the living systemic world within at the




[Names: Tivrah, Somasya, Somas, Piba]
Come, grab at the sharp and strong soma
draughts of elixir, distilled, energised and most exhilara-
ting, and drink without inhibition to your heart’s desire.







[Names: Bhuvat]
Be happy with the food, and then let it exhilarate
you with the cherished fulfilment of your heart. Indra,
O soul of this existential yajna, let there be peace at
your heart unto the depth of your soul.






[Names: Upame]
Indra, happy and free from all foes, distractions
and contradictions, come in response to the hymns of
adoration, invited to the sublime glory of the light of
heaven.



[Names: Tubhyayamadribhih, Soma]
Indra, to you is offered this soma, soothing and
exhilarating it is, distilled by celebrated admirers and
seasoned with the spirit of light and power of divine
ecstasy, especially for you.



Indra, listen to my call, come and have a drink
of our distilled soma seasoned with milk and ecstatic
power to your total fulfilment of the heart and soul.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 82 881






[Names: Somascamusu, Pibedasya]
Indra, of the soma which is distilled and poured
in the cups and ladles of spiritual yajna for you, drink
to your heart’s desire since you yourself rule over the
ecstasy of the nectar.






Drink of the soma which shines in the cups of
yajna, in the beauty of human karma, and in the skies
like the glory of the moon, drink freely since you alone
rule over the nectar.






[Names: Syenah]
Of the nectar of ecstasy which the mighty sage
and scholar distilled by flights of spiritual imagination
from heaven and brought in by the rays of light across
the spaces, drink and enjoy since now you alone rule
over the sublimity and power of this nectar.




Mandala 8/Sukta 83






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Kusidi, Kanva, Rshi, Devanamidavo, Vrsnam]
We choose for ourselves the grand patronage
and protection of the generous brilliancies of nature and
humanity for our safety, security and advancement.






[Names: Vrdhasasca]
May Varuna, powers of law and justice, wisdom
and discrimination, Mitra, powers of light, love and
friendship, and Aryama, dynamic forces of nature and
humanity, guides and path makers of life, all of them
being powers of omniscience and givers of knowledge
and awareness, be our friends and cooperators and help
us advance in life.





[Names: Puru, Yuyam]
O leaders of the knowledge and efficiency of
truth and karma and the science of yajna, just as you
cross the seas by boat, similarly take us by karma across


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 83 883
the vast seas of life.






[Names: Vamam, Samsyam, Varuna, Vamam]
O divine leader of advancement, Aryaman, let
our action for progress be noble and successful. O
Varuna, divine power of judgement and value, may our
honour and reputation be good and noble. We opt for
only what is good, noble and gracefully successful.






[Names: Vamasya, Nemaditya]
O Adityas, generous and brilliant leaders of what
is good and noble, all-aware of good and evil, destroyers
of violence and negativities, you are the rulers,
controllers and guides only of the true, the good and
the beautiful. You never favour or approve of what is
evil and sinful.





[Names: Ayamidvah, Deva]
O Vishvedevas, generous and leading divinities
of earth and heaven, whether we abide in the home or
go out on the paths of the wide world, we call upon you


only, for the sake of guidance and advancement.






[Names: Indraisam, Indraisa, Maruto]
Indra, lord of glory, giver of power and honour,
Vishnu, omnipresent divinity, Maruts, winds and vibrant
humanity, Ashvins, harbingers of the new dawn, take it
that we have come in advance of these homogeneous
communities and accept us as your own.






[Names: Maturgarbhe]
Brotherliness and similarity as well as duality
and dissimilarity, O generous Vishvedevas, we acquire
in mother Prakrti’s womb and bear from there.






[Names: Indrajyestha, Adha]
O generous Vishvedevas, you, with Indra, lord
omnipotent as supreme, are and abide as heavenly and
brilliant in knowledge and divinity. That’s why I speak,
celebrate and pray to you.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 84 885


Mandala 8/Sukta 84






[Names: Agni, Devata, Ushana, Kavya, Rshi, Prestham, Mitramiva, Agnim, Agni]
I sing and celebrate the glories of Agni, lord
omniscient, light and leader of the world, dearest and
friend, who like a divine harbinger, reveals the light of
knowledge to us.






[Names: Kavimiva]
I adore Agni whom the divinities established
among mortals as the visionary poet and the spirit of
enlightenment and awareness, as intelligence and mind,
as will and passion, as perception and volition, as male
and female and as the yajna fire and the vital heat of the
body system, the two ways in which divine vitality










[Names: Tvam, Raksa]
protect and promote the families of the generous people,
listen to their voices of prayer and, by all your will and
power, protect and promote the children and grand
children of humanity.



[Names: Kaya, Varaya]
O creator, preserver and protector of energy, dear
as breath of life and vitality of existence, with words of
beauty and bliss, O light of the world, we offer our
homage and adoration to you, lord refulgent and great.



[Names: Dasema, Kadu]
Agni, to which mighty, potent, adorable power
other than you, shall we offer our sincere homage, when
and where present these words of prayer?






[Names: Adha, Vajadravinaso]
And you alone will provide happy homes and
peaceful establishment for all our people and bless us
with vitality, power, wealth and victory in response to


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 84 887






[Names: Kasya, Gosata]
O lord protector of the world, as a happy home
and shelter for the people, whose sincere and abundant
prayers do you accept and fulfil? His whose prayers to
you are enlightened and inspired by knowledge, wisdom
and sincere awareness of divinity.


[Names: Svesu]
In their battles of life and in their homes, people
adore and glorify Agni, that high priest of divine action,


first and original initiator, leader and guide and mighty
potent creator of the universe.






[Names: Kseti, Agne]
Agni, O lord self-refulgent, the man who lives
at peace in his home with the wealth of his peaceable
protective good actions and wards off evil, no evil
thoughts assail, such a man prospers, brave and blest
with holy wealth and good progeny.




Mandala 8/Sukta 85






[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Krshna, Angirasa, Rshi, Madhvah, Somasya, Somas]
Come in response to my call, Ashvins, both
observers and preserves of truth. Come to taste, protect
and promote the honey sweets of the soma joy of life.






[Names: Imam]
Ashvins, listen to this call of mine, accept this


holy song of adoration, come to taste, protect and
promote the honey sweets of soma we have prepared.




[Names: Ayam]
This ardent celebrant invokes you and draws
your attention, Ashvins, winners of wealth and victories,
to come, enjoy, protect and promote the soma joys of
life for peace and progress.



MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 85 889




Listen to the call of the celebrant worshipper
who draws your attention to the soma joys and beauties
of life. Come, taste, protect and promote the honey sweet
efforts of the creators, O brave leaders of the people.






[Names: Chardir]
O divine leaders and harbingers of light and
peace, give a comfortable home free from fear and
violence for the celebrant and vibrant scholar in order
that he and others may pursue, create and enjoy the
honey sweets of life’s beauty of knowledge, culture and
advancement with a drink of soma.






[Names: Gacchatam]
Thus with the gift of a home of peace and
freedom, Ashvins, harbingers of light and beauty of a
new morning, go to the yajamana who generously offers
holy oblations into the creative yajna for new
knowledge. Go to enjoy the soma of his achievement,
protect and promote his efforts.








[Names: Yunjatham]
Ashvins, complementary harbingers of the
showers of wealth, honour and excellence, harness the
roaring motive power in your strongly built, unbreakable
chariot and go to the house of the celebrant to promote
the honey sweets of knowledge and power for the peace
and joy of the world.






[Names: Tribandhurena]
Ashvins, come by a three stage chariot powered
by a three turbine motive force to promote the honey
sweets of new knowledge and celebrate the soma joy
of the new achievement.






O twin divine powers, preservers and promoters
of truth and rectitude, pray honour and fulfil my words
of prayer for the advancement of knowledge, power and
joy of humanity, and come to honour, protect and
promote the soma sweets of success.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 86 891


Mandala 8/Sukta 86








[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Krshna, Angirasa, Vishvaka, Karshni, Rshi, Ubha]
Both of you, Ashvins, nature’s complementary
powers of efficacy, are destroyers of suffering,
physicians, health givers for peace, and both of you
abide by and honour the word of the specialist in the
field of health and medicine. The all-prevading spirit
of health calls on you to restore the body’s health and
efficiency. Pray forsake us not, deprive us not of your
natural friendship and organismic companionship in
matters of health, release us from pain and suffering.






[Names: Katha]
How can a person disturbed in the mind study
and honour you for the control of complementary pranic
energies of prana and apana? When the pranic energies
are controlled in meditation, you give the practitioner
the intelligential capacity to achieve the desired




concentration for peace and power of the mind. Ashvins,
the universal lover of health invokes you for the system’s
efficacy. Pray forsake us not, deprive us not of your






[Names: Yuvam]
O givers of good health and nourishment to all
living beings, you bring knowledge, awareness and
wisdom to the aspiring devotee of omnipresent divinity
for the attainment of desired honour and excellence.
That’s why the whole world calls on you for the health
of body and mind. Ashvins, forsake us not, deprive us
not of your friendship.






[Names: Yasya]
We call for that mighty energy of prana which
is the source of wealth, simple and natural cleanser and
strengthener of body and mind, which though it may be
far off, still whose sweetest gift of nourishment of
intelligence is like the gift of nature, father, and
omniscient God. Ashvins, pray bring us that energy,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 87 893


forsake us not, deprive us not of your friendship, save
us with that friendship.






[Names: Rtena, Samayata, Rtam]
Self-refulgent Savita, creator and energiser,
blesses with peace, truth and the laws of life, and he
expands the law of life with the expansive universe.
Truth and the law of truth overcomes the challenges of
even the mightiest opponents. Ashvins, complementary
powers of Savita, forsake us not, deprive us not of your
friendship, give us freedom by that friendship.


Mandala 8/Sukta 87






[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Krshna, Angirasa, Vasishtha, Dyumnika, Priyamedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Dyumni, Madhvah]
viverine.


Splendid is your song of praise, Ashvins, come
like the soothing sprinkle of a fountain, both of you,
and drink of the honey sweets of soma, delightful as
distilled in the light of heaven. Come, best of men,
leaders of life, and drink like thirsty stags at a pool in


the desert.




[Names: Pibatam]
durona ठ ni patam vedasa vayah.


Come Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, sit
on the seats of holy grass on the vedi and enjoy and
participate in the honey sweet warmth of yajna, social
culture, knowledge and discipline of the human
community. Happy and joyful in the human home, in
the human body, enjoy, preserve and promote life with
the wealth and knowledge you have.







O Ashvins, the holy performers who are
dedicated to yajna invoke and call you both with all
your succour and promotions, so that you go to the place
and paths of those yajakas who are ready with the grass
spread on the vedi and there join the yajna for the
realisation of their higher aims of life.






[Names: Somam, Soma]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 87 895


Ashvins, come from the light of heaven, sit
together on the holy grass, drink the honey sweet soma
like thirsty deer in the forest, and, exhilarated, listen to
the song of adoration offered in honour of divinity.






[Names: Dasra]
Ashvins, holy powers of humanity and nature
living and acting in complementarity, destroyers of evil
and negativities, moving by golden paths of virtue,
protectors and promoters of the good and positive values
of life, growing to higher life by truth, observing and
advancing the laws of truth by following paths of truth,
come with your mind and senses inspired and
strengthened by nature and enlightenment and enjoy the
soma delight of life.






[Names: Vayam, Purudamsasa, Srustya]
Ashvins, virile men and women, vibrant, wise
and devout, we call upon you for victory and
advancement in energy, food, honour and excellence.
Ashvins, noble and cultured, destroyers of negativities,
versatile in various actions, come without delay with
active intelligence, full awareness and spirit of action.




Mandala 8/Sukta 88






[Names: Indra, Devata, Nodha, Gautama, Rshi, Indram, Indra]
We invoke and call upon Indra eagerly as cows
call for their calves in the stalls, and with songs of
adoration over night and day we glorify him, lord
glorious, omnipotent power fighting for truth against
evil forces, and exhilarated with the bright soma of
worship offered by celebrant humanity.






[Names: Dyuksam, Ksumantam, Purubhojasam, Purubhojasa]
We pray to Indra, lord of light, omnificent,
hallowed with heavenly glory, universally generous like
clouds of shower, and we ask for food abounding in
strength and nourishment and for hundredfold and
thousandfold wealth and prosperity abounding in lands,
cows and the graces of literature and culture, and we
pray for the gift instantly.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 88 897


[Names: Yadditsasi]
te.


Not the mighty fixed mountains can restrain you,
Indra, generous lord, when you come to give wealth to
a celebrant like me. No one can stop and frustrate your






[Names: Yoddhasi, Savasota]
gotama ajijanan.


You are a victorious warrior by your strength
and yajnic karma. You are supreme over all things born
of your wondrous power and majesty. This worshipper
adores you for the sake of protection and advancement,
the lord whom the imaginative wise realise in their soul






[Names: Anu]
You transcend the bounds of heaven by your
might. The regions of earth and skies encompass you
not. Indra, lord of majesty and omnipotence, bring us
food, strength and the divine power of sustenance for
life.








[Names: Nakih, Asmakam]
Lord of world’s wealth, power, honour and
excellence, when you bless the generous devotee with
the gift of your profusion, there is no restraint on your
will and power. O lord most glorious and adorable,
inspirer and intensifier of our adoration, let us know
the paths for our noble movement forward for the sake
of real victory and progress.


Mandala 8/Sukta 89


Indra Devata, Nrmedha and Purumedha





[Names: Angirasas, Rshis, Angirasa, Brhadindraya, Maruto, Yena, Jagrvi]
O Maruts, vibrant leaders of humanity in
knowledge and action, sing the resounding songs of
Sama which, like the sun, dispel the darkness and
eliminate evil, the same by which the sagely servants
of eternal law and cosmic yajna in the service of God
vitalise, recreate and extend that divine inextinguishable
light of life which is ever awake in the world of


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 89 899






[Names: Apadhamad, Devasta, Indra]
Indra burns and blows away all curses and
calumnies and shines in power and glory beyond
scandalous criticism. O refulgent lord of power and
force, commanding the host of Maruts, vibrant leading
forces of nature and humanity, brilliant and generous
sages and divines try to achieve kinship as friends with
you.






[Names: Indraya, Vrtram, Satapar]
O Maruts, vibrant brilliant leaders of humanity,
worship Indra, lord omnipotent beyond all bounds, and
study the divine powers immanent in nature, with hymns
of Vedic adoration. He is the destroyer of evil, dispels
darkness and ignorance, and destroys the negative
uncreative forces with his thunderbolt of hundredfold
power.








[Names: Sravascit, Arsantvapo]
O man of determined mind, boldly with
confidence as that of Maruts, offer adorations to Indra.
Let your honour and fame rise and ring far and wide
and hold it well under control with a bold mind. Let the
mother-like pranic energies run through the veins with
vitality, destroy evil and darkness, and win the light of
heaven.


[Names: Yajjayatha]
O lord of glory, Indra, matchless without
precedent, when you rise for the elimination of darkness,
then you manifest the wide space and plan the heaven,
earth and sky in their place in the cosmic order.


[Names: Tadvisvamabhibhurasi]
And then proceeds the cosmic yajna, formation
of light, sun and the joyous agni and vayu. And thus
you remain and rule as the supreme over what has come
into being and what is coming into being.






[Names: Amasu, Gharmam]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 90 901


You move the ripening flow of sap in the veins
of maturing forms of life. You raise and place the sun in
the high heaven. O celebrants, as in the heat of fire,
temper and shine your sama songs of adoration and,
with noble hymns of praise, sing resounding Brhat
samans of worship with love in honour of adorable


[Names: Indra]
Mandala 8/Sukta 90


Indra Devata, Nrmedha and Purumedha






[Names: Angirasas, Rshis, Angirasa, Indrah]
Indra, lord of universal energy, world power and
human forces, is worthy of reverence and invocation in
all our joint battles of life. May the lord of strongest
bow, destroyer of evil and dispeller of darkness and
ignorance, great and glorious as sung in the Rks, grace
our songs of adoration and faithful efforts with the
beauty and glory of success.






[Names: Tvam, Tuvidyumnasya, Savaso]
You are the original giver of means of effort
and success in all fields of life. You are the maker of




leaders and giver of the wealth and honours of life. Of
such great lord of glory and power, promoter and
protector of strength and power, we pray for wealth,
honour and excellence worthy of your glory.




[Names: Brahma]
mahi.


Indra, celebrated in holy voice, unsurpassed
songs are offered in your honour. O lord commander of
instant powers of transport, communication and
and offer to you in response to your glory.





[Names: Savistha]
Indra, lord of wealth and glory, you are eternal,
never subdued, and many a form of darkness and evil
you rectify or destroy. O lord most potent, armed with
thunder in hand, bear and bring the wealth of life for
the generous yajaka who offers libations liberally into
the yajna vedi and gives help to the needy.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 91 903




[Names: Tvamindra, Savasaspate]
Indra, lord all powerful, ruler of the world, yours
is the honour, yours is the creation of wealth and joy.
All by yourself, unsubdued, you eliminate irresistible
forms of evil and darkness by the power you wield for
the people.






[Names: Tamu, Mahiva]
Indra, lord of vibrant energy and power, we look
forward to you as our partner, enlightened ruler and
master, and competent giver of reward for our action
and endeavour. Your very presence is our shelter, a very
home like the great mother earth, and we pray we may
ever enjoy the favour of your good will and benevolence.


Mandala 8/Sukta 91




[Names: Indra, Devata, Apala, Atreyi, Rshi, Kanya, Astam, Somamapi, Indraya, Indra]
The maiden having consented to marry, whether
she is emaciated in health or bubbling with energy,
should get the soma, and while going home should speak




to herself for autosuggestion: I prepare you, soma juice,
for Indra, regenerative and procreative power, for
shakra, strength and vigour of robust health.






[Names: Asau, Imam]
The invigorating juice of soma which gives
strength and vigour of health and radiates from person
to person, family to family, O maiden, O youth, drink.
It is expressed and invigorated to the last drop. It is
delicious, nourishing, seasoned with delicacies, fresh
and exhilarating, and invigorating with pranic energies.






[Names: Sanairiva, Sanakairivendrayendo]
O soma, we are trying to know you and your
efficacy, we do not yet know you in full. Slowly, O soma,
slowly, drop by drop, flow for Indra, health and vigour
of life.






[Names: Kuvicchakat, Kuvit]
May soma give us strength and vigour. May it
work for our all round improvement in personality. May


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 91 905


it make us happier and wealthier. And may be then we,
not yet in favour of matrimony and husbands, grow up,
reconcile and regain their love.






[Names: Imani, Siras]
These are three vital systemic organs of the
growing and continuous body existence which, O soma
energy, raise and refine: One is the head, seat of the
intelligential system, the other is heart and lungs, seat
of pranic system, and yet another is the stomach and
pelvic region, seat of nutritional and sexual system.
Indra, lord of energy and power, let these three grow to






[Names: Atho]
And that which is the heart region and this body
system of mine and the head region of the body which
is to continue in the family line, let all these grow to



[Names: Satakrato, Apalamindra, Suryatvacam, Suryatvaca]
Indra, giver of health and energy, O soul, agent




of a hundred good actions, whatever the weakness of
this chariot, the body system, whatever the weakness in
the pranic energy system, and whatever weakness there
be in the coordination of the various systems of body,
prana and mind in relation to the soul, all these
weaknesses of the unprotected, under nourished and
immature maiden, I pray, make up and give her a radiant


Mandala 8/Sukta 92




[Names: Indra, Devata, Shrutakaksha, Sukaksha, Angirasa, Rshi, Pantama, Indramabhi, Visvasaham]
nam.


Sing in praise and appreciation of Indra, the
ruler, protector of your food, sustenance and
maintenance, all tolerant, all defender and all challenger,
hero of a hundred noble actions and the best, most
generous and most brilliant of the people.






[Names: Puruhutam, Puruhuta, Purustutam, Purustuta]
Call him by the name and title of ‘Indra’,
invoked by many, adored by all, worthy of celebration
in story, all time famous who is also a scholar of


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 92 907






[Names: Mahan]
Indra is a happy and joyous leader, giver of a
high order of living, energy and life’s victories. May
he, with love, courtesy and humility, lead us to life’s
greatness and glory.






[Names: Apadu, Indorindro]
Let Indra, the ruler, value, protect and promote
the soma homage mixed and strengthened with the
delicacies of life and offered by the generous and
enlightened people. (The mantra points to the circulation
of wealth and economy of the nation managed by the
tax payers and the ruling powers of the government.)






[Names: Tamvabhi, Somasya, Somas, Tadiddhyasya]
Honour and appreciate Indra with words of
gratefulness and adoration for the consumption,
protection and promotion of the soma homage offered
by the people. That tribute of honour is the real exalting
strength and success for the ruler.







[Names: Asya, Visvabhi]
Exalted by the joyous power of this soma
offering of the people, the brilliant and generous Indra
rules over all regions of the world by light and lustre
worthy of a ruler.




[Names: Tyamu]
O people of the land, that generous and brilliant
victor (Sudaksha) in all sessions of the enlightened
citizens and celebrated in their universal voices, you
elevate to the office of ruler for your defence, protection
and progress.





[Names: Yudhmam, Somapam, Somapa, Naram]
The ruler, warrior that hits the target, being
irresistible, protector and valuer of life’s joy, inviolable
and unsurpassable leader in irrevocable action: such is




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 92 909




[Names: Siksa, Puru]
Indra, leader in knowledge and wisdom, pursuer
of the path of rectitude, guide and lead us to ample
wealth and protect us through our struggle for victory
of honour and excellence.




[Names: Atascidindra, Satavajaya]
And from here, Indra, come to us, bring us the
food of life for a hundredfold and a thousandfold victory
of honour and excellence.





[Names: Ayama, Jayema]
O wielder of power and force, let us come to
have leaders and warriors endowed with high
intelligence and enlightened will for action and, O lord
of thunderous power, in the development of lands and
breaking of mountains, let us win our battles by virtue
of our cavaliers and pioneers.








[Names: Vayamu, Ukthesu]
Indra, achiever of a hundred noble victories, just
as cows feel delight in green grass, so we give you the
pleasure of victory in our songs of celebration.






[Names: Visva, Satakrato, Aganma]
O lord of a hundred noble actions, all mortals
are moved by hopes and ambitions natural to humanity.
O wielder of thunder and justice, let us too move forward
and realise our hopes and ambitions.






[Names: Savaso]
O protector and promoter of strength and
courage, seekers of ambition and victory look up to you
for inspiration and depend on you for encouragement.
No one excels you in incentive and exhortation.





[Names: Sano, Dhiya]
O lord generous as rain showers, come and help
us with constant and most favourable, venerable and
sublime, instant and munificent friendly intelligence,
planning and wisdom for action and advancement of


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 92 911
the human community.




[Names: Yaste]
madah. Tena nunam made madeh.


O lord of a hundred great actions, Indra, ruler
of the world, the most generous, brilliant and ecstatic
will and pleasure that is yours, by that, pray, inspire us
and let us share the joy of divine achievement.






That ananda, will and pleasure of yours which
is most wonderful and famous, which destroys evil and
darkness upon the instant completely and which is most
potent in inspiring the celebrant with the courage of
action, honour and dignity, with that, prey, inspire us
and let us share that ecstasy.






[Names: Vidma, Somapah, Visvasu]
O lord ruler of clouds and mountains, ever true
and constant, lover and protector of soma, the joy and
beauty of life, glorious destroyer of darkness, we know
as we receive that the courage and will, the sense of




honour and dignity that prevails among all the people
of the world is yours, inspired by you, and a gift of
yours to us.






[Names: Indraya, Arkam]
Let all our voices of admiration flow and
intensify the soma for the joy of Indra, and let the poets
sing songs of adoration for him and celebrate his






[Names: Yasmin, Indram]
In our soma yajna of life, in meditation, and in
the holy business of living, we invoke Indra, in whom
all beauties and graces abide, whom all the seven seers
in yajna adore, in whom all five senses, mind and
intelligence subside absorbed, and under whom all the
seven assemblies of the world unite, meet and act.






[Names: Trikadrukesu, Tamidvardhantu]
In three modes of body, mind and soul, the
devas, seven senses, the human consciousness and the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 92 913


In three regions of the universe, noble souls meditate
on the universal consciousness of the divine Indra. Thus
they perform the yajna of divinity in communion. May
all our songs of adoration glorify that supreme






All the flows of soma, joys, beauties and graces
of life concentrate in you, and thence they flow forth
too, Indra, lord supreme, just as all rivers flow and join
in the ocean and flow forth from there. O lord no one
can comprehend and excel you.





[Names: Vivyaktha]
O lord of universal love and grace as showers
of rain, ever awake in the world of existence, your divine
bliss pervades all that essence of soma, joy and beauty
of life, which is food for the human soul, and it ripples
and rolls in the blissful reservoirs of your divine








[Names: Aram, Aram]
Indra, O lord of power and joy, destroyer of evil
and suffering, let there be ample soma to fill the space
in the womb of existence, and let the flow of soma be
profuse for all the forms of existence.






[Names: Aramasvaya, Aramindrasya]
The sage, having drunk of the soma of divine
love, sings in praise of the dynamics of motion and
attainment and the music overflows, he sings of the
dynamics of creative production and power of
communication such as waves of energy, earth and cows,
and he sings profusely of the lord’s refulgent forms of
wealth, beauty and excellence.




[Names: Sakra]
Indra, ruler of the world, all potent and
competent doer of holy action, when we have distilled
and achieved the soma of bright knowledge, action,
wealth, honour and excellence of life, you feel highly
glorified, and that achievement is a high tribute to your




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 92 915




[Names: Parakattac]
Indra, lord of clouds and mountains, wielder of
thunder and lightning, our songs of adoration reach you
even from far where we happen to be. We pray we may
realise your presence intimately by direct experience
of the spirit, beyond thought and speech.



[Names: Sura]
You love and honour the brave, you are brave
yourself, you are definite in intention and undisturbed
in attitudes. You are now ripe for the perfection of mind
to experience the soul’s beatitude in, divine presence.

[Names: Adha]
Indra, generous lord of the wealth and glory of
the world, thus by practice and meditation, is divine
generosity cultivated and achieved by all those who bear
and bring the offerings to you. O lord of power and
immense generosity, be my friend and companion.





[Names: Matsva]
O ruler, protector and promoter of the honour
and excellence of life, just as a vibrant scholar of divine
knowledge never slackens into sloth from wakefulness,
so you too should never be slothful and half asleep. Be
ever wakeful, enjoy and guard the distilled essence of
knowledge and creative achievement of wealth, honour
and excellence.





[Names: Mana, Indrabhya, Indrabh]
Indra, powerful friend and ally in spirit and
conduct, let no force, howsoever strong it may be, from
any direction come at night and overtake us by violence.
With you as a friend and inspirer, let us counter that
attack and win.





[Names: Tvayedinra, Tvamasmakam]
Indra, O lord omnipotent, O intelligent soul in
the state of divine beatitude, O mind in the state of
perfect spiritual control, only with you as friend and
companion do we counter and win our adversaries in
life. You are ours, we are yours.






[Names: Tvamiddhi, Sakhaya]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 93 917


Indra, O lord omnipotent, O ruler of the world,
O soul in divine union, O mind in perfect state of
spiritual control, may the poets, celebrants, men in
action, all assistant forces in unison live their life in
dedication to you, working for you and thereby exalting
you in song and in action as their friend, guide and


Mandala 8/Sukta 93


Indra (1-33), Indra and Rbhavah (34) Devata, Sukaksha






[Names: Angirasa, Rshi, Uddhedabhi, Astaramesi, Surya]
O Surya, self-refulgent light of the world, you
rise and move in the service of Indra, lord of the wealth
of revelation, generous and virile, lover of humanity
and dispeller of the darkness and negativities of the
mind, soul and the universe.


(Indra is interpreted in this Sukta as the
omnipotent, self-refulgent lord and light of the universe,
as the sublime soul, and as the enlightened mind
according to the context of meaning reflected by the
intra-structure of the mantra.)








[Names: Nava, Ahim]
Indra who breaks off the nine and ninty
strongholds of darkness, ignorance and suffering by the
force of his lustrous arms and, as the dispeller of
darkness, destroys the crooked serpentine evil of the






[Names: Sana, Ssivah, Indrah, Indra, Urudhareva]
That same Indra who is blissful, a gracious
friend and companion, commands the wealth of cows
and horses, nourishment and achievement, knowledge
and enlightenment and distils for us power, honour and
excellence from nature such as the torrential showers
of rain.






[Names: Yadadya, Sarvam]
O sun, dispeller of darkness, whatever the aim
and purpose for which you rise today, let that be, O
Indra, lord ruler of the world, under your command and




[Names: Yadva]
Indra, O mind, O soul, ever rising as the world


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 93 919


expands, protector of truth and reality, if you believe
and say in all faith that “I shall not die’, then it shall be





[Names: Somasah, Somasa, Sarvanstan]
Indra, O dynamic intelligence, protector of the
knowledge of truth and reality, whatever somas of
knowledge, culture and enlightenment are distilled
either far away or close at hand, pray you move there to
record and protect them for us.





[Names: Tamindram]
That Indra, dynamic and enlightened mind and
intelligence, we cultivate and strengthen for the
elimination of the great waste, deep ignorance and
suffering prevailing in the world. May that light and
mind be exuberant and generous for us with showers of






[Names: Dyumni, Sloki]
Indra, mind and intelligence, was created for




enlightenment and for giving enlightenment. Most
lustrous and powerful, it is engaged in the creation of
joy. It is rich in the wealth of knowledge, praise-worthy,
and cool, gentle and at peace in the state of






[Names: Geet, Gira, Vavaksa]
Held in and by the voice of divinity like the roar
of thunder and like the flood of sun-rays, it is powerful,
unfallen, irrepressible and lofty with thought, so let it





[Names: Durge, Tvam]
Indra, adorable lord, praised and prayed, turn
even the difficult paths to simple and easy ones and, O
lord of wealth, honour and power, do it as and when
you wish, you are the master.






[Names: Yasya]
No power can violate your sphere of self-rule
and sovereignty nor what you ordain, neither human


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 93 921




[Names: Adha, Susmam, Ubhe]
And then, O lord of glorious countenance, both
the divine earth and heaven honour and serve your

[Names: Parusnisu]
Only you as mind and electric energy bear, hold
and maintain in circulation this bright vital liquid energy
as sap and blood in the dark and red life sustaining veins
and arteries of living forms.



[Names: Vidan]
When all the divine perceptive senses and
conceptive faculties of the mind rise to fight the dark
powers of evil, Indra, the soul, the higher mind, realises
the fierce powers of evil and stirs:








[Names: Ajatasatrur]
Then Indra, the soul, the higher mind, my
saviour, destroyer of evil, provides me strength, and,
undaunted, I stir and become unchallengeable by
enemies.






[Names: Srutam]
For your strength, high success and
advancement, I strive for and try to attain to the highest
strength of the people capable of fighting out and
eliminating the darkness, ignorance and suffering of life.





[Names: Purunaman, Purunama, Purustuta, Soma]
Indra, O higher mind, O soul, O awareness of
divinity, who are adored by many, celebrated by many
many names in many ways, arise in every person in
every soma yajna by with virtue of this intelligence,
this knowledge and this awareness which nature has
given to every person.






[Names: Bodhinmana, Srnotu, Sakra]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 93 923


May Indra, lord of universal intelligence,
destroyer of darkness, commander of universal success
and joy, we pray, know our mind and listen to us for our
heart’s desire for success.





[Names: Kaya, Kaya]
Indra, lord of power and prosperity, generous
as cloud showers, by which modes of protection and
promotion do you bless us with the joys we have, by
which methods and graces do you bear and bring the
wealth which the celebrants enjoy?






[Names: Kasya, Vrtraha, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
In whose soma yajna does Indra, generous giver
of showers of joy, master of cosmic dynamics, virile all
creative, destroyer of darkness, want and suffering, take
delight as a friend and participate in the creation,
protection and promotion of the soma joys of life?






[Names: Prayanta]
Indra, lord all joy and bliss, our guide, delighted




with the soma yajna of the generous yajamana, enlighten
him and bring him a thousandfold wealth, honour and




[Names: Patnivantah, Apam]
These sparkling life-giving streams of soma joys
of life created by Indra in the world flow to the thirsty
yajakas for their enlightenment and joy just as streams
of water flow to the unsatiating sea.





[Names: Ista, Acchavabhrthamojasa]
Cherished and lovely offers of havi offered into
the fire in the yajna of life exalt Indra, and with light
and lustre lead the yajamana to the sanctifying bath on
the completion of the yajna.





[Names: Ilha, Volhamabhi]
And may those brilliant and jubilant perceptive,
creative and communicative dynamics of yajna working
in unison conduct Indra, the soul, onward in the business
of living and lead the yajamana to the desired wealth


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 93 925
and nourishment of life.






[Names: Tubhyam, Somah, Stotrbhya, Indrama]
O lord of light, the soma delicacies distilled and
seasoned are ready for you. The holy grass seats are
spread on the vedi. Pray come in and bring in Indra,
wealth, honour and excellence of life for the celebrants.






[Names: Indramarcata]
O lord of light, refulgent and glorious stars and
planets such as sun, earth and moon bear your power
and potential and they bear the jewels of life for the
generous yajamana. O celebrants, celebrate Indra and
pray for the devotees that the lord may bless.






O lord of infinite acts of grace, I hold in faith
and abide by your divine power and law and I stand by
all the divine injunctions of holiness and piety set out
in holy writ. O lord omnipotent, Indra, be kind and
gracious to the devoted celebrants.







[Names: Bhadram, Sata, Yadindra]
Indra, lord of infinite actions of grace, when you
are kind to us and bless us with joy and well being, you
give us food, energy, knowledge and enlightenment so
that we may rise towards perfection as good human

[Names: Sano, Satakrato]
Indra, lord of infinite acts of kindness, when


you are kind and gracious to us, bear and bring us all
the good fortunes, prosperity and welfare of life.





[Names: Tvamid]
Blest with the beauty, grace and excellence of
life, we invoke and celebrate you only, greatest destroyer
of the darkness, evil and suffering of life since you are
the highest power kind and gracious to us.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 93 927




[Names: Upano]
O lord and protector of the joys of life, come to
us to taste the soma of life prepared by us with our mind,
imagination and senses in your honour, come to us for
the soma distilled by our heart and mind for you.






[Names: Dvita, Satakratuh]
Indra, hero of a hundred noble actions, greatest
destroyer of darkness who know both the way of
knowledge and the way of karma for the good life, come
to taste our soma of homage prepared by us with our
heart and soul for you.





[Names: Somanamasi]
Indra, O soul, dispeller of darkness and
ignorance, you are the experiencer of the joyous soma
pleasures of life. Rise and enjoy the knowledge and
wisdom collected and offered by the senses, mind and








[Names: Rbhuksanam, Rbhuksana, Rbhu, Vajt]
For food, energy and knowledge, may Indra,
lord of creativity, imagination and power, give us wealth,
honour and excellence of broad, versatile and expert
nature. May the lord of speed and victory grant us
sustenance, energy and advanced success in our pursuit
of progress.


Mandala 8/Sukta 94






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Bindu, Putadaksha, Angirasa, Rshi, Marut, Gaur, Sravasyur, Marutam, Maruta, Yukta]
The cow, the earth, nature herself, mother of
magnanimous Maruts, mighty men, is committed to
provide sustenance and honourable existence for them
and, joined with them in piety, bearing lovely gifts for
them, provides the food of life and love as a mother





[Names: Yasya, Suryamasa]
She in whose lap the Vishvedevas, divinities of
humanity and nature, hold, maintain and observe their
laws of existence, and the sun and moon wear their
beauty and refulgence so that we may see and appreciate
the glory of divine existence:


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 94 929






[Names: Marutah, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
That same beauty and glory of existence and
the mother’s magnanimity, all our poets and pioneers
celebrate in song and heroic action. O Maruts,
magnanimous men of might, come, act, and enjoy this
soma of the Mother’s gift of glory.






[Names: Asti]
O Maruts, mighty men of honour and action,
this soma of glorious life is ready, created by divinity.
Lovers of life and adventure, Ashwins, live it and enjoy,
those who are self-refulgent, free and self-governed,
and who are ever on the move, creating, acquiring,
giving, like energies of nature in the cosmic circuit.






[Names: Pibanti, Varunah, Varuna, Trisadhasthasya]
Mitra, men of universal love, Aryama, men of
adventure on the paths of rectitude, and Varuna, men of
judgement and right choice, continuously drink of this
soma created and sanctified by the procreative power
of divinity pervading in the three regions of the universe,




heaven, earth and the sky.






[Names: Indrah, Indra, Pratarhoteva]
And surely the delight and exhilaration of this
soma, Indra, the soul, inspirited with the power of
brilliance and awareness, like a yajaka at dawn,
experiences, and celebrates the ecstasy in dance and






[Names: Kadatvisanta, Arsanti]
How brilliant and blazing are the brave, we
scholars and warriors of pure and unsullied power and
expertise who, like turbulent waters, break the violent
down and move forward on the paths of rectitude!






[Names: Kadvo, Tmana]
And when and how can I choose and hope for
the protection and patronage of the great, noble and
generous leaders and pioneers who are brilliant by virtue
of their own innate power and personality?


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 94 931






Those Maruts, pioneers of nature and humanity,
who have extended the beauties of existence, both
earthly and heavenly, for the experience and higher
awareness of the joy and ecstasy of it,






[Names: Tyan, Maruto, Asya, Somasya, Somas]
Those, O Maruts, heroes of power and purity, I
call from your regions of light to come and to enjoy,
protect and promote this delight and beauty of the world
of existence.






Those Maruts, nature’s powers of divine energy
who stabilise the regions of heaven and earth in the
cosmos, those Maruts, scholars, scientists and pioneers
of vibrant nature and energy who maintain the laws and
values of heaven and earth in human life, I call, to join
them in the experience of the delight and ecstasy of this
joyous world of beauty.




[Names: Tyam]
That host of Maruts generous as showers of
clouds, abiding on high as on the peaks of mountains, I
invoke and call to come and join us in the celebration


of life’s beauty and glory for the experience and
awareness of its divinity.


Mandala 8/Sukta 95





[Names: Indra, Devata, Tirashchi, Angirasa, Rshi]
Indra, adorable lord of glory, when the soma
sense of life’s beauty and meaning is realised, let our
voices of adoration reach you fast as a charioteer, and
as mothers out of love incline to their children, so let
our voices too closely abide with you.






[Names: Piba]
Indra, lord ruler of the world, adorable soul, let
these somas of transparent knowledge and awareness
of crystalline purity distilled from life reach in homage


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 95 933


to you. Accept these, enjoy, protect and promote these
rolling round in space for you as food for life and soul.


blessing to the human soul in response to its karmic
homage presented in the previous mantra. When a
devotee offers homage of prasada in the lord’s temple,
the lord returns it with blessings for the presenter.)





[Names: Somam, Soma, Tvam, Sasvatinam]
Indra, enlightened spirit of the universe, enjoy
the soothing and illuminating soma of joyous knowledge
distilled from life and living literature by dynamic and
adorable sages of enlightenment. You are the master,
protector, sustainer and ruler of all the universal and
eternal generations of the people.






[Names: Srudhi, Suviryasya]
Indra, listen to the invocation of the devotee’s
voice of deep silence who offers service and homage to
you, and bless the devotee with wealth of brave progeny,
lands, cows, knowledge and total fulfilment. You are
great, unbounded is your munificence.







[Names: Cikitvin]
Indra, whoever creates and offers you the latest
song of joyous adoration, you bless with a mind and
intelligence for eternal illumination, universal
understanding and wisdom, and dedication to exuberant
awareness of eternal truth and law.






[Names: Tamu, Indramukthani, Purunyasya, Purunyas]
We adore and worship Indra whom hymns and
songs of adoration exalt, and we pray to him for the gift
of many forms of strength, honour and excellence.






[Names: Suddham, Suddh, Suddhair]
Come, friends, and, with happy chant of pure
holy Sama songs, adore Indra, pure and bright spirit
and power of the world, who feels pleased and exalted
by honest unsullied songs of adoration. Let the
supplicant with a pure heart please and win the favour
of Indra and rejoice.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 935


of Indra Suddho na a gahi Suddhah suddhabhiru-


[Names: Suddho]
May Indra, pure and absolute spirit, come to us
and bless us. May the pure immaculate spirit come with
pure modes of action and protection. May the pure spirit
bring us wealth, honour and excellence. May pure
divinity, absolute peace and bliss, be pleased and





Indra, spirit pure and absolute, may bring us
wealth, honour and excellence. The pure may bring
jewels of life for the generous yajamana. Indra, the pure,
in order to eliminate evil and dispel darkness and
suffering, loves to give us strength, sustenance and
advancement, the lord pure and blissful that he is.


Mandala 8/Sukta 96







[Names: Indra, Marutah, Maruta, Brhaspati, Devatah, Tirashchi, Angirasa, Dyutana, Maruta, Rshi, Asma, Indraya, Indra, Usasa, Asma]
For Indra, this lord supreme ruler and ordainer
of the universe, the dawns advance their course, for
Indra, the last hours of the night are sanctified with
voices of adoration, for this same lord, seven motherly
dynamics of nature, 1.6., five elements, mind and pranic
energies, keep to their tasks in nature’s law, and for him
the rivers and seas ebb and flow for human navigation.






[Names: Atividdha]
With staggering missile he pierced thrice seven
mountain peaks in succession. Neither divine nor human
can ever do what the mighty hero in the state of






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Sirsannindrasya, Srutya]
The thunder bolt of Indra is made of unbreakable
steel, sharpened and integrated with his body system,
in his arms there is tremendous force and lustre, in his
head are definite thoughts, plans and actions of high
degree, and in his tongue is speech which people are
anxious to hear at the closest.


(These two mantras are highly mystical,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 96 937


comprehensively allegorical also. They describe the
divine process of evolution. We may interpret the astra
as the missile of the Big Bang of the divine will which
formally splits integrated Prakrti into seven stages of
mahan, ahankara and the five elements, i.e., akasha,
vayu, agni, apah and prthivi over three modes of satva,
rajas and tamas of each. The vajra, again is the will
continuously operative as Rtam, the law of the dynamics
of nature. At the human level, the same dynamic works
as living energy of prana in the biological system and
converts food into seven ascending stages of rasa, rakta,
mansa, meda, majja, asthi and virya which, properly
cultivated and preserved, shines as ojas, lustre of the






[Names: Manye, Manye]
Indra, hero of invincible power, plan and action,
I honour as the most revered of the powers worthy of
love and homage in yajna. Of the unmoved and
immovables, I honour you as the greatest mover and
the moving at the highest velocity. Of the real, the true,
the eternal, I honour you as the first and highest. And of
the dynamic visionaries, I honour you as the highest
visionary, most dynamic in power and generosity.








[Names: Indram]
Indra, when you hold the pride shattering
thunderbolt in hands for the destruction of evil forces,
mountains bend, earths adore, and divines sing hymns
of praise to celebrate your glory.





[Names: Tamu, Indrena, Mitram, Mitra]
We worship him that brought all these forms of
with Indra, and with hymns of adoration presented with
homage and humility, abide in his presence at the closest.






[Names: Vrtrasya, Marudbhirindra]
O soul of man, when at the frightful breath of
evil forces of thought and the external world all your
noble faculties who are your friends forsake you out of
fear and insecurity, at that time, Indra, O soul, of innate
power and self-confidence, hold on, be friends with the
Maruts, vital pranic powers, and surely you would win
in all the battles against evil.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 939






[Names: Trih, Maruto]
Thrice sixty Maruts, pranic and psychic
floods of light, exalting Indra, stand by Indra, the soul.
We stand by you, say they, give us our share of attention
and food for life in yajna, and by this very share of
recognition and food for life and power, we shall render
you back the strength and power you need.






[Names: Tigmam, Marutamanikam, Marutamanika, Anayudhaso]
Indra, O soul, the powers of the Maruts, pranas,
is really your fiery thunderbolt. Who holds a weapon
counter to thunder? The evil forces are, in fact, without
any force and weapon. Nor do they have anything
positive and divine about them. Rise, move and shoot
your wheel of concentrated force and strike them down.








[Names: Maha, Sivatamaya, Girvahase]
O man, set in motion the long range visionary
process of uprooting the evil tendencies with songs of
divinity for the sake of the great, lustrous, mighty and
most beneficent and peaceable Indra, the inner soul.
Collect and offer profuse voices of holy exhilaration
and exhortation in honour of the divine lord of song
and, O dear as breath of life, he would bless you with
ample gifts of health, progeny and prosperity.






[Names: Ukthavahase, Srutasya]
O man, direct and send up your thoughts and
prayers over to the great omnipotent Indra who loves
the devotee’s songs of adoration. Send up the adorations
as we cross over the rivers by boat. And with your vision,
intelligence and action feel the touch of the dear divine
lord of universal presence and glory in the very core of
your heart. Would not the lord dear as breath of life not
oblige and bless?






[Names: Sravaya]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 941


O man, do that and enter there where Indra
desires you to be. Worship the lord adorable and serve
him with homage and praise. O celebrant, sanctify
yourself and be close to him, never feel sorry and
depressed. Send up your prayers so that he may listen.
O dear friend, would he not listen and bless?






[Names: Avat]
The dark passion of pride with its ten thousand
assistants and associates comes, occupies the affections
and suppresses the emotive and creative streams of life,
but Indra, noble leader of men, the soul, with its great
thought and action, takes this bully over, controls its
violence and covers it with sweetness and love.






[Names: Drapsam, Nabho]
I have seen the dark devil of passion and pride
roaming around widely and variously on the banks of
the vibrant stream of life. O mighty energies of prana
and divine potential, I wish you fight in the battle and,
like unfailing agents of cleansing of dirt, throw out the
dark evil standing out and working boldly as well as








[Names: Adha, Viso]
When the dark passion is cleansed out, then pure
vitality, lustrous and sparkling, sustains itself in the lap
of creative life aflow. Indra, exuberant soul purified and
tempered, in cooperation with wide ranging pranic
energies, challenge and fight out the unholy tendencies
of carnal mind ranging around.






[Names: Tvam, Gulhe]
Thus does Indra become a victorious enemy for
the seven unrivalled unholy tendencies of sense and
mind and emerges a brilliant unrivalled hero. Thus does
he find the real joyous heaven and earth otherwise, for
him, covered in deep darkness. Thus do you, O soul,
bear and bring happiness to the regions of life vested in
dignity and excellence.





[Names: Susnasyavatiro, Sacyedavindah]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 96 943


You, virile commander of thunderous strength,
most daring hero, by your virile and thunderous force
of personality you won unequalled lustre and dignity.
With your deadly weapons, you overcame the ravages
of famine, deprivation and exploitation, and with your
courage and conscientious action you won lands and
cows and conquered your own carnal self.






Indra, you are the power on top, virile and
generous leader of the dynamic human community,
destroyer of darkness, evil and exploitation, and a
blazing brilliant hero. You release the streams of waters
and social energies restrained by forces of repression
and suppression, and you free and win over the floods
of human potential and action locked up under the force
of tyranny.





You are the hero of noble action, happy celebrant
of life and divinity in yajnic gatherings of knowledge,
enlightenment and advanced action. Unsurpassed is
your passion for action, and your splendour and


generosity is like the light of day.






[Names: Savrtrahendrascarsanidhrt]
With words of welcome and adoration, we
invoke, invite and serve the brilliant leader, destroyer
of want, ignorance and suffering, and sustainer of the
people, He is our protector, trustee of the nation’s wealth,
power and honour, defender of our honour and dignity
in world forums and giver of honour, prosperity and
excellence. He is the power and person adorable.






[Names: Rbhuksah, Rbhuksa, Krnvannapamsi, Puruni]
Indra, destroyer of darkness, ignorance and
exploitation, is patron of the wise and intelligent artists,
scientists, technologists and pioneers in the fields of
development and progress, and constantly born and
reborn in manifested glory and dignity, he is the highest
adorable power and person. Doing many many noble
acts worthy of a dynamic and progressive humanity, he
is inspiring as soma, loved, honoured and adorable for
friends, companions and co-workers wherever he is.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 97 945


Mandala 8/Sukta 97






[Names: Indra, Devata, Rebha, Kashyapa, Rshi, Indra, Stotaram]
Indra, lord of bliss and omnipotence, the food,
energy and vitality which you bear and bring from the
sources of pranic energy such as sun, air, cloud and
cosmic intelligence is great and admirable. O lord of
power and glory, pray advance the devotees who
appreciate, develop and celebrate this energy and spread
the holy grass of yajna in gratitude to you, offer homage
to you and develop your gifts.






[Names: Yamindra, Yajamane]
Indra, lord of glory, the light and energy,
nourishment, knowledge and dynamism and all our
share of natural and spiritual gifts of divinity which you
bear and bring for us, all that, pray, vest in the generous
yajamana, the soma maker and the giver of charity (who
all keep these in creative circulation) and never in the
uncreative, miserly hoarders and selfish exploiters.






[Names: Svaih]
tatah.


Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence,
he, the hoarder and wastour, who lies idle lost in deep
sleep, having forgotten divinity, gratitude and the law
of divinity, he destroys that wealth by his own actions
and behaviour, though that wealth, otherwise, deserves
to be used and developed. Better it is you vest that wealth
away from him, elsewhere so that it could be creatively
used and developed.




[Names: Yacchakrasi, Atastva]
vivasati.

O Shakra, lord of mighty holy action, destroyer
of evil and darkness, whether you are far off or close
by, the man of creative yajna invokes you and draws
your attention and presence from there by words of
adoration radiating like rays of light across the spaces
of skies and heavens of light.




[Names: Yadvasi]
gahi.


Whether you are in some region of light in
heaven or in some region of the skies above, or in the


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 97 947


depth of seas or anywhere on the surface of earth, O,
greatest destroyer of darkness, evil and suffering, come
and be with us.




[Names: Savasaspate, Somapah, Somapa, Madayasva]
nasa.


O lord of strength and power, protector of the
soma sweetness of life, beauty, vitality and joy, when
we have distilled the soma essence of life, knowledge
and existence, bless us with lovely, veritable wealth,
means and modes of advancement, and all round success
and lead us to the joy of the truth, goodness and beauty
of life.




[Names: Mana, Tvam]
Indra, lord supreme of truth, goodness and
beauty, pray forsake us not, be with us as a friend in the
great hall of life and joy, you are our protector, you alone
are ultimately our end and aim worth attaining, pray do








[Names: Asme, Krdhi, Jaritre]
Indra, when we have distilled the soma of life’s
knowledge and value, be with us as a friend and let us
be together so that we may experience the divine joy of
achievement. O lord of glory, create the great divine
protective band for the devotee, be our friend in
company, the soma of celebration is ready.





[Names: Visva, Savasabhibhurasi]
O lord of clouds and thunder, the divines
comprehend you not, the mortals comprehend you not.
By virtue of your supreme power and glory you are
above all things born in the world of existence. O lord
supreme, the immortal divines comprehend you not.




[Names: Visvah, Kratva, Indram]
vinam.


All the citizens together, in order to elect an
equal for the purpose of governance, create and shape
Indra, the ruler, the leader who is superior to others in
all battles of life, highest by noble creative action,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 97 949


eliminator of negative and frustrative opposition,
illustrious, most vigorous and emphatic in expression,
courageous and passionate in action.






[Names: Samim, Somasya, Somas, Svarpatim]
Let all intelligent people cordially welcome and
felicitate Indra for the protection of the honour, integrity,
beauty and culture of the nation of humanity, and when
they, together, exhort the guardian of their happiness
and welfare to advance the beauty of corporate life, then,
committed to the values, laws and ideals of the nation,
he feels exalted with lustrous courage and positive
measures of defence and protection.






[Names: Nemimnamanti, Suditayo]
Wise and vibrant sages greet the heroic ruler,
Indra, giver of showers of peace and joy, and with vision
of the future bow to him as the central power and force
of the nation’s wheel. O brilliant and inspired people
free from jealousy and calumny, smart and bold in
action, do him honour with laudable performance.








[Names: Tamindram, Mamhistho]
That Indra, ruler of the world, I invoke and
address, illustrious, pious and true, wielder of
unopposed powers, and I pray may the most generous
and adorable lord of thunderous power, in response to
our voice, turn to us constantly and clear our paths of
advancement for the achievement of wealth, power,
honour and excellence of the world.





[Names: Savistha, Tvadvisvani]
Indra, most potent hero of noble action, you
know how to break down the strongholds of evil and
darkness with this lustrous force of yours. O wielder of
the force and power of thunder, by you and by the
splendour of your power all regions of the world and
even the earth and heaven shake with awe.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 98 951




[Names: Tanma, Sura, Kada]
Indra, wondrous hero of universal might, may
the constant and ever true divine law of existence, Rtam,
protect me and guide me along the paths of rectitude. O
lord of the thunderbolt of justice and karma, Indra, like
my karmas, cleanse my mind and soul of all sins and
evil. Indra, refulgent ruler of the world, when would
you bless me with wealth, honour and excellence of
universal form and most cherished value?


Mandala 8/Sukta 98






[Names: Indra, Devata, Nrmedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Indraya, Indra, Dharmakrte]
Sing Brhatsama hymns in adoration of Indra,
vibrant spirit of the universe and giver of fulfilment,
grand and infinite, source ordainer and keeper of the
law of universal Dharma, giver and protector of
knowledge and karma, the lord adorable.






[Names: Tvamindrabhibhurasi, Suryamarocayah, Suryamarocaya, Visvakarma]
Indra, you are the lord supreme dominant over
all, you give light to the sun, you are the maker of the




universe, you are the one adorable light and spirit of
the world, you are the one great and glorious life of the






[Names: Vibhrajanjyotisa, Devasta]
Refulgent with your own light you pervade the
regions of bliss and beatify the glory of heaven. Indra,
the lights and divinities of the world vye and struggle
for friendship with you.






[Names: Endra, Girirna, Dear]
and giver of fulfilment you are, all dominant by nature,
character and action, inconceivably open and bright,
expansive and unbounded all round like a cloud of
vapour, lord and master of the light of heaven.






[Names: Somapa, Indrasi]
Lord eternal and ever true, lover, protector and
promoter of the beauty and joy of existence, you are
higher and greater than both heaven and earth. Indra,


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 98 953


omnipotent lord and master of the light of heaven, you
are the inspirer and giver of advancement to the pursuer
of the knowledge, beauty and power of the soma reality
of life.




[Names: Tvam, Sasvatinamindra, Hanta]
Indra, you are catalyser, breaker and maker, of

the eternal forms of existence in cosmic dynamics,
destroyer of the destroyer and promoter of thoughtful


people. You are the guardian of the light of life, sustainer
of the heavens of joy.






[Names: Adha, Udeva]
And O lord lover of song and celebration, Indra,
we send up vaulting voices of adoration and prayer to
you like wave on waves of the flood rolling upon the
sea.






[Names: Varna, Sura, Vavrdhvamsam]
O lord of clouds and oceans of space, munificent
and brave, expansive, boundless, infinite, like streams




of water augmenting the sea, our songs of adoration
exalt you wave on wave of flood day by day, the
knowledge about you is unending.



[Names: Yunjanti, Indravaha]
controlled by word, carry Indra, the soul, in the wide
yoked spacious body-chariot by the power of the
adorations of the universal mover, Indra, cosmic energy.



[Names: Satakrato]
Indra, lord of vision and hero of a hundred great
actions, bring us abundant and illustrious strength,
courage and procreative energy by which we may fight
out and win many battles of our life.





O lord of infinite action, shelter home of the
world and wealth of existence, you are our father, you
our mother, and to you, we pray for love and peace,
good will and grace.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 99 955






[Names: Puruhuta]
O lord of cosmic energy universally invoked,
hero of infinite acts of kindness and creation, giver of
sustenance and victory, we pray in silent sincerity of
conscience, bring us and bless us with noble strength
and vitality of body and mind and creativity of vision
and imagination.


Mandala 8/Sukta 99



[Names: Indra, Devata, Nrmedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Tvamida, Indra]
gahi.


Indra, lord of mind and soul, wielder of
adamantine will and energy, zealous celebrants and
leading lights serve and adore you today as ever before
in the past. Thus adored and contemplated, listen to the
prayers of the devotees in meditation, come and arise
in your own abode of the sage’s heart.








[Names: Matsva, Tava]
O lord of golden glory, moving and manifesting
by vibrations of joyous energy, arise and exult in the
heart. You alone, the wise sages exalt and glorify. Indra,
lord adorable in song, when the yajnic communion of
meditation is fulfilled, the vibrations of your ecstatic
presence are ideal and admirable.






[Names: Srayanta, Suryam, Surya, Vasuni]
Just as the rays of light share and diffuse the
radiance of the sun, so you too share and reflect the
golden glories of Indra, the cosmic soul. Let us meditate
on the divine presence and for our share enjoy the
ecstasy of bliss vibrating in the world of past and future
creation by virtue of Indra’s omnipresent majesty.






[Names: Anarsaratim, Indrasya, Indras]
Adore and meditate on Indra, giver of wealth,
honour, excellence and bliss. Infinite is his generosity,
the devotee, does not hurt his desire and prayer, he
inspires his mind for the reception of divine gifts.




MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 99 957




[Names: Tvamindra, Asastiha]
Indra, O inspired soul, in the external conflicts
of life and in the internal conflicts of mind, you are the
superior over all assailants. You are the destroyer of
evil and calumny, creator of goodness and eliminator
of impediments. Pray drive off all evil thoughts and
oppositions of life and mind.






[Names: Susmam, Anu, Visvaste, Turvasi]
Just as mothers follow the desires and interests
of children, so do the heaven and earth, all living beings
from earth to heaven, think and act in conformity with
you, evil destroying power. All oppositions slacken and
fall exhausted when you strike and destroy the demons
of evil and negativity in the interest of man.








[Names: Asum]
O men and women of the earth, for your
protection and progress follow Indra, unaging, all
inspirer and mover, himself unmoved and self-inspired,
most dynamic, highest victor, thunderer, master of the
chariot of life, inviolable augmenter of strength to






[Names: Iskartaramaniskrtam, Satakratum, Samanamindramavase]
vasavanam vasujuvam.


For our protection and progress, we invoke
Indra, lord supreme abiding in the soul, giver of
fulfilment, himself self-fulfilled, creator and giver of
strength, courage and fortitude, giver of infinite
protections, lord of a hundred good acts, equally good
to all, all protective and kind, settler and augmenter of
wealth and wisdom.


Mandala 8/Sukta 100






[Names: Indra, Suparna, Vajra, Devatah, Nema, Bhargava, Indra, Rshi, Ayam, Yada]
Indra, here I come before you in person and all
noble and brilliant sages follow after me. When you
secure my portion for me, then you perform noble


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 100 959






[Names: Dadhami, Asasca, Somah, Soma]
I bear my portion of the honey sweets of life
primarily for you in gratitude, out of which the soma
essence distilled from experience would be offered in
homage. May you, I pray, be kind and friendly to me on
the right and then together we shall eliminate evil and
darkness from life.






[Names: Indraya, Bharata, Nindro]
O seekers of strength, power and progress in
life, offer worship and adoration in honour of Indra if it
is your faith in heart and soul that reality is the truth
and Indra is the reality. Only some one of raw and
sceptical understanding would say: Indra is non-existent,
who saw him? And if none saw Indra, who and why
should we adore and worship?








[Names: Ayamasmi, Rtasya]
I AM. O celebrant, behold I am here. I am the
real on top of all that is born in the world, self-existent
by my own grandeur. The laws of existence exalt me
with space, and scholars of the laws, Rtam, adore me
all round. I am the creator, I am the destroyer, I split
open the seed, I manifest the world forms and I break
them back beyond the form into the seed state.






[Names: Manascinme]
When the wise visionaries reach on top of
thought and meditation and see me, the lone presence
over the glorious order of existence, my mind from the
core of my heart of love speaks out: My friends blest
with knowledge and vision through the power of prana
beyond sufferance have called on me. (This is the voice
of divinity, invitation to a higher life of cosmic vision.)






[Names: Visvet, Paravatam, Puru]
MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 100 961


Admirable are all those acts of kindness and
grace, laudable in yajnic meets of humanity, O lord of
glory, Indra, which you do graciously for the meditative
soul where by you reveal the climactic, intensely
concentrated wealth of beatific vision and presence for
the man of austere discipline in communion, brother of
the omniscient, all seeing creator, the cosmic poet.


O friends of divinity, with determined will and
decision, move forward and run fast, each in your own
style, there is none to stop you. Indra, lord omnipotent,


strikes the thunderbolt at the core of darkness and
destroys the obstructions.


8. Manojava ayamana ayasimatarat puram.




[Names: Divam, Somam]
Moving at the speed of mind, suparna, flying
human imagination and vision, crosses the iron bounds
of the fortress of the body, and having gone to the
regions of heavenly light and bliss brings the soma,
ecstasy of divine joy for the soul which bears the virile
vitality of the spirit, wielder of the soul’s thunderbolt.






[Names: Samudre, Bharantyasmai]
balim.


In the liquid vitalities of the body system
surrounded by living waters, the virile vitality of the
spirit, the vajra, resides in the human body. For this
vitality, streams of energy flowing forth in the veins
and nerves bear and bring contributive forms of physical
and pranic nourishment of the spirit for the soul’s rise
to divinity.






[Names: Yadvag, Catasra]
When the divine voice, joyous and refulgent,
settles in the heart, illuminates the mind and senses,
awakens the subconscious and the unconscious, and
reveals the secret potentials of the soul in divine
communion, then all the four directions of space, all
the four Vedic voices, and all the four layers of speech
distil the light and wisdom of divine existence for the
soul. What is the ultimate reach of that voice? Indra




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 963


Sages and scholars, brilliant and wise, manifest
and speak in human language that divine speech of
omniscience which, then, all living and seeing forms of
beings speak in its extended forms of variety over the
world. That divine speech, joyous and generous like
the milch cow, giving nourishment and energy,
honoured, served and studied, may, we pray, come direct
to us and bless.






[Names: Sakhe, Hanava, Indrasya, Indras]
Vishnu’s presence, act and advance to redeem your
divinity. O light of heaven, give more light and space
for the virile vitality of the soul to settle, consolidate and
rise. Then we, the human and the immanent divine,
together, shall eliminate evil, darkness and suffering from
life, release the inhibited streams of life to flow freely,
and the floods of human potential may then, we pray,
flow abundantly in the blissful yajnic creation of Indra.


Mandala 8/Sukta 101




[Names: Mitra, Varuna, Adityah, Aditya, Ashvinau, Vayu, Surya, Usha, Sunlight, Pavamana, Devatah, Jamadagni, Bhargava, Rshi, Rdhagittha, Mitravaruna]
dataye.


Truly does that person find peace of mind for
the attainment of divine love and favour who thus wins
the balance of Mitra and Varuna, i.e., prana and udana
energies for physical, mental and spiritual good for the
service of divinity.






[Names: Varsisthaksatra, Suryasya, Suryas]
Leading men of most generous and disciplined
strength and energy of body and mind, with broad
vision, refulgent, and steeped in the knowledge of
revelation over long time study and discussion, like
heroes of mighty arms in action, rise high with the rays
of the sun by virtue of divine love and service.






[Names: Ayah, Sirsa]
O Mitra and Varuna, love and judgement of
divinity, light and dark of life, sun and ocean of the
cosmos, external pranic energy and internal udanic
energy, the person who is wise and learned and
eliminates the negativities and undesirables of life, and
with his wisdom and values, realises you both achieves


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 965


the golden heights of wisdom and intrepid happiness in
the simplest way at the shortest time.






[Names: Tasmanno]
One who takes no interest in learning by
question and answer, or in the yajnic circulation of
wealth, or in social discourse is no good. O Mitra and
Varuna, rulers, leaders, teachers and pioneers of love
and judgement, save us from unnecessary encounters
with him, protect us by your arms of love and wisdom.




[Names: Mitradya, Mitrad, Varuthyam]
rajasu gayata.


O lover of truth and eternal laws and values of
cosmic truth, sing together, sing in the home and sing
on joyous occasions collective, homely and celebrative
songs in honour of Mitra, lord of love and universal
friendship, Aryaman, lord of the paths of rectitude, and
Varuna, lord of judgement and wisdom. Sing hymns of
adoration for all the refulgent divinities.








They, Mitra, Varuna and Aryaman, love,
judgement and will of divinity in nature, Aditi, bring
forth, move and inspire the one, refulgent, victorious,
shelter home of life, protector and illuminator of the
three, heaven, earth and the middle regions, the sun,
child of Aditi, and they, immortal, undaunted and
invincible, all round watch and protect the homes and
regions of the mortals.






[Names: Ubha]
O men and women of the mortal world engaged
in creative and cooperative economy, committed to truth
and immortal values, listen to my words inspired by the
brilliance of divinity, and, together in love and
friendship, turn them to practical application and truth
of achievement to create valuable materials for yajnic
enjoyment of life.




[Names: Ratim, Pracim]
O bright and energetic men and women of the
world welcome as the dawn, leading lights of life, when


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 967


we ask of you and pray for generous creativity and
generous gifting free from evil and violence, then come
adored by the devotee of lighted fire and advance the
ancient and eternal call of life to the joy of living.




[Names: Antah]
te.


O Vayu, vibrant sage of knowledge and science
of yajna, come to our project of divine possibilities with
your noble ideas and plans, and I, joining this
programme with you, offer this bright performance of
ours, pure within in purpose and bright and clear in form
and structure.




[Names: Vetyadhvaryuh, Adha]
somam gavasiram.

The high priest of yajna unhurting life, moving
with love, goes forward by the simplest and most truthful
ways of holy working with yajnic materials to create
the fragrances of life. Then you, master of yajnic
creations, taste and enjoy the soma of our creations both
in pure form and as seasoned and strengthened with
practical applications for the good of life.






[Names: Banmaham, Mahaste]
asi.


O Surya, light of life, you are truly great, lord
indestructible, you are undoubtedly great. O lord of
reality, highest real, great is your glory, adorable. In
truth, you are great, refulgent and generous.






[Names: Sravasa, Mahna, Jyotiradabhyam]
O Surya, lord self-refulgent, by honour and fame
you are great. In truth, you are great, generous lord, by
your grandeur among the divinities. Lord of pranic
energy, destroyer of the evil, prime high priest of
creation in cosmic dynamics, omnipresent and infinite,






[Names: Lyam, Citreva]
This light of the dawn coming down, from the
horizon, beautiful, created by the golden red rays of the
sun, radiating over the earth below like the arms of
divinity in the ten directions of space, looks like a
wonder gift of divinity.


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 101 969




[Names: Praja, Brahaddha]
pavamano harita व viveSa.


Three orders of evolutionary creation, sattva or
thought, rajas or energy, and tamas or matter, and three
regions of the cosmos, heaven, earth and the middle
regions proceed to expansive existence at the beginning
of the Being manifesting into Becoming, and others,
all biological forms depend upon the self-refulgent sun.
The infinite spirit of divinity abides immanent in the
cosmos, and pure, and sanctifying all forms, manifests
in all directions of space and greenery of the earth.






[Names: Mata, Rudranam, Rudrana, Aditim, Aditi]
Mother of Rudras, pranic energies, living forms
and scholars of the middle order, sustainer of the Vasus,
abodes of life such as earth, and scholars of the graduate
order, and sister of Adityas, suns and scholars of the
highest order, the centre fount of life’s nectar and
knowledge: that is Aditi, mother Infinity, Nature, mother
knowledge of the Veda, and the mother cow. Speak of
mother Aditi to the people who are keen for
injure, do not kill the innocent cow, Mother Nature and
the divine knowledge of Veda.








[Names: Vacovidam, Devim]
Vak is the eternal Word, the Language, bottom-
less reservoir of omniscience, inspirer of human lan-
guage and communication, closely and conscientiously
studied and served by all intelligent scholars of the
world: this divine gift revealed for the pious and wise,
holy as mother, as earth, as the cow, as divinity, come
as a blessing to me, no mortal should neglect. If a mor-
tal neglects this mother language, he remains but piti-
fully ignorant and poor in the mind.


Mandala 8/Sukta 102








[Names: Agni, Devata, Prayoga, Bhargava, Pavaka, Barhaspatya, Agni, Grhapati, Yavishtha, Anyatara, Rshi, Tvamagne, Kavir]
1. ‘Agni, light of the world, brilliant giver of
knowledge, you bear and bring abundant wealth and
honour of the world for the generous devotee. You are
ever young, eternal, omniscient poet creator, lord and
master, ruler and sustainer of the house of the universe.




MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 102 971




[Names: Sana, Cikidvibhanava]
Agni, brilliant lord of omniscience, along with
this reverent and worshipful voice of prayer and divine
knowledge, bring us brilliant and generous divinities
of nature and humanity.



[Names: Tvaya]
O most youthful catalytic power of evolution,
only in obedience and association with you, highest
inspiring spirit and power, shall we be able to move
forward and win success in achieving knowledge,
strength, wealth and honours of life.



[Names: Aurvabhrguvacchucimapnavanavada, Agnim]
Like a mature and self-disciplined sage and
scholar of nature and spirit, I invoke and study Agni,
the fire energy, concealed in the sea and the sky and the
psychic energy abiding in the mind.








[Names: Huve, Parjanyakrandyam, Parjanyakrandya]
I invoke the fire, passion and vision concealed
in the whistling wind, roaring thunder, the depth of the
sea and the cave of the heart.






Like the creative power of the sun and the
inspiring lord creator, and like the pleasurable gifts of
the lord of power, honour and excellence, I invoke and
study the passion and fire hidden in the sea and sky and
in the cave of the heart.






[Names: Accha]
Well with joint action and yajna, serve Agni,
most ancient power of the first order that leads you to
the advancement of strong familial unity and tolerant
but powerful social cooperation for your coming
generations for ages.






[Names: Ayam, Asya]
Just as the artist creates all possible forms out
of his plastic materials, giving them beauty, power and


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 102 973


purposeful meaning, so does this Agni, universal artist,
work on us, for us, and brings out our potentials and
gives us forms of beauty, power and excellence as a
family, community and common humanity for a purpose,
a meaning and a direction. His actions are great, gracious
and glorious.






[Names: Sriyo]
This Agni among all the divinities of nature and
humanity creates, sustains and rules over all the beauties,
graces and grandeurs of life. May the lord come to us
and bless us with all kinds of knowledge, power, wealth
and honour.


[Names: Visvesamiha]
Of all the yajnic creative powers of the world
here in the field of action, adore Agni, most gracious


and glorious, and first, foremost and most ancient power
in the eternal yajna of creation.




ze






[Names: Stram, Didaya]
Adore Agni, omnipresent, pure, fiery and
purifying. Agni is the highest divine, most famous, and
shines in us and illuminates our homes.



[Names: Tamarvantam, Susminam, Mitram, Mitra]
O vibrant scholar and dedicated yajaka, adore
and sing in praise of Agni, victorious giver of wealth
and success like an archer getting the target, powerful
inspirer of humanity for action and advancement as a


[Names: Upatva, Vayorantke]
Moving and vibrant adorations of the
enlightened celebrant reach you and stay by you in the
movements of air in the middle regions.





[Names: Yasya, Apascinni]
The three-quality mind of the celebrant with
sattva, rajas and tamas, open and unfettered, is the seat
of Agni where peace and potential for action both have


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 102 975






[Names: Padam, Bhadra, Surya]
The seat of the refulgent, generous and virile
divinity, Agni, with undaunted powers of protection is
auspicious and blissful, shining like an inner sun and
the second inner eye with inward light and vision.






Agni, light of life, brilliant and generous
divinity, burning and shining by the flames of fire fed
on ghrta, O enlightened scholars and divines, shining
by the light of knowledge fed by your own awareness,
bring in the divinities of nature and humanity to the
vedi and carry on the yajna.






[Names: Havyavaham, Angira]
manifest you, create you, reveal you, visionary poet and
maker of poetic beauties, carrier and harbinger of yajnic
wealths of fragrances.








[Names: Pracetasam]
O wise and visionary, poetic maker, Agni,
divinities of nature and humanity, wise sages, have
honoured and established you as wide awake, all present
carrier and harbinger of yajnic materials of existence,
catalyser of evolutionary development and the power
worthy of choice for living the good life.






[Names: Nahi, Athaitadrg]
power of my own, neither milk nor ghrta, nor even the
fire fuel to offer. Hence I adore and worship you the
way I can, offer you myself for the service I am worth.






[Names: Yadagne]
potential to destroy the evil and negativities of life, we
offer in service. Whatever weaknesses we possess, we
offer into your powers of fiery purification. O power
most youthful, pray accept all that with pleasure.


MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 103 977





[Names: Yadattyupajihvika, Sarvam]
Whatever your flames of fire consume, whatever
the fumes spread over, let all that be food for your
dynamics of existence in evolution.






[Names: Agnimindhano]
When the mortal starts lighting the fire in the
vedi, let him, with his whole mind in concentration, call
up all his faculties of perception, thought and action
and say: I light the fire with all my light, will and
awareness and awaken the divine in the soul.


Mandala 8/Sukta 103


[Names: Agni, Marutah, Devatah, Maruta, Sobahri, Kanva, Rshi]
girah.


There is seen the light of Agni, best knower of
the ways of life, where people concentrate their vows
of piety and discipline. Let our songs of adoration rise




and reach Agni, self-revealed, who opens the paths of
progress and urges us on to reach the goal of rectitude
for noble people.




[Names: Agnirdevan, Agnirdeva, Anu]
sanavi.


Agni, the sun, lover of holy admirers, sitting as
if on top of heaven in glory, turns his rays of light in
circuit to the mother earth for her children.





[Names: Yasmad, Sahasrasam]
From that gift of light the children of earth shine
and continue doing their daily duties. O people, do
service in homage to Agni, giver of light and a thousand
other gifts as in yajnic generosity. Do so with your heart
and soul, sincerely by thought and action.






O Giver of light, wealth and power of life, Agni,


MANDAL - 8 / SUKTA - 103 979


the mortal who offers to serve you with self-surrender
and gives in charity and whom you lead on the path of
prosperity and rectitude is blest with progeny celebrated
in song for his thousandfold generosity.





[Names: Sravah, Puruvaso]
The mortal you guide breaks open the strongest
forts of wealth and honour with his power and force
and wins immortal fame. O shelter home of the world,
under your protection, dedicated to divinity, we pray,
let us concentrate on and receive all good things of life.





[Names: Madhorna]
Like bowls of honey let our prime songs of

adoration reach this Agni who, blissful high priest of


existence, gives all the wealths and joys of the world to








[Names: Asvam, Ubhe]
Agni, lord of glory, ruler and sustainer of the
people, generous devotees dedicated to charity and love
of divinity, with voices of adoration and prayer, exalt
you like the motive power of the chariot of life, and
pray: Bring us the holy power and prosperity worthy of
the magnificent for our children and grand children.






[Names: Socise, Upastutaso]
0) celebrants of divinity, sing songs of adoration
in honour of adorable Agni, most generous, leader of
the paths of truth, great and glorious, lord of pure light
of divinity and fire of action.





[Names: Kuvinno]
Lord of universal wealth and power, light of life,
invoked and lighted, gives us honour and fame worthy
of the brave. May his love and good will come and bless
us with the latest honours, power and prosperity with






[Names: Presthamu, Agnim]
MANDAL - 8/ SUKTA - 103 981


O yajaka, creator of the soma joy of life, adore
and worship Agni, light of life, dearest of the dear,
harbinger of the joy of life in response to your
endeavour, and coming up like a visitor at will any time.




[Names: Udita, Dustard]
sisasatah.


Adore and exalt Agni, worthy of worship, who
knows, gives and circulates wealth of the world whether
open and developed or hidden and potential. Anxious
as he is to give wealth and victory by thought and action,
his generosity is difficult to surpass, like waves of the
sea in flood.





[Names: Mano, Agnih, Puruprasasta]
May this Agni, welcome as a venerable visitor,
shelter home of the world, universally adored who is
the noble giver and generous high priest of cosmic yajna,
never feel displeased with us, may the lord give us








[Names: Kirisciddhi]
Agni, shelter home of the world, may they never
come to harm who any way by any actions offer honour
and worship to you in holy words. The celebrant, bearing
havi to perform the holy yajna in service to you, prays
to you to bring him knowledge, honour and prosperity
in life.






[Names: Agne, Somapitaye, Somapitay, Marutsakha, Sobharya]
Agni, refulgent lord, friend of the mind and
senses, come, arise in the heart with pranic energies for
the protection and exaltation of the soul’s joy. Come,
accept the adorations and prayers of the self-confident
celebrant, join his golden yajna and exalt the ecstasy of




| AUM ॥






[Names: Original, Sanskrit, Text, Transliteration]
Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition
of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda)


English translation by


[Names: Tulsi, London]
(Professor, Administrator, Researcher and Writer)


Sanskrit Text as per publication of














[Names: Paropakarini, Sabha, Ajmer, Publisher, Vijaykumar, Govindram, Hasanand, Delhi, Edition, First, Price]
RIGVEDA Vol. IV by Dr. Tulsi Ram M.A., Ph.D.


Cv)





[Names: Particulars]
MANDAL -9
MANDAL -10


Page


1-424
425-1193


(vi)
DIACRITICAL MARKS OF TRANSLITERATION


[Names: Vowels]
ए € ae) ai aT 0 ओ au
(- 27




[Names: Consonants, Guttural]
Palatal










[Names: Lingual, Dental, Labial]
(5). 24 in




Mandala 9/Sukta 1








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Madhucchanda, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Svadisthaya, Soma, Indraya, Indra]
O Soma, Spirit of Divinity, peace and glory of
existence distilled in the essence for the soul’s being,
flow in the sweetest and most exhilarating streams of
ecstasy, cleanse and sanctify us unto purity and
constancy, and initiate us into the state of ananda, divine

(Soma in the physical sense is an exhilarating
drink, in the aesthetic sense it is ecstasy, in the psychic
sense it is ananda, and in the spiritual sense it is elevation
of the soul to the experience of divinity. It is the peace,
purity and glory of life, any power physical, social or
divine that leads to satyam (truth), shivam (goodness),
and sundaram (beauty) of life, anything, power and
person that gives us an experience of sacchidananda,
the real, the intelligent and the blissful state of the life
divine. In short, Soma is satyam, shivam and sundaram,
the sat, the chit and the ananda of life. It is not restricted
to a particular herb and a particular drink. The meaning
of soma is open-ended on the positive side of life and






[Names: Raksoha, Drunda]
You are the destroyer of negativity, destructivity
and evil and darkness, you are universal watcher and
guardian of all that is, you are centre of the origin and
end of existence, veiled in impenetrable womb of gold,
you are ever on the move yet settled and constant in the
house of life. (Soma is Divinity Itself.)






[Names: Varivodhatamo, Parsi]
Be the highest giver of the cherished wealth of
life, mightiest munificent, and the destroyer of want,
suffering and darkness. Sanctify the wealth of the
prosperous and powerful with showers of peace, purity
and generosity.






[Names: Abhyarsa]
Let your bounty flow free to the yajnic hall of
the great and generous divine yajnic givers with gifts
of holy food and prosperity, and bring us honour,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 1 3
progress and fame.






[Names: Tvamaccha, Indo]
Lord giver of showers of joy, we serve you with
all our will and dedication, that alone is our end and
aim of life day in and day out. All our hopes and
aspirations centre in you.





[Names: Punati, Somam, Suryasya, Suryas, Varena, Sasvata]
The soma of your eternal peace and joy flowing
universally, the dawn, daughter of the sun, glorifies with
the sanctity of her exquisite cover of beauty.



[Names: Tamimanvih, Svasarah]
That soma, sanctified by the dawn in the holy
congregation of peaceful life yajna, ten fine and youthful
sisterly senses and pranic energies receive and absorb
for the achievement of the light of salvation.








[Names: Tamim, Tridhatu]
That thrice energised honey sweet and sanctified
soma for the good of body, mind and soul, the ten prime
senses and pranas receive and then stimulate the light
of the soul within, which dispels the darkness of
ignorance and eliminates the junk of negative






[Names: Abhimamaghnya, Srinanti, Ssisum, Somamindraya, Somamindra]
And this soma, further, the ten senses and pranas
season and inflame with positive powers of the soul as
the milk of inviolable cows seasons and inflames the
power of soma juice, and then the enflamed joy of the
soul nourishes and inspires the dedicated man like a
divine baby for the achievement of spiritual glory.





[Names: Asyedindro, Suro]
And in the joy of this soma of peace and spiritual
power, Indra, the human soul, blest with strength of
body, power of mind and courage of the soul destroys
all the evils and shades of darkness and rises in glory.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 2 5


Mandala 9/Sukta 2






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Medhatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Pavasva, Soma, Indramindo]
O Soma, spirit of divinity, flow quick, purify
our mind and senses, and fulfil our prayers for piety.
Spirit of peace and spiritual joy in exuberance, bring us
the glory of life and let it sanctify our heart and soul.






Blissful Spirit of divinity, give us food for the
mind and soul, great you are, delightful, generous, most
sublime, the origin, wielder and sustainer of the universe
and the truth of universal knowledge.






[Names: Adhuksata]
The stream of soma purity, bliss and knowledge,
distilled and flowing from the omniscient, showers
honey sweets of life on us, and the holiness of the noble








[Names: Mahantam, Yadgobhirvasayisyase]
Just as great floods of water, rivers and seas join
the great ocean, and the great ocean abides by you, O
lord omnipotent, similarly all our will and actions abide
in you, lord supreme, since by your word and powers






[Names: Samudro, Somah]
The lord is Samudra, universal space, from
which everything follows. He is integrated with our
streams of earthly waters, self-sustained and all
sustaining, holder and sustainer of the regions of
heavenly light. The lord giver of peace and bliss is ours,
with us, in the holy business of our life and karma.






[Names: Acikradadvrsa]
Soma, Spirit of universal peace and bliss, is
generous and virile, destroyer of suffering, great, noble
guide as a friend, and proclaims his presence everywhere
as he shines glorious with the sun.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 2 7






[Names: Girasta, Yabhirmadaya]
Lord giver of peace and grandeur, your voices
of the Veda, exponent of karma, by virtue of your divine
lustre purify and sanctify the people. By the same voices
you shine in divine glory for the joy of humanity.





[Names: Tava]
For the sake of joy and elimination of the
suffering of life, we adore you, creator of the worlds of
nature and humanity. O lord, great are your glories sung






[Names: Asmabhyamindavindrayurmadhvah, Parjanyo]
For us, O lord of peace and bliss, munificent
giver of lustre and grandeur, bring showers of purity
and the honey sweets of life as a cloud laden with
showers of rain.








[Names: Gosa, Atma]
O lord of peace and glory, you are the very soul
of yajna, original and eternal since you are the foremost
fount of all giving. You are the giver of cows, lands and
the voices of wisdom and culture. You are the giver of
children and grand children over ages of humanity. You
are the giver of horses and all advancement and progress
in achievements. You are the giver of food, sustenance
and all powers and victories of success. Pray be that for


Mandala 9/Sukta 3








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ajigarti, Shunah, Shepa, Krtrma, Vaishvamitra, Devarata, Rshi]
This Soma, spirit of divinity, eternal and
immortal, expands to regions of the universe like soaring
energy and pervades there as an immanent presence.





[Names: Pavamano]
This refulgent spirit is celebrated by sages and,
and sanctifying everything and every mind.


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 3 9





[Names: Harirvajaya]
This refulgent spirit, light of life, saviour and
harbinger of joy, glorified by celebrants and poets of
rectitude is praised and adored for the achievement of
victory and advancement.



[Names: Suro, Pavamanah]
This divine spirit, pure, purifying and powerful,
advancing by its own essential power as a hero, brings
and distributes cherished gifts of life among the


[Names: Aviskrnoti]
This spirit of divinity going forward like a
chariot, pure, purifying, gives the gifts of life and reveals


new and latest words of advance knowledge as it moves
on.







[Names: Dadhadratnani]
This spirit, divine, generous and refulgent,
adored and exalted by sages and scholars, and holding
jewel gifts of life for people of generous charity, watches
and controls the actions of humanity and the laws of
nature in operation.



This spirit with the waves of its power rushes
and radiates unto the heavens across the skies and atomic
oceans of space, pure, purifying and roaring like thunder.


This spirit radiates to the heavens across the
atomic oceans of skies and spaces, unhurt and
unopposed, pure, purifying, performing the cosmic
yajna of love, non-violence and creation of new life in
evolution.





[Names: Harih]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 4 11


This divine spirit since its timeless
manifestation, revealed and manifested for the divines,
arises in the pure hearts of humanity, eliminating pain
and suffering.


[Names: Esau, Puruvrato, Dharaya]
This spirit of divinity, power of infinite law and
action, creating and providing food, energy and


sustenance for life, flows on in continuum, self-


Mandala 9/Sukta 4






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Hiranyastupa, Angirasa, Rshi, Sanda, Soma]
O Soma, divine spirit of peace and joy, eternal
power of love and friendship, most renowned giver of
food and sustenance, win over the opponents and make
us happy and prosperous, more and ever more.






[Names: Sana]
Soma, spirit of divine love and joy, give us




eternal light, give us heavenly joy, and give us all good
fortunes of the world and make us happy and prosperous
more and ever more.






Soma, spirit of peace and excellence, give us
strength and efficiency, protect and promote our noble
actions, and ward off all sin, violence and evil forces,
and thus make us happy and successful, more and ever
more.






[Names: Pavitarah, Somamindraya, Somamindra]
O sages, harbingers of purity, purify and enhance
the soma spirit of peace and joy for Indra, the growth of
power, protection and excellence of the world and thus
make us happy and prosperous more and ever more.






[Names: Tvam]
O Soma take us high to the light of the sun in
knowledge and purity by your noble speech and action
and by your paths of protection and progress, and thus


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 4 13


make us happy and prosperous more and ever more.






[Names: Tava, Suryam, Surya]
By your noble actions, O spirit of peace and
piety, and by your protections and promotions, bless us
that we may ever see and internalise the eternal light of
the sun, and thus make us happy and prosperous more
and ever more.






[Names: Abhyarsa]
Soma, creative and inspiring spirit of the world,
noble wielder and controller of the dynamics of life,
bless us with wealth and vision good enough for both
this life and the life beyond, and thus make us happy
and prosperous for the life divine for ever.






[Names: Abhyarsanapacyuto]
Soma, spirit of divinity, infallible and victorious
in the conflicts of nature and humanity, bring us wealth
of imperishable and unconquerable character and make
us happy and prosperous for ever.




Soma, spirit of purity and purifying power for
all, celebrants exalt you by yajnic performance in order
that you protect them to abide within their bounds of


Dharma. Pray protect us in our Dharma and make us
happy and prosperous more and ever more.


[Names: Rayim]
Soma, spirit of divine peace and bliss, bring us
wealth, honour and excellence of wonderful, progressive


and universal character and thus make us eternally happy
and prosperous more and ever more.


Mandala 9/Sukta 5








[Names: Apriya, Sukta, Mantrawise, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Samiddho, Prinan]
Refulgent sovereign ruler and sustainer of the
world, Pavamana, pure and purifying, shines in glory,
giving fulfilment to all, generous and virile, roaring as


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 5 15



[Names: Tanunapat, Antariksena]
Pavamana, lord pure and purifying, self-
manifested, unfallen, infallible and imperishable,
blazing on top of all, exists and operates, illuminating
and glorifying the heaven and beautifying the earth.


[Names: Tlenyah, Madhor]
Adorable, immaculate and beatifying lord of
light shines by his own lustre with honey sweet showers
of beauty and joy on earth.




[Names: Barhih, Devesu]
Self-refulgent lord infinite, pure and purifying,
pervading the timeless world of existence by his lustre
and majesty and withdrawing it unto himself is
manifested and operative in all divine things of the
universe and is, as such, realised through them.








[Names: Udatair, Pavamanena]
The golden doors of divinity vast as space
celebrated along with the divine spirit of universal
purity, open to the seekers in response to their effort in
meditation and research.






[Names: Naktosasa]
Beautiful and beatific, vast and grand heaven
and earth, the lord of piety and purity loves to shower
with grace and abundance as he does the night and day,
the glorious dawn and dusk.






[Names: Ubha, Pavamana]
Indra, generous lord and giver of glory and
excellence, and Pavamana, lord giver of peace, piety
and purity, both refulgent manifestations of supreme
divinity, relentless guardians of humanity, divine high
priests of the yajna of creation and showers of grace, I
invoke and pray and worship.






[Names: Bharati, Sarasvatila, Imam]
MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 5 17


May Bharati, divine mother bearer of earthly
life, Sarasvati, dynamic spirit of all-knowledge in flow,
Mahi, divine spirit of existential sustenance, and Ia,
infinite reservoir of knowledge, will and passion of
divinity for being, may this threefold divinity of the
supreme lord of existence, immanent and transcendent,
gracious and beatifying, pure and purifying, move and
bless this yajna of our pious living.






[Names: Tvastaramagrajam, Indurindro]
I invoke and worship Tvashta, the creative
maker, first manifested, protector and sustainer of the
world, and first pioneer and guide. I invoke and worship
Indra, the same lord of power, excellence and glory,
Indu, lord of peace and beatitude, Vrsha, generous giver
of showers of wealth and beauty, Hari, creator and
sustainer, Pavamana, lord of purity and graciousness,
and Prajapati, supreme father of his children in


[Names: Vanaspatim, Sahasravalsam]
O Pavamana, lord of piety and purity in divine


flow, with honeyed showers of health and excellence
bless and beautify this world of nature and humanity of




a thousandfold variety clothed in dear green gold of
blazing beauty and divine grandeur.






[Names: Visve, Vayur, Indrah, Indra]
May all divinities of the world come and join
this holy song of homage in honour of the lord of piety,
purity and beatitude. Let the vibrant pioneer, eminent
scholar, brilliant giver of enlightenment, enlightened
leader, mighty ruler, all dear and united in love and faith,
come and join and celebrate in peace and joy.


Mandala 9/Sukta 6




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Mandraya, Soma, Avyo]
O Soma, divine spirit of peace and beatitude,
you are the generous power divine, lover of divinities,
pervasive in stars and planets in space. You are for us
too, pray flow in exciting streams of joy and bless us
with peace and purity.





MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 6 19


O lord of power and peace, love and chivalry,
release that exciting and beatifying flow of divine spirit
of ecstasy and enthusiasm which blesses us with strength
and speed worthy of warriors pressing on way to victory.



O spirit of power and purity, you are the creator
and giver of eternal passion for life, its honour and
excellence. Pray inspire us with passion which leads us
to victory, honour and fame.



[Names: Anu, Punana, Indramasata]
The streams of that inspiring power and passion
flow on without interruption like showers of rain and,
inspiring, sanctifying and beatifying, bring us honour,
excellence and fame for the soul.




[Names: Yamatyamiva, Vane]
The soul, now that it is past the process of


purification, like soma after filteration, and sports in
the world of beauty, ten youthful senses and pranas




invigorate and shine like a chivalrous warrior on way
to victory.


[Names: Sutam]
That exuberant ecstasy distilled through sense,
mind and intelligence for the love and worship of
divinity, O man, further create and develop through


communion with the spirit of peace and beatitude for
joyous victory in the battle of life.





[Names: Devo, Payo]
Self- refulgent and generous lord divine creates
and showers streams of distilled soma for the blessed
illustrious human soul in communion since it is the lord
who creates the soma originally for the seeker who cares
for a drink of the nectar.





[Names: Atma, Pratnam]
The divine lord of joy and pure bliss, Soma, is
the soul of yajna and, all inspiring creator of bliss,
pervades and vibrates with power, fulfilling the seeker’s


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 7 21


desire, and thus the lord protects and promotes the
eternal beauty and poetry of life.


[Names: Indrayur, Guha]
O lover of Indra, the soul of humanity, most
joyous spirit, pure and purifying thus, exalt and edify
the beauty and ecstasy of life for the peace and ultimate
freedom of the soul since, after all, you hold the sacred
voice of divinity in the cave of the heart.


Mandala 9/Sukta 7


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Asrgram, Vidana]
Knowing the relevance of their vibrant action
in Dharma, wise sages, brilliant and gracious, move by
the path of rectitude following the eternal law of
existence created by the lord of peace and glory.






[Names: Havirhavissu]
Most adorable of the adorables, worthy of
worship, Soma, lord of peace and joy, first and foremost




of the honey streams of life, pervades the dynamics of
existence in the eternal law.


[Names: Sadmabhi]
First and foremost, generous and eternal lord
Soma of love free from violence proclaims the words
of truth relevant to yajnic life and calls up the devotees
to the hall of yajna in peace and bliss.

[Names: Pari, Svarvajl]
When the poetic spirit of omniscience wrapped
in glory moves and inspires the vision and imagination
of the poet, the creative spirit flies to the heavens and
celebrates divinity in poetry.



[Names: Pavamano, Yadimrnvanti]
The pure and purifying Soma rises over all rivals
and sits on top of people like a ruler when the wise
sages pray and move his attention and love.



MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 7 23




[Names: Avyo, Rebho]
Over the regions of light, dear, loved and
destroyer of suffering, Soma, Spirit of purity and energy,
resides in the heart of happy celebrants and, eloquent
and inspiring, illuminates and beatifies their heart and






[Names: Indram, Indra, Vayum, Vayu, Rana]
He who happily abides by the laws of this Soma,
spirit of vibrant purity, goes forward in life with powers
of ruling strength and excellence and sagely people of
noble knowledge and unfailing action.






[Names: Mitravaruna, Sakmabhih]
Those wise sages of knowledge, whose sweet
will and loving emotions abide by divine love and
friendship, freedom and justice, and excellence and
generosity, live happy and prosperous in a state of
vibrancy like waves of sparkling streams, by the love
and exhilaration of Soma, spirit of peace and purity.






[Names: Asmabhyam, Sravo]
May heaven and earth lead us to acquisition of


wealth, sweet homes, honour, excellence and fame for
winning the higher victories of life.


Mandala 9/Sukta 8






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras, Soma, Vardhanto]
These soma streams of life flow free and fulfil
the cherished desires of humanity and exalt the creative
splendour of the soul.






[Names: Punanasas, Vayumasvina]
The same soma streams of life distilled from
nature, contained in deep reservoirs, vibrating in human
veins and nerves, marshalling in social forces energise
and motivate the vibrant scholar and the pursuers of
jnana-yoga and karma-yoga in knowledge and action.
May they bring us the lustre and vitality of creative
splendour and graces of culture, sanctifying as they are.




MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 8 25




[Names: Rtasya]
O Soma, peace and power of the divine spirit,
purifying and sanctifying the life of humanity, inspire
and energise the heart and passion of Indra, the human
soul settled at the seed centre of the truth of existence,
for winning the ultimate success and victory of life.






[Names: Myjanti, Anu]
O Soma, human soul at peace, ten energized and
energizing modes of nature, subtle and gross elements,
give you the beautiful body form, and seven inspiring
faculties of sense and mind inspire and move you to
think and act. Thus equipped, let the wise sages provide
you pleasure and enlightenment with secular and sacred
literature.






[Names: Devebhyastva]
O Soma, man of peace and joy, while you are
creating psychic and spiritual joy for the service and
pleasure of nature and noble humanity, we, generous
mother powers and sagely scholars, nourish and
enlighten you with milk and noble voices of wisdom
and vision of divinity.







[Names: Punanah, Pari]
Soma, lord of peace and purity, destroyer of
suffering, manifests in refulgent forms of existence and
pervades all round in stars and planets of the universe.






[Names: Maghona, Indo]
Lord of peace and bliss, come and purify the
devotees, men of wealth, power and honour, and ward
off all our negativities, oppositions, jealousies and
enmities from us and bless us all to live together as





[Names: Vrstim, Saho]
O Soma, shower the lights of heaven and wealth,
power and glory over the earth. Give us courage,
patience and fortitude, hold on to us in battles of life
and give us the final victory.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 9 27




[Names: Nrcaksasam, Indrapitam, Indrapita, Bhaksimahi]
All-watching guardian of humanity, omniscient
lord of bliss, adored and self-realised by the soul of
humanity, we pray for the gift of food and energy, light
and knowledge, and all round happiness for all people
of the world, your children.


Mandala 9/Sukta 9






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Pari, Suvano]
Soma, cosmic soul, darling of the heavens and
loved of enlightened people, poetic creator, immanent
in his own creations, pervading all regions of the
and doing all those acts which are exclusively worthy
of the omniscient and omnipotent creator.






[Names: Prapra, Vityarsa]
O Soma, loved and cherished of all, ever move
with love and favours of grace to every home and every
region of the world for the celebrant and all men free
from jealousy and enmity, and bless them all with joy


and life’s fulfilment.






[Names: Sucir, Mahan]
He, creator of the universe, pure and great, self-
manifested, illuminates the great and glorious heaven
and earth, mothers of the created world which observe
and exalt the eternal laws of existence.






He, exhilarating divine consciousness, is
received through seven stages of mental and spiritual
realisation and, thus realised, sets seven streams of
which reveal the exalting presence of the one universal
light of existence.






[Names: Indum, Indra]
Indra, lord of light and joy, those seven mental
and spiritual stages of divine perception and reception
direct the joyous soul, which is ever existent, ever young
and inviolable, to abide in the great discipline of your


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 9 29
divine law.






[Names: Krivir]
The enlightened soul, immortal and inviolable,
user and inspirer of its human mind and sense, whom
seven modes of Prakrti and seven pranas define in the
existential state, overwatches the seven and, generous
like a fount of nectar, fulfills all the seven, i.e., when
they have fulfilled their function he retires them, and
they resolve into their mother source of Prakrti.





[Names: Tani]
O Soma, soul supreme, lord of peace and joy,
pure and purifying, cast away from us all sin and
darkness throughout all ages and all states of existence,
eliminate them all and protect us, save us, redeem us.






[Names: Pratnavad]
For sure and in truth, for our latest song of praise
and for our new life of divinity, open up the paths of
progress so that we reach you with our adorations. O


lord of light, shine and illuminate as ever.






[Names: Sana]
O lord of purity purifying all, all munificent,
give us great fame and excellence, lands and cows,
literature and culture, horses and transport, progress and
victory and heroic children. Give us vision and
intelligence, give us the peace, the light and the joy of


Mandala 9/Sukta 10




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Davala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Somaso]
The seekers of soma in search of food for body,
mind and soul rush on like resounding charioteers and
warriors of horse, and go forward for the achievement
of life’s wealth.






[Names: Hinvanaso, Bharasah]
Dynamic are the seekers like heroes


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 10 31


commanding superfast chariots laden with riches,
holding controls in their hands, their shouts of victory
rising like poet’s songs of celebration.





[Names: Rajano, Yajno]
Like kings celebrated by songs of praise, like
yajna beautified by seven priests, the soma seekers are
hallowed by songs of praise as soma is energised by





[Names: Pari, Suta]
Streams of soma distilled and consecrated by
the hallowed voice of the Veda flow round for the joy
of mankind.






[Names: Apanaso, Usaso, Sura]
The brave and brilliant seekers of soma, light
of divinity, having drunk the glory of the rising sun at
dawn and themselves rising in glory, extend and spread
the light of subtle knowledge around like light of the
sun.







[Names: Vrsno]
Veteran scholars and artists, blest with the
flames and showers of the light and generosity of the
omnificent lord of soma, open wide the doors of divine
knowledge and will for all humanity over the world.


[Names: Samicinasa, Padamekasya]
Seven priests in unison as brothers, happy and
dedicated with peace at heart, sit on the vedi and fulfill


the yajna in honour of one sole divinity for one sole
purpose in the service of humanity and divinity.






[Names: Nabha, Kaverapatyama]
In the core of the heart we hold the yajna and
the lord of yajna, our eye fixed on the sun with love and
reverence, and thereby we distil the light and peace of
existence, reflection of omniscient and creative divinity.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 11 33




[Names: Surah]
The brave visionary of soma creativity sees the
heavenly light and the vision of the light giver, distilled,
concentrated and treasured in the core of the heart by
the performers of soma yajna.


Mandala 9/Sukta 11






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Upasmai]
O leading lights of humanity, to win the wealth
of life’s joy, work and sing in thanks and adoration for
this infinite fount of pure bliss which overflows and
yearns to join and inspire the noble creative performers
of yajna.






[Names: Devam]
O Soma, you are the lover of the noble and
divine, and you love to bless humanity to rise to divinity.
The Atharvans, people on the rock-bed foundation of
piety, are steadfast, they direct their concentrated mind
to you and drink the life giving nectar mixed with honey
sweets of divinity.








[Names: Samarvate]
O Soma, self-refulgent light, life of life, flow
free and bring us fertility for the cow, agility for the
horse and maturity for the herbs and trees, undisturbed
efficiency for the senses, peace and tranquillity for the
mind and soul, and peace, prosperity and joy for the






[Names: Babhrave, Somaya]
Offer songs of adoration to Soma, lord sustainer
of the universe, self-potent and omnipresent, who
pervades boundless even to the heights of highest






[Names: Hastacyutebhir, Somam, Madhava]
As soma juice is extracted with stones worked
by hands, refined and seasoned with honey and milk,
so O lord, let my mind be refined and purified with
repeated chants of the sacred voice, and let it be
sanctified with the honey of devotion and let it be
absorbed in the honey sweet of divinity.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 11 35






[Names: Namasedupa, Indum]
O Soma, eternal peace and joy, come, listen and
abide by our homage at the closest, be one with our
prayer and meditation, hold our mind and spirit in
concentration within the ecstasy of your divine glory.






[Names: Amitraha, Devebhyo, Anukamakrt]
O Soma, lord of eternal bliss, you eliminate the
disturbance and negativities of the mind, you are the
all-watching divine eye, pray flow in streams of joy and
bring us peace and tranquillity of senses, mind and soul,
O redeemer and giver of fulfilment to the holy and
brilliant seekers of divinity.






[Names: Indraya, Indra, Manascin]
O Soma, shower of divine joy, you are the eternal
mind, cosmic master, protector and inspirer of all human
mind, and you vibrate and constantly flow for the joy
and fulfilment of Indra, the soul in the state of spiritual




[Names: Indavindrena]
O Soma, beauty and joy of life, pure and
purifying ever on the flow, our friend united with the
mind and soul, we pray bring us courage and creativity


of spirit, and wealth, honour and excellence of life, join
us with divinity in communion and freedom.


Mandala 9/Sukta 12






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Soma, Indraya, Indra]
Showers and streams of soma, most inspiring
honey sweets of beauty and bliss of the world of divinity
created in the house of the cosmic flow of existence
and distilled in holy action on the yajna vedi, are created
for the soul in the state of excellence.






[Names: Anusata, Indram, Somasya, Somas]
Just as mother cows low for the calf so do the
sages invoke and glorify Indra, lord of soma, beauty,
joy and excellence, so that the lord may bless them with


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 12 37


his presence and be happy with their songs of love and
adoration.






[Names: Madacyut, Somo, Sritah]
The joyous waves abide by the sea, the saintly
joy of the wise abides in the Vedic voice, and the soma
joy that is exuberant in divine ecstasy abides in the hall
of yajna.






[Names: Divo]
Soma, lord of eternal bliss, omnipotent creator
of the noble universe, omniscient visionary, centre of
the universe of heavenly beauty, all watching, who
transcends the best and highest, is the adorable love of





[Names: Somah, Taminduh]
The brilliant, the wise, seek and abide by Soma,
joyous lord of the universe, who reflects in all forms of
existence and abides in the holy cave of the heart.








[Names: Jinvan]
Soma, self-refulgent lord of bliss who pervades
unto the bounds of space, augments the treasure-hold
of the honey sweets of nature, inspires the holy minds,
and the voice of divinity overflows in poetry and ecstasy.






[Names: Nityastotro, Hinvano]
Soma eternally sung in hymns of adoration,
creator, protector and sustainer of nature, indwelling
inspirer of mind, intelligence and will, giver of the nectar
of nourishment and joy, inspires and fulfils the couples
and communities of humanity as a friend and






[Names: Viprasya]
Soma, divine poet creator, all peace and bliss,
abiding in the heavenly beauty of the universe, inspiring
and energising human creativity especially of the wise
sage, sends down streams of joy in song overflowing
the poetic imagination.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 13 39





[Names: Asme]
O Soma, pure, purifying and universally
flowing, refulgent and glorious, come, bless and bring
us wealth, honour and excellence of thousandfold lustre,
self-sustaining and abundant.


Mandala 9/Sukta 13






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Somah, Soma, Vayorindrasya]
Soma, beauty, joy, power and divinity of life,
pure, and purifying, vibrates every where and flows free
in a thousand streams, inspiring, energising and
protecting, it is released and sanctified by Vayu, cosmic
energy and empowered by Indra, divine omnipotence,
distilled by vibrant sages, received by creative humanity
and spread abroad by ruling powers.






[Names: Pavamanamavasyavo, Susvanam]
O seekers of energy, power and protection, sing
and adore the soma of existence, lord creator and


energiser, pure and purifying, omniscient giver of
knowledge and wisdom, for the sake of divine
excellence and felicity in life.



[Names: Pavante, Grnana]
The Soma streams of life’s felicity flow in a
thousand ways of energy, power and divine inspiration,
doing honour to the lord of glory and bliss, refining
and purifying us for favour of the divinities and for
winning victories of honour and excellence in life.



[Names: Dyumad]
O refulgent Soma, lord of peace, power, beauty
and glory, flow, purify and empower us for victory in
the battles of life and give us abundant food and energy
and high order of noble creative courage and rectitude.





[Names: Suvana]
May those streams of soma, divine showers of
beauty and glory, inspiring us, energising us with
strength and virility, flow and purify us, and give us a


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 13 41


thousand-fold wealth, honour and glory, and high
creative potential for further advancement.






[Names: Atya]
The showers of soma, blessings of the lord of
peace and protection, like fastest forces electrified to
omnipresence by urgent masters, reach to places and
people that need light and protection against ignorance
and darkness.






[Names: Vasra, Dadhanvire]
Loving showers of divine light, peace and
protection flow to the supplicants as mother cows move
to the calf and are held by the dedicated in love and





[Names: Justa, Indraya, Indra, Visva]
Let the pure and purifying showers of soma in
divine flow, dedicated to omnipotence and to humanity
in love roar as a cloud of rain showers, and, O roaring
showers, throw out all jealousies and enmities of the


world far away from us.






[Names: Apaghnanto, Yonavrtasya]
O shower of divine light, love and power,
warding off and eliminating all unrighteous and
uncreating elements of life, pure, purifying and flowing
for humanity’s good, revealing the light of divinity and
illuminating humanity, come and settle in the seat of
truth and rectitude in the yajnic hall of humanity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 14






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Pari, Sritah, Karam, Purusprham, Purusprha]
Pervading and reposing in transcendence over
the dynamics of this expansive ocean of the universe,
bearing and sustaining this poetic creation, the
omniscient poet creator, Soma, lord of peace, joy and
bliss, rolls and rules the world with pleasure and grace.







[Names: Gira, Pariskrnvanti, Five]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 14 43


organs together with volitional sense organs, dedicated
and committed to their law and discipline of Dharma,
desirous to do good, all honour and adore the sustainer,
Soma, lord of peace and joy, the earth mother, and the
master soul with their sacred work and voice.






[Names: Adasya, Susmino, Yadi]
And then in the pleasure and ecstasy of this
Soma, lord of bliss, all sages, scholars and divines of
the world exult when they are able to apprehend with
their mind and senses his presence and when he feels
pleased by their songs of adoration.


[Names: Nirinano, Atra]
Apprehended with discrimination and clear
vision, it descends into the devotee’s consciousness,


releasing light by its radiations, and, joining the devotee,
it destroys his darkness and ignorance.






[Names: Naptibhirno]
Shining as pure and radiant by the mind and




senses of the ardent devotee, it joins the sage and,
perfecting his mind and intelligence, reveals itself in
vision as if in concentrated form and splendour.






[Names: Vagnumiyarti]
Pure and absolute, free from any mode or
medium, it reveals itself by the subtlest and most pointed
intelligential awareness of the devotee, and this confirms
the truth of the Vedic words of revelation for the seeker
of divinity and knowledge.





[Names: Prstha]
The intelligential faculties of the soul cleansing
themselves, together in concentration, move to the lord
omnipotent of food, energy and intelligence and reach
the fount and foundation of all action and attainment
for the soul.


[Names: Vasuni]
O Soma, lord of peace, power and intelligence,
pray, having collected and concentrated all heavenly


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 15 45


and earthly wealth, honour and excellence of the world,
come and bring them for us.


Mandala 9/Sukta 15

[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Gacchann, Indrasya, Indras]
This Soma, spirit of peace and joy, brave
dispeller of darkness, moves with the subtlest
intelligence and awareness and comes by the fastest
media of psychic communication and comes to the seat
of its presence in the mind and soul of man.





[Names: Puru, Yatramrtasa]
This infinite and eternal Spirit of peace, love
and joy is ever keen to bless humanity with boundless
piety and divinity in which men of immortal knowledge,
karma and divine love abide.






[Names: Yadi]
This divine Spirit is attained and internalised in




the core of the heart and soul by the brilliant path of
clairvoyance, when the passionate seekers surrender
themselves in obedience to it.



[Names: Nrmna]
This Soul, vibrating on top of the highest bounds
of the universe, abides in repose in the world of
existence, one with all in the multitudinous world,
generous and virile, bearing and ruling the entire wealth
and powers of the universe by its power and splendour.

[Names: Subhrebhir, Patih]
It pervades every where by its holy brilliance
of light and wide creative forces, ruling over the
dynamics of the vibrating oceans of space.


It moves and overcomes hard and rough places
of hidden hoarded wealth of negative powers and goes


over to protect the powers that observe divine discipline
in the battles of life.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 16 47



[Names: Etam, Pracakranam]
People adore this glorious power closely
treasured in the heart, the divine power that creates and
gives great food, energy and advancement.


[Names: Etamu, Svayudham]
With ten pranas and seven faculties, five senses,
mind and intellect, glorify this Soma, lord of peace and


joy, who is most ecstatically blissful and wields noble
powers of protection for advancement and progress.


Mandala 9/Sukta 16






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Sargo]
O Soma, spirit of peace and bliss, your devotees,
in order to win the highest attainments of life and to
experience the joy of divinity, meditate and sojourn over
spaces between heaven and earth and find the divine
essence of existence, and then omnipresent divinity
flows like a flood into their consciousness. O man, that


essence of experience is for you.






[Names: Kratva, Gosam]
That delightful experience of the able
practitioner born of active meditation which guides our
chariot of life and adorns our actions through the
soothing experiences of mind and senses, we seek
through our noble karma and feel in every subtle particle
of our existence and awareness.


[Names: Anaptam, Somam, Punthindraya]
That rare soma joy of divinity rolling in
existence, achievable but with relentless practice across


trials and tribulations, O man, create in the purity of
heart and sanctify for enlightenment of the soul.






[Names: Somah]
The soma joy of the person who is purified
through the mind and intellect abides in the purity of
heart, and by virtue of his karma he attains his position
in the presence of divinity.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 16 49






[Names: Indra, Mahe]
Indra, lord of power, peace and joy, with songs
of honour and salutations to you, I have created and
offered joyous adorations to you which flow for the
grand fulfilment of the poet creator and man of divine
action.






[Names: Punano, Sriyah, Suro]
In the eternal imperishable spirit of divinity,
abide and roll all peace, power and glories of the world
like waves of the ocean in the midst of which the brave
soul, having purified itself of the junk of life, sits and






[Names: Divo, Vrtha]
Just as rain showers of heaven fall upon the
mountain, so do the showers of soma fulfilment and
spontaneously upon the mind and soul of the man of
purity and roll in the heart.




[Names: Tvam, Avyo]
O Soma, lord of peace, joy and glory, you purify
the wise among general humanity and move


continuously to the man of choice for the sake of
protection and advancement.


Mandala 9/Sukta 17






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Soma]
Just as rivers flow down the slopes of mountains,
so do streams of soma, divine bliss, destroying evil and
darkness, universal, rapid and restless, flow for






[Names: Indram, Indra, Somaso]
As showers of rain stream forth on the earth and
fertilize it, so do streams of soma distilled, released and
beatifying flow to dedicated humanity, inspiring it with
joy and creativity.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 17 51




[Names: Atyurmir, Somah, Vighnan]
Overflowing, inspiring and ecstatic, the soma
joy of existence across the fluctuations of existential
mind flows to humanity, destroying evil and negative
tendencies and exciting divine love, and rolls in the
sacred cave of the heart.



[Names: Ukthair]
This soma of divine vitality runs and ripples in
forms of life, spreads from one mind to another through
the light of discrimination and waxes and rises by songs
of praise in yajnas.



[Names: Isnant, Suryam, Surya]
O Soma, lord of light and bliss, rising as if higher
and higher, you transcend the three worlds of earth, skies
and the heavens and shower light and glory over the
heavens, and then, in a state of passion as if, you animate
the sun with power and fertility.








[Names: Anusata, Dadhanas]
Poets, vibrant scholars and sages and earnest
supplicants adore and glorify Soma in the beginning of
yajna, reposing perfect faith and love in the all-watching
divine lord of peace, power and glory.






[Names: Tamu, Myrjanti]
That lord of might, all victorious over cosmic
dynamics, the leading lights of humanity and vibrant
sages in search of peace, protection and advancement
by their songs and actions, glorify for attaining the bliss
and blessings of divinity.






[Names: Madhor, Carurrtaya]
O lord of bliss and inspiration, release the
showers of honey. You are intensely vibrant, bless our
hall of yajna, inspire and energise the yajakas. You are
glorious and gracious, give us the taste of truth and
nectar of divine law beyond satiety.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 18 53


Mandala 9/Sukta 18






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Pari, Madesu]
O lord, you are Soma, peace, power and bliss,
all creative, fertilising and inspiring, all present in
thunder of the clouds, roar of the winds and rumble of
the mountains, in purest of the pure. You are the sole
sustainer of all in bliss divine.


[Names: Tvam]
You are the vibrant sage of sages, the visionary


poet of poets, and the honey sweet of all tastes born of
all food. You are the sole sustainer of all in bliss divine.






[Names: Tava]
All divinities of nature and humanity in love
and faith with you yearn to drink of the divine nectar
and they are blest with it. You are the sole sustainer of
all in bliss divine.








You who hold in hands the entire wealth of the
world, we cherish, you who are the sole sustainer and
dispenser for all in bliss divine.






You who fill these great mother-like heaven and
earth with the wealth of food and drink and obtain for
us all nourishments from these are the sustainer and
provider for all in bliss divine.






You who always pervade the dynamics of both
heaven and earth with food, energy and the spirit of
evolution, are the sustainer and dispenser for all in bliss
divine.






[Names: Susmi]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 19 55


O lord of bliss, all-powerful and all-purifying,
you, who pervade all forms and regions of existence
and proclaim your presence and power therein in action,
are the sustainer of all in bliss divine.


Mandala 9/Sukta 19






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Soma, Tannah]
O Soma, lord of peace, purity and power, purify
for us the wealth, honour and excellence both worldly
and heavenly which is wonderfully versatile, valuable
and admirable, pray sanctify it and bless us with the






[Names: Yuvam, Indrasca]
O Soma, lord of peace and purity, Indra, lord of
honour and excellence, both of you are protectors,
sustainers and sanctifiers of earth, earthly well being,
culture and sacred speech, of heaven and heavenly light
and joy. Rulers and sustainers of existence, pray bless
us with exuberant intelligence and will for holy thought,
action and advancement.








[Names: Vrsa, Harih]
O Soma, giver of showers of fulfilment to the
soul in living forms, purifying and sanctifying the soul
of each one among humanity, presiding over the
evolving forms of nature with the divine will and voice
of thunder, taking on the role of creator through the
dynamics of universal law, the divine Spirit abides
immanent and pervasive in the womb of nature as the
total seed of existence.






[Names: Avavasanta, Sunor]
Just as females in season yearn for a darling off-
spring, so do the evolving forms of Prakrti, Mother
Nature, inspired by desire, long for the life seed of the
omnipotent father of universal life.





[Names: Kuvid, Sukram]
The great lord omnipotent Soma, pure and
immaculate, impregnates the forms of nature
overflowing with desire which receive the seed and
create living milk for the growth of life.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 20 51




[Names: Ssatrusu]
O lord of purity, those who stay far off, bring
close and instruct; those who are negative, strike with
fear; bring wealth, honour and excellence for life.





[Names: Satroh, Susmam, Dure]
O Soma, lord of peace, power and purification,
negate, overcome and win over the exuberance, power
and exploitation, and the spirit of the enemy’s enmity
whether he is far or near.


Mandala 9/Sukta 20





[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Sahvan]
Soma, creative poet and universal visionary, all
protective, withstanding all rivalry and opposition,
moves on with protection, advancement and choice gifts
for the creative souls for their divine fulfilment.








[Names: Pavamanah]
He alone, pure, purifying and dynamic, brings
for the celebrants thousandfold food, energy and
advancement with victory inspired and infused with
intelligence, knowledge, culture and enlightenment.






[Names: Pari, Sravo]
O lord, you give us all good things of the world
we love with our heart’s desire. You inspire and energise
our intellect, understanding and will for action. O Soma,
pray bring us the wealth of honour and fame with all
forms of life’s excellence.





[Names: Abhyarsa]
Bring wide and expansive fame for the men of
honour and generosity, bring wealth and power, bring
food, energy, knowledge and excellence of mind and
soul for the celebrants.






[Names: Tvam, Punano]
O Soma, you are like a ruler sustainer of the
holy laws of existence. You are present in the hymns of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 21 59


the Veda and you inspire the songs of celebrants. Pure
and purifying, O wielder and sustainer of the universe,
you are wondrous great and sublime, the like of which
never was and never shall be, rival there is none.






[Names: Somascamiusu]
That lord Soma, burden bearer of existence, is
the universal inspirer, energiser and enlightener, the very
passion and fire of life, pervasive in the waters of space,
unconquerable, blazing in the self-circuit of his own
refulgence, and he abides in the holy ladles of yajna as
much as in the mighty majestic armies of the universe.






[Names: Krilurmakho, Dadhat]
O Soma, you are joyous and playful, generous
at heart as the very yajnic creation of the exuberant
world, you move to the heart of the celebrants with
purity of divinity, and inspire and infuse the hymns of
Veda and songs of the devotees with the spirit of divinity
and creative exuberance.


Mandala 9/Sukta 21








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Indraya, Indra, Soma, Matsarasah]
These Soma streams of divine joy and
exhilaration, agile, mirthful, ecstatic and refulgent, flow
free in honour of Indra, lord of the beauty and glory of
life.





[Names: Pravrnvanto, Svayam]
These streams of soma are graciously
favourable, readily helpful, harbingers of wealth, honour
and fame for the devotees and naturally and by
themselves givers of health and longevity for the singers
and celebrants of divinity in song.






[Names: Vrtha]
These streams of soma, i.e., floods of rivers,
circulations and circumambulations of stars, planets and
galaxies, by nature and spontaneously move from and
back into the One and only One like the fire of yajna
arising from and receding into the same one vedi and
like the waves of the sea arising from, playing joyously
on and receding into peace into the same one sea.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 21 61




[Names: Hita]
All these streams of soma of the world, pure,
purifying and flowing, abide in the One and only One
like seven colours of the spectrum abiding in the light
of the sun.



[Names: Asmin]
All these various streams of existential matter
and energy bearing colourful forms in this cosmic
personality abide by one divinity which brings us total



[Names: Rbhurna, Sukrah]
Just as an expert artist makes a new chariot and
controls the motive power in order to reach the
destination so, O Soma, let the pure streams flow, purify
us, and bring us blissful enlightenment for total








[Names: Satah]
Thus do these soma streams of victorious divine
light and energy wish and shine and create and lead us
to the supreme state of joy, and thus do they animate,
inspire and fructify the thought and will of the truly
wise.


Mandala 9/Sukta 22





[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Somasa, Sargah]
These soma streams of nature and humanity fast

as chariots on course for victory roar like floods let free.






[Names: Parjanyasyeva, Agneriva]
These streams like winds of storm, torrents of
rain and flames of fire roar and press forward without
effort, spontaneously in their element.


[Names: Somaso, Vipa]
These living floods of energy, vibrant courses,
soothing moons, blazing suns and whirling galaxies,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 22 63


pure somas all blest by light and will divine of the centre
hold of life, inspire the will and awareness of thinking
men.


[Names: Tyaksantah]
All these, sparkling pure immortals ever on the
move tire not. Pure energy they are, restless, eager to
traverse the paths of space.






[Names: Utedam]
Pressing forward on the journey all round, they
cross the regions of heaven and earth and then reach
the highest pinnacle of light and space in existence.



[Names: Tantum, Anu]
Moving on with the flow of life across the
expansive web of creative existence, they reach the
ultimate where life can reach, the infinite.







[Names: Tvam, Tatam]
O Soma, peace, purity and wealth of existence,
you alone bear and bring the Word, peace of settlement
and wealth of culture and enlightenment for humanity,
and you turn the wheel of existence, proclaim it with a
boom and the web begins to spin out and in.


Mandala 9/Sukta 23





[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Soma]
I create the rapid streams of soma forms of

existence in constant motion with the currents of

honeyed ecstasy of nature in evolution in consonance


with the universal poetry of divinity articulated in the






[Names: Veda, Anu, Ruce, Suryam, Surya]
In consequence of the will divine, the eternal
particles of Prakrti move and assume new forms of
existence in evolution, and for the sake of light they
create the light of stars.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 23 65






[Names: Krdhi]
O Soma, lord of purity and power, socio-cosmic
dynamics, production and munificence, win over the
ungiving, uncreative and selfish people and give us all
a peaceful home and food, energy, knowledge and
wisdom for sustenance and happy continuance of the






The joyous worlds of Soma move on pure and
free, life for Soma devotees moves on pure and free,
they enjoy the ecstatic beauty and sweetness of the
world, and their homes abound in honey sweets distilled
from life.






[Names: Somo, Suviro]
The world of divine soma joy moves on, all
sustaining, bearing cherished sweets for pleasure and
celebration, the omnipotent is guardian of our honour
and fame.







[Names: Indraya, Indra, Indo]
O Soma, lord of purity and ecstasy, you flow
with love for Indra, the karma yogi and for the men of
noble character and action. You abide in the yajnic hall
and home, O lord of the beauteous flow of life, and
bless us with food, energy, victory and total fulfilment.


[Names: Asya, Jaghana]
Having drunk of the ecstasy of this divine nectar
of purity and power, Indra has eliminated and still


eliminates the forces of evil and darkness without


Mandala 9/Sukta 24




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Asita, Devala, Kashyapa, Rshi, Srinana]
Soma currents of purity, power and beauty of
divinity, purifying and inspiring streams of life’s joy,
sparkling, and enlightening humanity, when absorbed,
and integrated in human thought, word and action reflect


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 24 67
in life and glorify noble people.






[Names: Punana, Indram, Indra]
The ecstasy and power of soma vibrations
energise the mind and senses of the celebrant, purifying
and perfecting them, and, thus purified, the senses and
mind move to the presence of omnipotent all-joyous
Indra like streams and rivers flowing, rushing and
joining the sea.






[Names: Nrbhiryato]
O Soma, universal power and joy of existence,
pure and purifying, you vibrate in the universe like an
ocean of nectar. Celebrated by men of vision and
wisdom, you arise and manifest in your glory in the
devotee’s experience and inspire him to rise to divinity.





[Names: Tvam, Sasniryo, Anumadyah, Anumadya]
O Soma, joyous lover and lord of humanity, let
the ecstasy of your presence flow purifying for the
protection and fulfilment of humanity, pure, generous


and adorable as you are.






[Names: Indo, Aram, Indrasya, Indras]
O Soma, shower of divine beauty and bliss,
perceived, internalised and realised through the mind
and vision of the celebrant, you vibrate and shine in
sanctified awareness as the absolute beauty, bliss and
glory of existence for the human soul.






[Names: Pavasva, Anumaddyah, Anumaddya, Sucih]
Flow into the heart, beatify the soul, O greatest
destroyer of the dirt and darkness of life, in response to
our songs of adoration. O Spirit of absolute joy, you are
pure, sanctifier and absolutely sublime.





[Names: Somah, Devavir]
Soma, creator and energiser of existence,
ambrosial honey for the enlightened celebrants, is hailed
as purifier, sanctifier and protector of the divines and
destroyer of sin, scandal, jealousy and enmity.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 25 69


Mandala 9/Sukta 25






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Drdhachyuta, Agastya, Rshi, Pavasva, Marudbhyo]
O Soma, lord of joy and versatile intelligence
of the universe, pure, fluent and all-purifying eliminator
of want and suffering, giver of sufficiency, flow, purify
and sanctify the powers of noble and generous nature
to their full satisfaction, come as ecstasy of life for
vibrant humanity, for pranic energy and for the will and
intelligence of the seekers of light and dynamism for
action.






[Names: Dharmana, Vayuma]
O lord of purity and power, let your presence
concentrated by senses and mind in awareness, speaking
aloud in the heart and soul, abide in the pranic and
intelligential vitality of the soul with living
consciousness of divine law and virtues of holy life and
thus purify and sanctify us.








[Names: Vrtraha]
Soma, omniscient poetic creator, generous and
dear, dearest of divinities and destroyer of the evil and
darkness of life, vibrating in the cave of the heart shines
glorious in the soul and reflects beatific with the senses,
mind, intelligence and will in the conduct and grace of
the human personality.


[Names: Visva, Yatramrtasa]
Soma, pervading all forms of existence in the
expansive universe, pure and purifying, goes on blissful,
beatific and gracious, the omnipresence in which the


enlightened sages abide, having attained freedom from





[Names: Aruso, Somah, Indram, Indra]
Soma, glorious and blissful omniscient creator
of the poetry of existence articulating the divine voice
of the Veda flows vibrant and omnipresent to loving
humanity especially to men of action and enlightenment.






[Names: Arkasya]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 26 71


come in a wave of ecstasy and majesty to bless the pure
heart of the celebrant which is the seat of the soul and
of the golden glow of divinity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 26





[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Idhmavaha, Dardhachyuta, Rshi, Tamamrksanta, Vipraso]
Sages with their subtle mind and intellect, reason
and passion, glorify that exuberant bright and potent
Soma, lord of universal action and victory, on the vedi
in the lap of mother earth.






[Names: Indum]
That blissful Soma, sustainer of the refulgent
heavens, whose generous and inexhaustible grace flows
in a thousand streams, the songs of Veda, rays of the
sun, and the stars and planets, indeed all that move in
the moving universe celebrate and adore.








[Names: Dharnasim]
That divine and all sustaining, pure and
purifying, foundation of existence, wielder and sustainer
of infinite forms, stars and galaxies, the sages with their
thought, imagination and vision visualise, contemplate
and realise unto the heights of heaven.






[Names: Tamahyan, Patim]
Hymns of the Veda, wise sages and infinite
forms of existence, all with their light, motions, wisdom
and vision celebrate and adore that Soma, lord of
omniscience, peace and purity who shines radiant in
the light of the sun between heaven and earth and who,
fearless and indomitable, holds, protects, promotes and
speaks through the voice of eternity.




[Names: Haryatam]
Sages in unison, with their highest and most
intense mental and spiritual faculties, adore, celebrate
and realise that Soma on top of existence who is glorious
and blissful, destroyer of suffering, and universal


watcher, dispenser and disposer of the world of




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 27 73




[Names: Indavindraya]
O Soma, universal spirit of beauty and bliss,
pure, purifying and ever flowing, so glorious as you are
celebrated in songs of the universal Vedic eternity, self-
realised sages adore and exalt you for the joy and
ultimate salvation of the human soul.


Mandala 9/Sukta 27






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Nrmedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Punano]
This Soma, creative, inspiring and poetic spirit
of universal joy, pure and sanctifying, manifests in the
pure and pious consciousness of the devotees,
eliminating disturbing negativities when it is
contemplated with a concentrated mind.


[Names: Indraya, Indra, Pavitre]
This all potent and versatile divine spirit of
universal joy manifests in the pure consciousness of the


karma-yogi and wins the light of heaven for the vibrant
meditative soul.








[Names: Somo]
This Soma, joyous spirit of divinity, is the
summit of heaven, infinitely generous, self-existent and
omniscient, and with meditation, the ecstasy of it is
collected in abundance in the consciousness by the
dedicated sages.






[Names: Induh]
It loves the earth and earthly joys and loves to
give, speaking loud and bold its own eternal Word, it is
pure and purifier, it loves the golden beauty and
prosperity of life and loves to bless, it is soothing and
self-refulgent beautiful, conqueror of all battles of
cosmic dynamics, and eternally invincible.






It rises and abides with the sun on top of the
regions of light and, internalised in the pure mind and
clairvoyant consciousness, it is the divine ecstasy of
the celebrant.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 28 75




[Names: Punana, Indrama]
This Soma Spirit of eternal joy is omnipotent,
all pervasive in space, infinitely generous, eliminator
of suffering, and, purifying and sanctifying the human
soul, it is the ultimate bliss of existence.

Mandala 9/Sukta 28






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Priyamedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Avyo]
This supreme all potent soma light and joy of
the universe is realised by earnest sages within. It is all
aware over the universe, master controller of the
universal mind energy, all saviour and protector, and
without delay it rises and manifests in the inner self of


[Names: Visva]
This Soma, divine presence and bliss, emerges


and vibrates in holy minds, distilled by them through
meditation for the noble souls while it rolls in majesty


in and over all regions of the universe.





[Names: Vrtraha]
This self-refulgent, immortal divine presence,
highest lover of noble and generous souls, pervades and
shines all over in the universe through its mode of
Prakrti, dispelling darkness and eliminating evil.






This omnificent shower of generous divinity
vibrating by the dynamics of Prakrti and her tenfold
mode of subtle and gross elements proclaims its
presence loud and bold in beauteous forms of mutations
and manifestations of nature in the universe.


[Names: Suryam, Surya]
This soma illuminates the sun, pure, purifying


and dynamic, watching all, pervading all regions of the
universe, knowing and controlling all that is in existence.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 29 77


[Names: Susmyadabhyah, Somah, Devavir]
This mighty undauntable Soma, pure and
purifying, pervades and rolls in the universe everywhere,
protector and promoter of the good and destroyer of sin
and scandal.


Mandala 9/Sukta 29


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Nrmedha, Angirasa, Rshi, Prasya, Devan, Anu]
In character with its self-refulgence, and
glorifying its divine powers in nature and humanity, the


streams of this mighty virile Soma, pure and immaculate,
flow forth with the light and lustre of its omnipotence.




[Names: Saptim, Jyotir]
Sages embellish and exalt the might of the
omniscient and omnipotent Soma, poets and artists, with
the language of their art, celebrate the divine light thus
emerging and rising more and more admirable.







[Names: Susaha, Vardha]
O Soma, lord of universal wealth, power and
honour, those divine showers of generosity, those songs
of adoration and lights of glory, are holy and winsome
for your celebrant. Let the admirable ocean rise and





[Names: Visva]
Flow forth profusely, O Soma, lord of peace and
glory, by stream and shower, bringing and bestowing
abundant wealth, honour and excellence of the world
on us, and throw out all jealousy, enmity and malignity
far away from us.






[Names: Raksa, Nido]
O Soma, save us, protect us fully against the
arrogance, pride and malignity of the selfish hoarder
and uncharitable exploiter and from whoever else be
like that, and let us ever be fearless and free from
scandal, malignity and anxiety.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 30 79




[Names: Endo, Dyumantam]
O Soma, blissful as the moon and generous as
showers of rain, pure and purifying, flow forth, sanctify
us and bring us streams of wealth, honour and excellence
of the earth and heaven, bear and bring us divine
strength, forbearance and fortitude of a high order of
freedom and progress.


Mandala 9/Sukta 30






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Bindu, Angirasa, Rshi, Susmino, Punano]
For one who, purifying himself, seeks favour
of the divine speech, Sarasvati, showers of the light and
power of this soma, mighty, creative and energising
divinity, spontaneously stream forth into the sacred






[Names: Indurhiyanah, Tyarti]
The lord of light and bliss, when solicited by
seekers and celebrants, feels exalted, and, speaking loud
and bold unto the heart and soul of the supplicant,
inspires and augments their perception, intuition and
eloquence.





[Names: Susmam, Puruspr, Pavasva]
O Soma, lord of strength and enlightenment, let
showers of strength worthy of the brave and victorious
inspiring to prowess and chivalry loved by all flow to
us in streams of plenty and abundance.



Let soma, pure and purifying lord of peace, light
and power, flow and advance in shower and streams of
innocence and purity into the celebrants’ heart and soul.





[Names: Apsu, Indavindraya]
O Soma, spirit of light, peace and joy, the
celebrants, by earnest words, thoughts and acts, invoke,
adore and exalt you, sweetest of the sweets in life’s
honey, destroyer of suffering, fear and anxiety, and urge
you on to bless the heart of the supplicant to his full




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 31 81




[Names: Sunota, Indraya, Indra, Somam, Carum]
O yajakas, create the sweetest honeyed soma,
delicious and exhilarating, to augment the strength,
forbearance and fortitude of the adamantine soul and,
through words, thoughts and actions, to offer it in
gratitude to Indra, lord omnipotent wielder of the
thunderbolt of justice and dispensation.


Mandala 9/Sukta 31






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Gotama, Rahugana, Rshi, Somasah, Somasa, Rayim]
Exhilarating, thoughtful, pure and purifying
soma powers of divine nature and humanity flow,
advance, create and promote wealth, honour and
excellence of enlightenment and divine awareness.






[Names: Divas, Bhava]
Supremely excellent soma spirit of the universe,
be the promoter and exalter of our wealth, power and
enlightenment on earth and in heaven and be the
protector and promoter of the food, energy and
excellence of our human community.








[Names: Tubhyam]
O Soma, lord of supreme felicity, the dearest
most pleasant winds blow for you, the rolling seas flow
for you, and they all exalt your glory.






Glory be to you, Soma, pray promote and exalt
us, may your exalted shower of blessings come from
all round. O lord, be with us in all our battles of peace,
progress and prosperity.






[Names: Varsisthe]
O lord bearer and sustainer of the universe, in
your honour do stars and planets, lands and cows and
all energies of nature create inexhaustible milky
nutriments of life and adore you on top of generosity
and universal love.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 32 83




[Names: Svayudhasya, Indo]
O lord of the universe, excellent and blissful,
we desire and pray for your friendship, eternal and
imperishable wielder of supreme power of creation,
protection and promotion as you are.


Mandala 9/Sukta 32






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Shyavashva, Atreya, Rshi, Somaso, Suta]
May the streams of soma, nectar sweet and
exhilarating, distilled and sanctified in yajna, flow for
the safety, security and fame of our leading lights of
honour, power and excellence.






[Names: Adim, Indum, Indraya, Indra]
And the vibrant thoughts and words of the sage
beyond three fold bondage of body, mind and soul, with
all perceptions of sense and conceptions of mind
concentrated, rise, reach and exalt the lord of peace and
joy, destroyer of suffering, for the enlightenment and
ecstasy of the human soul.








[Names: Atyo]
And just as a hansa bird joins its flock and just
as a horse is controlled by reins to reach the destination,
so does the soul, having controlled and concentrated
all senses, mind and intelligence, rise and join the
presence of Divinity, its ultimate haven and home.






[Names: Ubhe, Somavacakasan, Somavacakasa, Sidann]
O Soma, lord of peace and joy over-watching
both heaven and earth, as a lion moves and rambles
freely at will in the forest, so do you pervade and vibrate
in the world of Prakrti well seated at the centre in the
vedi of yajna, at the seat of human psyche and in the
dynamic laws of existence.






[Names: Anusata, Agannajim]
Just as a maiden admires, longs for and meets
her darling lover, so do all perceptions of sense and
conceptions of mind with the consciousness concentrate
on the divine presence as is their love and faith and
reach their end and aim.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 33 85





[Names: Sanim, Sravah]
For all of us, for the leading lights of power,
honour and excellence, and for me too, bring honour
and fame enriched with enlightenment, bring us food
and energy, high order of mind and intelligence and total
fulfilment for the soul.


Mandala 9/Sukta 33


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Somaso, Vanani]
Just as waves of water rise to the moon and great
men strive for things of beauty and goodness, so do
inspired learned sages, lovers of dynamic peace and


goodness, move forward to realise the supreme power
and Spirit of the Vedic hymns.






[Names: Vajam]
Just as pure, powerful, brown nectar streams of
soma shower milky energies to fill the casks of
exhilarating drink for the aspirants, so do seasoned self-




realised scholars and teachers of Vedic knowledge and
experience, pure at heart and clairvoyant in vision and
intelligence, let flow powerful exhilarating streams of
knowledge and enlightenment in channels of truth, law
and immortality for competent and conscientious
seekers of life’s fulfilment.






[Names: Suta, Indraya, Indra, Varunaya, Varuna]
Knowledge, wisdom and expertise, valuable and
blissful as soma, collected and refined by sages and
scholars of vision and experience, flows on for Indra,
the ruling soul, Vayu, the vibrant people, Varuna, powers
of judgement and dispensation, Maruts, stormy warriors,
and Vishnu, universal sustaining powers of life and




[Names: Tisro, Harireti]
Three Vedic voices of knowledge, action and
prayer, loud and bold, enlighten and inspire to goodness,
organs of perception and volition urge to good action,
while earth and milch cows are profuse in fertility, and
the lord of bliss, destroyer of suffering, manifests bright
and blissful as life goes on in a state of prosperity.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 34 87


[Names: Anusata, Marmrjyante, Ssisum]
Holy voices, creators and sustainers of the rule
of truth and rectitude, ceaselessly flow around strong,
refining and doing honour to the teacher, scholar and
learner as they enlighten and sanctify the child of
heaven, the rising generation.






[Names: Rayah]
Flow free, O Soma, divine power, pure and
bright, bring us from all around the four oceans of wealth
and knowledge a thousandfold.


Mandala 9/Sukta 34


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Rujad]
Creating, inspiring and impelling life onward
all round with streams of divine energy and ambition,
Soma, blissful creativity of the lord omnipotent, goes


on, breaking down strongholds of negativity, evil and
darkness all round with its might and lustre.








[Names: Suta, Indraya, Indra, Varunaya, Varuna, Somo]
Soma, physical, psychic and spiritual streams
of energy released by divine creativity, flow all round
for Indra, men of power, Vayu, men of energy, Varuna,
men of judgement, Maruts, men of ambition, and
Vishnu, men of knowledge, wisdom and sustaining






[Names: Vrsanam, Somamadri, Duhanti]
Effusive and abundant generative energy of
soma, divine creativity, collected and controlled by virile
and visionary sages with adamantine discipline of body,
sense and mind, later scholarly yogis distil and advance
further with their spiritual power and thus create still
higher food for the soul.






[Names: Bhuvat]
Soma, lord of peace and bliss, is the object of
pure meditation for the yogi past the bonds of body,
sense and mind, the object for inspiration and ecstasy
for the yogi of power on way to aesthetic meditation,
and for the average person he is perceived through the
infinite forms of divine reflection in life.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 35 89






[Names: Abhimrtasya, Caru]
The infinite forms of versatile nature imbibe and
assimilate the spirit of divinity on top of the truth and
felicity of existence, and that is the dearest and most
beautiful divine gift worthy of choice and acceptance.






[Names: Samenam, Dhenurvasro]
These simple and innocent songs of praise and
appreciation rising higher and higher reach Soma, lord
of peace and bliss, and may he, kind and loving as a
parent, accept and cherish it as a gift of love and faith.


Mandala 9/Sukta 35






[Names: Pavaman, Soma, Devata, Prabhuvasu, Angirasa, Rshi, Yaya]
O Soma, lord of purity, pray purify and sanctify
us with showers of divine peace, and bring us wealth,
honour and excellence of high order by virtue of which
you are the sole lord and giver of light and grandeur to
us.








[Names: Indo, Rayo]
O lord of peace, heavenly light and beauty, all
pervasive vitaliser of the oceans of space, energiser of
the cosmos to move and expand by your omnipotence
and refulgence, wielder, controller and giver of universal
wealth, honour and excellence, pray radiate your
refulgence and glory, purify and bless us too.






[Names: Tvaya, Ksara]
By your heroic gift of bravery and fortitude, let
us win our rivals, contestants and enemies. Let choice
wealth, honour and excellence flow to us.






[Names: Vrata]
Indu, lord of soma beauty and grandeur, loves
and inspires victory, rousing the devotee with strength,
courage and fortitude; He is all watching omniscient
guardian; knowing and controlling laws and disciplines
of Dharma, is ever awake with protection and
dispensation by the arms of justice.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 36 91





[Names: Somam]
With hymns of adoration we exalt and glorify

Soma, inspirer of song, purifier, saviour and guardian
of humanity and their lands, cows and culture.





[Names: Visvo, Punanasya]
We adore and glorify Soma, lord of universal
wealth, honour and excellence, ordainer and guardian
of Dharma and all purifier, who holds and sustains the
entire world of humanity in his law of existence.


Mandala 9/Sukta 36






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Prabhuvasu, Angirasa, Rshi, Asarji, Karsman]
Just as a passionate champion warrior shoots to
the goal straight, so does Soma, potent spirit of peace,
purity and glory, invoked and celebrated with devotion
in the purity of heart and soul, descends to the centre
core of the heart without delay.








O Soma, burden bearer of existence, inspirer and
giver of enlightenment, ever awake and giver of
awakenment, lover of celebrants of divine mind, we
pray, let the streams of honeyed soma of light and joy
flow free to the heart of the devotee.






[Names: Kratve]
O Soma, lord of light, peace and joy, pure,
purifying and timeless, let the lights of knowledge shine
upon us and inspire and motivate us to engage and
achieve expertise and success in the science of yajnic
creation and production for the common good.






[Names: Sumbhamana, Pavate]
Glorious Soma, eternal divine light and energy
of the universe, adored and glorified by the lovers of
truth, natural law and creative yajna for universal social
causes, flows ceaselessly and constantly in the
imperishable circuit of its own light and supremacy in
the cosmos.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 37 93



[Names: Pavatam]
May Soma, we pray, purify and set aflow all
wealth, honour and excellence of the world, earthly,
heavenly and of the middle regions for the generous
yajamana and all.


[Names: Virayuh, Savasaspate]
O Soma, lord of purity, power and life energy,
giver of strength and courage, lover of lands, cows and
culture, horses, victory and advancement, brave warriors
and noble progeny for humanity, you pervade and
prevail not only on earth and in the skies, you shine in


glory on top of heaven too for the sake of devoted


Mandala 9/Sukta 37




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Rahugana, Angirasa, Rshi, Somah, Soma, Vighnan]
Soma, supremely generous Spirit of existence,
self-revealed, self-realised by the devotee, lover or




divine souls, manifests and vibrates in the pure heart of
the devotee, eliminating negativities, sin and evil, for
the pleasure and ecstasy of the celebrant.






Soma, all watching omniscient, destroyer of
suffering, omnipotent wielder and sustainer of the
universe, pervades and vibrates in Prakrti, proclaiming
its presence loud and bold as thunder.



[Names: Raksoha]
This dynamic omnipotent Spirit, light of heaven,
pure and purifying, vibrates universally and rushes to
the chosen imperishable soul of the devotee, destroying
negativities, sin and evil.



[Names: Jamibhih, Suryam, Surya]
Soma, pure, purifying, and all pervasive across
and ever on top of the three worlds of space and three
dimensions of time, shines with the sun and other


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 38 95



[Names: Somo]
Soma, destroyer of darkness, generous, self-
manifestive, self-revealed and self discovered, lord giver
of the best of wealth and excellence of the world, fearless
and undaunted, pervades and vibrates in existence as



[Names: Shakti, Indurindraya, Self]
by poets, rushes to manifest, brilliant, blissful and great,
in the heart of the devotees for the soul’s joy.


Mandala 9/Sukta 38






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Rahugana, Angirasa, Rshi, Gacchan]
This Soma spirit of joy in existence, mighty
charming, creating and giving thousandfolds of wealth,
honour and excellence, vibrates by its dynamic presence
at the highest and brightest in the heart of choice souls




and in choice beauties of existence.






[Names: Etam, Indumindraya]
This Spirit of joy, eliminator of suffering, happy
voices of the sage past three bondages of body, mind
and soul adore, with the intensity of adamantine
meditation for the spiritual joy of general humanity.






[Names: Yabhirmadaya]
This Soma, ten senses and ten pranas of the
devotee, well controlled past sufferance and pointed to
concentrative meditation, present in uninvolved purity
of form, by which experience the bright presence is
glorified for the soul’s joy.






[Names: Syeno, Gacchanjaro]
This Soma pervades and shines in the generality
of humanity like the eagle, victorious conqueror of the
skies, shining and radiating like the moon, lover and
admirer of its darling, the lovely night.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 39 97



This ecstatic bliss, honey sweet of life’s joy,
appears like the rising sun at dawn when, as the beauty
and glory of existence, it reflects in the heart of the
chosen soul.


[Names: Krandan]
This Soma spirit of joy, self-manifestive, all
wielder and sustainer, reflects with a boom in its darling
form, the golden womb of Prakrti, and rolls around for


the joyous experience of humanity eliminating pain and


Mandala 9/Sukta 39


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Brhanmati, Angirasa, Rshi, Asurarsa, Yatra]
O Soma, spirit of universal joy and infinite light
of intelligence, flow fast forward with your own


essential and dear light and lustre of form and come
where the divines dwell, and proclaim your presence.




[Names: Pariskrnvann, Vrstim]
Go forward cleansing, purifying and perfecting
the uninitiated, leading people to strive for food, energy


and advancement. Indeed, bring the showers of the light
of heaven on earth.






[Names: Suta, Vicaksano]
Soma, universal watchful guardian and light
giver of the world, discovered and realised in the self,
wearing its celestial light and lustre, manifests and
shines in the pure soul of the devotee.


[Names: Ayam, Sindhorurma]
This Soma is the spirit of joy which, at instant
and universal speed, descends and manifests in the


devotee’s pure soul from the light of divinity and
stimulates oceanic waves of ecstasy to roll in the heart.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 40 99




[Names: Avivasan, Indraya, Indra]
Self-manifested, illuminating the soul from far
as well as from near, it rains showers of honey sweets
of divine ecstasy for the soul.






[Names: Samicina, Anusata, Yonavrtasya]
Devoted yajakas in faith and perfect form
together adore and glorify Soma, eliminator of pain,
and with adamantine practice of meditation stimulate
its presence to power and ecstasy for themselves. O
Soma, pray, arise and bless the yajnic as well as the
psychic vedi with your presence, the vedi that is your
own seat of Truth and divine Law.


Mandala 9/Sukta 40


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Brhanmati, Angirasa, Rshi, Punano, Sumbhanti]
Soma, spirit of universal purity and purification,
all watching, faces and overcomes all adversaries of


the carnal world. Sages celebrate and glorify the vibrant
all prevailing spirit with songs of adoration.








[Names: Indram, Indra, Dhruve]
The glorious light of divinity, self-manifested
and self-existent, pervades its natural abode, the world
of Prakrti, and the generous spirit pervades the human
soul too, and while it seats itself in the unshakable faith
of man, the human soul too, purified and sanctified,
abides in the eternal presence of divinity.






Soma, lord of universal glory, blissful
omnipresence, bring us great wealth, honour and
excellence of the world from all around, let it flow to us
in a thousand streams.






[Names: Visva, Vidah]
O Soma, spirit of universal bliss and beauty,
bring us the light, lustre and glory of all the world. Bless
us with a thousandfold food, energy and advancement
in knowledge, culture and values of Dharma.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 41 101



[Names: Jaritur]
May the lord, Soma, pure and purifying, bring
us wealth, honour and excellence, bless us with divine
strength and generous heroism for the celebrant, and
elevate and exalt the devotees’ songs of adoration.



[Names: Punana, Vrsannindo]
O Soma, lord of peace, beauty, power and divine
bliss, bring us the honour, excellence and glory of both
the worlds, earth and heaven, and, O generous lord, bless
us with excellence worthy of celebration in sacred song
for presentation to divinity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 41
[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Medhyatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Ghnantah]
We adore the ceaseless radiations of divinity
which, like restless rays of the sun, blazing with lustrous


glory, move and shower on the earth and dispel the dark
cover of the night.








[Names: Suvitasya, Sahvamso]
We honour and adore that divine bridge to peace
and prosperity, otherwise difficult to cross, which faces
and overcomes selfish, uncreative and destructive
elements of life addicted to lawlessness.






[Names: Srnve, Caranti]
The music of divinity, pure, purifying and
edifying, is heard like showers of rain on earth, like
flashes of lightning and roar of thunder which shine
and rumble over the sky. This is the reflection of the
might, majesty and generosity of Soma.






[Names: Asvavad]
O Soma, divine presence of might, majesty and
bliss concentrated in the mind and soul, let showers of
great energy and pure prosperity flow, abounding in
lands and cows, knowledge and culture, golden beauties
of riches, horses, speed and progress of achievement,
and then attainment of the ultimate victory.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 42 103


[Names: Usah]
O lord all watchful, ever awake, fill the great
earth and heaven with prosperity, light and beauty of


life like the sun which blesses the dawn with the beauty
and glory of its rays of light.






[Names: Pari, Sara]
O Soma, spirit of beauty, bliss and peace, just
as the universe from centre to summit abounds in the
beauty and majesty of divinity, so let us all in heart and
soul be blest with showers of peace and pleasure of total
well-being from all around our life in space and time.


Mandala 9/Sukta 42






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Medhyatithi, Kanva, Rshi, Janayan, Suryam, Surya, Vasano]
Soma, giver of peace, creator and sustainer of
the world of existence, eliminator of want and suffering,
creates the regions of heavenly light, creates the stars
in space, and creates the waters and the planets such as


earth, pervading, bearing and transcending them all.






[Names: Dharaya]
This divine Soma, light and life of the world,
self-realised by the sages and adored with ancient and
eternal hymns of the Veda, vibrates for them in the heart
and soul and sanctifies them with showers of heavenly






[Names: Vavrdhanaya, Somah]
Mighty powerful streams of Soma, full of
thousand-fold vigour and promise flow for the karma-
yogi, progressive man of initiative, creative ambition
and efficiency of action, sanctifying and preparing him
for the achievement of his goal.





[Names: Duhanah, Krandan]
Creating the eternal life-giving food of divine
ecstasy for the soul, the presence of blissful Soma
vibrates in the heart of the celebrant and, calling out as
if loud and bold, awakens the dormant divine


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 43 105
potentialities of the devotee to active possibilities.



Soma, purifying the heart and soul of humanity,
creates and brings up all the choice wealth, honours
and excellences of the world for the noble and generous
brilliancies of humanity dedicated in service to the laws
and values of truth and rectitude in life.



[Names: Gomannah, Pavasva]
O Soma, adored and glorified in self-realisation,
let streams of pure abundant food, energy, possibilities
and achievements flow for us, rich in lands and cows,
honour and culture, noble progeny and brave warriors,
horses, speedy progress and victories, vibrant initiative
and perfect fulfilment.


Mandala 9/Sukta 43


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Medhyatithi, Kanva, Rshi]
The Soma which is radiant and pure like virgin




energy of nature and most blissful in experience is
realised for spiritual joy through the senses, mind and






[Names: Indumindraya]
That Soma of beauty, bliss and glory, all our
senses, in search of protection and advancement, adore
and glorify as ever before for the spiritual joy of the
soul.






[Names: Punano, Viprasya]
Pure and purifying, blissful in experience,
adored and glorified with songs of divinity by the vibrant
sagely celebrant dedicated to the yoga of the knowledge
way, Soma vibrates in the soul.






[Names: Indo]
O Soma, gracious and blissful, pure and
purifying divinity, bring us wealth, honour and
excellence sanctified in truth, beauty and grace of the
light and lustre of a thousand suns.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 44 107


[Names: Induratyo, Yadaksarati]
O Soma, Spirit of light, beauty and grace of life’s
vitality, moving fast like showers of energy in life’s
evolution in the service of divine purpose, come into


the pure heart of the dedicated sage and flow free loud
and bold with the message of the divine presence.






[Names: Pavasva]
Come, O Soma, bless and sanctify the dedicated
celebrant for advancement and achievement of his life’s
mission and bring us noble vigour and vitality, a brave
progeny and heroic powers of progress.


Mandala 9/Sukta 44


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ayasya, Angirasa, Rshi]
O Soma, vibrant and fast, bearing waves of light
and energy of divinity, you radiate to the noble and


brilliant divine souls for our great advancement and
achievement all round in life.








[Names: Mati, Viprasya]
near in human consciousness, invoked by vision and
intelligence through concentration of the mind and
senses of sagely celebrants in meditation, inspires the
devotee with showers of ecstasy.






[Names: Ayam, Somo]
This Soma of divine vigour and ecstasy, all
watchful, ever awake among the divines, flows free,
and when it is invoked for realisation, it moves and rises
to bless the holy heart and soul of the celebrant.






[Names: Barhisman]
O Soma, blissful, watchful and gracious, lover
of vibrant aspirants of divine progress, beautifier and
sanctifier of our yajna with holiness and grace, the vedi
is prepared, the grass is spread, the fire is awake, the
yajamana invokes you, adores and glorifies, pray come
and bless the celebrants’ yajna.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 45 109






May Soma, eternal and infinite, inspirer of the
holy and brave, come among our noble and generous
congregations of yajna and bless us with honour and
excellence of a progressive social order vibrant as the





[Names: Sano, Vajam, Sravo]
of the knowledge of holy, creative and progressive
action, comes and blesses us with the achievement and
victory of success, progress and continuous growth of
universal fame and rising glory.


Mandala 9/Sukta 45


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ayasya, Angirasa, Rshi, Indavindraya]
O Soma, spirit of light, and joy, omniscient all
watchful guardian of humanity, let streams of peace,
joy and well-being, pure and sacred, flow for the soul’s




exhilaration in divine experience for its dedication to
the service and satisfaction of the divinities.






[Names: Sano, Indraya, Indra, Devantsakhibhya]
O Soma, come like a harbinger of peace and
joy for the divine experience and ecstasy of the soul,
and as giver of holy and higher perception and vision
for our friends.






O vibrant lord of light and glory, with
concentration of mind and senses and with holy words
of praise and prayer, we adore you. Pray bring us peace
and joy and perfect well being, and open wide the doors
of progress for the advancement of our wealth, honour
and excellence.






[Names: Atyu, Indurdevesu]
As the omnipotent divine energy is on top as
burden bearer of the course of existence, so is Soma,
peace and exhilaration of the spirit on top of the course


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 46 111


of the pure heart and soul of the devotee and it flows
into the psyche of the divine souls as the spirit of peace
and joy of life.


[Names: Sami, Indum, Anusata]
Let friends and devotees on the vedi celebrate
Soma, spirit of universal joy, sportive and protective in
the beautiful world, and let their songs of adoration
glorify the spirit of peace, beauty and divine glory.
[Names: Taya, Indo]
O Soma, spirit of joy and glory, flow pure, purify
and sanctify us by that very stream of exhilaration by
which, received, loved and adored, you inspire the


enlightened celebrant with manly vigour and divine


Mandala 9/Sukta 46




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ayasya, Angirasa, Rshi, Asrgran]
Performers of heroic action, like universal




presences grown to veteran heights by knowledge and
action, are born and created for divine service of the
world and they let flow streams of soma joy for general






[Names: Pariskrtasa, Vayum, Vayu]
Initiated, cultured and sanctified like the sacred
maiden of her holy parents, these brilliant veterans of
knowledge, action and joyous character, having
mastered subtle subjects and divined into the mysteries
of life, create and release streams of soma joy for the






[Names: Somasa, Indram, Indra]
These joyous veterans, brilliant in mind, well
trained and self-directed, trying to act well in planned
and well-defined channels, exalt the glory of Indra, their
self and the nation by their performance and social






[Names: Sukra, Gobhih, Srinita]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 47 113


Experts of noble hand and versatile mind, come,
take hold of the pure and powerful materials with
specialised tools and, with tempering mix and
refinement, create the instruments of joyous social






[Names: Asmabhyam]
O Soma, lord of joy and noble knowledge,
winner of wealth and holy power, creator of great
infrastructure for development, pure and powerful
expert of the paths of history and social development,
pray let the streams of peace and joy flow for us.






[Names: Etam, Indraya]
This Soma, lord of peace and joy, pure, potent
and adorable, ten senses, ten pranas, ten forms of subtle
and gross orders of Prakrti elements serve in conjunction
with the mind and intelligence of nature and humanity,
and create the joy and excitement of evolution and
development in life in honour of Indra, humanity and
the lord ruler of humanity.




Mandala 9/Sukta 47


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Somah, Soma, Mandana]
This Soma, lordly Spirit of peace and joy, feels
great by this yajnic act of homage and, happy and
exalted, loves to advance and exalt the celebrants.






[Names: Krtanidasya]
The deeds done and to be done by this Soma,
by which he destroys negativities and dispels darkness
are known, and, daring and powerful, he acquits the
celebrants of debts and obligations.






[Names: Uktham]
And when the song of adoration is sung in
honour of this Soma, then the spirit of peace and inner
strength, inner joy, adamantine courage and rectitude
edifying the mind and sense of the celebrant arise a
thousandfold in the soul.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 48 115






[Names: Svayam, Yadi]
When this Soma is adored and celebrated by
thoughts, words and deeds, then he, himself a poet
creator and visionary, in order to support and reward
the celebrant, decides to bless the devotee with the
jewels of life’s wealth of his choice.


[Names: Sisasatu, Bharesu]
O Soma, lord of peace, prize and joy, you love
to give and you are the giver of all jewels of wealth and
honour to all aspirants: like success to the pioneers in


the race for life’s glory, and victory to the ambitious
warriors in the battles of life’s excellence.


Mandala 9/Sukta 48




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Carum]
O Soma, Spirit of peace, purity and power, with
holy acts of homage in the halls of yajna, we invoke,
adore and worship you, lord of beauty and bliss, and




exalt you in action, harbinger of the jewels of wealth,
honour and excellence from the lofty regions of the light
of heaven.






[Names: Samvrktadhrsnum, Satam]
We worship you, eliminator of arrogance and
pride, adorable, observer of lofty vows of discipline,
inspiring, and breaker of a hundred strongholds of





[Names: Atastva, Suparno]
For this reason of your glory and inspiring
nature, O lord of holy action and self-refulgent ruler,
controller and dispenser of wealth, honour and
excellence, the veteran sage and scholar can invoke you
from the heights of heaven without fear and difficulty.





[Names: Visvasma, Gopamrtasya]
The sage and scholar of lofty vision and
imagination, in order that all visionaries of the world


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 49 117


experience of your presence who are present

everywhere, who give motion to the energy of nature in

the cosmic dynamics and who rule and protect the laws

of eternal truth which govern the course of existence.



[Names: Adha, Abhistikrd]
And so, the inspirer of the power of senses, mind
and intelligence, giver of fulfilment to the devotees, all
watching Soma, divine Spirit of peace, power and
enlightenment, pervades and abides in and over
existence as the supreme power of divine glory.


Mandala 9/Sukta 49



[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Pavasva, Ayaksma]
Soma, lord of peace and plenty, give us holy
showers of waters, wave on wave of the rain, and give
us abundant food, energy and knowledge free from
pollution and negativities.





[Names: Taya, Janyasa]
Shower and purify us with that stream of power
and purity of peace and plenty by which our senses,
mind and intelligence, socially and positively motivated,
may be balanced in our personality and we may feel at
home with ourselves.






[Names: Ghrtam, Asmabhyam]
Let ghrta shower in streams, pure and powerful
in our yajnas, O lord and guardian of the noble and
divine worshippers. Bring us fulfilment and purify all
our intentions, purposes and motivations of life.


[Names: Devasah]
For energy, give us showers in streams of


imperishable purity of heart, and let the noble devotees
hear the blissful music of the rain.


[Names: Pavamano, Pratnavad]
May Soma, pure and purifying, all pervasive,
destroy all evils and negativities, and continue to


illumine the brilliant regions of the universe,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 50 119


Mandala 9/Sukta 50






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Uchathya, Angirasa, Rshi, Susmasa, Vanasya]
Higher and higher rise and roll your powers,
purities and forces, roaring like waves of the sea. Keep
up the motion of the wheel of life, let the swell of music
rise on with the chant going on.






[Names: Prasave, Yadavya]
When you rise and reach the pinnacle of yajna
which deserves to be protected and promoted, then as
you rise in intensity, the priests’ chant of the three voices
of Rks, Samans and Yajus also swells to the climax.






[Names: Avyo, Pavamanam]
The devotees, who are seekers of your protection
for advancement in their heart of hearts, intensify their
awareness through relentless concentration and meditate
on your presence dearer than dearest, eliminator of
negative fluctuations of mind, pure and purifying spirit


of divinity replete with honey sweets of ecstasy.






[Names: Arkasya]
Flow in and purify, O poetic visionary and most
exhilarating Spirit of ecstasy, the sacred heart of the
celebrant in streams of beauty, light and sweetness to
join the celebrant at the centre of his faith and devotion.



[Names: Indavindraya]
Flow on, most exhilarating Spirit, adored and
exalted by concentrative mind and senses of the seeker
in meditation, flow on for ecstatic experience of the
soul.


Mandala 9/Sukta 51




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Uchathya, Angirasa, Rshi, Adhvaryo, Somam, Soma, Punthindraya]
O high priest of soma yajna, create the
awareness of Soma, spirit of purity and divinity collected
and concentrated by the senses and mind in the heart,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 51 121


and sanctify and intensify it there for exhilaration of
the soul.






[Names: Divah, Indraya, Indra, Sunota]
Create the highest honey sweet Soma of divine
consciousness, highest exhilarating experience of the
light of heaven for the soul’s awareness, and then rise
to adamantine power against all possible violations.






[Names: Tava, Pavamanasya, Marutah, Maruta]
Then, O Soma, Spirit of divinity, the noblest,
most vibrant generous and brilliant souls have a drink
of the elixir of your honey sweet presence flowing
exuberantly at the purest.






[Names: Tvam, Vrsant]
Soma, lord of purity, peace and power, you alone
are the object of meditation, supplication and exaltation
for the ecstasy, vibrancy and protected progress of life,
you alone promote the celebrant to the top of sovereignty
and give him showers of joy.






[Names: Abhyarsa]
Flow on, O lord all watchful guardian of
humanity, and, realised in meditation, rain in showers
on the pure heart and bring in abundance of food and
energy for the body, mind and soul, and give us the
ultimate victory of fame in the world and fulfilment
across the world of time.


Mandala 9/Sukta 52


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Uchathya, Angirasa, Rshi, Pari, Bharadvajam, Bharadvaja, Suvano]
Light of the light of heaven, treasure-hold of
world’s wealth, with wealth, food and energy for body,
mind and soul arise and manifest in the pure heart,
inspiring it to a state of peace and benediction.





[Names: Tava, Sahasradharo]
Let your dear protected celebrant, sanctified by
a thousand streams of divine favours, rise to the
cherished state of fulfilment by the ancient and eternal


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 52 123
paths of divinity and Vedic lore.






[Names: Carurna, Vadhair]
Indu, spirit of peace, plenty and generosity,
inspire him who is receptive and generous as a cloud,
move him like charity in flow. O shaping power of hard
discipline, shape him through hardness and inspire him
to the good life of generosity and joy.




[Names: Susmam, Puruhuta]
Indu, lord of peace and plenty who rule over
us, invoked, adored and worshipped pray increase the


power and prosperity of those people who follow the
rule of your law of discipline and generosity.






[Names: Satam, Pavasva]
O lord of light, purity and plenty, with divine
powers and protections bless us with hundreds and
thousands of life’s purities and shower upon us
abundance of wealth, honour and excellence worthy of
that purity.




Mandala 9/Sukta 53




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi, Susmaso, Nudasva]
O lord of mountains, thunder and clouds, your
powers and forces stand high, breaking down the
negative and destructive elements of life. Pray impel or
compel the adversaries to change or remove them from
the paths of progress.





[Names: Stava]
By this power and valour of yours you eliminate
the negative forces. In this battle of the body chariot on
hand in this life, we adore you with a fearless heart,
you being the protector and guide.


[Names: Asya, Ruja]
The rules and laws of this mighty creative and


dynamic power no one can resist with his adverse force.
O Soma, whoever opposes you, break open and destroy.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 54 125






[Names: Indum, Indraya, Indra]
That giver of showers of sweetness and joy, lord
of peace and power, destroyer of suffering, energising
and flowing in streams of the universal dynamics of
existence, people admire and adore, he is the joy and
ecstasy of the living soul.


Mandala 9/Sukta 54






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi, Asya, Payah]
Men of vision and science of yajna, in pursuit
of the ancient and eternal Vedic tradition of this lord of
light, peace and purity, distil the brilliant, pure and
powerful and visionary knowledge of a thousandfold
nourishing and inspiring gifts of existence.





[Names: Ayam, Surya, Sapta]
This Soma, like the sun, all watching and
illuminating, sets rivers, seas and energies aflow,
pervading therein on earth and in the seven-fold light


of the sun upto the regions of light.




[Names: Somo, Suryah]
This Soma, lord of light, peace and power, pure
and purifying, pervades all regions of the universe in
and above, like the divine light which illuminates all
regions of the universe.






[Names: Pari, Punana]
Indu, spirit of peace, beauty and plenty, lover
of men of knowledge and power, purifying and
sanctifying the world, bring us food and energy for the
body, mind and soul for the service and fulfilment of
the men of brilliance and generosity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 55




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi, Yavam, Soma]
Soma, Spirit of peace, power and plenty, flow
forth, vitalise, purify and inspire us with fresh energy,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 55 127


power and grace of culture at every stage of our growth,
acquisition and progress, beatify all our good fortune
and prosperity of life in the world.






[Names: Indo]
O lord of beauty and grace, as you pervade your
own glory of adoration, your own creation, power and
nourishments of food and inspiration, so pray come,
bless our vedi of yajna, our life and work through the






[Names: Somandhasa, Maksutamebhir]
And O Soma, lord of energy, wealth and
advancement, master of knowledge and progress, by
the shortest time of the days ahead, bless and beatify us
with food for body, mind and soul, rich in lands, cows
and culture, horses, advancement and progressive power
and achievement.






[Names: Satrum]
You, who always excel, win or vanquish, who




no one can excel, win or vanquish, who advance and
destroy the destructive adversary, pray advance,
energise, purify and empower us too, winner of a


Mandala 9/Sukta 56


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Pari, Soma, Vighnan]
Soma is the universal truth and law of eternity,
instant and omnipresent, lover of the noble, brilliant
and generous people, destroyer of negative and


destructive forces, and it rolls in the heart of pure and
pious souls, inspires, energises and advances them.





[Names: Satam, Indrasya, Indras]
When Soma releases the divine energy and
enthusiasm of life, men of initiative and creativity
enjoying friendship and communion with divinity
experience the ecstasy of life flowing in a hundred




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 57 129




[Names: Mrjyase]
Ten youthful organs of perception and volition,
concentrated, directed and integrated with mind,
intelligence and consciousness serve and help the soul
to commune with you, Soma, like a loving maiden
communing with her lover, and then, O Supersoul and
master of the soul, you shine in the heart’s core for the
ultimate victory and fulfilment of the devotee.


[Names: Tvam, Indraya, Indra, Nrnt]
O Soma, spirit of peace and bliss, let divine
ecstasy flow forth for Indra, celebrant of power, and
Vishnu, omnipresence oriented soul, and protect and


promote the leading lights of humanity free from sin
and dedicated to divinity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 57






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi, Accha]
O Soma, the ceaseless streams of your
inexhaustible ecstasy flow like rains of heavenly light,
bringing thousandfold strength, energy and joy for the






[Names: Haris]
Soma, spirit of joy, destroyer of suffering,
watching all human activity, flows forth for its dear





[Names: Syeno]
Soma, adored and glorified by people, as a self-
controlled, powerful and brilliant ruler ever awake and
unfailing power, pervades in the human common-wealth
and the entire world of sustenance.





[Names: Sano, Punana]
Soma, lord of wealth, beauty and excellence,
ever pure and sanctifying, may, we pray, bring us all
the wealth, honour and fame of life on earth and the
light and magnificence of heaven.


Mandala 9/Sukta 58




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 58 131



[Names: Tarat, Tarat]
Soma, Spirit of peace, beauty and bliss, saving,
rejoicing, fulfilling, flows on. The stream of delight
exhilarating for body, mind and soul flows on full of
bliss. Crossing over the hurdles of life, delighted all
over, the celebrant goes on.






[Names: Usra]
Mother source of wealth, honour and
enlightenment, divine power that commands the saving
art for the mortals, saviour, delightful, giver of fulfilment






[Names: Dhvasrayoh, Purusantyora]
Let us receive a thousand gifts of the divine
soma power that destroys evil and exalts humanity.
Saving, delighting and fulfilling, the stream of divine








The divine Soma energy and power, destroyer
of evil and saviour of human good, of which we get
thirty virtues and a thousand other gifts, flows on saving,


Mandala 9/Sukta 59






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi, Pavasva, Soma, Prajavad]
Victorious over senses and mind, victorious over
will and ambition, victorious over the world, victorious
over pleasure, pride and victory, O Soma, life of life,
flow on and bring us jewels of children, family life and






[Names: Pavasvadbhyo]
O vitality of Soma, divine energy, flow on and
energise us with fluent systemic energy of body and
mind, redoubtable and undaunted power, flow in and
on with herbs and sanatives, energise, purify and
sanctify with self-controlled will and invincible will
divine.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 60 133

[Names: Tvam, Kavih]
O Soma, pure and purifying energy and divine
and, O omniscient vision and creativity, be seated on
the holy vedi and in the mind.





[Names: Indo]
O Soma, divine spirit of bliss, unborn, great,
ever manifesting anew, lord controller and giver of
heavenly joy, you are supreme over everything of the


Mandala 9/Sukta 60




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Avatsara, Kashyapa, Rshi, Indum]
O devotees, sing and enthusiastically celebrate
with gayatri hymns Soma, pure, purifying and ever
flowing in cosmic dynamics, all moving, omnipresent
Spirit of bliss and joy, lord of a thousandfold vision
and voice of Infinity.





That Supreme lord most adorable, of infinite
vision and voice and infinite sustenance of life and
existence, extremely lovable, worthiest of choice, you
internalise and sanctify in the heart and soul.



[Names: Indrasya, Indras]
Soma, lord supreme of the dynamic flow of life,
giver of choicest favours, pervading and shining at the
core of human heart and soul, manifests and vitalises
all forms of existence.





[Names: Prajavadreta]
O Soma, Spirit of peace, power and bliss, all
watching, all moving, bring us showers of peace and
purity for the soul’s fulfilment, and vest us with creative
vitality and virility for continuance of life through
generations and generations.


Mandala 9/Sukta 61




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Amahiyu, Angirasa, Rshi]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 135




[Names: Avahan]
O Soma, joyous ruler and protector of life, let
this creative peace, presence, power and policy of yours
prevail and advance, promoting those who join the
happy advance, and repelling, dispelling, even
destroying ninety-and-nine strongholds of darkness
which obstruct the progress.






[Names: Purah, Divodasaya, Divodasa, Adha, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu]
Go on thus always advancing for the people
dedicated to positive good work in thought, policy and
action, accelerating, controlling and balancing the forces
of peace, progress and restless ambition.






[Names: Pari, Ksara]
And for us, let abundant streams of food, energy
and wealth of a thousandfold riches and variety flow
abounding in horses, transport and progress, lands, cows
and beauties of culture and literature, gold and golden
graces. O creator, ruler and controller of peace and joy,
you know the values and dynamics of evolution and







[Names: Pavamanasya, Sakhitvama]
O Soma, pure and purifying lord and ruler of
life, the streams of your peace, plenty and piety overflow.
We pray for abiding love and friendship with you.


[Names: Tebhirnah]
The streams of your piety, purity, peace and
plenty rain in showers for the pure heart and soul in


humanity. O Soma, with those showers, pray bless us
with happiness, prosperity and all round well being.






[Names: Isanah]
O Soma, lord ruler and benefactor of the entire
world, pure and purifier of all, bring us food and energy
for body, mind and soul, versatile wealth and power
abounding in brave and heroic progeny for future




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 137




[Names: Etamu, Samadityebhir, Such]
pranas, ten subtle and gross modes of Prakrti and ten
directions of space, all glorify you, mother source of all
fluent streams of world energies shining with the zodiacs
of the sun and all other brilliancies of nature and






[Names: Samindrenota, Vayuna, Suryasya, Suryas]
O Soma, spirit of peace, plenty and energy of
the universe, you flow with the wind and cosmic
dynamics and, with the rays of the sun, you shine as the
very light of life which, realised and internalised, abides
vibrant in the pure heart and soul.





[Names: Carurmitre]
O Soma, beautiful, blissful, honey spirit of the
sweets of existence, flow free and purifying for the glory
of life, for vibrant forces, for the power of health and
growth, and for the friendly and discriminative people








[Names: Ucca, Ugram]
O Soma, high is your renown, great your peace
and pleasure, born and abiding in heaven, and the gift
of your energy and vitality, the earth receives as the
seed and food of life.


[Names: Enda, Sisasanto]
Soma is the lord of humanity and the earth. By
virtue of him and of him, we ask and pray for all food,


energy, honour and excellence for humanity, serving
him and sharing all the benefits together.






[Names: Sana, Indraya, Indra, Varunaya, Varuna, Varivovit]
Soma, lord of peace and purity, power and piety,
creator, controller and commander of the entire wealth
of life, flow on by the dynamics of nature and bless us
for the benefit of power and glory, yajna and unity
among the yajakas, judgement and right values and the
vibrant forces of law and order.






[Names: Indum]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 139


Soma, spirit of beauty, grace and glory, divinely
created, nobly born, zealous, destroyer of negativity,
beatified and celebrated in songs of divine voice, the
noblest powers of nature and humanity adore, share and






[Names: Tamidvardhantu, Indrasya, Indras]
As mother cows love, cheer and caress the calf,
so let our songs of adoration celebrate and exalt Soma,
love and grace of the heart of Indra, life’s glory on top
of existence.






[Names: Arsa, Vardha]
O Soma, peaceable ruling powers of the world,
rise, move forward and create conditions of peace and
progress for the earth, work for nature, animal wealth
and environment, advance human culture, create
nourishing food and productive energy for comfort and
common good and, thus, exalt the grace and glory of
human life, rolling like the infinite ocean.








[Names: Pavamano, Jyotir]
Let Soma, progressive, active and zealous power
dedicated to humanity and divinity, create the light and
culture of universal expansive order from the light of
heaven, sublime, awful and beautiful as the light and
resounding roar of thunder and lightning.





O Soma, beauty, grace and joy of life, refulgent
power, as you flow, pure and purifying, the pleasure
you release, the ecstasy you inspire, and the peace you
emanate free from negativities, radiates to the mind and
soul of the loved celebrant.





O vibrant bliss of the world, the purity, pleasure
and ecstasy of yours, versatile and refulgent, radiates
over space and time as universal light of divinity for
humanity to have a vision of the heaven of bliss.






[Names: Yaste, Devavir]
The soma ecstasy that’s yours, that is the highest


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 141


love of our choice. Flow on, radiate, and sanctify us
beyond satiation with light divine for the soul, protector
and saviour as you are of the holy and destroyer of sin
and evil for the good.



[Names: Jaghnir, Gosa]
Soma, power and peace of divinity, destroyer
of the evil and darkness of negative forces, constant
catalytic force of nature in creative evolution day in
and day out, you are the giver of earthly life and dynamic
motion for onward progress.



[Names: Sammislo, Stdanchyeno]
Be bright and blazing, integrated with creative
powers of growth, perception and imagination,
sojourning over space and time yet resting in your seat
at the centre of existence.






[Names: Vavrivamsam]
Lord of the joy of existence, for constant
conversion, elimination and destruction of negativity




you protect and promote the creative, structural and
developmental forces of nature in great evolutionary
dynamics on way to positive growth and progress.






[Names: Suviraso, Punano]
O Soma, virile lord of creation and evolution,
bless us so that, blest with noble warlike progeny, we
may win the wealth of life. Pure and purifying lord,
exalt our intellect and imagination and our songs of
adoration for divinity.





[Names: Tvotasas]
Safe under your power and protection, serving
and celebrating you in adoration, let us be destroyers of
negativities, jealousies and enmities. O Soma, ever
awake as you are, keep us awake in the observance of
divine law and discipline of holiness.






[Names: Apaghnan, Gacchann]
Destroying the destroyers, eliminating the
selfish, ungenerous hoarders and parasites, Soma, divine


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 61 143


creativity in nature and humanity attains to its yajnic
end and aim in the existential order created by






[Names: Maho, Rasvendo]
Lord Supreme of beauty, splendour and grace,
pure and purifying, ever awake, bring us wealth of the
highest order, eliminate the destructive adversaries and
bless us with honour, excellence and fame, and continue
the human family with noble and brave generations.






Lord of peace and purity, purifier and saviour
of the celebrants, when you please to bless the devotee
with prosperity and fulfilment in life’s yajna, not a





[Names: Pavasvendo, Visva]
Soma, lord of purity and generosity, light and
splendour, served and realised through yajnic life,
protect and purify us, help us join the community of




honour and excellence, ward off and eliminate all
malignity, jealousy and enmity from our life.


[Names: Asya, Sasahyama]
O lord of truth, beauty and generosity, within
the fold of your friendship and in the state of your
highest honour and excellence, let us face and win over
all the adversaries.



[Names: Raksa]
Whatever are your sharpest and most awful
weapons for the destruction of destroyers, with those
weapons, pray, protect us against all maligners and
enemies.


Mandala 9/Sukta 62




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Jamadagni, Bhargava, Rshi, Visvanyabhi]
These vibrant forces of humanity dedicated to
peace and joy for all, above pettiness and negativities,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 145


move on with noble work for humanity toward the
achievement of all wealth, honour and excellence.






[Names: Vighnanto, Puru, Tana]
Overcoming and eliminating the many evils and
undesirables of life, creating peace and comfort, wealth
and honour for vibrant humanity and their progress
through future generations, they go on as warriors and
pioneers of the human nation.






[Names: Krnvanto, Ilam]
Creating, collecting and preserving noble wealth
and strength and sustenance for us and for our lands
and cows and the honour and culture of our tradition,
they go on winning appreciation and admiration.






[Names: Asavyamsur, Syeno]
The peace and pleasure of life’s ecstasy in
thought and action, and the expertise well founded on
adamantine determination is created by Savita, the
creator, like the flying ambition of the soul and it is



settled in its seat at the heart’s core in the personality.




[Names: Subhram, Svadanti]
The radiant food of ambition created by people,
energised by noble leaders, sanctified in action, the
people enjoy seasoned with delicacies of cow’s milk.






[Names: Adimasvam, Madhvo]
And this ecstasy of the fruit of active ambition,
honey sweet of joint achievement in yajnic action,
leading lights of the nation like yajakas exalt and glorify
as the progressive sociopolitical order of humanity for
permanence and immortal honour.





[Names: Yaste, Tabhih]
O Soma, spirit of ambition, action and glory of
life, the honey sweet streams of your ecstasy flow for
the protection and sanctification of life. With those
streams come and flow in the holy yajnic hall of action.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 147




[Names: Sidan]
O Soma, spirit of holy action and life’s sanctity,
settle in your seat of yajnic action in the nation’s heart
for the honour and excellence of human values and flow
free down the permanent annals of human history and





[Names: Tvamindo, Varivovid]
O Soma, dynamic spirit of action, joy and glory
of life, harbinger of the best of wealth and honour, flow
sweet and most delicious for vibrant sages and scholars
and release streams of milk and ghrta for humanity.






[Names: Ayam, Hinvana]
This Soma, divine spirit of action, honour and
and dynamic, ever wakeful, setting in motion the flow
on for attainment of vast achievable success and








[Names: Karadvasuni]
This virile giver of showers of fulfilment, the
very commitment incarnate of divinity to beneficence,
always flowing, creating and giving, destroyer of
calumny and evil doers, creates and provides wealth,
honour and excellence for the generous yajnic givers.






[Names: Puruscandram, Puruscandra, Purusprham, Purusprha]
O Soma, come, flow and bring us piety and
purity of a thousandfold wealth of lands, cows, literature
and culture, horses, speed and progressive success all
beautiful and universally cherished.


[Names: Urugayah]
Such is Soma, spirit of life’s beauty and glory,
that flows pure, purifying and sanctifying on top, exalted


and glorified by celebrant humanity, universally admired
as poetic visionary, creator and harbinger of holiest






[Names: Sahasrotih, Indraya, Indra]
Soma, divine spirit and power of a thousand


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 149


ways of protection, a hundred modes of wealth and
power, commanding controller of the energies of life,
visionary creator of beauty and poetry, 1s dynamic, ever
fluent, and it creates and releases joy and ecstasy for
the honour of Indra, glory of the human social order.






[Names: Gira, Viryona]
Indra, the best man of supreme spirit and power
of light, peace and bliss, born and raised here in the
social order, initiated, admired and confirmed by the
voice of the land is appointed in place and position of
authority for a purpose like an arrow fixed on the bow
for a target.






[Names: Pavamanah, Camusu, Sakmanasadam]
Soma, the spirit and person of peace and joy,
pure and purifying, selected and anointed by leading
lights of the people, should move and act like power
and competence incarnate in places and positions with
his powers and obligations for the purpose specified.








[Names: Rsinam]
Him they enjoin to the three-level, triple
structural chariot of the nation, with sevenfold
intelligence, will and execution of the visionaries of
life.





[Names: Harim]
That leader and dashing pioneer, instant in
response and action, winner of life’s battles for wealth,
honour and excellence, destroyer of want and suffering,
O performers of the nation’s Soma yajna, exalt and
exhort for onward progress and fulfilment of humanity’s
joint and common mission on earth.






[Names: Avisan, Suro]
Taking over his positions of office, the leader,
pioneer and ruler presides over lands and affairs of the
order like a brave warrior moving forward and winning
all wealth, honours, excellence and graces for the
people, exhorted and exalted by them.






[Names: Deva]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 151


O lord of peace, grace and joy, to your pleasure
and the pleasure of holy powers, the people and the
noblest brilliant people of the land create and distil the
sweets and sanatives of peace and nourishment from
the life around.






[Names: Anahsomam, Devebhyo]
O performers and partners of humanity’s yajnic
social order, create, preserve and extend our soma of
the nation’s joy, beauty and grace, sweetest honeyed
soma ever heard of by the divinities, on the sacred earth
in honour of the holiest of holies.






[Names: Madintamasya]
These somas of human beauty, culture and
graces celebrated in song are created for the great
sustenance of fame, honour and excellence of life by
the stream of the most exciting annals of human history.






[Names: Sanadvajah]
O Soma, exciting peace, pleasure and excellence




of the human nation, you move forward, pure, purifying
and glorified, to achieve the wealth of lands and cows,
culture and literature, and the jewels of human
excellence for lasting peace and well being. Go on ever
forward, creating, winning and giving food and
fulfilment for the body, mind and soul of the collective


[Names: Utano, Grnano]
O Soma, lord of peace, joy and grace, glorified
by the sage of vision and lighted fire, bring us all the
world’s wealth of food, energy and knowledge abundant


in lands and cows and graces of culture of permanent
and adorable value.


[Names: Pavasva]
O Soma, you are the leading light. With various
and wonderful modes of protection and preservation,
purify and sanctify the speech of humanity and let it


flow free and fine. Be the same preserver, sanctifier and
promoter of all the art and literature of the world.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 62 153




[Names: Tvam]
O mover, shaker and inspirer of the world, you
are the first and foremost leading light, flow forth
purifying, sanctifying and energising the oceanic
vapours and waters of space, and inspiring and
preserving the eternal Word and the speech, manners
and cultures of the world of humanity.






[Names: Tubhyema, Tubhyamarsanti]
O Soma, lord of omniscient vision and creation,
these world regions of the universe abide in constant
steadiness in homage to you, and the seas on earth and
in space roll in honour to you.



Like showers of light from heaven, the streams
of your grace shower upon the bright world of humanity
below on the wide earth, incessantly.







[Names: Indrayendum, Indrayendu, Isanam]
O people of the earth, performers of soma yajna,
create, purify and energise the bright soma of passion,
peace and vision of life in honour of Indra, ruler,
versatile achiever and provider of the means and modes
of life for all round happiness and well being.


[Names: Somah, Dadhat]
May Soma, pure, purifying and energising,
eternal Truth, omniscient creator, peaceful and blissful,
come and bless the pure heart and soul of the devotee


vesting the song and spirit with strength and holy


Mandala 9/Sukta 63






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Nidhruvi, Kashyapa, Rshi, Soma, Asme, Sravamsi]
Soma, ruling power of creative wealth, joy and
fluent energy, let a thousandfold wealth of virility,
courage and creativity, pure and purifying, flow to us
and vest us with food, energy, fame and excellence of
life.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 155



[Names: Isamurjam, Indraya, Indra, Camusva]
Since you, ruler and most ecstatic creator,
produce, develop and release an abundance of food,
energy and knowledge to fullness and overflowing and
preside over the resource centres and organisations of
protection and production for the glory of humanity:






[Names: Suta, Somah, Madhuman]
Let that soma, plenteous overflow of peace,
prosperity and joy, created, distilled and purified, roll
in minds and human communities and be as sweet as
honey for Indra, leaders of knowledge and power,
Vishnu, generality of people all over the globe, and
Vayu, vibrant powers of progress and pioneers of
constant advancement in every field of activity.




These somas, powers of peace, prosperity and
joy, dynamic, fast and determined, advance, overcoming
forces of crookedness, intrigue and negativity by the
path of universal truth and law.







[Names: Indram, Apaghnanto, They]
glorifying life, making the world noble and nobler,
reducing and eliminating the forces of uncreativity,
negativity and selfishness.






[Names: Anu]
These determined forces of peace and progress
trained and committed to positive values of universality,
vibrant and fast, advance in their own essential nature
and realise the highest ideals of Indra, central power of
united humanity and common values.






[Names: Suryam, Surya, Hivnano]
Lord of the universe, by the energy with which
you give light to the sun, by the same light and energy
inspire the will and actions of humanity and purify us.






[Names: Ayukta, Antariksena]
The light of the world, pure, radiant and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 157


inspiring over man and mind, joins the man of super
fast intelligence and inspires him to rise and fly over
paths of the skies.






[Names: Indurindra]
And the man of brilliance and superfast
intelligence, yoking ten motive forces to go over paths
of the skies exclaims: “Indra is great, kind and
gracious!” and he flies over the paths of his holy choice.






[Names: Parito, Avyo]
And now, O celebrants, for the man of vibrant
action and power and far reaching vision among the
best of choice, pour out showers of sunniest and most
exciting soma appreciation and the best of safe guards.






O Soma, lord of light and vibrancy of spirit,
pure, purifying and sanctifying, exalted and
overflowing, bring us wealth, honour and excellence
of the rarest order unassailable by uncreative destroyers.








[Names: Abhyarsa]
Let flow to us a thousandfold wealth of lands
and cows, arts and culture, horses and progressive
achievements. Bring us also speed, energy, and
victorious success, and undying fame and excellence.






[Names: Somo, Dadhanah]
Soma, self-existent divine power of creativity,
radiates, energises and purifies all like the generous
refulgent sun vesting the sap of life in every form of




[Names: Vajam]
These, showers of soma, divine creative power,
great and dynamic, pure and powerful, rain down on
earth in streams of life sap and motherly process of
natural law, giving the milk of nourishment and vibrant
fulfilment to all forms of existence.



MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 159




[Names: Somaso, Pavitram]
The showers of soma, distilled and purified from
the motherly womb of nature, for the mighty ruling order
of life, wielding the thunderbolt of justice and
dispensation, radiate and sanctify every pious heart and
soul.






[Names: Mado]
O Soma, lord of peace and bliss, let the highest
joy, the best of honey sweets, most exhilarating and most
divinely blest, flow free to the pure and pious soul of
the celebrant for the sake of wealth, honour and
excellence of life’s fulfilment.




[Names: Tami, Indumindraya]
That shower of soma, sparkling brilliant, most
exhilarating, destroyer of suffering and pain, seeping
in the heart and flowing in the streams of life, the yajakas
exalt and adore for the glory of life.








Flow, O Soma, purify and exhilarate us, bearing
golden graces of beauty, progressive success, brave
progeny, vibrant victory and the prosperity of lands,
cows, arts and culture.






[Names: Pari]
As in war you send up a heroic warrior to battle,
so in times of peace of your choice create the sweetest
and most brilliant soma of beauty and joy for the glory
of the human order.



[Names: Kavim, Vrsa]
Vibrant sages and scholars who need assistance
and protection exalt Soma, lord of peace and joy,
adorable and omniscient visionary, with songs and
creative actions, and the potent and generous lord
responds in loud tones of heroism and moves forward
to action.



[Names: Vyrsanam, Somam, Mati]
Vibrant poets, sages and scholars, with their
thoughts, holy actions and spontaneous songs of truth


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 161


and sincerity, celebrate Soma, generous giver, brave
warrior and instant conqueror.






[Names: Pavasva, Vayuma]
O Soma, self-refulgent and self-joyous lord of
peace and bliss, let your presence vibrate and purify us.
Let your ecstatic bliss reach Indra, the ruler, for the glory
of mankind. May you with your divine power and
presence emerge and rise in the heart of vibrant devotees.






[Names: Sravayyam, Priyah]
Soma, pure and purifying omnificent lord, you
grant ample and praise-worthy wealth, honour and
excellence to the devotees. Pray, let your dear and
blissful presence arise in the ocean-like time and space
of human existence, inspire the depth of the heart and
save the supplicant.






[Names: Apaghnan, Nudasvadevayum]
O Soma, lord of absolute peace, purity, power
and holiness of action, omnipotent and blissful, you
vibrate in existence destroying sin and evil. Pray impel




the impious people to truth, piety and creative
generosity, or punish and eliminate them like hurdles
in the creative paths of piety and rectitude.





Streams of bright energising soma flow, pure
and purifying, among the songs of universal poetry of





[Names: Pavamanasa, Ghnanto]
Pure and purifying, instant and effective, bright
and blazing streams of soma like warriors of nature flow
and advance in action, creating peace and plenty for
life, dispelling and eliminating all jealous and
destructive forces from society.






[Names: Prthivya]
Pure and purifying Somas, evolutionary powers
of nature, divinity and humanity, creative, protective
and defensive, are created from the regions of light
above, the middle regions and the earth and, on top of
the course of evolution and progress, they remain ever


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 63 163
active for life in the service of divinity.






[Names: Pundanah, Jahi]
O Soma, creative divinity, bright, blissful and
dynamic, pure and purifying spirit of holy action, flow
by the stream and shower of life and grace, ward off all
hurdles of negativity and eliminate all evil forces of


[Names: Apaghnantsoma, Dyumantam, Susmam]
O Soma, spirit of creative peace and prosperity,
dispelling and eliminating negative and destructive
forces, roaring with success of positive progress, let


streams of peace and prosperity flow full with highest
strength, sweetness and light.





[Names: Indo]
O Soma, lord of peace, prosperity and divine
bliss, bring us all wealth, honour and excellence of the
earth and heavenly light. O spirit of beauty and grace,
bless us with all the wealth of success and fulfilment of




our highest choice on earth and beyond.


Mandala 9/Sukta 64




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kashyapa, Maricha, Rshi, Vrsa, Soma, Vrsa]
O Soma, divine spirit of peace and prosperity,
you are virile, omnipotent and generous, refulgent and
abundant giver of light, self-committed to showers of
generosity for humanity and all life in existence. O
generous and mighty lord, you alone ordain, maintain
and sustain the laws of Dharma in nature and humanity.




[Names: Vrsnaste, Satyam]
Generous as you are, your strength rains in
showers, generous is your plenitude, generous is the
bliss of your joy and ecstasy. Eternal truth, shower of
generosity, you are the ultimate generous giver of the
joy of life.





[Names: Asvo]
Like the roar of thunder you are loud and bold


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 165


in manifestation in existence. O dynamic presence of
infinite light and generous flow of energy, you pervade
and energise our perceptions and our will for action and
advancement. Pray open and widen the doors of wealth,
honour and excellence for us all.






[Names: Asrksata, Sukraso]
Vibrant heroes blest with the soma spirit of
peace, progress and brilliance, pure and potent, inspired
with ambition for lands, cows and culture, horses,
advancement and achievement, and advancement of the
brave generations of humanity move forward with the
spirit of generous creativity.


[Names: Sumbhamana, Pavante]
Blest and beatified by lovers of truth and divine
law, seasoned and tempered by light of the sun and heat
of fire, heroic men of the soma spirit of peace and


prosperity work vibrant on choice positions in the
imperishable order of divine existence.








[Names: Pavantamantariksya]
May the soma spirits of nature and humanity
initiate, purify and direct all world’s wealth, honour and
excellence, peace and progress, of earthly, heavenly and
middle order of the skies to flow to the generous and
creative people of yajna and self-sacrifice.





[Names: Pavamanasya, Suryasyeva]
Lord of the universe, pure, refulgent and
purifying, as you manifest in the flux of existence your
creations of peace and beauty flow and radiate like rays
of the sun.





[Names: Ketum, Samudrah]
Creating the lights of your existential presence
over the regions of heaven above, you reveal your power
by the beauty of forms you create, O Soma, universal
home of infinite bliss, and expand the possibilities of
life’s joy.





[Names: Hinvano, Akran, Suryah, Surya]
Invoked in yajna and inspiring songs of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 167


adoration you love, pure, purifying and pervasive in
the world of various forms and functions, you radiate
like the refulgent sun and transcend the world in





[Names: Induh, Srjadasvam]
Soma, lord of bliss, is self-refulgent and holy,
purest and most purifying, omniscient, dearest love of
the poets and celebrants, and wisest of the wise. Creating
the dynamic world of matter, energy and mind, he abides
like the master of the universal chariot.






[Names: Urmiryaste, Sidannrtasya]
The light divine that is yours, most heavenly,
radiates blissfully in the pious heart and soul, abiding
in the seat of its own law of eternal truth.






[Names: Sanoarsa, Indavindraya]
Let that divine ecstasy which is most heavenly
radiate and vibrate in our pure heart, O lord of beauty
and bliss, for the fulfilment of the soul.








[Names: Indo]
Shower in streams of purity and power and bless
us with food, energy and fulfilment, adored and exalted
as you are by sages, scholars and thoughtful devotees.
O lord of bliss and beauty, come and, with the light and
joy of your presence, sanctify our senses and mind,
vision and intelligence.






[Names: Punano, Hare]
Pure and purifying, adorable, adored and
exalted, saviour from sin and evil, want and suffering,
create the best of wealth, energy and ecstasy for
humanity, giving all round joy and well being for body,
mind and soul.






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Dyutano]
Purified, bright and clear Soma, songs of
adoration for service of divinity, go upto the presence
of Indra, lord omnipotent. Shining powerful, sent up,
inspired by enthusiastic celebrants, rise up to divinity.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 169





[Names: Dhiya]
Soma songs of adoration, inspired streams of
the joyous spirit of poetry, bright and energetic, move
to infinite divinity and, energised by thought, pleasure
and awareness, flow in concentration to Indra,






[Names: Marmrjanasa, Agmannrtasya]
Purified and sanctified devotees, bright, clear
and radiant, spontaneously concentrate on the infinite
oceanic presence of divinity and reach the central origin
of the moving universe and the dynamics of existence.





[Names: Pahi, Sarma]
O lord of peace, light and beauty divine, lover
of us all, bring us all wealths of the world with the light
and lustre of glory. Protect our peace and home blest
with brave progeny.







[Names: Mimati]
When the mind, agile communicative medium
of experience and awareness, joins the object of
meditation by virtue of all yajnic senses collected and
concentrated in the ocean-like depth of infinity, the yogi
reaches divine consciousness, voluable, in a state of





[Names: Jahatyapracetasah]
When the soul is established in the golden light
of divinity which is the centre origin of the flow of
of ignorance.



[Names: Majjantyavicetasah]
Enlightened sages adore, exalt and join the
divine infinity of bliss while the ignorant get drowned
in the existential ocean they fail to cross.






[Names: Indrayendo, Marutvate, Marutvat, Rtasya]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 64 171


O Soma, enlightened joy of spiritual purity and
bliss, flow into the consciousness of the vibrant soul of
the devotee as an offering to Indra, lord of universal
power and joy who abides at the heart of universal truth
and law of existence.






[Names: Tamtvavipra]
O Soma, lord of purity, joy and power of the
world, wise sages and the Vedic voice adore, exalt and
glorify you, and the people of knowledge concentrate
on you as the sole object of meditation.






[Names: Rasam, Varunah, Varuna, Marutah, Maruta]
O creative poet of existence and omniscience,
pure, purifying and ever flowing divinity, Mitra,
enlightened all-loving people, Aryama, men of
judgement and discrimination, Varuna, people of
rectitude worthy of universal choice, Maruts, vibrant
warriors of peace and heroes of karmic progress, all
drink and enjoy the nectar sweets of your presence in








[Names: Tvam]
O Soma, Indu, pure and purifying joy of divinity,
you love, inspire and energise the Vedic voice of wisdom
and omniscience which bears a thousand jewels of
knowledge and science.





[Names: Punana]
Indu, Soma, pure, purifying and sanctifying
omnipresence of divinity, bear and bring us the divine
voice of a thousand beauties, wealths and graces, the
giver of infinite gifts of yajna.



[Names: Puruhiuta, Priyah, Indu]
by all, bless the sacred heart of all these people, the
heart that is deep as the ocean of love and faith.


[Names: Davidyutatya, Somah]
Pure, powerful and heavenly radiations of


divinity flow with beauty, glory and shining sublimity
of grace, blessing the mind and soul of the supplicants.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 173



[Names: Sidanto]
Just as a warrior spurred on by ambition and
love of victory rushes to the field and wins the battle,
and just as ardent yajakas sit on the vedi and win their
object of yajna, so does the soul assisted by senses, mind
and intelligential vision win the target of its meditation
on Om, the presence of divinity.



[Names: Rdhak, Pavasva]
O Soma, instant and gracious divinity, creative,
omniscient and constant radiation of heavenly light, the
very sun for the vision of humanity, pray flow on with
the radiance and the bliss, purify and sanctify our mind
and soul.


Mandala 9/Sukta 65








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Bhrgu, Varuni, Jamadagni, Bhargava, Rshi, Hinvanti, Mahamindum]
Just as lights of the dawn like loving sisters fore-




run and herald and exalt the sun, so do the senses, mind
and intelligence together in service of the great soul
reveal the power and presence of the supreme lord of
the universe, blissful father sustainer of existence.



[Names: Visva]
May the self-refulgent lord supreme over all
divinities of nature and humanity, pure and purifying,
by his divine beauty and glory bring us all wealth,
honour and excellence of the world and bless our heart
and soul.



O lord pure and purifying, come to accept our
joint song of adoration and homage and bring us the
shower of your kindness and grace, honour and
excellence for the sustenance and advancement of the
generous nobilities of humanity.






[Names: Vrsa]
O lord of purity, purifier and sanctifier of heart


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 175


and soul, you are supremely generous and refulgent by
your own light and glory. We, celebrants by our holiest
thoughts and words, invoke and adore you for the light
and wisdom of your divine glory and generosity.






O divine spirit of peace, purity and abundance,
joyous wielder of noble arms, come to us and let pure,
creative courage and virility flow in abundance for us.



[Names: Yadadbhih, Druna]
O soul of peace and purity, when you are
honoured and anointed with the waters of divine
sanctity, refined with the light of knowledge and
tempered by yajnic fire, then by virtue of your own
progress you attain to your real, innate and rightful
position in society.



[Names: Somaya, Mahe]
O celebrants, like people of real attainments,
sing songs of adoration in honour of Soma, lord giver




of peace and purity, honour and achievement, the lord
that is great, who watches everything with a thousand
eyes.





[Names: Yasya, Indumindraya]
Whose essential being and existential identity,
honeyed sweet of infinite kindness, destroyer of want
and suffering, devotees adore, exalt and move with holy
songs and yajnic actions for the satisfaction and
beatification of the soul.



[Names: Tasya, Sakhitvama]
Of you, we, seekers of progress and victories of
peace and purity, choose to ask for all wealths, honours
and excellence of the world and, above all, pray for
friendship and spiritual affinity.



[Names: Marutvate, Marutvat]
O lord of absolute abundance and creativity,
sustainer of all worlds of existence by absolute power
and grandeur, you are all bliss for the people of vibrancy,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 177


action and gratitude. Pray bring us showers of peace,
purity and power for the good life.






[Names: Tamtva, Hinve]
That lord sustainer of earth and heaven, pure
and purifying sanctifier, watchful guardian and giver
of bliss, absolute victor in the evolutionary battles of
existence, we invoke, exalt and glorify for our good
and advancement.



[Names: Yujam]
Invoked and moved by this earnest and vibrant
adoration, pray bless us with this shower of purity, peace
and bliss. You are the destroyer of want and suffering.
Pray inspire, strengthen and fortify the friend, your
instrument, in the battles of life.



[Names: Asmabhyam]
Indu, lord of peace, purity and bliss, light of the
world for universal humanity, bring us showers of peace
and purity, food and energy, power and prosperity, and




knowledge of the world in great abundance. O Soma,
you are the absolute master of all the ways of the world
and unfailing guide for us.



[Names: Endrasya]
Indu, lord of light, peace and purity, grateful
minds and souls await and adore you in hope and
expectation. Pray come and bless them with showers of
joyous power, grandeur and spiritual might for
fulfilment of the soul.



Whose exciting nectar, sharp and exalting in
experience, devoted supplicants distil from meditation
on life, that same Soma, lord of power and purity,
destroyer of negativities, adversaries and enemies, we
pray, may come, save and bless us with peace, purity
and security.






[Names: Raja, Antariksena]
Refulgent Soma, divine spirit of power and


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 65 179


peace, pure, purifying and vibrant, is attained through
intelligential communion in meditation for reaching the
higher stages of existence into the middle sphere
between the earth and the highest regions of bliss.






[Names: Satagvinam, Vaha]
Indu, lord of joy, beauty and prosperity, bring
us a hundredfold wealth and pleasure of divine service
and dedication, rising prosperity of cows and horses,
enlightenment and advancement, progress and
achievement, all for peace and security.




[Names: Anah, Susvano]
Soma, lord of vital creativity and lustrous
vigour, and fluent power and progressive energy, bring
us the courage of constancy, forbearance, vibrant vigour
and enthusiasm, and an impressive personality for the


sake of illuminative lustre of life so that we may follow
the path of divinity while living here and after.








[Names: Arsa, Sidanchyeno]
Soma, spirit of divine power and peace of purity,
most potent and most refulgent, come roaring at the
speed and force of thunder and abide in the heart of the
faithful celebrant like the eagle in its nest, purify and
sanctify the soul.






[Names: Apsa, Indraya, Indra, Varunaya, Varuna, Somo]
Soma, spirit of the innate peace and power of
divinity, by its own will and energy, radiates to the heart
and soul of the devotee to vest it with the power of
cosmic energy (Indra), the speed of winds (Vayu),
pioneering spirit of the storm (Maruts), the depth of
space (Varuna), and the love of omnipresent divinity






[Names: Vishnu, Isam]
O Soma, bearing a thousandfold gifts of food,
energy, knowledge and will of initiative and assertion
from all sides of the world, pray flow to bless us and
our future generations with the power and peace of




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 181




[Names: Somasah, Somasa, Saryanavati]
Whatever gifts of power and peace for humanity
are created in the farthest nature or in this world of
existence or in that unknown transcendent source of all
that is in existence, all that, O Soma, lord of supreme
power and unfathomable peace, bear and bring for us
and our future generations.






Whatever powers of peace and energy are
created and distilled in active forces, in holy acts, in the
homes or among all five peoples of humanity, we pray,
may flow and sanctify us.


[Names: Suvana]
May the divinities of nature and humanity, pure,
vibrant and blissful, activated, seasoned and cultured
anywhere, bring us showers of power, virility and


creativity from the lights of heaven and energise and








[Names: Pavate, Hinvano]
Soma, lord of power, peace and bliss, saviour
and sanctifier of heart and soul, destroyer of suffering,
lover of all, adored and exalted by sages and scholars
of vision and wisdom, flows and sanctifies life and,
presiding over the body, energises and sanctifies the
organs of perception, volition and decision.






[Names: Srinana]
Pure and powerful, vital and vitalising,
stimulated and stimulating, energised and energising,
seasoned and cleansing, sanctified and sanctifying
somas, natural and human powers, reflect in the actions
and achievements of humanity like the seven rays of
light, and they shine and enlighten the world to move
on with its daily rounds.






That lord of soma power and peace, the
celebrants adore, exalt and glorify in their yajnic actions
in the service of humanity and divinity. O lord, be
pleased to accept this charming song of adoration, come,
purify and sanctify us.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 65 183






[Names: Pantama, Purusprham, Purusprha]
Today here and now, we choose for ourselves
and pray for your power, peace and bliss, light and fire
which is universally loved, all protective, promotive and






We pray for your gift of peace, power and
sanctity, delightfully adorable, worthy of choice,
stimulating and energising, enlightening, protecting and
promoting, universally loved and valued. We pray, let
it flow and purify us.


O lord of holy action, we pray bring us the
world’s wealth of enlightenment, protective, promotive


and valued universally, for our body, mind and soul and
vest it in our future generations.




Mandala 9/Sukta 66








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Agni, Devate, Shatam, Vaikhanasas, Rshis, Pavasva, Sakha, Omniscient, Soma]
guardian of humanity, adorable friend of friends as all
poets and poetry of the world declare, flow, purify and
sanctify our heart and soul.






[Names: Tabhyam, Pratict]
Vibrant Soma, pure and purifying, by those two
media of yours, omniscience of knowledge and
omnipotence of action, you shine, illuminate and rule
the world both of which too abide as eternal
complementarities of nature and divine power.






[Names: Pari, Somasi]
O Soma, you are the light, power and peace of
all regions of the world, your domain wherein and
whereon you pervade, pure and purifying, and reflect


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 185


and rule by the law and order of the time and seasons of
nature.
Flow on, pure and purifying, friend of friends,
and flow for their protection, creating food, energy and
all cherished means of sustenance for the world.



[Names: Tava, Pavitram]
O Soma, the mighty sublime radiations of your
glory extend over the top of heaven and on the earth,
spreading the holy light by their beauty and lustre.






[Names: Taveme, Tubhyam]
These seven seas, these seven modes of Prakrti,
all flow in obedience to your order of law. All thoughts,
all words, all stars and planets creative and moving in
the flux of existence move in honour and homage to
you.








[Names: Indraya, Indra, Dadhano, Sravah]
O Soma, peace and joy of existence created for
humanity, flow forth in constant stream, bearing
imperishable food, energy, fame and excellence for
fulfilment of the mind and soul.






[Names: Samu, Vipramaja]
O Soma, spirit of peace, power and bliss, seven
streams of Prakrti, seven metres of divine poetry, seven
notes of music, all in their functions and vitality in
unison, glorify you, vibrant spirit of existence, in the
dynamics of the light of life on the vedi of sacred fire.






[Names: Rebho]
When the mind is transparent, consciousness
flows in self-concentration, and the presence of divinity
vibrates vocal and voluble, advanced yogis with seven
sense-prana priests exalt you in higher language of the






[Names: Veda, Pavamanasya, Arvanto, Sravasyavah]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 187


O lord ever flowing in constancy, omniscient
poetic creator, omnipotent absolute victor and ruler,
streams of creations flow like waves of energy in search
of celebrative fulfilment.






[Names: Accha, Avavasanta]
The honey sweet nectar of soma ecstasy created
and vibrating in the presence of the supreme
imperishable eternal spirit, the yogi’s thoughts and
words exalt in celebration.





[Names: Agmannrtasya]
Just as cows retire into their stall, and words of
language retire into the ocean of absolute silence, so do
the mental fluctuations of the yogi recede and return
into the origin of their flow, into divinity.





[Names: Prana, Yadgobhir]
O spirit of Soma energy and existential flow,
Indu, in this great battle field of life, thoughts, energies
and actions flow, rivers and seas flow, when you energise




and vibrate with the dynamics of Prakrti.






[Names: Asya, Indo]
O spirit of love and peace, beauty and grace,
Indu, so gracious as you are, we offer yajna in honour
of your friendship under your protection, and we pray
we may enjoy your friendship and we may exalt and
glorify that friendship.


[Names: Endrasya]
O Soma, spirit of divine purity, come for
cleansing and intensifying the perceptions, reason and
imagination of humanity, for their enlightenment of high


order, and assimilated and internalised, energise their
heart and soul.





[Names: Mahan]
O Soma, you are great, first, greatest and most
lustrous of the mighty, and being a fighter, you are
always the winner.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 189




[Names: Bhuridabhyas]
You are mightier than the mighty, braver than


the brave, more generous than the generous, whoever


18.






[Names: Tvam, Vrnimahe]
O brave and generous Soma, you are the giver


of food, energy, honour and excellence, you are the giver
of children and grand children. We pray for your favour
of friendship, we cherish you for companionship.


19,




[Names: Agna]
Are badhasva ducchunam.


Agni, heat and energy of life divine, give us


good health and long age with purity, create and bring
us food, energy and excellence, and throw off and keep
away all evils and negativities from us.


20.








[Names: Agnirrsih, Agnirrsi, Tamimahe]
Agni is the light of life and fire of passion, pure
and purifying energy ever radiative, universal inspirer
of all people on earth and energiser of all five faculties,
adorable leader of entire humanity and guiding spirit of
the corporate life of all human communities together.
We adore, serve and pray for the favour of such generous
father of the household of humanity.





[Names: Agne, Dadhadrayim]
Agni, pray radiate and purify us. Lord of holy
action, bless us with holy lustre, noble courage and
virility. Bear and bring us wealth, honour and excellence
with promotive health and nourishment.


[Names: Pavamano, Suro]
Soma is pure, purifying, radiating, it goes
forward, eliminating violence and negativities, and
blesses our songs of adoration. Self-refulgent and all


watching, it enlightens the world like the sun with its






[Names: Samarmrjana, Induratyo]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 66 191


Soma is invoked, adored and exalted by
humanity, by all living beings indeed. Cosmic high priest
offering libations into the creative evolution, generous
giver, it is invoked and worshipped for the gifts of life
for peace and progress. Refulgent and blissful, it comes
and blesses the supplicant, for it watches all, responds,
and reveals the mysteries of existence.






[Names: Krsna]
Pure, purifying and self-dynamic, it brings into
existential manifestation the law and the mighty nature’s
model of the cosmos and the refulgent radiations of light,
dispelling and replacing the darkness and negations of





[Names: Jira]
Beauteous manifestations and brilliant
radiations of eternal light and power of lord creator,
destroyer of want and suffering, dispeller of darkness
and negation, ever active and constantly flowing, pure
and purifying, come into existence and flow according
to divine plan and the cosmic model.








[Names: Hariscandro]
Pure and purifying, supreme master of the
cosmic chariot and its controller, most refulgent with
its light and powers, destroyer of want and suffering,
commander and controller of all cosmic powers and
forces in action, such is Soma.






[Names: Dadhat]
Pure and purifying, omnipresent with its
radiations of self- refulgence, omnipotent giver of
strength, power and advancement, inspirer of the
celebrants and celebrations with divine bliss and energy,
such is Soma.






[Names: Punana, Indrama]
Creative, creator and energiser, peaceable
inspirer and self-refulgent Soma absolutely pervades
the holy imperishable world of existence and, purifying
and sanctifying, all blissful, radiates to the heart and
soul of the devotee.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 193




[Names: Indram]
This Soma, omnipresent spirit of absolute bliss,
plays in and on top of the universe with the stars, planets
and clouds of its creation and invites and inspires the
soul to participate in the play for joy.






[Names: Yasya, Tena]
O lord of light and glory, pure, purifying and
radiating with joy, the nectar of light, power and purity
that is yours is distilled in showers of the bliss of heaven.
Pray bless us and sanctify us with that for the joy of
living for the ultimate fulfilment.


Mandala 9/Sukta 67
[Names: Devatah, Pavamana, Soma, Soma, Pusha, Agni, Savita]
Agni and / or Savita (26), Agni or Vishvedevah (27),
[Names: Pavamani, Rshis, Bharadwaja, Kashyapa, Maricha, Gotama, Rahugana, Atri, Bhauma, Vishvamitra, Jamadagni]
Vasishtha (19-21), Pavitra and / or Vasishtha (22-32)








[Names: Tvam, Somasi, Pavasva]
O Soma, you are the spirit and constant stream
of love, life and beauty of the life and flux of existence,
sustaining integrative power, joyous and most vigorous
in the cosmic yajna of love free from violence, hate and
[Names: Flow]
purifying and sanctifying life, giving showers of wealth,
honour and excellence of life in bliss.






[Names: Indraya, Indra]
You, self-existent spirit, distilled and realised
in meditative yajna, are the giver of joy to humanity,
most ecstatic sustaining power of affirmation, creative,
brave and life-giving inspiration for the honour and
dignity of the soul for humanity.






[Names: Dyumantam, Susmam]
You, stirred by the brave celebrants in yajna and
meditation, arise and sanctify loud and bold, bringing
us showers of bliss, highest and most vigorous strength
and power for living a life of purity and happy




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 195




[Names: Indur, Harir]
Invoked, exalted and inspiring, divine Soma
manifests and vibrates, and across all obstructions gives
cherished and imperishable gifts. The spirit that
eliminates all want and suffering exhorts us to action
and victory.




[Names: Indo, Sravamsi]
Indu, lord of peace, beauty and glory, Soma, you
bring and bless us with all foods, energy, honour and
fame, all good fortune and victories of the wealth of
lands and cows, literature and culture of imperishable
value.





[Names: Satagvinam, Bhara]
Indu, Soma, lord of love, beauty, peace and
glory, bear and bring us wealth, honour and excellence
of a hundred and a thousand kinds, of lands and cows,
horses, advancement and victory, above all settlement,
peace and happiness.




in Pavamanasa indavas-tirah pavitram-asavah.


[Names: Indram]
Pure and purifying, instant and vibrant, gifts of
Soma, by their own potential of divinity, move and bless
the pure heart and soul of the devotee.




[Names: Kakuhah, Ayuh]
High, exhilarating and living nectar of eternal
Soma bliss ever vibrant in nature, flows to the dedicated
heart of the celebrant for his honour and excellence in
life.




[Names: Hinvanti]
As morning lights of the dawn exhort and exalt
the sun, so do brilliant sages invoke and exalt the honey
sweet vibrant and sanctifying soma bliss of divinity
while they sing and adore the divinity with their songs
of celebration.






[Names: Avita]
May the divine protector and promoter, lord of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 197


health and nourishment, Pusha of eternal presence and
progress join and bless us at every step on every path of
life in the pursuit of all our cherished goals, aims and
objects of living.






[Names: Ayam, Somah]
May this honey sweet soma ecstasy of divinity
flow and bless the veteran scholar as well as the fresh
graduate as ghrta flows to the vedi in yajna, and inspire
us too to join the scholars with absolute dedication and
commitment in our cherished pursuits of knowledge,
research and advancement.






[Names: Suci]
O lord of light and fire of passion and peace,
this soma ecstasy of your love, passion and peace of
life, pure, purifying and inspiring, flows abundant like
ghrta into the vedi. May this passion, light and peace
inspire us and join us in our cherished pursuits of life
with complete commitment and dedication.








[Names: Devesu]
Soma, you are the creator, originator and inspirer
of the voice of poets. Flow free and abundant in streams
and showers of revelation for the poets. You are the
sole treasure and harbinger of the jewels of vision into
the heart and soul of the poets of divinity.






Soma, spirit of light and passion fire, dives into
the heart and imagination of the creative souls and, like
the divine bird of flight and freedom, the eagle, breaks
through the seal of mystery, speaking loud and bold into
the poetic consciousness to reveal the secrets of






[Names: Pari, Syeno]
O Soma, spirit of light and passion of
imagination, the ecstatic joy of your creativity distilled
and treasured in the poetic soul flows free like the
tempestuous eagle bird traversing space and creates
songs of divine adoration for life’s mystery.






O Soma, creative spirit, highest honey sweet of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 199


divine ecstasy, flow abundant, pure and purifying,
energising and rejoicing for Indra, the divine soul.
[Names: Asrgran]
Flowing and creating, Soma streams rush
forward like victor chariots in the service of divinity.
[Names: Vayuam, Vayua]
Your creative spirits of imagination, powerful
and most ecstatic, give birth to the vibrant poet creator,
the karma yogi of imagination.




[Names: Gravna, Dadhat]
Invoked and adored by the celebrant, O Soma,
you move and arise in the pure heart of the devotee
bearing creative vision for the celebrant and vesting
vigour and power in the song.





[Names: Raksoha]
This Soma, thus invoked, stirred and adored,
arises and vibrates in the pure heart of the celebrant
and, dispelling negativities, confusions and darkness




of illusion, energises its favourite and imperishable spirit
of humanity.






[Names: Yadanti]
O Soma, pure and purifying spirit of divinity,
whatever fear there be that is far distant or that which is
close at hand and assails me here, pray dispel and destroy
the same.






[Names: Pavamanah]
The Soma that is pure and purifies us now with
its sanctity and power, that all watching guardian and
universal purifier may, we pray, purify and sanctify us






[Names: Brahma]
Agni, lord of light, omniscient Spirit of the
universe, whatever power and purity there is pervasive
in the rays and radiation of light, with that same light,
O lord infinite, illuminate and sanctify us and energise
our song of adoration.


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 67 201






[Names: Brahmasavaih]
Agni, lord omniscient and self-refulgent,
whatever power and purity there is in you and your
radiations such as the sun and other stars, with that,
pray, purify and sanctify us. Purify and illuminate us
with the radiations of your grace.






[Names: Ubhabhyam]
O Agni, Savita, self-refulgent lord of light and
creative energy, by both your purifying radiations and
the creative living vitality your radiations bear, purify,
sanctify, energise and vitalise me all round, all ways.






[Names: Tribhistvam, Agne]
O Savita, creator, Soma, energiser, and Agni,
illuminator, energise, vitalise and illuminate us with your
highest all three powers and potentials of light, purity
and vitality. Bless us in the gross, subtle and causal
bodies.








[Names: Punantu, Visve]
May the brilliant generous sages and scholars
purify me. May the Vasus, givers of peace and
settlement, sanctify me with knowledge and wisdom.
May all divinities of nature and humanity vitalise me.
O Jataveda, omniscient Agni, pray purify and sanctify
me.






[Names: Devebhya]
O Soma, spirit of life and fulfilment, flow
abundant, flow exuberant with all the shoots and sprouts
of life and with the best yajnic offerings for the
divinities. Make up our wants and deficiencies.






[Names: Aganma]
dear, admirably vocal and expressive, youthful creator
and promoter of nature’s and humanity’s yajnic offerings
into the divine yajnic evolution of the cosmos.


30.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 67 203




[Names: Aldyyasya, Akhum]
O Soma, brilliant lord of life and vitality, destroy


the axe of the assailant. Destroy the weapon of the thief.
Save that which only turns the soil for food. O power








[Names: Sarvam]
Whoever studies the sanctifying Rks, nectar


preserved by the sages, he tastes the food seasoned and
sanctified by the life breath of divinity.


a2.



[Names: Pavamaniryo, Tasmai, Sarasvati]
kam.


Whoever studies the Rks, sanctifying nectar


preserved by the sages, for him, mother Sarasvati,
omniscient divinity, herself distils and offers the milk,
butter, honey and the nectar essence of life.




Mandala 9/Sukta 68






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vatsapri, Bhalandana, Rshi, Barhirsado]
Seekers of the light and soma sweetness of
divinity, themselves noble and refined with honey
sweets of culture, manners and holy language, approach
the refulgent and generous divine lord like calves going
to mother cows. Sitting on the holy grass of yajna at
dawn, eloquent of tongue and clear of understanding,
they receive and treasure the nectar stream of soma,
peace and bliss of divinity, as calves receive milk
streaming from the udders or as dawns receive radiations
of light from the sun over the night’s darkness.




[Names: Srathayant, Tirah, Saryani]
varam.


He, eternal preceptor, refulgent dispeller of want
and darkness, instant, transcendent, omniscient and
eloquent master of the eternal voice, feels delighted with
the rising seekers and, accepting and inspiring them,


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 68 205


removes all superfluities and impediments, reveals and
releases the soma of higher joy of knowledge and thus
grants them the sacred boon they desire.


eeu




[Names: Mahi]
The lord grants that soma joy of divinity which,
going over and pervading the great and boundless
heaven and earth, energises, vitalises and expands the
inviolable twin sisters growing together in glory, with
the milky spirit of divinity, and which, thus going
forward unobstructed, holds the imperishable power and
bliss of divinity.






[Names: Amsur, Sirah]
The lord grants that power and bliss of soma
which vibrates with motherly heaven and earth,
energising the cosmic waters and the dynamics of nature
and humanity, which partakes of the omniscience of
divinity, flows and swells the holy spirit of the yajnic
meditative soul and which, invoked and served by noble
humans of kindred nature with meditation inputs, grows




from shoots to flowers and unites with, preserves and
promotes the highest faculties of humanity.






[Names: Yuna]
The creative soul, Soma, is born along with mind
and noble intelligence, the seed and seat of divine law
and wisdom hidden somewhere far deep by the laws of
nature. Being together, they, mind and intelligence, are
first physically born as in any other creature, the other,
higher and enlightened self, is born, rather reborn, as it
is raised through purity and elevation of the mind from
the depth of its hiding cave.






[Names: Mandrasya, Syeno]
The yogis of elevated, enlightened and
concentrated mind feel and know the presence of the
blissful soma spirit of existence which the vibrant
visionary soul perceives, distils and actually realises as
food for fulfilment far off and everywhere. The sages
adore and worship that very exalting spirit flowing in


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 68 207


streams of existence which is passionate and loving,
energising, all comprehensive and adorable, sung and
celebrated in hymns of the Veda.






[Names: Tvam, Avyo]
O Soma, Spirit of the bliss of existence, ten
youthful senses and vibrant pranas of the soul adore
and exalt you, sung and celebrated by the sages of
knowledge, thought and meditation, served by the best
of men with best of homage and divine presentations,
and realised and treasured by the seers. O lord of
universal protection and progress, give us a vision of
your divine power and presence for our ultimate victory
and spiritual fulfilment.






[Names: Pariprayantam, Somam]
Joyous celebrants with sincerity of mind and
soul exalt Soma, universally vibrant Spirit, lovely and
adorable, holy and companionable who, immortal
treasurehold of the wealth and honey sweets of life,




gives us streams and showers of the divine voice of
omniscience from the heights of heaven.






[Names: Ayam, Somah, Adbhir]
This Soma, lord of peace and power, moves all
the particles of nature and forces of power from the
centre of light and, pure and purifying, sits and pervades
in all forms of existence. By the adamantine and
generous powers of nature and humanity, it is exalted
with the dynamics of energy, will, acts and voices of
intelligence, and the holy spirit, thus distilled and
realised, pure and purifying, brings us the best and
dearest wealth, honour and excellence of immortal
value.






[Names: Advese]
Thus adored, exalted and served, O Soma, flow
with vibrant presence, bringing us the most wonderful
food, health and strength. We invoke the earth and
heaven free from jealousy, contradiction and enmity,
and pray may the divinities of nature and humanity bear
and bring us wealth, honour and excellence worthy of


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 69 209


the brave.


Mandala 9/Sukta 69





[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Hiranyastupa, Angirasa, Rshi, Isurna, Urudhdareva, Soma]
Like the arrow fixed on the bow, the enlightened
mind is directed to the divine mother’s treasure of milk
for the baby. Then like the mother cow coming home
with milk streaming forth for the calf, the coming life
at hand is replete with joyous possibilities of fulfilment.
Thus, under the laws of the lord’s dispensation, nectar
soma is created, loved and realised for the joy and
fulfilment of the soul.






[Names: Pavamanah]
When the mind is joined in concentration with
divinity, honey is released and pours forth, divine ecstasy
stirs in the heart within, and the continuous stream of
soma, overflowing with joy like the uninterrupted
ecstasy of the yogis of perfect renunciation, showers


upon the blessed soul.






[Names: Avye, Srathnite, Harirakran]
^ ° ^ ~


The stream of soma joy flows in the protected
heart of the dedicated celebrant, attenuates the extrovert
natural tendencies of the mind and augments the inner
concentration of the higher mind for the man of natural
truth and divine law. And Hari, divine lord controller
of agitation and dispeller of darkness, intensifies the
controlled flow of the yogi’s joy in communion and,
deepening and directing it on the fixed target, shines
like a victor with divine strength and glory.






[Names: Uksa, Atyakramidarjunam]
The generous virile soul overflowing with soma
joy vibrates with Infinity, the senses having returned
inward like cows to the stall. The enlightened mind and
thoughts of the holy soul unite with the hallowed centre
of the spirit. The soul breaks through its existential
cover, returns to its original imperishable purity, and
Soma protects it as a pilgrim cleansed and redeemed.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 69 211






[Names: Amrktena, Divasprstham]
The saviour, destroyer of suffering and darkness,
cleansing and sanctifying existence with imperishable
light of his glory, pervades, transcends and beatifies the
top of heaven and the middle regions of vapour between
earth and heaven, vesting them all with his splendour.






[Names: Suryasyeva, Tantum]
The dynamics of the lord’s creation instantly in
motion, energising the sleeping existences, joyous and
joyously moving everything to ecstatic being, all
together move across the web of life conceived and
created by the lord omnipotent, Indra. Not without Indra
does any particle, any wave, any world, move pure and
sacred as it is.









[Names: Sindhoriva]
Floods of river waters showered from the clouds
flow fast in their happy course down to the sea and mix
with the ocean. Like these, may our people, joyous with
showers of soma, fast and progressive, flow and proceed
like water courses to the divine Indra. O Soma, lord of
peace and joy, let there be peace and joy in our
homesteads for humans and animals both. May our
people and our powers and progress be firm and constant
on the forward paths of higher achievement.






[Names: Yuyam]
O Soma, lord of peace, progress and joy, bring
us, purify and let flow, the wealth of peace and honour
replete and overflowing with settlement and security,
golden glory, progressive achievement, lands, cows and
culture graces, food and good health, and noble courage,
strength and forbearance. You alone are our father and
mother, you alone would stay so constant, light of
heaven, top of excellence, stable as earth, and giver of
food, health and sustenance for a long full age.






[Names: Indram, Indra, Somah, Sutah]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 70 213


These soma joys of life, pure and purifying, like
divine radiations of victory, flow to the karma-yogi, man
of holy action and enthusiasm. Distilled and
concentrated, they flow to the sacred heart, dispel ill
health and infirmity, and, ever fresh and inspiring, they
bring showers of divine bliss.






[Names: Indavindraya, Bhara]
O lord of peace, beauty and joy, giver of
happiness and well being, adorable divinity, destroyer
of violence, enemies and impediments, flow for the great
Indra, for the glory of the karma-yogi. Bring the beauties
of wealth, settlement and security, honour and
excellence of life for the celebrant. O heaven and earth,
come along with the divinities of nature and humanity
and protect and promote us with happiness and well


Mandala 9/Sukta 70







[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Renu, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Trirasmai, Catvaryanya]
Thrice seven cows, creative powers of natural
evolution, generate the milky strain of vitality added to
the evolving reality in the service of the creator Soma
in the cosmic yajna in absolute time and space, Soma
who also created four other beautiful orders of existence
for the glory and sanctity of existence which grows by
the laws of cosmic dynamics.


(The seven cows may be interpreted as the seven
evolutes of Prakrti: mahan, ahankara and five subtle
elements of ether or akasha, energy or vayu, fire or agni,
water or apah, and earth or prthivi. Three are orders of
sattva or thought, rajas or motion, and tamas or matter.
This makes the thrice seven, the four other beautiful
orders of existence may be interpreted as mana (mind),
and ahankara (I-sense or existential personality).
Another interpretation could be the four Vedas,
knowledge, the corresponding order of existence in
terms of awareness and expression.






[Names: Sasrathe, Tejistha, Sravasa]
He, loving, sharing and pervading the immortal
beauty of existence, orders and adorns both heaven and
earth with his art, intelligence and poetic sublimity, also
vesting the vapours of the middle regions with his might
and splendour. Those who know the reality of the lord’s


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 70 215


creation alongwith his power, love and generosity really
know and share the bliss.






[Names: Yebhir, Anu]
May those radiations of the light and power of
this divine Soma, spirit of bliss, free from mortality,
deception or unreality, by which the lord strengthens,
purifies and sanctifies acts and virtues both human and
natural, be in accord with life, human as well as of other
forms, and may humanity receive and internalise that
divine spirit of love, peace and refulgence with all their
thought, thoughtful action and meditation.






[Names: Vratani]
He, blissful and watchful guardian of humanity
both pious and impious, exalted by ten efficient senses
and pranas and by ten holy observances of Dharma, who
is pervasive in the midst of human faculties of perception
and volition, awareness and understanding to watch and
warn us, thereby strengthening and promoting the holy
and immortal dharmic discipline of humanity, He




watches at first hand what people do in thought, word
and deed.






[Names: Vrsa, Surudhah]
He, adorable and exalted, pervades and abides
in both heaven and earth and in the middle regions,
happy, blissful and generous with showers of joy for
humanity for their honour and exaltation, to help them
to wield their potential efficiently. With divine power,
he warns men of negative understanding, even
commanding them like a warrior who wards off the evil
and finally destroys the forces of violence and






[Names: Janannrtam, Marutamiva]
As mother cows watch and guard the calves, so
does Soma, lord of light and power of life, vibrant and
resonant like roaring winds, pervade, watch and vitalise
heaven and earth, mother givers of life and sustenance.
And the man of holy action, knowing the cosmic law of
divinity and the prime paradisal agent of the good of
humanity, should love and worship that Soma for his


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 70 १17






[Names: Ruvati, Srnge, Somah]
Mighty, virile and generous all-watching soma
spirit of divinity, sharpening its top powers of perfection
of good and elimination of evil, settles in the heart centre
of the man of holy action, vibrates and resounds, and
then the man’s perceptive and discriminative
intelligence becomes definitive, protective and creative,






[Names: Sucih, Justo, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra]
Pure, purifying and sanctifying the holy man in
body, the protective and gracious Soma spirit of divinity
is enshrined on top of the holy man’s inviolable being,
loved and adored for the sake of the spirit of friendship,
veneration for judgement and vibrant enthusiasm for
life, and then honey sweets of triple powers for body,
mind and spirit are created by men of holy action.










[Names: Pavasva, Pura, Somadhanama]
O Soma spirit of life and divinity, virile and
generous, pure and purifying, favourite of divine hearts,
come for the service of the divine Lord and join the
soma yajna and the soma yajis. Take us across the evil
before its onslaught. After all, he alone can guide the
traveller asking for directions who knows the area on
earth and the field of life.






[Names: Hito, Nava]
Like a war horse directed to the field of battle,
come Indu, Soma spirit of peace, power and joyous
action, flow, enter and purify the spirit of Indra, man of
action and the social order. Like the mariner crossing
the sea by boat, advance, O scholar and warrior, fighting
on. Protect us, destroy the scandal mongers and take us
across the sea of life.


Mandala 9/Sukta 71


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Rshabha, Vaishvamitra, Rshi]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 71 219




[Names: Susmyasadam, Hariropasam]
The gift is given liberally, the mighty, Soma,
comes to the hall and presides, the wakeful protects
against the evil and the jealous, and the omnipotent
Soma, lord of peace and plenty, creates water vapours
as a pillar and cover between the green earth and heaven
of light and reveals the Vedas to sanctify and glorify






[Names: Jahati]
The mighty hero of peace, power and plenty,
Soma, goes forward roaring like a warrior, loud and
bold, revealing, manifesting and displaying that vibrant,
assertive and tempestuous character of his which dispels
and destroys darkness and evil, realises and maintains
the purest sacred spirit of his ancestral tradition in action
and attains the perfect, unsullied and absolute fulfilment
of his earthly existence.









[Names: Adribhih]
The soma spirit of life vibrates and sanctifies,
distilled and condensed by clouds, realised by sages,
shining in sun-rays and reflecting in meditative minds
of the yogis. Virile and generous, it waxes in strength,
showers with the cloud and inspires all with intelligence.
It rejoices, reaches all, makes everything possible, and
with the divine voice joins humanity, cleanses and
sanctifies, and blesses all in yajna and in their yajnic






[Names: Pari]
Honey showers of peace, patience and fortitude
rain on the master of homely fire-side, lover of light
and dedicated performer of soma yajna, in whose life
and family senses, mind and memory, fed on positive
and yajnic perceptual and conceptual food of
experience, retain and sanctify high moral and spiritual
values of prime importance with the highest reflections
of divinity.



[Names: Sami, Jigadupa]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 71 221


Just as ten fingers of both hands control and
direct the chariot’s course so, if the ten faculties of
perception and volition and the ten pranas collected
together in meditation were to raise the yogi’s
intelligence and awareness and he were to rise as reborn
and reach the lap of mother Infinity, he would attain to
the top of the blissful stage of existence which all his
faculties in unison would generate for him.






[Names: Syeno]
As the eagle bird comes to rest in its nest, so
does the light of the soul rise and shine in the golden
cave of the heart, the seat of divinity, prepared by the
light of higher intelligence and awareness. There on the
seat of sanctity the celebrants adore the dear Soul with
holy song where the divine Spirit, loving and adorable,
blesses the divine soul of the yogi and his transparent
faculties and rules as an emperor over the dominion.





[Names: Para, Sahasranitiryatih]
The divine Soma Spirit of peace and power self-




refulgent beyond the lights of heaven, omniscient
creator, omnificent giver, visionary and watchful over
the three orders of time and space, delights in the songs
of adoration as a committed listener. It is omnipotent
guide over a thousand ways, immanent and
transcendent, and rules and illuminates the eternal dawns
of light and vision like the sun.






[Names: Tvesam, Apsa]
Its form assumes a lustrous character of blazing
refulgence, and wherever it reflects, shines and abides,
there in the battles of human life and existence it destroys
negativities and inner conflicts. Commanding the
dynamic powers of life with its innate potential it goes
to the pious celebrant and abides there in the heart
adored with the highest words of exaltation.






[Names: Ukseva, Divayah, Suryasya, Suryas, Somah]
Just as cosmic energy comprehends and controls
all systems of the universe and with its thunderous
dynamics vests the sun with light, so does Soma,
supreme spirit of creativity, peace and joy, the light of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 72 223


life and cosmic intelligence, watches the earth and nature
and, with its holy creativity, controls and enlightens all
systems and species it has created.


Mandala 9/Sukta 72






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Harimanta, Angirasa, Rshi, Harim, Udvacamirayati, Purustutasya, Purustutas]
Devout celebrants love Soma divine like the
warmth of fire, admire it like beauty of the dawn, and
exalt it like light of the sun. You join the bliss of this
divinity with all your senses, mind, intelligence and
awareness. And then you would realise that Soma
vibrates in the heart as bliss and rolls as waves of the
sea. It inspires men to burst forth in song, energises
thoughts and intellect, and sharpens the vision and
imagination. Indeed there are no bounds to the precious
gifts of Soma, infinite are they, universally adored and









[Names: Sakam, Indrasya, Indras, Somam, Yadim]
When intelligent celebrants experience the
Soma ecstasy in the heart core of personality, when
brilliant people, leading lights of high mind and soul,
with all ten senses and pranas collected, controlled and
exalted with Soma, realise the bliss they cherish, they
all celebrate the divine presence and burst forth in song.






[Names: Aramamano, Suryasya, Suryas, Anvasmai]
Bearing love and enthusiasm for this Soma, the
devotee abides with both sister senses of perception and
volition, but indifferent to sense experience and
pleasure, he moves on to the sweet message of the dawn,
daughter of the sun, and goes still beyond to bliss of the






[Names: Nrdhiuto, Purandhivan, Indra]
O soul, master of senses, mind and intelligence,
the soma joy of existence flows free for you everywhere.
Exercised in practice by holy men, distilled and realised
in the heart and on the holy grass of yajna, darling of
the soul, ruler of sense and mind, it masters, controls


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 72 225


and governs the stars and planets. It is refulgent,
heavenly and illuminative, and blissful across the
seasons, time and space. It holds and sustains all systems
of nature and humanity, it is the harbinger of success
and fulfilment for us in all our yajnic corporate acts,
and it is pure and immaculate beyond possibility of sin,
evil and pollution.




[Names: Nrbahubhyam, Aprah]
harih.


Indra, O soul, the soma joy of divinity flows
free for you, impelled by human arms of karma,
showered in streams with resonant hymns. Move on to
holy actions in yajna, and Soma, lord of peace and
power, pervading in heaven and earth and the middle
regions like cosmic energy and the dynamics of cause
and effect, would fulfill your desires, intentions and
resolutions of mind.





[Names: Amsum, Sami]
All perceptions, volitions, thoughts and feelings,




collected together into the mind through repeated
practice, absorb into the heart centre of the original seat
of meditative meet of the soul with divinity, and there
in awareness wise men of holy action and creative vision
receive and experience soma showers of joy, vital,
voluble, imperishable, creative and blissful.






[Names: Nabha]
Centre-hold of the earth, wielder of the mighty
heaven of light, showers of living energy on the waves
of the sea, adamantine force of the thunderbolt of Indra,
virile and generous, treasure-hold of the wealth of the
universe, Soma, ecstatic joy of creative divinity, flows
in the holy heart and blesses it with purity.






[Names: Siksa]
O lord of holy action and yajnic dynamics of
the universe, flow and purify everything of the globe
and the skies, giving me, your enthusiastic celebrant,
the vision and wisdom for the good life. Deprive us not
of the peace, power and wealth of the home and family.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 73 227


Bless us that we may live in peace and enjoy peace and
homely wealth of golden plenty and variety.






O lord of light and bliss of peace, pure and all
purifying, giver of a hundred-and-thousandfold wealth
of advancement and achievement, creator and ordainer
of all human, animal and golden wealth of the beauty
of the world, come to bless our yajna, listen to our songs
of adoration, and bless us with vast expansive wealth
of food and energy, knowledge and culture alongwith a
sense of values of those divine gifts for our good.


Mandala 9/Sukta 73




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Pavitra, Angirasa, Rshi, Srakve, Trintsa]
paran.


Streams of the waves and particles of exuberant
soma of the creator singing in unison flow into forms
in the cosmic home of existence, and the centre-holds




of the forms of systems and sub-systems flow back into
the vedi of the cosmic yajna, completing the cycle. The
highest and omnipotent lord of cosmic vitality, to begin
this yajna, brought into manifestation three modes of
Prakrti, sattva, rajas and tamas, and the emergence of
living forms of species, boat-like carriers-on, finally
complete the holy creative process.






[Names: Samyak, Madhor, Indrasya, Indras]
Mighty men, sages, scholars and leaders, wise,
ambitious and good intentioned, holily all together
stirring on top of the oceanic waves of existence, keep
it moving fast and faster and, creating beautiful things,
doing good work in honour of the lord creator, advance
this dear world of the Almighty with streams of the
honey sweets of soma.







[Names: Pavitravantah, Mahah]
Men of soma purity of mind and character, they
stand by the holy voice of divinity and the dynamics of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 73 229


nature. The eternal father and ruler over all protects and
promotes their discipline of Dharma. Just as the all
enveloping space alone can cover the mighty ocean and
the cosmic vapours, similarly men of stable mind only
can keep original human commitment in matters of






[Names: Sahasradhare, Asya]
In this world of a thousand streams of soma joy
and divine generosity, the soma souls in humanity sing
and swim in action, sweet of tongue, mind and will,
joining the paradisal vision of heavenly light. The instant
and watchful eyes of the dynamics of divinity, all
enveloping and all beholding, are ever awake without a
wink for the moment. O lord, at every step the binding
bonds are there, and there are saviour bridges as well.






[Names: Piturmaturadhya, Indradvistamapa]
Like the rays of sunlight radiating from above
to mother earth in unison, shining with their brilliance,
illuminating and purifying, and burning off those




pollutants which act against natural law, the soma souls
of humanity acting in unison around father and mother
in holy tradition, shining and sanctifying life with divine
hymns, reducing and eliminating powers of negative
character and habit against natural law and human
values, they drive off and eliminate the defilers and
violators of cosmic law, and, with the knowledge and
power of the light of great heaven, they remove the veil
of the darkness of ignorance.






[Names: Pratnanmanadadhya, Apanaksaso]
Soma souls that act in unison with faith in eternal
values, who are self-controlled by the divine Word and
follow the spirit of lord Almighty pursue the path of
universal law and reach the divine destination. But men
of negative disposition see not what they see and hear
not what they hear, abandon the path of truth and fail to
reach the divine destination of life.






[Names: Rudrasa]
In this expansive world of a thousand streams


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 73 231


of purity flowing on and on, men of noble thought and
poetic vision create, speak and sanctify their word. Men
of judgement and rectitude, they discriminate between
right and wrong and the natural consequences thereof.
They are dynamic, free from jealousy, penetrative
observers, worthy of reverence, holy visionaries and
constant watchers of humanity






[Names: Rtasya, Vidvantsa]
The man of universal truth, guardian of law, is
undaunted, he is not for fear, nor for deceit. Pure at
heart and holy of action, he maintains that strength and
purity in his threefold conduct in thought, word and
deed. Man of knowledge, vision and practical wisdom,
he overwatches the entire regions of the world, brings
to book the sceptics and the uncommitted, and fixes the
saboteurs and the violators of law.





[Names: Dhirascit, Varunasya, Varunas]
The web of Truth and Law is vast and universal.
It extends enshrined in the pure at heart and speaks at




the tip of the tongue by virtue of the wondrous power
of Varuna, lord of love and justice, choice and
discrimination. The brave, settled at heart and mind,
receive it and follow it to self-fulfilment. The sceptics,
dissenting and denying, fall from grace into negation
and utter frustration.


Mandala 9/Sukta 74






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kakshivan, Dairghatamasa, Rshi, Sisurna, Divo, Sarma]
When in this vernal wood of existence, man
clamours like a new born baby for sustenance, then that
mighty refulgent heavenly giver of light and bliss waxes
with love and desire overflowing with the milk of grace
and blesses him with the living energy of heavenly
divinity. To that divine lord of light and peace we pray
with songs of holiness for life’s well being and spiritual







[Names: Seme]
We pray to that centre-hold of heaven,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 74 233


foundation of existence, boundless holy presence all
pervasive and perfect, covering all space all round who
holds both these worlds of earth and heaven with the
middle regions together and sustains them like a
yajamana. He is the omniscient visionary, poetic creator
and giver of food and energy for sustenance and
knowledge for enlightenment.






[Names: Mahi]
Of mighty form is he, generous, adorable,
exceedingly refulgent controller of universal dynamics,
shelter home of life who rules over the rains of living
waters on earth. The honey sweets of soma homage well
expressed and distilled are for him, yajamana of the
yajnic wide paths of rectitude of mother earth and nature.


Wa: us




[Names: Atmanvannabho, Samicinah]
Living energising showers of soma ghrta and
waters are received from space. The centre-hold of
eternal truth and spirit of immortality here constantly
manifests in the flow of existence. Joint integrated
generous powers of nature serve that divinity and
leading lights of humanity too offer service in abundance


to the munificent power.






[Names: Aravidamsuh, Dadhati]
The soma spirit of divine vitality, one in love
with life, vitalises and strengthens the holy earth and
body health of humanity with the waves of its joy and
love desire. It vests the womb of earth with seed and
fertility by virtue of which we beget our children and






[Names: Sahasradhare, Catasro]
Those creative vitalities in the sun of a thousand
streams of light and life be there above in the third region
of light in space and come down to earth. Four treasure
casks of Dharma, artha, kama and moksha abide well
guarded in the region of light and, overflowing with
ghrta, living water and divine sanctity, bring down the
spirit and message of full life on earth for the joy of
human life, imperishable and immortal.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 74 235






[Names: Svetam, Dhiya]
Whenever man desires, Soma, life of life on
earth and virile controller of solar energy that pervades
vast natural resources, forms shining clouds of vapour,
parjanya, then, with its intelligential dynamics, joins
with the vapour powers, and, going forward from light
to the cloud, breaks the flood of water vapours into rain.
(Like the clouds of rain showers of water, also, come
the rain showers of knowledge and wisdom for






[Names: Adha, Satahimaya]
Just as a well trained race horse shoots to the
victory line, so does Soma, lord of light, life and peace,
proceed to the pure heart of the devotee, a transparent
receiver refined and consecrated by the holy voice of
divinity. To him do celebrants of divinity with sincere
mind enthusiastically pray to bless the scholars, the
teacher and the disciple, with a hundred years of
enlightened life of knowledge and wisdom.








[Names: Adbhih]
O Soma, lord of light and bliss, pure and
purifying, lover of life with showers of living
consecrating nectar, the immortal bliss of your presence
flows to the chosen soul of humanity. As such, celebrated
and exalted by poets, O Spirit immaculate most ecstatic,
pray flow and be sweet and gracious for the delight and
fulfilment of Indra, virile soul of pious humanity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 75






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Suryasya, Suryas]
Soma, spirit of life and joy of existence, mighty,
infinite, omnipresent, pervades and vitalises all dear
beautiful systems of waters and light, expansive and
exalted therein. Greater than the great, all watching, it
rides the grand chariot of the sun which comprehends
and illuminates the whole world.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 75 237






[Names: Rtasya, Dadhati]
The flame of yajna as the voice of eternal truth
rises and expresses the dear delicious beauty and glory
of Soma, spirit of universal light and bliss. The speaker
and protector of the acts of yajna and Soma truth of life
is fearless, undaunted. Just as progeny is the continuance
and illumination of the honour and reverence of parents,
so is yajna the progeny and illuminative soma of Soma
refulgent in the third and highest region of the light of






[Names: Abhimrtasya, Usaso, Anusata]
Evoked and concentrated in the golden cave of
the heart by veteran yogis, leading them to a vision of
divinity, illuminating the sacred hearts, it vibrates and
speaks loud and bold in the spirit. Those who distil the
eternal truth of existence in their yajnic communion with
divinity celebrate and exalt it in song as it abides over
three regions of earth, heaven and the skies and shines
over the glory of dawns.








[Names: Adribhih, Romanyavya]
Distilled in essence and presence in the heart,
realised in bliss by veteran wise, pure, immaculate and
brilliant, illuminating mother earth and mother heavens
of life and existence, Soma radiates, blessing sacred
hearts in communion and augmenting systemic unions
of existence all round flowing in streams of honey joy.






[Names: Pari, Indram, Indra]
O Soma spirit of joy and victory of existence,
radiate and come for the happiness and all round well-
being of life. Pure and purifying, exalted by the veteran
wise, come and sanctify the beauty of life. With all those
joyous gifts of yours which are mighty universal and
radiant in the dynamics of existence, pray inspire Indra,
the ruling soul, to create the honour, wealth and
excellence of life and bless us with the highest bliss.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 76 239


Mandala 9/Sukta 76






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Dharta, Harih]
Soma, joyous spirit of the universe, sustainer
of the regions of light, constant doer, eternal delight
and bliss of divinities, perfect omnipotent power, sole
worthy of worship by humanity vibrates omnipresent,
purifies and sanctifies the life of existence. Destroyer
of want and suffering, ever creative, with its own powers
spontaneously, like energy itself creates movement and
growth in the channels of existence.






[Names: Suro, Gyudha, Indrasya, Susmam, Indras]
Wielding the powers and instrumentalities of
nature, like a warrior and victor in immanent will and
omniscience, keen to share the joy of existence with
humanity in paths of daily business, commanding the
chariot of the universe in micro and macro systems of
its dynamics, inspiring and elevating the soul’s potential,




itself stimulated and energised into manifestation by
thinkers and men of yajnic action in meditation, the spirit
of universal light and glory is aroused to raise and bless






[Names: Sasvatah]
Soma, vigorous spirit of joyous power and
generosity, pure, purifying and constantly flowing,
brilliant, blazing and advancing in strength, come by
the stream and waves of energy and enter in the heart
core of the soul. As thunder, lightning and clouds of
rain shower and augment heaven and earth, pray
strengthen us, and with divine intelligence, as it were,
extend our food, energies, progress and victories for all
time. You are the creator, you are the maker, you are the
giver.


hires: US
[Names: Visvasya, Suryasyasirena, Suryasyasir]
Soma is refulgent ruler of the world. It flows


pure, purifying those who see the light divine. Loving,
commanding, and illuminating the dynamics of nature


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 77 241


unto waves and particles, seer of the seers as it is, exalted
by sun beams, father generator and giver of knowledge,
it transcends the vision and word of the wise and poet’s






[Names: Vrseva, Indraya, Indra]
Soma, mighty virile spirit of divinity, thundering in the
depth of clouds of vapour, you overflow the clouds.
Thus, O most joyous and blissful spirit of the universe,
you flow for the soul. Pray bless us so that under your
natural protections of grace we may win in the struggles
of life.
Mandala 9/Sukta 77




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras, Abhimrtasya]
This soma, blissful spirit of the universe, full of
honey sweets of joy, vibrates and reveals itself aloud in
the ananda-maya kosha at the heart’s core of the soul,




potent as thunderbolt of Indra, beauty, power and bliss
incarnate, more beautiful and vigorous than beauty and
power itself. All voices of speech replete with the spirit
of truth and divinity, generous and overflowing with
liquidity of meaning and spirit of divinity and divine
law flow from it, about it and to it like milch cows
overflowing with milk for the calf.






[Names: Syeno]
That eternal joy, which the brilliant light of
divinity moved in the heart core distils from heaven
through the middle regions of human fluctuations of
existence, vibrates omnipresent and purifies all who
care. That same joy full of honey sweets, vibrating with
power and bliss joins with the weaker humanity stricken
with fear and anxiety and may, we pray, inspire the
devotee with new strength and vigour.







[Names: Iksenyaso]
May those ancients of vision and the later ones
present and future blest with light and power, inspire


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 77 243


us to win new prizes of great advancement and victory
rich in wealth and advancement. May they, thinkers and
seekers, generous and sublime like clouds of rain
showers, who meditate on the essence of vast existence
and offer the essence of sacred oblations of yajnic
fragrances with love and faith, inspire us.






[Names: Ayam, Inasya, Purustutah, Purustuta]
This our sagely scholar, brilliant and generous,
widely admired and adored, loving the loving and
dispelling the violent with a disciplined and
concentrated mind, who has received the eternal seed
of knowledge in the presence of the glorious lord of
divinity, proceeds to the highest abundant origin of the
mind and senses and moves further forward.






[Names: Cakrirdivah, Asavi]
The creator of the universe flows omnipresent,
purifies, sanctifies and blesses. Constant doer adorable,
delight of the celebrants, great, undauntable, lord of
judgement and choice, abandons men of crooked nature
and behaviour and fulfils the mission of the holy. Friend




on all paths of life, companionable, giver of fulfilment,
He vibrates in the multitude of existence and roars like
thunder in the depth of clouds.


Mandala 9/Sukta 78






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Grbhndati]
Soma, creative ruling spirit of the universe, self
moved with will and desire, producing the cosmic sound
of speech, releasing the flow of cosmic energies, pleased
and pervasive, proceeds to the yajnic formation of stars
and planets. The kind protective sun fertilises the
manifestive earthly forms with its own living energy
and the immaculate soul proceeds to nature’s womb of
divinities for their manifestation and self-realisation.





[Names: Indraya, Indra, Purvirhi]
Soma, spirit of universal joy, is poured from one
form into another for the sake of Indra, the soul. The


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 78 245


spiritual cosmic flow is loved and worshipped in the
beautiful world of divinity. O lord, eternal and universal
are the holy dynamics of your creation for humanity to
pursue and follow, infinite your moving forces,
advancing, arresting and absorbing in the yajnic world.






[Names: Samudriya, Somam]
Vibrations of divine presence flowing in space
and enshrined in the heart radiate to the enlightened
soul at peace. They inspire and move this resident
companion soul of the beautiful mind and body so that
the devotees pray for imperishable peace and bliss of
the pure and purifying divinity.






[Names: Gojinnah]
Soma, universal spirit of peace and bliss, is the
creator master controller and giver of earthly and divine
wealth and enlightenment, movement and progress,
golden graces of beauty and excellence, happiness and
fulfilment and fluid assets, it purifies us and wins us a




thousand victories of existence. This spirit of universal
enlightening, giver of peace and fulfilment, the divines
reveal to us for our enlightenment and well being.






[Names: Etani, Jahi, Satrum]
O Soma, our well wisher, pure and purifying,
these are the real and true acts of kindness and grace,
doing which you vibrate for our prosperity, honour and
[Names: Pray]
and enemities far as well as near, and open for us the
paths of progress wide, straight and free from fear.


Mandala 9/Sukta 79






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kavi, Bhargava, Rshi, Acodaso]
May the bright and blissful soma streams of
divinity, self-moved and self-inspired, life-giving,
gracious dispellers of darkness and suffering, inspire
us to move forward in the vast yajnas of celestial


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 79 247


proportions. Let the enemies of our food and energy
perish. Let the saboteurs be destroyed. Let our hopes
and plans be realised and fulfilled.






[Names: Tiro]
May the bright and blissful Soma streams of
divine honey joy inspire us, by which we, warriors of
advancement and progress, may win and acquire wealth
and, warding off the crookedness of any human power
whatever it be, we may always achieve wealth of






[Names: Dhanvan]
He is the enemy of one’s own adversity, and of
another’s adversity too, he is the enemy, a very
thunderbolt, against adversity and enmity. Deal with
adversity and enmity the way you deal with thirst in the
and dynamic spirit, dispel the negative will and
understanding of the obstinates and the malignants.








[Names: Divi, Adrayastva]
The supreme power and bliss of yours, which
captivates and holds, abides in the centre of the regions
of light. The inspirations for the light arise here on top
of the earth. The veteran wise exalt you in the vedi on
the floor of the earth, and thinkers and seekers distil the
bliss in their actions as they milk the cow with their
hands for milk.






[Names: Nidamnidam, Susmo]
O Soma, bright and blissful divine spirit of
existence, pure and purifying power, thus do veteran
devotees of noble dedicated mind distil the gracious,
delicious and inspiring bliss of divine joy. Pray dispel
the malice of all malignant minds so that your dear
delightful power and bliss shines pure and bright every
where in every living being.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 80 249


Mandala 9/Sukta 80






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vasu, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Somasya, Somas, Brhaspate]
The stream of soma, light and bliss of divinity,
flows free. It purifies, sanctifies, embraces and
enlightens all humanity and arouses the divinities with
the yajnic call of divine law. It vibrates and shines with
the voice of omniscient lord transcendent, Brhaspati,
and, like the vaulting oceans and expansive space, the
generative vibrations of divinity extend beyond the
lights of heaven.






[Names: Maghonamayuh, Srva, Indraya, Indra]
You, O vibrant lord of omnipotence, whom all
inviolable forces of nature and communities of humanity
adore and exalt, rise in all your glory and manifest in
the golden heart cave of the soul. O lord of infinite joy,
you promote the health and age of the men of piety and
prosperity. Bless Indra, the ruling soul with honour and
high renown and shower boundless bliss upon humanity.


The ceaseless flow goes on.


satus ॥




[Names: Endrasya, Pratyan]
The stream of Soma divinity most joyous and
exhilarating, radiating energy, auspicious harbinger of
good fortune, honour and excellence, purifies and
vibrates in the heart and soul of man. All pervasive,
Soma generates and extends all regions of the universe,
playful, beatific saviour, infinite mover, and it continues
to flow in boundless omnipresence, a fact of direct
observation and experience for the wise.






[Names: Nrbhih]
Men of vision and wisdom blest with ten senses
of intense perception, thought and imagination
experience the most beatific presence in infinite showers
of bliss for the devotees from the divinities. O Soma,
lord of bliss, winner, master and controller of infinite
gifts and powers, vibrant presence, distilled by the


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 81 251


veteran wise by experience with meditative mind and
senses, pray come and bless the holy celebrants with






[Names: Indram]
Such as you are, Soma, sweetest presence of
bliss, infinitely generous, men of mighty arm for action
and ten senses of intense perception, will and
imagination experience your presence and realise the
message in their actions, manners and behaviour. O spirit
of light and bliss, pure and purifying, like waves of the
sea you roll on giving delight and beatitude to the ruling
soul and general humanity blest with love of divinity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 81







[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vasu, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras, Somasya, Somas, Dadhna]
Charming vibrations of the presence and power
of pure and purifying Soma, supreme spirit of light and




peace, radiate to the heart core of Indra, lover of
knowledge and light of divinity, when, seasoned and
supplemented with experiences of senses and mind
elevated through higher states of inversion and
concentration in Dharma and Dhyana, they exhilarate
the brave soul with strength and excellence and exhort
it to divine love and total self-surrender.






[Names: Accha, Somah]
Soma, lord of radiant peace and power, generous
and omnipotent reaches and vibrates in all forms of
existence and in the heart core versatile movement at
the fastest. It knows and vibrates among the divinities
simultaneously in their present life as well as in the past
and future and reaches from here to there and there to
here at the same time (since it is omnipresent and
presently comprehends both time and space, and, as
Yajurveda says, it moves and yet it does not move).


(So versatile is the yogi also by attainment blest
by Soma.)




[Names: Siksa]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 81 253


O Soma, pure and purifying lord of peace and
glory, bring us peace and prosperity of the world, and
be the harbinger of great honour and excellence and
high potential for success and progress. Wielder,
controller and giver of health and age and wealth of the
world, give us insight into ways of noble wealth and
excellence, and never deprive us of our hearth and home
and our peace and prosperity.






[Names: Brhaspatirma, Varunah, Varuna, Vayurasvina, Sarasvati]
May the generous divinities of holy abundance
both in nature and humanity come and grace us with
their gifts : Pusha, giver of good health and long age,
Pavamana, fluent powers of purity and purification,
Mitra, powers of love and friendship, Varuna, powers
of judgement, discrimination, freedom and discipline,
Brhaspati, powers of environment and space, knowledge
and communication, Maruts, vibrant defence forces,
Vayu, dynamic leaders and pioneers, Ashvins,
complementary powers of social system with knowledge
of theory and practice, Tvashta, designers and makers
of things and systems, Savita, creators, generators,
givers of light and inspiration, Suyama, powers of law
and discipline, Sarasvati, mother giver of knowledge
and living tradition. May all these come and bless with
the spirit of love.








[Names: Ubhe, Bhago, Aditirvidhata]
May both heaven and earth, home of the world,
Aryama, just and refulgent ruler and leader, Aditi,
mother Infinity, Vidhata, lord sustainer and law giver,
Bhaga, powers of prosperity and excellence and all
divinities of nature and humanity, love, honour and serve
Soma, vast as space, adored and worshipped by


Mandala 9/Sukta 82






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vasu, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Asavi, Punadno, Syeno]
Soma, self-refulgent supreme creative spirit of
the universe, virile and generous, dispeller of darkness
and deprivation, regal and gracious like a ruler, self-
moves, vibrating to the generation of stars and planets.
Itself pure, purifying and sanctifying, it moves to
manifest in the heart of imperishable Prakrti as it chooses
and, like the sun that warms and fertilises, it enlivens
the generative centre of life as its own womb of
manifestive existence. Thus does Soma create and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 82 255
generate the universe.






[Names: Kavirvedhasya, Apasedhan]
Soma, omniscient visionary and poetic creator,
with the desire to enlighten, you radiate to great minds
and move to dynamic yajnas of humanity like
accelerated energy to its target of achievement. O lord
of light and peace, be kind, dispelling all evil to nullity.
Wearing the grace of beauty and purity of yajnic love
and sweetness, you move and embrace humanity for






[Names: Parjanyah, Parjanya, Svasara]
Father and sustainer of all great and small, birds
and trees, serious realists and flying dreamers, centre
hold of the earth and showers of rain, you abide in the
mighty clouds and over the mountains. Your waves and
vibrations flow and radiate, flow as sister streams and
radiate to the stars and planets, and in holy yajna you
vibrate with the music of soma stones and the chant of








[Names: Jayeva, Seva, Antarvanisu]
O Soma, blessed man, child of the earth and
solid reality of existence, listen, I say: As a wife feels
elevated in love and service for her husband, you too
love and serve life and the lord of life within the laws
and values of the voice divine for the fulfilment of your
self in action. Live free from calumny and scandal and
keep awake in the paths of life.






[Names: Yatha]
O Soma, Spirit of peace, prosperity and bliss
vibrating in the dynamics of existence, free from
violence, unviolated and inviolable, as you ever blest
the ancients of all time with hundredfold, thousandfold
food, energy, safeguards and victories of progress, same
way, we pray, bring us peace, progress and well being
for the new generations. All our people and all our
actions honour and obey the law and discipline
enshrined in the voice divine.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 83 257


Mandala 9/Sukta 83






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Pavitra, Angirasa, Rshi, Pavitram, Ataptatanurna]
Vast and expansive is your holy creation of
existence and the voice divine, O Brhaspati, lord of
expansive universe. You are the master and supreme
controller who pervade and transcend its parts from the
particle to the whole. The immature man who has not
passed through the crucibles of discipline cannot reach
to that presence, but the mature and seasoned ones who
still maintain the ordeal of fire and abide by the presence
attain to it and the divine joy.






[Names: Tapospavitram, Avantyasya]
The holy light of the cosmic sun extends and
lights the regions of heaven where the rays shine and
blaze, radiate all round and abide in constancy. Those
instant radiations in heavenly state protect the devotee
of holy commitment. Indeed the devotees abide there
on top of the state of heavenly light with their mind
stabilised in peace and joy.








[Names: Arurucadusasah, Mayavino]
Lighting up the dawns, stars and planets in
space, the sun, prime and abundant source of light,
warmth of life and waters of sustenance, giver of food
and energy sustains the regions of the world. By the
light, power and causal effects of it on other objects in
existence such as planets and satellites, scholars of
science do their astronomical calculations, and parental,
kind and studious scholars studying humanity and
divinity realise the nature and character of Soma, the
original seed of life and source of energy for the world
of existence.






[Names: Gandharva, Grbhnati, Sata]
The true, eternal and marvellous sustainer of the
universe wields and sustains its state of existence and
sustains and promotes the evolution of divine refulgent
stars and planets as well as the birth cycles of brilliant
and generous people. Omnipotent power, it seizes the
adverse forces and subdues them into systemic


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 84 259


conformity. Devotees and yogis of holy action make it
an object of experience in meditation and enjoy the
honey sweets of its presence as spiritual food for
elevation to the divinity.






[Names: Havirhavismo, Raja, Sravo]
Soma, lord of light and bliss, you are the prime
yajamana of universal yajna. Holding the holy materials,
wearing divine space as refulgent cloak, you move to
the great hall of creative yajna free from negativity and
violence. Supreme ruler, riding the divine chariot, rising
to omnipotence, wielding a thousand arms, you are the
supreme victor of infinite glory.


Mandala 9/Sukta 84





[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Prajapati, Vachya, Rshi, Pavasva, Indraya, Indra, Krdhi, Varunaya, Varuna]
O lord inspirer of divines with joy, all watcher
of the universal flow of karmic evolution, flow on with
gifts of purity for Indra, ruling powers, Varuna, powers




of judgement and knowledge, and Vayu, vibrant leaders
and pioneers. Bless us now with wealth and excellence
for well being, and in this great house of the world,
pray, accept this noble humanity and raise it to be worthy
of divine praise and grace.






[Names: Somah, Krnvant, Suryah, Surya]
Flow, purify and consecrate all, O Soma,
immortal and eternal light, life and joy of existence,
who pervade constant in all regions of the universe and
vibrate therein, over, above and beyond, who, making
one single unity into infinite variety (specifics in
generalities, tensions in balance, centrifugals in
centripetal motion, all differences and contrarieties
moving in complementarity within the dynamics of a
single, central, unmoved mind, all re-attaining to the
same unity) for the common good and self-fulfilment
of all, abide, the One in union with all like the sun with
the dawns, illuminating all.





[Names: Indram]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 84 261


Soma who, abiding by all, wishing to create the
beauty of variety for the good and self-fulfilment of all
divine creations, creates the sap of life in herbs and trees
with solar radiations, flows on with streams of energy,
and when the presence is distilled and realised in the
consciousness, Soma consecrates the soul of the karma-
yogi and vibrates to the delight of divine humanity.






[Names: Induh]
Thus this Soma flows, constant, victor of a
thousand victories, energising and accelerating the
sound of Aum, the Big Bang of creative manifestation
in continuous motion that wakes and awakens at the
dawn. Light, life and joy of existence, it rises to the
oceans of space with the waves of cosmic energy and,
being the joy of the soul’s heart core, it abides in all
forms of life in existence (some know and care, others
don’t, but it is there everywhere, all time).




[Names: Somam, Srinanti, Dhananjayah]
canah.




That divine Spirit of life and inspiration, joyous
and omniscient, abounding in the life-giving energy of
the universe, all senses and mind with higher
intelligence and elevated thoughts join, perceive and
present to the enlightened soul with the thrill of its
radiance. Master giver of all wealth and excellence of
life, the Spirit flows, vibrates and beatifies, all doer, all
joy, all intelligent, all creative, and sublime as splendour
of heaven by the beauty of poetic creation.


Mandala 9/Sukta 85






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vena, Bhargava, Rshi, Indraya, Indra, Soma]
O Soma, divine joy of life, distilled and realised
in meditation, flow for the delight of the soul. Let
adversities and ailments be far off, give us freedom from
negativities, contradictions, adversities and violence.
Double dealers would not have the joy of that experience
and freedom. May all streams of Soma be abundant in
wealth, honour and excellence.






MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 85 263



[Names: Asmant, Jahi, Somamava, Jahi]
O lord pure and purifying, dynamic power of
life, inspire and strengthen us in the yajnic battle of
life. You are the perfect power among the divines for
the divines, dear inspiration, exhilaration and joy.
Eliminate the contradictions. Accept the Soma homage
of the celebrant, throw out the adversaries for our sake.






[Names: Ababdha]
Indu, Spirit of universal love, peace and power,
inviolable, awful and imperishable, pure and purifying,
most joyous you flow in the dynamics of existence,
being the soul of energy and highest wielder of power
and sustenance for life. All wise men of serious thought
celebrate you in song as the refulgent ruler of this world
and pay homage in reverence.








[Names: Sahasranithah, Indrayenduh, Indrayendu, Jayan]
Marvellous lord of a thousand powers and
possibilities, Soma, spirit of cosmic beauty and joy,
flows in a thousand streams of cosmic dynamics for the
human soul and brings us the honey sweets of human
choice. Flow on forward, O Soma, winning fields of
life’s battles for us, winning fields of karmic dynamics,
broaden our paths of activity and possibility, O lord
generous and omnipotent.


ada: We




[Names: Kanikradat, Marmrjyamano, Indrasya, Indras]
O Soma, you vibrate voluble in the heart core
of the soul. Your presence is conducted through
vibrations of perception by the senses and mind and,
alongwith the vibrations, you reach the imperishable
soul. Adored and exalted there, the blissful presence
like waves of divine energy continues to radiate and
shine in the heart core of the soul as shower of ananda,
ecstasy of divine bliss.


BUS Il





[Names: Svaduh, Svadurmitraya, Varunaya, Varuna]
O Soma, delicious ecstasy of divine presence,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 85 265


continue to flow for the soul reborn into divine self-
realisation, delicious for the karma yogi of high status
who can invoke your presence at will. Flow to the
ecstasy of the soul of universal love, for the soul of
discriminative intelligence and awareness, for the
vibrant potent soul, for the soul attained to the presence
of Infinity. Flow delicious as honey, bring freedom from






[Names: Atyam]
Ten faculties of the soul, senses, mind and
pranas, receive, intensify and exalt the vibrations of
divinity in the heart core of the soul. With these, the
perceptions and vibrations, the understanding and
awareness of realised souls spontaneously burst into
song. The vibrations of divinity radiate and continue to
radiate to the celebrant soul, and they enter, settle and
integrate with the soul.






[Names: Pavamano, Sarma, Makirno]
O Soma, pure, purifying and dynamic presence




of peace and inspiring power, bring us holy strength
and generosity, wide paths of possibility and progress,
great expansive home of peace and joy. Let no violence
and oppression of this world rule over us. Let us by
your grace win the wealth of ultimate value.






[Names: Raja]
Self-refulgent light of heavens, omniscient, all
watching Soma, omnipotent and omnificent, illuminates
the heavens, pervades and rules over the space and the
highest heaven. Shining, blazing, rising and resounding,
it vibrates and goes to the heart core of the sacred soul
and over, and enlightened souls of humanity distil the
nectar of it there from the heavens.






[Names: Divo, Apsu]
Dedicated celebrants of Soma, sweet of tongue,
having risen above material attachments, distil the honey
sweet nectar, ecstatic essence of fluent elixir exuberant
in the clouds, resounding in the holy Word, abounding
in the waves of the seas in the oceans of space. They


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 85 267


distil it and enshrine it in their sacred heart, established
in the light of heaven.






[Names: Nake, Sisum]
Universal voices of the dedicated celebrants of
old reach and adore the Soma spirit radiant and
resounding in the heaven of freedom and showering on
earth. The thoughts and prayers of the wise too reach
and celebrate with love the adorable subtle presence of
on earth and settled in universal peace.





[Names: Urdhvo, Bhanuh, Ssucih]
High over the regions of light, freedom and bliss
abides the sustainer of earth and space in motion,
illuminating and revealing all manifestive forms of
existence. Thus the sun shines pure and radiant with
the power of divine splendour illuminating both mother
earth and mother heaven and the middle regions.




Mandala 9/Sukta 86
[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Rshis, Akrshtah, Mashah, Sikata, Nvavari, Prshnayah, Ajah]
Akrshtah Mashah and Sikata Nivavari and Prshnaya






[Names: Atri, Bhaumah, Grtsamada, Shaunaka, Divyah]
O pure and purifying Soma, peace and power
of divinity, the ecstatic vibrations of your bliss, instantly
radiant and inspiring for the mind, flow spontaneously
like rays of light at the speed of thought. The divine,
flying, honey sweet effusions of bliss, most exhilarating,
overwhelm the mind and settle in the heart core of the
soul.






[Names: Dhenurna, Indramindavo]
O Soma, spirit of peace, power and pleasure of
divinity, the vibrations of your joy, ecstatic and instant,
rise and flow, beautiful and pleasing, separate but in


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 269


successive showers like drops in a ceaseless chain and,
as the mother cow’s milk flows for the calf, the delicious
and shining waves of honey sweets flow for the soul
wielding the spiritual power of thunder.






[Names: Atyo, Vrsda, Somah]
Inspired and energised like a shot fired for the
target of battle, O soma spirit of omniscience, flow to
the victorious soul of the celebrant like liquid energy
showering from the sun to the cloud in formation in the
sky. O generous vibrant presence, pure and purifying
on top of the sanctified and imperishable soul, flow on
for the sustenance of its honour and excellence.






[Names: Prantar]
O pure and purifying Soma, your divine showers
of joy streaming fast at the speed of thought flow on
with the milk of grace into the heart cave of the soul,
they are the showers of fulfilment in the heart core of
the soul within, which the wise sages, realised souls of
knowledge, create and exalt in the heart.








[Names: Visva, Vyanasih]
O Soma, all seeing lord of existence, the mighty
radiations of your power reach and prevail over all
regions of the world. All pervasive, you flow and vibrate
with the virtues of your own nature, power and function
and, O sovereign sustainer of the entire universe, you
shine and rule supreme.






[Names: Ubhayatah, Yadi]
The rays of the light of Soma, lord existent,
immovable, pure and purifying, pervading over both
earth and the skies, radiate all round. When it is felt and
adored, exalted in the pure heart, then the sanctifier
presence settles and abides in the sacred hearts of the
celebrants, the real seat of its own love and choice.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 271




[Names: Yajnasya, Sahasradharah]
Soma is the mark and summit of yajna, ultimate
master and prime yajamana of cosmic yajna free from
hate and violence and, in love, it radiates to the pure
and sanctified heart of the holy celebrants. It moves and
manifests in the heart core of the soul in a thousand
streams of shower and, generous and potent, it
transcends all existential purity and power as absolute




[Names: Raja, Sritah, Adhyasthat]
divah.


Shining and ruling it plunges and rolls in the
oceans of space and plays with the currents of winds. It
joins the waves of floods of water and waxes with the
seas. Pure, purifying and flowing, it rises on top of
imperishable existence. It is the centre-hold of the
universe and mighty foundation of the heavens of light.





[Names: Divo, Dyausca, Indrasya, Indras]
vivevidat somah punanah kalasesu sidati.




Roaring as thunder on top of the regions of light,
holding heaven and earth by its universal laws of nature,
thus having the company of Indra, its own essential
nature power, Soma flows pure and purifying and
pervades in all forms of existence.






[Names: Jyotiryajnasya, Dadhdati]
Light of human and cosmic yajna, Soma vibrates
pure, purifying and omnipresent, dearest most delicious
honeyed spirit of life, creator and sustainer of divinities
and master of infinite wealth and power. It holds and
commands the jewel wealth of its own power and
potential hidden in earth and heaven and vibrates in the
mysteries of nature and humanity — divinity most
joyous, ecstatic, glorious, pure bliss that it is.






[Names: Abhikrandan, Harirmitrasya]
Roaring, the omnipotent pervades in the
universe and flows with a thousand streams, all watching
sustainer of the light of existence. Beatific, glorious,
dispeller of darkness and sufferance, it abides in the


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 273


homes of love and friendship, cleansing, purifying and
consecrating with its protective favours and showers of
grace, infinitely potent and generous since it is.






[Names: Agre, Agre]
Soma, prime spirit of the world in existence,
pure and purifying, moves as the first cause of flowing
waters, first cause of the flow of thought and speech,
and it moves as the prime cause of the motions of stars
and planets. First, before the start of evolution, it takes
on the great warlike dynamics of the creative
evolutionary flow of existence. The same omnipotent
generous power, mighty of arms, is adorned and exalted
in yajna by celebrants on the vedi designed by the lord
and structured by his Shakti, Prakrti.






[Names: Ayam, Tava, Sucirdhiya, Indra]
This omniscient Soma, spirit of light and divine
joy, like a bird of good omen just in front, flows pure
and purifying for you with waves of joy in this protected
world. O poetic soul of humanity, Indra, it vibrates over




earth and the firmament for you and feels happy and
exalted by your thought and action in service and
adoration of divinity.






[Names: Drapim, Svarjajnano]
The spirit of divine joy wearing the aura of
divinity, touching the heights of heaven, adorable in
yajna, vibrating in the skies and pervading all regions
of the world, creating the bliss of paradise, rises and
floats with the clouds where it shines and glorifies its






[Names: Sarma, Padam]
Whoever the self-controlled and dedicated
seeker that surrenders and attains to the original and
essential presence and abode of Soma, the abode that is
in the highest heavens above the worldly turmoil or in
the deepest core of the self, the lord grants him great
peace and joy on this attainment, and the celebrant faces
all situations of life with equanimity of mind.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 275






[Names: Marya]
Indu, Soma, light of life and divine ecstasy, goes
forward to the sacred heart of the devotee and, like a
friend of friends, destroys contradictions, confirms
complementarities and advances human growth. Thus,
just as youthful mortals go with their lady love, join
and protect them, and live a full life with vows kept
within the bounds of discretion and the law, so does
Soma in the sacred heart inspire the loved soul as a
friend in covenant by a hundred paths of human
possibilities of growth and advancement within the
bounds of Dharma. The Lord does not break the promise
ever.





[Names: Somam]
O joyous devotees, celebrants and seekers of
divinity, let all your thoughts, actions and prayers
converge and concentrate on the omnipresence of Soma,




on the universal vedi of Soma yajna. With mental
reflections and spiritual meditation, your self wrapped
in the beauty and bliss of Soma, adore the divinity. Let
all your voices of adoration and songs of prayer be for
the master with love and total surrender as cows with






O Soma, lord of light, Indu, spirit of beauty and
bliss, pure and purifying divinity, bless us with
controlled and well directed ever increasing food and
energy, knowledge and culture of imperishable character
and value which may for all time past, present and future
us and continue to bring for us honour, dignity and
heroic courage and forbearance full of energy,
excellence and sweetness.





[Names: Krana]
Generous inspirer of the intelligent and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 277


meditative souls, Soma pervades, flows and purifies.
Omniscient and all watching, it is the illuminator of the
day, the dawn and the sun. Maker of floods, rivers,
oceans and the seas, it vibrates in all forms of existence.
It loves the sacred heart and with love it enters and
blesses the heart core of the pious and powerful soul of
humanity. Such is Soma celebrated by the sages and






[Names: Manisibhih, Tritasya, Eternal]
by sages and meditated by pious people pervades,
energises and holds to the centre all forms of existence
from the cell and particle upto the expansive universe,
creating from Prakrti and its three modes of sattva, rajas
and tamas all forms and names of things, letting streams
of honey sweets flow, and releasing the joint,
cooperative and friendly activity of Indra and Vayu,
energy and its flow at the cosmic level, and the soul
and mind at the human level.









[Names: Usaso]
This Soma, illuminating the dawns, became the
maker of the worlds from the oceanic flood of particles
of Prakrti, the one material cause of the universe.
Creating the milk of nourishment and sustenance of life
from thrice seven orders of Prakrti, Mother Nature, its
own shakti, that is, three modes of sattva, rajas and tamas
(mind, motion and matter), two generalities of Mahat
and Ahankara (tangible nature from the intangible, and
identity from the tangible) and five specificities of basic
elements (Akasha, Vayu, Agni, Apah and Prthivi), it
flows pure, purifying, beatific and ecstatic in the heart
core of the soul.






[Names: Pavasva, Sidann, Suryam, Surya]
Flow on, O Soma, spirit of life in the divine
worlds of existence, creating and ecstatic. Vibrate, O
light and lustre of life, in the heart core of the sacred
soul. Abiding in the heart core of the soul, vibrant loud
and bold, energising and illuminating, meditated and
realised by devout people, rise to the sun in the highest
regions of the universe where you illuminate the sun,
the dawns and the days.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 279




[Names: Adribhih, Tvam]
O Soma, spirit of life realised by veteran saints,
you flow and vibrate in the sacred heart. Indu, O spirit
of light divine, abiding in the heart core of the soul, be
the all watching illuminator and unfailing guardian of
humanity. O Soma, spirit of protective life and light of
the world, open the secret treasures of knowledge and
vision for the lovers of life and the piety of yajna.






O Soma, pure and purifying dynamic spirit of
the world of existence, men of noble thought, will and
action, veteran saints, seekers of divine favour and
protection adore and exalt you. Indu, O spirit of life
and light higher than highest regions of light, exalted
and glorified in purity by all sages of the world of
wisdom, the imaginative seeker of divinity attains to
you by his flights of meditation.









[Names: Avye, Apamupasthe]
Seven faculties of the soul, i.e., five senses, mind
and intellect, and seven metres of the Vedic voice exult
in the presence of Hari, divine dispeller of darkness and
want, pure, purifying and streaming forth in waves in
the heart of the chosen and protected soul of the devotee.
Holy men and veteran sages and scholars delight and
adore the omniscient all watching Soma at the closest
in their actions at the yajnic level of universal truth and
observance of divine law.






Indu, soma spirit of life and light of the world,
pure and purifying, overcomes all adversaries, clearing
all paths of life, making them simple for the man of
self-sacrifice for social and creative purposes. Revealing
its own real form in its original purity, the refulgent and
omniscient lord goes forward to the chosen soul, bright
as a flash of light.





[Names: Asascatah, Ksipo]
Those ceaseless, overflowing, bright and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 281


extensive showers of adoration in love and homage
flowing in a hundred streams reach beatific Soma, light
of life. Holy vibrations of mind in faith exalt the lord
wrapped in sun-rays abiding in the third and highest
region over the bright heaven and enshrine it in the soul.






[Names: Tavemah, Athedam]
These people, these birds and beasts, all these
worlds of existence, are yours, born of your divine
creative power, the original divine seed. You shine and
rule over this entire world of existence. And O Spirit
pure and purifying and omnipresent, this entire universe
is under your control. Indu, O light of life and life of
the world, you are the only, first, original and eternal
cause, foundation and sustainer of the world order.






[Names: Jabhrise, Suryah]
You are the original infinite womb of life in
existence and the ultimate haven, absolute master of
the entire universe, O poet creator. Within you and in
your order of Dharma are contained and sustained all




the five dimensions of existence, material, psychic,
spiritual, temporal and spatial. You hold and sustain the
heaven and earth, absolutely, and, O lord immaculate,
purifying and vibrant, the stars are but reflections of






In this holy order of existence governed by the
law of divinity, O Soma, light of life immaculate, your
presence emanates from every particle of the divine
elements of Prakrti, from all the divine regions of the
universe in balanced motion, and the same presence is
distilled in purity by the wise for noble humanity. The
first vibrant lovers of divinity perceive and realise this
presence at the dawn of creation. From you the entire
worlds of existence emerge and unto you they all return.





[Names: Anu]
The Absolute divine, Shabda Brahma, emerges
roaring with a bang, AUM, goes forward creating and
sounding over and across the imperishable world of his


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 283


desire, potent in creative showers, and transcends his
own creation. The same all potent and overflowing
presence, blissful, projecting all and withdrawing all,
roars loud and bold in moments of time and acts of love,
desire and worshipful creations. That do the wise sages,
loving and worshipful, adore and exalt in prayer. The
wise and vibrant all love and adore the admirable
presence living and breathing in the entire world of






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas, Nayannrtasya, Siso]
That Soma, creative Spirit of the universe,
wrapped in the light of his own refulgence, radiating
by the rays of the sun, weaving and expanding the three
dimensional web of existence as he intends and plans,
inducting the newest and latest designs of the laws of
cosmic evolution as father generator of successive
generations, radiates and moves to the creative vedi of







Ruler and controller of the cosmic streams of
evolution, lord of the light of heaven, moves and flows
on loud and bold by the paths of cosmic law in a
thousand streams and showers of new life. The creative
spirit dispelling want and darkness, pure and purifying,
goes on close by sustainers of life, creating new forms
and names of existence, and is celebrated as divine
creator, controller and director of the evolution of life.






[Names: Gabhastiputo]
O Soma, immaculate sanctifying spirit of cosmic
evolution, boundless flood of creative energy, by your
power to imperishable forms of existence. Exalted by
rays of the sun, realised by veteran saints and sages,
you rush on for great wealth and victory in the onward
progress of the world.







[Names: Isamurjam, Syeno, Indraya]
O Soma, spirit of the cosmos in evolutionary
flux, you move food and energy in the process of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 285


creative evolution, and like the speediest harbinger of
joy you settle in the heart core of devoted celebrants.
You are the self-existent joyous and inspiring source of
ecstasy for the soul, pillar of the light of heaven, most
excellent beyond comparison and all watching




[Names: Sapta, Apam]
rajase.


Seven sisterly perceptive, conceptive and
discriminative organs of sense and mind jointly confirm
the presence of Soma, all pervasive, ever new,
informing, victorious, universally wise, sustainer of
waters and earth, heavenly, and constant watchful
guardian of humanity. They perceive you, Soma, as you
pervade and illuminate all regions of the world.





[Names: Sana, Taste]
O Soma, Indu, lord of light and beauty of
peaceful life, you rule over all these regions of the world
harnessing dynamic forces of nature’s energy. May these




forces of yours produce and shower on us ghrta and
milk of honeyed sweetness and may the people abide
by your laws and discipline of life.






O Soma, you are constant watchful guardian of
humanity all round in all ways. O lord pure and
purifying, vigorous and generous, you cleanse us with
all those powers of yours. Pray purify and energise us
so that we may be prosperous with peaceful settlement
and golden graces of wealth, honour and excellence to
live happy in the regions of the world.






[Names: Govit]
O Soma, Indu, lord of life, beauty and grace,
flow, pure and purifying, vibrant omnipresent in all
regions of the world. You master and control the wealth
of lands and cows, light of knowledge and culture,
jewels of peace and settlement, and the beauty of gold
and grace. You are virile and command creative energy.
You are mighty brave, ruler over the world. We, vibrant


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 287


devotees, adore you with songs of praise and prayer,
and pray we may be close to you.






[Names: Unmadhva]
Soma of honey sweets of divinity helps desires
to be stabilised. The great ardent one wearing the cloak
of dynamics of creativity sojourns over spaces.
Refulgent ruler riding the purity chariot advances to
victory in elemental evolution and, wielding a thousand
arms of blazing light, wins high and imperishable
renown and adoration.






[Names: Sabhandana, Brahma]
It raises sun rays and moves our thanks and
adorations which bring up noble progeny, all health and
long age and abundant fulfilment of universal value day
and night. Indu, Spirit of light and joy of life, sung and
celebrated, give us the knowledge of divinity, wealth
of noble progeny, a home full of comfort and
achievement, and power and excellence of the world.








[Names: Samsam]
That Soma, dispeller of darkness in advance of
the day, blissful and glorious Spirit, inspiring and
exalting, illuminates with intelligence and enlightens
with consciousness day by day. It moves within, rousing
both men and women, high and low, general humanity
and leading lights, and inspires all to acquire, intensify
and maintain higher and higher intelligence and
awareness both admirable and divine day by day.






[Names: Anjate, Sindhorucchvase]
They realise it in the vibrant soul, diversify the
presence in various statements of definition and
communication, and integrate the experience and the
statements in the awareness of its absolute glory. They
love and adore the soul of cosmic yajna and worship it
with honey sweets of homage in acts of soma yajna. In
these ways of awareness, thoughts, words and deeds,
do lovers of the golden glory of soma realise and
integrate with the all watching universal power and
presence vaulting on top of their waves of consciousness


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 86 289
with incessant showers of bliss divine.






[Names: Vipascite, Ahirna]
O people, sing in honour of Soma, omniscient
spirit of life, pure and purifier that brings us food, energy,
honour and excellence in torrential streams. Knowing
that, man, free from want, suffering and small
mindedness, goes forward with life happy, youthful,
playful as a colt and generous as showers of rain, and at
the end of life goes on again, having left this body as a
snake casts off its old skin and goes free and youthful
again.






[Names: Agrego, Harirghrtasnuh, Jyotirathah]
open to all, maker of days and nights, omnipresent in
all regions of the universe, is adored and worshipped
by all. Soft and sweet, gracious and illuminative as ghrta,
destroyer of darkness and suffering, blissful of sight,
deep as space, riding the chariot of light, universal haven
of all, moves, initiates and consecrates us for the


achievement of honour, wealth and excellence.






[Names: Asarji, Amsum]
Soma, lord supreme, that creates, moves and
pervades all regions of the universe constituted of three
modes of Prakrti, sattva, rajas and tamas, is the pillar of
the highest heavens, up and wakeful, highest of reality
and inspires humanity with divine ecstasy. The wise love
and worship the self-manifestive, self-expressive,
vibrant Soma with songs of praise while the celebrants
adore the immaculate divinity with hymns of praise,
the holy Rks, and realise it.






[Names: Yadgobhirindo]
Indu, Spirit of life and light of the world, Soma,
pure and purifying, the streams of your creative power,
extremely subtle, virile and generous, move united at
the speed of thought when, between heaven and earth,
you vibrate and radiate, one with the rays of the sun,
and, inspiring, worshipped and consecrated within, you
abide in the heart core of the realised souls.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 87 291






[Names: Jahi, Atrino]
O Soma, Spirit of life and peace, Indu, light of
the world, all knowing master of yajnic action, radiate
and flow for us, lord adorable and all protective. Distil
the dearest honey sweets of life for the chosen soul and
bless. Destroy all ogres and demons who devour human
wealth. Blest with heroic courage and noble progeny,
we celebrate and glorify you with abundant praise in
the yajnic congregation.


Mandala 9/Sukta 87






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ushana, Kavya, Rshi]
O Soma, radiate, flow into the sanctity of the
heart and sink into the soul of the devotee. Adored by
the yajakas on the vedi, let the showers of joy stream
forth. The celebrants, exalting your power and presence,
invoke and invite you like energy itself with adorations
to the grass seats of the yajna.








[Names: Svayudhah, Pita]
Divine Indu, light of life, equipped with noble
arms, destroyer of scandal and malignity, protector of
yajna vedi against crookedness and intrigue, flows pure
and purifying. It is the generator and sustainer of the
divine powers of nature and humanity, perfect and expert
original agent of action, pillar of heaven and foundation
support of the earth.


[Names: Rsirviprah, Rbhurdhira]
Divine seer, vibrant and sagely power, potent
maker, stable of will and action, Soma is brilliant with


innate vision and wisdom. He alone knows what is the
hidden secret and mystery of these stars and planets.





[Names: Indra, Sahasrasah, Sasvattamam]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 87 293


Indra, omnipotent generous creator and ruler of
the universe, this Soma is your honeyed shower of
beneficence and grace which profusely flows over and
across the immaculate world of life. May this Soma,
giving a thousand boons in a hundred forms of infinite
values, a mighty victorious divine force, abide by us
and bless the universal vedi of human life with eternal






[Names: Pavitrebhih]
The soma showers heading to the earth, like
mighty warriors rushing to battle for victory and
immortal fame, bearing a thousand forms of strength,
sustenance and advancement, enshrined in purity of the
soul vibrate and flow for the holy seeker’s imperishable
attainment of immortality over the state of mortality.






[Names: Pari, Puruhuto]
O Soma, pure and purifying divine spirit of
joyous energy, invoked by all people, enshrined in the
heart core of the soul, bring all forms of life’s joy. Flow
for our battle of life for the victory of immortality over




the state of mortality and bring us food, wealth and
honour and excellence created by divine energy for the
soul’s sustenance on way to the final victory.






[Names: Somah, Tigme, Suro]
This Soma, pure and purifying creative energy
of divinity, vibrates in immaculate nature and flows in
the devotee’s pure heart like the mighty force of nature
itself, sharpening its rays of light for dispelling darkness
and negation. It goes on like a poised hero keen on his
determination for victory in the battle.






[Names: Divo, Somasya, Somas]
Indra, lord almighty, this Soma stream of your
power and bliss flows from the highest regions of
existence and, sustained somewhere in the vast expanse
of space, reaches the earthly regions of the universe
like lightning from the regions of light, thundering with
the clouds in the middle regions of the skies, seen and
heard on the earth.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 88 295






[Names: Purviriso, Siksa, Sacivastava]
Soma, O spirit of life and ecstasy of being, you
move together with Indra, the noble soul riding the body
chariot, you move together to the multitude of things
perceivable and radiate to the senses, mind and
intelligence of man, pure and purifying. O lord of all
power and knowledge, infinite giver of vast possibilities,
worshipped at the closest in the heart core of the soul,
bless us with those abundant and eternal gifts of food
and energy, honour, power and excellence and the
wisdom and vision of divinity which we need for


Mandala 9/Sukta 88

[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ushana, Kavya, Rshi, Ayam, Indra, Soma, Tvam, Somam, Soma]
Indra, O soul of life, O man, this soma spirit of
life and light, this beauty and joy is created for you; it
flows, illuminates and sanctifies, for you; take it, live
it, protect and advance it, don’t destroy it. Indeed you




create it, it is your choice to create it. And whatever
you do and choose to do is for your mutual joy and
indispensable togetherness. O man, enjoy the beauty
and vibrancy of life, maintain and advance it for peace
in mutual interest in a spirit of interdependence and
cooperation.






[Names: Saim, Puruni, Adim]
The great exalted soma spirit of life’s vibrancy,
like a great chariot of abundant comfort, capacity and
possibility is enjoined for achieving many kinds of
wealth, honours and excellences, and then all things
born, created and achieved, all high ups, giving showers
of joy in the exciting field of life honour, adore and
celebrate the soma spirit of life divine.






[Names: Vayurna, Visvavaro]
O Soma, vibrant spirit of life in ceaseless flow
like energy reaching the cherished goal, most blissful
like the Ashvins, circuitous currents of nature’s energy
in the exciting field of life, you are the treasure-hold of
world’s wealth of universal value, infinite giver of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 88 297


everything like the parental beneficence and
nourishment of divinity, and you move forward at the
speed of thought.






[Names: Indro, Paidvo]
O Soma, who are a great performer like Indra,
the omnipotent, you are the destroyer of demonic forces
and the breaker of their strongholds. Like lazer beams,
you are the killer of the malignant, the poisonous and
all the other negativities of the world.






[Names: Agnirna, Somah]
Created like fire by friction in the serious
business of life, Soma spontaneously creates mighty
motions of flow in the dynamics of existence. Like a
mighty man warrior roaring and resounding as a great
victor, soma goes forward to billows of the sea sending
out waves of purity and power all round.








[Names: Vrtha]
These soma currents of fluent joyous divine
energy pass through higher regions of purity and
refinement in the process of nature, and then these divine
and protected treasure-holds of joy like vapours of rain
bearing clouds, cleansed and sanctified, flow to the heart
core of the devoted celebrants in the same manner as
showers of rain from the clouds bless the earth and rivers
flow down to the deep sea.






[Names: Susmi, Sardho, Marutam, Maruta]
O mighty power of purity and action like the
force of winds, flow and purify, blow away the dead
leaves, dry up the roots of negativity so that the nation
of humanity may be clean and brilliant, free from malice,
hate and fear of misfortune. Be instant cleanser and
sanctifier of our will and understanding like holy waters
of grace and give us a noble mind. Be like yajna, giver
of a thousand noble powers and a victor in conflicts
within and outside.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 89 299




[Names: Rajno, Varunasya, Varunas, Sucis]
Bless us, O Soma, that we may observe the rules
and laws of your discipline, refulgent ruler and highest
justicier. Profound is your presence, infinite your space.
[Names: Immaculate]
expert guide, adorable, all bliss, beauty and pure joy.


Mandala 9/Sukta 89






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ushana, Kavya, Rshi, Sahasradharo, Somah, Soma]
That Soma, Spirit of life and life’s joy, burden
bearer and harbinger of living energy and divine vision
may, we pray, descend by auspicious paths of existence
and, like showers of divine bliss, pure and purifying,
bless us. May divine Soma of a thousand streams
proceed for our yajnic home, pervade over mother
earth’s lap of love and flourish in the deep clouds,
flowing streams, dense forests and the profuse greenery
of fields and gardens.







[Names: Raja, Apsu]
The ruler, mover and controller of the flow of
rivers, Soma takes on the forms of holy waters and the
laws of nature as helmsman of the ship of life with
honesty and naturalness. Inspired and moved by divine
imagination, open minded with the social dynamics of
humanity, he receives the blessings of heavenly father
and the father blesses the daughter earth. Thus does
Soma, the ruler, grow in stature and augment the earth.






[Names: Simham, Suro]
Honey sweets of heaven and enlightened
humanity come to the chief, valiant and benevolent
sustainer of this world, the mighty hero who longs to
be the first in the struggles of existence and who,
generous and vigorous ruler, protects and promotes its
lands and cows and its culture and traditions with his
radiance.






[Names: Madhuprstham, Svasara]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 89 301


The leader, pioneer and ruler, loving burden
bearer, awful for the awful, instant in action,
indefatigable in endeavour and sublime in achievement
of the goal, such as he is, all enlightened powers of the
world enjoin him to the highest and foremost position
in the vast and mighty moving chariot order of the world.
All dynamic, self-controlled autonomous forces and
sub-systems anoint and cosecrate the high soma power,
and all people joined to the centre of the order support,
strengthen and energise the dynamic, blazing, onrushing
leader, controller and ruler of the order.






[Names: Catasra]
Four eternal powers in existence, cooperative,
creative, and gracious, abiding and integrated with and
within the one, united, uniform and all integrative
systemic soma spirit of the cosmic, social and individual
order of life, pure, purifying and strengthening it with
obedience and sustaining energy, move to the central
master spirit, all time stay around and serve it for the
continuance of life in existence.


(In the cosmic system, the four are earth, water,
fire and air in time and space. In the social order, they
are the four classes: intellectuals, teachers and
researchers; rulers, administrators and organisers of
defence and law and order of peace and justice system;




producers and distributors in the economic system; and
the support services.) At the individual level, they are
mana (mind and senses), buddhi (intelligence and
discrimination), chitta (memory), and ahankara ([-






[Names: Vistambho, Asat]
Soma, cosmic spirit of peace and glory, is the
pillar of heaven, and it is the foundation support of the
earth. Indeed all stars and planets of the universe and
all people of the earth are in its hand for control and
sustenance. O man, may this soma spirit, this fount of
infinite glory and benevolence, commanding all forces
of the universe, the honey sweet vibrations and
radiations of it, be for the good and glory of the celebrant
humanity. Indeed they all flow for humanity.






[Names: Vanvannavato, Sagdhi, Puruscandra]
O Soma, lord of universal peace and bliss,
of the universe, destroyer of evil and darkness, let the
gifts of divinities flow to the yajna of humanity for our


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 90 303


worldly good and spiritual glory. Pray give us strength
so that we may be masters, protectors and promoters of
great and glorious wealth of excellence and
enlightenment and a brave virile and generous progeny.


Mandala 9/Sukta 90








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Rshi, Indram, Indra]
Inspiring the celebrants to action and
achievement, creator of heaven and earth, winning
strength and victory like a chariot warrior, moving to
the karma-yogi, sharpening and calibrating weapons of
warlike action, bearing all wealth and power of the world
in hands, may the spirit of peace and power come and






[Names: Vana]
The celebrants’ songs of adoration in honour of
the generous, virile and life bearing Soma, sustainer of
three worlds arise in homage of love and faith. Holding
precious treasures and powers of the world like Varuna,




all covering space and the ocean holding the deep seas,
the wielder of world jewels bestows gifts of choice on




[Names: Suragramah, Tigmayudhah]
Commander of a multitude of heroes, himself
brave in every way, patient and mighty, all time victor,
generous giver of all wealth, honour and excellence,
wielding weapons of instant light and fire power,
unconquerable in contests of values and destroyer of
the enemy in battles of arms, may we pray, flow and






[Names: Urugavyutir, Apah]
Bountiful bearer of the abundant world of
heaven and earth, creating and clearing the wide paths
of truth and rectitude, making them free from fear and
mutual conflict, enlightening us on the dynamics of
karma in the flow of existence, expanding heavenly
lights of the dawns of successive days, pray speak loud


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 90 305


and bold and clear and bring us great victories of
sustenance, power, honour and excellence in the struggle
for progress in a state of purity.






[Names: Matsi, Varunam, Varuna, Mitram, Mitra, Matsi, Sardho]
O Soma, universal spirit of life’s joy, Indu, spirit
of brilliancy, pure and purifying divinity, you inspire
and exhilarate Varuna, freedom of choice, law and
justice, advance and inspire Mitra, spirit of love,
friendship and cooperation, inspire and exhilarate Indra,
ruling powers of governance and defence, honour,
exhort and advance Vishnu, all prevailing powers of
intelligence and enlightenment, exhort and intensify the
force and powers of Maruts, stormy pioneers and
fighters, honour and advance brilliant scholars and
creative artists and technologists. O divine and brilliant
spirit of divinity, Indra, inspire and exhilarate the great
ruler Indra for the sake of high honour and excellence
of humanity.


TUE I







[Names: Indo]
Thus like a brilliant ruler, presiding power of
universal action and human endeavour, pray flow on
and purify us with your divine powers destroying all
evils and undesirables of the world. O lord of refulgence
and life’s joy, bless us with good health and long age
for the sake of holy speech and grateful songs of
adoration. O divinities of heaven and earth, pray bless
us with all time peace, progress and all round happiness
and well being.


Mandala 9/Sukta 91








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kashyapa, Maricha, Rshi, Asarji, Dasa]
As in a chariot race, so in the progressive
business of organised society, an eloquent speaker,
prominent thinker and manager of imaginative and
decisive first order is appointed to take on the business
of governance and administration. Ten cooperative
persons capable of independent thinking, working in
senses of perception and volition, in the house, assist
the leader on top of the protective social order of yajnic




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 91 307




[Names: Viti]
The high priest of the yajnic social order,
brilliant and benevolent, immortal soul, consecrated by
wisest of the brilliant people and the general community
and exalted by leading lights and ordinary mortals with
common voice, supportive actions and protective
thoughts and opinions, goes forward leading the yajnic
order for their common good.






[Names: Vrsa, Sahasramrkva]
Virile and generous Soma, leading power of the
yajnic order, pure and purifying, creative and brilliant,
goes forward for the abundant social order, roaring and
illuminating, and elevating the fertility and abundance
of the earth. Speaking and chanting a thousand holy
words, visionary of thought and communication, the
hero goes on by paths of love and non-violence, reaches
and opens the subtlest secrets and even breaks through
the atom.








[Names: Ruja, Vrscoparistat]
Indra, lord of power, break down the strongholds
of demonic destroyers. Pure, purifying and consecrated,
cover the forces of positive strength of creativity. Uproot
the saboteurs and the destroyers coming from above,
break with the bolt those who are far off or near within,






[Names: Purukrt, Purukso]
O lord of universal acceptance and adoration,
open the paths of advancement for the modern celebrant
as ever before and let the paths be constant as the ancient
ones. O lord of infinite action and munificent giver, let
us have those means, methods and weapons which are
of high uncounterable calibre over a vast effective area
of operation.





[Names: Suryam, Surya]
O Soma, spirit of peace and joy, pure, purifying


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 92 309


and thus adored and consecrated, bless us with the
abundance of earth, showers of the skies and
illuminations of the highest regions of light, wealth of
children and grand children. Give us peace and well
being, vast field of action for expansion, and brilliant
illuminations of knowledge and wisdom. And give us
the vision to see the light of the sun for all time.


Mandala 9/Sukta 92






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kashyapa, Maricha, Rshi, Pari, Apacchlokamindriyam]
Invoked and adored for the attainment of
fulfilment, inspired and pleased, may the divine
destroyer of suffering and frustration, unifying
omnipresence of divinity, radiate as joy and bless the
soul. Worshipped as pure presence, may the divine Spirit
come, acknowledge and receive my song of prayer and
exaltation, and bless the noble nature of humanity with
food and inspiration for the body and mind, and freedom
for the soul.








[Names: Accha, Sidan]
Soma, all watchful guardian of humanity and
omniscient creator, bearing the divine name and the
essential nature of divine bliss, radiates and vibrates
with joy in the pure heart core of the soul, abiding there
as chief high priest at the head of congregations at yajna,
and around him concentrate and join seven seers, that
is, five organs of perception, mind and will, and the
discriminative intelligence. (That personal yajna of the
individual and the joint yajna of society is the essential
seat of Soma.)






[Names: Somah, Bhuvad]
Soma, Spirit of divine intelligence, knowing all
ways of the earthly world, universal refulgent generous
giver, pure and purifying power, always moves and takes
its divine seat in the heart core of the soul and on the
yajnic grass of the vedi. Rejoicing in all intellectual and
poetic holy meets of the world and, inspiring the
constant spirit of steady wisdom and resolution, it joins
the five orders of universal humanity and exhorts them
together to move forward on the common way to




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 92 311




[Names: Tava, Dasa]
O Soma, vibrant omnipresent spirit of life, pure
and purifying, all those thirty three divinities of
existence, for sure, integrate in the mysterious depth of
your presence. Ten pranas, ten subtle and gross elements
of nature and seven mighty constant streams of existence
at the cosmic and microcosmic levels with their own
oblations serve, adore and glorify you on top of the
protected and protective world of existence.






[Names: Tannu, Jyotiryadahne]
True it is of Soma, pure and purifying, Truth
itself of Soma, wherein all basic causes of existence
converge, merge and integrate: Soma it is who created
the sun and light of knowledge for the day and
enlightenment, which protects the man of thought and
knowledge, which for the ignorant lost in darkness is
but a distant possibility or even a cause for collision.



samitiriyanah. somah punanah kalasan ayasit




Like a high priest going to a prosperous and
enlightened hall of yajna, and like a real kingly ruler
going to the assemblies of state, may Soma, pure and
purifying, consecrate the heart and soul of a dedicated
devotee and reign there as a mighty lion ruling
majestically over the forests.


Mandala 9/Sukta 93






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Nodha, Gautama, Rshi, Sakamukso, Harih, Surya]
Ten generous, agile, spontaneous and simultane-
ous sister faculties of the self-controlled, self-established
yogi together concentrate, communicate and glorify
Hari, Soma spirit of divine joy that eliminates want and
suffering, and the Spirit, pervading the vibrations of
divinity, the light born of the sun, radiates like a constant
wave, reaches and settles in the heart core of the blessed
soul, the seat of divinity. (The faculties are faculties of
perception, thought and will which normally wander
over the world of outside reality but which are
controlled, concentrated and inverted in meditation and
focussed on the presence of divinity within, and then
the presence reveals itself in all its refulgent glory.)




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 93 313




[Names: Maryo, Puruvaro]
Like a child fulfilled and secure with mother’s
and grandmother’s love, the loving Soma, generous
treasure home of universal gifts of life, fulfils the
celebrant with showers of pranic energy and, like a lover
meeting his lady love, blesses his consecrated heart, and
therein vibrates with the dedicated soul with divine
radiations of light in thought, word and deed.






[Names: Murdhanam, Srinanti]
Soma, spirit of blessed light and omniscient
power, essence of self-refulgent beauty, fills the
inviolable receptacles of nature with milky nourishment
which the man of enlightenment, joining the milky flow,
enjoys. The radiations of light, currents of energy and
the words of wisdom all shine and elevate the soul in
all situations of life with spiritual food as they shower
him with the wealth and honours of immaculate order.








Lord of lght and love, refulgent and
illuminative, pure, purifying and vibrating with the
divinities of nature and humanity, loving and
commanding dynamic wealth and virtues of existence,
give us the wealth and virtues of the world and open
the paths of fast, penetrative, brilliant and all sustaining
intelligence and will so that we may achieve the gifts of
wealth, honour and excellence without delay or






Indu, divine spirit of beauty, brilliance and
benevolence, pure and purifying presence, give us the
wealth and power of leading lights and noble progeny
worthy of the brave, blest with universal beauty and
grace flowing in at the spiral speed of winds. O Spirit
of life, bless the celebrant with good health and long
age, and in the morning may the divine light and spirit
of intelligence and will radiate to us.


Mandala 9/Sukta 94


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kanva, Ghaura, Rshi]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 94 315


As people exert themselves for the achievement
of light and brilliance and when their mind, thoughts
and higher intelligence concentrate on this Soma, divine
spirit of peace and inspiring brilliance, for illumination,
then the Soma spirit, choosing, loving and enlightening
the intelligence, thought and creativity of the devotee,
radiates into the mind and spirit of the devotee for the
augmentation and elevation of the thought, imagination
and sensibility of the celebrant.






[Names: Dvita, Dhiyah]
For the man of divine vision the worlds of
existence extend revealing the twofold, physical and
spiritual, grandeur of the treasure-hold of immortal
Soma. Like cows lowing in their own stall, the songs of
divine Veda, inspiring and expanding in their own abode
of the mind and nature, resound and celebrate the
refulgent Indu, Soma, divine spirit of beauty, peace,
power and bliss.






[Names: Pari, Devesu, Purubhusu]
Soma, omniscient poetic spirit of the universe,
which holds and brings us all celebrated beauties of the




world and, as the omnipotent hero and master of the
universal chariot, bears and sustains all regions of the
universe, is the living glory in all divinities,
magnificence for mortal humanity, wealth for the expert
artist and ever new life in all forms of existence.





[Names: Sriye, Sriya, Sriyam]
Soma manifests in glory for the grace and
magnificence of the world, moves simultaneously,
omnipresent, for glory and bears beauty and grace,
health and age for the celebrants. The yajakas wearing
vestments of immortality, with their oblations into the
fire of measured law and movement, join together in
truth and achieve their immortal meaning and purpose
in the battle of life.





[Names: Isam, Visvani, Satrun]
O Soma, spirit of divine peace and power, move
and bring us food, energy and excellence, move and
bring movement and progress, lands, cows and light of
knowledge. Make these expansive and rising. Give joy


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 95 317


and fulfilment to the noble sages, scholars and generous
people. You are the power and courage of forbearance.
O pure and purifying power, we pray and ask for these
of you. You prevent and cast off the enemies and
negative forces of life.


Mandala 9/Sukta 95






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Praskanva, Kanva, Rshi, Kanikranti, Nrbhiryatah]
Soma, divine spirit blithe and blissful, saviour
and sustainer, invoked in meditation, abiding in the heart
core of the soul, pure and purifying, vibrates loud and
bold. Served and adored and celebrated by devotees, it
renders the senses, mind and intelligence pure and
immaculate and then it gives rise to spontaneous songs
of praise offered with complete surrender and self-
sacrifice.


Vara nu




[Names: Harih, Devo]
Soma, saviour and sustainer of life, invoked and




self-manifested, reveals and proclaims aloud the divine
voice of the path to eternal truth guiding listeners to the
shores of Infinity like a pilot rowing man to the sea
shore. That same spirit, further, reveals the names,
definitions, secrets and mysteries of existences in the
meditative yajnic mind for expression and
communication on the vedi.






[Names: Apamivedurmayastarturanah, Namasyantirupa, Somamaccha]
Like waves of the sea pressing onward with
force and speed, the songs of adoration rise and radiate
with love to Soma. Expressive of ardent love, faith and
reverence, they reach and join the divine presence which
too is equally ardent and anxious to receive them.






[Names: Varunam, Varuna]
That Soma spirit of existence, adored and
exalted by devotees like the supreme presence on top
of existence, subtlest and self-refulgent, virile and
generous, abiding over clouds and mountains and
reflected in divine voices, that same loving and beloved


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 319


spirited and divinity, leading lights of humanity adore,
join and milk forth for the nectar of life. The Spirit of
three worlds over three times bears and sustains the law,
justice and Dharma in space.






[Names: Isyan, Indrasca]
Indu, spirit of peace, light and life of the world,
lover of songs of adoration, pure and purifying, we pray
you and Indra, omnipotent ruler, like prompter of the
priest, abiding both together, give us the vision and
wisdom of divinity for our good so that we may be
masters of that courage, endurance and fighting force
which is worthy of the brave.


Mandala 9/Sukta 96






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Pratardana, Daivodasi, Rshi, Bhadran, Indra]
Soma, heroic brave leader, warrior and
commander, marches at the head of chariots, ardently
ambitious for positive gains for the commonalty, his
army follows with joyous enthusiasm. Thus nobly




fulfilling the divine call of Indra for the advancement
and excellence of the friends of humanity, Soma takes
on the robe and role of peace and protection and the
arms for the defence of humanity.






[Names: Samasya, Indrasya, Indras]
Active and self-sacrificing people of society
with fast driving forces and incessant inputs of men,
materials and committed loyalties empower the chariot
of this leader of humanity. Also, the ruling Indra’s friend,
a sagely scholar, comes up and joins the chariot, and
with him Soma goes forward well with proper
understanding, principles and policies.






[Names: Sano, Krnvannapo, Indrapanah, Indrapana]
O divine Soma, you are the protector of the
honour and excellence of humanity, indeed of the very
soul of life. Come and bless our great and beautiful
social yajna in honour of divinities, initiating,
stimulating and exciting noble thoughts and actions,
blessing this earth from heaven and the vast spaces with
showers of divine favours of grace, purifying us and
giving us fulfilment of our highest order of desire and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 321






[Names: Ajitaye, Tadusanti]
O pure and purifying Soma, peace and power
of divinity, come, purify and strengthen us against
slavery and injury to our honour and excellence, come
for our well being and universal welfare of high order.
That gift of honour, freedom and welfare, all these
friendly communities of the world love and pray for,
that same I love, and that we all pray and strive for.




2: Somah pavate janita matinam janita divo janita


[Names: Janitagnerjanita, Suryasya, Suryas]
Soma, spirit of divine peace, power and
generous creativity, flows and purifies universally. It is
generator of heavens, maker of the earth and creator of
the nobilities of sagely wisdom, generator of fire, maker
of the stars, manifester of its own omnipotence, and
manifester of the omnipresence of its own self in


VALUE






[Names: Brahma, Syeno, Somah]
The Soma Spirit is Brahma, supreme over
divinities, highest of the poets, divine seer among the
wise, lion among the strongest animals, eagle among
the birds of power, sword among the killers and, roaring
and thundering, it goes forward, excels all others, and
blesses the pure heart core of the soul.






[Names: Pravivipadvaca, Antah]
Soma stirs and inspires the flow of thought into
speech as the sea stirs and rolls the waves of the flood.
Pure and purifying, it inspires imagination, poetry and
adoration. Pervading all within and watching, it abides
in the closest intimacies of all yajna within and without
and, potent as it is, knowing every thing, it energises all
organs of thought and sense.







[Names: Indrayendo]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 323


Soma is inspiration, excitement and ecstasy.
Itself unmoved, it destroys negativities in the yajnic
battles of life. Power and generative vigour of a thousand
sort, pray move and energise all power, energy and
enthusiasm of life. Pure and purifying, O spirit of beauty,
peace and power, thinker and imaginative creator,
inspiring and energising all senses and imagination, pray
let the waves of ecstasy roll and flow for Indra, spirit,
honour and excellence of life for humanity.






[Names: Pari, Indraya, Sahasradharah]
Soma, spirit of peace, beauty and joy, dearest
favourite of all, inspirer and worshipped of divinities
and nobilities, beatific shower of joy in a thousand
streams, commanding a hundred forms and orders of
energy and power, all bliss at heart, radiates like the
spirit of energy itself, moves, vibrates and blesses the
pure heart core of the soul for its joy, honour and







[Names: Abhisastipa]
Soma, eternal spirit, master sustainer of the
world and its wealth, universally manifestive, adored
and exalted, distilled in the cloud and envisioned in
thought and action, protector from evil and calumny,
ruler and sustainer of the universe, knower and revealer
of the paths to divinity is realised in purity and illumined
in spiritual yajna of meditation for the attainment of the
vision of eternity.






[Names: Tvaya, Vanvann]
O Soma, pure and purifying spirit of the world,
itis only by your grace that our forefathers of yore all
time performed their acts of Dharma in life. Unhurt,
unmoved and unchallenged, pray open up all inhibiting
limitations and raise us to honour, excellence and glory
with brave heroes and dynamic forces of progress and






[Names: Yathapavatha]
As ever before for all time immemorial you
vibrate, flow and purify humanity for their good, bearing
good health and happy age, destroying negativities and
enmities, knowing the wealth we need and bearing the


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 325


wealth unbounded with honour and excellences of life
and holy fragrances of the yajna of living, so now too,
pray, vibrate, flow and purify, bearing wealth, honour
and excellence, vest in the spirit of humanity and in
human glory, and create the weapons of defence against
the onslaughts of conflict and contradictions.






[Names: Pavasva]
Flow, purify and bless, O Soma, rich in the
honey sweets of life, high priest of cosmic yajna,
reflecting in the cosmic processes of evolution on top
of protective nature. Flow and abide in the depth of
holy hearts deep in love and faith divine, O spirit most
exhilarating, ecstatic and infinite source of fulfilment
for Indra, potent vibrant soul, lover of divine glory.






[Names: Vrstim]
O lord of thousandfold speed, power and victory,
harbinger of a hundred showers of bliss, bring us
showers of heavenly light for our yajnic worship of
divinity. Loving and abiding in the holy hearts of




celebrants, let streams of good health and joyous age
flow to us with infinite oceans of love and bliss and
showers of the light of knowledge.






[Names: Esasya, Payo]
This, the lord Soma, celebrated and exalted by
devotees and wise sages, overcomes contradictions and
negativities like a victor war horse trampling the
enemies. It is delicious like the milk of the inviolable
cow, sure guide like a wide path on earth, and unfailing
carrier and saviour like a trained courser for the






[Names: Svayudhah, Sravasya, Vayumabhi]
Wielding powers of law and justice, exalted by
lovers and celebrants, O Name and Word beatific, come
and bless the secret cave of the heart. O Soma, like an
instant power of transportive ecstasy, take us to the
strength and speed of success and fulfilment, lead us to
honour and fame of excellence, take us to the vibrancy
of the winds and, O lord of light and generosity, give us
illuminative knowledge and perceptive and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 327






[Names: Sisum, Kavir, Maruto]
Dedicated celebrants perceive the presence
beatific, manifested and expansive in the experience of
and distil it in the spirit and adore it in song. As winds
in storm raise a spark to blazing fire, bands of admirers
celebrate it in its native glory. Omnipresent all-watching
sagely divine, exalted to its omniscience and
omnipotence in human consciousness by the music of
the poetic voice, Soma, divine presence, radiates into
the pure human heart loud and bold and transcends the
soul to infinite space.






[Names: Rsimana, Trttyam]
Soma is the presence that is the universal seer
and poetic creator, maker of poets, exalted by sages,
shower streams of bliss, adored a thousand ways for
infinite power and glory, ultimate love and desire of
poets, awful refulgence radiating to the third blazing
space beyond the earthly and paradisal regions of life,
the presence that rules and illuminates the heart and




soul beyond the state of existential involvement, the
one loving, blessing, beatific ultimate object of
adoration and worship.






[Names: Camusacchyenah, Apamurmim]
Pervading every form of life and nature,
adorable supreme Soma presence of divinity, abiding
with stars and planets in motion, bearing infinite powers,
vibrating with the waves of nature’s dynamics, vesting
the cosmic structure, transcends to the fourth state of
absolute bliss. Only the mighty sage speaks of the






[Names: Maryo, Vrseva]
Radiant and adorable Soma wearing the
manifestive cosmic form like the mortal human wearing
the body form, moving fast like radiations of light for
the realisation of world’s wealth by pervading, vibrating
like a mighty power across the cosmic structure as a
virile leader, fills the skies between earth and heaven
and abides there proclaiming its presence loud and bold.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 96 329






[Names: Pavasvendo, Krilancamvora, Indram]
O spirit of light divine, beauty and peace, flow,
pure and purifying, adored and exalted by great souls,
radiate bright and bold and self-proclaimed, and seep
into the heart core of chosen souls. Come playing over
and between heaven and earth, enter pure and exalted,
and may your exalting spirit of ecstasy exhilarate and
exalt the soul and its glory in the world of existence.






[Names: Prasya, Sama]
The streams of this Soma joy flow vaulting full,
and the spirit adorned by songs of celebration seeps
into the heart core of chosen souls. Thus does Soma,
omniscient, goes forward with humanity proclaiming
its presence and loving like a twin brother and sister.








[Names: Apaghnannesi, Satrun, Sidan, Sakuno]
O spirit pure and purifying, you go forward
bright and blissful, loving life, casting off and destroying
enemy forces of negation and contradiction against life,
moving like a lover cleansed by fire to meet his lady
love, sitting in the hearts of lovers and admirers, flying
like the eagle bird to its nest, and pure, exalted and
edifying, abiding in the heart core of the celebrants.






[Names: Hariranitah, Puruvaro]
The rays of your light and glory, O Soma, spirit
pure, purifying and radiating, replete with life energy
streaming forth, rain in showers like the love of a
youthful mother. The divine spirit, destroyer of want
and suffering, love and choice of all humanity, manifests
bright and beautiful in the dynamics of nature and in
the heart and actions of the lovers of divinity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 97











[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Indrapramati, Vasishtha, Vrshagana, Manyu, Vasishtha, Upamanyu, Vyaghrapada, Vasishtha, Shakti, Karnashrut, Vasishtha, Mrlika, Vasukra, Vasishtha, Parashara, Shaktya, Kutsa, Angirasa, Rshis]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 331




[Names: Asya, Sutah]
Divine Soma, moved and energised by the surge
of golden impulse, joins its potency with the senses and
mind, and thus seasoned and empowered, vibrant with
vitality, it moves to the holiness of the heart like a
sanative, or as a priest going to 8 yajnic enclosure, seat
and anchor of sensitive visionary powers of humanity.






[Names: Bhadra, Samsan]
O holy Soma power, pure, purified and
purifying, wearing vestments of a fighting force, great
and creative, expressive loud and bold, come, expand
and resound between heaven and earth over all things
material and spiritual, ever watchful, ever awake, in the
service of divinities in yajna.



[Names: Samu]
O Soma spirit of power and poetic creativity,




exalted on top of protection, defence and advancement,
honoured of the honourable, of the earth earthy for our
sake, shine and resound across the spaces. O divinities,
pray protect and promote us with all round well being
and good fortune for all time.






[Names: Svaduh]
Sing and celebrate, let us honour the divinities
and exhort Soma for great victory and achievement of
wealth, honour and excellence. Sweet and lovable, Soma
rises to the protective position of choice and, loving
the divinities, it abides in the right position at the centre.






[Names: Indurdevanamupa, Nrbhih, Anu, Indram, Indra]
Indu, Soma spirit of light and life, coming close
to friendship of the divinities, purifies and flows in a
thousand streams for the joy of humanity. Adored by
leading lights, it rises to the top of honour and glory in
keeping with its position and reaches Indra, the ruling
soul, for the great good fortune of society.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 333




[Names: Stotre, Devairyahi]
O Hari, Soma spirit destroyer of suffering, flow
pure and purifying for the achievement of wealth,
honour and excellence when songs are sung and yajna
is performed. O Soma, may your vigour and ecstasy
flow to Indra, the ruling soul, for the sake of victory
and human glory. May your power and potential come
well with the light and vigour of divinities by the chariot
of glory and may all the divinities protect and promote
us with all round well being and good fortune for all
time.






[Names: Mahivratah]
The brilliant poet, singing like an inspired fiery
power divine, reveals the origin of nature’s divinities
and the rise of human brilliancies. Great is his
commitment, inviolable his discipline, bonded is he with
purity as a brother, having chosen light of the sun and
shower of clouds for his element, and he goes forward
proclaiming the message of his vision by the paths of








[Names: Angusyam]
Like hansa birds of discriminative taste by
instinct, judicious poets and scholars spontaneously
come home to passion and ardour of thought and
imagination free from fear and violence and, together
in unison as a band of friends, generous and mighty of
power and understanding, sing and celebrate the
adorable, pure and purifying unforgettable Soma source
of beauty, music and poetry.






[Names: Parinasam]
That Soma source of beauty, music and poetry
is ever dynamic spontaneously playing the sportive
game. The power, force and velocity of that presence,
the mind and senses do not comprehend. The spirit of
ultimate penetrative and pervasive power reflects
infinite possibilities, the beatific saviour manifests its
omnipotence day and night.







[Names: Indurvaji, Somah, Hanti]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 335


Indu, brilliant Soma, energetic and victorious,
pure and purifying, vibrant and dynamic, creating
strength, patience and endurance for the soul’s joy, is
ever on the move. It destroys evil, prevents negativities
and opposition and casts them far off, and, giving
wealth, honour and excellence of the best order of our
choice, rules as the brilliant creator, controller and
dispenser of strength, courage, power and life saving
vitality in existence.






[Names: Adha, Indurindrasya]
And by streams of honey shower, joining
spiritual awareness, overflowing the heart cave, Soma,
distilled from the adamantine practice of meditative self-
control, flows pure, purifying, wholly fulfilling. The
brilliant divine spirit of joy cherishing friendly
communion with Indra, the Soul, is the ecstasy meant
for the joyous fulfilment of the soul.







[Names: Indur]
To all dear loving ones flows divine and brilliant
Soma, pure, purifying and fulfilling the noble sages with




its nectar of ecstasy. May the brilliant joyous divinity,
pervading and shining with virtues according to time
and season, purify and fulfill us on top of this protective
world of ten senses, ten pranas and ten gross and subtle






[Names: Vrsa, Sono, Indrasyeva]
Generous, joyous and refulgent Soma spirit
divine pervades the stars and planets and vibrates in
the sun rays, making the heaven and earth resound. It is
the very voice of Indra, lord omnipotent, heard in the
dynamics of existence, awakening the spirit, and it
inspires this holy speech to burst forth in adoration.






[Names: Rasdayyah, Pavamanah, Indraya]
O Soma, stream of divine joy exalted with songs
of praise, inspiring honey sweets of vital growth and
enlightenment, you go forward, pure and purifying, and
release continuous showers of ecstasy for the soul for
its grandeur and glory when you are honoured and
adored by the celebrants.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 337






[Names: Pari]
Thus vibrate and flow on, spirit of ecstasy, for
joy, bending and breaking the clouds which hold up the
rain and radiations of light, and, bearing bright light
and illuminative varieties of knowledge, continue to
flow on, O Soma, generous and exalted presence, lover
of showers and light and bearer of the bolt of power
and force to strike down the negativities.






[Names: Justvi, Ghaneva]
Indu, refulgent Soma, happy and kind, flow and
purify us, creating simple and straight paths of living in
the wide world and giving us honest and virtuous wealth
and honours of our choice. Destroying all evils of the
world as thunder of the clouds, let ceaseless streams of
joy flow for us and protect us on top of the protective








[Names: Vrstim, Stukeva, Vayun, Vayu]
dynamic and universal, productive and illuminative,
peace giving and abundantly generous. Selecting and
favouring like loved children these friendly and
brotherly people here and elsewhere, vibrant as winds,
pray inspire and energise them to live a full joyous life.






[Names: Granthim, Atyo]
O Soma, pure, purifying and refulgent divinity,
liberate the man in chains, breaking the bond as you
untie a tough knot. Make the paths of life simple and
straight, let the strength be natural and sincere, free from
guile. Spirit of divinity, you roar as thunder, you are
saviour and sustainer, creator and maker of the mortal
humanity, and you are the sole master of the universe,
your home.






[Names: Justo, Sahasradharah]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 339


O Soma, refulgent spirit of divinity, lover of joy
and loved for the sake of joy, in yajna, pray flow, inspire
and energise us on top of safety, security and prosperity
with incessant stream of joy. Undaunted and invincible,
let a thousand streams of ecstasy flow, let the breeze of
fragrance blow, in the battle for victory worthy of brave






[Names: Arasmano]
Soma streams of ecstasy, unfettered, unbound,
uninvolved, flow free like radiations of energy,
refulgent, pure and consecrated, inspiring and energising
in the yajnic battle of life. Let the leading lights of
humanity advance and join the yajna to drink of the
nectar.






[Names: Somo]
Thus O self-refulgent Indu, spirit of divine
peace, power, beauty and prosperity, let there be a
shower of light and knowledge on us in yajna. Let
showers of rain fill our tanks, lakes and rivers and




fructify our fields and gardens. May Soma give us
wealth, honour and excellence of the highest order of
our choice with mighty brave heroes.






[Names: Taksadyadi, Adimayan]
If the language of the mind in words of love of
the vibrant sage of worshipful devotion, established in
the beauty and splendour of the supreme spirit and law
of the universe, were to visualise the picture-presence
of Soma, ultimate sustenance of life, then all
perceptions, thoughts and imaginations, loving and
faithful, would move and concentrate into that presence
of the choicest, most loved and beatific master vibrating
in the heart core of the soul.






[Names: Dharma]
Most charitable giver, heavenly, promoter of
liberal philanthropists, self-refulgent inspirer of noble
intelligence, Soma purifies and enhances the rectitude
of the enlightened. Being the sustainer of Dharma,
master ruler of all powers and forces of the universe,
the mighty Soma sustains the world by the dynamics of


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 341


the ten gross and subtle elements of nature.






[Names: Pavitrebhih, Dvita]
Flowing and purifying by its pervasive presence
of sanctity, all watching Soma is the ruler of all divine
forces of both nature and humanity. Controller of both
nature and humanity, presiding over the dynamics of
universal law, bearing and sustaining the cosmos,
brilliant and beatific, Soma is the master, ruler and
dispenser of all wealth, honours and excellence of the






[Names: Arvan, Sravase]
Vibrate and flow for the good of Indra, the soul
in search of power, and for Vayu, the vibrant seeker of
Karma, radiating like energy itself for the sake of honour
and success in yajna. O Soma, knowing and
commanding wealth and power, pure and purifying, be
the giver of a thousand powers of sustenance, energy
and enlightenment for us.








[Names: Devavyo, Ayajyavah]
May showers of the power and grace of Soma,
generous to the divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity, served, adored and sanctifying, bless our
peaceful home with noble heroes of action. Creative
they are by nature’s yajna, overflowing with universal
light and intelligence like yajakas in the regions of the
sun where universal Soma yajna is going on, and they
are the most inspiring and most beatific.






[Names: Mahasciddhi]
O self-refulgent Soma, sanctifier and giver of
fulfilment to the holy and nobly brave in yajna, flow,
inspire and energise us for the achievement of a great
organised social order. Pure and purifying power of
divinity, great we shall be, for sure, nobly inspired and
committed to the good in the battle of life. Make the
earth and the global environment, heavens and the skies,
noble, good and creative as ahome good for the progress
of life.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 343






[Names: Asvo, Arvacinaih]
Roaring as thunder and lightning, awful as a
lion, faster than mind, enjoining and inspiring the
generous and the brave, O lord self-refulgent and
gracious, come by the latest modern paths which are
simple, natural and true, and purify, inspire and energise
the noble power and virtue of our mind and soul.






[Names: Satam, Indo]
Hundred streams of soma joy born of divinity
flow for the divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity. A thousand ways poets and sages sing of them,
adore and exalt them. O self-refulgent lord of bliss and
generosity, let the holiest wealth and virtue flow from
the light of divinity. You alone are the eternal, original
and prime giver of the great wealth, honour and
excellence of life.








[Names: Divo, Mitram, Mitra, Piturna]
As the rays of day light radiate from the sun, as
a good ruler does not hurt the people and treats them as
friends, as the son tries by yajnic actions to win the
father’s love and favour, 80 O Soma, come to bless this
people and assure their victory and progress.






[Names: Prate, Suryam, Surya]
O Soma, the honeyed showers of your gifts
radiate and flow when you, with your power and purity,
move to your favourite choices well protective and well
protected. Indeed, pure and purifying, you move and
bless the treasure homes of light, and, self-manifesting
and generative, you vest the sun with the light that
illuminates the days.







[Names: Kanikradadanu]
Loud and bold you reveal the path of truth and
rectitude and define the eternal law of existence. Self-
refulgent, immaculate and omnipotent, you shine in


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 345


glory, the very abode of immortality. You vibrate, radiate
and sanctify for the sake of Indra, the soul of the karma-
yogi, and for the conscience of humanity, inspiring the
poets and sages with vision and imagination and the
visionary scientists with thought to burst forth in
spontaneous songs of adoration, you being the treasure-
hold of ecstasy, indeed ecstasy itself.






[Names: Divyah, Endo, Suryasyopa]
Heavenly light, super-abundant spirit of peace,
protection and divine bliss, O Soma, reveal yourself,
speak and shine, and let the rising streams of your
presence flow into our divine life-yajna with higher and
higher potential. O Spirit of peace and protection, bliss
and beauty, consecrate this heart-core of the soul open
to Soma, awaiting, come resounding, and let the
radiations of refulgent divinity illuminate and sanctify
us.





[Names: Gavo, Somam]
Soma inspires three orders of speech: practical




speech that carries on the daily business of life, the
thought that conceives of the vibrant immanent divine
presence, and the deeper language of silence which is
the mode of transcendent reality. The language
operations of daily business move in search of the master
source of world mystery as in science and philosophy,
and the speech of thought and imagination and of love
and worship moves to the presence of peace and bliss,
Soma. (The three speeches in Vedic language are Ida,
Sarasvati, and Mahi or Bharati as described in Rgveda
1, 13, 9 and Yajurveda 21, 19. Explained another way
these are the language of the Rks or knowledge, Yajus
or karma, and Samans or worship.)






Dynamic and creative languages of love and
faith celebrate Soma, the languages of scholars
enquiring into reality with thought and analysis
concentrate on Soma. It is Soma which, distilled from
observation and experience and crystallised in nature
and function, is sought to be comprehended or
apprehended in the language medium. Indeed all speech
media of description, definition, comprehension,
apprehension, celebration or adoration arise from Soma
and merge into Soma.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 347


Feat ३६ ul




[Names: Indrama]
Thus, O Soma, served, adored and celebrated
with your power and purity, let your presence radiate
and purify us for our good and all round well being.
Come and settle in the soul with the mighty voice of
divinity. Generate and exalt the awareness and speech
of vision and celebration communicative of high divine
realisation.







[Names: Sapanti, Ever]
purifying and celebrated, Soma abides in the heart core
of the visionary sages, and him, loving yajakas dedicated
to yajna of love and non-violence, noble of action
commanding their body chariot of personality, together
serve, adore and worship with high love and devotion
of their mind and soul.








[Names: Priya]
That Soma, pure and purifying, creator and
sustainer, pervades and fills the heaven and earth as it
abides in the sun and destroys darkness and ignorance.
Dearer than dear are its powers for our protection for
sure. May Soma give us wealth, honour and excellence
as one would give wealth to the artist.






[Names: Savardhita, Yena]
Soma, exalted and exalting, pure and purifying,
virile and generous, may, we pray, protect and promote
us with the light of knowledge by which our forefathers,
knowing the meaning and purpose of life step by step
with a passionate desire for knowledge, rising to the
sun, attained to the ultimate freedom and bliss of heaven.






[Names: Akrantsamudrah]
Soma, prime cause of the world of existence,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 349


unfathomable as ocean, taking on by itself countless
causes of existence in the vast vault of space and time,
roaring and generating the evolving stars, planets and
forms of life, is the ruling power of the universe. Potent
and generous, infinite, creative and generative, refulgent
Soma pervades the immaculate, sacred and protective
universe and on top of it expands it and transcends.






[Names: Mahat, Adadhadindre]
Soma, potent absolute, generated the Mahat
mode of Prakrti, Mother Nature, which is the womb of
all elements, energies and forms of existence and which
comprehends all perceptive, intelligential and psychic
powers as well. And then the creative-generative lord
of evolutionary action, Soma, vested lustre and energy
in Indra, the soul, and, lord of light as it is, Soma vested
light in the sun.





[Names: Matsi, Varuna, Vayumistaye, Vayumistay, Matsi, Marutam, Maruta]
O self-refulgent Soma, you energise the Vayu
for its windy fulfilment and accomplishment of the
purpose of creative evolution and, purifying and




sanctifying as you are, you energise and fulfil the
centripetal and centrifugal modes of energy. You
energise the sense of courage, boldness and even
defiance of stormy energy, you energise the senses, mind
and intelligence, and you energise and fulfil the heaven,
earth and the skies of space.






[Names: Rjuh, Abhisrinan]
Flow on, creative power, pure and purifying,
simple, straight and natural, destroyer of crookedness,
driving away and warding off violence and negativities,
extending and refining knowledge with knowledge of
the dynamics of nature, mind and senses. You and we,
then, are friends and cooperators in progress, O friend
of the karma-yogi.





[Names: Madhvah, Svadasvendraya]
Pacify and consecrate the springs of honey
sweets and let these flow free, let abundance of wealth,
honour and excellence, let power, prosperity and glory
flow to us all. Spirit and power of peace and purity,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 351


refulgent and beatific Indu, be sweet and kind for the
soul. Let immense wealth flow from the bottomless sea.






Soma, self-existent Spirit of creativity realised
and exalted by humanity, inspiring and energising like
radiations of light, rushing down in streams like a flood,
pray come with the glory of victory. May the spirit of
Soma, pure and purifying, flow and bless the loved heart
core of the soul. May the spirit, bright and illuminating,
flow with showers of knowledge and enlightenment and
beatify us with the soothing waters of peace for the mind,
senses and the soul.






[Names: Esasya, Somascamusu, Svarcaksa]
Hey Indra, dear soul, it is that Soma, Spirit of
divinity which flows free and purifying for you, the
human lover that cherish the Spirit. Pervasive in the
holy hearts and indeed in all forms of existence,
constant, almighty, watching, radiating and revealing,
itself the light of heaven, master of the cosmic chariot,




inviolably true in its potential, it flows free like the love
as well as the lover of the celebrants of divinity.






[Names: Vasanah]
This Soma, for eternity, bearing eternal life
energy for body, mind and soul, pure, purifying,
sanctifying, sustaining and yet transcending all
existential forms of its generated world, its darling
daughter, pervading, loving and enlightening the holy
peaceful three-level universe of heaven, earth and the
middle regions sustained in the atomic dynamics of
nature’s laws, goes on and on resounding as the high-
priest and chief yajaka through the creative-conflictive-
evolving orders of yajnic mutability reaching the divine






[Names: Nunastvam, Apsu]
Verily to us for our vision and experience, you,
O master of the cosmic chariot, refulgent Soma, flow
on in the mighty forms of existence both physical and
psychic. Flow on, pure, purifying and sanctifying in the
dynamics of nature, flow into our actions, thoughts and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 303


[Names: Flow]
of life, the very spirit of truth and eternal law, you who
are self-refulgent and generous like the life-giving sun,
sole lord of truth and laws of constant mutability at heart.






[Names: Mitravaruna, Vayum]
O Soma, pure and purifying, resounding across
the spaces, flow, sung and celebrated, and bring peace,
progress and fulfilment to humanity, to the man of
vibrant enthusiasm, to the man of love and judgement.
To humanity, bring readiness of intellect and
understanding, firm and undisturbed yet dynamic like
a master of the chariot sitting at peace, unmoving and
undisturbed, while the chariot may be speeding at the
velocity of light. So also flow to Indra, master ruler of
the arms of thunder, virile and generous, mighty yet




O refulgent Soma, pure and purifying, sung and
celebrated, bring us vestments of beauty and grace,
cows, abundant and fertile, words of knowledge




brilliant, deep and creative, bring us golden graces of
beauty and soothing vitality for sustenance and success,
bring us the energy and motive powers for our chariot
of corporate life.






O Soma, pure and purifying spirit and power of
divinity, bring us celestial honour and excellence and
the peaceful shelter of divinity, all materials of the
world’s wealth and power by which, like people of
divine vision, we may attain to the universal wealth and
virtue of the universe worthy of the sages of divine
imagination.






[Names: Bradhnascidatra, Purumedhascit]
Generous, refulgent Soma spirit of beauty, peace
and glory, sanctify us by these streams of grace. In the
ocean depths of this honourable universe, energise and
move all forms of wealth and peaceful settlements and
consecrate us in the space of divine voice and wisdom.
Spirit of the expansive universe, dynamic like the stormy
winds, high-priest of cosmic yajna for all, bless us with
a settled state of humanity in the vibrant system of a


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 97 355






[Names: Srava, Sastim]
And by this sacred stream of divinity, cleanse
and sanctify us in this holy lake of the divine Word worth
hearing over and above what has been heard. Master of
infinite power and wealth, destroyer of hoards of
negativities, give us boundless forms of wealth for our
battle of life, shaking, as if, like a tree of ripe fruit this
mighty tree of the world.






[Names: Mahime, Asvapayannigutah, Mitran]
These are the mighty great and constructive
works of the virile and generous Soma in the battles of
life either in social dynamics or close encounters or in
fierce conflicts: sending the destroyers to sleep,
separating off the unfriendly and removing the unawake
and unaware from here where they are, (by constructive,








Hey Indu, spirit of beauty, power and glory of
divinity, you move and bless three holy expansive loved
favourites of your choice and, pure and purifying, you
hasten to them one by one since you are the wealth and
power for the mighty, you are the giver for the generous,
and you are the glory for the glorious.






This Soma knows, holds and consecrates the
world as a holy place for life. Omniscient and all-
sentient, it is the refulgent ruler of the entire universe.
Spirit of light, beauty and grace of generosity, inspiring
and energising perception and awareness of the holy
performers in yajnas, it moves and enlightens the chosen
protected soul, abides there and moves on.




[Names: Indum, Hinvanti]
Great undaunted celebrants love and adore

Soma on the yajna vedi. Passionate strivers as well as


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 98 357


poets sing and celebrate it in song. Constant devotees
with all ten senses and pranic energies worship it in
peace and quiet, and by the fluent pleasure and power
of it they join the very presence of it.






[Names: Sasvat, Tanno]
O Soma, spirit of divine peace, power, beauty
and glory, in our battle for self-control and divine
realisation, let us always choose and abide by paths and
performances shown and accomplished by you, pure
and purifying power of divinity. And that resolve of
ours, we pray, may Mitra, the sun, Varuna, the ocean,
Aditi, mother Infinity, Sindhu, divine space and fluent
vapour, earth and heaven, help us achieve with credit.


Mandala 9/Sukta 98
Pavamana Soma Devata. Ambarisha Varshagira and


[Names: Rjishva, Bharadvaja, Rshis, Purusprham, Purusprha, Indo]
asaham.


Indu, divine spirit of peace, power, beauty and
grace, move and bless us to achieve wealth, honour and
excellence of high order, universally loved and valued,




challenging and finally victorious.






[Names: Pari, Indurabhi]
May that Soma, brilliant spirit of peace, power
and purity of divinity, invoked and inspired to bless the
pious heart, flow by streams and showers, inspiring and
fertilizing, and reach the imperishable soul of the
devotee and protect him like the armour protecting the
watrior in the chariot.






[Names: Dhara]
May that Indu, divine Spirit of peace, purity and
beauty, inspiring and strengthening, overflowing with
the power of ecstasy, flow and reach into the favoured
heart of the devotee, that supreme shower of divinity
which goes forward like radiations of light into the yajna
of love and non-violence with love and desire to reveal
the truth of life.






MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 98 359


O Soma, refulgent and generous spirit of peace,
prosperity and beauty, you shine upon the charitable
mortal of relentless discipline and bestow upon him
wealth, honour and excellence of a hundredfold power
and a thousandfold value.






[Names: Vayam, Purus, Puru]
O spirit of instant mantra movement, lord of
world’s wealth and shelter home of life, destroyer of
evil, darkness and ignorance, let us be closest to you
and the all desired world’s wealth, let us be closest to
your treasure of food, energy, and knowledge and to
your divine peace and comfort.



[Names: Dviryam, Priyamindrasya]
minam.

Soma, dearest love of the soul, innately glorious,
the glory intensified by spiritual light, vibrant spirit
rolling in the consciousness whom ten psychic powers


of mind and sense perceive, conceive and exalt, that
spirit we cherish and adore.






gacchati.


Ten psychic powers with the best of their
potential adore and exalt that dear divinity, omniscience
itself, who, omnipresent, pervades and rejoices with all
divinities of the world with divine ecstasy.






[Names: Asya, Sravo]
This spirit of beauty and perfection, sublime like
the sun, by virtue of its own innate potential which vests
all great ones with their mighty power and honour, that
spirit you all adore for protection and perfection of your
life.


[Names: Devo]
That divine spirit of beauty and perfection,
brilliant and generous, resounding over heaven and
earth, vested in cloud showers and mountain tops,
loving, gracious and deeply human at heart, O men and
women of the earth, create in your yajnas and realise in
lite:



MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 98 361




[Names: Indradya, Indrad, Soma, Nare]
O Soma spirit of light and ecstasy of grace, you
are adored and served for the soul’s experience of
divinity, for the man of charity and the brilliant sage on
the vedi of yajnic service so that the demon of evil,
darkness and ignorance may be expelled from the soul
of humanity and destroyed.






[Names: Somah, Apaprothantah]
Those eternal, natural and universal vibrations
of divine love and grace flow and beatify the human
soul in the purity of heart core in the holy light of the
dawn, subduing, expelling and destroying those crooked
and clandestine forces of evil, darkness and ignorance
of the human mind.





Come friends, all of us and all the wise and
brave, let us reach that Soma spirit of light and grace
and achieve the spirit as a prize and treasure home of
peace, fragrance and life’s victory.




Mandala 9/Sukta 99






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Rebhasunus, Kashyapas, Rshis, Sukram]
For the lovely bold Soma, devotees wield and
stretch the manly bow, and joyous celebrants of heaven
and earth before the vibrants create and sing exalting
songs of power and purity in honour of the life giving
spirit of divinity.

[Names: Adha, Yadi]
When the thoughts and actions of bright
celebrants invoke, invite and inspire Soma to move,
initiate and bless, then the divine spirit, exalted by the
songs, moves toward battles and inspires, energises and
exalts their mind and courage for victory.

[Names: Tamasya, Indrapatamah, Indrapatama]
surayah.


That power and ecstasy of this Soma, worthiest


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 99 363


of the soul’s delight, we adore and exalt, which the sense
and mind with their perceptions and reflection receive
and which, for sure, veteran sages too have experienced
for times immemorial.






That spirit of Soma, pure and purifying, the
celebrants adore and exalt by songs of old in Vedic voice
and, the same, thoughts and actions of veteran sages
with the divine name content of the lord supplicate and


[Names: Dutam, Sasate]
That omnipotent virile generative Soma creator,
the very pillar and foundation of the universe, thinkers
and meditative sages sanctify and hold in the pure heart
core of their soul and celebrate as the prime divine voice


of revelation of the eternal Vedic knowledge for
enlightenment of the human soul.








[Names: Somascamusu, Pasau]
That Soma, pure and purifying, most ecstatic
and exhilarating, abides in all forms of yajnic existence
and, holding the cosmic seed and impregnating Nature
as a living organism, is worshipped as the father and
sustainer of all thoughts of living beings.






[Names: Vide]
That divine, refulgent and generous Soma,
realised by sages of holy action for noble humanity, is
celebrated and glorified in the human world, and when
itis known as the sole giver of every thing among these
people, then it releases mighty floods of living waters
for life sustenance.






[Names: Suta, Indraya, Indra]
O spirit of divinity, brilliant and blissful,
perceived, reflected and meditated with constant
exercise of spiritual discipline, you are distilled from
experience and realised by devoted people in the purity
of heart for the soul. It is thus that, most ecstatic and
exhilarating, you abide in the heart and soul of humanity.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 100 365


Mandala 9/Sukta 100






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Rebhasunus, Kashyapas, Rshis, Vatsam]
Just as young mothers love and caress the first
born baby in early age, so do people free from malice
and jealousy take to Soma, meditative realisation of
divinity, dear favourite love of Indra, the soul.





[Names: Punana, Tvam]
O Soma spirit of divinity, bright and blissful,
bring us twofold wealth and excellence, expansive for
both life on earth and beyond, and give us complete
fulfilment. Indeed, you create and augment the wealth,
honour and excellence of the world in the house of the
man of generosity and charity.




O Soma, like the rain showers of the clouds,
pray create, inspire and augment the vision, intelligence,




understanding and will which may stabilise the mind in
the state of peace and constancy. Indeed, you create and
augment the wealth, honour and excellence of both
earthly and heavenly order.






[Names: Pari, Ramhamana]
When you are distilled from experience and
meditation, then the stream of your bliss, fast and
ceaseless, flows to the chosen and protected heart of
the devotee like the prize winning spirit of a victorious






[Names: Kratve, Indraya, Indra, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra]
Soma, spirit of poetic omniscience, flow and
purify us by streams of bliss distilled from experience
and meditation for our intelligence, expertise and
enlightenment, for fulfilment of Indra, man of power,
Mitra, man of love, and Varuna, man of judgement.




[Names: Pavasva]
mah.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 100 367


Soma, all inspiring spirit of the universe,
sweetest presence distilled and realised in the holy heart,
flow on purifying by the stream of exhilaration, giving
food, energy and fulfilment for the soul, for the universal
vibrancy of nature and humanity, and for all the noble,
generous and enlightened people.




mani.


O Soma, pure and purifying saviour spirit of
universal sanctity, just as mother cows love and caress
anew born calf, so do the motherly forces of nature and
humanity free from the negativities of malice and
jealousy love and cherish you arising in the heart and
inspiring the soul in various dharmic situations of life.






[Names: Sravas, Sardhan]
Soma, pure, purifying vibrant spirit of life divine
commanding great power, honour and glory, you go
forward with wondrous manifestations of your power,
bold and indomitable, destroying the darkness and evils
of the world, and reach and bless the yajnic house of
the man of charity and generosity.




[Names: Prati]
O Soma, universal soul of high commitment of
Dharma, pure and purifying energy of omnipresent
divine flow, you wear the armour of omnipotence, bear,


sustain and edify the heaven and earth by your majesty
and transcend.


Mandala 9/Sukta 101


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Andhigu, Shyavashvi, Yayati, Nahusha, Manava, Manu, Samvarana, Vaishvamitra, Vachya, Prajapati, Rshis, Purojiti]
O friends, for your attainment of the purified
and exhilarating Soma bliss of existence, eliminate
vociferous disturbances of the mind and concentrate on
the deep resounding voice of divinity.






[Names: Indurasvo]
Brilliant and blissful Soma, when, filtered and
exhilarated, vibrates and flows in clear purifying streams


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 101 369
like waves of energy itself.






[Names: Somam, Yajnam]
That blazing unassailable Soma, adorable in
yajna, leading lights invoke and impel with universal
thought and speech, with controlled mental reflection
for self-realisation.




[Names: Sutaso, Indraya, Indra, Pavitravanto]
madah.


Filtered, felt and cleansed, honey sweet soma
streams, pure and exhilarating, flow for Indra, the soul,
and may the exhilarations reach you, noble favourites
of divinity.






[Names: Indurindraya, Vacaspatir]
Soma, divine, brilliant and blissful, flows for
Indra, the soul, say the noble sages, and thus Soma,
divine source and master of speech and thought, ruler
and sustainer of the entire world by his own lustre and
power, is honoured at all yajnas of knowledge, yoga


and austerity, for advancement.






[Names: Sahasradharah, Somah]
A thousand streams of Soma joy and
enlightenment flow, inspiring and purifying. It is a
bottomless ocean that rolls impelling the language and
thought of new knowledge. It is the preserver, promoter
and sustainer of all wealths and honours and a friend of
the soul, inspiring and exalting us day by day.

[Names: Ayam, Patir]
It is Pusha, life-sustaining and nourishing
protector, wealth and honour of the world, power and
the glory, Soma that is pure and purifying, ever going
forward with the world. It is the master, sustainer and
ruler of the vast expansive universe and illuminates both
heaven and earth.



[Names: Samu, Anusata, Somasah, Somasa]
Dear daring voices exalt and extol Soma for the
sheer joy of illumination. Indeed men of Soma vision


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 101 371


and courage, blazing brilliant, pure, purifying and
pursuing, create and carve their own paths of progress.






O pure and purifying Soma, bring us honour
and excellence most lustrous and renowned, valued
among all the five classes of people by which we may be
able to win the real material and spiritual wealth of life.






[Names: Mitrah, Mitra]
Streams of Soma flow for us, brilliant, eloquent
and expansive, friendly, inspiring, free from sin,
intellectually creative and spiritually illuminative.






[Names: Susvanaso, Isamasmabhyamabhitah]
Reflective, inspiring and generative by
controlled operations of higher mind in the purified heart
core, let the Soma streams, vibrant and vocal, bring us
spiritual energy, intelligential illumination and divine
awareness all round in the world.








[Names: Somaso, Suryaso, These]
illuminating, are bright and beatific as the dawn and,
vibrant but unfluctuating, they abide constant in the






That silent voice of the generative illuminative
Soma of divine food, energy and enlightenment, the
the clamours and noises which disturb the meditative
yajna as men of wisdom ward them off to save their


[Names: Sarajjaro]
As a child feels secure with joy in the arms of
its parents, as the lover goes to the beloved, as the groom


sits on the wedding vedi, so does the Soma spirit pervade
in the natural form of its choice love.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 102 373






[Names: Harih]
That potent Soma, master controller of all
powers, means and materials of success in existence,
who sustains both heaven and earth, is the saviour power
of protection and pervades the universe presiding as
omniscient high priest over the vedi of cosmic yajna.






[Names: Kanikradadvrsa, Indrasyabhyeti]
Soma, omnipresent protector, abides with the
souls of its choice discipline, vibrating in the heart core
across the fluctuations of mind and senses. Loud and
bold and voluble, thus, the generous potent saviour spirit
blesses the original nature of the soul in its innate purity.


Mandala 9/Sukta 102


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Krana, Visva]
Maker of stars and planets, inspiring the light
and law of the dynamics of existence, dear adorable
giver of fulfilment, Soma rules over both spirit and


nature, heaven and earth.






[Names: Yajnasya]
Close to the adamantine integration of Purusha
and Prakrti in human form is the secret seat of heart
and clairvoyant intelligence wherein the climactic
presence of the master of three orders of Prakrti and
super presence of divinity, and there it is shared by seven
prakrtic, pranic and psychic orders of existence and
adored by seven metres of Vedic hymns as the dearest
supreme object of worship.



[Names: Trini, Mimite]
By three streams of the moving particles of
matter, energy and mind does the triple master, Soma,
move the dynamics of existence, and thus does the
supreme high priest order and accomplish his cosmic



[Names: Jajnanam, Sriye, Ayam]
Seven measured motherly orders of existence


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 102 375


at the material, pranic and psychic level join, reveal and
celebrate Soma manifesting in beauty and glory, this
constant unmoved mover who, being omnipresent and
pervasive, knows of the wealth and sublimity of the






[Names: Asya, Sparha]
Enjoined in the law and order of discipline of
this Soma, all divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity, committed and free from malice and
negativity, who join and rejoice in him command the
enviable love and respect of the world.






[Names: Yami, Kavim, Purusprham, Purusprha]
To realise and reveal that divine treasure origin
of the world and its glory, sages and divines, celebrating
his law, truth and yajnic evolution, love and join the
presence of Soma, great and glorious, poetic creator,
mighty generous, universally adored, and manifesting
anew in the world of love and beauty.








[Names: Samicine, Tanvana, Anusag]
The great joint spontaneous generators of the
dynamic world in existence are Soma, supreme Purusha,
and Prakrti, which the sages, who enact and advance
the meditative yajna of science and direct realisation,
constantly adore and glorify.






[Names: Kratva, Hinvann]
O Soma, creative spirit of the universe, by holy
action, brilliant light of pure knowledge and the inner
vision of the spirit, pray open wide the paths and doors
of the light of divinity, thereby inspiring and advancing
yajnic revelations of the divine law and its operation in
this advancing world of love and non-violence.


Mandala 9/Sukta 103


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Dvita, Aptya, Rshi, Somaya, Soma, Bhrtim]
Sing rising songs of adoration in honour of
Soma, pure and purifying, omniscient and inspiring
ordainer of life, and offer the songs as homage of yajnic
gratitude. Soma feels pleased with enlightened songs
of love and faith.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 103 377




[Names: Pari]
Pleased and exalted with songs of adoration,
Soma, saviour spirit of bliss, radiates with its protective
presence to the distinguished hearts and, purifying the
body, mind and soul of the celebrants, blesses them in
their physical, subtle and causal body states of existence.





In the protected heart core of the blessed soul
overflowing with honey joy, the Soma presence vibrates,
and hymnal voices of the seer sages in seven Vedic
musical metres adore and glorify the divine presence in
ecstatic response to the guiding spirit of divinity.






[Names: Somah]
Soma, guiding spirit of the mind and soul, self-
refulgent soul of the universe, undaunted and invincible,
pure and purifying, pervading the heaven and earth,
manifests inspiring in the mind and soul of meditative
celebrants, eliminating their darkness and sufferance.








[Names: Punano]
O Soma, immortal spirit of existence, pure,
purifying and realised in the pure heart core of the soul,
vibrant and voluble with the celebrants in response to
their yajnic homage and divine attainments, radiate with
the human soul as a chariot mate of its physical existence
on the move.





[Names: Vyanasih]
Like universal energy, the glorious Soma, all
victorious, brilliant, realised by sages in its original
nature and character, pervades vibrant here, there,
everywhere and beyond, transcending.


Mandala 9/Sukta 104
Pavamana Soma Devata, Parvata and Narada Kanvas or




[Names: Shikhandinyas, Kashyapyas, Apsarasas, Rshis, Sakhaya, Sisum, Sriye]
Come friends, sit on the yajna vedi, sing and

celebrate Soma, pure and purifying spirit of life, and


with yajna exalt him like an adorable power for the grace
and glory of life.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 104 379






[Names: Sami, Devavayam]
As mothers love, adore and adorn a child with
beauty and ornaments, so energise and exalt Soma as
versatile beauty and grace of life, protector of divinities,
source of ecstasy and doubly strong both physically and






[Names: Punata, Yatha, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra]
Realise and exalt Soma in the essential purity
of its nature, power and presence as the very foundation
of perfection and achievement in life, so that it may be
the surest and most peaceful base of strength, power
and fulfilment for the spirit of love and friendship as
well as for freedom and judgement.






[Names: Asmabhyam, Gobhiste]
Our songs of adoration celebrate and exalt you
as creator, knower and giver of peace, power, wealth
and honours of the world. Indeed, with thoughts, words
and vision, we glorify your power and presence as it
emerges in our experience.


380






[Names: Sano, Sakheva]
O spirit of beauty, brightness and bliss,
controller, protector and promoter of life’s joys, divine
and heavenly indeed is your power and presence. We
pray be the guide and pioneer as a friend and spirit of
love for friends.





[Names: Sanemi, Apadevam]
O Soma, let us be together in peace and
friendship, in arms and in the daily business rounds
forward as ever before. Keep off the demonic destroyer,
the ogre, the impious, the double dealer, and the sin
and sinner.


Mandala 9/Sukta 105


Pavamana Soma Devata, Parvata and






[Names: Narada, Kanvas, Rshis, Sisum]
O friends, enjoying together with creative acts
of yajna, sing and celebrate Soma, pure and purifying


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 105 381


presence of divinity, with songs of praise, and exalt and
adorn him as a darling adorable power for winning the
joy of life’s fulfilment.






[Names: Devavirmado]
Holily is Soma, brilliant presence of beauty,
peace and power of divinity, protector of sages, ecstasy
of life, realised in the essence, and, adorned by devotees
as a darling presence, it is invoked and worshipped with
creative acts of meditation by the celebrants.



[Names: Ayam, Ayam]
This is the means to efficiency for perfection,
this is for strength and success for fulfilment, and when
it is realised, it is the sweetest, most honeyed experience
for the divines.



[Names: Gomanna, Sucim]
O Soma, refulgent spirit of divine bliss and
beauty, manifest every where and realised within,
commanding universal power and perfection, pray set




in motion for us the flow of wealth full of lands, cows,
knowledge and culture, and of horses, movement,
progress and achievement. I pray bless me that I may
honour and worship your pure divine presence above
all, above mind and senses and above the things mind
and senses are involved with.






[Names: Sano, Sakheva]
O spirit of beauty and universal majesty,
controller of all movements, beauties and perfections,
divine presence that comprehend all forms of refulgence
and generosity, like a friend for friends, be good for our
pioneer leadership and brilliance on the vedi.






[Names: Sanemi, Sahvan]
O spirit of divine beauty, bliss and brilliance,
one with us in all acts and movements, courageous, bold
and forbearing, ward off from us all impieties and keep
away the impious and ungenerous people wherever they
be, whoever is a devouring destroyer, and a double
dealer.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 106 383


Mandala 9/Sukta 106




[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Agni, Chakshusha, Chakshu, Manava, Manu, Apsava, Rshis, Indramaccha, Srusti]
May these realised, cleansed and confirmed,
blessed, beautiful and brilliant virtues and sanskars
touching the bounds of divine bliss, emerging and risen


in the mind, well reach and seep into the heart core of
the soul completely and permanently.





[Names: Ayam, Indraya, Indra, Somo]
This Soma, competent and victorious for the
battle of life, when realised, flows for Indra, the winning
soul, and enlightens it about the world’s reality as it is
and as it knows.





[Names: Asyedindro, Vajram]
Under the inspiration and ecstasy of this soma
of divine love, let the soul seize the victorious bow,
take on the generous virile and mighty bolt of will and




power of faith and win the target of the battle of Karma
to the attainment of Divinity.






[Names: Dyumntam]
Flow on, O Soma, spirit of divine bliss, ever
awake, brilliant and enlightening, streaming on and on
for Indra, the soul, bear and bring the light and fire of
the sun and vision of heaven.


[Names: Satah, Sahasrayama]
Let divine showers and streams of visionary
ecstasy rain and flow for Indra, the soul, O Soma,


maker of a thousand paths, shining, all watching and






[Names: Asmabhyam, Sahasram]
Best pioneer, path finder and highest honeyed
joy for us, for the divines, come roaring by a thousand
paths of light and holiness.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 106 385






[Names: Pavasva]
O Soma of divine light and peace, harbinger of
honeyed joy, flow in streams with power and lustre for
our attainment of the path of divinity and abide in our
heart core of the soul.



[Names: Tava, Indram, Tvam]
The streams of your peace, beauty and bliss
swell like streams of water in flood, and the divines
drink of the ecstasy for the attainment of immortality.



[Names: Vrstidyavo]
O streams of the beauty and bliss of peace and
joy filtered from experience, heavenly showers, liquid
floods, paradisal bliss pure and purifying, bring us the
wealth, honour and excellence of the highest order.








[Names: Somah, Agre]
Soma, pure and purifying, protective and
blissful, flowing by streams and sanctifying, roaring
with ancient and original hymns of divine adoration,
rushes to the heart core of the distinguished soul.






[Names: Dhibhirhinvanti]
Men of distinguished mind, adoring Soma with
holy thoughts, words and action, invoke and celebrate
all protective Soma, victorious spirit and cosmic energy,
playing in the beautiful world over three regions of
heaven, earth and the skies.




[Names: Asarji, Punano]
Soma, vibrant spirit of divinity, rushes to the
heart core of realised souls like instant energy radiating
to the centre of its target in the human battle of survival
and distinguished search for immortality, there


stimulating, creating and sanctifying hymns of
adoration, and there in the soul it abides.






[Names: Pavate, Abhyarsantstotrbhyo]
The beauteous and beatific divine saviour spirit


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 387


of Soma vibrates, purifies and flows with tremendous
force, casting off all crookedness and contradictions,
and overflowing with valour, honour and excellence for
the celebrants and their heroic progeny for generations.






[Names: Rebhan]
Thus vibrate, purify and flow, friend of sages
and divines, releasing these honey streams of joy, and
go on eloquent to bless the pure heart all round all ways
in the world.


Mandala 9/Sukta 107








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Saptarshis, Rshis, Bharadvaja, Barhaspatya, Kashyapa, Maricha, Gotama, Rahugana, Bhauma, Atri, Vishvamitra, Gathina, Jamadagni, Bhargava, Vasishtha, Maitravaruni, Parito, Dadhanvan, Soma]
From here onward sprinkle Soma with love and
service, Soma, the spirit of beauty, peace and joy of
life, Soma, realised with best of thoughts, effort and
determined discipline of meditation, Soma which bears
the best materials for creative yajna of personal and




social development, Soma which is the leading light of
life, realised within in the heart and our Karmas
performed in life.






[Names: Nunam, Sute]
For sure, pure and purifying, flow on with
protective and promotive forces, gracious, undaunted,
more and more charming and blissful. When you are
realised in our actions, mixed as one with our energies,
will and senses, then we rejoice and celebrate you in
our perceptions with hymns of praise, and later in silent






[Names: Pari]
Celebrated in our thoughts and perceptions, joy
of the sages, power of holy yajnic action, brilliant and
blissful, all intelligent and omniscient, we adore you
for the augmentation of our intelligence and




[Names: Punanah]
yah.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 389


O Soma, pure and purifying our thought, will
and actions, abiding in the heart, you move and flow on
in our consciousness. Bearing treasures of jewels, pray
come and sit on the seat of yajna vedi and our sense of
truth and eternal law. Indeed, O lord refulgent, you are
the fountain head of life’s golden treasures.






[Names: Duhana, Aprcchyam]
Giver of fulfilment, treasure trove of life’s
sustaining milk, yielding celestial dear honey sweets of
living strength and joy, pervasive in its eternal universal
loved seat, all conqueror all watching and knowing,
when moved by meditative celebrants, Soma radiates
and vibrates in the faithful heart of earnest seekers.






[Names: Tvam]
Pure and all purifying, O Soma, spirit of peace
and bliss, ever awake and awakening with your eternal
consciousness, all protective and promotive, dearest in
the heart of the cherished loving soul, you are the vibrant
awareness of omniscience and the very life energy of
life. O Spirit of peace, joy and divine bliss, pray bless
our yajna of life with the honey sweets of existence.








[Names: Somo, Suryam, Surya]
Soma, virile and generous giver of fulfilment,
omniscient master of the ways of existence, supreme
creative seer, vibrant super-soul, all watching and
knowing, flows and purifies all. O Soma, you are the
poetic creator, dearest friend of the divines, and it is
you who generate and raise the sun over to the heaven
of light.





[Names: Asvayeva]
Soma, invoked by celebrants, manifests with
blissful inspiring powers of protection and promotion
rushing, compelling, in an impetuous stream like waves
of energy, and it also goes forward by a stream of mild
motion, soothing and refreshing.




[Names: Anupe, Anup, Samudram]
madaya (0541.


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 391


Soma, divine master of holy speech, emerges in
the depth of the heart with the voice of divinity and
blesses the devotee with the revelation of the milk of
spiritual sustenance. Just as streams of water flow and
reach the sea, so is the divine stream and spirit of joy
invoked and celebrated for the central bliss of the soul.






[Names: Jano]
O Soma, spirit of universal bliss and protection,
invoked and stirred by acts of meditation, radiating
across the covers of darkness, enter the heart core of
the soul as citizens enter their home in town, arise in
the depth of heart and intelligence and abide there in
the love and faith of the soul, your own cherished seat
of existence among the wise.




[Names: Anumadyah, Anumadya]
Like a war horse in victorious battle, Soma
radiates across the fine fluctuations of senses, ecstatic,


flowing in exuberant streams, when it is impelled and
realised by the wise, vibrant Vedic sages in meditation.








[Names: Amsoh]
O Soma, be full with the liquid spirit of joy like
the sea which is full with the flood of streams and rivers,
and, like the very spirit of ecstasy overflowing with
delicious exuberance of light divine, ever awake, flow
into the devotee’s heart blest with the honeyed joy of





[Names: Tamim]
Dear, loved and fascinating, Soma emerges in
like a child’s and inspiring as a sanative. Devotees
stimulate it with holy karma, a thing beautiful and
inspiring, and let it join and flow in the streams of
thought and action between their intellect and emotion
and their prana and apana energies.






[Names: Somasa, Samudrasyadhi]
Intelligent and dedicated lovers of Soma refine
and sublimate their pleasurable joy of the heart and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 393


emotion, direct it to divinity on top of the existential
ocean of daily business and, thoughtful, ecstatic and
divinely oriented, experience the heavenly ecstasy of
Soma as in samadhi.






[Names: Tarat, Arsan, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
Across the ocean of existence, pure, purifying
and flowing by waves of ecstasy, refulgent generous
divine ruler of life, itself the law of expansive universe,
radiating by and with the Dharma of Mitra, spirit of
love, and Varuna, spirit of justice, inspiring and
stimulating the universal law of truth and advancement,






[Names: Nrbhir]
Invoked and impelled by leading lights of
self-refulgent divine light of life, omnipresent in the
universe, it rolls for Indra, the soul.




[Names: Indraya, Indra, Marutvate, Marutvat, Sahasradharo]
yavah.




Soma, joy of existence, invoked and realised,
flows purifying and consecrating for Indra, the vibrant
soul, in a thousand streams of ecstasy and overflows
the heart and soul of the devotee. That Spirit of the
universe, intelligent dedicated yogis realise, exalt and






[Names: Pundanascamu]
Pervading and energising heaven and earth,
indeed the entire world of Prakrti and Jiva, stimulating
intelligence, the poetic creator rejoices among the
divinities, stars and planets and the senses and mind of
humanity. Wearing the cosmic waters as a cloak,
inspiring and sanctifying our thoughts and actions,
manifesting in all beautiful things, and thus perceived
by our senses and apprehended by intelligence, it abides
higher and somewhere beyond our apprehension.




[Names: Tavaham, Puruni]
tan ihi.

O Soma, light of life and universal joy of
existence, I rejoice in your friendly company day in and
day out. O mighty bearer sustainer of the universe, a
host of negativities surround me, pray break through


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 395
their bounds and come and save me.






[Names: Utahamnaktamuta, Ghrna]
And I, O Soma, bearer and sustainer, yearn day
and night to abide in your presence for the sake of your
love and friendship, and pray that we may rise, flying
like birds beyond the sun blazing with its refulgence,
and reach you, the Ultimate.






[Names: Mrjyamanah, Rayim, Purusprham, Purusprha]
O Spirit omnipotent with the world in your
generous hands, celebrated and exalted, you stimulate
and inspire the song of adoration in the depths of the
heart and, pure, purifying, radiating and exalting, set in
motion immense wealth of golden graces of universal
love and desire for us.








[Names: Mrjano, Devanam]
O Soma, universal spirit of generosity,
cleansing, purifying and radiating in the protected heart
of the cherished celebrant, you manifest loud and bold
in the deep and beautiful world of existence and, sung
and celebrated with songs of adoration, you move and
manifest in the holy heart of divinities, pure, purifying,







[Names: Pavasva]
O Soma, spirit of universal light and joy, radiate
and move, purifying and inspiring, toward the spirit of
universal vision and creativity for the achievement of
knowledge and enlightenment. You are the first highest
and original master poet creator who bore the mighty
treasure trove of infinite light and joy and let it open to
flow for the divine sages.






[Names: Satu]
O Soma, with all your power, laws and virtues,
flow purifying and inspiring all that is earthly, heavenly
and in the middle regions of the universe. O Spirit all
knowing and watching, bright and pure, the sages with


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 107 397


their thoughts and actions invoke and exalt you for
inspiration and enlightenment.





[Names: Marutvanto]
Purifying, energising and inspiring currents of
ecstasy and nourishment for the senses, will, intellect
and imagination flow by stream and shower at the speed
of winds to the holy heart of the sagely celebrant.






[Names: Janayan]
Invoked and exalted by celebrants, the Soma
spirit of light and joy radiates to the heart and soul of
the devotee, there inspiring and enlightening the
thoughts, will and imagination to action, creating the
light of joyous vision and energising the mind and
senses, as if shaping the original spirit of purity and
divinity of the soul anew.




Mandala 9/Sukta 108
[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Gauriviti, Shaktya, Shakti, Vasishtha, Angirasa, Rjishva, Bharadvaja, Urdhvasadma, Angirasa]
Krtayasha Angirasa (10-11), and Rnanchaya Rajarshi






[Names: Rshis, Pavasva, Indraya, Indra, Mahi]
O Soma, sweetest honey spirit of light, action
and joy, radiate purifying for Indra, the soul. You are
the wisest spirit of the knowledge of holy action, greatest
and most enlightened spirit of joy.




[Names: Yasya]
naitasah.


Having drunk of the Soma spirit of light, action
and joy, Indra, the soul, overflows with strength and
virile generosity. Having drunk of it, the soul receives
the light of heavenly knowledge. And the soul, also,
blest with inner light of spiritual awareness, rushes to
achieve food, energy and enlightenment as a warrior
wins the battle of his challenges.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 108 399




[Names: Tvam, Amrtatvaya]
O Soma, dear as life, pure and purifying, most
humanity to holy life and proclaim the path to






[Names: Yena, Devanam, Sravamsyanasuh]
Soma is that spirit of enlightenment by which
the meditative sages on way to divinity open up the
path to immortality, by which the saints attain to the
peace and well being worthy of divinities, and by which
the lovers of immortality obtain their desired ambition
and fulfilment.






It is that Soma, most joyous spirit of life’s beauty,
which, when realised by controlled minds of choice
meditative order, flows pure and purifying by the stream
of ecstasy, playful and exalting like waves of the sea.








You who with your might and lustre break open
the cloud and release the streams of water from the
womb of the cloud, who pervade and extend your power
over the vault of the universe, pray come like a warrior
in arms and break open the paths of progress in
knowledge and advancement.






[Names: Sincata, Vanakraksamudaprutam]
O celebrants, come, realise and all-ways serve
of water and rays of light, the spirit pervasive in the
universe and deep as the bottomless ocean.






[Names: Sahasradharam, Rtena]
For the rise of the self to the state of divine
refulgence, let us serve and adore Soma, divine spirit
of a thousand streams and showers, potent and generous,
augmenter of the milk of life, dear as father and friend,
who, manifestive in the laws of universal existence,
pervades the expansive creativity of divine power and
is the self-refulgent ruler, generous divinity and the


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 108 401
infinite law, truth and ultimate reality itself.






O refulgent generous Soma spirit of life, lover
of divinities, master of food and energy for body, mind
and soul, give us the light to rise to the honour and
excellence of higher life towards divinity, and for that
pray open the middle cover of the soul and let us rise to
the state of divine bliss.





[Names: Vrstim]
O Spirit omnipotent of divine action, invoked,
adored and vibrant in the internal world of mind and
soul and in the external world of nature, sustainer and
ruler as burden bearer of humanity, stimulate the
radiation of light from heaven, sanctify the shower of
bliss, and inspire and illuminate the mind and
intelligence for the seeker of enlightenment.






[Names: Etamu, Visva]
This treasure trove of the wealth, honour and




excellence of existence, overflowing with honey sweets
of ecstasy in a thousand streams, virile, brilliant and
generous, the sages worship and they receive the milky
grace of divinity for life and joy.






[Names: Vrsa]
Generous immortal Soma, supreme spirit of
eternal light, manifests, generating life and removing
darkness with light. Celebrated and worshipped by
visionary sages, it manifests in their consciousness
wearing its immaculate garb of threefold Prakrti of
matter, mind and motion by virtue of its omnipotence.



13. = व 5171८ yo vasunam yo rayamaneta ya ilanam.

[Names: Somo]
That Soma which is the generator, harbinger and
ruler guide of all forms of wealth, honour and
excellence, lands, knowledge and awareness, and of
happy homes is thus realised in its divine manifestation.





[Names: Indrah, Maruto, Mitravaruna]
MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 108 403


Soma is the omniscient and omnipotent divine
whose powers, our vibrant forces experience and adore,
by whose path and guidance our power and honour
moves and moves forward, by whose grace we develop
our pranic energies and our sense of love and judgement,
and by whose word and grace we anoint and consecrate
our ruler for our high level of defence and security.






O Soma, life divine, realised by leading lights,
wielding noble arms of defence, being most exciting
and bearing sweetest honey gifts, flow forth in
consciousness for the soul’s fulfilment and for glory of
the social order.






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Somadhanama, Justo, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra]
O Soma spirit of life divine dear to humanity,
come, enter the heart core of the soul of humanity’s
social order full of love and reverence for the joy and
glory of life. Come, enter as rivers flow to the sea. Loved
and worshipped for Mitra, spirit of friendship, for
Varuna, spirit of freedom and choice with justice and
vision, and for Vayu, vibrant power and dignity of the




human nation, come and bless, supreme sustainer of
heaven and earth.


Mandala 9/Sukta 109








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Agnis, Dhishnyas, Agni, Aishvaris, Rshis, Pari, Soma]
O Soma, come and inspire as the most delicious
psychic and spiritual experience for the soul and the
nation, for friends, for the sustaining guardians and for
the spirit of honour and glory of humanity.




[Names: Indraste, Indrast]
ca devah.


Soma, spirit of glory and grandeur, loved,
realised and reverenced, let Indra, the ruling soul,
experience the ecstasy for noble action and efficiency.
Let all divinities of the world enjoy the divine presence.






[Names: Evamrtaya, Sukro]
Thus for immortality, for great dominion and
for highest ascension, may that pure, potent and celestial
Soma presence flow and radiate as the sweetest taste of
lite,


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 109 405



[Names: Pavasva]
Flow forth and consecrate, O Soma presence of
divinity, as great ocean of life, father, generator and
sustainer of divinities and ultimate haven and home of
all the worlds of existence.





[Names: Sukrah]
O pure and potent Soma spirit of divinity,
consecrate and radiate for the generous brilliant
nobilities and divinities and bring showers of peace and
joy for heaven and earth and for the human people and
all other forms of life.






[Names: Divo]
You are the sustainer of the heavenly regions of
light, most blissful presence for experience in the yajna
of truth and divine law, and the ultimate winner of the
victory. Flow forth, divine Soma, purify and consecrate
us in the presence.






O Soma, you are the glory and the grandeur,




holy stream and shower, the first and eternal of the
greatest of the great, pray flow forth in presence, radiate
and purify as ever before.






[Names: Nrbhiryemano]
Realised by leading lights, manifestive in the
world and consciousness, presence consecrated in the
heart core, blessing the world with divinity, ecstatic,
the presence of heaven itself, that’s what you are, Soma.






[Names: Induh]
Soma, generous, brilliant and blissful spirit of
divinity, pure and purifying, inspirer and energiser of
people, may, we pray, generate all wealth and honours
of the world for us.






O Soma, as victor of life and divine glory, flow,
radiate and inspire us like energy itself controlled and
consecrated for creative and productive holy work,
expert technique and the production and achievement
of wealth.




MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 109 401




[Names: Somam]
O Soma, spirit of divine energy and peace, your
yajnic celebrants create and consecrate that very blissful
liquid flow of your ecstatic energy for joy and for the
great honour and glory of life.






[Names: Sisum]
They adore and exalt that Soma spirit of divine
beauty, peace and glory in their pure heart core, the spirit
that is creative and lovable, manifestive, saviour and
inspirer, for the achievement of noble virtues worthy of
the noble and generous people.






Indu, Soma spirit of refulgent divinity, blissful
and poetically creative is the omniscient highest
purifying and saving spirit and power for the sake of
honour and joy on the basis of one’s own Karmic




[Names: Bibharti, Jaghana]
That Soma spirit of beauteous and blissful
divinity bears the name of Indra, power of omnipotence,
by virtue of which it overcomes and destroys all the


darkness and evil of the world.




[Names: Pibantyasya]
All the divine nobilities and brilliancies of the
world drink of this soma sweetness of divine joy realised
by leading lights of humanity and exalted with the
beauty and grace of art and imagination.




The Soma spirit of divinity realised and exalted

by the celebrant, streaming in a thousand showers,


reaches and sanctifies the pure, protected and sanctified
heart of its cherished devotee.




[Names: Srinanah]
May that victor spirit of Soma divinity of infinite

power, realised with meditative Karma and crystallized


by perception and awareness, manifest in the heart and






O Soma spirit of divinity, pursued in practice
by men and realised in name and presence through


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 109 409


senses, mind and intelligence of the yogis, come and
abide in the heart core of the soul.






[Names: Asarji, Indraya, Indra, Somah]
Soma, the vibrant victor spirit of divinity of
infinite streams of joy, manifests through the purity of
heart for the soul’s experience.




[Names: Anjantyenam]
madaya.


Celebrants exalt this Soma spirit of beauty and
bliss with honey sweets of poetic flavour for the joy of
generous and virile human soul.






[Names: Devebhyastva, They]
in Prakrti and in Karma, the saviour spirit, for the sages
and for achievement of strength.






[Names: Indurindraya]
The mighty self-refulgent Soma spirit of beauty
and bliss is realised for the soul and, mingling and
moving with the flow of karma, it is attained for the
salvation of the soul in ultimate freedom from karma




and sufferance.


Mandala 9/Sukta 110








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Tryaruna, Traivrshna, Trasadasyu, Paurukutsya, Rshis, Puryu, Dvisastaradhya]
O Soma, vibrant Spirit of life, victor over evils
and darkness, move on with us, inspiring and energising
us for the achievement of food, energy and
enlightenment, for elimination of malignity, negativities
and contradictions, with the obligation that we pay the
debts and never overdraw on our karmic account.





[Names: Anu, Vajan]
While you are with us at heart, O Soma, spirit
of constant peaceful life, we rejoice with you in the great
common-wealth order of governance where, dynamic,
pure and purifying, you ever advance to victories in
honour, excellence and glory.






[Names: Ajijano, Suryam, Surya, Gojiraya]
MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 110 411


Soma, pure, purifying and dynamic by your
essential omnipotence, mighty moving with cosmic
intelligence and ignition of oceanic particles of Prakrti,
you create the sun, generate bio-energy in all containing
space and set in motion the stars and planets of the






[Names: Sadasaro]
Immortal Soma, manifesting in mortal forms,
radiating in the operative laws of eternal and immortal
blissful dynamics of existence, vesting in mortals the
energy and ambition to live, you move on ever in union
with mortals and immortals.






[Names: Abhyabhi, Saryabhirna]
Bearing in hands as if, and maintaining in
balance by evolutionary powers, you hold and control
the means of life sustenance, and release them in
constant flow of food and energy like an inexhaustible
stream of water for the maintenance and fulfilment of








[Names: Adim, Varam]
And some men of vision who can perceive the
adorable presence worthy of attainment, and some
divinely blest lovers of the life sustainer Soma who
adore and exalt him, these reveal the mystery and
majesty of the supreme Soma spirit as the sun reveals
the world of physical reality.




codaya.


Into you, O Soma, did ancient sages of
uninvolved mind with yajnic dedication concentrate and
focus their mind and senses for the attainment of a high
order of spiritual enlightenment. O Soma spirit of
divinity that enlightened the sages, pray inspire and
enlighten us too with that same divine manliness of
vision and action.






[Names: Devah, Yadukthyam, Yadukthya, Indramabhi]
That nectar of divinity, eternal and adorable,
which the ancient sages distilled from the mighty great
and infinite heaven of light, and which they perceived
rising for the soul while they sang in adoration, that


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 111 413
same nectar, O Soma, may shower on us too, we pray.






[Names: Adha, Yuthe]
And then, O pure and purifying Soma, as long
as these heaven and earth and all these regions of the
world you wield with your might abide, you abide as
the master in the centre of the multitude,






[Names: Somah, Sahasradharah]
And that long may Soma bless us, pure and
purifying, vibrant as wind and joyously manifesting
playfully as a darling spirit in the protective world of
choice beauty, flowing with a thousand streams and
commanding a hundred forces of existence, blissful,
brilliant and gracious as it is.






[Names: Vajasanir]
This Soma, pure and purifying, honeyed
presence, ruling lord of truth and eternal law, bright and
beautiful, treasurehold of power and sustenance, master
of wealth and honour, mighty warrior and victor,




pervades and vibrates as the sweetest presence in waves
of ecstasy.






[Names: Svayudhah]
O Soma, spirit of power, patience and fortitude,
wielder of mighty arms, flow pure, protect and purify
us, warding off fighting forces of evil, eliminating
difficulties, and challenging and defeating enemies.


Mandala 9/Sukta 111






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Ananata, Paruchhepi, Rshi, Dhara, Visva]
This Soma spirit of the fighting force of divinity,
protecting and purifying by its own victorious lustre of
innate powers, overcomes all forces of jealousy and
enmity as the sun dispels all darkness with its own rays
of light. The stream of its radiance, realised and
purifying, shines beautiful and blissful. The lustrous
saviour spirit which pervades all existent forms of the


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 111 415


world, goes forward pure and purifying with seven notes
of its exalting voice and seven rays of light and seven
pranic energies expressive of its mighty force.






[Names: Tvam, Paravato, Tridhatubhir]
You win the wealth of advantage over hard
bargainers in exchange and, in trade and commerce, turn
deficit into surplus and make it shine with native
resources in your own home, yes with open, honest,
yajnic transactions of law and truth as on the vedi of
yajna. Songs of praise and appreciation from afar are
heard where expert organisers and workers rejoice in
action. Bright and brilliant Soma spirit of peace holds
life and sustenance in hand by shining wealth of matter,
mind and motion in open peaceable circulation, yes
Soma holds life and sustenance in hand, under control,
and provides it freely.








[Names: Purvamanu, Agmannukthani, Vajrasca]
Intelligent and well aware, Soma warrior goes
forward in the line and to the destination in consonance
and continuation of living tradition of law and custom,
his glorious divine chariot is directed by rays of light
and vibrant enthusiasm, thus the glorious chariot goes
on. Songs of praise in honour of the brave resound,
exalting Indra, the ruling soul of the order, for the
victory, when the ruling soul and the fighting force both
become the one thunderbolt infallible in battles, verily
one invincible power in battle.


Mandala 9/Sukta 112


[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Shishu, Angirasa, Rshi, Nananam, Taksa]
Different are our thoughts and ways of thinking,
different are people’s acts, plans and commitments. The
maker wants to repair the broken, the physician looks
for the sick, the Vedic scholar loves the maker of soma
and soma yajna, and you, O Soma, spirit of life’s joy,
flow for Indra, soul of the system.




MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 112 417




[Names: Jaratibhir, Karmaro]
With ripe herbs, bird’s feathers and with stones
and flames, the smith makes the arrows and seeks the
man of gold who can buy. O bright and sparkling Soma,
you go forward with Indra, ruler of the social order.






[Names: Karuraham, Nanadhiyo]
physician, mother, a miller. We are of different mind,
competence and interests and in search of wealth and
sustenance we go in different directions like the senses
and yet stay together. You, O Soma, flow for Indra,
centre and soul of the system.






[Names: Asvo, Sepo]
The motive power needs a smooth carrier, close
friends in concert love fun, the beautician wants the
cosmetics of her choice, and the vibrant sensitive loves
to appreciate and value the subtlest distinctions between
the seductive sweets and elevating beauties of life in




experience. O Soma, spirit of peace and joy of life, you
flow for the soul’s bliss. (That’s what I am. I am the
soul. I love Soma.)


Mandala 9/Sukta 113






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kashyapa, Maricha, Rshi, Saryanavati, Balam, Somamidrah, Somamidra, Indra]
In the order of power and prosperity, let Indra,
ruler soul of the order, dispelling darkness and
destroying evil, wielding the power and creating super-
strength and lustre in the self, enjoy, protect and promote
the honour and glory of the order to the heights of
excellence. O Spirit of cosmic beauty, glory and grace,
flow and radiate in the service of the glory of divinity
higher and higher.






[Names: Rtavakena]
O Indu, Soma, spirit of power and glory, master
ruler and protector of the quarters of space, virile and
generous, realised with faith and relentless austere
discipline in pursuance of the Vedic voice, come from
the depths of nature and simplicity of eternal law, and


MANDAL - 9 / SUKTA - 113 419


flow, pure and purifying, for Indra, the ruling soul, in
the service of divinity.






[Names: Parjanyavrddham, Suryasya, Suryas, Parjanyavrddha]
That Soma, glory of life, growing great as the
cloud by the cloud, daughter of the sun, the dawn and
divine faith, brings to the earth. The forces that sustain
the earth take and fill that glory of soma with beauty
and joy of life. O Indu, spirit of power and grace of
glory, flow for the power and majesty of Indra in the
service of divinity.






[Names: Rtam, Sraddham, Indrayendo]
O Soma, spirit of glory and majesty of the order,
great with the light and lustre of truth, reflecting the
truth and rectitude of the order, speaking the truth, doing
things aright, reflecting divine faith in action and policy,
shining bright and ruling, purified and consecrated by
the universal divine ordainer, O Soma, flow for Indra,
soul of the system in the service of divinity.








[Names: Satyamugrasya]
Together and in truth flow the laws of infinite
potent majesty. Beauties and graces of gracious blissful
[Names: Indu]
spirit of beauty and joy, purified and energised by the
spirit of Infinity, flow for the sake of Indra, ruling soul
of the system in the service of divinity.






[Names: Yatra, Gravna]
Where the sage, pure at heart and purifying,
chanting the sacred word of the Veda grows to spiritual
dignity by the control of mind and senses, there, creating
the joy of life by the experience of divine ecstasy, O
Spirit of glory and majesty, flow for Indra, the ruling
soul in the service of divinity.






[Names: Tasmin]
Where light is eternal, where divine bliss is
vested in life itself, in that immortal imperishable haven
of freedom and bliss place me, O Spirit of beauty,
majesty and grace, and flow for the sake of Indu, soul


MANDAL - 9/ SUKTA - 113 421


of the system I love and admire.






[Names: Yatramuryahvatirapastatra]
Where eternal Time is the ruler supreme, where
light and bliss is self- contained eternally without
obstruction of mutability, where those mighty streams
of bliss flow within constant Infinity, there, O Soma,
place me immortal. Indu, O spirit of joy, generosity and
grace, flow for Indra, soul of the system of existence in
the service of divinity.






[Names: Yatranukamam, Loka]
Where you move free as you wish, in the highest
paradisal bliss, in the highest heavenly light, yourself
the light of Being itself, where all worlds and all people
are vested in light divine, there in that heaven of bliss,
O Soma, place me immortal. O Indu, spirit of light and
bliss, flow for Indra, the soul that I am, for the soul that
is supreme.








[Names: Svadha]
Where all desire is beyond desire, where
knowledge is climactic supreme, where faith, self-
sacrifice, surrender and the self itself is fulfilment, there
in that heaven of peace, place me immortal. O Indu,
spirit of universal eternal peace, flow for Indra, the soul
of existence.





[Names: Yatranandasca, Kamasya]
Where all orders of bliss, all forms of pleasure,
all delights and ecstasies abide subsistent in bliss divine,
where all desires and ambitions are subsumed in
fulfilment, there in that heaven of eternal joy and
fulfilment, place me immortal. O Indu, flow for Indra,
ultimate soul of existence.


Mandala 9/Sukta 114






[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Kashyapa, Maricha, Rshi, Indoh, Tamahuh, Somavidhanmana, Indrayendo]
One who rises and lives upto the presence, rules


MANDAL - १ / SUKTA - 114 423


and laws of vibrant omnipresent Soma, light of the
world, they say, he is the man, fulfilled in the self and
family. O Soma, spirit of light and joy divine, vibrate
and bless the man who dedicates his mind and sense,
will and action to your presence and law.






[Names: Somam]
O lord omniscient, cosmic seer, sustainer of life,
the sage who sublimates and raises his songs of praise
with hymns realised in the essence by the Vedic seers,
and, having paid homage to self-refulgent ruling Soma,
rises in the self-awareness of divinity is divine. O Indu,
lord of light, sustainer of nature, vibrate and flow in
your presence for such a soul and bless him.






[Names: Sapta, Deva, Indra, Somabhi, Aditya, Adit]
Seven are the directions, regions of the universe,
many many suns, seven priests and seasonal yajakas of
nature, bright divinities, suns and stars, all the seven
orders of existence that there are, with all these, pray
protect and promote us. O Soma, let the divine power
and presence vibrate and flow for Indra, the soul of








[Names: Arativa]
O Soma, spirit of light and life of the universe,
whatever your ripest gifts of knowledge and power, with
those, pray, bless and promote us. Let no enemy oppress
us. Let none hurt anything of ours. O Indu, spirit of
light and bliss, may your presence flow for the soul and
promote the life and spirit of humanity.




425


MANDALA 10


Mandala 10/Sukta 1





[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Agre, Agnirbhanuna]
There on the eastern horizon, with the first lights
of the dawn emerging out of darkness, rises up the sun,
mighty Agni, great and glorious with radiant light, and
as it rises it covers and lights up all regions of the world.






[Names: Citrah]
Agni, born of the womb of earth and heaven
covered in darkness over night, you are beautiful, lovely
as a child and wonderful, and as you rise over night and
darkness, you radiate your rays over mother heaven and
earth proclaiming them bright, and immediately you are
received and held over them in the herbs and trees for
life.








[Names: Visnurittha]
Omnipresent Agni, Vishnu, thus risen as the sun,
attains to its third and supreme state of the expansive
light of infinite divinity which it radiates, protects and
promotes. Those wide-awake sages who receive this
divine light energy through direct presence and
internalise it celebrate it in song and worship it as the
nectar gift of divinity here on earth.






And you, Agni, who bear and augment the food
for life, life creative and food productive agents of nature
and humanity, bearing food for you, serve you in
response to you, and as they feed you, you reach them
again while they are in different form, and thus you are
the leading power in the yajnic cycle of life among
nature and the human people and communities.






[Names: Hotaram, Pratyardhim, Sriya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 1 427


Agni, high priest of all non-violent and
inviolable yajna, all creative and productive activity in
nature and humanity, moving forward by wondrous
beautiful chariot, blazing banner-bearer and pioneer of
progress, cyclic augmenter and promoter of every
brilliant and generous divinity in nature and humanity,
is loved, cherished and reverenced of humanity by virtue
of its divine grandeur, generosity and grace: this Agni
we worship and serve by yajna.






[Names: Agnirnabha, Aruso]
assuming different modes of form and function, holding
on at the centre hold of the earth, burning in the vedi,
arising on top of the world, bright and beautiful, at the
heart of clouds flashing with lights of thunder, present
in advance of evolution, present all time upfront, high
priest of cosmic yajna, ruling supreme, pray join all
divinities of nature and humanity, bring them here and






Agni, you always pervade and illuminate both




mother earth and heaven as a saviour child illuminates
both parents at heart with elation. Go forth ever strong,
ever youthful climactic power and presence bright and
beautiful, mighty forbearing, come to the loving
celebrants and bring in all that is divine, here and now.


Mandala 10/Sukta 2






[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Piprthi, Ever, Agni]
all-reaching all pervasive power and presence, ordainer
and maintainer of the seasons of time and nature, fulfil
the loving and aspiring seekers, dedicated scholars and
divine powers, and be with energy they should have. O
self-refulgent divine energy, light and intelligence, of
all the divine powers and presences, stars and planets,
which together carry on the dynamics of cosmic yajna,
you are the closest, highest and most adorable power
worthy of attainment.






[Names: Vesi, Svaha]
Agni, you produce, procure, energise and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 2 429


provide all yajnic inputs, refinements and purifying
agents of life for humanity at the individual and social
level for life’s maintenance and promotion. You are the
harbinger of intelligence and knowledge and giver of
wealth and honour, and you are the observer and
presiding power of holy rites, laws and seasons of time
and nature. We enact the yajna with holy inputs and
with truth and honey of thought, word and deed, and
pray may divine and adorable fire carry the fragrance
to the divinities for human fulfilment.






[Names: Agnirvidvantsa]
Let us follow the path of the divinities, sagely
scholars, stars and planets as far as we can and do that
in proper order so that we may be able to continue: Agni
knows, the scholar knows, the sun is the base of
knowledge in relation to its systemic position, that is
the high priest of the solar system, that controls the
harmonious movements of the planets, that ordains the
pattern of the seasons.


(Let the sun be the base of our knowledge of
the stars and planets in our pursuit of yajnic astronomy.
Similarly let the sagely scholar who knows the science
of yajna be our guide in our studies and our actions.)








[Names: Yadvo, Agnistad]
And if we, being ignorant and deficient, neglect
or transgress or overstep the laws and disciplines of
those who know, then, O divinities, Agni, the sun, the
sage, being abundant and graciously fulfilling, makes
all that up and saves us by those very powers and actions
in time and seasons by which it keeps the sages and
divinities in the systemic order.






And if we mortals, either because of immature
mind or poor faith and want of expertise, do not know
and do not understand and appreciate the way the divine
solar yajna is going on, even so Agni, the high priest of
that yajna, knowing, ordering and conducting that yajna,
the most adorable pervasive all reaching partner, carries
on the yajna of heavenly bodies in order according to
the time and seasons.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 2 431




[Names: Visvesam, Janita]
The creator of all the stars and planets of the
universe moving in their orbits created you too, O Agni,
O sun, wonderful pioneer and commander of the solar
system. Pray come, join us and give us lands and earths
blest with noble people, and bring us cherished foods,
energies and knowledges, and let there be showers of
rain giving us abundance of food and fertility for the
life species of the world.






[Names: Panthamanu]
O Agni, you whom the heavens bear as sun and
light, the middle regions bear as wind and electricity,
and the earth bears as fire and magnetic energy, whom
Tvashta, cosmic maker of all forms of existence,
fashioned forth and brought into existence, you, O Agni,
O Sun, knower of the paths of father Time and mother
Niyati, cosmic intelligence, and of the Karma and fate
of ancestors, children of time, you, lighted in the vedi
and blazing in the heavens, pray shine on us and
illuminate the paths of life for us.




Mandala 10/Sukta 3




[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Cikidvi]
rusatimapajan.


[Names: Mighty]
illuminator of heaven and earth, blazing and
commanding terrible power, abundant with life giving
energy, is seen on high, energising life for intelligent
and industrious work on earth and shining with
boundless light, and then relinquishing the day light
and projecting the light far away ahead, passes on to
the area of erstwhile darkness of the night. (Then night
follows the day here and the day follows night there.)






[Names: Krsnam, Urdhvam, Suryasya, Suryas]
Then again, overcoming the dark passage of the
night with its illumination of light and manifesting the
youthful daughter of great and vast heaven bearing the
light of the sun up above, the same Agni shines with
heavenly light constantly for the day.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 3 433




[Names: Bhadro, Supraketair, Agnir]
The sun of auspicious light, dispeller of darkness
of the night, has come up close at the heels of its love,
the beauteous holy dawn now on the run on its own and
thus Agni, prevailing with beautiful sun shine of the
morning holds off the darkness for the day.






[Names: Asya, Ssivasya, Idyasya]
The mighty floods of the solar light version of
this Agni, bursting forth like thunderous explosions of
the voice of kindly, friendly, adorable, potent and
sublime power, are fair and blissful reflections of the
eternal Spirit, the Purusha, for the man of vision and
knowledge on way to divinity.






[Names: Svana, Jyesthebhir]
Agni, beauteous and blissful, mighty and
sublime presence whose brilliant rays and reflections




radiate, resound and flow like roaring winds and
thunderous lightning illumines the heavens with its
highest lustre and with its sportive and most potent
splendours reaches the summit of refulgent space.






[Names: Susmaso, Pratnebhiryo]
The mighty radiations of this solar Agni,
universally vibrant and armed with thunder, roar with
the winds while this divinest and most refulgent
universal presence pervades and relentlessly energises
the universe with its eternal, brilliant and resounding
reflections and vibrations.






[Names: Agnih]
Agni, bring us great wealth, honour and light
of the world. Be with us on the yajna vedi, being radiant,
vibrant and ever on the move between the joint world
of heaven and earth. Agni, commanding light,
illumination and instant motion, eloquent by expression,
come by the waves of energy with the voice of thunder,
come and bless us here on the vedi.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 4 435


Mandala 10/Sukta 4






[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Dhanvanniva]
Agni, eternal, self-refulgent and universal spirit
of light, I join you in yajnic self surrender, I send up my
thoughts and prayers to you so that you may be always
with us, adorable and present, in our yajnas and joint
battles of life. Just as rain is the shower of bliss in the
desert, so you are the giver of fulfilment to the yajnic
celebrant and the needy supplicant.






[Names: Duto]
To you, most youthful Agni, people move and
they join you for bliss as cows move to the warm stall
to escape the cold outside. You are the saviour and
vibrant presence at the heart of divinities and mortal
humanity, and by your radiant presence and grandeur
you exist and vibrate in every thing.








[Names: Sisum, Dhanoradhi, Just]
loving it and raising it, so does mother earth hold and
bear you, victorious, as fire and magnetic energy,
augmenting you and loving to be with you, and you,
radiating through the middle space, rush down, loving
and ambitious to win and excel, like a captive animal






[Names: Mura, Saye, Jihvayadan]
O wise one, enlightened presence, light and fire
of knowledge and energy, we are ignorant, but you know
and bear your grandeur, dear loving Agni. You pervade,
vibrate and radiate, lying immanent in various forms,
touch, lick and consume with your flames and rays
various assimilative forms of existence, being master
of the world.







[Names: Kucijjayate, Asnatapo]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 4 437


Somewhere it arises and manifests in old and
dried woods with the banner of smoke or streak of a
falling star in dead worlds. New, adorable as well as
ancient bright, it abides unattached in floods of water
and vibrates and radiates in vapours and clouds like a
mighty force of energy which intelligent knowledgeable
people visualise, realise and generate in various ways
for various uses and purposes.






[Names: Tanutyajeva, Iyam]
Like dedicated self-insulated researchers in
pursuit of light and energy scholars study Agni with the
application of light rays and ten senses and pranas and
then say: this is the latest new knowledge about you,
Agni, pray come and join us as a new chariot of
achievement with brilliant rays of power for energy.






[Names: Brahma, Raksa]
O Agni, all pervasive, all knowing and born
anew, this voice of knowledge, this offering is homage
and this song of adoration may ever be progressive and
rising for us. Pray protect and promote our children,




protect our grand children, and protect and watchfully
guard our body and mind without relent.


Mandala 10/Sukta 5






[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Ekah, Sisaktyudharninyorupastha]
The one deep oceanic treasure hold of all world’s
wealth, manifestive in many ways, Agni inspires and
expands our hearts with light and generosity, fills the
middle space between heaven and earth with vapours
of the cloud, and abides at the hidden centre of the
mystery deep in the cloud.






[Names: Samanam, Rtasya]
Great, generous, animated and impregnated
forces such as clouds, bearing the same one inner law
and spirit of Agni, join with impetuously fast moving
forces and, open ended, vibrant, expressive and
expansive, observe the universal dynamics of the law,
and at their centre continue to bear many other forms
and forces of water and energy yet to develop and act
further in evolution.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 5 439





[Names: Rtayini, Visvasya]
The forces of law and change and the forces of
form and intelligence evolving things together in
measure of form and time create every new form as a
lovely baby and thus, with the mind of the cosmic seer,
designer and maker, extend the genetic thread of Agni,
the centre seed and centre hold of the entire world of
moving and non-moving versions of cosmic reality.






[Names: Adhivasam]
Visionary scholars who know the paths of law
and change in evolution study and apply the versions
of Agni evolved and developed in latest form for the
achievement of new and extended food, energy and
knowledge of reality which heaven and earth both
sustaining all forms of life feed for extension with inputs
and refinements of the honey sweets of water and energy.








[Names: Sapta, Antaryeme, Pusanasya, Pusanas]
The sun rising and illuminating the world
radiates seven rays of bright light and raises them from
the honey sweets of mists of the morning in order to
illuminate the world for all to see. The sun, of ancient
and eternal birth, radiates them across the middle regions
and, with love for the earth, shines over, meets and
energises the nutritious forms of things on earth.






[Names: Ayorha]
Seven are the bounds between good behaviour
and evil set up by the wise. If one violates even one of
them, he is a sinner. Agni is the pillar and centre hold of
humanity. At the end of the journey, one, who in life
has observed these bounds, reaches and rests in the
shelter of the highest and closest, Agni, and abides in
the highest states of being.







[Names: Asaccha, Agnirha]
Being and Becoming, constant and mutable,
both in the Supreme Absolute mystery, then the seed of
perfect existence in the womb of Mother Nature, and


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 6 441


then Agni, self-manifested at the earliest stage of
creative evolution, all this, our father and mother as one,
was in the ultimate infinite mystery of Brahma, -the
Supreme Reality, the Absolute Soul, One with its own


[Names: Prakrti]
Mandala 10/Sukta 6






[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Ayam, Sarmann, Jaritabhistau, Jyesthebhiryo]
This is that Agni under whose shelter with all
protection the celebrant rises towards the attainment of
total fulfilment and who, self-refulgent and gracious,
infinitely abundant, transcends all with the highest and
most blazing lights of divinity.






Agni who, self-refulgent and gracious, shines
along with the light of divinities and light of cosmic
stars, keeps the eternal laws and values of life and nature,
and who, ever true, inviolable and unviolated, goes on
with love and friendship with the friends and celebrants
of divinity like energy itself, constantly.








Agni who rules over all the divine bliss and
yajnic gifts of the world, who, life of the world, is the
life giver and rules over lights of the dawn and
maturation of wisdom, for whom oblations of yajna are
offered into the fire with heart and soul, that Agni of
the unviolated cosmic chariot sustains the universe by






[Names: Sasebhirvrdho, Mandro, Agnira]
Agni, self-exalted by its own powers and
majesty, loved and adored with Vedic hymns, awakens
and inspires the divinities at the earliest and fastest.
Charming and adorable, holy receiver and liberal giver,
most highly worshipped with heart and soul, universally
immanent and pervasive, Agni blesses the sages with
divine gifts of holiness and grace.




MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 6 443




[Names: Tamusram, Indram, Indra, Agnim]
That Agni, giver of prosperity, shining and
radiating like light energy, you should study, realise and
exalt with words of adoration and oblations of holy
offerings. Agni, universally immanent and wakeful giver
of strength and power, sages and scholars study and
exalt with high words and application of mind and





[Names: Asme]
Agni, brilliant divinity and power, into which
all wealth, honours and excellences of the world
concentrate like stormy war horses in close formation
by swift movements and converge in battle victory, pray
create and bring us the latest, fastest and most powerful
means of defence, protection and advancement.


[Names: Adha, Anu]
Agni, leading light and power, instantly ignited,
enflamed, rising and growing to admirable stature, come
and abide in our heart and home with grandeur, grace




and power. That bright, potent and awful form and nature
of yours, the first and highest sages, protected and
protective, take up, develop and exalt.


Mandala 10/Sukta 7






[Names: Agni, Devata, Trita, Aptya, Rshi, Svasti, Sacemahi, Samsaih]
Agni, divine power and presence, life of the
world, bless us with life, health and food of universal
order and quality, and bring us all round happiness and
well being for yajnic fulfilment of our life. Protect and
promote us, Spirit of wondrous powers and
performance, by your wide, comprehensive and far
reaching intelligence and open declarations of laws and
values, and finally let us join you.




[Names: Yada, Anu]
Agni, Spirit of life and giver of light, these
hymns of adoration spontaneously arisen in praise of


your glory, with all our mind and senses, celebrate your
gifts of success and achievement when, O shelter home


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 7 445


of life and giver of wealth, the mortal receives his reward
according to your law, bears and manages it with his
mind and senses in order and feels the divine awareness
vibrating in the soul.






[Names: Agnim, Agnimapim, Agnimapi, Agneranikam, Sukram, Suryasya, Suryas]
I always accept and adore Agni as father, Agni
as my own closest relative, Agni as brother and as
unfailing friend. I worship the great Agni’s solar
presence in the heaven of light, adorable, refulgent,
worthy of love and service.






[Names: Sidhra, Rtava, Puruksur]
Agni, may our thoughts, prayers and adorations
be effectual and give us fulfilment. O constant giver of
light and life, home mate in yajna, whoever you protect
and promote, grows higher in dedication to truth, divine
law and yajnic living, blest with holy and bright sense
and mind, abundance of food, energy and life’s joy. We
pray may our life be good and prosperous with
brightness day by day.








[Names: Dyubhirhitam, Mitramiva, Bahubhya]
Refulgent with lights of life and knowledge,
helpful and cooperative as a friend, ancient and eternal,
constant yajaka by seasons, lover and accomplisher of
yajna, such is Agni. People generate it with dexterity of
hands, awaken it in the soul with constant practice and
renunciation, and establish it among people as giver of
life and sustenance.






[Names: Svayam, Yathayaja]
O self-refulgent spirit of the universe, by
yourself you energise the divine forces of nature in the
higher regions of life and conduct the yajna of evolution.
What can man, limited in knowledge, accomplish for
you in this cosmic yajna? O lord omnipotent, as you
have eternally carried the yajna according to time and
seasons, similarly, O lord, carry on the yajna of the






[Names: Bhava, Rasva]
MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 8 447


Agni, pray be our protector and be our preserver
against external fears and internal weaknesses. Be our
protector of health and good age and bring us greater
and higher strength and vigour. O lord of grandeur, give
us the wealth and competence to carry on our yajnic
homage to the divinities and humanity in the yajnic
evolution of the divine cosmos. Save us, protect and
promote us, without neglecting the well being of our


Mandala 10/Sukta 8






[Names: Agni, Indra, Devata, Trishira, Tvashtra, Rshi, Divascidantan]
Agni, mighty abundant power and presence,
goes forward with lofty lightning force and banner
roaring over heaven and earth. It goes to the very heights
and bounds of heaven in all directions and sub-directions
and pervades in the middle regions in the depth of
vapours and the mighty one grows mightier there at the
heart of clouds.






[Names: Mumoda]
Agni waxes with joyous energy, all pervasive
and comprehending, mighty abundant, virile and
invigorating, lovely as a child yet perfect and powerful
as accomplisher, and expresses itself loud and bold from
silence of the night to roar of the winds and thunder of
the clouds. Thus does Agni go on, the quintessence of
divine powers, raising and energising all presences, as
the prime power and presence in its own universal
dwellings over and across spaces (as agni, fire and
magnetic force on earth, as vayu, electric energy in the
middle regions, and as aditya, light in the high heavenly






[Names: Asya]
In the cosmic yajna of motherly earth and
paternal heaven, Agni, the sun, enlightens the top
regions, in the middle regions the oceanic vapours and
vibrant winds hold it as electric energy, and in its lower
paths of radiation on earth on the yajna vedi all physical
forms of existence join its bright flames and radiations
and benefit from it.






[Names: Usauso, Rtaya, Mitram, Mitra]
MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 8 449


Agni, Vasu, sustainer of life, generating the sun
for the manifestation of your self, you rise first with
every dawn, illuminate the day and distinguish both day
and night, and for conduct of the yajna of existence you
bear the seven flames of fire and seven rays of light.






[Names: Bhuvascaksurmaha, Bhuvo]
You are the eye and guardian of the mighty
yajnic order of the cosmos, and when you proceed for
the dynamics of the order you become the great
evolutionary force of the process of formative evolution.
You are the omnipresent power that sustain the waters
and energies of the cosmic evolution against devolution,
and you are the inspirer and promoter of the yajamana
who offers you the holy inputs of the evolutionary
yajaka.






[Names: Divi]
Agni, you are the leader and carrier of yajnic
energies and energiser of the regions through which the
energies rise and radiate, where you join and conduct
the holy waves of energy onward. In the regions of light
you sustain the blissful sun high and on the earth you




enjoin your flames of fire to carry the fragrance up and
around for the world.






[Names: Sacasyamanah]
Trita, the human soul, wearing three body covers
of gross, subtle and causal forms in earthly existence,
with the desire to win the love of this supreme paternal
divinity by concentrative meditation, chooses to
meditate on divinity within the self and, thus nestled in
the parental presence praying as a child for protection,
obtains the arms for defence against internal and external
onslaughts of material involvement.






[Names: Trisirsanam]
That divinely self-realised soul, having got the
paternal arms of defence and inspired by Indra,
omnipotent supreme divinity, fights against the material
adversaries and, having controlled and subdued the three
headed seven bridled bondage of sense and mind, gets
free of the bonds.


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 9 451






[Names: Bhuridindra, Tvastrasya, Sirsa]
Indra, protector and saviour of the pious and
true devotees, destroying the mighty lustrous, rising and
proud adversaries of the child of cosmic materiality,
breaks the bonds of seven fold sense-mind complex,
destroys the three headed cover of physicality and sets
the soul free.


Mandala 10/Sukta 9




[Names: Apah, Devata, Trishira, Tvashtra, Sindhudveepa, Ambarisha, Rshi, Mahe]
Apah, liquid energies of cosmic space, surely
you are creators and givers of peace and joy. Pray inspire
and energise us for the achievement of food and energy
for body, mind and soul so that we may see and enjoy
the mighty splendour of divinity.





[Names: Sivatamo]
Let us share here in body that nectar sweet taste
of yours which is most blissful, be like loving mothers
for their children.



[Names: Tasma]
O holy waters, lovers of peace and pleasure of
bliss, we come to you without delay for that pleasure,
peace and enlightenment for the promotion and stability
of which you move and impel people and powers and
invigorate us too. Pray bless us with vigour and vitality.



May the divine waters be for our peace and bliss
for body, mind and soul and bring us showers of peace,
protection and blessedness.


Sovereign givers of the cherished gifts of our
choice, harbingers of peace and settlement to people, I


pray may waters of peace bring me health, sanatives
and blessedness.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 9 453




[Names: Apsu, Agnim, Agni]
Soma in the waters touches and speaks to me:


All sanatives reside in the waters which also contain
the vital warmth and fire of Agni for peace and
blessedness of all.






[Names: Jyok, Suryam, Surya]
O waters, give me peace, stability and sanative


vitality for my body so that I may see the sun for a long
long time in life.






[Names: Idamapah, Yadvaham]
Holy waters, wash off all this negativity and


whatever is ill or deficient in me, or whatever I
disapprove and hate, or whatever wrong, false or








[Names: Payasvanagra]
Today I have enjoyed the touch, taste and
sanctity of waters in the right spirit. We are all one with
the spirit of waters. O fire, divine Agni, master of the
nectar spirit of waters, come, take me on to bless me.
Consecrate me with valour and lustre into a new life.


Mandala 10/Sukta 10


Devata: Yama Vaivasvata (1, 3, 5-7, 17, 13) and Yami
Vaivasvati (2, 4, 8-10, 12, 14) Rshi: Yami Vaivasvati (1, 3,
5-7, 11, 13) and Yama Vaivasvata (2, 4, 8-10, 12, 14)


This sukta is a beautiful poem in the form of a
dialogue between Yama, the bright day, and Yami, the
dark night. They are children of Vivasvan, the sun. The
theme is desire of the night to commingle with the day,
which is not possible as long as the earth rotates and
revolves round the sun and the world continues to exist
as itis. Yama and Yami can commingle only when all
this variety of existence goes back into the unity of
absolute essence beyond physicality. The dialogue thus
is a nature myth which borders on the mysterious


Yama and Yami are treated as human characters.
For this reason certain commentators as Sayana and
others who follow Sayana and popular mythology
interpret Yama and Yami as twin brother and sister. The
theme then is reduced to a story of incestuous love
unfulfilled. This interpretation is not correct because if
Yama and Yami were brother and sister, the name of the
sister would be Yama ending with long a, and not Yami.
Yami can be the name of the female partner of a wedded
couple (Panini, 1, 4, 48) and not of a twin sister. They
are interpreted here as complementarities.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 10 455


It may be further suggested here that Yama and
Yami on the human plane need not necessarily be
[Names: They]
be interpreted as two close friends in love, Yami
proposing and soliciting the love of Yama and Yama
replying that the love possibly cannot be consummated
because the day and night can never meet except at that
point of time where meeting and parting are identical
and simultaneous. And whenever the meeting would
be possible in remote future, at pralaya, the time of


[Names: However, Yama]
and Yami as twins they should be interpreted as the male
and the female complementary forms of the same one
human species, children of the same one creator,
Vivasvana, in which case the question of incest between
brother and sister does not arise.)






[Names: Puru, Piturnapatama]
Yami: With love and desire I come to my friend
of my own choice, a friend who has crossed the vast
ocean of life a long long way, and I solicit and pray that
knowing and thinking of your fulfilment of familial
obligation on earth, you beget a successor saviour of
your father’s familial line and (in marriage) bless me
with a child.








[Names: Mahasputraso]
Yama: Your friend accepts not your proposal of
love, friendship and union since you are not
homogeneous with him in character and versatility of
merit and maturity, in fact you are the contrary. Indeed
the brave progeny of the great lord of life and energy of
nature, refulgent with light and wisdom, who maintain
the light of heaven along with the earth take exception
to such a proposal of union, in fact they watch, wonder
and rule out such a proposal for union.





[Names: Usanti]
Yami: The immortal sustainers of earth and
heaven do wish that every mortal should leave at least
one descendant child. I have accepted your mind and
soul as one with me, so pray come and join me in body
as life giver husband of your child.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 10 457




[Names: Gandharvo]
Yama: Having observed the laws of divine
nature and observing them now, what we have never
done before how can we do now in violation of the truth
and law? Gandharva, the sun, sustainer of the earth, is
there in the middle region, the moon too is there, so are
you, youthful night, as I am. But the earth is the common
axis between you and me both, and that is the extreme
opposition between you and me. (We cannot possibly
meet while the earth is in orbit.)






[Names: Garbhe, Nakirasya]
Yami: Our generator Savita, creator of the
universe, Tvashta, maker of forms and Kah, sustainer
of created forms, made us a couple in nature’s womb of
generation itself as keepers of this earthly home. None
can now violate the rules of the lord’s discipline, they
don’t. Mother earth and father heavenly sun know of
this complementarity of ours.








[Names: Brhanmitrasya, Varunasya, Varunas]
Who knows of this complementarity created at
the dawn of creation? He alone knows. As of now, who
witnessed it? Who can vouchsafe it now? Vast is the
distance between east, the house of Mitra, sun and the
day, and west, house of Varuna, presiding deity of the
night. O wanton dear, having seen the people now, who






[Names: Yamasya, Jayeva]
I, the night, feel stricken with desire to share
life with you, Yama, in one house and one bed and wish
I should surrender my body as a wife does to the husband
so that we may carry on the business of life like the two
wheels of a chariot.






[Names: Anyena]
Yama: These watchful lights of divinities which
sojourn here around in space neither stop nor deviate
from their path, nor do they wink their eye. O love-lorn
maiden, go soon to one of these, other than me and with


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 10 459


him carry on the business of life like a chariot wheel.






[Names: Ratribhirasma, Suryasya, Suryas, Diva]
If for a moment the lord of existence were to
reduce the earth to the axis and its centre point and the
light of the sun were exhausted along with days and
nights, then like heaven and earth together we too may
be together and the night may enjoy conjugal union with
the day without any obstruction





ages hence when contraries would lie together and
coexist without contradictions. Therefore for the time,
O sweet and debonair, extend your hand of love to








[Names: Kamamuta, Yami]
to me? And I, deprived of love and care, become a sister,
bereft, going away elsewhere in search of another?
[Names: Lovelorn]
with body. (Are you just a complementary support and






[Names: Nava]
Yama: No, I would never touch your body with
my body. The wise say that to go and meet a sister like
that is a sin, to meet a corresponding way farer in orbit
is a violation of the law of nature. O dear and fortunate
one, go, be happy with another other than me and make
it possible if you can. Your brother way farer does not
love this proposal, no he cannot.






[Names: Bato, Anya]
Yami: Sorry Yama, O day, it is a pity I did not
know your mind and heart this way of nature. May be
some one other than me too may join you like a girdle
round your waist and embrace you like a creeper
clinging by a tree.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 11 461






[Names: Anyamu, Tasya]
Yama: Some other may embrace you too and
you embrace him like a creeper by the tree. Love you
the other man and his heart, may he too love you and
yours. Thus may you create and achieve a happy union
in love and good fortune.


Mandala 10/Sukta 11





[Names: Agni, Devata, Angi, Havirdhana, Rshi, Vrsa, Visvam]
Generous, omnipotent and indomitable Agni,
self-refulgent ruling Spirit of life in the systemic order
of existence, with its natural art and intelligence and
creativity, creates and showers the waters of growth and
sustenance from the divine infinity of inexhaustible
plenty of light, life and joy for the yajnic and generous
powers of nature and humanity. The Spirit is Varuna,
omniscient intelligence with universal discrimination,
knowing the world as it is and the way it behaves. May
the lovable and adorable Agni worshipped at yajna love,




join and bless the yajnic celebrants of life divine
according to the seasons and its own love and






[Names: Rapadgandharvirapya, Istasya, Aditirni]
May the spirit and power of Agni blazing in the
sun, thundering in the clouds, vibrating in vapours,
flashing in lightning, burning in the vedi and roaring in
rivers, protect, promote and inspire my mind. May
imperishable Infinity, indomitable nature and inviolable
policy establish us all at the heart of what we love to
do, accomplish and worship in life and society, and may
our chief, eldest, supportive and sustaining brother,
speak to us and enlighten us in matters of Dharma, artha,
kama and moksha.






[Names: Yadimusantam, Agnim]
Instantly does that blessed, blissful, inspiring
and elevating dawn, light of life, vision of wisdom,
harbinger of honour, excellence and divine virtue, arise
and shine in response to dedicated action bearing the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 11 463


bliss of heaven for all humanity when, in pursuit of
corporate creative living and search for total freedom,
people light the yajna fire for Agni, lover of the lovers
of divinity and chief high priest of the yajna of life.






[Names: Adha, Yadi]
When noble and dynamic people, lovers of life
dedicated to yajna fire, choose to worship the potent
and gracious Agni, chief of cosmic yajna and harbinger
of infinite gifts, then the celebrant soul of the individual,
or society or the ruler of the social order, with flying
super-intelligence inspired by the spirit of divinity,
achieves that same great and ecstatic power and
enlightenment of universal order both on earth and in
the spirit by social yajna and spiritual meditation, and
by that Agni itself, omniscient, omnipotent and
omnificent, becomes the inviolable foundation of human
karma, and all possible faculties of thought and action
arise for the achievement of success.









[Names: Sadasi, Viprasya]
Agni, just as food is dear and auspicious to the
robust lover of health, so are you dear, exciting and
inspiring for humanity, being the holiest presiding power
of social and spiritual yajna served with hymns of
invocation and adoration, you who, pleased with the
sage’s songs of adoration, sharing and fulfilling the
yajnic homage of devotees, visit and bless the celebrants
with plenty and immensities of gifts of enlightenment






[Names: Udiraya, Vivakti]
Agni, raise and augment the parental powers of
heaven and earth and extend the honour and excellence
of humanity there like the sun, stealer of the night, which
spreads its light in space. The yajamana performs yajna
in honour of the divinities of nature and humanity and
loves the divinities and yajna with his heart and soul.
The ruler, burden bearer of the life of humanity, is up
and active and adores and exalts you. The fire is rising
and blazing bright, the high priest is inspired, and the
life giving energies vibrate with action and intelligence.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 11 465




[Names: Yaste, Srnve, Isam]
Agni, creator and augmenter of power, patience
and fortitude, the mortal who reaches and internalises
your divine favour of knowledge and wisdom rises to
immortal honour and fame and, having abundant food,
energy and life’s graces of his choice and enjoying
equipment of horses and fast transport, rises in light,
lustre and splendour of life day by day.






[Names: Yadagna, Ratna]
Adorable Agni, when this holy assembly of your
yajnic powers and virtues honoured among the divines
meets and, O lord self-refulgent and self-sufficient, you
distribute the jewels of life among them, then pray bless
us too with our share of the honour and excellence of
life.







[Names: Srudhi]
Listen to our prayer, Agni, in this hall of yajna,
harness your chariot replete with the nectar of




immortality, bring us the wealth of earth and light of
heaven both divine, let none of the divinities forsake
us. Pray abide in our heart here and ever.


Mandala 10/Sukta 12






[Names: Agni, Devata, Angi, Havirdhana, Rshi, Dyava, Devo]
Heaven and earth are the first and closest
divinities by virtue of the cosmic order to listen to the
holy chant and proclaim their response with light and
generosity, when Agni, refulgent spirit of life and light
of the world, chief priest and inspirer of cosmic yajna,
calling mortals to the altar, settles in the vedi itself
upfront, generating and accelerating the radiation of its
own energy in the yajnic process being enacted.






[Names: Dhumaketuh]
May Agni, supreme power and presence of the
spirit over divinites of heaven and earth, first and instant
cognizant of our invocation and prayers, radiate and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 12 467


carry our homage and oblations to the divinities of
nature by the laws of its cosmic order, Agni, the power
with the banner of light and fragrance, blazing with the
flames of fuel fire, adorable sublime, divine call for
action and creative evolution, eternal and imperishable,
loving and companionable by words of sincere
adoration.






[Names: Svavredevasyamrtam, Visve, Anu]
When the celestial nectar of this refulgent
power’s own essence radiates, then the energies
generated by it support and sustain both earth and
heaven, and all divinities of nature and humanity receive
and celebrate these gifts of Agni, the divine beauty,
radiance and liquid energies which the light divine






[Names: Arcami]
Listen both heaven and earth my words of
adoration : I celebrate you both heaven and earth as
father and mother, givers of the liquid energies of life
for the growth and progress of humanity and the




environment, which, may the brilliant geniuses of
humanity, taking forward the energy projects and
policies of the world, promote day and night incessantly,
and which, may the parental powers and leadership of
mankind refine and augment to further the light and
sweetness of life here on earth.






[Names: Mitrasciddhi]
Does the ruling and refulgent Agni receive and
and limits of benediction and experimentation? Who
knows this secret we ought to know? Agni after all is a
friend. Invoked and served with excess or remiss, it
would still accept our homage and adoration and convey
it to the divinities, and we pray let there be success and






[Names: Durmantvatramrtasya, Yamasya]
Incomprehensible is this mystery of immortal
Agni and its power, for sure, since arising from the same
one origin and being homogeneous, it grows to
boundless variety of forms, which, nevertheless, for the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 12 469


man who knows the One Supreme, Agni, ordainer and
controller of this existential variety, is simple and clearly
understood. This man, O lord great and gracious, protect
and promote without relent.






[Names: Yasmin, Surye]
In whose being the divinities of nature and
humanity rejoice in the yajnic order of existence, carry
on their assigned tasks in the regions of light and in the
heart and mind of humanity, and vest light in the sun
and the dark tinge in the moon, that self-refulgent Agni,
the sun and moon and all other divinities constantly
adore and serve.




[Names: Mitro]
vita devo varunaya vocat.


In whose illuminative yet mysterious being all
divine powers exist and act, we know not well. May the
same self refulgent Agni, the divine powers reveal to
us, simple, sincere and conscientious seekers of divinity,
so that we may distinctly and intelligently know and
serve the divine power. May Mitra, universal spirit of
[Names: Aditi, Mother, Nature]
refulgent Savita, the sun, reveal the mysterious power


and presence to us.






[Names: Srudhi]
Listen to our invocation and exhortation, Agni,
in this spatial hall of cosmic yajna. Harness the chariot
replete with the nectar of immortality, bring us the
wealth of earth and light of heaven both divine. Let
none of the divinities forsake us. Pray abide in our heart
and soul here and for ever.


Mandala 10/Sukta 13








[Names: Havirdhane, Devata, Angi, Harvirdhana, Vivasvan, Aditya, Rshi, Adit]
in Yuje vam brahma purvyam namobhirvi Sloka etu


[Names: Srnvantu]
For you, O heaven and earth, men and women,
bride and bride groom, bearers of the holy materials of
yajna, I chant the holy Vedic voice of divinity with
fragrant oblations into the vedi in honour of Agni, lord
self-refulgent. May this voice spread around like the
spirit of light and joy of the enlightened. Let all children
of immortality across the world listen, and listen all those


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 13 471


too who abide in the celestial regions of light and divine






[Names: Yame]
Living and working together like a pair of twins
in this home, when you perform this yajna, then the
people around dedicated to divinity would accept and
honour you as a holy couple. Abide in your own
beautiful place as an enlightened couple and, happy and
healthy in your own joint life, live on for the peace and
joy of yourselves and all of us and for self-fulfilment in
the service of divinity.






[Names: Panca, Aksarena]
By the discipline of body mind and soul, I would
cover the five stages of earthly existence from the
vijnanamaya kosha to the anandamaya state of divine
joy. I would cover the four stages of brahmacharya,
grhastha, vanaprastha and sanyasa to total freedom. By
meditation on Aum I would cover the physical, psychic
and spiritual stages to the fourth stage of turiya, the




state of transcendent happiness. Thus would I reach and
abide in the centre of the divine order of existence in
the state of absolute purity of the spirit.






[Names: Devebhyah, Brhaspatim]
Which death does Brhaspati or Yama choose for
the divines? What immortality does he not choose for
[Names: Choose, Brhaspati]
Seer as the high priest as well as the object of yajna,
self-sacrifice, and Yama would either strengthen the dear
body vestment of the soul, or, otherwise empty it out of






[Names: Sapta, Marutvate, Marutvat, Ubhe]
As children for the parent, seven poetic
compositions of the Veda shower the light and bliss of
eternal truth on the soul, master of pranic energies and
abiding within at the heart in the body. Both thought
and speech, heaven and earth inspire and elevate both
divines and humans, both exercise both to rise and both
strengthen and refine both orders of life, both coexist
with the Law.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 473


Mandala 10/Sukta 14








[Names: Yama, Lingokta, Pitarah, Shvanau, Devatah, Yama, Vaivasvata, Rshi, Pareyivamsam, Vaivasvatam, Anupaspasanam, Anupaspasana, Know, Yama, Time]
all comprending Time, pervading all that moves forward,
stars and planets all, watching, showing the paths of
movement for all and outlasting them all. Temporal
correspondent dimension of Vivasvan, Savita, ultimate
light and supreme spirit, immanent and transcendent,
eternal and infinite, ordainer and controller of the world,
ultimate end and destination of all that is born, it is the
creator, mover and consumer all in one. Worship it with
service and homage of yajna (if you wish to survive as
spirit through the flux).


Note: In Surya Siddhanta time is Cosmic Time
and, secondly, it is temporal which is the temporal
correspondent of things in flux. One is called Lokanam-
anta-krt-Kala which comprehends all things in
existence, and the other is time in respect of calculation,
‘Kalanatmaka’. Yama in this hymn is not the god of
death, it is the child of the sun, Vivasvan. Therefore
Yama should be interpreted as time, in both aspects,
i.e., temporal aspect and beyond the temporal in its
eternal aspect which is the space-time continuum of








[Names: Yamo, Yatra, Anu]
Time, first and highest of existence, knows as it
comprehends our course of life, and that course no one
can avoid, escape, alter or alternate, and that same is
the path by which our earlier forefathers went their way,
and that is the path by which all who are born go their
way, knowing according to their Dharma and choice.
Honour that time with homage.






[Names: Matali, Yansca]
Terrestrial fire and bodily heat grow by food
and fuel, Yama, life time and life energy, grows by pranic
energy, and Brhaspati, spirit and enlightenment, grows
by Vedic words and divine joy. These capacities which
divinities of earth and heaven and divine enlightenment
augment, and the divinities of the environment on earth
and above, which humans augment, grow mutually, the
divinities by svaha oblations, and humans by svadha
offerings of food, and thus they rejoice.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 475




[Names: Imam]
O Yama, happy life time of health and joy, come
in union with nourishing and protective energies of
nature and vest those energies in my yajnic body system.
Let the thoughts and health mantras of the sages come
with you here with exhilarating and inspiring poetic
voices, and then, shining and ruling in the system within
with all these gifts, rejoice and make me happy too.






[Names: Angirobhira, Vivasvantam]
O Yama, life time of health and age, come with
pranic energies of nature of various and versatile sort
worthy of union and assimilation according to time and
seasons, be happy and rejoice with me. I invoke the
refulgent Sun also, your generative father, and pray
come and be seated in the holy heart core of this life
yajna of mine for a full age of good health and joy.
(Reference may be made to Atharva Veda 3, 8, 1: May
the sun come with its rays joining and entering the earth
and energising it according to the seasons. Rgveda 1,
71, 2 throws further light on the science of health and
solar rays in relation to the earth and global atmosphere.)








[Names: Angiraso, Tesam]
May the pranic energies radiated by the sun in
the seasons of summer, rains, autumn, early winter, peak
of winter and spring be good for us for body, mind and
spirit. Lovable, companionable and promotive they are,
worthy of reverence. May they be agreeable to us and
give us a healthy environment, pleasant, benevolent and






[Names: Prehi, Ubha, Varunam, Varuna]
Go forward, O man, move on by the ancient
paths of life universally carved for you, by which the
forefathers too went forward to complete their course
of life. Intelligent you are and you see both the divine
sun and the divine night, the all comprehending time
and the spirit of cosmic judgement, the solar region and
the cosmic waters, divine, brilliant, ruling mighty in
terms of their own powers and agreeable by your service
to them and to the environment.






[Names: Hitvayavadyam]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 477


O soul, join with pitr pranic energies and go
forward, join with another life time for future existence
and go forward, join with your acts of obligation and
dharmic choice and go forward to the highest spaces,
having left this exhausted body, go to a new home, join
with a vigorous bright body full of fresh life again. (This
is the journey from one life time to another.)






[Names: Apeta, Ahobhir]
Pitr pranic energies of solar radiation which have
carried this soul, departed, gone away, carried around
by sun rays, have prepared this new home for it, and
Yama, cosmic order of time, with days, nights, dawns
and liquid energies, has provided this another stage of






O soul, by paths of divine law and rectitude, go
forward to a life of day-night cycle, each being of twelve
hour duration of colourful beauty, both children of
dynamic energy, alert and on the move, lighted by the
sun and moon. Then enjoy the auspicious rays of the
sun which always rejoice with the passage of time.








[Names: Tabhyamenam]
O time, those two day and night are your
guardian sentinels of twelve hour duration each, all
watching, protective companions of humanity on way.
O ruling lord of light, to their care entrust this soul. Let
there be peace and well being for it all round, bless it
with good health and freedom from sin and ailment.





[Names: Urunasavasutrpa, Tavasmabhyam, Suryaya, Surya]
Those two night and day are the most perceptive,
abundant and alert, mighty strong and relentless watch-
dogs of time immediately close ahead and on the heels
of people. Let them now again give us happiness and
well being full of bubbling energy so that we may see
the light of the sun anew, giver of life and enlightenment.




13. Yamaya somam sunuta yamaya juhuta havih.


[Names: Yamam]
Prepare the soma for Yama, lord of the light and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 14 479


life of cosmic order, offer the homage of soma oblations
to Yama, the holy soma-yajna goes to Yama, with all its
beauty and power conducted by the holy fire, divine
messenger between the devoted yajakas and the sun.






[Names: Yamaya, Sano]
Offer holy homage full of ghrta to Yama for
harmony between your life and the cosmic order of time
and nature, and abide in that mood and state of karma.
And may the lord vest strength and efficiency in our
body, senses and mind for a long life of good health.






[Names: Idam]
Offer the sweetest and holiest honeyed oblations
to Yama, Lord of time and refulgent sovereign of the
cosmic order. This homage is in honour of the sagely
seers, the forefathers, the ancients who carved the paths
of life for us.






[Names: Trikadrukebhih, Tristubgayatri]
The great one, supreme, infinite, omnipotent, is




One, pervading the variety of existence by three
dimensions of time, present, past and future, and by six
seasons of the year, three lokas of space, earth, sky and
the heavens, and six directions, rules alone. Trishtubh,
Gayatri and all other Chhandas abide in the One Word,
Aum. All these orders of omniscience, omnipresence
and omnipotence abide in One, emerge from That and


[Names: Yama, Time]
Mandala 10/Sukta 15


[Names: Pitarah, Devata, Shankha, Yamayana, Rshi]
Pitaras in this hymn means nature’s life giving,
life preserving and life promoting pranic energies,
especially the sun rays which start an invigorating yajna
with the dawn and continue it upto sun set. It also means
the flames and fragrances of yajna rising from the vedi
and joining the natural energies to enhance the efficacy
of nature’s recuperative power for life. On the human
plane it means the seniors, the enlightened, the teachers
and social workers, men of experience, vision and
judgement who contribute to the welfare and progress
of society with, their actions and ideas. It does not,
however, rule out pitaras of human tradition and history
who continue to live by their ideas and ideals they
contributed for the progress of society, to whom we feel
grateful for their living guidance even after their




[Names: Udiratamavara, Asum]
pitaro havesu.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 15 481


May the sun rays of the morning, mid-day and
evening time which radiate and inspire vital soma energy
into the things they touch rise in power and efficacy
and promote the strength and joy of life. May the wise
seniors of the average, high and middle order, harbingers
of peace and joy, friendly, dynamic scholars and
scientists of yajna who know the cosmic order and the
laws of nature and living truths of life rise, inspire us
with energy and enthusiasm for life, and may all these
saviour and protective powers of nature and humanity
strengthen us to defend and promote ourselves in
internal and external challenges of life and the







[Names: Idam]
Let this yajnic homage today be for the sun rays
and pranic energies radiating from the east and west,
for the energies which abide in the earthly sphere and
in space and skies, and for the energy which vibrates in
the living forms of nature anywhere and in humanity.







[Names: Aham, Barhisado]
I know and join the holy, wise, generous and
parental powers of humanity. I know the stable, radiative
and expansive power and presence of yajna and its
creative effects. O scholars and scientists of yajna who
join the creative science here on the vedi with your
inputs of knowledge and expertise, come and partake
of the freshness and fragrance of fruits produced and
given by yajna.






[Names: Barhisadah, Samyorarapo]
O parental powers of humanity, scholars of the
science of atmospheric and environmental management
of the globe, for all round peace and protection of life
here and hereafter, we have prepared these yajnic
materials for you for homage which please accept and
use with love and faith. O masters, come always with
peaceful modes of universal protection, bear and bring
us showers of peace and freedom from sin, violence
and fear.






[Names: Upahutah, Sruvantvadhi]
Senior venerable sages eminent in the science
of soma and yajnic production of the dearest valuable


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 15 483


wealth forms for peace and progress, invoked and
invited with reverence, pray, come here to the yajna,
listen to our ideas and words, speak, consider and
discuss, and protect and promote us with knowledge.






[Names: Acya, Purusata]
O saviour sages of the world, with knees bent
in honour of the vedi, please sit on our right, accept and
accomplish the yajna with specific words, and if we
happen to transgress some manners or ritual, or are
impertinent to you because, after all, we are human,
pray be kind and do not in any way hurt or punish us.





[Names: Asinaso, Putrebhyah]
The radiations of sun rays in the lights of the
dawn bear wealth and energy for the man of charity,
and wealth and comfort for his children too. May the
sages seated on the vedi realise and bring that wealth
and energy for us and our future generations.








[Names: Somapi, Tebhiryamah]
Those eastern lights of the dawn which awaken
and inspire us bear pranic energies radiant and replete
with life energy of the sun, treasure source of living
soma. May the sun shining and rejoicing with those very
bright rays accept and revitalise our oblations offered
into the holy fire at dawn.






[Names: Agne]
Those bright rays of the dawn, divine, sharp and
inspiring, invigorating, which come to earth thirsting
for holy food and water, with those very rays, generous,
truly divine, poetically sublime and soul satisfying,
conveying pranic energies with morning, mid-day and
evening warmth and heat of the day, O yajna fire, come
and bless our yajna for the gift of rain.







MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 15 485


O yajnic fire, arise and come with those true
and pervasive, oblation consuming, water promoting,
electric energy borne eastern and western sun rays along
with divine forces of nature which are laden with pranic
energies of a thousand mind and sense inspiring
sanatives pervasive in the light of the sun from dawn to






[Names: Agnisvattah, Agnisvatta, Atta]
O senior sages and scientists of solar energy and
yajnic production committed to policies of positive and
assigned and reserved in the programme, accept the
homage and yajnic materials offered and, by the conduct
of yajna, bless us with wealth, power and honour worthy
of brave humanity for generations.





[Names: Tvamagna, Pradah]
O divine fire present in everything born, lighted,
raised and developed to flaming power, you catalyse
refine and energise the holy materials to tremendous




power and fragrance. O brilliant divinity, consume the
materials offered, feed them to the sun rays, and may
they too further refine, energise and spread them all
around in space for creative purposes of nature for life






[Names: Yeceha, Tvam, Jataveda, Agni]
those sun rays which are here, those which are not here,
those which we know of and those which we do not
know of, you know them all and, as far as you pervade
and know, pray accept our oblations of yajna with
pleasure, make them good, and turn them to universal
power and goodness by radiant rays of the sun for the
benefit of all humanity and all life on earth.






[Names: Agnidagdha, Tebhih]
Those rays of the sun which carry the heat of
fire, in summer, and those which do not carry the heat
of fire, in winter, all these which radiate in the spaces
between the solar region and the earth and bring joy to
people by showers of rain, by all these, O self-refulgent
Agni, strengthen to the utmost, energise and refine this


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 16 487


body which is the seat of life energy.


Mandala 10/Sukta 16






[Names: Agni, Devata, Damana, Yamayana, Rshi, Mainamagne, Sariram, Yada, Srtam, Agni]
it entirely, do not cast away its form, do not cast away
its body entirely. When its gross body is reduced to ash,
[Names: Jataveda]
deliver it to the sun rays.






O Jataveda, when you have reduced its gross
body to ash and delivered it to the sun rays, when it
comes to the process of transmigration to higher
constituent elements, then it is subjected to the laws of








[Names: Suryam, Surya]
Let the eye go the sun. Let the soul go to the
wind or to the region of light or to the earth in
consequence of its dharmic performance, or, if such be
its interest and desire, let it go to the water or reach in
herbs and trees there to stay in mere body form.






[Names: Socistapatu, Yaste]
O Jataveda, that part of human personality which
is unborn and eternal is the soul, purify and season it to
its original purity by the heat of your divine discipline.
May your light and fire purify and shine it to its purity
and lustre beyond the dross. And by those divine natural
potentials of yours which are holy and blissful, pray
carry this soul to noble body forms in blessed regions
of life.





[Names: Ayurvasana]
O Agni, Jataveda, form and shape out once again
from material elements and energy what, having been


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 16 489


offered to you in the fire, roams around vested with its
own potentials. The soul that remained alive after giving
up its material vestments in the fire may, we pray, assume
a life time of earthly existence and go about with the






[Names: Svapadah, Agnistadvisvadagadam, Somasca]
O soul, in the course of life, whatever fear, harm
reptiles may do to your body, may Agni and Soma and
Soma science known to experts heal that and restore
you back to good health.






[Names: Agnervarma]
O soul, from fire itself, from the flames
themselves, get another body form anew and cover it
with flesh and marrow, and let not this fire, bold and
crackling with blaze of power, embrace you and burnt
you out.








[Names: Imamagne]
O Agni, do not disturb and dislodge this new
body form which is a darling of the divines and the sun
rays of light and bliss, this body in which the immortal
divinities rejoice and find their fulfilment with yajnic
food and drink.






[Names: Kravyadamagnim, Ihaivayamitaro]
I set in motion the fire which consumes the
corpse, and may it, carrier of the material body, go up
with it and reach the regions of life consuming spirit of
Time. And here itself the other fire, Jataveda, all
pervasive fire of life, all aware, may bring in the food
for life for the sustenance and satisfaction of the
divinities.



[Names: Yoagnih]
The fire that turns away from the corpse
consuming fire enters your homes and, watching this


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 16 491


other all pervasive fire, I give up that and take to this
brilliant fire for honour to ancestors and the
environment. May it carry our yajna to the sun in the


[Names: Predu]
The fire, participant of natural law, which carries
the elements of the corpse to nature, pervades in senior
humanity and vibrates in natural energies too. The same
fire carries the yajnic homage and proclaims the gifts
for the ancestors, for the divines and for nature.


With love and passion we hold you at heart for
thought and reflection. With love and faith we light you
together and celebrate. You too with love and longing
come and bring our loving seniors and blissful energies
to receive our offerings and universally disperse them.






[Names: Kiyambvatra]
O fire, leave the place, extinguish the heat, let it




cool where you scorched and burnt it, and let it be fresh
with the growth of watery plants, luxuriant grass and






[Names: Sitike, Sitikavati, Mandidya]
O cool grass, O refreshing land, growing with
luxuriant grass, O delightful spot covered with delightful
flowers, rejoice with beauty and grace, let this place of
holy fire be renewed, joyous and gracious.


Mandala 10/Sukta 17






[Names: Saranyu, Pusha, Sarasvati, Apah, Apah, Soma, Devatah, Devashrava, Yamayana, Rshi, Tvasta, Yamasya]
Tvashta, cosmic maker of forms of existence,
for the fulfilment of the creative urge of nature, Prakrti,
initiates the process of evolution and the entire universe
comes into being in cosmic time. While Prakrti, consort
of the self-refulgent creator Savita (Tvashta Being its
forming faculty) and mother origin of the order of
evolution, is fertilised and moved on to its generative
function, it disappears, that is, it converts from its


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 17 493


original and intangible essence into the tangible creative
form and power in existence.






[Names: Apaguhannamrtam, Utasvinavabharadyat]
Transforming the original immortal constant
Prakrti in favour of mutable mortal forms of existence,
the evolutionary power of divinity, creative and dynamic
Prakrti, offers this form of itself to self-refulgent creator
and master, and then in that dynamic state as it is then,
it bears a twin pair of evolved existence, the Ashvins,
positive-negative complementarities of the evolutionary
circuit of nature’s dynamics, and produces procreative
couples such as Agni and Soma, energy and matter,
prana and rayi, male and female, presence and absence
(as the two may be described from different points of
view).






[Names: Pusa]
O man, may Pusha, lord of life and nourishment,
omniscient sustainer and pervasive protector of the
world, whose light and life of forms never goes out of
existence, inspire you and lead you on the right path
from here. May he, leading lord self-refulgent Agni,




dedicate you to noble parents and brilliant generous






[Names: Ayurvisvayuh, Yatrasate]
Pusha, life of the world and giver of life and
nourishment, may protect you all round and inspire and
promote you on the path forward, and may Savita, self-
refulgent lord of light and vision, guide you where men
of noble action reach, and stabilise you where they
abide.






[Names: Pusema, Anu, Svastida]
Pusha knows all these paths and directions of
life and he fulfils all our hopes and ambitions too. May
he lead us on the most fearless path of progress. May
he, giver of all round good and well being, refulgent
and vigilant, all mighty, all knowing, be our pioneer
and path maker without neglect or relent.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 17 495




[Names: Prapathe, Ubhe]
Pusha inspires, strengthens and guides humanity
to know and follow the best paths of life and reach the
goal, the paths to heaven and the paths over earth. He
pervades the dearest paths of progress here and the paths
to freedom there and, all knowing and emerging in
consciousness, guides us here and beyond.






[Names: Sarasvatim, Sarasvatima, Sarasvatim]
Aspirants to knowledge and the light of divinity
invoke Sarasvati, voice of divinity, they offer homage
of faith and devotion in psychic and spiritual yajna
which expands their intelligence and vision. Men of
noble action invoke Sarasvati, ever flowing Spirit of
Knowledge, for strength of will and direction. May
Sarasvati grant cherished gifts of knowledge, will and
vision to the generous yajakas.






[Names: Asadyasmin]
O divine Sarasvati, cosmic voice of divinity,
who radiate and expand on the rays of light and rejoice




with homage of faith and devotion and the inner
vibrations of mind and soul, pray come, abide in this
inner seat of mind and consciousness, bless us with
divine joy and bring us food and energy free from sin
and pollution for the enlightenment of mind and soul.






[Names: Sahasrarghamilo]
dedicated to meditative yajna in mind and soul invoke
and serve in right earnest, we pray, bless the yajamanas
with their share here of food and nourishment, wealth,
honour and excellence, and the vision and voice of
divinity loved and sought for by thousands of seekers.






[Names: Visvam, Sucira]
May the fluid and vibrant currents of cosmic
energy, original mother source of nature’s dynamics of
evolution, which, divine and inviolable, soaked in
goodness and grace, wash away the entire sin, evil and
pollution of life, purify and sanctify us with sweetness
and beauty of manners and culture. Thus purified and
sanctified, I rise and go on in life.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 17 497






[Names: Drapsascaskanda, Samanam]
The elixir of life showers on the earliest
refulgent worlds by the dawn of days, on this world
and this life also as did ever before. The same elixir of
life, the same radiant sun, the same soma element of
divine nature, vibrant in this world and this life, I invoke
and celebrate with all my seven faculties in honour of
the spectrum of its beauty and divinity.






[Names: Yaste, Adhvaryorva]
O Savita, lord giver of life and light of the world,
the soma nectar of life that showers ever from divinity,
that vigour and inspiration which is released from your
hands and from the loving heart of exuberant Mother
Nature filtered through her pure sattvic elements in the
cosmic yajna, that nectar received at heart in the soul, I
offer in homage with prayer.








[Names: Ayam]
O Soma, lord of life, giver of light and bliss,
your nectar of divinity that vibrates every where, the
radiations of light and spiritual awareness expansive
here in existence and existent there in absolute time and
space, that very nectar of life and light of existence,
may Brhaspati, this generous spirit of infinite knowledge
and speech, shower upon us by the Word and vibrations
of divinity for our fulfilment of life here and hereafter.






[Names: Payasvatirosadhayah, Apam]
May the oshadhis, herbs and trees, which receive
the sap and sweetness of their sustenance from sun light
and moon rays, be full of exuberant Soma nectar of life.
May this fluent song and speech of mine be full of love
and sweetness of life’s joy. May this inspiring essence
of the liquid flow of natural energies be full of universal
nectar, and may all these with that nectar energise, purify
and sanctify me.


Mandala 10/Sukta 18


[Names: Mrtyu, Dhata, Tvashta, Pitrmedha, Prajapati, Devatah, Sankusuka, Yamayana, Rshi]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 18 499



[Names: Param, Anu, Caksusmate]
O Death, go off to that other path that’s yours,
of mutability other than the path of divinity. You have
eyes to see and ears to hear, and to you I say: Do not






[Names: Mrtyoh, Apyayamanah]
O travellers on the path of divinity, dedicated
performers of yajna, as you go forward effacing the onset
of death and living a long life of high order of happiness
and virtue, may you be blest with wealth and noble
progeny, may you be pure and sanctified at heart and in
the soul.






[Names: Pranco]
May these living people, (we all), be free from
the shades of death in life. May our dedication and
service to divinity be auspicious and fruitful today. May
we go forward living a long life of high order of virtue
full of the joy of song and dance and laughter.








[Names: Imam, Satam, Purucir]
I set this border line of order for these people.
May none of these trespass this into the other territory
of death. May they live a long age of full hundred years,
bearing though the fact of death within with adamantine
walls of resistance by the discipline of health.






[Names: Yathahanyanupurvam, Yatha]
Just as days follow in succession, the latter
following the former and the former living on in the
latter, just as seasons go on by order of the seasons of
the year, just as the successor does not and cannot
forsake the predecessor, so in the same order, O lord
ordainer and sustainer of humanity, order and sustain
the life line of these people.



[Names: Anupirvam, Anupirva]
mayuh karati jivase vah.


Go forward high on course of life choosing a


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 18 501


full age unto completion and fulfilment in the order of
succession and renewal from former to latter, living in
discipline actively, all of you, as many as you are. Nobly
born here in life, living together in piety with love and
devotion as you are, Tvashta, the cosmic maker, ordains
a full life of long years for you to live in joy.






[Names: Anasravo, Janayo]
Let these women, noble wives living with their
husbands, enter and live in their homes, and let them,
decked with jewels with beauty aids, creams and
unguents, free from sorrow and ill health and blest with
noble children, move forward high in life.






[Names: Udirsva, Hastagrabhasya]
Rise, O woman, to a new phase of life, your
husband is now dead and gone. Come take the hand of
this man from among the living who offers to take your
hand and maintain you, and live in consort with this
other and new husband of yours for a life time.








[Names: Dhanurhastadadadano, Atraiva]
Taking the arms from the hand of the dead
warrior for the sake of our social order and its strength
and glory, here itself and now, you and we all blest with
brave heroes shall overcome all our rivals and enemies
of the world.






[Names: Urnamrada]
O man, go to this land, this motherly earth wide
and expansive, kind and gracious. Soft, generous and
youthful for the man of generosity and yajnic dedication,
she would protect you from the clutches of adversity
and premature death and promote you with prosperity.






[Names: Ucchvancasva, Mata]
O mother earth, receive this soul with elation,
stop it not, hurt it not. Be a nursing mother for this child,
be soft and caressing with love and affection. Just as
mother covers the child with the hem of her sari, so, O
mother earth, cover, caress and protect it to maturity.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 18 503






[Names: Ucchvancamana, Ssrayantam, Saranah]
May the earth stay abundant, generous and
prosperous, giving life sustenance and shelter to
uncountable souls which may live in here with peace
and joy. O mother, may your homes be full of love and
abound in food and delicacies, and may they always
provide peace, pleasure and comfort for humanity.






[Names: Etam]
O man, for you I sustain this earth up in space,
for you I place this global atmosphere around, and this
I would not hurt or dislodge. This well pillared, well
sustained planet of clay the rays of the sun would sustain,
and the sun would sustain and vitalise the homes of
life.








[Names: Praticine, Praticim]
In the days ahead, as the archers fix feathers on
the arrow to hit the target, so may I concentrate my
attention with the arrow-like chant of Aum to reach the
target of Divinity and, like a horse controlled by bridle
reins, direct my voice of prayer in focus on the deity.


Mandala 10/Sukta 19








[Names: Apah, Gavah, Devata, Mathita, Yamana, Bhrgu, Varuni, Chyavana, Bhargava, Rshi, Agnisoma]
O cows, fluent energies, flowing waters and
radiant rays of light, O dynamic people, all treasure
holds of wealth, go round and come, go not elsewhere,
come bearing wealth of life. Bring us showers of
abundant food and energy. Agni and Soma, fire and
water energy, Punarvasu, wealth in circulation, bring
in wealth for us from all round.






[Names: Punarena, Indra]
O ruler, keep the dynamics in motion and
circulation, control them back and forth. Let Indra, the
controller, keep them in controlled circulation. Let Agni,
the enlightened, keep them in radiation, watch them and
keep them in ordered motion.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 19 505






[Names: Punareta, Thaivagne]
Let these dynamic forces in circulation come
back again, grow and rise in this social system governed
by the ruling power. Here itself, O Agni, keep their reins
on hold, and let the wealth centre here in the soul of the




[Names: Yanniyanam, Avartanam]
huve.


Of the people in the society, of the dynamics of
wealth in the socio-political system, of the fluctuations
of mind and sense in the individual personality, the
balance and equilibrium, the expense out again,
withdrawal, release and hold, I watch, and I invoke and
call up whoever is the keeper, ruler and master.





Whatever the expense out, whatever the
investment out, revolvement of wealth, energy and
assets, whatever the total state of economy in action,


let the managing powers constantly watch and control.






[Names: Jivabhirbhunajamahai]
Indra, ruler and controller of life and the world,
come, come constantly, keep life constantly in motion,
give us the wealth and energy of life again and again.
Pray let us enjoy life with living wealth, bubbling energy
and creative ambition.




[Names: Pari]
I hold, maintain and sustain you all round with
energy, water, milk, ghrta and the delicacies of manners
and graces of culture.


May those who are divines worthy of yajnic
service and association refresh, rejuvenate and advance
us with wealth, honour and excellence.





[Names: Bhumyascatasrah]
O constant, vibrant, ever present lord, turn to
us. O lord ever vigilant, inspire us to turn to you. Four
are the directions of the earth. From all these, let the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 20 507


wealth of the world, the energies of nature, the
fluctuations of our mind and senses turn to us, revolve,
concentrate and vibrate there and here.


Mandala 10/Sukta 20
[Names: Agni, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi, Bhadram]
O Agni, lord of light, inspire and enlighten our
mind to turn to divinity and concentrate there.


[Names: Agnimile, Sasa, Agnimil, Mitram, Mitra, Yasya]
I invoke, celebrate and worship Agni, ever most
youthful and powerful of the divine givers of life’s joys,
friend, irresistible in law and justice, in whose order
and Dharma all earthly people and divine forces of light
serve, live and enjoy life as on the mother’s breast.






[Names: Yamasa, Bhrajate]
Agni, refulgent giver of light and sustenance,
profound abode of love, power and kindness, source of
light and knowledge, whom people exalt with prayer


and adoration shines in glory.






[Names: Aryo, Kavirabhram]
Master and ruler of the people, mainstay of life
like the earth, Agni pervades and vibrates upto the
bounds of heaven. Omniscient poet and universal
visionary, he gives the light of lightning to thunder and
the clouds of rain.






[Names: Jusaddhavya, Minvantsadma]
Accepting with love the homage of humanity,
Agni abides in yajna and shines high by flames of fire
and, transcending the hall of yajna, goes on vibrating
across the spaces.






[Names: Ssrustidasya, Agnim]
Agni is the source of peace and well being,
receiver of yajnic homage, adorable in yajna.
Unimpeded is his course, instant his motion, infinite
the ways he goes by and ultimate his light and voice to
which the divines reach for bliss.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 20 509






[Names: Yajnasaham, Sevasya, Adreh]
I love and adore Agni, the refulgent power that
conducts the spiritual and social yajna of the highest
order. A celebrity worthy of worship, inexhaustible
treasure of eternal joy, inspirer of dedicated devotees,
life giver, indeed the very life of existence as they call
him.






[Names: Naro]
Those leading lights of humanity among us who
serve and exalt Agni with yajnic offerings of homage
may, we pray, enjoy your love and favour.






[Names: Krsnah, Sveto, Sono, Hiranyarupam]
Black, white and red is the order of this Agni
moving the world forward, great bond maker, simple
straight and fast, rich in food, wealth and honour, grand
and glorious, which the lord creator has adorned with
golden beauty and grace.







[Names: Gira]
Thus does the celebrant in ecstasy of adoration,

O Agni, Spirit of universal light and life, inspirer and
sustainer of cosmic energy, offer you homage in
immortal words of love and faith. O refulgent spirit of
life divine, bearing holy vision and wisdom for the
devotee, bless us with food and energy for body, mind
and soul, give us a happy home with wealth and honour
of universal order.


Mandala 10/Sukta 21








[Names: Agni, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi, Agnim, Agni, Yajnaya, Siram]
Like fire for comfort, with our own holy chant
for the internal yajna of our spiritual purification and
of cosmic yajna, all pervasive purifier by the white heat
of his divine radiance. Verily the lord is great and
glorious for you.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 21 511






[Names: Tvamu, Veti]
Those self-radiant self reliant men of strength
and success adore and exalt you. Their simple, honest
and natural homage of oblations reaches you for your
pleasure and satisfaction. Verily you are great for the
devotees.






[Names: Krsna]
Devotees dedicated to your Dharma serve and
feed you with profuse ladlefuls of ghrta, you who for
your pleasure and excitement bear white and dark flames
and fumes and assume all the beauties and graces of
life. Verily you are great for your devotees.





[Names: Yamagne, Tama]
Agni, immortal power of strength and fortitude,


the wealth, honour and excellence you hold and believe
is great, that very wondrous wealth bear and bring us in




yajnas with your pleasure and magnificence for our
victory in our struggle for progress. Surely you are great
and glorious for the devotees.






[Names: Agnirjato, Bhuva]
Agni, light of divinity, realised by the man of
constant mind, would enable him to know all knowledge
of the world, being the messenger of the spirit of
omniscience and love of the man of divine discipline.
Agni you are great in your own light and joy for your
devotees.






[Names: Tvam]
Agni, light, energy and power of life, people
value and adore you in their corporate programmes of
creation and development at every stage of the noble
creative process. You, indeed, bear and bring for the
people of creativity and generosity all the wealth and
power they desire, since in all matters of joy and
celebration for yourself and for them you are always
waxing great and glorious.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 22 513




[Names: Ghrta]
People set, establish and celebrate you in yajnas,
Agni, charming, shining with oblations of ghrta, bright
and pure, most illuminative accomplisher of yajna
according to the seasons and your vision of the world.
Agni, you are waxing great for your devotees.





[Names: Agne, Sukrena]
Agni, with pure and powerful flames you shine
and expand infinitely in many many various ways.
Roaring and thundering, you love to shower on earth
from heaven and inspire life forms with new energy
and vitality for your own joy and for joy of the people.
Agni, you are always waxing great and glorious.


Mandala 10/Sukta 22
[Names: Indra, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi, Kuha, Indrah, Indra, Sruyate, Rsinam]
gira.


Where is Indra heard of today? Where like a




friend, among what people, is he heard of? Indra who
is exalted by words of prayer, in the homes of sages and
realised in their mind?





[Names: Mitro]
Indra, lord of justice and thunder is renowned
and sung here among us, most adorable worthy of
worship for us, who is glorified among people, perfect
and absolute and kind as a friend.




[Names: Maho, Bharta]
Mighty master, commander and giver of great
strength is he, perfect, unequalled and great giver of
wealth and power, wielder of the awful thunderbolt and
father protector and promoter of humanity as of his own





[Names: Yujano, Syanta]
O wielder of the thunderbolt and adamantine
will, harnessing commander of cosmic energy mightier


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 22 515


than the roaring winds, generous self-refulgent lord of
divinities, guide of the travellers of the paths of light
and creator of new paths of advancement open for
humanity, you are adored as the master, protector and
promoter of life and its possibilities.






[Names: Tvam, Yayordevo]
You by yourself impel those two straight and
natural currents of cosmic energy of which there is no
other impeller divine or human, nor is any one else who
and apana of the body system too.)






[Names: Adha]
The lover of life, the human soul, asks you both,
currents of prana and apana energies, for what purpose
did you come to this mortal home of ours, this body
system, from the far off region of heavenly light and
from the earth?








[Names: Susnam]
Indra, lord omnipotent of cosmic energy and
pranic vitality, pray join us and accept our homage of
adoration by which we pray of you that great strength
and protection of divinity which may repel and destroy
inhuman and evil onslaughts of our mortal enemies.






[Names: Akarma, Whoever]
human and anti-life, that negative and destructive force,
O destroyer of the unfriendly, saboteurs and destroyers,
control, suppress and eliminate.






[Names: Sura, Surairuta, Purutra]
O lord most potent, Indra, protect and promote
us by the brave so that even in terrible crises we may
survive and prevail. Infinite are your gifts of fulfilment
that abound all round, and multitudes of people over
earth sing and celebrate your generosity.







[Names: Guha, Savasam]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 22 517


Indra, lord most potent, wielder of thunder and
justice who abide inspiring at the heart of visionary poets
and thinkers, general people and those commanding the
imperishable power of light and social order, pray
inspire, and energise those heroic leaders, pioneers and
leading lights who are engaged in decisive battle against
darkness and evil, ignorance, want and injustice.






[Names: Maksu, Yaddha]
Indra, ruler most potent and wielder of the
thunderbolt, adamantine will and justice, most generous
giver, instant are your gifts of protection, charity and
advancement in matters of success, achievement and
fulfilment, since with your assistant cooperative forces
you destroy all evils of darkness, ignorance and want
of the world created by demonic forces of negativity
and destruction.






[Names: Vayam]
O lord most potent, wielder of the thunderbolt
and justice, may our desires, aims and ambitions, and
achievements of wealth and victory never be fruitless.
May we always be favoured with the blissful presence




and joy of all these fulfilled ambitions and cherished
desires.






[Names: Asme, Vidyama]
Indra, wielder of thunderbolt and justice, may
all our prayers, adorations and yajakas, full of love and
faith without violence, reaching you in service and
worship, be true and fruitful, and may we be blest with
pleasing fruits of these like delicious cow’s milk and
delicacies.





[Names: Ahasta]
The earth grows and expands without hands or
feet by the Sama showers of nature’s existential forces
worth knowing, since for the sake of world life you,
Indra, repel and destroy the negative forces circumam-
bulating the earth.





[Names: Pibapibedindra, Somam, Soma]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 23 519


Indra, omnipotent lord of the world, mighty
ruler, pray accept our soma homage of worship. O shelter
home of life, giver of peace, wealth, power and
excellence, pray fail us not, protect and promote the
celebrant blest with power and honour, O lord of wealth
and magnificence, help us rise to great wealth of life
and attain to mastery of that wealth and power for moral
and spiritual grandeur.


Mandala 10/Sukta 23








[Names: Indra, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi, Yajamaha, Indram, Indra]
We join and adore Indra, lord of cosmic energy,
who wields the thunder in his right hand and controls
the versatile potentials of complementary currents of
cosmic energy in the universal circuit, who with energy
shakes the earthly vegetation, rises high, and with his
forces and implicit potentials acts as catalytic agent and
vests us with natural power and success in achievement.









[Names: Hari, Rbhurvaja, Rbhuksah, Rbhuksa, Savo]
The wealth of energy which the currents bring
into the solar rays are universal whereby Indra becomes
powerful with natural forces to break the dark clouds
of rain. Master of spiritual and physical strength, Indra
rules and protects the wealth, power and honour of the
world, under that protection I too wish to eliminate even
the last trace of negativity and force of destruction.






[Names: Yada, Sruta]
When Indra, glorious lord ruler of the world
rides his golden chariot of state which complementary
forces draw on the course with the energy of solar rays
in nature and the light and loyalty of leading citizens in
society, then he is celebrated as universal master of the
common wealth and the ruler and protector of lasting
power, prosperity and honour of the world.






[Names: Indrah]
The real shower is that when with his own
essential lustre and with his complementary forces Indra
sprinkles and fills the waving greenery on earth with


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 118 521


life energy, when the divine presence pervades happy
homes and weaves them into a happy web of life on
earth with sweets of life, vibrates with power and shakes
contradictory forces as the storm shakes the forest.






[Names: Puru, Tattadidasya]
Who with one united forceful voice silences and
eliminates many many hundreds of contradictory and
confrontationist voices of manly violence, sabotage and
destruction, that power and voice of this mighty Indra
we admire and celebrate, the ruler who, like a parent
power, promotes and elevates our strength, lustre and






[Names: Stomam, Vidma, Purutamam, Purutama]
Free from pride and passion, we have created
and offer you, O lord of divine charity, Indra, an ancient,
unique and most copious song of celebration. We know
the gifts of protection and promotion of this mighty lord,
and, masters of our senses and mind, we keep his divine
presence at heart as the all-seeing master of our life and








[Names: Makirna, Sivani]
Indra, mighty ruler of life and the world, let not
this bond of friendship between you and the sage free
from the shackles of pride and passion ever sever. O
generous lord of light and life, we know your good will
and kindness toward us and we enjoy it too. May this
bond of friendship and the gifts of the bond be good
and blissful for us like the filial bond of parent and child.


Mandala 10/Sukta 24








[Names: Indra, Ashvins, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Ashvin, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi, Indra, Somam, Soma, Asme, Puruvaso]
Indra, lord of infinite wealth, power, honour and
excellence, accept and bless this soma homage of love
and faith, honey sweet, distilled and offered in the ladle
of yajna, protect and promote this joyous world of honey
sweets extending from earth to the skies, bear and bring
us wealth of the world as you in your own divine joy
carry the thousandfold burden of this world. You are
great, lord of glory.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 24 523






[Names: Tvam, Sacipate, Sacinam]
With yajnas, mantras and oblations of holy
fragrances we adore and worship you, O lord of
omniscience and omnipotence, and we pray that in the
ecstasy of your own self and generosity, bear and bring
us the best and choicest of your grand gifts for us. O
lord, you are ever waxing great and glorious.






[Names: Yaspatir]
Indra, you are the master and protector of the
best of wealth, beauty and glory of the world, inspirer
of the obedient devotee, and saviour and promoter of
the celebrants. O lord, in the ecstasy of your own bliss
and omnipotence, pray protect us from sin and jealousy.
You are ever waxing great and glorious.






[Names: Yuvam, Vimadena]
Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and
humanity, currents of energy, teacher and preacher,




scientist and engineer, men and women, powerful,
miraculous, you are always working together, and when
you are invoked and prayed together by the sage free
form passion and pride, O powers ever true and
committed, you come into action and generate the fire
of life.






[Names: Visve, Nasatyavabruvan]
All divinities of nature and humanity shower
love and kindness on the complementary powers
working together in unison without relent or remiss on
their commitment, and as the work goes on, O divinities
ever true and never false or failing, the powers of the
world exclaim: Go on, go on, that way success lies.






[Names: Madhumanme]
Ashvins, complementary divinities of nature and
humanity, let the way beyond be honey sweet for me.
Let the way back on return be honey sweet for me. O
divines, with your blessings, pray both of you make
our life here, hereafter and here again full of honey
sweets and joy.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 25 525


Mandala 10/Sukta 25








[Names: Pavamana, Soma, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi, Bhadram, Adha]
O Soma, lord of peace and bliss, inspire our
mind, skill and wisdom, and our yajnic actions to move
in the direction of goodness and piety, so that, living in
your love and friendship, we may enjoy food and life’s
delicacies like cows enjoying their favourite grass and
thus partake of your divine joy in life here itself. O Soma,
you are great and glorious indeed.






O Soma, all over the world in all places, all these
devoted seekers of wealth and all these heart felt desires
and ambitions of mine worship you and concentrate and
abide in your divine peace and joy. O Soma, you are
great and glorious indeed.








And O Soma, with a mature mind and
intelligence, I follow the rules of your discipline. Then
O Soma, as father for the child, pray bless us to partake
of your divine joy, be kind and save us from death and
deprivation all round. O lord, you are great for the good
of all.






[Names: Samu, Kratum]
Just as showers of rain and streams of water flow
down and rush to the sea, so all our thoughts, prayers,
acts and adorations move and reach you, ultimate
destination of holy works. Pray accept us and our
adorations like ladlefuls of yajnic homage into the joy
of your divine presence. O lord you are great for the joy
of all.






[Names: Tava, Sktibhir, Grtsasya]
Those devotees with a balanced mind, lovers of
divinity, inspired with devotion to the loved and potent
Soma, with all their power of concentration in


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 25 527


meditation reach the state of joy in your presence, O
Soma, wherein they find a settled haven with
enlightened mind and senses and a vibrant will here
itself. O lord you are really great for all.






[Names: Pasum, Purutra, Samakrnosi]
O Soma, you protect and elevate our enlightened
soul. You generate, protect and promote the settled world
of vast variety as well for our holy and joyous living
for a full life in the presence of your divine bliss.
Watching the entire world of existence, you wax great
in your glory.






[Names: Tvam, Sedha]
O Soma, be our guide and dauntless guardian
and protector all round in the world. O ruler of the world,
ward off all errors, failures, violence and foemen far
from us. Let none wicked and malicious boss over us.
O lord, you are waxing great in your glory for the joy of








[Names: Ksetravittaro]
Soma, lord of all knowledge and holy action,
pray let us awake for living a full life of age and
enthusiasm. You know the microcosm and the
macrocosm of existence, none other knows. Pray protect
us from evil men and from sin and jealousy. O lord you
are waxing great in your glory for the joy of all.






[Names: Ssivah]
O Soma, greatest dispeller of darkness and want
and deprivation, our gracious friend as well as gracious
friend of Indra, the ruler, people all round, struggling
in their battle of life for the advancement of their future
generations, call upon you for help, protection and
success since, then, you are waxing great and glorious
in your joy for the good of all.






[Names: Ayam, Indrasya, Indras, Ayam]
This Soma, instant fast, dear happy friend of
Indra, the soul, is great, advances the wisdom and vision
of the great sage dedicated to assiduous thought and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 26 529


work with concentration. Surely, O Soma, you are
waxing great and glorious in your joy for the good of






This Soma moves, inspires and brings immortal
vision and food, energy and the joy of victory for the
sage who has wholly surrendered himself to the divine
presence. He saves the blind and the lame and brings
the highest learning, wisdom and freedom to the seven
sagely yajakas. O Soma, you are ever waxing great and
glorious in bliss for the joy of all.


Mandala 10/Sukta 26








[Names: Pusha, Devata, Vimada, Aindra, Prajapatya, Vasukrt, Vasukra, Rshi]
With love and faith do our cherished thoughts,
prayers and adorations well directed in meditation reach
Pusha, lord of health and fulfilment. Great, beatific and
blissful, his chariot of ultimate freedom of moksha is
ever in readiness, may the lord ever protect and promote
us to that ultimate freedom.







[Names: Yasya, Vipra]
Pusha, whose grandeur of that order, that food
for the soul, may this humanity, this vibrant sage, attain
by noble thoughts and actions. The lord knows of our
sincere prayers and adorations.




Pusha, like Soma, the moon, giver of showers,
knows of our prayers and adorations. Assuming and
pervading all forms of life, he showers his favours of
grace on us, he also showers his kindness and favours
on our foods, pastures and cows as well.





[Names: Mamsimahi, Pusan, Pusa, Matinam]
We know and adore you, divine Pusha, sustainer
of life, giver of success to our intelligentsia, pioneer
guide and purifier of our vibrant sages.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 26 531




[Names: Pratyardhiryajnanamasvahayo, Rsih]
Pusha is the promoter and accomplisher of
yajnas, energy, power and mover of the shining stars,
all seeing creator of joy, well wisher of humanity and
inspiring guide and friend of the sages.





[Names: Adhisamanayah, Sucaydsca, Suca, Vasovayo]
Pusha is the sustainer of immaculate Prakrti and
of the pure intelligent soul, and just as the weaver
weaves a cloth of wool, so does he weave out the
structure and texture of the physical web of the world
and create the bodies of form and adorns them with






Mighty Pusha is the master controller of energies
and powers of the world, generous friends of growth
and progress, spontaneous energises and inspirer of
rising youth, and he is the unchallengeable supreme








[Names: Pusannaja, Visvasyarthinah]
O Pusha, unborn, eternal and undiminishing
forces move your chariot wheels on and on, friend of
all supplicants of the world, eternal, unborn and



[Names: Asmakamurja, Bhuvad]
vam.

May the mighty Pusha power and protect our
chariot of life with divine energy, may the lord be


promoter and augmenter of our food, energy and onward
progress, and may he listen and grant this prayer of ours.


Mandala 10/Sukta 27






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasukra, Aindra, Rshi, Asat, Siksam, Anasirdam]
O dedicated celebrant, the divine nature and
power is good and true, it is this: I grant the prayer and
give the desired object to the dedicated creative Soma
yajaka. But I punish and strike down the ungenerous,
selfish violator of eternal truth and law persistently


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 533


addicted to sin, evil and falsehood.






[Names: Yadidaham, Susujanan]
If I were to collect forces to fight out the selfish,
ungenerous and audacious who are such by their sheer
physical prowess and brute force in this house of yours,
O divine Ruler of existence, I would train a mighty,
generous, enlightened leader, warrior and protector, feed
him on distilled essences of fourteen branches of
knowledge, application and practice being the fifteenth,
and thus perfect the ruler.






[Names: Naham, Yadavakhyat]
I know not one who says: I have defeated and
destroyed the evil and ungenerous in the battle between
right and wrong by myself; instead, when the battle
between good and evil is won, then the brave warriors
declare that they attribute the victory only to me.


Tal usu






[Names: Yadajnatesu, Jinami]
When I am in regions and battles unknown, all
existent holy powers are around me. Then in the interest
of the good of the world I defeat all negative powers
and, catching them by the root, I throw them on the






[Names: Mama]
When I decide to do what I want to do, no
powers can obstruct me on the way, not even powers
persons of faintest ear shake with fear. And the sun,
commanding boundless light rays goes on way day and






[Names: Darsannvatra, Sarave, Ghrsum]
When I see forces which oppose, contradict or
deny Indra, presiding power of world order, people who
wrest the food and drink prepared for honest labour,
who twist others’ arm for extortion, who pounce upon
the innocent to kill, or those who revile a friend for his


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 535


candid but unflattering warmth, over all such the strokes
of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment would fall
and ultimately crush them.






[Names: Abhurvauksirvyu]
Indra, unborn and eternal, the seed, the sower
and nursing mother and the very life of the world, you
destroy the anti-life forces of the earliest times and, later,
of the others too. Both earth and heaven comprehend
you not, you who transcend these and pervade the






[Names: Hava]
The cows ranged together in the pasture graze
and enjoy the grass. I, the master, watch them along
with the cowherd. When they are called back they come
and stand round the master. The master rejoices in them.
Similarly Indra, the master, sees the life around as his
cows, rejoices in all life forms, and in the evening of
the created world calls them back, and they all abide by
and abide in his presence.








[Names: Atra]
Here in the pasture, in the midst of the vast world
of experience and pleasure, we live and enjoy together
with all those living beings which enjoy the grass and
experience the things they love and find as the result of
their karma, and I too among humans enjoy my share
of karmic bhoga. Here then, joined to the lord giver of
life, experience and ultimate freedom and peaceful
abode, let the soul love and meditate on the master,
Indra, and may the loving master accept the devotee,






[Names: Atredu, Stribhiryo]
And here in the world, take it as my own word of
truth that it is I who generate the biped humans and the
quadruped animals, and whoever aspires to win as a
virile warrior but with indulgence with women, I take off
their share of the desired attainment even before or
without the interaction between their ambition and
nature.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 537






[Names: Yasyanaksa, Kataro]
Who is the sage and scholar who knows that
blind force, that eyeless generative power, Prakrti,
mother womb of existence that was there in the pre-
existence state of divinity in absolute time and space?
Indra, whose consort it was, the Shakti of divinity to
generate the various forms of life in historical time and
space. Who would wield that mighty force for himself
as consort, as Word, as thunder? Who would release
her? Who takes her on and controls? Who chooses and
loves her? Who except Indra?






[Names: Kiyatt, Bhadra, Mitram, Mitra]
Some maiden feels pleased and satisfied with
the dear lovable wealth and speech of the man wooing
her for a wife or she is herself pleasing and accepted
for her speech and riches. But in reality, that wife is
good and fortunate who, noble in person and manners,
loves and chooses her friend and husband by herself
from amongst the youth.








[Names: Patto, Sirah, Asina]
Indra emanates and manifests the generated
world step by step, then he withdraws it also step by
step at the end. The top light of Prakrti, he places and
holds up on high as head and heaven. All present and
pervasive, the next high form of it he holds in his lap as
the middle region, and the lowest of the high he forms
as the earth and pervades it.






[Names: Brhannacchayo, Anyasya, Infinitely]
and sufferance, all mover, all moving constant, beyond
bonds and bounds, he is the all bearing mother womb of
existence. Loving and pervading the living forms of the
other, Prakrti, as a mother, like his own progeny, he forms
and sustains the world with divine peace and bliss of
existence as the mother cow holds the milk for her calf.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 539




[Names: Sapta, Nava]
Seven off-springs came up from the deepest of
Prakrti (they are five subtle elements, mind and senses),
eight sprang from the upper part (they are eight vasus,
sustainers of life, 1.e., earth, water, fire, air, space, moon,
sun and stars), from behind came nine well placed in
position (they are nine planets and nine sense organs),
and ten pranas arise from the front and move high up in
air.






[Names: Dasanamekam, Garbham]
One is the darling of all the ten equally, which
they energise and serve for fulfilment of the ultimate
purpose of life. Mother Nature bears the soul as its baby
well placed in the currents and atomic dynamics of
existence, nourishing and pleasing it, though the baby
at this stage is unaware of it, but still loves to stay on in
the womb.






[Names: Pivanam, Anu]
Ten pranas together with the senses, positioned




in the holy body for nature’s purpose, mature the living
body of the soul. Two of these pranas, i.e., prana and
apana, active in the vital waters with warm energy,
mature, purify and perfect the growing body for the soul.






[Names: Ayam]
Souls come into the world from various
directions in various ways, chanting the name of
[Names: Some]
remains half way only. This is what Savita, lord of life,
giver of light, says to me: the yajna fire which consumes
the fuel wood and oblations of ghrta helps the soul to
mature through yajna and self-sacrifice. The man who
lives on fruit and milk and butter matures with divine
love and yajnic fire.






[Names: Apasyam, Sisaktyaryah]
From far off by observation of nature and from
near by meditation, I have perceived and realised the
divine power and presence bearing the multitudinous
humanity and other forms of life by its own essential
might, moving without wheels, that is, moving and yet


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 27 541


in manifestation, who, sole lord of life, creates the male
and female pairs of humans from eternity.






[Names: Etau, Apascidasya]
Lord of life, pray do not deprive me, the mortal
man, of these two vital energies of prana and apana
joined to my existence, pray keep them integrated with
me, active and pleasing. The subtle body and the pranic
energies help us reach our divine goal, and may the sun
and pranic energies, like the cloud, shower me here
below with light and joy.






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas, Purudha, Srava]
This thunderous pranic energy, which radiates
from the mighty orb of the sun in varied ways, comes
down to us by the paths of Prakrti. Beyond this is there
another path and destination too, revealed and heard,
to which the celebrants of divinity free from psychic
travails of existence attain beyond the flood of pleasure
and pain here.








[Names: Vrksevrkse, Adhedam, Purusadah, Purusada, Siksat, Indraya]
The string fixed like destiny on every bow
twangs with a clang, the arrows fly and fall like
cannibals on humanity, consuming life and karma. And
then the whole world shakes with fear. O yajaka on the
vedi, keep on the offer of soma homage to Indra, the
omniscient who knows it all.






[Names: Devanam, Trayas, Anupa]
For the formation of the first and basic divine
natural causes of cosmic evolution, the original causes
already existed in the primordial state of Prakrti. From
the disturbance of those primordial causes in that state
of unified equilibrium into dynamic state, arose the
diversity of subtle and gross elements of material and
psychic forms. Three of these (heat, air and water)
together mature the earth for life, and two (heat and air)
bring the life energy to it.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 28 543




[Names: Avih]
That, O man, is your life line, the trinity of sun,
air and water, Know it, and know that divine Indra. It’s
all his. In the serious holy business of living, forget it
not, nor let life slip away. Indra creates and opens out
the bliss of life, consumes the waste to create further,
and this evolutionary cyclic process of the life giver


Mandala 10/Sukta 28
Devata: Indra (1, 3-5, 7, 9, 11), Vasukra Aindra (2, 6, 8,


[Names: Rshi, Indra, Vasukra, Aindra]
This hymn is a dialogue between Indra and
Vasukra. It is an allegory on the organismic, integrated,
organised system of life from the individual to the social
and the cosmic order. The chief and supreme master is
the soul, the ruler, Indra. Others too are powers, but
subordinate to the chief.




[Names: Visvo, Jakstyaddhana, Somam, Soma]
are arrived here. Only the chief is not come. I wish he
were here, accept our hospitality of food and drink and,


satisfied and fulfilled, go back to his seat.


(The soul emerges in the body, takes over and
rules over the body system after all other powers have
developed and the body is mature for emergence of the
soul. So is the social system the soul of which is the
sovereign ruling power. So is the cosmos, the ruling
soul of the system is Indra.)






[Names: Visvesvenam]
Indra: I, mighty ruling power, harbinger of
showers of plenty and prosperity, commanding sharpest
forces of defence and offence, abide on top of the mighty
expanse of the earth. Whoever the maker of soma that
offers me homage and hospitality to my pleasure and
satisfaction, I defend, protect and promote in all battles
of life.





[Names: Adrina, Soman, Pacanti]
Vasukra: O mighty ruler of wealth and power,
Indra, happy performers of the yajnic system, with the
best of equipment, extract exciting soma juice and they
prepare sanative tonics from vrshabha herbs, of which,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 28 545


when cordially invited, you drink and taste with pleasure
to your satisfaction and fulfilment.






[Names: Idam, Lopasah]
O celebrant, know this force of my power: By
the dynamic force of my system and order, the stream
of ordered life can carry off criticism, opposition and
contradictions and throw out all poisonous elements,
the ordinary vegetarian citizen faces and drives off the
violent carnivorous enemy, and a single clarion call
would dig out and throw out the most destructive
terrorist forces from the darkest den.






[Names: Katha, Tvam]
O lord of wealth and power, all knowing all
watching ruler of the world, Indra, how would I, a simple
man, understand and know this mysterious ground
power and policy of yours, wise and versatile master of
the mighty order. O lord, you alone know, you alone
can enlighten us about the admirable basis and direction
of your policy of peace and progress of humanity




according to the time and season.





[Names: Thus]
soul, ruler of the system. The foundation, structure,
direction and stability of the system, the power I wield
to sustain and rule the system is greater than the vast
single stroke. Indeed the creative powers that generate
and manifest me as power generate me without enemy
and opposition.






[Names: Vadhim]
Thus do the devas, divine powers and faculties
create and know me as mighty and formidable, virile
and generous in every act of the system. Happily with
the mighty vajra, vital power, I break the dark cloud of
rain with mighty thunder and open the paths of progress
for the creative and generous vital channels of the
dynamics of the system.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 28 547






[Names: Devasa]
Let men of power and enlightenment march
forward bearing weapons of defence and action, felling
forests and oppositions, march forward with people of
the land, stay the floods of rivers, release the flow into
streams and canals, burning the undergrowth and drying
up pools of stagnant water.





[Names: Sasah, Brhantam]
The deer faces and beats up the tiger of fatal
paw since I can break up the mountain with a lump of
clay from far or near. I can crush the biggest with the
tiniest, and the calf, waxing with strength, can force the
bull to retreat and run. (This is the might of soul and









[Names: Suprarna, Niruddhascinmahisastarsya]
10. Let Suparna, Indra, the soul on top all
round of the living system and at the centre of the self,
confirm, hold and monitor its power-in-readiness as this:
Like the lion in the den ready with his paw, like a rhino
in position thirsting to strike (as a battery of force and
power calibrated unto the live switch) and the power
like the bow string in optimum tension would strike
and throw out and far off the negativities and enemies
wherever they be, (such is the force and power of prana,
spirit and soul of the living system at individual, social
and cosmic level) in service for the master, Indra.




[Names: Tebhyo, Sima]
11. The systemic strength in optimum tension
spontaneously throws out those who, feeding on the
nutriments provided by the system itself, abuse, revile
and sabotage the social order, eating into all the
creativities of the system and thereby, at the same time,
damage the strength of their bodies by themselves.





[Names: Nrvad, Sravo]
12. Those persons rise to creative power and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 29 549


grandeur who, with holy words and noble acts of yajnic
creations of soma peace and vitality serve life and
humanity and strengthen and advance the body of the
social order and thus address the ruling power: O ruling
soul of the order, speaking and proclaiming as leader,
pioneer and ruler, bring us all our share of sustenance
and power, acknowledge our achievement and victory,
and feel great that you wield the honour and power of
the order, yours is the name and the glory from earth to
heaven. You are the heroic brave.


Mandala 10/Sukta 29






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vasukra, Aindra, Rshi, Vane, Yasyedindrah, Purudinesu]
Like the baby bird placed in the nest on the tree,
waiting and watching for the mother bird, and the mother
bird arriving, may this song of love and purity reach
you, O complementary powers of light, Ashvins, the
song, of which Indra, ruler of the world, is the inspirer
and deity, manliest leader of men, who rules over the
day and night of human activity









[Names: Usasah, Usasa, Satamavahanrn, Anu]
Indra, ruler of the world, manliest leader of the
leaders of humanity, lord of triple splendour of
knowledge, action and spiritual advancement, who
command a hundred heroes by virtue of power and
thunder, source of peace, advancement and bliss, may
we ever abide in the light and joy of the dawn of today
and of other days to come in our course of life.






[Names: Kaste, Kadvaho, Sakyam]
What is the most exhilarating song of prayer
and presentation dear to you? O lustrous lord of force
and power, come to us by the doors of yajna in response
to our songs of invocation. Harbinger of power and
peace, when shall I see you face to face? When will my
prayer be fruitful? When shall I be able to regale you
with homage and adoration, most eminent master and
ruler?







[Names: Kadu, Mitro]
Indra, when shall we have the light, power and
honour of prosperity in life? What is that order of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 29 551


intelligence by which you transform humans to divine
consciousness of your presence? When would you
reveal your presence to us in direct experience? O lord
adorable ever true as friend, when would our thoughts
and actions be fruitful and win your favour of food,
sustenance and stability for all mankind in peace and




of Preraya suro artham na paramye asya kamam


[Names: Girasca]
Indra, like the sun that leads from darkness to
light, inspire and lead humanity to the attainment of
their desire for freedom across the world, all who
entertain this ambition like their love for home life
earlier. O lord of infinite manifestation, bless all those
people who adore you with songs of universal
exhortation, who guide others to sing and pray with
universal voice, and who offer homage to divinity with
foods and charity in various forms.






[Names: Matre, Varaya]
O Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent,
mother earth and the heaven of light, both ancient and
eternal in the existential cycle, are created in excellent




measure of form and function by your vision and power.
May the delicious and refined honey drinks of soma
and sumptuous foods gifted by sun and earth be
exhilarating and delightful for noble humanity and for
their yajnic homage to you.






[Names: Indraya]
Let us offer the honey sweet bowl] of our heart
and soul overflowing with love and faith to Indra who
is truly magnificent and munificent. He is the benevolent
guide of humanity and supreme leader of leaders and
by his powers, potentials and creative actions manifests
higher and exalted over the expansive earth and space.






[Names: Vyanalindrah]
Indra, lord of holy light and lustre, pervades the
peoples’ heart and soul within and joins them in their
struggles in the world outside. The best of people since
time immemorial try to win his love and friendship with
homage, prayer and meditation. O lord of cosmic
chariot, ruler of the world, come to us to bless us and
our social order like a master of the chariot among
people whom you inspire and bless with clear


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 553


intelligence, noble ambition and holy enthusiasm in the


Mandala 10/Sukta 30






[Names: Apah, Apam, Devata, Kavasha, Ailusha, Rshi, Mahim, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras]
Let our voice of thanks and praise, our acts of
yajnic creation and self-sacrifice in service of the cosmic
sustainer, reach all the divine energies and powers of
nature and humanity which are ever on the move and
sustain life, and let this expression be the very symbol
of the total dedication of our mind and soul. O celebrant,
O high priest of yajna, proclaim and realise this our
will to live as a mighty gift of the lord of love and
judgement, and proclaim as well our vision of the
ultimate freedom from selfish attachment, which we
would realise in dedication to our own spirit, to the social
order, and to the infinite lord of cosmic dynamics with
the same love and judgement.









[Names: Adhvaryavo]
O priests and organisers of the socio-cosmic
order, bear and bring the fragrant materials of yajnic
action for development, rise with passion and
enthusiasm, reach the vaulting waters of life, and with
open expert hands today receive the waves which the
moon and ocean raise and the flood of light and energy
which the sun showers down.






[Names: Somam, Soma]
O priests and organisers, reach the ocean and
the waters of space and connect with the sun and light
in space and skies with the right materials of yajna. The
sun never allows the waters to exhaust and gives you
the purest showers ever. Create and offer the sweetest
and most powerful soma oblations to the sun for
permanent supply of liquid energies for the sustenance
of life.






O sun who burn and shine in space without fuels
of fire, whom priests and scientists serve and adore in
yajna, who never allow liquid energies of the world to
exhaust, pray give us the honey sweets of liquid energies


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 555


by which Indra, ruler of the world order on earth, may
rise to strength and accomplish great deeds for humanity.






[Names: Yabhih]
The liquids with which Soma, the ruling spirit,
rejoices and feels exhilarated as men feel happy and
exhilarated by noble youthful women, those exciting
liquid energies, O high priest of yajna, find from far
and near, and when you find them, then cleanse and
strengthen the drinks and sanatives for health and joy.






[Names: Evedyune, Satiretyaccha]
Just as youthful women submit to young men,
and as men with love eagerly advance to loving women,
so do the leaders of social and scientific yajna know
the liquid energies of nature and with their science and
intelligence create, obtain and develop. So do also they
develop the energies and competence of the rising
youthful generation for the social yajna of the world
order of humanity.








[Names: Sasteramuncat, Tasma, Indraya, Indra]
O people of the social order of the world,
committed to honesty and loyalty, the ruler who opens
the doors of freedom against inhibition and creates a
beautiful world for you, for that Indra, mighty ruler,
create honey sweet fragrances of exhilarating
environment and offer him divinely joyous foods and
drinks of self-fulfilment.






[Names: Prasmai, Ghrtaprstham]
O streams of life aflow, O dynamic people blest
with wealth, honour and excellence, listen to my call
and exhortation: Create and set in flow the sweetest
honeyed waves of joy for this master power and ruler
who is the fountain head and fathomless ocean source
of your joy and fulfilment, refulgent and illustrious,
adorable in the noblest yajnic meets of the world.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 557




[Names: Indrapanam, Indrapana, Madacyutam]
O streams of life, dynamic people of the world,
inspire and set in motion that joyous wave of living and
working worthy of all ruling Indra which helps to realise
both ends of life, fulfilment over here and freedom of
moksha hereafter, overflowing with divine ecstasy,
admirable, heavenly, universal, good for earth, heaven
and the middle regions, continuous for three living
generations, dynamic as the river and deep as ocean.






[Names: Avarvrtatiradha]
O sage, visionary celebrant of the yajnic world
order, respect, honour and celebrate the vibrant people
of the land, fluent in action like winding streams,
dedicated in thought, word and deed to the two streams
of individual and collective good, observing a compact
order of law like fighting forces deployed on fields of
action over the same one earth, creators, planners and
achievers of yajnic development, having a common
origin and growing and moving together in one
direction.








[Names: Hinota, Rtasya]
O dynamic powers of nature, O vibrant people
of the earth, in worship of the lord supreme, in honour
of mother nature’s divinities, and for love and well being
of noble humanity, inspire and accelerate our yajnic
action in cooperation, for the achievement of wealth,
honour and excellence raise the voice of divine
knowledge, application and action, in the pursuit of
collective action under the laws of nature and grateful
humanity, open the sluice gates of clouds and unlock
the treasure holds of wealth. O powers of the dynamic
flow of existence, be good, creative and blissful for our






[Names: Rayasca, Sarasvati]
O cosmic dynamics of mother nature, O fluent
streams of earth and the environment, O vibrant people
of the land, O generous mothers of mankind, be master
rulers of the world’s wealth, promote the yajnic
development, well being and immortal values of happy
life, be protectors and promoters of the veins of nation’s
wealth and makers of the noble generations of
humanity’s heroes. May Sarasvati, mother stream of
divine knowledge, culture and grace bear and bring good


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 30 559
health, full age and vibrant energy for the celebrant.






[Names: Prati, Adhvaryubhir]
Apah, all fluent streams of nature and humanity,
dynamic forces, powers and people of the world, I see
you rising and coming in response to the call and prayer
of the high priests and celebrants of yajna, bearing water,
milk and ghrta and the honey sweets of life for fertility
and life’s generation, in perfect union with the mind,
hopes and aspirations of the priests and yajakas on the
vedi and bringing pure distilled Soma beauty, prosperity
and joy for Indra, ruling power and reigning glory of
life.






Friends, priests and yajakas, these waters,
vibrant energies of nature and dynamic powers and
personalities of humanity, all overflowing with life,
fertility and generative potential, are come here. Give
them an honourable place in yajna. They know, they
are united with us, and they are blissful, and they never
allow the waters of life to exhaust. Know them, seat




them on the holy grass and create the beauties and joy
of life for all.






[Names: Agmannapa, Adhvaryavah, Somama]
Brilliant, fluent and divine energies, powers and
personalities, united in love with divinity and noble
humanity have come and they are seated on the holy
grass in the corporate yajna of love and non-violence
for development and the creation of life divine for
humanity. O priests, O yajakas, create the soma for Indra,
ruling power and reigning glory of life, and may your
yajnic prayers and programmes for life and humanity


Mandala 10/Sukta 31






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devatah, Kavasha, Ailusha, Rshi, Samso, Tebhirvayam]
May the adorable word and wisdom of lord
Supreme and all divinities of nature and humanity come
to us in communion with all the speed, power and
excellence of the world for our protection and progress.
May we be good friends with them and cross over all


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 31 561


hurdles, sins and evils of existence.






[Names: Pari, Sreyamsam]
Let mortal man love and desire wealth, honour
and excellence in the comprehensive context of the
world and divinity, shine and refine it with faith and
reverence by the path of truth and universal law, speak
of it, think and define it with his own conscience in
communion with divinity, and then, with his own mind
and soul, realise the high degree of expertise, vision
and perfection of thought, action and achievement for
himself. (Divinity, humanity, nature, the world around,
these are the context of our success and achievement.)






[Names: Adhayi, Abhyanasma]
Maturity of thought and concentration is
achieved, vibrations of thought in waves flow in,
protective and illuminative for the spirit in virile posture
like waves of flood on the holy shore. Thus may we
achieve the power of success and prosperity, thus may
we be knowers and achievers of the boons of immortals
in knowledge, awareness and, in fact, in our very being.








[Names: Nityas, Bhago]
May the lord eternal, master of the world’s
wealth of Prakrti, generous and potent, love to give and
bless humanity for whom Savita, lord creator and
generator provides all things of existence, and may
Bhaga, lord of universal power and prosperity, and
Aryama, lord of justice and dispensation, enlighten him
with the word of knowledge, and may the lord of love,
beauty and bounty, provide man the sweet shade of
protection for advancement.






[Names: Iyam, Usasamiva, Savasa, Asya]
When clouds laden with power and plenty of
rain, and sages with words of enlightenment and power
come and bless the earth, then this world of humanity,
like the light and freshness of the dawns, shines and
prospers on earth, and seekers of wisdom and power
asking the sages for knowledge and wisdom of divinity
and power and advancement on earth flock here to us,
and we pray may power and prosperity continue to flow
in for us and our children.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 31 563






[Names: Asyedesa]
This knowledge and wisdom, this Vedic voice
of this sage of divinity, may, we pray, be universal,
eternal and ever expansive, and may we, united and
organised together on this equal and undivided earth,
abide under the same one social order of this mighty
life-giving ruler, living safe, secure and sustained in a
state of peace and progress.






[Names: Samtasthane]
Which is that forest, which was that tree, that
material cause, from which the Vishvedevas, divine
powers of lord Supreme, fashioned forth the heaven and
earth sustained in cosmic order in the imperishable
universe, safe and protected, which the eternal days and
nights and the dawns at morning and evening proclaim
and adore.








[Names: Naitavadena, Tvacam, Suryam, Surya]
There is no other universe like this nor beyond
this, and yet there is one power not just exactly as this
but beyond, and that is the mighty generous creator and
generator who bears this heaven and earth. That is the
master lord of Prakrti, his own Shakti, the mighty
material cause of the universe, and he creates and
structures the sacred form of it and bears it all as the
cosmic energies and space directions bear the sun.






[Names: Stego, Mitro, Sokam]
As the sun lights up and transcends the earth, as
the wind shakes the cloud of life showers and passes,
so does he pervade and transcend the heaven and earth,
so does he move the universe to creative activity. Where
Mitra, the sun, and Varuna, the moon, 1.e., the couple—
prana and apana, heat and water, sun and air, sun and
moon, energised and impassioned, create and release
life energy, heat and desire, there Agni releases the life
of life as fire releases heat and vests it in the wood.




[Names: Stariryat, Putro, Samyam]
Like the heifer, mother Prakrti (void of life in


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 32 565


pre-creation stage of existence) is immediately energised
and impregnated by the Spirit of life Supreme, master
of the herd of living forms. The original and efficient
cause, first mover, creates motion in the unmoved and
unmoving, and makes the potential forms move in their
orbits. The saviour protector and presiding power that
existed awake as ever, even before the parental couples,
manifested in action and mother Prakrti gave birth to
forms which now ask, seek and worship the mystery.






And man, the intelligent, they call the child of
divine energy. The vibrant, the wise and bold achieve
the wealth of life and divinity, and for such as draw the
attention and love of divinity, the lord opens his treasure
hold of joy and blesses them. None other than divinity
can bless humanity with joy and ultimate fulfilment.


Mandala 10/Sukta 32









[Names: Indra, Devata, Kavasha, Ailusha, Rshi, Asmakamindra]
May Indra, omnificent spirit and highest
presence of the universe, cherished object of the
meditative seeker, move to accept the best of the seeker’s
acts of homage and surrender and bless him in his state
of clairvoyant ecstasy with the objects of his love and
desire. Indeed Indra, who acknowledges the homage
and service of the man dedicated to search for divinity,
loves, joins and rewards our search for knowledge and
action with fulfilment.






[Names: Vindra, Purustuta]
Indra, omnipotent light of the universe, adored
and worshipped by all, by your universal light and
energy you pervade and radiate over all divine
luminaries of earth, heaven and all space. Those who
continuously send up their prayers and dedicate their
yajnic actions and endeavours to you win the fruits of
their prayers and worship and thereby eliminate all their
want and deprivations.





[Names: Tadinme, Jaya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 32 567


Let it be more and more pleasing for me as soul
in body form then when man grows more and more
handsome than beauty itself in existence, when the child
born of parents carries the family line higher forward,
when the wife pleases the husband and exhorts him with
sweet words to love and noble thoughts, and it is nice
and auspicious for the man to be good and cleansed at
heart by love and loyalty.






[Names: Tadit, Mata]
Indra, give us a bright happy home where
illuminative voices of divine Vedic wisdom rule and
lead the family as horses draw the chariot, where the
mother is honoured as the first and intelligent centre of
the family and where the inmates are healthy and virile
with all the seven vitalities of physical health.






[Names: Jara]
O seekers of divinity, there is only one guide
and leader for you who creates and provides the ultimate
haven for you with the divines. And that is Indra who
readily and instantly comes with his powers of justice,




reward and punishment. And among the seekers of
immortality and freedom, divine worship and adoration
alone is the ultimate and unfailing giver. Therefore offer
honeyed hospitality and sincere worship for the
divinities that provide the means of protection,
advancement and immortality.






[Names: Nidhiyamanam, Indro, Anu, Anusista]
The protector and preserver of the laws of
divinities, Indra, divine spirit and teacher, enlightens
me and speaks of the fire and spirit of life, Agni,
pervasive and concealed in the waters, in particles of
Prakrti abounding in space and in the will, awareness
and acts of humanity. O Agni, Indra, the spirit, only
experiences and watches your presence. Taught,
enlightened and committed by Indra, I have come to
the realisation of your presence.






[Names: Aksetravit, Etadvai, Anusasan, Anusasa]
Let the man ignorant of the field of life ask the
teacher who knows the field and facts of life and who
can communicate, and, thus taught and trained, go
forward in the business of living. This only is the holy


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 32 569


and auspicious end and aim of teaching and training
for life. And this is the way of the evolution and
development of tradition by which man gets enlightened
on way to progress.






[Names: Adyedu, Emenamapa]
Just today Indra, the soul, starts receiving the
energy of prana in the womb, then, covered in the womb
these days, it has the feel of its existence, then, when
born it sucks the mother’s milk, then it grows, thought
and language comes to it, adolescence and youth, and
finally old age takes it over the youth. O lord, let the
resident soul in the body be holy at heart without anger
and frustration.






[Names: Etani, Dana]
O treasure hold of knowledge, Indra, O learned
teacher, O listener of my praises and prayers, these are
the holy acts of reverence and adoration which we,
givers of thanks and presents, perform in homage to
your honour. O men of wealth and power of knowledge,
let this knowledge and this presentation of thanks and
appreciation be a holy gift of gracefulness and culture,




and so may this soma of knowledge be for you, the
knowledge which I hold at heart in myself.


Mandala 10/Sukta 33








[Names: Vishvedevah, Indra, Kurushravana, Trasadasyava, Danastuti, Upamashrava, Maitratithi, Devatah, Kavasha, Ailusha, Rshi, Visvedevaso, Pusanam, Pusana]
May the divine givers of knowledge and
enlightenment to the people inspire and enlighten me
too, so I hold the lord giver of life and nourishment
dear to my heart in the soul. May the divinities of heaven
and earth in nature and humanity protect and promote
me. The indomitable is come: this is the declaration.




matih.


All round the pressures of life oppress me like
rival mistresses, adversity, depression and exhaustion
bind me down to loss of self-awareness, and my
understanding is paralysed like the bird’s before the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 33 571






[Names: Muso, Ssisna, Satakrato, Sakrt]
As mice eat up the weaver’s thread soaked in
starch, so do the afflictions of want and worry consume
me, your celebrant, O lord of a hundred grand acts of
protection, promotion and boundless generosity. O lord
of power and glory, Indra, be kind and save us now as
ever, and always be our saviour and protector like a





[Names: Kurusravanamavrni, Mamhistham]
I, the man of vision and comprehensive
judgement, choose and abide by the brilliant ruler, all
attentive and universal listener, offspring of the
destroyer of evil, want, injustice and violence, and most
generous protector and patron of the wise and grateful






[Names: Yasya, Stavai]
I celebrate and adore Indra, generous lord of
thousandfold charity of kindness and grace, whose




threefold gifts of divine knowledge, holy will and
grateful prayer and adoration transport me like three
horses of the divine chariot of human life well through
and across the world of human existence to the state of
freedom from limitations and eternal bliss.






[Names: Ksetram]
I celebrate the brilliant ruler whose words of
kindness and grace—fatherly protector, exemplary
listener and exceptionally rich and honoured as he is—
are like a field shower of joyous generosity for the






[Names: Mitratitherihi, Pituste]
generous, honourable son and scion of the line of the
ruler, friend of friends and strangers alike, I honour and
adore your father and your family line. Pray come and






[Names: Yadistyamrtanamuta, Jivedinmaghava]
If I were master controller and ruler of the mortal


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 34 a7 3


as well as of the immortal principles and elements of
my existence, then I would be really alive in all my
power and potential for all time.





[Names: Tatha]
No soul of a hundred year life on earth, even if
it had a hundred lives, can live beyond the laws of nature
and divinity, therefore it has to leave and return to life
with its natural concomitants of body and mind again
and again in the cycle.


Mandala 10/Sukta 34






[Names: Aksha, Krshi, Akshakitava, Ninda, Devata, Kavasha, Ailusha, Aksha, Maujavan, Rshi, Pravepa, Somasyeva]
The large quivering dice, made of vibhidika tree
grown on grassy green mountain slopes, shaking and
rolling awesome on the dice board, tantalise me like
the sight of exhilarating drink from a munyja grass
covered mountain valley, they excite me and I lose my








[Names: Aksasyaham]
This gentle lady, my wife, is good to me and to
my friends, she never quarrels with me nor does she
embarrass or hate me. Alas, for one reason, my persistent
addiction to gambling, have I alienated my devoted wife
totally dedicated to her life’s duty.






[Names: Dvesti, Svasrurapa]
Normally speaking, the wife of a gambler feels
indifferent and alienated from him, the mother-in-law
hates him, the wretched man finds no friends’ sympathy,
there is none to comfort him. Like an old, exhausted,
otherwise, no one bids for him. I set no value upon the
gambler. Who would?





[Names: Anye, Pita]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 34 575


[Names: Others]
the mighty dice have cheated him of his money and all
wealth. Father, mother, brother, all disown him and say:
off with him, we bound and taken. We know him not.






[Names: Yadadidhye, Nyuptasca]
When I realise and think I must not play with
dice and must not be miserable, even then, having so
decided, I succumb to the approaching dice as to
seductive friends. Red and shining dice cast in the game
rattle and resound, and I walk into the den like a woman
stealing to her paramour.






[Names: Sabhameti, Aksaso]
Puffed up in body and mind, the gambler moves
to the gambling house asking, even assuring, himself
in mind: Shall I win? I must, this time. And his dice,
held and poised in hand to defeat his rival, inflame his
fire to play and win, more and more.








[Names: Aksasa, Kumaradesna]
The dice hold the gambler by the hook, pierce
like a dagger, hew down the man and even his family
from the root, as a hatchet, burn like fire and torture
like incessant pain. For the winner, they bring joyous
gifts for the time but later in turn they destroy, and
though soaked in honey for the moment, they tear the
gambler to pieces at the end.





[Names: Tripancasah, Ugrasya]
The group of fifty-three of those dice is played
strictly within unsparing rules of the game like the divine
sun observing the laws of its motion. They do not bow
even to the strongest of men, indeed the ruler bows and
offers obeisance to the dice (if he too is addicted).






[Names: Nica, Divya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 34 577


[Names: Some]
up high, and although they are armless they beat the
strongest armed warrior. Thrown upon the dice board,
they can be burning brilliant and some time, even though
ice cold, they burn the heart.






[Names: Jaya, Rnava]
The forsaken wife of the gambler suffers at
heart, the mother of her child wandering somewhere
feels tortured by loss. Down under loss and debt, pining
for money, he is oppressed by fear, and at night goes to
other’s home either for shelter or for money the way he
can get.






[Names: Striyam, Purvahne]
The gambler suffers when he sees his wife, and
he regrets when he sees another’s wife well settled, their
noble acts and comfortable home. Yet again in the
forenoon he grabs the tempting dice as a warrior takes
to his steed, but when the fire is gone cold, he falls
down broken and farlorn.








[Names: Tasmai]
O dice, O gamblers, to that which is the first
and foremost of you, the ruler of your mighty order and
organisation, the leading warrior over all of you, my
homage and salutation with farewell with folded hands
and all the ten fingers, open all in front with the vow
that I would lose no money any more, and this is the
be, because his hands are empty now.)





[Names: Aksairma, Tatra]
Play not with dice. Till the land. Be happy with
the land and wealth you produce. Take it that that much
is enough and be content. There are the cows, O gambler,
there your wife is happy. This is what Savita, lord of
life and giver of light has revealed to me.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 579




[Names: Mitram, Mitra]
Be friends, make friends, be good and kind to
us. Treat us not with the torture of fear and suppression.
Let your anger and passion subside into peace and
tranquillity, and may another unfortunate in adversity
in the snares of dice be the same way free.


Mandala 10/Sukta 35






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Lusha, Dhanaka, Rshi, Abhudhramu, Indravanto, Mahi, Usaso]
In the early hours of the dawn, those flames of
morning fire bearing light and energy of the sun awake
and awaken the great heaven and earth, dispelling the
darkness, and arouse the people to the karmic business
of the day. In this very morning hour of the day, we
pray for the protection and promotive energy of the
divinities of nature and humanity for enlightenment.







[Names: Divasprthivyorava, Anagastvam, Suryamusa, Somah, Soma]
We pray for the good will, protection and
inspiration of heaven and earth for light and
nourishment. We want the love and blessings of mother
powers, the energy and liquid flow of the streams and
seas, showers of clouds, the cool of mountain snows
and gifts of soma herbs. We pray for the energies of all
that is dynamic and generous in life. Innocent and free
from sin, we pray for the rise of a new dawn and light
of the sun every day. May the peace, beauty and
inspiration of nature at dawn inspired with the love and
power of divinity bless us with vision, will and power
to act here and now so that we too may rise and shine.






[Names: Dyava]
May this new day, the great mother powers of
earth and heaven, generous givers of inspiration, light
and settlement, protect and promote us, their innocent
children, for the sake of happiness and well being. May
the bright dawn now rising keep off sin and evil. We
pray that the lighted fire and rising light and all
enlightened powers of human will and action be good
to us and all may be well and blissful.






MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 581


[Names: Tyam]
revati vyucchatu. Are manyum durvidatrasya


This dawn, this maiden, this first moving power
of the early day, blest with wealth and energy of rising
life may, we pray, shine, bring us and illuminate divine
gifts of life worthy of the holies for the friendly
community of seekers. May we cast off the anger and
malice of the unbearables and take in and internalise
the love and enthusiasm of the most challenging
discipline of life divine. We pray may the lighted fire
and rising dawn bring all happiness and all round well
being of life.






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas, Bhadra]
The lights of dawn at the break of day which
shine with rays of the sun, bearing the message of
enlightenment, may, we pray, rise and radiate and be
good for us today for our nourishment of body, mind
and soul and for our honour and excellence of life. We
pray may the lighted fire and rising dawn bring us all
happiness and well being of life.








[Names: Anamiva, Usasa, Jyotisa, Ayuksatamasvina]
May the dawns free from ailments bring us good
health, and may the yajna fires rise up high with blazing
light. Let the day and night keep the fastest chariot in
harness for us. We pray may the lighted fire and the
rising dawn bring us all happiness and well being of
life.





[Names: Srestham, Rayo]
O Savita, lord of life and giver of light, create
for us the highest of our choice share of life’s joy to our
satisfaction and pleasure as you are the treasure hold of
the jewels of life. I speak and pray to the voice and
omniscience of divinity, universal creator of life’s
wealth: May the rising dawn and lighted fire bring us
all happiness and well being of life.







[Names: Pipartu, Visva, Suryah, Surya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 583


May that original voice of divinities, which
revealed the nature and laws of existence at the
beginning of human creation and which we humans
honour, adore and pray for, protect and promote us with
fulfilment. The sun rises, the same one, and illuminates
all the dawns. We pray may the lighted fire and rising
dawn bless us with felicity and total fulfilment.






[Names: Adveso, Adityanam, Sarmani, Adityana]
Today in the congregation of the sages on the
holy grass spread on the yajna vedi of search for
knowledge without jealousy, anger and malice, we pray
for the fulfilment of our aspirations. O man, smart and
brilliant as you are, we wish that you enjoy the light
and peace of the bliss and warmth of the sun in the
zodiacs throughout the year in the inspiring company
of eminent scholars and thus advance. We pray that the
lighted fire and rising dawn bless us with felicity and









[Names: Indram, Indra, Varunam, Varuna, Mitram, Mitra]
O lord of light and bliss, O Adityas, phases of
the sun and earth on the move, in this joyous hall of
yajna in our open ended search for physical, mental and
spiritual knowledge and well being, I invoke the
brilliancies of nature and humanity and pray let the seven
priests be seated for the conduct of the yajna (the seven
being senses of perception, senses of volition, speech,
mind, discriminative intelligence, selective memory, and
the self). We invoke Indra, divine and secular power,
Mitra, divine and human love and cohesion with
cooperation, Varuna, divine and human judgement and
choice in relation to nature and society, and Bhaga,
divine glory and human prosperity with power and self
confidence, for sure success and victory. We pray may
the lighted fire and rising dawn bless us with felicity
and self fulfilment.






[Names: Brhaspatim, Pusanam, Pusana]
May the Adityas come and join us with love and
favour for the advancement and comprehensive success
of our yajna of universal character and save, protect
and promote our yajnic projects of creative progress.
We invoke Brhaspati, power of infinite knowledge and
speech, Pushan, power of nourishment and growth,
Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and
humanity, and Bhaga, spirit of universal power and
prosperity and pray may the lighted fire and the rising


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 35 585
dawn bring us felicity and total self-fulfilment.






[Names: Tanno, Pasve]
May the Adityas, divine harbingers of the light
of omniscient divinity at the dawn of humanity, give us
that universal word of knowledge and that peaceful
settlement in life which holds all abundant power and
prosperity for the protection and advancement of our
human family, the animals, our children and grand
children for our good health and full life of joy. We
pray may the lighted fire and the rising dawn bring us
all felicity and total fulfilment.






[Names: Visve, Maruto, Visve]
Today in this life of ours, may all the winds and
pranic energies and all lighted fires of the world bring
us all protections and promotions. May all divine powers
of nature and humanity in the world come with all
protection, power and progress. May all wealth, honour
and excellence of the world, all speed, success and


and universal victory.






O Vishvedevas, divine powers of nature and
humanity, pray let us be, help us all to be, a happy,
vibrant and dynamic human community of noble nature,
character and action living the life divine and moving
ahead on the holy path of life to total fulfilment here
and beyond: The person and the community whom you
protect, guide and lead to victory in the struggle of
existence, whom you save, guard and direct against sin
and suffering to success knows no fear. Pray let us be
that on the paths of pilgrimage to the Life Divine.


Mandala 10/Sukta 36


[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Lusha, Dhanaka, Rshi, Usasanakta, Indram, Indra, Marutah, Maruta, Adityan, Aditya]
I invoke the rising dawn of the light of day and
the soothing darkness of restful night, the radiant


illuminative heaven and the vast sheltering stabilising
earth, both great and expansive, beautiful and beatific,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 36 587


I invoke Varuna, oceans of earth and spatial vapours,
Mitra, friendly warmth of the sun, Aryama, refreshing
breezes, Indra, infinite energy and power of nature,
Maruts, stormy forces of the winds, clouds and
mountains, sun rays, zodiacs of the sun, radiative energy
of the sun and magnetic and gravitational energy of
earth, the middle regions of space for expansion and
the highest regions of light for illumination.






[Names: Dyausca]
The sun and the earth, father and mother, both
sources of enlightenment, both committed to divine law
and replete with dynamic energy, may, we pray, protect
us from sin and violence. Let ignorance, injustice and
adversity never dominate our life, let pain and suffering
keep off. This is the safety, security and protection of
our choice we pray for of the divinities today.







[Names: Visvasmanno, Mitrasya, Mitras, Aditih, Aditi, Svarvajjyotiravrkam, Varunasya, Varunas]
May the eternal mother power, the divine Shakti,
Aditi, protect us from sin and suffering of the world,




she being the mother of abundant sun and ocean, love
and judgement. May we receive the light of heaven
without violence. This is our prayer for protection we
may make to the divinities with free choice today.






[Names: Grava, Adityam, Sarma, Marutamasimahi]
May the thundering voice of wise sages keep
and fear of death, and all voracious elements of society.
May we obtain the protection, peace and enlightenment
of the leading lights and stormy troops of society. This
is the shelter and protection we now pray for, of our
own choice, from the divinities.






[Names: Endro, Supraketam]
May Indra, omnipotent lord of the universe,
enlighten us at heart and bless our yajnic home, may
Ila, the earth and the divine voice, raise our health and
awareness, may Brhaspati, sagely scholar of the divine
Word, adore the spirit with songs of praise, and may we
obtain divine wisdom and intelligence and meditate on


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 36 589


the light divine. This is the favour and protection of the
divinities we pray for today.




[Names: Divisprsam, Pracinarasmimahutam]
May the Ashvins, complementary fire and wind,
refine and energise our yajna of love and non-violence,
fed on ghrta, rising in high flames as ever before, and
may they raise it to the regions of the sun to bring us
peace and joy for the fulfilment of our aspirations. This
is the favour and protection of the divinities we pray
for today.




[Names: Marutam, Sambhuvam, Rayas, Sravasaya]
mahe.


I invoke and call upon the band of Maruts,
vibrant winds of nature and dynamic sages and pioneers
of humanity, worthy of service and adoration, pure and
purifying and harbingers of peace and well being, all
heroic and sublime. I invoke them to win their love and
friendship. We study and meditate upon wealth, energy
and enrichment for participation in their grace and glory.




This is the protective and promotive favour of the
divinities we choose to pray for today.




[Names: Apam, Surasmim, Somamin, Somami]
mahe.


We bear Soma at heart, love and honour Soma,
spirit of universal peace, vitality and ecstasy, protector
and promoter of life’s liquid energies for action, inspirer
of life adorable for the divinities, beauty of the yajna of
love and non-violence, worthy of invocation and
celebration. Beautiful are its flames of fire, its rays of
light and its waves of fragrance worthy of being
perceived, experienced and internalised, all these we
love. And that Soma is the gift, favour and protection
of the divinities we choose to pray for, this day.






[Names: Sanema, Jivaputra, Brahmadviso]
Let us join and live that Soma spirit of life along
with all others who live it with passion and enthusiasm.
We are all children of life, living and vibrant with our
children and grand children, free from sin and crime.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 36 591


Let others who negate, hate and violate that universal
Spirit of love, life and peace bear, for that reason, their
negativities and the dispensation thereof. And that
favour of the love of Soma and protection against
negativities we beg of the divinities this day.






[Names: Ssrnotana, Jaitram]
And listen all, those who are dedicated to yajna
at heart in communion with divine Soma, be steadfast
and, O divine souls, bear and bring us that we pray for
from you : Bring us the spirit of success and victory,
holy yajnic action, wealth, honour and fame with
progeny worthy of the brave. That is the favour and
prayer of our choice we ask of you this day.






[Names: Mahadadya, Yatha]
Today, the grandeur of the great we ask for, of
our own choice, and the protection of the grand
progressive and irresistible divinities we pray for, so
that we may acquire the security and stability created
and established by brave generations of humanity: that




is the favour and prayer of our choice for protection of
the divinities we ask for this day.11. Today, the
grandeur of the great we ask for, of our own choice,
and the protection of the grand progressive and
irresistible divinities we pray for, so that we may acquire
the security and stability created and established by
brave generations of humanity: that is the favour and
prayer of our choice for protection of the divinities we
ask for this day.






[Names: Maho, Sarmanyanaga, Sresthe]
Let us live under the shelter and protection of
the great Agni, self-refulgent, self enlightened leading
light of the cosmic yajna. Let us live free from sin and
evil under the abundant care of Mitra, friendly sun, and
Varuna, boundless ocean of space, for the achievement
of plenty, prosperity and all round well being. Let us
live under the guidance and ruling control of Savita,
highest spirit of life, creation and regeneration. This is
the gift of protection and progress we choose to ask of
the divinities this day.






MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 37 593


All those generous, brilliant and illuminative
divinities of the world, both in nature and in humanity,
which observe and work under the laws and discipline
of Savita, creator of the world of truth and reality, Mitra,
lord of light and love, and Varuna, lord of judgement
and boundless abundance, may they all bear and bring
for us all holy good fortune, power of choice and action,
and wondrous variety of wealth blest with brave
progeny, lands, cows and culture of enlightenment.






[Names: Savita, Savita]
May Savita protect us from behind. May Savita
protect us in front. May Savita protect us from above.
May Savita protect us from below. May Savita bless us
all round, create and give us universal wealth of
existence. May Savita bless us with a long, happy and


Mandala 10/Sukta 37






[Names: Surya, Devata, Abhitapa, Saurya, Rshi, Namo, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Duredrse, Samsata, Suryaya, Surya]
Homage and salutations to the eye of the lord
of universal love and cosmic judgement, lord of day
and deep night, mighty generous light of the world.
Observe and abide by that universal law of the lord.
Sing and celebrate in honour of the Sun, child of Light,
heavenly ensign of divine refulgence, born of space,
the eye that can see as far as the bounds of existence.





[Names: Sama, Visvamanyanni, Suryah]
May the word of truth abide by me and protect
and sustain me all round all time: That Sun, light of the
world, is the presence in which the heavens of light and
the green earth abide, days and nights arise and expand,
wherein the other worlds abide and all else moves and
abides, wherein all dynamics of the universe abide and
move day and night, wherein the sun rises every morning
for all time in the existential world.






[Names: Pracinamanyadanu]
O sun, when you ride your chariot and move on
with the radiation of your rays, the earlier darkness of
the night does not stay before you, instead it moves on


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 37 595


to the other region you left behind, and as you move
on, you go forward with your light for another region
of the world.






[Names: Yena, Tenasmadvisvam]
O sun, by the light by which you dispel the
darkness, and by the rise by which you go up and light
up the moving world in the day, by that very light and
enlightenment, pray, dispel and throw out all famine of
food in the world,, all poverty of yajnic programmes,
all sickness and disease, and all depression and evil
dreams born of want and poverty of light.






[Names: Visvasya, Yadadya, Anu, Anu]
O lord of light, moved and inspired by your own
divine self and invoked by prayers of the supplicants,
you protect and rule the laws and disciplines of the world
around, and without passion or disturbance you rise and
move according to your own powers and in response to
your celebrants’ homage (such as the homage of the
planets and yajnic offers of devotees). O sun, whatever




we pray for, may the divinities of nature and humanity
favour and respond to our yajnic action and prayer.






[Names: Indrah, Indra, Suryasya, Suryas, Maruto]
That word of invocation and prayer, and that
word of homage and prayer with supplication may the
heaven and earth as father and mother, waters of earth
and space and the learned sages of holy attainments,
Indra, omnipotent lord and ruler of the earth, Maruts,
pranic energies of life and leading lights of humanity
listen, and may they favourably respond. May they never
be indifferent. May we live blest in the light of the sun
and the illumination of divinity. We pray that living in
peace and felicity, we may enjoy a full life of good health
and mental and spiritual fulfilment.






[Names: Visvaha, Udyantam, Mitramaho]
enlightened of vision, blest with noble progeny, free
from ill health, sin and evil, and thus happy and healthy,
live long to see you rising every day all the time. May


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 37 597


we, O sun, see you rising day by day as the greatest
friend of ours and live long for a happy time in the light
and bliss divine.






[Names: Mahi, Arohantam]
O sun, lord of vision watching all, we pray that
while we live a long and full life time here on earth, we
may continue to see you as the divine power bearing
great light of life, shining bright and blessing every
living eye with light and joy, and rising high over the
vast order of mighty time and the world of existence.






[Names: Yasya, Anagastvena]
O Sun, self-refulgent divinity, by whose light
and sustaining power all regions of the universe, stars
and planets move on with their tasks in their own orbits
and then recede into their state of rest as into the night,
O lord of radiant light and fire of life, by your inviolable
purity of law and natural piety, shine, and emerge more
and more bright and excellent for our experience,
guidance and sustenance day by day for us.








[Names: Sarno, Yatha]
By your light and gracious eye, let there be peace
and bliss for us, peace and well being by day, peace and
bliss by light and solar radiation, peace by the cool of
snow and peace by soothing warmth of the sun, peace
the way it may be possible on our paths of progress,
and peace and all round well being in the home. That
wondrous variety of wealth, honour and excellence, O
Sun, give us by which there may be all round peace and
total well being in life.






[Names: Asmakam, Adat]
May all you Devas, divinities of nature and
humanity, give us peace and felicity for our life, for
both humans and animals. Let all that is eating, all that
is drinking be strong, energetic and fulfilled. Pray give
us that peace and well being which is free from violence,
sin and evil.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 38 599






[Names: Yadvo, Arava]
O Devas, divinities of nature and humanity, if
we trespass or do some grave offence by word, thought
or action and behaviour to earn your displeasure or even
provoke your anger, pray forgive us and cleanse us of
that weakness and negativity. And if there be some mean
and uncharitable person among us who behaves in a
vile manner toward us, then O divine givers of peace
and shelter, pray let that sin visit back upon the source.


Mandala 10/Sukta 38






[Names: Indra, Devata, Mushkavan, Rshi, Asmin, Simivati, Indra, Yatra]
Indra, O ruler of the world, in this mighty battle
for honour and industry, you roar and thunder, pray
defend and protect us to advance to the victory. This is
a battle for the reclamation, defence and development
of the lands and cows, between bold, undaunted soldiers
thirsting for the enemy’s blood, and on them, in this




murderous contest, sharp and blazing arrows fall on all
sides.


pau




[Names: Sravayyam, Syama]
Indra, O lord of power and glory, in this house
of the social order abundant in food, water and the
wealth of lands and cows, cover, protect and promote
the honoured wealth of the nation. O mighty victorious
lord, let us be your friends, allies and admirers and, O
lord giver of peace, settlement and a good home, pray
do as we would wish to fulfil our aspirations.






[Names: Purustuta, Asmabhiste, Satravastvaya]
O lord most admired and celebrated, Indra,
whether it is a power ignoble and slavish in character,
or even one dynamic in character but undivine and
negative, who challenges us to battle, let those enemies
be boldly faced and fought out, and let us all under your
leadership, overthrow and destroy them in battle.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 38 601


ASUS




[Names: Srutam]
In the decisive battle of humanity to the point
of the destruction of evil and negative forces, we now
choose and install that man as Indra, leader for defence,
protection and progress, who is adorable equally by the
select few and the many, small as well as great, who is
clean and pure, reputable and universally rich and
powerful to create the space and freedom for thought
and action around.




[Names: Svavrjam, Kutsadiha]
asate.


Come Indra, lord potent and generous, rise and
take on the leadership. We hear and know you are
powerful by yourself to uproot evil, indefatigable,
inspirer of fighting forces, uplifter of the weak and
breaker of blockades. Pray be free and free us from terror
and violence. How can the brave like you stay back
stolen by ravishment in obscurity?




Mandala 10/Sukta 39






[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Ghosha, Kakshivati, Rshi]
Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and
humanity like heat and cold, light and liquids, teacher
and preacher, science and technology, swift and smooth
is your chariot, turning, moving and going all over the
world in all directions. Adored and adorable is it day
and night by admiring priests, worthy of invocation by
them with homage and havi. Since time immemorial
we have been calling on you and this chariot of yours
as we chant the holy name of father, and we call upon
you, riders of the chariot, now.






[Names: Codayatam, Yasasam, Somam, Soma]
Ashvins, inspire, energise and raise the voice
of truth and divine law of eternity. Nourish, strengthen
and advance the intelligence and will of humanity for
action. Raise up, strengthen and confirm the principles


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 39 603


and policies which govern and sustain the values of
human institutions. That is what we love and desire of
you. Create and confirm our share of honour and
excellence in the affairs of human society. Vest the
beauty and grace of sweetness and culture for our sake
among the men of wealth and power.






[Names: Amajurascidbhavatho, Andhasya]
Ashvins, you are the hope and inspiration of the
bed-ridden home-confined old person. You are saviours
of the debilitated and the weakest persons who are
unable to eat and move. O lovers and observers of the
truth and law of nature, you bring light for the blind,
strength for the anaemic and health for the chronic
sufferers. That is what people call you, “saviours of life’.





[Names: Yuvam, Nistaugrya]
You rejuvenate the broken old man to fresh
youth to go round and enjoy life as the craftsman repairs
an old worn out chariot and converts it to new efficiency.
You raise the drowned man from the water and revive




him to life. That’s why all your works and achievements
are praised and celebrated in holy gatherings.








[Names: Purana, Sradariryatha]
O physician and surgeon dedicated to truth and
goodness of life, your old and ancient deeds I proclaim
and praise among people. Be you both harbingers of
good health, peace and joy. We celebrate you both as
adorable for the sake of health and protection so that
this dynamic community may have faith and trust in you.




[Names: Iyam, Ssiksatam, Anapirajnd]
I, this supplicant girl, request you, Ashvins, pray
listen to me, and as father speaks to the child, so please
instruct me on matters of health. I am alone and
unrelated, ignorant, without kith and kin and immature.
Pray protect me with knowledge before the onslaught
of the effects of that ignorance.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 39 605




[Names: Purumitrasya, Purumitras]
O Ashvins, with your knowledge of body and
mind, you join the youthful, bright and intelligent
daughter of the widely friendly father with a bright
young man for their joy and fulfilment. You listen to
the call of the barren woman, treat her, restore her
fertility, and she is blest with a child for a joyous home
life.






You rejuvenate and restore to vibrant youthful-
ness the aging veteran scholar in pursuit of research.
You raise the man of holiness from chronic ailment to
renewed life. And you help the public health authority
in community health programmes so that they may go
on with their normal activity.










[Names: Yuvamrbisamuta]
You revive the sinking man who has lost
consciousness, all but surviving in the brain, and
muttering from the subconscious. You cure the man in
high fever in the state of delirium and restore him to
health, full consciousness and self-immunity with all
his five senses, mind and intelligence fully working in






[Names: Carkrtyam]
Ashvins, for the active intelligent soul you give
pure unsullied virility and vitality and vibrant swift
smartness blest with nine and ninety qualities and
faculties of body (nine faculties of sense and mind each
energised with ten pranic energies) ever in action
onward like a constant friend as you bring for people
plenty, prosperity and power full of peace and joy worthy
of love and invocation in life for all time.







[Names: Yamasvina, Rudra]
O brilliant, independent and inviolable twin


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 39 607


divine powers, nothing from any where, no sin, no evil,
[Names: Ashvins, Ashvin]
invoked and approachable, moving by paths free from
the pain and suffering of ailments, you join in wedlock
and lead forth to a happy home.






[Names: Yasya]
O Ashvins, morning stars divine, come by that
chariot of yours faster than mind which the celestial
artists crafted for you, that which you yoke in harness
and the maiden of heaven walks forth to ride and rise
and then both the happy day and soothing night born of
the sun move on.






[Names: Sayave, Vrkasya]
O Ashvins, divine powers of knowledge and
action, enlightened men and women of the world,
harness the victorious chariot of divine vision and
inspiration, rise forth and move forward by the road to
the clouds, strengthen and raise the rousing voice for
sleeping humanity, and with your voice and actions free


the poor victims seized and held in the jaws of wolves.






[Names: Etam, Nyamrksama]
Ashvins, complementary twin powers of nature
and humanity, this song of adoration we offer in your
honour as the divine artists craft and offer the celestial
chariot for you, and we have adorned it as we always
adorn and prepare a bride for the groom. Blest with
children and grand children we abide in life (and depend
on you for strength and inspiration in the life cycle day
and night, through the seasons, year in and year out).


Mandala 10/Sukta 40





[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Ghosha, Kakshivati, Rshi, Ratham, Prataryavanam, Sami]
O leading lights of life and humanity, who and
where, with holy intelligence and action, crafts, adorns
and prepares your mighty spacious, brilliant, and
auspicious chariot ever on the move in action going
every morning to yajna every day to every people,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 40 609


bearing and bringing all kinds of wealth for the sake of
happiness and well being?






[Names: Kuha, Sayutra]
Ashvins, man and woman, where were you at
night? Where in the day? Where do you find food and
rest? Where do you live? Where do you sleep? Where
do you stay together like the widow with her second
husband, or a maiden married to a youth? Who invites
you to yajna?






[Names: Pratarjarethe, Kasya]
Early morning, like venerable divinities you are
honoured with songs of praise. Venerable and adorable,
you visit the devotee’s home day by day. Whose
weaknesses do you destroy? And O leading lights of
humanity, whose house and yajna do you visit like the
princes of a royal realm?








[Names: Yuvam, Yuvam]
Looking and searching for you as seekers and
saviours, we invoke and invite you with homage day
and night. All house holders invoke you and offer you
homage of havi according to the seasons, and you,
leading lights for humanity, treasure holds of good and
promoters of the auspicious, bring food and energy for
the people.






[Names: Bhutam, Saktamarvate]
Ashvins, leading lights of the land, rulers and
warriors, this voice of the ruling order like a daughter
of the sovereign, going round and knowing every thing
of the state, asks you and says : Be up and awake for me
day and night and strengthen yourselves and strengthen
me to meet the challenges of the forces of horse, chariot
and the stormy troopers and thus save me and the social







[Names: Yuvorha, Bharata]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 40 611


Ashvins, you are visionary poetic creators, stay
fast on the chariot, go to the people and appreciate their
songs of adoration as a creator and maker of songs
would. The honey sweets of your creation, the honey
bees taste and drink with their mouth as a youthful
woman loves the sweet beauty of her new home.






^०.~ ° ~




Ashvins, protect the protector and sustainer of
the people’s standard of living, protect the dependent
and supporter, protect him who appreciates and adores,
and protect the poet of love and beauty. Your generous
admirer loves to be friends with you, and I too pray for
your protection and gift of well being. Pray help all these
people to complete their journey of life to self-







[Names: Sayum]
Ashvins, both of you, pray protect and support
the weak, the depressed, the supporter of the weak, and




the widow who has lost all support. And, O Ashvins,
for the lovers of knowledge and devotees of yajna and
divinity, open the seven rousing flood gates of the seven
metres of Vedic poetry for chanting and hearing.






[Names: Janista, Asmai, Anu]
The maiden is grown mature, the suitor comes
seeking and proposes for marriage, the plants and
creepers bloom according to innate power and potential,
streams and rivers, desires and passions for living and
continuing, flow down the slopes for the young man,
and that is the stage for matrimony when the day of
youthfulness is on the high and irrepressible.






[Names: Jivam, Vamam]
People yearn for life, live it with tears and
ecstasy, exchange vows and positions on the vedi of
love and non-violence, and they desire that they live in
wedlock as long as they may wish. Those who live in
this felicity for their parents and elders, even away from


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 40 613


and bring them peace and joy in their conjugal






[Names: Natasyavidma, Priyosriyasya]
We know not of that mystery of life, O Ashvins,
pray speak of that mystery, that bond and felicity, to the
youth who lives in the home of his youthful wife. We
only wish that we may find a sweet home with a loving,
generous, virile young man, loving at heart and winsome
to his wife.






[Names: Abhutam]
O Ashvins, twin powers of domestic
complementarity of love and wisdom, masters of the
science and art of wedlock and home life, may the
benefit of your enlightenment come to us, may there be
the joy of life with wisdom and emotional control in
our hearts. That way, be our protectors as leading lights
in our pursuit of happiness and well being. Bless us
that we may love, desire and find a home with loving,
enlightened, generous and caring husbands.






[Names: Krtam]
tim hatam.


O Ashvins, joyous spirits of love and wisdom,
prosperity and generosity, to the celebrant of life and
divinity, to the house of humanity, bear and bring wealth,
honour and excellence with brave progeny worthy of
the celebrant. O givers, protectors and promoters of the
good and well being of life, establish a happy home life
overflowing with food, drink and freedom of holiness.
Pray cast away infirmity, rigidity, hatred and negative
disposition that may obstruct our path of progress in
life.






[Names: Kvasvidadya, Ssubhaspati, Ashvins, Ashvin]
where have you been today? Among which people have
you been enjoying yourselves for the day? Who can
make you stay for the day? Which sage’s or which
yajamana’s home did you visit for the day?


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 41 615


Mandala 10/Sukta 41






[Names: Ashvinau, Devata, Suhastya, Ghausheya, Rshi, Samanamu, Puruhutam, Puruhuta, Parijmanam, Usaso]
O Ashvins, harbingers of new light and energy,
in the light of the dawn with holy chant of mantric
formulae, we invoke and call for that constant and
invariable, universally loved and invoked, venerable and
chariot which would be constantly on the move to reach
yajnic programmes all over the earth.





[Names: Prataryujam, Viso]
O Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge
and energy of life, leading lights of humanity dedicated
to truth and never deviating from your path of rectitude,
you ride and guide the chariot harnessed, started and
moving in the morning, which bears and brings honey
sweets of life and by which you reach the yajnic
communities and bless the celebrant’s yajna joined by
devotees in unison and cooperation.







[Names: Adhvaryum, Viprasya]
O Ashvins, harbingers of the light of knowledge
and practical power and energy through yajna, whether
you go to the dexterous organiser of yajna, bearing
honeyed offerings, or you go to the initiator of yajna
and fire kindler, expert in the science and power of yajna
and at the same time generous and socially oriented, or
whether you go to the yajnas of the vibrant scholar
specialist, you would have a taste of the honey sweets
of life for achievement.


Mandala 10/Sukta 42




[Names: Indra, Devata, Krishna, Angirasa, Rshi, Asteva, Vaca, Indram, Indra, Soma]
As an expert archer shoots a distant target with
the arrow, similarly bear and offer a holy song in honour


of divine Indra, thereby exalting him with the beauties
of word and music. O sages, with your voice of song


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 42 617


overwhelm the other voice, of negation. O celebrant,
hold the divine Indra at heart, be happy and let the
Presence shine in your peaceful soul.






[Names: Dohena, Ssiksa, Jaritar, Kosam]
O celebrant, with constant churning of the mind,
refine and energise your voice of adoration, send it in
to your friend Indra, the soul within, and, like a
treasurehold overflowing with wealth of light, stir it,
wake up the brave soul for the gift of excellence and






[Names: Kimanga, Ssisthi, Sisayam, Srnomi, Apnasvati, Sakra]
Indra, mighty soul, dear as breath of life, grand
and sublime, don’t they say you are the giver of all
pleasure and glory of life? Pray bless me too with the
wealth of light and grandeur. I hear you are the all
omnificent lord. O Lord Almighty, refine and sharpen
my vision and understanding to the efficiency of divine
attainment. Indra, pray bring us glory and good fortune
full of wealth, power and peace.




Rusu




[Names: Tvam, Atra, Surah]
Indra, people invoke you for help in contests of
righteousness and call upon you while they march to
the battle. Here too, however, he alone wins his help
who offers faith and yajna, because the mighty one does
not love, nor recognise, the friendship of the selfish and
the non-performer of Soma-yajna.






[Names: Dhanam, Tasmai, Soman]
Whoever the man of discipline and practice that
offers precious gifts of holy and plenteous value and
performs effective and powerful soma yajna of peace
and pleasure for this divine Indra, ruling lord of
humanity, for him Indra dispels all darkness and evil
and eliminates all his enemies at the very outset of the
day, howsoever strong, violent and well-armed the




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 42 619




[Names: Yasmin, Samsamindre, Ssisraya, Araccit, Satrur]
Indra, the ruler in whom we repose our faith
with admiration and who assures our fulfilment in all
we want and aspire for, is great and all powerful. His
enemies, even though they be far off cower with fear
and flee, and to him all the wealth and powers born and
produced in the land submit in reverence and loyalty.






[Names: Aracchatrum, Asme, Puruhiuta]
Indra, ruler of the world, invoked and celebrated
by all, by that thunderbolt of power and justice which
is lustrous and awful, throw out and keep off from us
all social and environmental enemies. Give us
abundance of grain, lands and cows, and for the
celebrant yajna create an environment of enlightened
action productive of the jewel wealth of life.






[Names: Naha]
The ruler to whom powerful creations of
generous and imaginative artists and inspiring somaic
achievements of peaceful projects are offered and




dedicated from within the land for highly generative
purposes and social values, that ruler, commanding
wealth, power and majesty, does not impose any
restrictions upon such veteran and generous artists,
instead he provides manifold inspiring incentives to the






[Names: Samit]
A veteran winner, he counters an attack and wins
the opponent just as an expert player or hunter rounds
up his prey and chooses the right time to strike and win.
He does not restrict or restrain the philanthropist who
loves divinity and spends on yajnic projects, instead,
master, protector and promoter of wealth and power as
he is, he blesses the giver with more and more of wealth.






[Names: Gobhistaremamatim, Vayam, Puruhuta]
O ruler of the world invoked and celebrated by
all humanity, let us solve the difficult problem of poverty
and mental and cultural backwardness by cow
development, land development and proper education,
and the problem of hunger, by food production across


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 43 621


the world. Let us take the initiative first to win wealth
by cooperation with other rulers, and ultimately win our
goals by our own power and effort.






[Names: Brhaspatirnah, Indrah]
May Brhaspati, omniscient lord of divine voice,
protect us from sins and negative legacies of the past,
from doubts and fears from above and below. May Indra,
mighty ruler, be our friend and protect us from
difficulties facing upfront. May he promote us on and
on. May he place us at the centre of life’s problems,
protect and promote us and create the wealth of honour
and excellence for us, his friends.


Mandala 10/Sukta 43






[Names: Indra, Devata, Krishna, Angirasa, Rshi, Accha, Indram, Indra, Pari]
All my thoughts, words and actions, all together
in perfect unison concentrated on the love and light of
divinity, ecstatically adore and celebrate Indra, lord
almighty of existence. Just as wives with love embrace




their human lover, protector and husband, so do my
prayers centre on Indra, lord of glory, power and purity,
for all round protection, promotion and well being.






[Names: Rajeva, Puruhita]
Indra, lord universally invoked and celebrated,
may my mind and soul having surrendered its love and
ambition to you, never go astray from the presence such
as yours. O lord beatific and glorious, you abide on my
vedi and in my heart as the sovereign ruling presence.
May your divine love, joy and protection ever abide in
this mind and soul and bless it with peace and joy in






[Names: Visuvrdindro, Tasyedime]
Indra, lord of all power and glory, dynamic
presence all round in the world, dispels hunger and
ignorance, rules and dispenses wealth, power and peace
of shelter and settlement. Indeed, under the rule of this
mighty generous master, all these seven streams of
nature, life and living energy flow on and evolve to


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 43 623


perfection. (This is true of both the external world of
nature under the law of the cosmic spirit and of the
internal world of mind and pranic energy under the rule
of the spirit within.)






[Names: Vayo, Praisamanikam]
Just as birds take to the tree of rich foliage for
rest and replenishment of life energy, so the soma cheer
and energy of the sevenfold fluent streams of cosmic
and individual systems take to Indra, the soul, for life
and peace and joy. Then the expressive face of these
shines with the splendour of Indra, and thus the living
light of divinity descends in showers for the bliss of
man.






[Names: Krtam, Suryam, Surya, Anu, Sakanna]
Just as a player in the game casts the die and
wins and piles up his gains, so does Indra, lord
omnipotent and omnificent, in this pleasure garden of
the dynamics of existence win over the sun and the rain










[Names: Visam, Yasyaha, Somaih, Somai]
The lord of glory abides with all people of the
world whosoever they be. The generous lord knows,
listens and grants all prayers of the people. Whosoever
the devotee whose yajnas the mighty one joins and
enjoys, that celebrant wins over all his rivals and
adversaries by the power of his ardent soma offerings
of holy action in yajna.






[Names: Vardhanti]
As rivers flow into the sea, as streams of rain
flow into the lake, so do the beauties of faith and pleasure
in soma yajnas concentrate on Indra, glory of the world.
As showers of rain with profuse divine generosity raise
the crops of barley and the plants grow up in ecstasy, so
in the homely presence of this generous lord of
sublimity, saints and sages rise and shine in moral and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 43 625


mane ॥




[Names: Vrsa]
Just as the swelling cloud causes the vapours of
water in the skies to be released of itself and lets these
showers of rain fall upon the earth, so does Indra, lord
of glorious generosity, bring showers of light and bliss
for the generous man of charity who offers the homage
of soma to the lord for humanity.






[Names: Ujjayatam, Sucih]
Let the thunderbolt of power and justice arise,
let the voice of truth and law divine be generous, creative
and fruitful as ever before, let the bright sun rise with
its immaculate light and glory, may the lord protector
and promoter of the good reveal the light and power of
divinity as the bliss of heaven.








[Names: Gobhistaremamatim, Vayam, Puruhuta]
Let us dispel the darkness of ignorance with the
communication of universal knowledge, let us remove
the world’s hunger with food production, let us reclaim
our original wealth of knowledge, power and prosperity
with our innate lights and enlightened actions.






[Names: Brhaspatirnah, Indrah]
May Brhaspati, lord of Infinity and the master
of knowledge protect us against the violence of sin and
ruler and friend of humanity, create and lead us to the
wealth of life for us and our friends, all at present and
in our midst.


Mandala 10/Sukta 44






[Names: Indra, Devata, Krishna, Angirasa, Rshi, Pratvaksano]
May Indra, lord ruler of his world of reality,
come, arise in view, in our consciousness, for the joy of
his devotees. Mighty is he, loving, bright and accepting
by his own essential nature and the laws of life, and, by
his boundless grandeur and generosity, he takes on all


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 44 627


challenges of counterforces and reduces them to naught
for his people. (The mantra may be applied to Divinity
or to the ruling power).






[Names: Susthama, Sibham]
Stable, strong and perfectly directed is your
chariot, controlled and accurate your dual powers of
motion. O refulgent ruler and protector of the people,
in your hands you hold the controls of the thunder power
of force and justice. Pray come at the fastest by the safest
and straightest path to us right here. We celebrate and
exalt your powers and generosity, and you love to protect
and promote your celebrants.






[Names: Endravaho, Pratvaksasam, Susmamemasmatra]
May the mighty, blazing, penetrating, vigorous
and refining radiations of this Indra, protector and
promoter of humanity, thunder armed, virile and
generous, indomitable upholder of truth, come in unison
with inspiring strength and bring him to us for our social
and spiritual good.








[Names: Ojah]
Thus do solar radiations transmit the presence
of Indra, lord protector and ruler pervasive in the world
of humanity, all aware, the pillar of universal energy,
strength and power. Thus do we exalt and celebrate
Indra. O lord, you are the shower of power and
generosity in the all-sustaining world of yours. Pray
create and give us the strength of life, hold us in your
power and presence for our promotion and progress
since you are the ultimate lord and master of the
dedicated aspirants for light.






[Names: Gamannasme, Samsisam, Tvamisise]
Indra, may wealths, peace and honours of the
world come to us, I wish and pray. Come, accept the
homage of the celebrant’s song of praise. You rule all,
come and abide in this holy seat of yajna and love of
the heart. Bold and undaunted, we are your celebrants
by the nature and Dharma of our being.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 44 629






[Names: Prthak, Sravasyani]
People of the first order dedicated to divinity
and yajnic piety go forward by holy paths of the first
order and perform admirable acts of the most difficult
order. But those who cannot board the ark of yajnic order
and divine love, men of unclean character, doubtful
mind and crooked ways, lie about here in the lower and
lowest orders of being.






[Names: Evaivapagapare, Ittha, Puruni, Vayunani]
Thus do people of evil disposition keep
wallowing in low states of existence whose mind and
senses are engaged in wrong things like restive horses.
And thus do others of the first and higher disposition
fare who are dedicated here itself to the higher
omnificent divinity in which infinite gifts of freedom,
peace and happiness abound.








[Names: Girinrajran, Samicine]
He wields the dynamics of nature, fixes the
mountains and moves the roaring clouds. He holds the
raging heavens and shakes the violent skies. He holds
both earth and heaven together and, the glorious sun
having drunk up the vapours, showers down the rains
in joy like the overflow of divine ecstasy in the music
of song.






[Names: Imam, Asmintsu]
I happily abide by this law and discipline of
yours, Indra, which is divinely maintained and sustained,
the law by which, O lord of power and glory, you punish
those who strike life by their hoof and claw. May your
presence abide in this holy seat of my yajna in the heart
and soul. May your divine majesty, O lord of glory, know
and fulfil our desire in this cherished act of love and





[Names: Gobhistaremamatim, Vayam, Puruhuta]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 45 631


O lord universally invoked and celebrated, let
us overcome the difficult problems of want, of moral
and spiritual vision and knowledge, by the Vedic voice,
and the problem of world hunger by cooperative
production of food. And let us on top win wealth, honour
and excellence by our own brilliance of intelligence and






[Names: Brhaspatirnah, Indrah]
May Brhaspati protect and promote us all round
from behind, from above and from below against sin
and evil. May Indra, our friend and ruler, create and
give wealth, honour and excellence for us and for the
entire fraternity of the world from within at the centre
of humanity and may he continue the same into the
future.


Mandala 10/Sukta 45




[Names: Agni, Devata, Vatsapri, Bhalandana, Rshi, Divaspari, Agnirasmad, Trttyamapsu]
Agni first manifests as light in the high heavenly
region in the form of the sun. Secondly it manifests as




Jataveda, vital heat in all earthly forms around us. In
the third form it manifests as energy in waters in the
middle regions of space as electricity. Agni is the vital
energy which enables humanity to live and work. Man
as self-intelligent being lights this perpetual Agni and
thereby exalts and celebrates the eternal creative spirit
of existence.






[Names: Vidma, Vidma, Purutra]
Agni, universal vital energy, we know the three
modes in which you menifest in three different forms,
structures, properties and functions. All pervasive
energy, we know the three regions in which you abide.
For sure we know the deepest secret cave where your
abode is since we know the infinite source from where
you arise and manifest as Agni, Vayu and Aditya on
earth, in sky and in heaven.






[Names: Samudre, Trtiye]
Agni, the fluid energy excites and kindles you
in the currents in the depths of the waters; in the region
of light, the sun that illuminates the world of humanity
produces and radiates you; and in the third region of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 45 633


the skies, the energy of the winds produces and
augments you as you abide in the depths of the cloud.






[Names: Akrandadagnih, Sadyo]
Agni roars as if thundering and shaking the
skies, at the same time reaching and kissing the earth
and beautifying the greenery. Always present, instantly
rising, it proclaims itself, shines, and fills the heaven
and earth with its light.






[Names: Srinamudaro, Vasuh, Somagopah, Somagopa, Usasamidhanah, Usasamidhana]
Liberal source giver of light, beauty and life’s
graces, treasure home of wealths, honours and
excellences, harbinger of intellectual smartness and
fulfilment, protector and promoter of the soma energies
of life, shelter home of peace and comfort, child as well
as energiser of strength and courage, and the ruling
inspirer of the soul in will and actions, Agni, kindled
and rising, shines in advance of the dawns at the horizon.








[Names: Visvasya, Vilum]
Illuminator of the world, pervasive life energy
of the universe, as it rises it fills the heaven and earth
with light and life. Moving ahead and penetrating, it
breaks the mighty strong cloud, and for this reason of
its energy, power and light all communities of the world
kindle and adore it in their yajnic projects of creation
and production.






[Names: Usik, Tyarti]
Charming, purifying, dynamic, inspiring the
mind and intelligence to acts of holiness, immortal Agni
pervades in all mortal forms of nature and humanity. It
bears and emanates light, sets in motion free fragrance
for life and, with powerful pure light, fills the heavens
of space.






[Names: Drsano, Sriye, Agniramrto]
All watching and self-revealed, glorious Agni
shines awfully, infinite light, indomitable life and pranic
energy, all refulgent for the beauty and grace of life.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 45 635


Agni is immortal and eternal with waves of living energy
since the heavenly divine life spirit of existence
generates it as it is.






[Names: Yaste]
Agni, holy light of life, self-refulgent generous
divinity, whoever the dedicated celebrant of the divine
that prepares and offers you homage and yajna with
perfect discipline of mind and sense, pray bless him, O
power ever youthful, with honour and excellence of high
order and the peace and comfort of a happy home.






[Names: Sasyamane, Priyah]
O self-refulgent Agni, love the celebrant, bless
him among the celebrities of high renown, love and bless
him in every celebrative song of adoration, Let him be
dear to the sun, a darling of the fire to enjoy the favour
and blessings of these divinities. May he rise with what
he has created and achieved. May he rise by all that he
is going to create and achieve.


aa: nee






[Names: Tvamagne, Anu, Tvaya]
Agni, lord of light and glory, those who offer
you yajnic homage and worship are blest with all the
world’s wealth, peace and comfort of their choice.
Seeking and aspiring for honour and excellence, loving
sages and pioneers of progress not only achieve but also
open the gates of further possibilities on earth abounding
in lands, cows, and culture of knowledge and grace.






[Names: Astavyagnirnaram, Ssusevo, Advese]
Agni, self-refulgent light and fire of life, blissful
guardian of humanity, world guide and pioneer of
leading lights, protector and promoter of the soma
beauty and glory of life is praised and exalted by seers
and poetic celebrants. We invoke and pray for the
blessings of loving heaven and earth free from anger
and jealousy. We pray may the divinities bear and bring
us wealth, honour and excellence with brave generations
of progeny.


Mandala 10/Sukta 46






[Names: Agni, Devata, Vatsapri, Bhalandana, Rshi]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 46 637




[Names: Dadhiryo]
High priest of the cosmic yajna of creation,
universally self-manifested, great and glorious,
pervasive in space and things even beyond the senses,
abiding in the heart and soul of humanity, Agni rolls at
the heart of the dynamics of existence. O man, the
omnipresent light of the universe which holds, controls
and sustains everything is celebrated in the Vedas and
worshipped at heart. It is Agni, sustainer of the
individual body and the cosmic form, ruler and
controller of everything, that bears and brings you all
food and energies and blesses you with all wealth,
honour and excellence of life.






[Names: Imam, Guha]
Just as people search for a lost animal by
following the foot prints of the animal in the forest,
similarly seekers and aspirants of this Agni, omnipresent
in the dynamics of existence, try to search for it by the
overt as well as covert marks of its presence in the wide
world of nature, and the deeply dedicated brilliant sages,
loving and patient in their persistent search with yajnic
homage, self-dedication and surrender, find it vibrating
in the cave of the heart and soul.








[Names: Ssevrdho]
The ardent lover of divinity, Trita, the man
having got over threefold suffering of body, mind and
soul through knowledge, good work and meditation,
finds this Agni presence on top of inviolable nature and
earthly life in the absolute state of consciousness. Thus
realised in spiritual manifestation, Agni, harbinger and
augmenter of spiritual felicity, becomes the centre hold
of happy homes and a youthful presence of divinity in
the mind of enlightened souls.






[Names: Mandram, Visam]
Earnest men of love, passion and faith among
people hold at heart and with homage serve Agni, the
power that is joyous, yajnic creator giver and organiser,
foremost leader directly realised, worthy of love and
reverence, leading power of creative programmes of
love and non-violence, cleanser and purifier, harbinger
of holy materials for social development. They hold
Agni at heart and create and exalt it as the prime power
among the people.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 46 639






[Names: Nayanto]
Earnest men of love, passion and faith, but,
being human, limited in intelligence, hold at heart,
worship and serve Agni pervading and dominating the
world of existence, great, sustainer of the vibrant wise,
all knowing and wise, breaker of the strongholds of
negativity and darkness, the original seed and source
of life, beatific, supremely intelligent, golden flamed
and divinely adorable. Men hold at heart, worship and
serve this omnipresent Agni being more dynamic than
the dynamics of nature, the instant presence that it is.






[Names: Atah]
Agni, the light of three worlds, all supportive
and sustaining, enveloped in light and flames, sits in
the vedi in the homes as in the midst of regions of the
universe, and from there, having received the homage
of yajnic oblations, the generous Agni reaches the
leading divinities of nature and humanity in various
ways according to different laws of nature.








[Names: Asyajaraso, Sviticayah, Somah, Soma]
The eternal, adorable and all saving flames and
fragrances of the powerful fires of this Agni are
pervasive in forests, clouds and waters, and they are
vibrant and blissful as the soothing pleasures of soma.






[Names: Agnih, Vayunani, Tamayavah, Sucayantam]
Agni, light of omniscience, vests humanity with
the wisdom, will and power of action, and also with the
awareness of the laws of the expansive universe, by the
flames of its powerful Vedic voice of revelations. And
the people hold, adore, serve and follow that Agni, the
most lovable and adorable, purifying, sanctifying and
joyous power which is the high priest of the dynamics
of existence, the receiver and a thousandfold giver.




[Names: Dyava, Ilenyam]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 47 641


That Agni, self-refulgent spirit and light of the
universe, is the universal presence which the heaven
and earth manifest with their vastness, which the blazing
lights of the stars reveal with their splendour, Agni, the
first and supreme power and presence, lovable and
adorable, which the mighty winds and other bright
divinities of nature reveal for thinking humanity.






[Names: Purusprho]
Agni, self-refulgent light and spirit of the
universe whom the divine forces of nature and ardent
lovers and faithful people adore and worship as loving
and friendly bearer of the gifts of yajna, we pray, bring
the food, energy and health and light of life for the
dedicated celebrant on the highways of existence. May
the lover of divinity be blest with eternal fame, honour
and excellence.


Mandala 10/Sukta 47

[Names: Vaikuntha, Indra, Devata, Saptagu, Angirasa, Rshi]
at: ue





[Names: Jagrbhma, Vidma, Sura]
Indra, lord ruler, controller, promoter and giver
of the world’s wealth, peace, comfort and joy, we,
seekers of wealth, honours and excellence, hold on to
your liberal hand of generosity. Lord of omnipotence,
we know that you are the ruler and controller of the
earths, stars, knowledge, wisdom and culture of life.
Pray bless us with profuse and wondrous source wealth
of the world with honours, excellence and happiness.






[Names: Svayudham, Carkrtyam]
We know you, Indra, wielder of mighty
round in the four quarters of space, treasure-hold of
universal wealth, constantly doing and glorified,
adorable and infinite source of choicest boons. Pray bear
and bring us abundant and wondrous wealth of the




[Names: Subrahmanam, Srutrsimugra]
rayim dah.

We know you, Indra, lord of divine speech,
highest lover of divinities, greatest, boundless, deepest,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 47 643


foundation of the expansive universe, exalted among
seers and sages, blazing lustrous, destroyer of
opponents. Pray, bear and bring us abundant and
wondrous wealth of the world.




[Names: Sanadvajam, Dasyuhanam]
dah.


We know you, Indra, abundant in food, energy
and advancement, commanding the brave and
intelligent, guiding presence over the ocean of existence,
infinitely opulent, giver of strength and sure success,
most powerful, destroyer of evil and negativity, breaker
of mountainous obstructions, ever true and eternal. O
lord omnipotent, give us wondrous wealth of life in






[Names: Asvavantam, Satinam, Bhadrav]
We know you, Indra, equipped with dynamic
forces, cosmic chariot and brave powers of the world,
abundant in hundredfold, thousandfold, even infinite
energy, power and victory, assisted by excellent powers
of natural law, served by the wise and brave sages, the
lord all blissful. Pray give us abundant and wondrous


wealth of the wonderful world of life.






[Names: Angiraso]
We know you Indra, lord of the seven-fold world
of existence sung by seven priests with seven songs of
the Veda, lord of infinite intelligence, presiding over
the expansive universe whom the man of intelligence
adores and who is directly invoked with homage and
prayer of the man of dynamic faith. Pray give us the
wondrous wealth of the world full of abundant creative
at: Wie


[Names: Vanivano, Indram, Hrdisprso]
My songs of adoration full of love and faith,
vibrating with holy thoughts, expressive of the language
of my mind and touching the heart, reach Indra like


messengers of my soul. Indra, pray give us wondrous
wealth of the world in abundance.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 48 645




Indra, what I pray for, graciously grant us, a
boundless expansive abode of joy unlike any house of
the people on earth. May heaven and earth approve of
my prayer and join in the supplication. Indra, lord
omnipotent, give us wondrous wealth of the world,


Mandala 10/Sukta 48




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vaikuntha, Rshi, Aham]
I am the eternal lord, master protector and
promoter of the world of existence. I create, raise, protect
and rule over the eternal wealths of the world. Living
beings call on me as father, mother and saviour guardian.
I provide food and sustenance for generous humanity
dedicated to service and yajna.








[Names: Ahamindro, Ssiksan]
I am the corselet and the centre-hold of pranic
energy in the state of tension and equilibrium. I create
the streams of vapour over the cloud and waves of
energy for the three realms of earth, heaven and the
middle regions. I collect and disburse wealth of materials
and energies from and for the dynamics of evolution,
and I give protection and perception of sense and
response to the foetus in the mother’s womb.






[Names: Mahyam, Mamanikam, Surya]
For me, Tvashta, formative faculty of divine
nature, creates the thunderbolt of steel. For me, the
divinities of nature and humanity perform their tasks
and surrender them unto me. My blazing power is
insurmountable like the sun’s, and all actions past,
present and future in nature or humanity must come to
me for effectual fulfilment.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 48 647




[Names: Ahametam]
^° ^~




[Names: Somasa]
When men of soma peace and piety chant hymns
of praise in gratitude to cosmic divinity, it pleases me,
and this man of perceptive senses, thinking mind,
penetrative vision, energetic character and a golden
heart, I vest with the abundance of a thousand capacities
and capabilities of refinement for rooting out sin and
evil.






[Names: Somaminma]
I am Indra, the powerful, never defeated. None
can deprive me of my identity. I exist not for death. O
makers of soma, ask me for the wealth and peace of
life. Men who abide in friendship with me never come
to harm.







[Names: Ahametan, Ahvayamanan]
I destroy those challengers who, panting for




battle in two’s, raise their thunder weapon and challenge
the mighty ruling power of the system. I throw them off
without the weapon, without bending in compromise
either, but with a determined mind and the warning word
of the inevitable.






[Names: Abhidamekameko, Khale, Satravo]
I am one, the absolute without a second. I am
destroyer of the enemies who do not recognise me, Indra,
centrality of the system. Those who challenge me, I
destroy, whether it is one or two or three. I crush them
all as sheaves of corn on the threshing floor. It is a pity






For the protection and advancement of the
unostentatious people of piety and creativity among
humanity, I hold and maintain persons and powers that
are hospitable, producers of food, and destroyers of sin,
evil and violence, and I protect them like the very
nourishment of society, since Iam known and celebrated
for what Iam and what I do: eliminate the forces counter


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 48 649


to growth, break the cloud for rain, and dispel darkness,
want and ignorance.






[Names: Didyum, Samsyam]
My celebrant is worthy of love and honour,
because he is for sustenance, enjoyment and
procurement of knowledge for society. He is loved and
honoured for two reasons: for friendship and for
enlightenment. And when I have given him the light in
abundance in the battles of life, only then I raise him to
the position of praise and celebration.






[Names: Pranemasmin, Among, Soma]
divine spirit of joy, beauty and peace, the protector
within. Among others, the lord manifests as a bolt from
the blue, the sudden fall of thunder. Fighting the sharply
armed, strongly determined forces, he stands and








[Names: Thus, Adityanam, Adityana, Savase]
Light of lights, generous and potent, I never
violate, frustrate or transgress the identity, function and
power of the Adityas, zodiacs of the sun, of Vasus,
natural spheres of life sustenance, or Rudras, forces such
as winds and pranic energies. Nor do I ever disturb the
aditya, rudra and vasu scholars of knowledge and divine
service. Let them all realise me and manifest my spirit
and presence for their good and fulfilment of their
prowess: me, Indra, undaunted, unviolated and


Mandala 10/Sukta 49








[Names: Indra, Devata, Vaikuntha, Rshilndra, Vaikuntha, Rshi, Aham, Aham]
I give to the celebrant of divinity eternal peace
and freedom of the soul, the highest value of life across
the world of existence. I create the eternal song of
existence for self celebration in joyous exaltation. Iam
the giver of inspiration to the yajnic performer and
partner in cosmic evolution, and I subdue the negationist
and uncreative soul in the entire struggle of life for
evolution.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 49 651






Living beings of land, waters, heaven and all
spaces and all that move, they accept and adore me in
faith as Indra, the omnipotent sustainer. I keep the
twofold dynamic forces of high velocity constantly on
the move in the cosmic process of evolution, and I,
power supreme, wield the thunderbolt as my sceptre of
omnipotent justice and dispensation.






[Names: Ahamatkam]
I pierce and dispel the darkness for the visionary
seer, giving him the break-through and the light with
radiations of illuminations and revelation. I protect the
sage with these modes of protection and advancement.
I, dispeller and destroyer of drought and want, wield
the thunderbolt for the negationist and the destroyer
whom I do not recognise by the name of a creative








[Names: Kutsaya, Kutsa]
Like a father for the good of the man of creative
generosity, I subdue and throw out the obstinate and
persistent forces of bruteness, violence and terror. I am
for the advancement of the man of yajnic creativity and
enlightenment, and I have nothing good for the violent
and the bully.






[Names: Jihita, Vayuna]
I subdue the roaming mind of the learned man
so that it matures and, always by thought and action, it
abides in me without going astray. I condition the inner
spirit of man to humility, love and kindness, and I
remove the obstacles from the path of the man on way
to progress.




[Names: Yadvardhayantam]
rocanakaram.


I am that who, like breaking of the cloud, destroy


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 49 653


the evil tendencies of body and mind extending to new
areas like epidemics expanding and covering large
terrilories, and thus I am that who throw away for all
time all that sin and darkness which would otherwise
go on rising and expanding in effect and intensity.






[Names: Suryasya, Suryas, Yanma]
I manifest all round in glory as my presence is
conducted by fast radiations of sun rays, and when the
celebrant of soma yajna for peace and joy calls on me
for fulfilment of his essential nature in divinity,
immediately I strike off all impediments by strokes of
the thunderbolt as the negativities deserve.






[Names: Savasa, Turvasam, Turvasa, Yadum, Yadu]
I am the destroyer of sevenfold darkness (of
passion, anger, greed, infatuation, pride, fear and
sorrow) by sevenfold light of divinity. I am the bond
between humanity and divinity, stronger than strength
itself. The aspiring man of action and effort, I raise to
heights of honour and fame. Others, I fortify with




courage and patience, and the rising ones, I cause to
rise higher by nine and ninety times for a full life of






[Names: Ahamarnamsi]
Infinite, generous and omnipotent, I cause the
seven streams to flow and the seven seas to roll on earth,
and I cause the seven streams of blood and nerve to
flow in the body. Master of holy action, I provide for
the river’s flow, and with the dynamics of nature and
society, I provide the paths of progress for humanity on
way to fulfilment.





[Names: Sparham, Somama, Siram]
I create and cause to flow that bright fluid in
these seas and streams of earth and the body which no
bright power of nature or humanity, not even Tvashta,
the divine artist, could have created and made to flow:
the lovely milk in cow’s udders, honey sweet waters in
the rivers, and the sparkling life blood in the body’s


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 50 655
veins, the essence of vitality.






[Names: Evadevan, Visvet]
Thus does Indra, lord of glory and protector of
Truth and Law, impel and inspire natural and human
forces of generous and positive action with energy. As
such, all men of action and excellence over the world
exalt and adore you, O lord of radiant presence,
omnipotence and innate excellence, and they feel blest
in themselves.


Mandala 10/Sukta 50




[Names: Indra, Devata, Vaikuntha, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras]
You seekers and celebrants, offer reverence and
homage with service, prayer and selfless work to Indra,
omnipresent guide, giver of happiness and fulfilment
to all people of the world, whose holiness of universal
creativity, strength, grandeur, honour and glory, and
gracious generosity, both heaven and earth proclaim and
adore.








[Names: Visvasu, Sura]
He, Indra, Lord of heaven and earth, leader and
master of humanity with love and friendship for all,
loved and adored universally, is worthy of worship for
all men like me. O lord omnipotent protector and
promoter of the good and true, you rejoice, exhilarate
and energise us in all top situations worth challenging
in the world, in all battles of the brave worth winning,
and in all states of darkness and showers of the clouds.






Indra, who are those people that try to win your
favour of sustenance and enlightenment, who realise
your divine bliss of peace and well being, who exert
themselves to win the strength and spirit of life and joy
of divinity, and who delight in their own acts of
ambition, manliness and generosity?




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 50 657


[Names: Bhuvastvamindra, Bhuvo]
sane.


Indra, you are great by virtue of your infinity
and eternity of Being and the eternal Word of Being
and Divinity. In all holy works of creativity in the world,
you are adorable. In all struggles of existence, you are
the power and inspiration of humanity. And you are the
first, highest and the most sacred chant of human
consciousness of divinity, O lord all watching and
inspiring for the world.






Indra, you are great, pray protect and promote
the lovers and performers of the divine yajna of faith
and creativity. People know the grandeur and greatness
of your power of protection. Unaging and imperishable
you are, pray promote life and all. Indeed, ultimately, it
is you who effect all these acts of creation and progress
with strength and speed.








[Names: Varaya]
You perform all these acts of holiness, O inspirer
of force and power, which you hold and sustain. May
your protection be for safety and peace, wealth for
Dharma mantra, for communion, and the song be for





[Names: Divinity]
Lord of vibrant generosity, the celebrants of
divinity in song together in this assembly wait for your
gift of the highest wealth of wealths. May they, with
their heart and soul and by the path of rectitude, abide
in the peace and joy of the soma gift of your grace of


Mandala 10/Sukta 51
Agni (1, 3, 5, 7, 9), Devah (2, 4, 6, 8) Devata, Devah (1,
3, 5, 7, 9), Agni Sauchika (2, 4, 6, 8) Rshis


This sukta is a dialogue between the Devas such
as Mitra, Varuna, pranic energies such as prana and
udana and Agni. Agni here means many forms of energy
of the world of existence: earthly agni that is fire, middle
regions’ agni that is electricity, and self-refulgent agni
that is light of the solar region. In Vedic literature, it


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 51 659


means energy not only in these forms but also in many
more forms, that is, the vital heat of life, the passion for
living, the spirit of life, the body heat, the vital virility,
life itself, the soul and the cosmic spirit. This wide
context is relevant to the present sukta.






[Names: Mahat, Visva]
O Agni, Jataveda, cognizable in existential
forms, great is that form, that cover, that medium, fine
and firm, clothed in which you enter upon the course of
life in existence. There is one Divinity which watches
all your body forms existent in nature in various media
in the world.






[Names: Kvaha, Mitravaruna]
O Devas, who saw me? Which is that Divine
who sees me in my body forms in so many ways? O
Mitra and Varuna, O sun and moon, O vital energies of
prana and udana, say where abide all my bright and
vital waves and flames of fire and energy in the world
which light up the paths of divinity and lead humanity








[Names: Aicchama]
O Jataveda, manifest in all that is born and come
into existence, Agni, we seek for you, co-existent as
you are with all waters, motions, plants and trees. Yama,
the One Divine who directs all things in existence knows
you and watches you, O mysterious presence of infinite
forms, shining, illuminating, energising and vitalising
life from the depth of ten orders of existence: ten sense
organs, ten pranas, and ten physical abodes, 1.6., earth,
skies, heavens of light, the fire, electric energy, the sun,
waters, plants, trees and the living bodies.






[Names: Hotradaham, Varuna, Tasya]
O Varuna, lord of judgement and choice,
soothing spirit of waters cool in peace, afraid of self-
sacrifice to the senses and to the fiery divinities, I, the
soul, come to you from the burning fire. Here neither
the senses nor the divinities would consume me. As such
my body and body organs with all waves and vibrations
are completely merged in you. Here I know no such
purpose as there in the fire.


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 51 661






[Names: Sugan]
Agni, come, you are the soul, director of your
divine senses and mind, thoughtful and intelligent, lover
of divinities, dedicated to yajna. But you are still steeped
in darkness. Come, get ready for yajnic performer.
Prepare the paths of divinity for yourself and, happy at
heart, carry the holy fragrances to the divinities by yajna.






[Names: Agneh, Tasmadbhiya]
O Varuna, earlier my brothers created the same
paths for themselves as a charioteer selects the road for
himself, but they went off. For that reason I have come
this far to you here, and I tremble with fear as a deer
shakes with fear from the twang of the bow string of a









[Names: Kurmasta]
O Agni, O soul, known as born in the body, we
create and ordain an unaging life for you so that joined
to that life divine you come to no hurt, nor would you
die, and then, happy at heart, happily born, you carry to
the divinities that share of the yajnic homage which is
meant to be dedicated to them.




~ ° ~ ~“ ^




[Names: Ghrtam, Purusam, Purusa]
O Devas, give me the prayaja, food part of yajnic
offerings, and the anuyaja, supplimentary part of food,
and that part of the offerings which gives energy, light
and vision, the lustre of liquid energy, vitality from herbs
and plants, long age of health for the soul and freedom
from death. O Devas, brilliant, illuminative generous
givers. Give me only that part which is mine.





[Names: Tava, Anuyajasca, Tavagne]
O Agni, O Soul, yours is the prayaja part of
yajnic food, yours is anuyaja, the supplimentary part.
Let all this be for experience and for the realisation of
your essential spiritual nature. And let your share be


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 52 663


full of energy and light for you. Indeed all this yajna of
your individual existence is for you, the soul, as the
cosmic yajna of existence is for the cosmic soul. Let it
not go counter to the soul. Let all four directions of
space and all that therein is be for experience and self-
realisation. (Let it be subservient to the soul, let not the
soul be lost in the experience of it.)


Mandala 10/Sukta 52






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Agni, Sauchika, Rshi, Visve]
O Vishvedevas, generous brilliancies of nature
and humanity, instruct me that, selected, elected,
appointed and seated in my position as organiser and
high priest of the yajnic social system, how I should
think and act and how and in what way or ways I shall
carry out my responsibilities and fulfil my obligations
to you in the social system to offer you your share of









[Names: Aham, Maruto, Aharaharasvinadhvaryavam]
I am the hota, performer of yajna, calling to the
fire and offering oblations into the vedi, seated on the
vedi one in unison with all people. All divinities of the
world and Maruts, vibrant youth, like winds of storm,
inspire and energise me. O Ashvins, complementary
powers of nature and humanity, men and women,
teachers and preachers in the socio-economic system,
yours is the conduct of the organisation of yajna day by
day at and from the very rise of dawn. Let the Vedic
scholar, bright and cool like the moon be the Brahma,
presiding high priest, and act like ignition and
illumination of the fire, and let that light and fire be the
concluding oblation into the fire.






[Names: Ayam, Aharaharjayate]
Who is this hota, yajnic performer, who carries
out any and all the powers and obligations of Yama,
order and controller of the whole system, whom all the
devas, brilliancies of the system, anoint, prepare and
honour? He rises higher and higher day by day, month
by month, and all the devas, divine powers, uphold and
support him while he conducts the vital economy of the




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 52 665




[Names: Agnirvidvan, Agnirvidva]
Me the devas, divines, honour and uphold while
I conduct the powers and obligations of the yajnic
system for them and face the many difficult and most
laborious situations even in the minutest details with
perfect discipline. Hence they all say: This Agni, the
light and fire of the system, well aware of life and its
conduct, accomplishes the yajna, threefold, five ways
and seven stages.






O devas, as I do honour and service to you in
the best manner, as I pray for your gifts of immortality,
virility and vitality, and as I hold in hands the ruler’s
thunderbolt of justice and dispensation, this way does
man win all the battles of life.






[Names: Trini, Sata, Auksan]
Three thousand three hundred thirty and nine
are the divinities that serve this yajaka, Agni, shower it
with brightest ghrta and cover the vedi with holy grass,




and they seat the high priest over the yajna of the cosmos,
nature, society, and also the individual living soul.


Mandala 10/Sukta 53






[Names: Agni, Devah, Devata, Deva, Sauchika, Agni, Rshis, Yamaicchama]
He whom we Devas loved and sought with heart
and mind is come. He knows the integrated process of
yajnic union, knows all and every part of it. May this
unifying principle of life, most venerable, join us here
in the yajna of life, infact it was abiding here itself within
before we joined. (The Devas are the divine principles
and faculties of life, and Agni whom the Devas love
and seek is the life itself, the soul, which integrates the
faculties with the identity that the soul acquires with
the body and the faculties, all united in one organismic
individual form. Reference may be made to Aitareya
Upanishad, ch. 1, 2 and Atharva-Veda, 5, 30, 17).





[Names: Aradhi, Yajamahai]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 53 667


The high priest, Agni, lovable and adorable, is
seated on the vedi. Honoured and adored, he also
observes with interest and favour the sacred offerings
placed with faith and reverence on the vedi in homage.
We adore and worship all the divine powers that deserve
and command our worship and adoration. They deserve
service and we adore and worship them with the homage
of ghrta and fragrant havi.






[Names: Sadhvimakardevavitim]
May Agni beatify our yajnic service to the
assemblage of divinities on the vedi today so that we
may have their blessings and hear the secret voice of
divinity by the flames. May the life spirit, harbinger of
health and happiness, come today bearing the fragrance
of life and render our divine worship full of blessings
and all round well being.






[Names: Tadadya, Urjada]
I, Agni, presiding power of corporate life by
yajna, now think and meditate upon that first, highest
and eternal Word, AUM, by which we, yajnic souls
dedicated to divinity, may overcome the evil adversaries.




Let all those who live on energy foods and join together
for noble creative works in the spirit of yajna, and the
people of all the five classes and communities listen
and follow my call to action.






[Names: Panca, Prhivi]
Let the people of all five classes and
communities listen to my call to action, children of the
earth, lovers of the common voice of divinity, and all of
those dedicated to united action for creativity and
production, and may mother earth protect us against
sin and evil earthly, and may the skies protect us against
all dangers from the space above.






[Names: Tantum, Anulvanam, Anulvana]
Spinning and expanding the thread of life divine,
pursue the light of the sun across the skies and space.
Protect and follow the paths of light created by the wise
with thought and vision. Weave the web of the sinless
spontaneous men of word and vision in action. Be Man,
build up a community of enlightened people, human


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 53 669
and close to divinity.






[Names: Aksanaho, Astabandhuram]
Lovers of Soma, peace and joy, bind the traces,
harness the horses, tighten the reins and refine them to
perfection, move on the eightfold chariot all round, the
chariot by which the divines bring in the dearest
treasures of life. (This mantra is a metaphor of the
eightfold path of yoga from the control of senses and
mind to the attainment of samadhi which marks the
communion of the soul with divinity.)


[Names: Asmanvati, Atra, Sivan]
The rocky river of life flows on in flood. Hold
on fast together, friends, rise and swim to the shore. let


us jettison all that is inauspicious here. Let us swim and
cross over to attain the trophies of victory.








[Names: Tvasta, Santama, Sisite]
The cosmic maker Tvashta, supreme expert of
the artists of the world, knows the mysteries of karma
and the secrets of fortune or misfortune, and most
beneficent as he is, he carves and fills the most delicious
cups of joy for the holies. The lord of cosmic wisdom
also makes and sharpens the golden axe of knowledge,
justice and dispensation whereby the man who attains
to this prize knowledge cuts at the root of his karmic
tree and drinks the nectar of universal sweets of freedom
from the divine cup.






[Names: Sato, Vidvamsah]
O men of vision and seekers of divinity, sharpen
and refine your golden axe of knowledge with the voice
of Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient, by which you
prepare for the attainment of immortality. O scholars of
knowledge, carve out the mystical paths to divinity,
work out the progressive stages by which the seekers
of divinity attained to the nectar of life eternal.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 54 671




[Names: Garbhe]
The devas, seekers of divinity, hold the Word
of omniscience like the sacred vedi fire in the depth of
their mind alongwith the reality of existence signified
by the Word, and they hold it with the sense of clarity
of expression by their tongue controlled and disciplined
in the mouth. Indeed such a man of divine word and
action in control is always happy at heart and all round
efficient, and only such a man wins the victory prizes
of life.


Mandala 10/Sukta 54






[Names: Indra, Devata, Brhaduktha, Vamadevya, Rshi, Pravo, Indra]
Indra, lord of glory, I celebrate that renown of
yours by the greatness of which the earth and heaven,
both struck with awe, call upon you and glorify, by
which you protect the holy and generous brilliancies,
subdue the unholy negatives and destroyers, and by
which you award the strength and lustre of life to your








[Names: Yadacarastanva, Mayet, Satrum]
As you pervade among people, self-exalting by
the power of your presence, and thereby manifest your
own glory, and as poets and sages sing and celebrate
your battles against evils within and without in the world
of humanity, all this glory is but your own essential
divine potential, and that is why you have had no enemy






[Names: Yanmataram]
Which ancient sages and seers before us could
ever comprehend the bounds of this absolute glory of
yours since you brought into existence both earth and
heaven together as mother and father of life from your
own material power of Prakrti?





[Names: Catvari, Tvamanga]
O great and glorious Indra, four are your states
of being, four the modifications of existential


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 54 673


manifestation, all of them living and imperishable,
which all, O dear lord of life of the universe, you know
and by which, O lord of cosmic majesty, you perform
the acts of universal life in existence.


(The four states of cosmic being are waking,
dreaming, sleeping and the transcendent Absolute. Four
states of existence are generation, sustenance,
withdrawal and the trans-existential state. Four Prakrti
modifications are Prakrti, mahat, ahankara and the
specifics of material and mental forms of physical,
biological and psychic stages of evolution which are
then absorbed into the Absolute state at the end.)
Reference may also be made to ‘Om’ which is the divine
Word, the name of divinity consisting of four matras A,
U, and M and the fourth is silent and absolute. ‘A’ refers
to the waking, that is, the objective state of existence
which is the subject of science. ‘U’ refers to the
imaginative and subjective state which is the subject of
psychology and meditation upto the stage of ‘vitark’
and ‘vichara’ samadhi, and ‘M’ refers to the sleep state
which is realisable in ‘Ananda’ state of Samadhi. All
these are covered under the Samprajnata Samadhi. The
fourth, transcendent state, is realisable in Asamprajnata
samadhi which is Transcendental Meditation).





[Names: Tvam, Kamaminme]
You bear and absolutely comprehend all the




treasures of existence, manifest as well as unmanifest.
Pray do not frustrate my longing for fulfilment. Indra,
you are the knower, the ordainer and the giver.






[Names: Adha, Susamindraya]
In honour of Indra who vests light in the stars
and creates honey sweets of life with the honey sweets
of divinity, and to that Indra, poets of divinity sing with
love and faith songs of thought, beauty and power from
their articulate meditation on the Infinite.


Mandala 10/Sukta 55


[Names: Indra, Devata, Vrhaduktha, Vamadevya, Rshi]
AUT: WU




[Names: Dure, Udastabhnah]
Far too distant and far too deep is that name
and lustre, O lord of glory, Indra, for indifferent people
to understand and appreciate which the heaven and earth
struck with awe call upon for sustenance. O lord of glory,
you sustain both heaven and earth in space in
complementarity with each other and illuminate the rays


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 55 675


of the sun and lightning of the cloud, both brotherly
providers of sustenance to life.






[Names: Mahat, Purusprg, Pratnam]
Great and deeply glorious is that name and
divine presence universally loved and adored by which
you create all that has been and that which would be.
That light and glory of this Indra is eternal, ever existent
and dear to all into which all the five people that love
him and are dear to him and all the five elements of
nature retire (when the cycle of existence has run a full
circle).






[Names: Catustrimsata, Purudha]
That glorious presence pervades and fills heaven
and earth and the middle regions, fills and energises
the five divine elements, five senses, five pranas, seven
regions of the universe, seven rays of light, forty nine
orders of the winds, all according to the seasons of time,
and it watches and illuminates thirty four orders of
divine powers of eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve
Adityas, nature’s nourishment by Prajapati, nature’s




energy of fire, electricity and light, and Vak, the
articulation of consciousness, all in many ways, with
different functions and effects.






[Names: Yadusa]
O Dawn, when you arise and shine first of the
lights of the lord, Indra, and bring in fresh life for the
world generated and nourished by Indra, then your
motherly love for humanity is the one unique and great
life giving blessing of the supreme spirit of divinity for
humanity on this earth.






[Names: Vidhum, Devasya]
Old age consumes even the youthful man of
versatile action whom many fear to face in battle and
flee. Look at the inscrutable power of the lord divine
by whose inevitable law of mutability the man who was
living yesterday is dead today, and the one that dies
today would be living to tomorrow.


arate


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 55 677




[Names: Sakmana, Sako, Surah, Yacciketa]
He is Almighty by might supreme, blazing
lustrous, high flying and all caring, great, brave,
eternally unbound by space. What he knows is truth
inviolable, never infructuous, he is universal haven,






[Names: Aibhirdade]
With these potent and positive waves of natural
energy, the virile Indra, wielder of thunderbolt, assumes
those powers for breaking the clouds of darkness and
want by which he brings about the showers of rain for
the world of existence, which powers too for bringing
about the showers of positive action and creativity arise
from the grandeur of the omnipotent original doer of





[Names: Yuja, Pitvi, Somasya, Somas]
Originally causing and bringing about the
dynamics of cosmic karma, the Lord Almighty of the




world, destroyer of negatives and despicables, all-
knowing cosmic mind, instant and total victor, protector
of soma, augmenter of light, almighty, blows the conch
and blows away the forces of nescience.


Mandala 10/Sukta 56






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Brhaduktha, Vamadevya, Rshi, Idam, Samvesane]
This (body, this life time) is one mode of your
existence. The one next (mind and karma) is another
such. By the third (spiritual and meditative life) join
you with life eternal. On merging of the soul, happy
and darling of the divinities, be free in the presence of
the supreme creator of the world.






[Names: Tanuste, Ahruto]
O dynamic soul, may your life here in the body
carrying your self bring precious wealth of joy to us
and peace and comfort to you. Living an honest natural
life, great in your own self, in service of the sustainer
of divinities, create your own light and bliss for yourself,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 56 679


pursuing the light of the heart within as the light of
heaven above.






[Names: Vajyasi, Suvito]
You are the dynamic soul by virtue of your
innate power and potential. Realising your love of life,
living in peace and prosperity, rise to the heights of your
own self-glory, happy and pious, and reach the heights
of heaven. Happy in rectitude, follow the first, original
and eternal Dharma. Happy and self-realised, rise to
the life divine to the joy of the divines, and, a blessed
soul, attain to the Spirit Eternal of the universe.




[Names: Mahinma, Samavivyacuruta]
raisam tanusu ni vivisuh punah.


The forefathers lived in the grand manner of
these divinities such as light of the sun and moon to
their own will and desire as if commanding the bliss
and beauty of these. Divine were they who raised their
acts and worship to the presence and piety of divinities.
They join those lights of divinity which shine and then
again they come back to join life in their existential
bodies.







[Names: Sahobhirvisvam, Tanusu, Purudha, Anu]
These souls by their own karmic potential roam
around across all regions of the world, freely ranging
over boundless worlds of high order, sajourning in
various body forms across the spaces begetting and
extending the creativity of life in various ways according
to the law of karma.






[Names: Dvidha, Svam]
Children of divinity, creative and procreative
souls, by their third, familial, karma, vesting the vital
and spiritual life principle further along with the
procreative vitality, establish their own progeny in the
next generation which is the extension of the thread of
life in natural piety.



[Names: Nava]
MANDAL - 10 /SUKTA - 57 681


Just as you cross the flood by boat and, with
noble acts of knowledge, action and piety, cross all
difficult problems of earthly life, so does the man of
praise-worthy knowledge, action and piety cross over
the problems of life and death and leaves his own legacy,
physical, intellectual and spiritual, by his own grand
potential vesting it in the next and further generations
to survive and continue.


Mandala 10/Sukta 57








[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu, Gaupayanah, Rshis, Mantah]
Indra, O Lord Almighty, let us, lovers of soma
peace, enlightenment and life’s joy never deviate from
the path of rectitude and never forsake the creative way
of yajnic living. Let no want, malignity, adversity and






[Names: Tamahutam]
There is a thread of unity, love, cooperation and
active continuity in the web of life in nature’s divinities,
and a similar bond of unity in an enlightened community
which alone keeps it together and leads it on way to




corporate progress. It is created and maintained with
relentless self sacrifice in the spirit of yajna. Let us attain
and maintain that very bond of yajnic unity for our
progress and prosperity. (That is the bond of Agni, vital
heat and love.)





[Names: Mano, Pitrnam]
We invoke the mind, alert ourselves and, with
songs of human approbation and celebration, join with
the thoughts and wisdom of our parents and ancestors
to maintain the thread of continuity.





[Names: Jyok, Suryam, Surya]
Let your mind and spirit arise and be alert again
and again, continuously, for noble action, expertise of
performance, joyous living, and to see the sun for light
and enlightenment for a long long time of health and






[Names: Punarnah, Jivam]
May our parents, seniors, the spirit and wisdom


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 58 683


of our ancestors, and men of divine wisdom inspire our
mind and spirit again and again, continuously for
refreshment and energy, so that we may live a life of
discipline and holiness.






[Names: Vayam, Soma, Prajavantah]
O Soma, lord of peace and enlightenment, we
pray that, holding our mind and senses in body in good
health within your law and discipline and blest with
noble progeny, we may live a happy life dedicated to
you.


Mandala 10/Sukta 58


[Names: Mana, Devata, Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu, Gaupayanah, Rshis]
The theme of this hymn is ‘Return of the mind’
from wandering and depression to normalcy for a




O man, that mind of yours that wanders far to
the sun and broods over time and death, that we restore
to normalcy, here to stay at peace for the good life.





Your mind that wanders far and roams over earth
and heaven, we bring it back to normalcy, here to be at
peace for the good life for you.





Your mind that wanders far over lands and
deserts burning and blazing all round, we bring it back
for you, to be at peace here for the good life.



Your mind which wanders far over all the four
directions of space, that we bring back for you, here to
be at peace for the good life.






Your mind that wanders far over the sea and the
waters of space, we bring back for you, here to be at
peace for you for the good life.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 58 685


Your mind that wanders far over heavenly
heights and radiating rays of light, we bring back to
normalcy here for you to be at peace for the good life.
Your mind that wanders far over waters, herbs
and trees, we bring back to normalcy for you to be at
peace for the good life.



[Names: Suryam, Surya, Yadusasam, Yadusasa]
Your mind that wanders far to the sun and the
dawn, we bring back to normalcy, here to be at peace
for you for the good life.






Your mind that wanders far over mighty




mountains and vast floating clouds, we bring back to
normalcy, here to be at peace for your good life.
Your mind that wanders far over this wide world,
we bring back to normalcy, here to be at peace for you
so that you may live happy.

11. Yat te parah paravato mano jagama durakam.


Your mind that wanders far and farther over
regions unknown, we bring back to normalcy, here to
be at peace for your good life.






Your mind that wanders far over the past and
the future that is unpredictable, we bring back to
normalcy, here to be at peace for your happy life.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 59 687


Mandala 10/Sukta 59
Devatah: Nirrti (1-3), Nirrti and Soma (4), Asuniti (5-6),
[Names: Lingokta, Dyavaprthivyau, Dyavaprthivi, Indra, Rshis, Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu]
Gaupayanah






[Names: Adha]
Let new life and new initiative rise and advance
higher and higher as the dynamic master of the chariot
constantly moves forward and as the progressive pioneer
achieves his goal and moves higher and higher. Let want
and adversity fall off and depart far and farther.





[Names: Saman, Sravamsi, Purudha]
Let us create peace for wealth and food in
abundance with security and many other forms of life’s
values and excellence so that the poet, the singer and
the senior too may enjoy life without worry and want,
and adversity, fear and insecurity may fall off and depart
far and farther for good.







As the sun overwhelms the earth, as thunder
overwhelms the clouds and clouds overwhelm the fields
with rain, so may we overwhelm the negativities and
enemies of life and society with our natural and essential
strength, virtues and achievements so that the poet, the
singer, the senior, the assessor and the admirer may
know, and want and adversity, fear and insecurity may
fall off and disappear for good.






[Names: Soma, Dyubhirhito, Suryam, Surya]
O Soma, lord of peace and prosperity, give us
not up to death and decay. Let us go on and advance
with the rising sun day by day. Let our growth in time
be positive for our good day by day. Let want, adversity,
ill health and death stay far away from us.





[Names: Asunite, Rarandhi, Suryasya, Suryas]
O mother harbinger of pranic energy, bless us
with the strength of mind and morale, and for our good


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 59 689


living give us good health and long full age. Mature
and establish us in the light of the sun and the vision of
divinity, and with the lustre and energy of nature raise
our health and age to the heights of perfection.






[Names: Jyok, Suryamuccaran, Suryamuccara, Anumate, Anumat]
O divine Spirit of life and energy, bless us
constantly with the faculty of vision, constant pranic
energy too, and vest in here in the body the capacity
and faculties to live and enjoy the sweets of life. O
motherly spirit of love and acceptance, may we see the
rising sun for a long time. Be pleased and kind and bless
us with happiness and well being all through in life.






[Names: Purarno, Punarnah, Somastanvam, Somastanva]
May the earth give us pranic energy of life again.
So may the divine sun and the generous sky give us life
again. May Soma, divine spirit of joy and peace, give
us the body again, and may Pusha, divine spirit of
nourishment, place us on the journey of life again and
give us happiness and well being.






[Names: Bharatamapa]
mo su te kim canamamat.


May the mighty heaven and earth, mother spirits
of truth and waters of life bring peace and joy for the
holy child and loving brother of living beings. May the
sun and earth, father and mother, make up whatever be
wanting in body, mind and spirit and the child’s senses
of values. May they strengthen the child against sin and
evil and forgive him for his pitfalls in the struggle for
sorrow, hurt and violate you ever against your self-






[Names: Ksama]
In two’s (as the Ashvins or prana and apana)
and in three’s (as Ila, Sarasvati and bharati, or as light,
electric energy and water) the sanatives for life and
health flow from the heavenly region of light and one
by one be active on earth. May the sun and earth make
up what is wanting in body, mind and spirit. May they
strengthen humanity against sin and evil and forgive us
in the struggle for self-realisation. O man, may nothing
whatever, sin or sorrow, hurt and violate you ever against


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 60 691






[Names: Samindreraya, Sinaranya]
O Lord omnipotent, Indra, O Sun, inspire and
energise the pranic force of the body, inspire and
energise the vitality of passion, will and understanding
of the body. May the sun and earth make up what is
wanting in body, mind and spirit. May they strengthen
humanity against sin and evil and forgive us where we
fail in our struggle. O man, may nothing whatever, sin
or sorrow, hurt and violate you in your struggle for


Mandala 10/Sukta 60
[Names: Asamati, Indra, Jiva, Hasta, Devatah, Bandhu, Shrutabandhu, Viprabandhu, Gaupayanah, Agastya, Rshis, Aganma]
Bearing gifts of homage we come to the man of


radiant glory, honoured and celebrated by the greatest
of the great.








[Names: Asamatim, Bhajerathasya]
We come to the incomparable lord and protector
of the true and the good, destroyer of evil and darkness,
radiant illustrious, commander of the chariot of victory
in the battles of rectitude.






[Names: Utapaviravan]
We have come to the mighty hero who, whether





[Names: Yasyeksvakurupa, Diviva]
We have come to the ruling lord under whose
order of law, justice and discipline, the enlightened, the
opulent and the brilliant fighters and indeed all the five
classes of people in their own professional fields live
happy and free as in heaven on earth.






[Names: Suryam, Surya]
Indra, lord of light and law, ruler of the world,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 60 693


first among exceptional equals of the chariot
commanders of the world, pray hold and rule the order
of the commonwealth of humanity as the lord supreme
holds the sun in heaven for all the worlds to see.






[Names: Agastyasya, Panin]
For the supporters and admirers of the simple,
sinless, enlightened and disciplined ruling soul of the
order, you harness two nimble bright forces of internal
discipline and external defence, and, O refulgent ruler
of the system, you control all the greedy, selfish,
uncreative and uncommitted elements of the world






[Names: Ayam, Idam]
O holy brother, O friend, O brilliant soul of the
system, this systemic order is your mother, your father,
come up as your life giver. Come in, come here, O soul
and ruler of the system, this is your haven and home for
life’s advancement, its meaning and purpose.








[Names: Yatha]
As they bind the yoke fast with thongs for the
balance and stability of the chariot on the move, so does
the lord hold fast your mind and spirit, not for death but
for your life, fulfilment and freedom from evil and






[Names: Yatheyam]
O man, just as this great earth holds and bears
these herbs and trees (for the sustenance of life), so does
the soul hold and bear your mind and spirit, not for death
but for your life, fulfilment and freedom from evil and






[Names: Yamdaddaham, Jivatave]
I, the spirit of man, holy and blessed, bear my
mind from Yama, lord of light and law, I receive my
spirit of energy from the sun, I bear and hold it in
equipoise, not for death but for the pleasure and
fulfilment of life and freedom from sin and evil.






[Names: Nyagvato, Nicinam, Suryah]
MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 61 695


The wind blows downwards, the heat of the sun
goes downwards to the earth, the holy cow lets her milk
flow down. O man, let your sin and evil too go down,






[Names: Sanah]
This my hand is the hand of good fortune, this
is even the hand of greater good fortune, this is the
solution to all my problems of the world. This hand is
for the touch of holiness with life, the instrument of
action for fulfilment.


Mandala 10/Sukta 61






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Nabhanedishtha, Manava, Rshi, Idamittha, Sacyamantarajau, Kranad]
The eloquent scholar displays his knowledge,
in theory and practice, of this divine Vedic voice of the
mysterious truth of nature and divinity in relation to
Rudra, lord omnipotent of natural justice and
dispensation, in the assembly of the wise and brave
where his parents, teachers and eminent scholars are
present on the day of academic accomplishment and




satisfies all the seven high priests of his educational
yajna with a sense of fulfilment.






[Names: Turvayano]
Thus accomplished for a creative and corrective
role in life, equipped with right means and methods of
art and science, he prepares the vedi, 1.e., a full
programme of family life and social action, for himself.
Dynamic and assertive in action, bold in speech,
agreeable in tone and deep in meaning, he collects the
spirit of virility in the mind as in a deep reservoir and
expresses it for the protection and promotion of human
dignity and happiness.






[Names: Mano]
O men and women of the land, O Ashvins, O
sun and moon, with voice and action, honour the call of
this vibrant scholar and master of ample wealth and
power who, with all the means and methods on hand,
exhorts you to join the yajnic programmes of
development to which you rush at the speed of the fastest
and sharpest mind.


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 697






[Names: Krsna, Vitam]
Ashvins, children of light, when the darkness
of night mingles with the crimson lights of the morning,
I call upon you, come and join the lovely yajna for me,
forget about all undesirables and negativities, enjoy
yourselves and partake of the holy food to your heart’s
desire.






[Names: Prathista, Punastada]
That most expansive creativity and generative
vitality of Rudra Prajapati, lord creator, animated and
vested in nature, which also is an irresistible human
impulse, further expands into life when it is received
and borne to maturity by the loving youthful maiden,
motherly agent of nature’s innate urge for self-








[Names: Madhya, Mananagreto]
When the generator, father, and the youthful
maiden, the mother, both joined in love and marriage
with the desire to fulfil their obligation to Prajapati, lord
of the household, have begot and brought up the progeny
and have fulfilled their obligation in common, they give
up and retire. All this, love, desire, accomplishment and
fulfilment, is an extension of the process of divine
creativity initiated on top of heaven at the centre of






[Names: Pita, Svadhyo]
As the father, the sun, covers the skies and the
earth, his counterpart, and, shedding his living light and
lustre, fills them with the vitality of life, then the devas,
radiant divinities of nature, create and form Agni, keeper
of the vows of the law and master of the earthly home.






[Names: Saim, Sarat]
That master of the home, Agni, like a mighty
generous cloud, showers the vitality of life in the process
of nature and sends our homage of oblations to far off
distances from us except that if some small minded


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 699


person of stingy character takes no step forward and
neglects the ordinances of charity, then Agni, otherwise






[Names: Maksi, Sanitedhmam]
The master of the home is the leader, burden
bearer and the voice of the people. He must never defile
the common wealth of this earthly home like a stingy
selfish man defiling the sacred fire. In fact he is arisen
as the protector, sharer and trustee of the common assets,
energy, honour and progress of the nation, who works
for its unity and advancement with his power, patience
and fortitude.






[Names: Maksu, Dvibarhaso]
Just as fresh waves of solar radiations in the
morning, manifesting the laws of nature and flow of
living energy, meet with homogeneity of the beautiful
earth and, in contact with both the sun and earth, join
the all sustaining gravitational life force, and, without
taking anything for themselves create and give universal
showers of imperishable creative and motherly fertility




to the earth. (So do new generations of youthful men
from institutions of education, knowing, proclaiming
and living the laws of nature and the land with loyalty
to both find the love and friendship of their dear choice
maidens in marriage and, dedicated to both the family
and humanity, join the high priest of the land and create
permanent gains for the nation without any selfish






[Names: Suci]
Soon the solar radiations in unison with the
homogeneity of fertile earth stimulate the vital process
of nature’s creativity and produce the liquid living
energy, pure life seed, latest prize like the legacy of
divinity for you, O yajamana, the gift of generous earth
and the mother’s milk. (Similarly the young men who
win the love and friendship of the lovely maidens of
their choice and earnestly observe the laws and
discipline of nature and maintain the purity of their seed
of life receive the generous mother’s gift of noble




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 61 701




[Names: Pasva, Vasorvasutva]
After the fulfilment of family obligations, the
man having renounced the life of senses and materiality
and exulting in the joy of divine revelation exclaims :
O friends of knowledge and divine law, O celebrants of
songs of divinity, the lord giver of the highest wealth
and haven of peace, immaculate and free, brings us the
ultimate food of divine joy and supreme wealth of




[Names: Tadinnvasya, Susnasya, Puruprajatasya, Puruprajatas]
Then the mind, pranic energies and senses,
present all round, vested variously in the body, come
desires, when the man fulfilled in the soul knows and
realises the presence of the all-mighty, all-pervasive
supreme spirit in the depth of the heart and soul,
interwoven indeed in the web of life itself.








[Names: Bhargo, Agnirha]
Blazing brilliant and mighty sublime is that
Spirit indeed whose refulgent and divine powers like
paradisal bliss abide in the three regions of heaven, earth
and the middle spaces. Agni, light and fire of the
universe, is its name, animating all that is born in
existence. O high priest of the yajnic dynamics of
existence, clarion call of the universe, all love free from
hate and animosity, pray listen to our call and prayer.






[Names: Manusvad, Indra]
offsprings of Rudra, lord of mercy, justice and
dispensation, Ashvins, twin powers of natural
complementarity, commanding the light of life,
dedicated to infallible truth, both happy, givers of joy,
adorable in yajna with homage, come to me, ready on
the holy grass with my people, advance our yajna and
acknowledge our homage and prayer among our
community of celebrants.






[Names: Ayam, Agnim, Agni]
This adored and refulgent ruler is worshipped.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 61 703


All knowing, all doing, all vibrant pranic and soma force
of divinity, all saviour bridge, by itself crosses all waters
and spaces. It moves all spatial energies and all fiery
elements just as horses move the centre and the circle
of a fast whirling wheel.






He that holds the two worlds of heaven and earth
in bond, the high priest of cosmic yajna, all pervasive
power that helps us to cross over the flood of existence,
gives us the immortal gift of eternal Word and vision
when a person, with the best of chant and meditative
practice, realises together Mitra, centripetal, and Varuna,
centrifugal, processes of cosmic dynamics, and also
Aryaman, the all-controlling spirit that controls both
the centre and the circle of the wheel of existence.


[Names: Tadbandhuh]
O soul, says the celebrant in love with divinity,
that binding bond, the sun in heaven, is the giver of


your will and intelligence and also its guardian, your
closest link of nature to life eternal. That navel link is




our highest centre of existence and of that, in
consequence, I am the devoted celebrant among many.






[Names: Iyam, Dvija]
This is my navel link with life, here is my haven
and ultimate home, all these divine brilliancies, winds
and pranic energies are mine, here I am all, complete.
Whether first born of divinity or twice born of nature
and education, all this universe is born of Prakrti in
motion and action under the law of divinity. The divine
gives birth to it and to all we need.






[Names: Adhasu, Urdhva, Sevrdham]
And in the directions of space pervades Agni,
joyous, dynamic, bright, moving across heaven and
earth, lord of woods, high power admirable, lovely,
which, like an army array, destroys in no time. That
stable power, giver of comfort and joy, too, Mother




[Names: Nature]
MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 705




[Names: Anu, Srudhi]
And as the prayers of some veteran saint reach
you, lord of love and favour, O holy lord of wealth and
glory, listen to our prayer: Give us the yajnic gifts of
life, you who feel exalted by the joyous and truthful
adorations of devotees who have risen above their senses
and passions of the mind.






[Names: Adha, Raksa]
And O lord of might and glory, Indra,
magnanimous lord protector of humanity, wielder of
thunder arms, pray know us and grant us our prayers
for wealth, honour and excellence. O lord of nature’s
forces and destroyer of suffering, protect us, promote
us, all dedicated to the power and honour gifts of divine
favour. We pray let us enjoy your love and good will
that we may live in a state of freedom from sin and evil.






[Names: Viprah]
And then, O men of light and wisdom, the
person who is keen to rise and is rising in the search for




the lord’s love and good will, who seeks to adore and
serve the lord creator, such a vibrant devotee becomes
the dearest of all these seekers for the lord, crosses the
flood of existence and, speaking of the highest absolute
and inspiring them, helps others too to seek divine






[Names: Saranyurasya, Scasi, Sravasasca]
And so for the sake of our growth and progress
under the protection of this lord absolute and all
victorious master of the universe, we spontaneously sing
and pray : you are the creator and sole mover of this
universe, all pervasive and dominant, all providing giver
of fulfilment and most renowned harbinger of success
and victory.






[Names: Yuvoryadi, Visvatra]
O enlightened men and women of the world, if
for your love and friendship and the growth of our
strength, the devotee were to offer a song of adoration
with homage, humility and love to the lord to whom all
earnest voices of prayer converge and reach for


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 61 707


fulfilment all over the world, and the lord of all might
were pleased to accept, he would bless us with a vision
of the path of truth and progress.






[Names: Vardhad]
Say the lord almighty adored by holies is a friend
of the divines. Noble brother and all unifier, He is to be
worshipped and exalted with homage of love, hymns
of faith, rituals of service and words of praise. His grace
rains in showers by paths of love in piety and meditation
as the mother cow’s milk flows for the calf.




amurah.


Great and glorious divinities, loving friends,
adorable visionaries, decisive and discriminative in
wisdom and judgement, pray ever abide by us for our
protection and progress, you who are leading lights and
harbingers of abundant food, energy, victory and
ultimate fulfilment of life.




Mandala 10/Sukta 62






[Names: Vishvedevah, Angirasas, Vishvedeva, Angirasa, Savarni, Danastuti, Devatah, Nabhanedishtha, Manava, Rshi, Indrasya, Indras, Tebhyo, Angiraso]
Brilliant divinities of light and wisdom,
Angirasas, self-realised souls dear as breath of life, who,
distinguished and beautified by performance of yajna,
self-sacrifice and liberal giving, have won the love and
friendship of Indra, lord almighty, and attained the
freedom of immortality, may there be all round
auspicious good fortune for you in life. O sagely divines,
pray take man under your kind care for spiritual






[Names: Dirghayutvam]
O parental sages and scholars, Angirasas, who
research, recover and create the wealth of knowledge
and the divine voice and thereby, through yajna and the
study of nature’s law, break through and dispel the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 62 709


darkness of loss and ignorance all the year round in the
seasonal cycle, may Indra bless you with a long happy
life. Pray take the son of Manu under your kind care,
sages of holy wisdom and knowledge.






[Names: Suryamarohayan, Suryamarohaya, Suprajastvamangiraso]
Angirasas, nature’s powers of creation and
evolution who, by the divine law and cosmic yajna of
nature, raised the sun and set it there and formed and
expanded mother earth, may you have the wealth of
noble progeny. Enlightened sages of noble intellect and
wisdom who study and research the laws of nature, pray
take the children of humanity under your kind care.






[Names: Ayam, Subrahmanyam]
O children of divinity, seers and visionaries, this
central soul speaks the voice divine in your yajnic home,
in the core of your heart. Listen to that. O Angirasas,
may this divine voice be yours and your heritage to your
posterity. O sages of holy mind and wisdom, pray take
the children of humanity under your care.








[Names: Virupasa, Angirasah]
Rshis are seers of various forms of existence
including the structures and meanings of the voice
divine. They are powers and performers of serious and
mysterious actions. They are all Angirasas, children of
the cosmic soul born as waves of cosmic energy. O
cosmic soul, O cosmic energy, O Agni, they are your
children, creators too in their own natural ways, born
of you like sparks from the yajna fire.




[Names: Navag, Angirastamah, Angirastama]
hate.


Of these various forms of existence born of Agni
in the regions of light, the waves called navagu and
dashagu being most powerful excel among the divine
forms of nature.


Similarly among the living forms of existence
born of the divine soul and divine energy, the human
form of five elements and four powers of the self, 1.e.,
mana, buddhi, chitta and ahankara, all together nine,
and further, ten pranas and ten senses, excels as the
highest and most powerful of the divine forms of life.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 62 711




[Names: Indrena, Sahasram]
The wise and visionary yajakas with the
inspiration of Indra, lord ruler, create knowledge relating
to senses, mind and will, and with their senses raised to
eighfold power and sensitivity, giving me a thousand






May this man, for sure, arise and grow like a
germinating seed in fertile soil, who creates and gives a
thousand gifts of hundred horse-power achievement
straight to be dedicated to charitable good.





[Names: Savarnyasya]
No one can approach even the fringe of this
wonder worker’s achievement as the sun’s on top of
heaven. After all, the versatility and generosity of this
man of universal competence flows ceaselessly like the
flood of a river and expands as the sea.








[Names: Yadusturvasca]
And the giver, the visionary, the prosperous, the
industrious and the victorious, all exalt him and feel
honoured to serve and support him.






[Names: Sahasrada, Savarnerdevah]
The giver of thousands, leader of the community,
must not be hurt, nor would he hurt anyone. May this
generosity, active and advancing, rise with the sun day
by day. May the divinities prolong and elevate the health
and age of the man of versatile generosity and
competence, and may we, under his guidance and
leadership, relentlessly advancing, win the goal and
victory of our aspirations.


Mandala 10/Sukta 63




[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Gaya, Plata, Rshi, Paravato, Yayaterye]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 713


May those divinities of humanity and bounties
of nature that love humanity and come from afar anxious
to meet and talk to the children of light under the sun,
those who join the yajna on the vedi of dynamic and
aspiring humanity bound and dedicated to karma across
time through birth and death, may they all speak to us
of the light divine and eternal wisdom.






[Names: Visva, Sruta]
O Devas, brilliancies of nature and humanity,
all your names, nature and functions are venerable,
adorable and worthy of yajnic communion. May all of
you who are born of the earth, over the sky and space
and mother Infinity may hear my call and invocation
here on the vedi.





[Names: Yebhyo, Ukthasusman, Adityan, Aditya, Anu]
Serve, exhilarate and replenish those Adityas,
children of light on earth and brilliancies of nature for
whom mother earth yields and augments honey sweets
of the milk of life, the sun, mother infinity and the cloud




bearing sky shower nectar sweets of rain. Be grateful
and rejoice with those, Adityas, who bring the resonance
of mantric power to yajna, who move the mighty clouds
of rain and who perform the noblest creative acts for
the good, happiness and all round well being of life.






[Names: Nrcaksaso, Jyotiratha]
Ever watchful inspirers of humanity, active
without a wink, adorable in their own right, mighty
brilliant and generous, they attain to the freedom of
immortality. They ride the chariot of light and, inviolable
of might and free from sin and evil, they abide on top
of heaven. May they come and bless our yajna for the
good and all round well being of life. Serve them,
exhilarate them, be grateful and rejoice.






[Names: Samrajo, Aditim, Aditi]
Those illustrious children of light, self-refulgent
and steadily rising in knowledge and wisdom, who come
and grace the yajna and, straight and unassailable in
action and character, abide in the sphere of the light of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 715


divinity, those great children of inviolable mother
Infinity and Mother Nature, serve, exhilarate and
replenish with homage and humility for the good and
all round well being of life. Be grateful with holy words
of praise and rejoice.






O Vishvedevas, brilliancies of nature and
humanity, O thoughtful people, all of you born on the
earth that abide on the vedi, who leads your song of
divinity to success? Whom do you love and serve with
adoration? Who leads your yajna to auspicious
completion? He that cleanses us of sin and evil. That
same divinity whom you love and adore, that same lord
of yajna, serve and exhilarate for the sake of the good
and all round well being of life. Be grateful and rejoice.





[Names: Adit]
Those Adityas, children of eternal light blest




with knowledge and wisdom of divinity, for whom
Manu, omniscient creator, lighted the first fire of
creative yajna with thought and tapas and conducted
the yajna with seven priests (five elements with mahat
and Ahankara, seven pranas, sevenfold sense and mind
complex, seven rays of the sun, seven sages and seven
chhandas of the Veda) may, we pray, bring a peaceful
life and home with freedom from fear and make our
paths of life simple, straight and clear from darkness
and evil for the good and all round well being of life.






Those divine, brilliant and generous powers of
nature and humanity with a noble heart and mind that
know and rule the entire moving and unmoving world
of existence may, we pray, save us today and protect us
from sin and evil whether past or future for the good
and all round well being of life.






[Names: Bharesvindram, Varunam, Varuna, Mitram, Mitra, Marutah, Maruta]
For success in our yajnic struggles of life and
for victory against negativity and evils of the world, we


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 717


call upon and pray to Indra, mighty ruler of the world,
instant listener, noble doer and deliverer from sin and
adversity. We call upon Agni, spirit of light and fire,
Mitra, loving power of friendship, Varuna, power of
judgement and discrimination, Bhaga, lord of power and
prosperity, earth and heaven, Maruts, tempestuous
forces, and the noble and brilliant people dedicated to
positive good action so that we may enjoy the good life
of all round well being.






[Names: Sutramanam, Daivim]
In order to cross the oceanic flood of life and its
challenges, let us board the boat of life equipped with
sure safety measures, vast like earth, high and bright
like the regions of light, free from sin and evil,
comfortable and peaceful, unbreakable, well structured
and well steered, divine and brilliant, fitted with fine
oars, faultless and free from leakage, so that we may
cross the flood with ease and enjoy the good life with







[Names: Visve, Satyaya, Srnvato]
O Devas, brilliant and venerable sagely scholars
of the science and vision of yajna, pray enlighten us on
our defence and protection. Protect us from chronic evils
and strengthen us with safe-guards against sudden
calamities. In earnest truth we call upon you with words
of divinity, pray listen and come for our protection so
that we may live the good life with all round well being
and happiness.




[Names: Apamivamapa]
datramaghayatah. Are deva dveso asmadyu-


[Names: Sarma]
Brilliant divinities of nature and humanity, pray
remove all sickness and disease of the world, eliminate
indifference and opposition to divine service, remove
selfishness and miserliness, remove the malignance of
the sinner souls, throw off hate and jealousy far from
us and give us a spacious peaceful happy home so that
we may live the good life with happiness and all round






[Names: Aristah, Yamadityaso]
Unhurt does the mortal advance in the world,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 63 719


rises in values and practice of Dharma and thrives with
family and progeny whom you, O brilliant divines, lead
by noble paths of rectitude. Indeed, he crosses over all
evils of the world whom you enlighten and guide for
the good life and well being all round.






[Names: Ssurasata, Prataryavanam, Maruto]
O Lord Almighty, Indra, O Maruts, vibrant and
enlightened heroes of nature and humanity, let us ride
that chariot of life, unhurt, inviolable and victorious,
taking off early morning at dawn, which you protect in
the battle of the brave when the action is on for the
victory and attainment of food, energy, culture and
advancement of all for the good life and well being all
round. (The chariot here is the human body for the
individual, and the social, economic and the organismic
commonwealth of humanity on the political level.)







[Names: Svasti, Svasti]
O winds, O vibrant scientists and engineers, let
there be peace, security and well being on the highways




and desert lands, all well over the waterways, rivers
and seas, all good and well being in our programmes of
enlightened advancement for general happiness. Let
there be general good and universal well being among
our women’s lives and in family development
programmes. O Maruts, bring us auspiciousness in our
programmes of economic development for the growth
of national wealth.






[Names: Svastiriddhi]
Let there be peace, goodness and all round well
being of the highest order in our long term programmes
of development, only that which brings abundant wealth,
noble success and honour and splendour of grace. May
that peace and splendour strengthen us at home and
protect us abroad and may that peace, protected by noble
and brilliant divine souls, have the rightful passion and
pride of self-confidence.




[Names: Isanaso]
gayena.


O brilliant divine Adityas, children of light, O
mother Aditi, thus does the intelligent and inspiring son
of the fulfilled household and prosperous community


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 721


exalt you. Thus are ruling masters of themselves and
their wealth and power, leading lights, the people, the
enlightened, praised and celebrated by the liberated
immortal and the intelligent rising generation.


Mandala 10/Sukta 64






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Gaya, Plata, Rshi, Katha, Srnvatam]
In the course of our life, which gracious name
of the divinities that hear our prayer shall we adore and
how? Who is kind to us first and most? Who brings us
peace and pleasure? Who cares for us and turns to us
with protection constantly?






[Names: Kratuyanti]
Thoughts, desires and resolutions arise in the
heart and mind anxious to do honour to divinity.
Dedicated celebrants love the objects of their love and
ambition and their desires and ambitions fly in various
directions. For them, there is no other source of comfort




and happiness than the object of these desires, be it
ambitions and prayers converge and concentrate on the
divinities.



[Names: Nara, Samsam, Agnim, Agni, Pusanam, Pusana, Suryamasa, Usasam, Usasa]
O man, with holy words worship the divine spirit
adored by humanity, study, honour and celebrate Pusha,
divine unfathomable source of nourishment, Agni
present in direct experience and lighted by noble and
brilliant yajakas, sun and moon and their relative
monthly movements, the heavenly energy operative in
the three regions of the sun, sky and the earth, the dawn,
the night and day and the Ashvins, complementary
dynamics of natural energy in motion.






How, by what words, with which mantric voices
and yajnic actions is the omniscient poet, master ruler
and almighty commander of infinite forces studied,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 723


celebrated and known in his infinite nature and
presence? In yajnic acts of search for knowledge, with
holy words of celebrative language used with honest
intention, unambiguous resolution and faithful purpose,
is the one absolute power, unborn and undying,
thunderous presence in space, celebrated and, if you
use that language with that resolution in those actions,
he would listen and respond.






[Names: Daksasya, Mitrava, Aturtapanthah, Pururatho]
And O mother Aditi, eternal nature, at the dawn
of the day, you energise and illuminate both Mitra and
Varuna, complementarities of unity and diversity of
energy and light, both luminant and bound in law like
day and night, and you bring into action the all ordaining
cosmic law, Aryama, like the sun ordaining the day and
night, which is unobstructed in its course, which
commands the many chariots of the universe such as
solar systems and galaxies, and which has seven high
priests in the dynamic universal yajna, like the seven
rays of the sun showing up the infinite forms of things
as they come to light.








[Names: Sahasrasa]
May all those veteran scholars and scientists
who listen to the call of the nation and, moving at
measured speed, win victories in their fields, who in
their pioneering adventures discover and produce great
wealth in all sincerity by their own competence while
they bring us a thousand gifts in our yajnic programmes,
listen to our invocation and exhortation at this juncture
too.




[Names: Vayum, Vayu]
tasah.


O yajakas, by your programmed yajnic sessions
of scientific endeavour, study the munificent Vayu and
Pusha, realise and harness the motive energy of wind
usable in chariot and also the nourishing and
invigorating power of nature as friends of life for the
service of humanity. Both Vayu and Pusha in this cosmic
yajna of Savita, lord creator and sustainer, are efficacious
and together take life’s growth and evolution forwards.


Aue ॥


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 725




[Names: Trih, Krsanumastrn, Agnimutaye, Agnimutay, Rudram, Rudra]
For our protection and advancement, in our
yajnic sessions we invoke and exalt thrice seven rays
of energy active in the three regions of heaven, earth
and the sky, the flowing streams, floods of water and
vapour great and greater, herbs and trees, clouds and
mountains, various orders of fire energy, electric energy,
catalytic currents of cloud breaking energy, solar energy
and the yajnic fire which destroys the negativities of
the environment.






[Names: Sarasvati, Devirapo]
For our protection and progress may Sarasvati,
cloud forming vapour streams, Sarayu, torrents of falling
rain, rivers flowing on earth, and all mighty floods
rushing and rolling at tempestuous speed flow for our
benefit. O divine rivers, mother streams of nourishing
waters full of living energy, ghrta, nectar and honey,
pray flow shining and roaring and bring us honour and








[Names: Utamata, Rbhuksa, Samsah, Sasamanasya]
And may mother Infinity of boundless light and
father Tvashta, maker of body forms, with all divine
generative forces, listen to our words of prayer and
celebration. May Rbhuksha, light and energy sustaining
the intelligent and wise, Vaja, spirit of nourishment and
energy, the master lord of the cosmic chariot, Bhaga,
spirit of grandeur, honour and power, all happy givers
of felicity worthy of adoration by the celebrants, sustain,
protect and promote us on the way forward.






[Names: Ranvah, Gobhih, Marutam, Maruta, Rudranam, Rudrana]
The celebration of Maruts and Rudras, scholars
of the science of health and pranic energies, is full of
blessings, joyous and beatific to the celebrant’s vision
like a haven of peace and total fulfilment. O divinities,
we pray, may we always adore you with holy songs of
celebration, enjoy your love and friendship and, blest
with honour and wealth, live happy among the people
of the world.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 64 727




[Names: Indra, Varuna, Mitra]
O Maruts, vibrancies of divinity, O Indra, lord
of honour and power, O divinities of nature and
humanity, O Varuna, spirit of judgement, Mitra, spirit
of love and friendship, let my intelligence and
imagination, which is your gift to me, grow and overflow
with exuberance like the cow’s milk. You do always
carry our prayers on the chariot and convey these to the






[Names: Lord, Supreme, Kuvidanga, Nabha, Maruto]
Dear Maruts, wise sages, you know and we pray
enlighten us of our divine affinity and essential
relationship with this Lord Supreme whatever way it is
possible. May Aditi, mother Infinity, lead us to find our
essential nature and identity and guide us to reach there
where we may regain our first and original centre of





[Names: Ubhe, Puru]
Heaven and earth, both of them great, divine,
venerable mothers of life from their very birth in
existence, are united with generative vitalities of nature
here itself. Both sustain the moving and unmoving forms
of life with their nourishing powers and both pour out
abundant fertility and generative vitalities replete with
the seeds of life essence in natural form.






[Names: Grava]
That wonderful voice of divinity, the Vedic
Word, which comprehends and corresponds to the entire
world of cherished forms of existence is inviolable and
sublime. Brhaspati, dedicated preserver and promoter
of the divine Word adores it. Therein the master speaker
and teacher of it is honoured as harbinger of honey
sweets of joyous knowledge. Men of reason and faith
with best of thought and action love and serve it beyond
measure.


Wa eeu



[Names: Ukthebhir]
Thus does the poetic visionary, celebrant of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 729


divinities and the divine Word, vibrant devotee of the
laws of Truth, worshipper of the highest wealth of
Divinity, lover of the wealth and values of existence,
with thoughts, words and songs of piety in a state of
inspiration and ecstasy serve and celebrate the divinities
here in the congregation of the learned in this life.




[Names: Aditya, Adit, Isanaso]
gayena.


O Adityas, children of the inviolable light of
the universe, O Aditi, mother Infinity, thus does the
inspirer of the swimmer across the flood of existence
adore you. O ruling powers of the world, O leading lights
of humanity, thus is the brilliant and divine humanity
celebrated by the inspired poet in a mood of ecstasy.


Mandala 10/Sukta 65






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Vasukarna, Vasukra, Rshi, Agnirindro, Vayuh, Vayu, Aditya, Marutah, Maruta, Adit, Sarasvati, Aditir]
May the cosmic spirit of divinity in its various

and harmonious manifestations integrated in nature and

humanity...: Agni, fire and magnetic energy of the earth,




Indra, wind and electric energy of the skies, Varuna,
beauty of the moon, peace of night and depth of oceans,
Mitra, warmth of the sun and freshness of the day,
Aryama, cosmic gravity that orders the stars and planets
in the united orbit of existence, Vayu, cosmic energy,
Pusha, life energy of nourishment and growth, Sarasvati,
cosmic enlightenment and universal speech vibrant in
universal mind, Adityas, inviolable light energy of the
stars, Vishnu, centre-hold of existence and omnipresence
of sustaining divinity, Maruts, various versions of wind
energy in currents, Svah, cosmic light and universal
bliss, Brhat, expansive space home of the universe,
Soma, cosmic spirit of peace and divine ecstasy
pervasive from the sun to earth, Rudra, thundering
clouds and the voice of sublimity, Aditi, imperishable
infinity of existence, and Brahmanaspati, the ultimate
immanent and transcendent, evolution and involution
of life, may all these together in love and unison bless
the life of nature and humanity in spirit, awareness and
expression in thought, word and deed.






[Names: Indragni, Antariksam]
In the dispelling of darkness and want and in
the breaking of the clouds for rain, Indra and Agni,
electric and fire energy, both protectors and promoters
of the reality of substances, enhancing each other by
their own essential power, work together in the same


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 731


system, and these together and Soma, the great and
soothing life-promoting spirit with its harmonious
power and lustre, all fill, energise and vitalise the great






[Names: Tesam]
By the grandeur of these mighty, irresistible,
self-sufficient powers of nature which observe and
advance life’s evolution by the laws of divinity, I,
knowing the laws of nature and exigencies of the
environment, structure, realise and accomplish my
programmes of development and social advancement
within the specifics of the Vishvedevas which,
harbingers of wondrous possibilities, friendly and
helpful, may, we pray, give us rain showers of liquid
prosperity and progress for our honour and glory.





[Names: Svarnaram, Prksa]
These Vishvedevas, cosmic powers, by their
glorious lustre and power, hold and sustain the bright
sun, the shining stars, heaven and earth and the




expansive universe. Brilliant celebrants adore and exalt
them as divine powers, munificent givers and generous
friends for humanity.






[Names: Mitraya, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitra, Yayordhama]
Offer homage to Mitra and Varuna,
complementary centripetal and centrifugal currents of
cosmic energy, both sovereign and self-lustrous which
never fault on their observance of law and generosity
by their very nature. Their abode and sphere of operation
shines by their law of Dharma and the great heaven and
the great earth both abide in their vast sphere of cosmic
dynamics. Offer homage to these generous givers of
the light of day and peace of the night.






The earth which goes about in her well defined
orbit, ceaselessly moving on over the orbital stages of
the revolution and yielding milky nourishments for life
on the way for living beings, expresses her thanks to
generous Varuna and does homage to Vivasvan, the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 733


refulgent sun, Varuna dispelling it and the sun attracting
it, both holding it in balance for the worshipful






[Names: Divaksaso, Agnijihva, Santa, Dyam]
Cosmic divinities clothed in light with tongues
of fire observe and augment the law of cosmic yajna,
and together, in a spirit of grateful union, sit at the centre
with the central cause of all cosmic evolution. Holding
the heavens high with their lustre, creating the waters
of life, and lighting up and sustaining the yajna fire,
they anoint themselves with divine grace.






[Names: Pariksita, Dyavaprthivi]
Extending and expanding, all embracing, each
in its own sphere but both abiding together in the same
one space, heaven and earth, earliest parents of life, rest
in the original cause of cosmic evolution and both,
dedicated to the law of divinity, replete with the waters
of life, create and augment living energy for the great
Varuna, pranic spirit of life.








[Names: Parjanyavata, Devan, Adityan, Aditim, Aditi]
Clouds and winds, mighty water bearer vapours,
Indra and Vayu, currents of electric energy and the
winds, Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, centrifugal,
centripetal and all controlling cosmic energy, the devas,
Adityas, rays of solar emissions, Aditi, mother nature,
all we invoke, adore and exalt, all that pervade and abide
by earth, heaven and the middle regions of the sky, for
knowledge and its application in practice.






[Names: Tvastaram, Vayumrbhavo, Brhaspatim, Usasam, Usasa, Somam, Soma]
O learned scholars of the science of yajna, for
our achievement of wealth and all round well being, let
us study and adore Tvashta, the specific natural energy
that creates and shapes the forms of life, Vayu, wind
and electric energy, the solar energy of the dawn, the
vast space, the catalytic force that breaks the cloud and
the soma energy which energises the heavenly yajakas,
prana and apana, and enhances the efficacy of brain and
the senses.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 65 735






[Names: Brahma, Suryam, Surya]
Let us invoke, study and adore for extension
and improvement the natural processes producing and
enhancing the quality of food, cows, horses, herbs and
trees, earth, mountains, waters, and the facts of nature
which shine and rise to the sun in heaven, all highly
productive and generous givers, creating, causing and
stimulating the best actions on earth.




^ = ~ ^ -




[Names: Bhujyum, Kamadyuvam]
Ashvins, complementary powers of divine light
and regeneration, you save the man of suffering and
sufferance from sin and evil, refertilise the barren land
and revitalise the seed to germinate, raise the genetic
quality of seeds and plants for better taste and
nourishment, and raise the general capacity of the seeker
of knowledge to higher competence.








[Names: Paviravi, Visve]
Thunder and lightning, the one absolute unborn
eternal sustainer of heaven, the sun, flowing rivers,
Oceanic waves and waters, rain bearing clouds, all the
divinities of nature and the seasons, and the divine
mother of knowledge and speech with the cosmic
intelligence and will may hear my prayer and respond.






[Names: Ratisaco]
May all divinities of nature and humanity, with
their thoughts, intentions and will and actions, adorable
at heart in yajna, immortal, self-established in divine
truth and law, givers of intelligence and competence
for accomplishment, loving and sociable, the very voice
and vision of divinity, soul of bliss divine, listen and
accept my song of divine adoration.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 737




The most brilliant sage celebrates and adores
the immortals who abide in all regions of the world.
May they now give us universal knowledge and vision
of the highest adorable lord divine. O Vishvedevas, pray
always protect and promote us with all that is good for
total well being of life.


Mandala 10/Sukta 66






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Vasukarna, Vasukra, Rshi, Devan, Indrajyesthaso]
For the good and well being of life all round, I
invoke the Vishvedevas, all bounties and divinities of
nature and humanity. Abundant and renowned are they,
refulgent givers of light, enlightened promoters of the
yajna of love and non-violence, who enhance the
creative and productive processes of overcoming
ignorance, injustice and poverty. Immortal observers and
promoters of universal law with Indra, the omnipotent,
as their supreme leader, they know, command and
promote the entire wealth and well being of the world.








[Names: Indraprasuta, Varunaprasista, Suryasya, Suryas, Marudgane]
Created, inspired, commanded and controlled
by Indra, supreme ruler, instructed by Varuna, lord
supreme of wisdom and judgement, the Maruts have
attained to their share of the light of the sun. The wise
and the brave institute yajna for the sake of divine
bounties. May we too concentrate and dedicate our heart
and soul to the strength and liberality of the Maruts.


[Names: Indro, Rudro, Aditih, Aditi]
May Indra protect and promote our home with
the wealth of the eight Vasus. May Aditi, mother Infinity,
give us peace by all the twelve Adityas. May Rudra,
lord of justice and mercy, with the eleven Rudras be
pleased with us. May Tvashta promote us with the power
of all the divinities for happiness and peace.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 739




[Names: Aditirdyavaprthivi, Adityan, Aditya]
For our protection and promotion, we invoke
Aditi, mother Nature, heaven and earth, the great cosmic
law of Rtam, Indra, cosmic energy, Vishnu, omnipresent
divinity that sustains the universe, Maruts, wind
[Names: Vasus, Rudras, Savita, Rudra]
lord of life and giver of light, lord supreme of cosmic
action, and the twelve Adityas, all refulgent divinities
of the universe.






[Names: Sarasvan, Brahmakrto, Vayur]
The rainy sky with its actions of showers, Varuna
with its own laws of functioning, Pusha, nature’s energy
of nourishment and growth, the mighty all pervasive
Vishnu, the winds, and the Ashvins, all dedicated to the
supreme spirit of the universe, immortal powers in direct
contact with the Supreme Divine, may, we pray, give us
peace and rest for body, mind and soul free from sin
and evil.








[Names: Vrsa, Vrsana]
May yajna bring us showers of peace and
prosperity, may the yajakas be generous and abundant,
may the divinities be generous and abundant, may the
bearers of havi be generous and abundant, may heaven
and earth replete with waters be generous and abundant,
may the clouds be generous and abundant, may the
celebrants of the generous divinities too be generous
and abundant and bring us showers of peace and






[Names: Agnisoma, Puruprassasta, Yavijire, Sarma]
Agni and Soma, heat and cold, two
complementarities of nature, both generous and
abundant for the achievement of food, energy and
advancement in knowledge and culture, universally
praised and adored as generous and abundant, both of
which others too serve and adore as generous and
abundant by yajna, I glorify, and pray they may give us
threefold peace and protection for body, mind and soul.


aad ue ॥


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 741




[Names: Dhrtavratah, Agnihotara]
Dedicated Kshatriyas consecrated in yajna,
brilliant in the knowledge of divinity, meticulous
performers of yajna with beauty and grace with Agni as
their high priest of yajna in observation and exaltation
of the laws of divinity, free from hate and enmity, move
forward in their battle against darkness and evil and set
the waters of life aflow like rain showers on the break
of dark clouds.






[Names: Dyavaprthivi, Antariksam]
Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity,
dedicated to their duties and discipline, creating and
promoting herbs and trees and forests for nature’s sacred
purpose of protection and promotion of life, fill the
regions of earth, sky, the sun and the highest heaven
with replenitude and add beauty to their own body and
the environment to their heart’s desire.









[Names: Dhartaro]
May the divine powers, sustainers of bright
heaven, roaring winds and thundering clouds, faultless
perfect waves of light and Rbhus, formative intelligence
of nature and expert humanity, waters, herbs and trees
listen, enjoy and augment our mantric voice, and may
Bhaga, abundant spirit of highest grace, Rati, mother
nature’s generosity, and the Vajins, fire, wind and sun,
life energies of the three regions, listen to my invocation
and join our yajna with abundance of gifts and teeming





[Names: Samudrah, Ahirbudhnyah]
May the ocean, the sea and rivers, the middle
regions of vapour and air, the one absolute eternal
sustainer of the universe, the thunder, the spatial ocean,
the region of dark clouds, and all divinities and eminent
sages and scholars of the world, listen to my invocation
and prayer and respond.






[Names: Syama, Adit, Sasyamanani]
O men of thought and enlightenment, may we


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 66 743


all be for your advancement and well being on the path
of holiness and rectitude. Please take our yajnic
endeavours forward in the right direction in a simple
and straight manner. O Vasus, Rudras and Adityas,
scholars of the first, higher and highest order, noble and
generous, please refresh, promote and advance these
hymns of adoration to higher achievement in the






[Names: Daivya, Ksetrasya]
O divine yajakas, O high priests of nature and
humanity, I follow the straight path of rectitude and
universal law of nature’s creativity. And we pray to the
lord ruler and protector of the universe immanent in
every form of existence, and, join all the divine powers,
immortal and relentlessly active in the universal process,
for study and advancement through yajna.





[Names: Vasisthasah, Prita]
Brilliant sages and scholars studying the divine
powers and researching the divine resources of nature




like the seers and, like parents and protectors, creating
the knowledge and the language of knowledge for life’s
our cherished needs and desires like loving friends and
relations, pray energise our economy and create wealth
for the community.





The brilliant sage of the first and highest order
adores and celebrates the immortal Vishvedevas who
abide in all regions of the world. May they give us
universal knowledge and vision of the highest adorable
lord divine. O Vishvedevas, pray protect and promote
us for all time with all that is good for the total well
being of life.

Mandala 10/Sukta 67








[Names: Brhaspati, Devata, Ayasya, Angirasa, Rshi, Imam, Turtyam, Samsan]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 67 745


revealed for us this universal voice of knowledge
spontaneously. Structured in seven metres, it is born of
the lord’s awareness of Satyam and Rtam, 1.6., the eternal
and mutable truth of existence and its laws of evolution,
sustenance and involution. He, the original source of
the birth of the universe and its knowledge and language,
also revealed the fourth and silent mode of existence in
the transcendent state of Moksha beyond the earlier three
of Dharma, Artha and Kama without effort and spoke it
for Indra, the soul.






[Names: Rtam, Vipram]
Speaking the Word of eternal knowledge,
meditating on the natural, eternal spirit of omniscience,
the Rshis, children of light, brave offsprings of divine
virility, self-disciplined souls established in the position
of vibrant sages among humanity, realise in direct
experience the first and original presence of the adorable






[Names: Supreme, Hamsairiva, Brhaspatir]
Chanting with friends as with hansa-like simple




sinless souls of purity, breaking the adamantine chains
of karmic bondage, loudly proclaiming the divine Word
of omniscience, Brhaspati, master celebrant of the
Infinite Spirit, blest with knowledge and vision divine,
sings and adores the lord divine.






[Names: Brahaspatis]
Brhaspati, master of language, wishing for the
light of knowledge and expression in the midst of the
darkness of the web of the world of mutability, expresses
the two upper levels of language, i1.e., madhyama and
vaikhari, which he expresses by two media of thought
and word, and the one hidden below, i.e., Pashyanti, he
apprehends through one, the deeper mind in meditation.
Thus he reveals the three modes of language. (The fourth
is Para, the silent mode of language in its originality
beyond the world of mutability which can be realised
in the highest state of Samadhi.)




[Names: Vibhidya, Sayathemapacim, Brhaspatirusasam, Suryam, Surya]
Brhaspati, the seeker of light, in the state of
turiya beyond deep sleep, breaks through the three bonds


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 67 747


of the city of darkness of the mutable world like thunder
and lightning breaking the dark cloud and directly
realises the dawn, the sun rays, the sun and the light
beyond the sun.






[Names: Indro, Svedanjibhir]
Indra, mighty ruling soul, wishing to taste the
sweetness of milk mixed with soma, 1.e., divine ecstasy
with vibrations of grace, removes the veil of darkness
covering the light of knowledge and divine speech with
an act of will as if with a stroke of thunder and lightning,
throws the demon away lamenting, recovers and enjoys
the light of knowledge with the voice of divinity and
showers of bliss in a state of clairvoyance.






[Names: Saim, Brahma]
Brahmanaspati, master, protector, promoter and
ruler of the world of existence, blest with divine light,
vision and speech breaks down the thief of cows, Le.,
hoarders, exploiters and destroyers of the wealth of life.
He breaks them down with the help and cooperation of
friends and associates who are generous, self-fulfilled,




fervently dedicated to truth, purity of conduct, laws of
Dharma and rectitude, and blest with ample means and
materials for the achievement of their goal. Thus does
he recover and establish wealth and common wealth
for the individual and the society.






[Names: Brhaspatirmitho]
They, friends and associates, with dedication to
truth and with honest mind, intentions, thoughts and
actions, wishing to promote the cows, 1.e., the wealth
and culture of the nation as a system, approach the
‘gopati’, 1.e., the head of the commonwealth, and he,
Brhaspati, master, protector and ruler of the expansive
system, together with his associates at his full command,
with safeguards against negativity, scandal and calamity,
creates and organises a nation of freedom and progress
ranging over the earth in peace and joy.






[Names: Brhaspatim, Surasatau, Anu]
Exalting him with our thoughts and actions
dedicated to peace, freedom and all round well being
of life, supporting him waxing and roaring victorious
as a lion in the world’s hall of yajnic freedom and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 67 749


progress, let us join Brhaspati, mighty and generous
protector, for the sake of victory in every battle worthy
of the brave, and win our goals and enjoy life with him.






[Names: Yada]
When Brhaspati achieves food, energy and
victories and higher possibilities of universal order and,
like the sun, reaches and illuminates the heavens with
light, then those who receive and shine with light like
the planets, being many and various, exalt the mighty
generous master ruler with words of adoration.






[Names: Satyamasisam, Pasca, Srnutam]
O Brhaspati, O leading lights of humanity, for
food and energy, good health and age, fulfil the hopes
and ambitions of the people and justify your words of
purpose to the point of truth without compromise.
Protect the cooperator and celebrant with your own
power and security. Then let all violence, enmity and
sabotage be overcome and cast off totally far away. And
may the heaven and earth, givers of universal fulfilment


listen to our prayer and adoration.






[Names: Ahannahim]
Indra with his might breaks the top of the great
ocean of waters in space and, breaking the dark cloud,
releases the seven seas and sets the rivers aflow. May
the heaven and earth protect us by the divinities.


revelation of the Vedas in seven metres at the time of
the creation of humanity. The revelation breaks through
the darkness of ignorance and releases the light of
knowledge to radiate in seven chhandas of the Vedas.)


Mandala 10/Sukta 68






[Names: Brhaspati, Devata, Ayasya, Angirasa, Rshi, Udapruto, Giribhrajo, Like]
watchful guards raising their voice, like the rolling
rumble of rain clouds, like rippling streams flowing
down mountain slopes, the celebrants raise their hymns
of adoration to Brhaspati.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 68 751






[Names: Jane]
Just as Angirasa, enlightened disciple of the sage
of living knowledge, like Bhaga, divine lord of light
and grandeur, leads his friend to knowledge and
prosperity, as a friend leads a couple in the community
to come together in marriage, so O Brhaspati, inspire
and energise the aspirants to go forward and win their
goal by the light and words of divinity.


fava: nau




[Names: Sadhvarya, Brhaspatih]
Replete with pure, living energy, ever on the
move, loved, coveted, brilliant golden, beautiful in form,
such are the rays of light and vitality which Brhaspati,
the sun, recovers from the deep caverns of darkness
and sends them down to clouds and earth as a farmer
sows the seeds of barley in the field.








[Names: Aprusayan, Brhaspatir]
Sprinkling the womb of life with the honey
sweets of vitality like the sun radiating the rays of light
from the regions of heaven, Brhaspati recovers the
showers of life from the clouds and, as showers of water
seep into the crust of earth, so the seeds of life are vested
and borne in the earth.






[Names: Anumrsya, Anumrs]
As the sun removes darkness with light from
the middle regions, as the wind removes the cover of
moss and grass from the surface of water, so does
Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, with deep
thought, remove the cover of the darkness of nescience
and sets in motion the dynamics of nature’s creativity
in circuits of energy as the motions of the wind.






[Names: Yada, Dadbhirna, Agnitapobhir]
When Brhaspati with the flames of fire and rays
of the light of his creative will breaks through the
darkness of nescience covering the primeval potential
existence and takes it over as the tongue takes over the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 68 753


food crushed by teeth, then he opens up and reveals the
vast reservoir of his energies of the dynamics of creative
nature.






[Names: Brhaspatiramata, Andeva]
Brhaspati knows the name and identity of these
voluble facts and processes of existence which are
present but hidden in the deep womb of nature and
which, radiating like rays of light and flowing like
streams, grow and come into being as chicks on maturity
break the bird’s egg and spring into full life.





[Names: Asnapinaddham, Nistajjabhara]
Brhaspati sees the sweetness and beauty of
human life caught up in the bonds of pleasure and
sufferance in the body like a fish caught up in shallow
waters, and he raises and refines it like a cup of soma
for the divinities, crafted from rough wood, having
refined and blest it by the resounding voice of revelation.








[Names: Sosamavindat, Agnim, Agni]
The blessed man realises the light of the dawn
of knowledge, the light and bliss of heaven, the vision
of refulgent divinity, and with that light wards off the
darkness of evil and ignorance. Indeed, Brhaspati raises
the man subject to body, senses and mind, now blest
with divine vision like a real man, otherwise completely
sinking in the depths of darkness and evil.






[Names: Himeva, Ananukrtyam, Suryamasa]
Just as the leaves of forest trees are made to fall
by winter, so darkness is dispelled and light is created,
so is ignorance dispelled and the light of Vedic revelation
revealed by Brhaspati, and that is an act he does
unparallelled and unrepeated as long as the sun and
moon shine together and illuminate the days and nights.




[Names: Syavam, Ratryam, Jyotirahan]
Like a dark horse adorned with golden
trappings, the rays of light adorn the heavens with stars.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 69 755


Brhaspati vests darkness in the night and light in the
day, breaks the cloud, releases the light and showers
recovering the light of existence from the night of
annihilation, and enlightens the heart of darkness with
revelations of the light of divinity.






[Names: Idamakarma]
This homage we offer to Brhaspati, lord of living
waters and thunder, who reveals the eternal words of
divine knowledge. May that lord bless us with good
health and long age with lands, cows and the light of
knowledge, horses, transport and advancement, brave
progeny, leading lights and enlightened people.


Mandala 10/Sukta 69


[Names: Agni, Devata, Sumitra, Vadhryashva, Rshi, Bhadra, Yadim]
May the controlled and directed radiations of
light and yajna fire, Agni, be auspicious, may its
inspiration and guidance be auspicious and rewarding,




may its associations and functioning mutualities be
auspicious. When noble and friendly people kindle and
install it in the prime position in the vedi of yajna then,
raised and fed on oblations of ghrta, it rises and shines,
adored and exalted by the celebrants.


(This metaphor of physical fire and light, of
which the flames and radiations are controlled and
directed, is extendable to the socio-political and
educational life of the human community. In this context
Agni is to be interpreted as the leader, ruler, commander
and teacher, leading the people to auspicious
attainments. And, as in the case of all words indicative
of divinity, Agni is the supreme lord of light and life
whose divine functions are all self-refulgent and self-
controlled, leading us all to auspicious attainments.)





[Names: Ghrtamagner, Ghrtenahuta, Surya]
Ghrta means and is the rise and exaltation of
self-controlled self-directed Agni, ghrta is the food, and
ghrta is the growth and expansion with love and grace.

Fed on ghrta it rises and expands unbounded and,

kindled, energised and exalted with ghrta, it shines

glorious and beatific like the sun.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 69 757




[Names: Sravo]
O prime and pioneering power, Agni, the bright
and blazing light and flame of yours which Manu,
thoughtful intellectual and noble friend, kindles with
positive intention and purpose is new and it is adorable.
Let it shine rich in wealth. Listen and respond to our
words and voices of hope and prayer. Destroy negative
forces. Create and bring us honour and prosperity here
and now.






Agni, you have been loved, studied and adored
since the earliest times. The same you, I study and adore
with controlled and concentrated mind, senses,
intentions and motivations in my yajnic performance.
Pray listen to my words and respond to this endeavour
of mine. Be the protector of our homes and families
and of our health of body and community, and protect
this gift of yours which you have given to us.








[Names: Bhava, Sura]
Agni, power of controlled light and flames of
fire, be our protector and harbinger of splendour, and
let no enemy of humanity challenge and assail you. Like
a mighty warrior, Agni is all surpassing, all inspirer, a
noble friend, and this is how I celebrate the name of the
blazing power of self-control and splendour.






[Names: Samajrya, Jigetha]
Agni, you win the wealth of clouds and
mountains, plains and seas, conquer destructive and
darkening forces, and win over noble and dynamic
powers. O mighty power of light and fire, like a mighty
warrior all surpassing, inspirer of people, you challenge
and defeat the adversaries.






[Names: Dirghatanturbrhaduksayamagnih, Dyuman]
This Agni, of expansive unending life, vastly
mysterious and revealing, a hundred ways dynamic


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 69 759


brilliants, adored and exalted by leading lights among
friends of noblest mind, shines among the lovers of






[Names: Tvam]
O Jataveda, omniscient lord of all existence, in
you abides the perennial, inexhaustible mother cow,
nature, the divine Word, agreeable and spontaneous
giver of ceaseless streams of life sustaining light and
natural energy. You are enkindled and adored by all
leading lights of humanity bearing homage in
abundance, noble friends, devotees who love and






[Names: Devascitte]
O Jataveda, lord of infinite power and motion,
the immortal divines proclaim your greatness and glory,
and when mortal humans come and ask who destroys
the dark and the wicked, the answer is: You win over
the dark and the wicked with those noble people who
adore and exalt you as the master, leader and








[Names: Piteva, Jusano]
As the father bears the child in his lap with love
and supports it, so does the dedicated celebrant with
controlled mind and sense place you in the vedi in the
lap of mother earth, serving you with faith, reverence
and awe. O power most youthful, loving and accepting
his lighted faith, reverence and service, pray ward off






[Names: Sasvadagnir, Satrin, Samanam]
Agni, divine leader of light and life, always wins
over the enemies of the self-controlled man of dynamic
mind and senses by heroic men who distil the soma with
faith and reverence and offer it to Agni in homage. O
wondrous lord of light and fire, eliminate conflict
wherever it be and, yourself rising in glory, break down
violence and destruction when it is raising its head.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 70 761




[Names: Ayamagnir]
This Agni, lord of self-refulgent light, all time
invoked and lighted with prayer and homage, is the
dispeller of darkness for the devotee of controlled mind
and senses. O lord and leader of light and life, face upto
and overthrow our enemies whether they are united as
acommunity of saboteurs or as a hoard of heterogeneous


Mandala 10/Sukta 70








[Names: Apriyah, Idhma, Samiddhagni, Narashasa, Barhi, Davidvara, Ushasanakta, Daivyau, Prachetasau, Sarasvati, Bharati, Tvasta, Vanaspati, Svahakrti, Devatah, Sumitra, Vadhryashva, Rshi, Imam, Varsman]
O divine spirit of light and life, harbinger of
knowledge and wisdom, on the sacred vedi of this holy
earth, pray accept this homage of holy fuel and cherish
this ladleful of ghrta and, O divine fire of noblest action,
during this happy time of fine season rise on top of the
world and shine by our faithful service to divinity by








[Names: Rtasya]
May Agni, prime pioneer of divinities,
universally valued, praised and adored, come here to
yajna with all its universal powers of light and energy
and, as highest of divine agents of yajna, catalyse,
manage and carry our homage with holy offerings to
nature’s bounties for their service and replenishment
by the paths of natural laws and bring their blessings
for us by the same paths of nature.






[Names: Sasvattamamilate, Vahistairasvaih, Agnim, Agni]
Men with homage of yajnic offerings always
invoke, serve and pray to Agni to carry their offerings
to the divinities and bring in their blessings. O high
priest of yajna, pray come, bring in the divinities by the
strongest fastest chariot drawn by most radiant carriers
of natural dynamics, sit on the vedi and, by the same
powers, transmit our fragrances to nature’s bounties.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 70 763




[Names: Ahelata]
May the yajnic light, fire and prosperity loved
by the divinities, grow, expand and rise all round, long,
wide and lofty in space and time so that there may be
sweet fragrance for us all time. O divine light, fire and
fragrance of yajna, O lord of space and divine bliss,
help us with a gracious mind free from hate and anger
to join the brilliant divinities with Indra, omnipotent
Supreme, first and highest of them.






[Names: Divo, Srayadhvam]
O divinities of yajnic energy of nature, treasure
troves of prosperity, touch the highest top of heavenly
light and open and expand the fertility of earth in ample
measure. Loving, passionate and gracious, ride the
cosmic chariot of Infinity with the great divinities by
virtue of your own grandeur and open the doors of
boundless prosperity and enlightenment for humanity.








[Names: Devi, Usasanakta]
O divine daughters of heaven, dawn of the busy
day and restful night, both dexterous accomplishers of
yajna, abide in the midst of the creative endeavours of
humanity. Loving as you are, generous and gracious,
may the dedicated and enthusiastic celebrants of divine
nature come and abide in the boundless bosom of your
love and good fortune.






[Names: Urdhvo, Purohitavrtvija]
When the sounding stone for soma goes up, the
lighted fire rises in flames, and the havi vessels shine
bright and lovely on the vedi in the lap of mother Infinity,
then may the priest and the yajaka, Agni and Adityas,
both brilliant and divine more and ever more create the
wealth of life for humanity. (Yajna here is a metaphor
of the creative endeavour of noble humanity in corporate
action. )


[Names: Manusvad]
O triple divinities, Ila, Sarasvati and Bharati,


mother Infinity, vibrant spirit of knowledge, language
and culture, and Bharati, all bearing nature and mother


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 70 765


earth overflowing with ghrta, we pray, come and grace
this lovely vedi which we have created for you with
adoration, prayer and meditation. May divine Ia,
transcendent Infinity, Sarasvati, inexhaustible spirit of
light and stream of knowledge vested in awareness, well
ordered, and Bharati, spirit of earthly prosperity, come,
join the vedi as humans and partake of our homage with
love and grace.






[Names: Deva]
O divine Tvashta, creator and maker of the forms
of existence, when you create the beauty and graces of
life and become a friend and associate of the Angirasas,
spirit and energy of the life of humanity, then O generous
lord of the world’s wealth, loving and all knowing, pray
give food and living sustenance for the holy creative
people on their paths of life.






[Names: Vanaspate, Svadati]
O lord of vanaspatis, life giving sun rays, and
herbs, trees and forests which provide food for living
beings, you are the light giver, all watching and
energising, you create the food for divinities and give it




the right form for their living systems. The generous
lord of light makes the food palatable and thus forms
the sacred materials as food for the living yajna of life’s
evolution. May heaven and earth listen to my voice of
prayer and exhortation and bless us with the right forms
of food for us and for our yajna and protect us.






[Names: Agne, Indram, Indra, Varunamistaye, Varunamistay, Maruto, Sidantu]
Hey Agni, lord of cosmic light and living energy,
bring us Varuna, water from the ocean and the clouds
for our cherished yajna of the good life, Indra, light and
power from the heavens, and Maruts, winds from the
middle regions. May all divine yajna powers and holy
yajakas of the world come and join our vedi with the
chant of svaha, in truth of thought, word and deed. May
all the immortal divinities rejoice and may they give us


Mandala 10/Sukta 71




[Names: Jnana, Knowledge, Devata, Brhaspati, Angirasa, Rshi, Brhaspate, Yadesam]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 71 767


O lord of Infinite Speech, Brhaspati, the first
and original form of eternal speech, which is the
integration of name, word and factual reality, which the
sages receive and bear in mind and articulate at the dawn
of human creation, lies immanent in the universal mind.
It is borne in the best and immaculate minds of the sages
who make it manifest from there by divine inspiration
in a state of grace.






[Names: Saktumiva, Atra]
When the sages of patient and transparent mind,
with their thought and imagination, conceive, visualise
and articulate the divine word, crystallising it to the state
of purity as they sift the grain of truth from the chaff of
local variety, then the friends and associates come to
know of the idea and the word and the union of word
and meaning in communication, and then noble and holy
is their knowledge manifested and received from the
depth of the sage’s language.






[Names: Yajnena, Tamabhrtya, Purutra]
By yajna and meeting of minds on the vedi, they




get to the form and meaning of language, tracing it word
by word in the structure, realising the reality of meaning
hidden in the mind of the sages. And having reached,
realised and received it, they bear it around and
communicate it in many ways widely in many places at
[Names: Thus]
serve and worship it, structured and articulated in seven






[Names: Srnvan, Srnotyenam]
However, even in association, in spite of
discussion, someone having seen the language, let us
say, in print, or having seen the meaning in practical
the language by the ear may not hear it in the soul. But
Speech to someone, some honest, conscientious
dedicated soul, opens up and reveals its hidden meaning
as a loving wife beautifully clad opens and reveals
herself, her very soul to her loving and faithful husband.






[Names: Adhenva, Susruvan]
Such a realised soul, they say, is a sober scholar
on solid foundations in matters of language, meaning


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 71 769


and vision of reality. In scholarly meets they do not trifle
with him, nor contradict him. But some may not even
come to the fringe of his attainment. And another one
moves around like a barren cow, struck by the magic of
mere sound of words, hearing language without fruit or






[Names: Yastityaja, Yadim]
If someone forsakes the divine speech of the
Veda, a real intimate friend for life and after, there
remains no substance even in his speech of daily wear,
and whoever listens to him listens in vain because he
does not know the path of well being and of well doing.






[Names: Aksanvantah, Adaghnasa]
Indeed friends and companions equal of eyes
and ears are unequal in mind and intellectual efficiency.
Some are like tanks just waist deep, others neck deep,
and yet others are deep as lakes, rivers or even seas
wherein you bathe and feel sanctified and absolved.








[Names: Hrda, Atraha]
When scholars in close friendly association join
in intellectual meets organised with careful thought and
aside as ignorant while others, scholars of valuable
subjects, actively move on with discussions of latest






Those there are who pursue neither the
knowledge of this material world nor the knowledge of
the spiritual world, nor are they Brahmanas interested
in the holiness of the world of reality, nor even do they
follow ritual and worldly life consciously with open
mind. So being ignorant people they use only the non-
holy language of impiety and merely extend the thread
of physical existence at the human level in their life.





[Names: Sarve, Kilbisasprt]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 72 771


All friends feel happy and celebrate with a
learned person who comes as a friend with honour,
reputation and social prestige, and such a person,
eliminator of sin and evil, provider of food and
knowledge, rises to the position of leadership among
them, being good for their honour and enlightenment.






[Names: Rcam, Sakvarisu, Brahma]
Of the devotees of the divine voice of the Veda,
one chants, celebrates and maintains the energy and
enthusiasm of life vibrating in the Rks, one, the udgata,
sings the gayatri verses in the Shakvari hymns of power,
the Brahma, presiding high priest, proclaims the verses
of universal knowledge from all the Vedas, and another,
the adhvaryu, orders and organises the entire programme
of the yajna in all details.


Mandala 10/Sukta 72








[Names: Devah, Devatah, Brhaspati, Laukya, Angirasa, Aditi, Dakshayani, Rshi, Devanam, Ukthesu, Sasyamanesu]
Let us proclaim in clear words of grateful




adoration the birth and evolution of nature’s divine
manifestations which, when the verses are chanted, one
may see and appreciate in later ages to come.






[Names: Brahmanaspatireta]
Brahmanaspati, lord, master and ordainer of the
cycle of existence, sets these devas in motion like an
artisan in the earliest age of evolution and they awake
from the unmanifest state of Being into the manifest
state of Becoming in existence. (The Avyakta,
intangible, becomes the Vyakta, tangible, mode of






[Names: Prakrti, Nature, Tadasa]
In the first age of the devas, the manifest stage
of existence arose from the unmanifest Zero stage, 1.e.,
the Zero state emerged into the first positive state of
existence after Zero. Then in consequence arose space
and the quarters of space. Thereafter arose Uttanapada,
the open ended possibilities of boundless evolution
further. (The one Vyakta gives rise to potential




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 72 773




[Names: Bhurjajna, Aditerdakso]
From Uttanapada arose Bhu, specific possibility,
and many more such arose in space in the spatial
quarters. From Aditi, inviolable nature, arose Daksha,
will and intelligence, and from will and intelligence,
Aditi, the desire to grow and procreate further.






[Names: Aditirhyajanista]
O Daksha, lord of will and intelligence, Aditi is
born which is your offspring, indeed your desire to be
many. In consequence, the devas are born, the noble
fraternity of the immortal (Nature and divinity).


The order of the birth of the devas is thus
described in the Upanishads and in Sankhya philosophy
of natural evolution it is this: From avyakta Prakrti
evolves Mahan or Pradhana which is vyakta Prakrti.
From Mahan arises Ahankara which is described here
as Uttanapad or the tree of the universe. From Prakrti
are also manifested the three qualilative modes of
existence: Sattva or intelligence, Rajas or energy, and
Tamas or solid matter. This same is the order here in a
different terminology. From Ahankara are born the five
subtle bhutas and both mental and perceptive organs.
From five subtle bhutas are born the five gross bhutas:
Akasha, Vayu, Agni, Apah and Prthivi which all are
composed of paramanus, the smallest units.








[Names: Yaddeva, Atra]
O Devas, when you abide and play together
dancing as if joyously in that vast space, then your
radiant energy and ecstasy rises high (to receive the
descent of life as the ripe gift of the sun on high).






[Names: Devas]
energise and enliven the regions of the world, so here
too in the ocean of matter, energy and prana, you hold,
support and cherish the bright sun, the soul deep under
the mysterious fivefold cover of existential body form.






[Names: Astau, Devan]
Eight are the divine modes of Aditi, eternal
inviolable Prakrti, which are evolved from her
personality like children born of the mother (these being
Mahan, Ahankara, five material forms and the sense-
mind complex which is called Martanda because it bears
the soul which passes through the birth and death
stages). With seven of these it goes on evolving and the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 73 7715


eighth, Martanda, it leaves aside free (to grow by itself
with the soul in the human form).






[Names: Saptabhih, Prajayai]
With seven of her children mother Aditi retires
to the post-pre-creation stage of the Avyakta absolute,
but she continues to bear the Martanda, the soul with
the subtle body cover during Pralaya, for birth and death
again and again in the eternal cycle of existence. (For
8-9, further, refer to Gita, 7, 4-5, and Aitareya


[Names: Upanishad]
Mandala 10/Sukta 73






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gauriviti, Shatya, Rshi, Janistha, Avardhannindram, Marutasci]
Indra, ruler of humanity and the world, adorable,
is born to subdue pride and opposition to humanity, and
when mother Infinity, or humanity, fortunate and
rightfully proud, bears such a brave hero, leader and
ruler, the Maruts, leading lights, adore and exalt him.








[Names: Druho, Ssamsena, Puru, Abhivrteva, Indram]
The armies of the enemy of darkness and pride
stand round him well ordered and deployed with fighting
forces ready for the move, and they abundantly exalt
Indra with universal songs of praise. The people safe
all round covered with mighty defence and security rise
and progress like showers of rain released from the depth
of dark and dense expansive clouds.






[Names: Rsva, Tvammindra]
Indra, great and elevated are the columns and
constituents of the system you rule over. When you
advance and win your goal, the most eminent leaders,
scientists and technologists, warriors and whoever
others are here, all praise and exalt you. You appoint
and maintain thousands of vigilant guards on the
forefronts of the land. Indra, keep the social economy
and all subsystems of the order moving, keep the circuit





[Names: Samana, Vasavyamindra]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 73 777


Going fast forward in the struggle of life, you
move close by the ways of yajna, holding on to the
common creative values of corporate life and bringing
all complementary forces of the system together for
friendship ever in action for advancement. Indra, brave
hero and ruler, hold and manage the wealth of the nation
while the Ashvins, complementary forces of the system,
create and contribute a thousand forms of honour, wealth
and all round prosperity to the commonwealth.






[Names: Mandamana, Abhirhi]
Further, happy and joyous with the rule of
inviolable law and dispensation of justice, Indra creates,
holds, manages and provides wealth and well being for
the people with the cooperation of his friendly and
enthusiastic colleagues, and with these very cooperative
forces faces the negative elements, negates their
mischief and dispels all fog, depression and oppressive
darkness from the land, uproots all these.









[Names: Sanamana, Rsvairagacchah, Usaso]
Indra, dispel the darkness of the forces of equal
name and power and subdue them with your light like
the sun which overtakes the car of the dawns and turns
it to day. Move forward with heroic friends who are
brilliant and ambitious and with them together win the
firmness and stability of your heart’s desire.






[Names: Tvam, Tvam]
You subdue the miserly hoarder and the
negative, destructive clever trickster and convert him
to be a lover of yajna and social generosity, living a
simple natural life for the advancement of the seer. You
make the paths of human progress peaceful and
enjoyable, holy, simple and natural to follow for the
pilgrims of divinity.






[Names: Tvametani, Anu]
Indra, you fill up all these agents of positivity
with strength. Ruling and controlling, you hold the rule
and justice like the thunderbolt in hand. Consequently
all the divinities of nature and humanity rejoice and exalt
you with power and joy. Indeed you turn all the clouds
above downwards to release the showers of life giving


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 73 7719


rain.




[Names: Cakram, Prthivyamatisitam, Yadu]
His wheel of power and presence which operates
across the spaces and rules the dynamics of nature and
humanity also fills and covers the whole system of
existence with honey sweets of joy for life and for the
lord’s own fulfilment too, the same honey which
fertilises the earth and fills the clouds, the nectar that is
filled in the cow’s udders and sweetens the sap in the






[Names: Asvddiyayeti, Manyoriyaya]
While some say this power and presence comes
from the system itself, and I think it is born of divine
lustre, arisen from passion and subsisting in forms and
subsystems, the truth is that wherefrom it arises Indra
alone knows the mystery.








[Names: Vayah]
Men of vibrant intelligence and flying
imagination, seers and sages with love and reason, in a
mood of supplication, prayer and faith sit and abide by
Indra. O lord, unveil the truth from darkness, perfect
our vision for the light of truth, release us for we are
bound like birds in snares.


Mandala 10/Sukta 74






[Names: Indra, Devata, Gauriviti, Shaktya, Rshi, Vasunam, Arvanto]
Wishing to honour the winners of the wealth
and glories of heaven and earth by thought and action
and by corporate yajnic performance, I celebrate the
warriors of horse and commanders of wealth and honour
of excellence who support the friends and destroy the
assailants in the battles of life and who uphold and exalt
the well received words and traditions of reputed sages
and scholars.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 74 781




[Names: Hava, Sravasyata, Caksana]
Their call to action, with the fragrance of their
yajnic performance full of freshness and rejuvenation
for life, rises to heaven and, with their ideas and fame,
spreads over the whole earth where brilliant sages of
vision and generous leaders, with their own essential
choices and best actions, create a heaven on earth for
the good and all round well being of life.






[Names: Iyamesamamrtanam, Dhiyam]
This is the voice of song in adoration of these
immortals who, in the general yajna of all humanity,
create and bestow on us the jewel wealth of life, elevate
ideas and actions and accomplish the corporate creative
programmes of total humanity by yajna. May they, we
pray, bear and bring unbounded wealth and honour for






[Names: Indrayavah, Indrayava, Sakrtsvamye, Puruputram, Puruputra]
Indra, ruler of the world, the people adore and
exalt you when they reap the harvest of abundant food




and milk, and when they till the land, and, like the
mother cow, wish to milk the great wide earth of a
thousand streams who, for her many many children,






[Names: Saciva, Indramavase, Indramavas, Rbhuksanam, Rbhuksana, Puruksuh, Puruksu]
O yajakas, for your protection and progress,
adore and exalt Indra, lord of wondrous power and
action, undaunted subduer of enemies, glorious,
majestic, admirable and abundantly generous friend of
humanity. And he wields the thunderbolt of power,
justice and dispensation.






[Names: Yadvavana, Purutamam, Purutama, Aceti]
While Indra, subduer of the strongest enemy,
destroyer of the strongholds of darkness, breaker of the
clouds, is known as the justifier of his name and fame,
he, lord of patience and fortitude, most powerful, helps
us achieve whatever we wish to accomplish.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 75 783


Mandala 10/Sukta 75






[Names: Nadyah, Devata, Sindhukshit, Praiyamedha, Rshi]
O fluent streams of water, energy and light, your
best and highest grandeur and quality in every region
of the master of earth, skies and light (Vivasvan), the
scholar scientist devotee adores, describes and
celebrates. Seven streams flow three ways in every one
of the three regions, and in all the flowing streams the
one common current flows on with its own innate energy
and power.


waa neu




[Names: Bhumya]
O flowing stream, as you flow for the energy
and vitality of foods in plants, herbs and trees, or as
you flow by the tops of mountains of the earth or as you
elevate the first and best part of these living and moving
forms of nature with pranic energy, the sun makes the
path for your flow.








[Names: Divi, Abhradiva]
When the force and flood of energy is set in
motion by the sun, the rumble of infinite energy shakes
the spaces in heaven and the atmosphere on earth. As
thunder roars and reverberates from the sky, so do
showers fall and the river flood flows resounding like
the cloud.




[Names: Rajeva]
O Sindhu, flood of water, just as mothers move
with love to the child, just as lowing cows with milk
move to the calf to promote life, so do streams flow to
you and you take them forward flowing to the sea like a
warrior king leading his armies to the battlefield for




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 75 785




[Names: Imam, Sutudri, Sarasvati, Asidnya, Jikiye, Ssrnuhyd]
O Ganga, ever flowing stream of water, life and
life energy, Yamuna, stream that joins others and flows,
Sarasvati, stream of abundant water and light of life,
Shutudri, fast flowing stream of water and energy,
Marudvrdha, stormy stream of water, prana and passion
for life, Arjikiya, overflooding stream of life breaking
over the banks, along with Parushni, sparkling stream
flowing through stages, and Sushoma, stream of peace
and vitality deep as the fathomless ocean, Asikni and
Vistasta may all listen to this song of homage of mine
and bless life.


Note: It is said that the words from Ganga to
Sushoma are names of ten particular streams. It is not
so. According to Yaska and Swami Dayananda, Veda is
universal knowledge, there is no history and no
geography in this body of knowledge. If particular
streams are called by these names, the names were
derived from the Vedas in which those name-words
already existed, and the name-word and the
characteristics of the stream corresponded. For this very
correspondence, certain nerves, arteries and veins in the
body also were named after these Vedic words. Pandit
Jaya Deva Sharma in his translation of Rgveda
[Names: Arya, Sahitya, Mandala, Ajmer]
p. 131) quotes from a Kerala manuscript on music the






[Names: Alambusa, Dehamadhyagata]
nadyah”, and continues that Ganga is Ida, which leads
us to spiritual enlightenment, Yamuna is Pingala which
joins with and orders various organs of the body,
Sarasvati is sushumna which leads us to the joy of
[Names: Parushni]
kutilagamini) which goes through the vertibrae of the
spine is shining, Asikni is dark, Marudvrdha is
augmented by all nadis, Shutudri is fast and full, Vitasta
controls body temperature, Arjikiya originates from a
centre called Rjuka in the brain, also called vipat which,
if it breaks, then death occurs and the pranas and the
soul forsake the body. For this reason it is also called
urunjara. Sindhu is the soul into which retire all the
pranas and the nadis. Thus ‘streams’ and names of
streams are general terms of life’s dynamics in different
physical, psychic and spiritual contexts.






[Names: Trstamaya, Tvam]
O Sindhu, flood and ocean of the dynamics of
life, the streams which you first join and go on by the
body chariot of existence are: Trshtama, the nadi with
which food is first digested in the stomach, Susartu by
which the energy produced is distributed over parts of
the body system, Rasa by which energy vibrates across
the whole system, Shveti by which food energy joins
the blood stream, Kubha by which the skin cover is


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 75 787


formed and sustained, Gomati by which speech and
other senses are controlled, Krumu which controls and
coordinates body movements, and Mehatnu which
controls the urinary function.






[Names: Ryityent, Adabdha]
Rjiti which moves peacefully, Eni which
controls the white corpuscles, and Rushati which is
bright and creates the body lustre, move by the energy
and grandeur of the spiritual centre and communicate
particles of energy and vitality across the system.
Sindhu, the central stream and spirit, undaunted, is the
most dynamic of all dynamics, wonderful as a ray of
light and beautiful as a youthful maiden.






[Names: Svasva, Urnavati]
Sindhu, the central psychic and spiritual stream
of the system commands beautiful senses and mind and
the beautiful body chariot, it is fragrant, golden, nobly
youthful, provided with an efficient structural body




system, beatific, honey sweet and rich, which abides in
and rules over all streams of the system.


fer: ue




[Names: Sukham, Mahan]
Sindhu, spirit of the stream of existence, flows
incessantly, riding the cosmic chariot of all joy and
comfort, wonderfully dynamic, by which it wins
victories of attainments for its devotees and tributaries
in this cosmic play. Great is its glory praised and
celebrated by poets, undaunted and inviolable, innately
glorious, infinitely abundant and generous.


Mandala 10/Sukta 76






[Names: Gravana, Devata, Sarpa, Airavata, Jaratkarna, Rshi, Maruto]
O scholars and celebrants of yajna, creators of
soma wealth, I honour and cooperate with you at the
dawn of light and energy in the morning. Pray honour,
celebrate and serve Indra, the sun, the winds, the earth
and the environment and reveal their power and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 76 789


potential for us so that both day and night they may
produce and give us wealth born of earth for every home.






[Names: Tadu, Vidaddhyaryo]
Enact and accomplish that highest plan of yajnic
action which like a goal-oriented programme of cloud
showers in the hands of the creative maker of soma wins
strength and power, progress and victory for the
yajamana so that for the achievement of great wealth
and progress he overcomes the worst hurdles and goes
forward with quick mile stones of success.






[Names: Tadiddhyasya]
Let that creative soma yajna programme of this
yajamana promote and extend his actions and
achievements the way as ever before it has opened and
extended the paths of progress for humanity and inspired
pioneers of positive acts of love and service to go
forward in the scientific development of land, cows,
culture and enlightenment and in the technological
development of efficient means of transport and








[Names: Bharata]
O yajakas and creators of soma, destroy the
wicked and the evil tendencies, hold off the crooked
and negative forces from the ways of development and
progress, drive off want and poverty, create and bring
us wealth and progeny worthy of the brave, and sing
songs of thanks and praise in honour of the divinities.






[Names: Divascida, Vayoscida, Somarabhas, Somarabha]
I sing in honour and appreciation of you all who
create more and more energy and power from the light
of the sun, more and more energy and speed from the
electric energy of the middle regions, more and better
energising tonics and sanatives from the fresh vitality
of the winds, and more and better nourishing food from
the heat and fertility of the earth.




MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 76 791




[Names: Bharantu, Naro]
May the yajakas, creators of soma, bear and
bring that nectar of honour and energy wherein, inspired
by the heavenly voice of divinity rising to the skies,
enlightened people together in unison distil the honey
sweets of cherished love and fulfilment of life, their






[Names: Sunvanti, Somam, Soma, Duhantyudhar]
Devotees of Soma, lovers of divinity, riding the
body chariot in the state of dharma-megha samadhi
extract the nectar juice of divine joy. Loving the vision
and word of that joy they distil the taste and flavour of
it. They milk the presence, the taste, the flavour of
divinity from the udders of Mother Nature to sprinkle
on and around the vedi of life and, as people taste the
holy food with their tongue, they sanctify and experience
the joy in the state of clairvoyance.







[Names: Indraya, Indra, Vamam, Somamadrayah, Somamadraya]
O enlightened sages, such you are, people of
holy action, yajakas and creators of soma, to offer your
homage of living joy to Indra, lord of glory. All the
beauties and graces of life you create, all the wealth,
honour and excellence of earthly life you achieve is for
the service of Indra, your homage in totality to Divinity,
Spirit of the earth.


Mandala 10/Sukta 77






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Syumarashmi, Bhargava, Rshi, Marut, Abhrapruso, Sumarutam, Sobhase]
Like clouds of rain bringing showers of wealth
and fertility to the earth, like yajakas bearing sacred
offerings for the fire and replenishing the vitality of the
environment, the vibrant currents of cosmic mind and
holy sages of the divine Word bless humanity with the
Vedic voice. Now, in order to do them the honour they
deserve, sing and adore the assembly of the sages like
the divine currents of Maruts, and do so in order that
you too may deserve the honour and appreciation you





[Names: Sriye, Divasputrasa, Adityasaste, Adityasast]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 77 793


For their honour and glory, mortals adore and
celebrate them, Even veteran powers of earliest fame
cannot violate them. Children of light, they shoot
forward like archers and do not deviate from the course.
Children of Aditi, mother Eternity, they advance like
rays of light and extend the bounds of knowledge.






[Names: Pajasvanto, Suryah, Surya]
By virtue of their own strength and power (they
are great) but not separate, not unrelated to heaven and
earth just as the sun is great but not unrelated to the
cloud and the sky. Commanding power and grandeur
like heroes, they are adorable like mortals who destroy
negativity, and they are refulgent in their own right.


Tet WU




[Names: Yusmakam, Sratharyati, Visvapsuryajno]
In your area of operation you shine on together,
as in the spaces of cosmic dynamics the earth does not
shake, nor does it slacken, but goes on and on steadily
on its course. Same way your yajnic operation in the
cosmic law is universal, versatile and holy. Pray come




to our sessions, bear and bring us the food, energy and
the wealth we need and work for.






[Names: Yuyam, Syenaso]
In our programmes of progress, be like the
motive powers of the plan with rays of light and reins
of control. Be like light givers with sun-light on the
rise of the dawns of initiative on a new day. Self-
refulgent and glorious like harbingers of soma, be
destroyers of violence and negativity. Like world-
travellers, shining and sinless on meticulous missions,
be harbingers of universal showers of rain and






[Names: Marutah, Maruta, Vidanaso]
O Maruts, creators, achievers and givers of
wealth and providers of peace and settlement, when you
come from afar and bring great wealth of choice human
value and order capable of further and capital
development, then you eliminate all hate, jealousy and
enmity polluting the heart within and society outside.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 77 795






[Names: Revat]
The man established in Vedic chant and yajnic
programmes of creation and development who gives
for yajna and also gives to the brilliant and versatile
Maruts achieves good health and long age blest with
plenty of wealth and noble children and he also enjoys
the protection of divinities on the path of rectitude.






May the Maruts, adorable at yajna, protectors
and promoters most benevolent and blissful by the gift
of solar light and enlightenment and showers of
substantial waters and energy, versatile movers of the
dynamics of cosmic yajna circuit protect and promote
our mind, intelligence and knowledge while they love,
cherish and extend our grand paths of progress in our
social programmes of creation and production in the
spirit of universal love, friendship and peace and non-
violence.




Mandala 10/Sukta 78






[Names: Maruts, Devata, Syumarashmi, Bhargava, Rshi, Marut, Vipraso, Rajano]
Like sages holy and self-possessed by noble
thoughts and meditation, like dreamers of dreams
devoted to divinity by yajnic actions, like wondrous
brilliant rulers noble in person and performance, the
Maruts are pure and sinless like noble mortals among






[Names: Agnirna, Prajnataro, Soma]
Shining with golden halo and lustre like fire,
always devoted to protection and promotion of life like
winds by free will and dedication of the self, highest
and wholly committed to noble policies like wise and
enlightened sages, they work for the peace and holy
soma joy of the men of action and endeavour as divine
harbingers of mental peace and spiritual bliss.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 78 797




[Names: Vataso, Varmanvanto, Samsah]
Stormy shakers are they of the stagnant as well
as of the vibrant like winds, blazing like flames of fire,
mighty strong like warriors clad in armour for battle,
and profusely generous like blessings of the parents.





[Names: Rathanam, Sura, Vareyavo]
United in common with the centre as spokes of
the wheel with the nave, lustrous like warriors thirsting
for victory, liberal givers of the showers of prosperity,
and soothing of speech like the holy chant of Rks, such
are the Maruts for humanity.






[Names: Asvaso, Angiraso]
They are vibrant winners of the highest order
like rays of light in focus, generous givers like
commanders of the chariots of plenty and charity,
progressive seekers like rivers flowing down to the sea,
and versatile workers of theoretical knowledge into
practice like the Angiras sages of Atharva Veda realising


their hymns with the music of Samans.






[Names: Gravano, Sisula]
Like the clouds of rain they are makers of the
floods and oceans of collective wealth and knowledge,
always opening the flood gates of showers like thunder
across the world, playing like innocent children of noble
mothers and going forward with light and lustre like a
mighty community united in action.






[Names: Usasam, Usasa, Sindhavo]
Like lights of the dawn they illuminate the sky
and beautify the yajna on earth, themselves shining with
graces and wishing the world all well all round. Moving
forward like rivers in flood they shine in arms, and like
pioneer travellers over boundless woods and spaces they
cover miles and miles of distance in progress and




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 79 799




[Names: Subhaganno, Maruto]
O noble and divine Maruts, vibrant scholars and
sages, blazing warriors, benevolent philanthropists and
relentless seekers and creators, let us be sharers with
you, blest with noble jewel wealth of existence.
Yourselves exalted by our adorations, exalt us, the
celebrants. Come and acknowledge our song of praise,
appreciation and friendship. Liberal you are, and
immense are the gifts of your generosity for all time
past, present and future.


Mandala 10/Sukta 79








[Names: Agni, Devata, Sauchika, Vaishvanara, Sapti, Vajambhara, Rshi, Apasyamasya, Nana]
I see and realise the sublime presence of this
catalytic powers open and close and open like the jaws
of a living being, disjoining and joining together
insatiably and relentlessly, creating, destroying and
recreating new forms from old ones, and ultimately
consume all things thereby consummating and
completing the process of evolution back into involution
and annilation.








[Names: Guha, Siro, Atranyasmai]
The highest presence of Agni is hidden in
mystery, in the cave of the heart. Its eyes of universal
vision are objectified separately in the sun and moon.
With its tongue it consumes various things, even the
best and most beautiful too, insatiably. In homage to it,
yajakas all across humanity bear holy offerings with
hands raised in reverence and adoration and bring them
step by step for its consumption in the fire and in the
crucibles of the discipline of meditation.






[Names: Sasam]
Loving and seeking the ultimate mystery of
Agni, mother spirit of life and human evolution, the
by and along the various folds of earthly existence,
ultimately reaching the centre core of the mystery and
attains the radiant presence deliciously ecstatic like the
ripest fruit of life.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 79 801




[Names: Tadvomrtam, Naham]
O heaven and earth, father and mother of life in
existence, truly do I speak to you of that law of life
which you observe and sustain: the baby life in the
womb and, thereafter, receives its sustenance from father
and mother. I, the rising vital form, the mortal, know
not of the lord divine. For sure, Agni the omniscient
alone knows all, Agni alone illuminates the spirit in the





[Names: Tasmai]
Whoever the person that readily and
enthusiastically brings and offers food to this Agni, feeds
the fire and raises the flames with ghrta and intensive
oblations of havi, Agni watches and enlightens him with
a thousand eyes and visions. O lord of light and life,
Agni, you are always with us, all time, all round, with
and within at the closest.









[Names: Akrilan]
among the divinities, in sport or not in sport, you subject
men to sin, anger and aversion, since the omnipotent
power, creator and destroyer, to swallow what is to be
swallowed at the end, cuts things into particles like a






[Names: Visuco, Caksade]
Fortunately born in a beautiful body, the soul
uses various and versatile senses controlled by simple
and natural operations of the will and intelligence and,
loving and enlightened by Agni, cosmic lord omniscient,
grows stage by stage with pranic energies and prospers.


Mandala 10/Sukta 80








[Names: Agni, Devata, Sauchika, Vaishvanara, Sapti, Vajambhara, Rshi, Agnih, Agni, Srutyam, Agni]
Agni gives us fast faculties of sense and mind
which bring us food for life and experience with success
in many fields. Agni gives valiant progeny, learned and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 80 803


cultured with dedication to noble action. Agni pervades
heaven and earth, beautifying them, and blesses the
family home of man and woman, beatifying it with light
and passion for good action, and Agni blesses the
woman with fertility, motherhood of the brave and
wisdom to keep a happy home.




[Names: Agnerapnasah, Agnirekam, Agnireka]
dayate puruni.


May the full fire, heat and light of Agni, versatile
power of action be good for universal well being, Agni
which pervades both heaven and earth. Agni inspires
and energises every one in the battles of life, and Agni
dispels and destroys all evils of want and darkness.






[Names: Agnirha, Agniratrim, Agniratri]
Agni protects the devotee’s health of sense and
mind and establishes him in piety and prayer. Agni burns
away the debilitating impurities from waters and from
the blood stream of the body system. Agni protects the
enlightened man free from triple bonds of infatuation
with family, fame and finance. Agni establishes the man
dedicated to yajnic advancement of humanity in the right
relationship with family, friends and community.








[Names: Agnirdad, Agnirrsim, Agnirrsi, Agnirdivi, Purutra]
Agni, heroic in form and pride of the brave,
gives wealth, honour and excellence and all that is
valuable in the world. Agni rewards the sage, seer and
visionary scholar a thousand ways. Agni raises and
diffuses the fragrance of oblations to the heavens. Indeed
the presence and pervasions of Agni are boundless,






[Names: Agnimukthairrsayo, Agnim]
Seers invoke Agni with the chant of sacred
hymns. People in crisis on the journey onward call on
Agni for help and guidance. Like birds flying up in the
sky, sages on the way higher up towards the heavens or
deep in awareness in the mind adore Agni. Agni, indeed,
pervades and transcends a thousand abodes of light and
life and inspires and enlightens the souls that seek and




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 81 805




[Names: Agnirgandharvim]
Communities of humanity conscious of their
humanity and social responsibility worship Agni for
guidance. People who rise above their earthly bonds
thank and adore Agni. Agni holds and proclaims the
holy voice of eternal truth which guides humanity on
the paths of rectitude. The path that leads to Agni exists
in and radiates from the lustre of Agni itself.






[Names: Agnaye, Agne]
Rbhus, sages of divine vision and genius,
compose and sing songs of adoration in honour of Agni.
We too offer holy songs of reverence and worship in
celebration of Agni. O Spirit of universal light and life,
ever youthful Agni, pray protect and promote the
celebrant and give us the highest wealth of yajnic life
in communion with you.


Mandala 10/Sukta 81








[Names: Vishvakarma, Devata, Bhauvana, Rshi]
The eternal Rshi, visionary creator and cosmic
yajaka, our father generator, who calls up all these
worlds of the universe into existence ever abides by
himself. Moved with desire to give the wealth of life
with his blessings to the souls, he first generates the
original Prakrti vesting it with his divine will and then
simultaneously enters and pervades the modes and forms
of Prakrti as they evolve.






[Names: Yato]
What was the basis, what the beginning of the
beginning, what sort and whence, from which
Vishvakarma, omniscient all watching guardian of the
universe, creating the heaven and earth shaped them
and vested them with divine grandeur?








[Names: Visvatascaksuruta]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 81 807


All watching with cosmic eyes, all speaking with
cosmic voice, all protecting with cosmic arms and all
sustaining on cosmic foundations, the sole self-refulgent
maker creating heaven and earth shapes and controls
the universe with his hands, 1.e., thought and will with
strokes of the natural forces forging things into form.






[Names: Manisino]
Which is that forest and which is that tree from
which the divine forces of nature carve out and shape
the heaven and earth? O sages and scholars of divine
vision, with your heart and intelligence ask that
omniscient lord who abides and presides over the worlds
of all existence, holding and controlling them in order.






[Names: Siksa]
O Vishvakarman, creator and maker of the
universe, whatever the regions, their names and forms
which are your creation, whether the highest and
farthest, or the middle ones, or the lowest and closest,
pray enlighten the friendly seekers and devotees about




them. O lord of your own might of Prakrti and natural
law, keep on the universal yajna by yourself, offering
the fragrant havish and expanding the body form of the






[Names: Visvakarman, Muhyantvanye]
O Vishvakarman, you yourself guide and
perform the yajna of heaven and earth with the holy
materials from within nature itself, yourself exlating in
the expansive universe. Here the other people, unaware
of the mystery, feel awe-stricken but, we pray, may you,
Lord Almighty and omnificent, be the ultimate giver of
enlightenment for us.






[Names: Vacaspatim]
For our enlightenment and victory in our battle
of existence and action today, we invoke Vishvakarma,
lord of universal speech and the expanding universe,
creative cosmic awareness inspiring human mind and
thought, and we pray that the lord of holy action and
universal well being be pleased to listen and grant us
the fruit of all our invocations, prayers and adorations.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 82 809


Mandala 10/Sukta 82






[Names: Vishvakarma, Devata, Bhauvana, Rshi, Caksusah, Yadedanta]
The creator, protector and promoter of the light
of the eye and sensitivity of mind, constant and
inviolable, by his own will and resolution manifests the
plasticity of nature’s potential, Ahankara, from Mahat,
and then the double plastic potential of psychic and
material forms, mind and senses on the one hand and
tanmatras, subtle materials, on the other. And when these
basic bounds are shaped and confirmed, then these
tangible forms of intelligential and material existence,
heavens and earths grow, extend and expand.





[Names: Visvakarma, Tesamistani]
Vishvakarma is infinitely intelligent, infinitely
percipient, and all watchful. By virtue of his immanence
and inspiration, living beings enjoy the cherished objects
of their love and desire. It is that one Supreme Spirit




which all sages celebrate and adore as One and Absolute.
It is from him that all seven mantra chants arise and






Vishvakarma is our father and mother, he who
is the sustainer, ruler and controller of existence, who
knows all abodes and regions of the universe, who is
the sole ordainer of the nature, functions and names of
all divinities and the sole unity of all these in one, the
one comprehensive question of all questions and the
one complete answer to all questions, the one ultimate
reality into whom all regions and worlds converge and






[Names: Asurte]
The earliest Rshis, i.e., the vital energies of
nature in the process of creative evolution in their own
right with their power of Being, did yajnic service to
the creator and offered their best input in the formative
process like celebrants. Placed and abiding in the tumult
of the moving and unmoving elements and forms, they


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 82 811


fashioned forth the later forms of Being in homage to
the divine will.






[Names: Paro]
What is that generative as well as emergent spirit
and reality which is beyond the heavens, beyond this
earth and this entire universe, beyond the divinities and
the energies, beyond and above all that is in existence?
What is that presence, that Hiranyagarbha, that golden
seed model of the universe which the primeval Prakrti
particles contain and which contains and generates those
particles themselves, wherein all the divine existences
find and realise themselves?






[Names: Tamidgarbham, Ajasya]
That Vishvakarma is the first power and
presence which the particles of Prakrti contain as the
immanent generator and which also generates, contains
and rules the particles as the transcendent presiding
power wherein all the divinities converge, abide and
realise themselves. All that is, is self-contained in the




central generative core of the eternal unborn and
undying spirit, and therein abide all the regions of the






[Names: Ntharena]
You do not comprehend that spirit which creates
all these worlds of existence. That is something else,
deeper than the deepest that you feel you are and know
yourself. Covered by the fog of extrovert thought,
playing with mere words, happy and satisfied with a
breathing existence, singing songs of self-gratification,
people roam around and miss the centre pole of the


Mandala 10/Sukta 83






[Names: Manyu, Devata, Tapasa, Rshi, Yaste, Sahyama]
O Manyu, spirit of passion and ardour of mind
for righteous action, awful as thunder and accurate as
an arrow to hit the target, whoever bears, honours and
commands you with strength and enthusiasm, rises in


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 83 813


universal honour and splendour. We pray that with your
friendly and unfailing spirit of courage, patience and
vigour, we may be able to support the noble and defeat
the violent and the destroyers. (Righteous passion is
the gift and spirit of all the divinities.)






[Names: Manyurindro, Manyum]
Manyu, righteous passion of the spirit and
courage of mind, is Indra, glory and power. Manyu is
brilliance, manyu is yajaka and performer of yajna,
manyu is Varuna, deep as ocean, blazing as sun and self
confidence of choice, manyu is Jataveda, spirit of
intelligence and existential awareness. Communities
which live all over the human world honour and adore
manyu. O spirit of passion and universal intelligence
of divine mind, dearest friend and inner inspiration, pray
protect and promote us with the strength and discipline
of body, mind and soul.






[Names: Abhthi, Satrun, Amitraha, Come]
with valour and austerity of discipline, destroy the




enemies. Come, saviour of friends and destroyer of
adversaries, dispeller of darkness, eliminator of evil and
negativity, bear and bring us all wealth, honour and
excellence of the world.






[Names: Tvam, Visvacarsanih]
O noble wrath and passionate spirit of rectitude,
you are illustrious subduer of adversaries, self-existent
and self justified, awesome, challenger and destroyer
of hostilities, universally present among men, patient
and forbearing. Pray inspire us with strength and high
morale in our battles of life.






[Names: Abhagah]
Being void of righteous passion, O spiritual
rectitude, giver of self confidence and assertive identity,
Iam gone far from my own self and, by action, deprived
of your spirit of lustre and inspiration. O manyu, O Indra,
O Varuna, O Jataveda, I am guilty of remiss toward you,
and I pray bless me with the strength of body, mind and
soul.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 84 815






[Names: Ayam, Manyo]
Here I am all for you, O spirit of courage and
self assertion, challenging sustainer of all the world,
come turn to me universal spirit. O spirit of awesome
passion and undaunted self-identity, wielder of the
darkness and destroy evil. Pray inspire and awaken me,






[Names: Juhomi]
Pray come forward and be on my right side in

your own place, and together we shall eliminate all

darkness and adversities. I offer you the best, foremost


and sweetest honeyed homage of the self, and we shall
together drink of the joy of victory in closest intimacy.


Mandala 10/Sukta 84








[Names: Manyu, Devata, Tapasa, Rshi, Tvaya, Tigmesava, Marutvah, Marutva, Agnirupah, Agnirupa]
O Manyu, spirit of vaulting passion without
compromise with negativities, may our leading lights,
warriors of universal rectitude, riding the chariot with
you, breaking through paths of advancement, joyous,
like lazer beams, weapons sharp and blazing, move
forward like flames of fire.






[Names: Agniriva, Hatvaya, Ssatrun]
forces, spirit of forbearance and challenge, invoked and
called upon, come to lead our battles of life, face the
enemies to destroy the adversaries and share the wealth,
beauty and goodness of life with all. O spirit
comprehending lustrous light of life, move forward,
push the adversities back and throw out the adversaries.






[Names: Sahasva, Ugram]
O wrath of justice, rectitude and dispensation,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 84 817


eliminating the forces of negation. Blazing is your face
and courage, none to obstruct and stay your advance.
You are the master, all in control, leader of the forces of
predominance, sole born of divinity without an equal.








[Names: Akrttaruk]
Manyu, you are the one unique among many,
invoked and universally adored. Pray instruct, inspire,
prepare and perfect every community to fight and win
against negativity and adversity. Your lustre unimpaired
and unchallengeable, with you as leader and inspirer,
let us raise the blazing battle cry and raise the flag of


at GU




[Names: Vijesakrdindra, Priyam, Uncontradicted]
Indra, O Manyu, be our protector and promoter here
throughout life. For sure, O spirit of courage,
forbearance and victory, we adore you, dear and
adorable of all. We know where you arise from, fountain
head of the lust for life, inspiration and victory: Dharma


and the universal love of life.






[Names: Abhitya, Kratva, Puruhita]
Twin brother of the ardour and glory of life,
thunderbolt of divine humanity, unfailing pointed arrow,
you bear the higher ardour of human love and passion
for life. O Manyu, sweetest companion of living
splendour universally invoked and adored, come to us
with the force of unfailing yajnic action in the heat of
the grand battle scene of life.






[Names: Samsrstam, Bhiyam, Varunasca, Ssatravah]
May Varuna, highest lord of life loved and
worshipped with rational choice, and Manyu, highest
ardour of life, give us integrated material and spiritual
wealth of both this world of humanity and the light of
divinity, and may the enemies, negativities and
adversities, fear stricken at heart and defeated, run off
and dissolve into the darkness of their origin.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 819


Mandala 10/Sukta 85








[Names: Soma, Surya, Devah, Somarkau, Chandrama, Marriage, Vadhuvasa, Yakshma, Surya, Savitri, Devatah, Rshi, Satyenottabhita, Rtenadityastisthanti, Sritah]
The earth is sustained by the force of its own
identity within the truth of divine law, the heaven is
sustained by the sun within the same truth of divine
law, the Adityas are sustained by Rtam, the natural law
of Divinity, and Soma is sustained in the highest heaven
of the same law.






[Names: Somenaditya, Atho]
The Adityas are mighty by Soma, divine energy
and law of existence. By Soma, the earth is great and
adorable. And in the closest environment of these stars
Soma is abiding in concentrations as sustaining energy.




[Names: Somam, Somam]
§nani kascana.




The person who drinks the soma juice feels that
the herb which they crush and squeeze for the juice is
soma. But the Soma which the divine sages know and




[Names: Acchadvidhanairgupito, Gravnamicchrnvan]
vah.


Preserved by divine ordinances, protected by the
measures of Brhat Samans, Soma is guarded safely by
somapalas. O Soma, you abide somewhere in divinity
hearing the roar of thunder and clouds, no one earthly
can drink or experience the ecstasy of your celestial
nature and identity.






[Names: Vayuh, Somasya, Somas, Vayu]
O divine Soma, when the sun rays drink you as
the moon in the first, dark half of the month, then you
come up to full growth as the moon in the second, bright
half of the month. The wind, cosmic energy, is the
protector of soma in its place. Thus the month is the
constituent of years and presents the full form of the
two equal fortnights of the moon.


Note: Mantras from 6 to 16 are a metaphor
which can be interpreted as wedding of the dawn in the
context of nature and the Veda, and as wedding of a


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 821


maiden and relevance of the Veda in the human context.
The maiden and the dawn are synonymous.






[Names: Raibhyasidanudeyi, Suryaya]
Raibhi verses of the Veda are the bride’s
wedding gifts, Narashansi verses, the bride’s ornaments,
grace and good fortune, her bridal robes sanctified by
exemplary verses relating to the good life.






[Names: Cittira, Dyaurbhumih]
When Surya, the dawn, the new bride, goes to
the house of her groom, then her noble mind and thought
is her resting couch, her gracious eye, the collyrium,
and the earth and heaven, her treasure.






[Names: Stoma]
Hymns of adoration are the axle of her chariot
wheels, music of the hymns, her head scarf and cushion,
the Ashvins, prana and udana energies, are friends of
the groom, and Agni is the first call of maturity.








[Names: Suryam, Samsantim]
Soma is the proposer and Ashvins, pranic
energies, the first attraction and attention, when Savita,
giver of life and light, gives away the bride, love-lorn
at heart, to the groom.






[Names: Mano, Sukravanadvahavastam]
The mind is her bridal chariot, bright sky its
canopy, the sun and moon the motive powers when the
bride, like the glorious dawn, goes to her own home
with the groom.






[Names: Rksamabhyamabhihitau, Srotram]
Sun and moon, both equal and glorious, yoked
and celebrated by Rks and Samans, move the chariot
on the new procession. Let revelation of the Word and
infinite Space be the movement towards advancement,
and let the path be both tumultuous and restful over the
moving and the unmoving world unto the light of
heaven.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 823






[Names: Suci, Ghatah, Suryarohat]
Surya, the new bride, rides the chariot of the
mind when she moves to the house of the groom (with
her dreams of the future). When she moves, her pure
ears are the wheels (on which the chariot moves because
the mind moves in response to the stimulants of the
senses) and the wind, psychic energy of thought, is the
axis of the wheels.






[Names: Aghasu]
The bridal procession of Surya proceeds which
Savita, her father, starts. The bullocks are made to move
the chariot in Magha constellations and the bride is
inducted into the groom’s home in Phalguni






[Names: Yadasvina, Visve, Suryayah, Anu]
O Ashvins, married couple, when you come
together by the three wheeled mental chariot of Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas constituents of personality in balance,




asking for fulfilment of the wedding of Surya, let all
the Vishvedevas, nobilities around and the mind and
senses within, know and approve your intent and
purpose, and then let Pusha, future progeny for
sustenance, select the life giving parents for the arrival.






[Names: Yadayatam, Suryamupa, Kvaikam]
O Ashvins, protectors and promoters of life’s
good, noble men and women of reason and passion,
when you come to the bride, darling choice of the groom,
where is one of the wheels of your chariot and where
abide the two for the purpose of benediction?






[Names: Athaikam]
O Surya, bride of the new home, the sages of
knowledge know the two wheels of your life’s chariot
according to the seasons, 1.e., your words and actions
according to your moods and circumstances. The third,
thought, reflection and intentions, is hidden in the depths
of the mind which only exceptional master minds know.
And that one is a mystery.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 825




[Names: Surydayai, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra]
This homage I do and offer to Surya, the dawn,
the divinities, the loving friend and the wise for the sake
of intelligent progeny and to all those who know and






[Names: Purvaparam, Visvanyanyo]
These two, sun and moon, move on in sequential
order by their own power and virtue, playing happily
like innocent children and go on participating and
contributing to the divine yajna of the cosmos. Of these,
one watches and enlightens all regions of the world and
the other rises again and again according to the season
and thereby setting the seasons in order.






[Names: Navonavo, Bhagam]
The moon rising again and again ever anew,
proclaiming days and lunar dates, comes ahead of the
dawn in the dark fortnight. While coming it brings its
share of the havi for divinities and gives long life to
biological and human life.








[Names: Sukimsukam, Salmalim]
Welcome, O bride, bright dawn of a new
morning, ride and rule the golden, well structured, well
geared chariot of ahomely world, beautiful and glowing
like a shalmali garden in bloom and turn it into paradisal
bliss of immortal joy for the husband and the family.


fas eeu




[Names: Udirsvatah, Anyamiccha]
Rise from here. This girl is now married as wife
to a husband. Thanks and salutations I offer to the master
of the world’s wealth with homage and words of
reverence and adoration. Love this girl, your other self,
born, bred and raised to fullness in the parental home.
She is now a part of your life. Know her, accept and
take her as a complement of your self from the very
birth by nature, culture and future growth of your life.






[Names: Udirsvato, Ajyamiccha]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 827


Rise from here and now, O master of the wealth
of anew world, we honour and adore you with reverence
and homage. Love this bride, this other self of yours,
fully mature and cultured, accept, take and join her in
the role of husband.






[Names: Anrksara, Samaryama]
Let our paths be simple, natural and comfortable,
free from obstacles, by which our friends may win the
goal of their choice. May Aryama, lord of vision, justice
and rectitude, and Bhaga, lord of power, prosperity and
glory, lead us on to fulfilment. O divinities of nature
and humanity, may our married life be happy, noble and






[Names: Varunasya, Varunas, Rtasya]
I free you from the bonds of Varuna, discipline
of virginity observed in the spirit of justice, freedom
and responsibility in the parental home, into which
Savita, lord giver of life and natural growth unto
maturity, had bound you in full dedication without




inhibition, and I settle and establish you with your
husband into a new life of natural conjugal order in the
world of noble action free from sin, violence and
violation of the law.




[Names: Preto, Yatheyamindra]
gasati.

I release you from here, the parental home and
its discipline, but not from there, the husband’s home,
where I establish you duly bound in the new conjugal
law and discipline so that, O Indra, O noble husband,
she may be the proud and fortunate mother of noble






[Names: Pusa, Grhan]
May Pusha, the husband who would maintain
you, having accepted your hand, lead you to the new
home. May the Ashvins, other leading personalities,
escort you by chariot to the husband’s home. O bride,
go to the new home and new families as mistress of the
new home and new family so that you become the
darling ruler of the new hearth and home. You are come
to anew yajnic order, and you speak a new language of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 829




[Names: Ilha]
Here in the new home may your new love and
happiness increase to new heights with family and
children. In this new home keep awake for the good of
the children and the family. Here with this husband of
yours join in body and mind, and both of you enjoy
good fellowship, company and converse till full age and
fulfilment in yajnic life.






[Names: Nilalohitam, Edhante]
Then the blood grows dark and red, love and
desire vibrates for fulfilment, the near kinsmen of this
bride swell with hope and expectation, and the husband
is bound in new responsibilities.



[Names: Para, Krtyaisa]
Cast away the sense of sin and impurity, share




wealth and knowledge with and from the holy and wise,
and when the bride has taken the seven steps to conjugal
duty, she joins the husband heart and soul.






[Names: Patirya]
The body becomes polluted, injured and
injurious by that impious act if the husband touches or
wants to touch his body with the clothes of the wife in
her period.




[Names: Punastan]
agatah.

Those consumptive ailments which afflict the
health and handsomeness of the husband or the beauty
and fertility of the wife from birth, let the sages and
brilliant specialists of yajna treat and cure upto the
source whence, otherwise, they may come and afflict
again.





[Names: Sugebhirdurgamatitamapa]
And those which overtake and afflict the wedded


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 831


couple on their course of life must not come, and may
all adversities, wants and malignities disappear and go
down to far off depths beyond recurrence.


[Names: Sumangaliriyam, Saubhagyamasyai]
Auspicious is this bride, gracious, please come,
see her to wish her all good fortune in life, and having




[Names: Trstametat]
Matrimony? It is roughshod, it is thorny bitter,
all barbs, all poison, it is dangerous to flirt with it. Only
the wise youth of divine vision who knows and realises
the light and sanctity of Surya, he deserves the prize he






Hope, fear and debasement, frustration, anger
and cruelty, and the irony that cuts too deep to the very
core, these are various moods and manners of women.




These the wise vision knows and corrects, purifies or
excuses with superior understanding.






[Names: Grbhnami, Bhago]
I take your hand for the sake of good fortune so
that you may live a long full life till old age with me,
your husband. Bhaga, lord of glory, Aryama, lord of
cosmic order, Savita lord giver of life and light, and
Purandhi, divine beneficence, have given you to me for
the creation of a happy home and family.





[Names: Sepam]
Pushan, O lord of creativity and growth, inspire
her, the most auspicious wife, in whom men sow the
seed of life, who, moved with love and desire for
progeny, surrenders herself with body and mind and men
too with love and passion enter into the conjugal rite of




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 833


[Names: Tubhyamagre, Punah]
saha.


O lord of divine fire, Agni, parents bring Surya,
the bright bride to you with her gifts and ornaments. O
yajna fire, pray give back the bride to the husband
alongwith her potential to bear children for the husband.






[Names: Dirghayurasya, Saradah]
Agni then gives Surya, now a wife, when the
wedding ceremony is complete, to the husband along
with her health and age, honour and lustre of life with
the blessing: Long live the man who is her husband for






[Names: Somah, Trtiyo, Agniste, Agnist]
O Surya, bright girl, your first protective and
promotive guardian is Soma, nature’s energy which
leads you to puberty. The next is Gandharva which
energises you with fertility. The third is Agni which
inspires you with love and passion. And your fourth
guardian is your husband, son of man, for the extension
of humanity.








[Names: Somo, Rayim]
Soma gives you to Gandharva, Gandharva gives
you to Agni, and O dear bride, Agni then gives this wife
to me, the husband, and with her gives me progeny and
wealth, honour and excellence of family life.






[Names: Thaiva, Krilantau]
O man and wife, live here itself in the family
joined together, never separate, live and enjoy a full
life in your own home playing and celebrating life with
children and grand children.






[Names: Adurmangalih]
May Prajapati bless us with children, may
Aryama bring us honour and glory upto the completion
of a long full age, may the blessed wife abide with grace
in the husband’s home of paradisal bliss, and may there
be all round peace and well being for humans and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 85 835






[Names: Aghoracaksurapatighnyedhi, Siva, Virasurdevrkama]
Be lady of the gracious eye for the husband. Be
kind and good to the animals, noble at heart and brilliant
in mind and sense of honour and propriety. Be the
mother of brave and noble children. Love your
husband’s brothers. Be cheerful and blissful. Let there
be all round peace and total well being for us all, peace
and well being for humans and animals all.





[Names: Imam, Dasasyam]
Lord of glory and fertility, Indra, bountiful ruler

of the world and the home, bless this bride for noble


progeny, honour and glory. Give her ten children, and
let the husband be the eleventh, as guardian over all.





[Names: Samrajni, Nanandari]
Be a darling queen for the father-in-law, be a
favourite queen for the mother-in-law, be a loving queen




for the sister-in-law, and a kind queen for the brothers-




[Names: Samanjantu]
nau.


Listen and know all ye Vishvedevas, divinities
of nature and nobilities of humanity, like the waters of
two streams our hearts and mind are one. May the Vayu
join us as one personality. May the lord controller of
the world make us one personality. May mother
Sarasvati of the divine voice join and proclaim us as
one. May the Vishvedevas join and integrate our hearts
and minds into one inseparable personality.


Mandala 10/Sukta 86
[Names: Indra, Devata, Vrshakapi]
Aindra (7, 13, 23), and Indrani (2-6, 9, 10, 15-18) Rshis






[Names: Yatramadadvrsakapiraryah]
The creatures having been created flowed forth,
streamed too far and strayed from acknowledgement of
the creator Indra, where Vrshapkapi, the human soul,
jivatma, top master among the created, rejoiced among


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 837


My friend and favourite Indra, great and
generous, is supreme over the whole creation, says
Prakrti, the mother consort.






[Names: Para, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Indra, far too far you move from Vrshakapi who
anywhere else other than Indra’s presence to enjoy the
soma joy of life... Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Kimayam, Yasma]
What has this Vrshakapi done to you, this golden
green natural, who needs initiation but who is the top
master spirit of the created, toward whom you show so


Indra is supreme over the whole creation.







[Names: Yamimam]
and favour so much falls a victim to greed which crushes
him in its jaws as a hound seizes a boar by the ear.


Indra is supreme over the whole creation.





[Names: Priya, Siro]
And all my dear forms of existence wrought into
head down, I would not be good and never allow him
anything too easily for this sinner.


Indra is supreme over all the world.





There is no other creative consort of Indra other
[Names: Prakrti]
more pliant, more responsive, more attractive and more


Indra is supreme over all the world.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 839




[Names: Bhasanme]
Mother Nature, Prakrti, blessed and blissful
fertility and giver of virility, whatever is to be shall be.
My breast, my loins, my head all vibrate with energy,
your gift. Indra is supreme over all.





[Names: Surapatni]
O lady of lovely arms and nimble fingers, wavy


hair and ample zone, divine consort of omnipotence,


Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Aviramiva, Ssararurabhi, Utahamasmi, Marutsakha]
This naughty thinks of me as naught, bereft of
the brave, while I am blest with heroes, and I am the
creative consort of Indra and friend of the Maruts,
stormy troops of the winds of nature.


Indra is supreme over all.


840






[Names: Samhaotram, Vedha]
The creative force in original time receives the
cosmic seed and stirs into action for the dynamics of
creative evolution. For this very reason, Prakrti,
impregnated with the cosmic seed, is exalted as the
consort of Indra, mother of the universal brave,
controller of the laws of existence.


Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Indranimasu]
So have I heard of Indrani among the creative
dames as the mother of glory. Never shall her lord, Indra,
ever die of old age like others, men of mortal nature.
Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Nahamindrani, Yasyedamapyam]
O divine consort, Indrani, I never enjoy the play
of existence without my friend and companion,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 841


Vrshakapi, generous playful humanity, since the havi
given by him and given for nature and humanity goes
up and reaches the divinities which I share.


Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Vrsakapayi, Ghasat]
O Vrshakapayi, mother Prakrti, provider of
living beings, opulent and abundant power, mother of
noble children and giver of joy and bliss, mother fertility,
Indra would ultimately take over and consume whatever
dear, creative and inspiring havi you would offer here
in the created world.


Indra is supreme over all the world.






[Names: Utahamadmi]
Natural powers of creative mother Prakrti ripen,
mature and give up fifteen evolutionary forms of matter,
energy and mind with twenty parts of the biological
systems which I swallow at the completion of the
existential cycle and I feel satisfied with the
involutionary consumption of the Rtam and Satyam
modes of existence. Indra is supreme over all.








[Names: Vrsabho, Manthasta]
Indra, just as a sharp horned bull bellows and
lords over the herds of cattle with pride, so may the
joyous process of the creative cycle which the dedicated
celebrant and loving Prakrti enacts for you give you
satisfaction and joy at heart as lord and master of the


Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Sedise]
That person does not rule over the self whose
hedonic mind roams and rambles around among objects
of sensual pleasure. That person rules as master of the
self whose radiant mind in a state of peace and freedom
blossoms and expands in spiritual wakefulness. Indra
is Supreme over all.






MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 86 843


That person whose radiant mind in a state of
peace and freedom blossoms and expands in spiritual
wakefulness does not rule the world of Prakrti. The
master that rules the world of Prakrti is the power whose
ecstatic presence in peace and sovereignty pervades in
and over space and time. Indra is supreme over all.






[Names: Ayamindra, Asim]
Indra, lord omnipresent and omnipotent, let this
Vrshakapi, lover of joyous showers and shaker of
thoughts of evil, know and realise that the duality
between the self and the super self is ended. Then he
will attain the soul inspiring pranic energy, creative
intelligence, new spirit of yajnic performance and full
achievement of the saving light of divinity.


Indra is supreme over all the world.






[Names: Ayamemi, Pibami]
Perceiving the light of knowledge, building up
my score of yajnic action, I come to the omnificent
vibrant presence of divinity, and I drink of the nectar of
the light and life of purity, eternity and direct realisation
of divine communion. Indra is greater than the world


of existence.






[Names: Dhanvaca, Nedtyaso]
The desert land, the dead-wood or the dark
they must be given up. Come closer to your own homes,
shelter of the closest divinity. Indra is supreme over all
the world.






[Names: Punarehi]
O Vrshakapi, come again and both of us would
create good things for your peace and comfort in well
being. Thus destroying the state of dream and sleep,
this lover of showers and breeze, Vrshakapi comes home
by the paths of existence and piety again and again.
Indra is supreme over all the world.






[Names: Yadudanco]
O Vrshakapi, O Indra, when the higher souls


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 845


come rising to the state of peace in the divine home,
then where does the sinner, the vexatious and the seeker
roaming around go, to what state of life?


Great is Indra, supreme over all the world.






[Names: Parsurha, Bhadram]
The creative and catalytic power of omniscient
modes of matter, energy and thought for physical,
biological and intelligent forms of existence. O noble
soul, blessed be the mother who suffers the travail to
bear the transmigrant soul on way to earthly pleasure
and pain and then the bliss divine. Great is Indra, greater
than all, supreme over all the world.


Mandala 10/Sukta 87


[Names: Agni, Rakshoha, Devata, Payu, Bharadvaja, Rshi, Raksohanam, Mitram, Mitra, Sarma, Sisano, Agnih, Agni]
I sprinkle the holy fire with ghrta and dedicate


myself to Agni, light and fire of life, destroyer of evil
and giver of victory, friend and saviour most boundless,




and there I find peace and freedom for life eternal. May
Agni, sharp and blazing with yajnic actions of creativity,
protect and promote us against hate and enmity, violence
and obstruction day and night.






[Names: Ayodamstro]
Omnipresent spirit of life and protection of
existence, blazing with flames of fire and fierce with
jaws of steel, destroy the anti-life elements with the
touch of your lazer beams, seize the agents of death
with flames, catch the blood suckers and flesh eaters
with the jaws and crush them to naught.






[Names: Ubhobhayavinnapa, Utantarikse]
Destroyer of the negative, refining the positive,
commanding both creative and corrective powers for
protective and punitive purposes, promote life both here
and hereafter. O refulgent ruler of the world, fly over
the skies and, with the force of both power and
persuasion, overwhelm the violent and destructive, and
either correct and integrate them or throw them out.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 847






[Names: Yajnairisuh, Tabhirvidhya]
Organising the armed forces into order, alliance
and submission by discussion, cooperation and
submission, shining and updating the forces by the
addition of lightning weapons and thereby paralysing
the heart core of the terrorist forces, break their violent






[Names: Agne, Jataveda]
through the cover, camouflage, secret shelters and
hideouts of the elements of evil, violence and sabotage
with fatal light and penetrative power, split up every
section and every unit of it to bits, disperse and destroy
them all, and let the fire which consumes the dead collect
and consume the remains and reduce them to ash.








[Names: Yatredanim, Yadvantarikse]
awa




[Names: Sarva]
And now, whenever you see, O ruler all
knowing, Agni, the enemies of life, elements of darkness
and destruction, covered in clusters or roaming around
or even flying in the sky by paths of air, then sharp,
shining and instantly shooting, destroy the enemy with
a fatal shot of thunderous missile.






[Names: Utalabdham, Sosucana]
Agni, first and foremost power, bright and
blazing, knowing and commanding over everything
born, with the strike of your force, power and
punishment, release the innocents caught up in the
clutches of the forces of violence and terror, destroy
the carnivorous, blood suckers and eaters into the flesh,
and let them be thrown to the vociferous vultures.






[Names: Tama]
Agni, expose and proclaim right here whoever


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 849


be the violent force that does this damage. O youthful
power ever watchful of humanity, subject it to the fuel
fire and destroy it that all may see.






[Names: Tiksnenagne, Himsram]
O Agni, blazing ruling power of nature and the
world, ever alert, ever watchful of humanity, with
penetrative and comprehensive eye, guard, protect and
promote the yajnic order of society enacted and
proceeding so clearly and transparently, and let it
progress for the achievement of wealth, honour and
excellence for all the people. Unsparing destroyer of
the negatives, shining, and burning the destructive, let





[Names: Nrcaksa, Tasyagne]
Agni, all watchful power, watch for the wicked
enemy hidden among the people, crush his three prime
forces of intelligence, arms and follow up. With your
blazing fire and passion, break his back three ways,




financial, manpower and allies. Throw up and throw
out the forces of violence and destruction root and






[Names: Triryatudhanah, Tamarcisa]
whoever violates the law of truth with the force of
untruth, must suffer threefold shackles of your law and
power, justice, punishment and deterrence. Crashing on
him with the light and power of truth, crushing him
down openly before the law abiding and socially
dedicated people, root out the evil and the violent.






[Names: Tadagne, Atharvavajjyotisa]
O Agni, cast the same eye of light on the law
abiding celebrant of the social order by which you watch
the violent and antisocial elements treading on the peace
and order of society. As an enlightened power
undisturbed at heart, with your divine light and power,
light up or burn out the callous and violent destroyer of
truth and law.


13.


MANDAL - 10/ SUKTA - 87 851




[Names: Yadagne, Manyormanasah]
Agni, the sharp and shooting words with which


fighting rivals revile and execrate, the rough and raging
words which the poet creates for irony, the piercing pain
that issues forth in words from the mind in a state of
passion, with that language chastise and strike the
demonic violent deep to the heart core (yourself


14.





[Names: Para, Pararcisa]
Agni, shatter the violent with heat, destroy the


demonic with passion, destroy the destroyers with blaze,
and destroy the devitalizers with light.


|






[Names: Pardadya, Vacastenam, Ssarava]
Let the divinities break off the crooked, let the
cruel curses visit back upon the crooked curser, let the
arrows reach the heart core of the thief with the right
message, and let the saboteur suffer universal bondage
with loss of freedom under the rule of Agni.






[Names: Sirsani]
Whoever feeds himself upon the flesh of
humanity, whoever prospers by animal wealth at the
cost of animal wealth by destroying it, whoever carries
off the milk of the inviolable cow and destroys the
fertility of the earth, O Agni, strike off their heads with
light and passion for truth.






[Names: Samvatsarinam, Pityusamagne]
Agni, watchful guardian of humanity, let the
oppressor not drink milk of the cow for a year, and if
the oppressor drinks of the milk and excessively too,
punish him with your flame unto the heart core.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 853






[Names: Visam, Parainan]
Let the oppressors of the cows, earth and the
environment drink poison instead of milk. Let the
oppressors of Aditi, mother, sister and nature suffer in
isolation. O Savita, saviour soul of renewal and
replenishment, throw them off to ruin and let them be
denied their share of herbs and trees. (Those who
oppress the creative and productive powers of natural
sustenance of life and pollute the sources of energy
themselves deny the sustenance because that is the law
of Agni in nature and life).






[Names: Sanadagne, Anu]
Agni, you destroy the oppressors since time
immorial. Never can the evil dominate over you in their
battles against the good. Let the flesh eaters alongwith
the cruel and wicked be destroyed, and may they never
escape the strike of your divine punishment and natural








[Names: Tvam, Prati, Samsam, Sosucato]
Agni, pray protect us from below, from above,
from behind and in front against the oppressors facing
us. May those unaging flames shining and blazing burn
down the malignant and sinful enemies of life to ashes.






[Names: Pascat, Sakhe]
all round, from the back and front, from above and
below, as now and hereafter, by the light of your vision
and wisdom. O Agni, unaging friend, immortal divinity,
save the mortals, save your friend, bless us all mortals
to live a happy life till a full age of fulfilment.




[Names: Pari, Dhrsadvarnam]
ravatam.


Agni, day in and day out all time, we celebrate
and adore you, eternal giver of fulfilment, wise, resolute
and brave, redoubtable vanquisher of the mischievous
and destroyer of the destroyers of life and nature.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 87 855






[Names: Visena]
Agni, with pervasive and expansive light, heat
and penetrative flames and with beams of constant
action against the negativities of life and society, pray
burn up the crooked and destructive elements of life in
every field of their activity.








[Names: Pratyagne]
Agni, burn up the oppressive and destructive
alliances and combinations of the negativities of life
and nature on the prowl looking for where to strike. O
power all intelligent and wise, with holy thoughts and
prayers, I invoke and exhort you. Arise, O power
indomitable, and strike against the killers.






[Names: Yatudhanasya]
Agni, universal spirit of light and fire, creator,
protector and destroyer, refulgent ruler of nature, life
and society, with your love and passion for life and
goodness and with your wrath against evil, sabotage




and negativity, seize, cripple and all round destroy the
strength, vigour, valour and resistance of the negative
and destructive forces of evil and wickedness, lurking,
working and persisting in nature, life and society. Save
the good and destroy the demons.


Mandala 10/Sukta 88








[Names: Surya, Vaishvanaragni, Devata, Murdhanvan, Angirasa, Vamadevya, Rshi, Havispantamajaram, Tasya]
Devas, the divines of humanity and divinities
of nature, with food and reverence, offer delicious,
expansive, loved and solemnly dedicated havi into the
holy fire which rises to the skies and reaches the sun.
Thus do they exalt Agni so that they may well be, rise
and exalt in the gracious order of Agni under the divine
shelter and support of the order.





[Names: Girnam]
The world of existence lay deeply engulfed and


covered in the darkness of the night of Pralaya,
annihilation, and then on the rise of Agni, Lord Supreme


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 857


of light and life, it rose and manifested: Akasha, time-
space continuum manifested, and then others followed,
earth, light and heat, waters, herbs and trees all arose,
and all the devas, divine spirits of nature, rejoiced in
the love and friendship of this Lord Supreme, Agni.






[Names: Devebhirnvisito]
Inspired by Devas and lighting the fire of yajnas,
I adore and exalt Agni, lord unaging and eternal, infinite,
who, by his self-refulgence, pervades this earth and
heaven and expands both heaven and earth and the
middle regions of the skies.






I adore and exalt Agni who is the first, original
and efficient cause of the cosmic yajna, loved and
celebrated by the devas, whom the best of men with
cherished love and choice sprinkle and serve with sacred
ghrta, who creates, shapes and rules the world of flying,
moving, non-moving and revolving objects and living
beings. That is Agni, Jataveda, self-refulgent and








[Names: Yajjatavedo]
O Jataveda, Agni, who abide and shine on top
of the world with the sun, with our thoughts, words and
holy songs we adore and worship you. You are adorable,
worthy of worship, pervasive all over heaven and earth.






[Names: Murdha, Mayamiu]
Agni as Vaishvanara is awake and vibrates as
the prime reality and spirit of existence at night when
the whole world sleeps. Then in the morning, rising with
the dawn, it shines as the sun. It is but the wondrous
work of the highest of adorables, cosmic Maya, that it
thus moves and vibrates at the fastest, knowing and
watching all actions and movements of the world of
moving and non-moving objects.






[Names: Drsenyo, Tasminnagnau]
Wondrous in form, Agni, who, refulgent with


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 859


its own grandeur, shines in heaven as the light most
gracious is the divinity into whom, in sacred fire form,
all devas, divinities of nature and humanity, guardians
of our health and body, offer yajnic oblations of havi
with the chant of Vedic mantras.






[Names: Suktavakam]
The devas, noble yajakas, first chant the divine
Word, then they light the fire and then they prepare and
offer the havi. That Agni is the adorable lord of them
all, guardian and promoter of health and age. That the
heaven receives, that the earth receives, and that the
waters receive, and that all of them realise, the pervasive
power and energiser.






Agni which all the divine powers of the universe
create and serve, into which all worlds of the universe
offer their oblations at the cosmic yajna of evolution
and devolution, that Agni, radiant and natural ordainer,
lights and energises this earth and heaven with its glory
and self refulgence.








[Names: Stomena, Tamu]
By mantric power and their own potential the
divine powers in heaven create and raise Agni which
pervades earth and sky too, thus creating it in three ways:
Agni or fire on earth, Vayu or electricity in the sky, and
Aditya or light in heaven. This same Agni of all universal
forms well matures and ripens herbs and all vegetation






[Names: Yadedenamadadhuryajniyaso, Yada]
When the divine powers, performers of cosmic
yajna, place this sun, child of the refulgence of Aditi,
mother Infinity, in the heavenly region, then it becomes
two, moving together as twofold power, Agni and
Vaishvanara, sun and dawn, and as they pervade all
regions of the world, so do all regions of the world see




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 861




[Names: Visvasma, Agnim, Agni]
Devas, divine powers, create and make the solar
form of Vaishvanara Agni, and make it the flag sign of
the day for the sake of the whole world, and the sun,
radiating, lights up the bright dawns and dispels the
darkness of the night with its light, unveiling the day.






[Names: Vaisvanaram, Naksatram]
Wise and visionary Devas, adorable divine
powers, create the unaging Vaishvanara Agni, the
ancient star unalterable and inviolable, moving as the
ruling star of space, blazing and expansive.





With Vedic mantras we invoke and adore Agni,
Vaishvanara, light divine ever shining bright, the very
eye of omniscience which, with its might and grandeur,
enlightens and overwhelms both heaven and earth, the
ultimate light and bliss above and below, the end and
the foundation both.








[Names: Tabhyamidam]
I hear there are two paths of life in existence:
Pitryana, the path of average mortals to earthly bliss,
and Devayana, the path of divine souls to divine bliss.
By these does the world of vibrant life travel
transmigrating from birth by father and mother to death
and attains whatever is between earth and heaven.




[Names: Sirsato]
Two, earth and heaven, together bear Agni born
on top, vibrant and radiating from the highest heaven,
and that abides immanent and pervasive all over the
worlds of existence, unremissive, radiant and divinely






[Names: Yatra]
Where both terrestrial agni and supraterrestrial


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 88 863


22111, both high priests of yajna, communicate and
commingle then, for us, which one of these excels and
proclaims the distinction? When yajakas do perform the
yajna and serve and celebrate Agni together on the vedi,
who would speak to us of the distinction?






[Names: Katyagnayah, Suryasah, Suryasa, Nopaspijam]
How many are the fires? How many the suns?
How many the dawns? How many the waters? O
enlightened sages, I say this not out of curiosity, I ask
you this in all seriousness for the sake of knowledge.






[Names: Tavaddadhatyupa]
As long as the all moving glorious Vayu, the
electric form of Agni, with radiant sun rays bears and
wears the face of dawn as its banner of the day, so long
would the holy yajaka, the Brahmana, go to the yajna
vedi and sit and offer the fragrant havi in honour of the
terrestrial fire, the high priest of yajna.


Note: The answer to these questions is given in
Rgveda 8, 58, 2: The same one Agni shines and blazes
in many forms, The same one sun shines in all lights of




the universe, the same one dawn rises over all this world,
and the same one lord of existence manifests in all forms
of the world,


Mandala 10/Sukta 89






[Names: Indra, Varunau, Devate, Renu, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Indram, Indra]
Adore and celebrate Indra, highest over
humanity, who overwhelms the lights of the world with
his grandeur and rules over the ends of the earth, who,
watchful sustainer of humanity, pervades and fills the
worlds of the universe by his excellences and, all
overpowering, exceeds the oceans of earth and space
by his glory and grandeur.






[Names: Suryah, Surya, Atisthantamapasyam]
the greatest, he moves the worlds of existence like
chariot wheels and, destroying the deepest darknesses
of the world with his refulgence, keeps the dynamic
universe in ceaseless flow like a particle in a wave of


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 89 865








[Names: Samanamasma, Indrascikaya, Indrascika]
Worship Indra, constant, evident and immanent,
greater than heaven and earth, infinite, adorable ever
new, who, as primary foundation and ultimate master,
knows all that are born in existence and neither deserts
friends nor hurts the devotees.






[Names: Indraya]
I sing songs of praise and make incessant
streams of water flow from the oceans of space and sky
in honour of Indra who, with his cosmic power and
actions, sustains the heaven and earth in motion like
wheels of a chariot held in balance by the axle.








[Names: Apantamanyustrpalaprabharma, Somo]
Boundless in passion and potential, impetuous
in action, mighty mover and shaker, awfully powerful,
strongly armed, simple and natural, creative and
inspiring like Soma, is Indra. Not all the winds and
weapons of the world, not all the lights and blazes, no
measures and comparisons of the finite world, can face,
equal, much less exceed and overcome Indra.






[Names: Yadasya]
Neither heaven and earth, nor sky, nor space,
nor clouds and mountains, equal his might, creative and
inspiring Soma as he is, especially when his power and
passion, overwhelming all, shatters the strongest and
shakes the firmest fixed.






[Names: Jaghana, Bibheda]
Destroying the demon of darkness like lightning
striking the woods, Indra shatters the strongholds of
evil. He breaks the clouds and mountains like a little


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 89 867


new earthen jar, and as he sets floods of rivers aflow, so
with his own waves of divine energy, he lets the streams
of psychic energy and spiritual enlightenment flow for
the devotee.






[Names: Tvam, Varunasya, Varunas, Mitrasya, Mitras, Mitram, Mitra]
You alone are the constant and magnificent giver
of bliss, and you alone, like the sword severing every
knot and joint of negativity, destroy the evil and
crookedness of life for those good people who do not
violate the light and law of Mitra and Varuna, universal
spirit of love, friendship and judgement and for those
who do not ever deceive a real sincere friend of all time.






[Names: Nyamitresu, Varunam, Varuna, Sisthi]
And against those crooked men of unholy ways
who deceive the friend, violate the progressive man of
justice and rectitude, hurt dedicated men of positive
social support and oppose the man of judgement and
enlightenment, O lord of power and progress, Indra,
prepare the thunderbolt, instant, overwhelming and
blazing but just and unquestionable, and strike such
unfriendly and negative forces without delay.








[Names: Indro, Indrah]
Indra rules over the heavens, Indra rules over
the earth, Indra rules over the waters of earth and space,
Indra rules over mountains and the clouds, and Indra
rules over all our actions and ambitions. And Indra is
the spirit and power for the rising wise on way to
progress in times of peace and prosperity to be invoked
and worshipped for protection and preservation of what
has been gained and for the achievement of that what
has yet to be gained further. (Yoga is achievement, and
Kshema is preservation and protection of what has been
achieved, and both these are two aspects of progress.)






[Names: Praktubhya]
Indra is far greater than the nights of existence,
greater than days, space, and the bounds of space. He
transcends the expansive currents of energy, the bounds
of the universe, the flowing flux of existence, and all
definitions of the flux in form.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 89 869






[Names: Sosucatya, Usaso]
Like the blazing flames of dawn dispelling the
dark, let your boundless thunderbolt strike. With that
blazing thunder, like a shot from heaven pierce the forces
of hate and enmity.





[Names: Anvaha, Anvindram]
Indeed, days and months, herbs and forests,
clouds and mountains, shining skies and earth and the


oceans and vapours of space, all move and proceed in
accordance with Indra as it emerges into manifestation.






[Names: Karhi, Mitrakruvo, Sayante]
Where is that punitive power of yours, Indra,
and when does it strike, the power that picks up and
shatters the sinner, the criminal, and the perpetrator of




evil, and struck by which the betrayers of friends, felled
and dead, lie on the ground like cattle carcasses.








[Names: Satriyanto, Andhenamitrastamasa]
Enemies of humanity, obstructionist forces,
highly organised gangs which afflict us, may all
unfriendly forces suffer deep darkness on their way, and
may the powers of enlightenment and progressive
culture face them and overcome them.





[Names: Imamaghosannavasa]
May all felicitative yajnas of the people and holy
songs of celebrant seers adore and exalt you. O lord,
listening to this prayer and invocation, proclaiming your
acceptance and pleasure, come to all the devotees in
direct experience and bless them with peace and




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 871




[Names: Evate, Vidyama, Thus]
of, experience and enjoy your protective, enlightening
and ever new gifts of kindness and grace. And may we,
being friends of the world, singing and celebrating your
divine gifts, know you and be happy by your favour
and protection day and night.







[Names: Sunari, Srnvantamugramutaye]
We invoke and adore Indra, lord of bliss,
omnipotent, highest leader and guide of humanity in
this our battle of life for protection, victory and further
advancement. Indra is listening, blazing in battles,
destroying demons of darkness, negativity and
obstructions, and winning the honours, wealth and
excellences of the world for humanity.


Mandala 10/Sukta 90






[Names: Purusha, Devata, Narayana, Rshi, Sahasrasirsa, Purusah, Purusa]
Purusha, the cosmic soul of existence, is
Divinity personified, of a thousand heads, a thousand
eyes and a thousand feet. It pervades the universe wholly
and entirely and, having pervaded and comprehended
the universe of ten Prakrtic constituents, It transcends
the world of existence.






[Names: Utamrtatvasyesano]
All this that is and was and shall be is Purusha
ultimately, sovereign over immortality and ruler of what
expands by living food.

[Names: Etavanasya, Pado]
So great is the grandeur and glory of It, and still
the Purusha is greater. The entire worlds of existence
are but one fourth of It. Three parts of Its mystery are in
the transcendental heaven of immortality beyond the



[Names: Tripadurdhva, Tato]
Three parts higher rises the Purusha above the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 873


universe in which only one measure of Its glory
manifests again and again, pervading all the material
and biological world and thence remains transcendent
over the universe.






[Names: Tasmadvirdalajayata]
From Purusha arose Virat, the cosmic idea, the
blue-print in terms of Prakrti. The Purusha manifests in
the Virat and remains sovereign over it. Though
manifested, it exceeds, transcends and then creates the
universe and the world regions for forms of existence.






[Names: Purusena, Purus, Vasanto, Sara]
When the sages visualise the universal yajna of
creation and enact it in communion with the Purusha in
meditation, then the spring season is the ghrta, summer
is the fuel, and winter is the havi. (This meditative
enactment is in terms of nature. In fact, the creation of
the universe is an evolutionary process beginning with
Prakrti evolving into material, biological and psychic
forms as follows in this very hymn.)








[Names: Purusam, Tena]
The Rshis of universal vision, sages of universal
accomplishment and scholars of the Veda, invoke and
worship the eternal Purusha, self-manifested in advance
of every thing else of the cosmic yajna. They spread
and consecrate the grass over the vedi in mind and offer
the oblations in the cosmic fire with Veda mantras.



[Names: Tasmadyajnat, Pasun]
yasca ye.

From that cosmic yajna with total input of
Prakrti, by the universal Purusha was prepared and
received the sacred ghrta, living plasma, the universal
material of creation. He created the animals, all those
birds of the air, rangers of the forest and inmates of the



[Names: Chandamsi]
From that Lord of universal yajna were born
the Rks and the Samans. From him were born the
Chhandas and from him were born the Yajus.



MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 875




[Names: Tasmadasva]
From that yajna were born the horses and those
which have two rows of teeth up and down. From that
were born the cows and from that were born the goat
and sheep.






[Names: Mukham]
How do the Rshis visualise the manifestive
modes of the Purusha? What was his mouth? What the
arms? What the thighs? What are the feet as they are
said to be?






[Names: Brahmano]
The Brahmana, man of divine vision and the
Vedic Word, is the mouth of the Samrat Purusha, the
human community. Kshatriya, man of justice and polity,
is created as the arms of defence. The Vaishya, who
produces food and wealth for the society, is the thighs.
And the man of sustenance and ancillary support with
labour is the Shudra who bears the burden of the human
family as the legs bear the burden of the body.








[Names: Candrama, Mukhadindrascagnisca]
The moon is born of the cosmic mind, the sun
is born of the eye, the fire and energy is born from the
mouth and the wind is born from the breath.






[Names: Nabhya, Padbhyam]
The sky was born of the navel of the cosmic
Purusha, that is, the sky is the navel part of the universe,
the heaven of light arose from the head, the earth
solidified from the dust of the feet, the space quarters
emanated from the ear, and the other regions of the
universe similarly arose from the Purusha.




[Names: Saptasyasan, Deva, Puru]
sam pasum.


Seven are the bounds of the vedi of cosmic yajna
in meditation, thrice seven, twenty one, are the
samidhas, fuel sticks, ordained and offered into the yajna
fire. When the sages enact the yajna within, they
concentrate on the Purusha, the universal observer,
whose presence they crystallise and fix upon in the soul
for direct realisation.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 90 877


Note: In this mantra the word “‘pashu’ does not
mean ‘animal’ as has been interpreted by certain
translators. The word ‘pashw’ is derived from the root
‘pash’ which means ‘to see, to observe’. ‘Pashu’ then
means ‘one who sees’, and here it means the ‘Purusha,
cosmic observer’ whose presence is the object of
concentration in meditation.


Seven bounds and twenty one samidhas is the
mystique of meditative yajna of creation which has been
explained in different ways. Swami Dayanand explains
it thus in his commentary on Yajurveda, 31, 15:


Seven bounds are the seven chhandas, metrical
compositions of Veda mantras such as Gayatri. Twenty
one samidhas are: Prakrti, potential material cause of
the universe, Mahat, material cause actualised,
Ahankara, individualised identity of the universe which
may also be called the blue print of the universe, five
senses, and three qualitative orders of the creative
materials, i.e., Sattva (thought), Rajas (energy) and
Tamas (matter), and that makes up twenty one.


In the Introduction to his Commentary on the
Vedas Swami Dayanand explains the same thing in a
different and detailed manner in the chapter on creation.


For an average reader, a simpler way to
understand is to refer to the seven stages of creative
[Names: Prakrti, Mahat, Ahankara, Tanmatra]
perceptive faculties, volition faculties, and gross
elements. These stages of evolution are the seven bounds
of creative yajnas performed by Purusha. They are also
samidhas because each successive evolute arises from




yajnic consumption of the preceding one. And each of
these seven is of three orders of quality, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas. That makes it thrice seven.


Another way to realise the seven boundaries is
to refer to the seven Vyahrtis: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah,
Mahah, Janah, Tapah and Satyam which are the
boundaries of each loka or region of existence.






[Names: Yajnena]
By that yajna of the mind, and in meditative
realisation of the cosmic process of evolution, the sages
worship the master of cosmic yajna and realise the
eternal and original Dharmas of existence. Blest with
the light of the divine, they experience that heaven of
freedom which the primeval sages of the world enjoyed
at the dawn of creation.


In objective terms: Divine powers and potentials
by integration and interaction conduct and accomplish
the yajna of creation. They are the primary modes of
the laws and causes of creative evolution which, while
they wield and realise their potential in evolution, they
also embody and realise the heavenly purpose, the
original and efficient cause, the Purusha, and they are
also the same original and eternal potentials of divinity
which carry on the eternal cycle of existence.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 91 879


Mandala 10/Sukta 91






[Names: Agni, Devata, Aruna, Vaitahavya, Rshi, Visvasya]
Agni, celebrated by enlightened devotees, is
kindled and lighted in yajnic halls on the holy ground
on earth. Generous it is, loving and inspiring, universal
giver and receiver of yajnic materials and fragrances of
yajna, loving choice of all, all pervasive, refulgent, and
an unfailing friend who loves the devotees as friends
and is honoured by them as a friend.





[Names: Sisriye, Janamjanam]
Commanding excellent grace and grandeur,
honoured like a holy guest, it abides in every home and
every forest like a flying bird. Lover of humanity, it
loves every class of people and lives with all classes
and communities with equal love and favour.








[Names: Sudakso, Vasurvasunam]
Refulgent Agni, generous with immense gifts,
noblest performer by holy works, you are the omniscient
poetic creator evidently by your cosmic poetry of
existence. You alone dwell in the world as the highest
Vasu of life shelters and living forms, and you are the
master of all that the heaven and earth create and sustain.






[Names: Prajanannagne, Usasamivetayo, Suryasyeva]
Agni, lighted and refulgent, come and take your
holy seat in the vedi prepared and sprinkled with ghrta
according to the season on the floor of the yajnic earth.
The light and flames of your arrival shine and appear
like rise of the dawns, like rays of the sun, pure,




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 91 881




[Names: Tava, Sriyo, Yadosadhirabhisrsto, Usasam, Usasa]
Your wonderful lustre and beauties shine like
lightning flashes of the clouds of rain, like lights of the
rising dawns, specially when, radiating warm and free,
you reach and shine upon the herbs and trees and fields
of grain and receive them into the shining warmth of
your maturing and ripening radiations.







[Names: Tamosadhirdadhire, Tamit, Agnim]
That Agni, energy, the herbs and waters receive
into them and they bear it as mothers, producing it on
maturity as nourishment and energy for life forms. The
same Agni, the herbs and trees of the forest receive
equally, hold it in the womb and always produce it as
the embodiment of energy.







[Names: Vatopadhiuta, Anu]
When urged and impelled by wind, Agni, you




rush fast to objects of your choice love and consumption,
then your youthful unaging flames, burning and blazing,
rush on like the horses of a monarch’s chariot.






[Names: Medhakaram, Tamidarbhe]
Devotees choose to worship Agni alone, none
other than Agni, giver of intelligence, accomplisher of
yajna and education for knowledge, high priest of yajnic
existence, supreme over all, omniscient wise, and
equally loving for all, whether the havi offered is small
or great, whether the purpose is high or low. O lord of






[Names: Tvamidatra, Yaddevayanto]
Agni, here in the world, your loving devotees,
wise sages, thoughtful people, choose to worship you,
high priest of yajna, when dedicated to divinity and the
divine potentials of nature, having spread the holy grass
on the vedi and bearing sacred havi, they offer their
dearest fragrant oblations to you.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 91 883




[Names: Tavagne]
dame.


Agni, you are the over all master and lord of
yajna, yours are all the functions: you are the yajaka,
you are the purifier, you are the leader, you are the
kindler, you are the director, you are the manager, you
are the Brahma, presiding priest, and you are the chief
of our yajnic home.






[Names: Yastubhyamagne, Tasya]
Agni, whoever the mortal that gives unto you,
Spirit imperishable, Lord immortal, and surrenders
himself by way of fuel fire, dedicates his total life as
yajnic performance, you yourself become the yajaka for
him, move as his messenger, speak to him in the soul,
and take over his life itself as manager of the yajna.
(Surrender, O man, to the Immortal for the sake of








[Names: Vasuyavo]
and songs of adoration, prayers for peace, prosperity
and fulfilment reach this Agni, omniscient, omnipresent
and ultimate haven of all that exists, the lord that waxes
with love and exaltation when these rise and reach him.






[Names: Imam, Bhuya]
Let me raise this new holy song of praise to the
loving and gracious eternal Agni. May the Lord listen.
And let it be like an inspiring creative poem full of love
and passion in a beautiful form for the master, able to
touch and move his heart within to bless me.






[Names: Yasminnasvasa, Kilalape, Somaprsthaya, Somaprstha]
With love and devotion at heart I create this song
of thoughtful praise for the kind and gracious Agni under
whose order and dispensation horses, virile bulls, cows,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 885


sheep and goats are created and range around freely
and then are called back to the stalls.






[Names: Ahavyagne, Vajasanim, Somah, Soma]
Agni, fragrant havi is offered into the sacred
fire as ghrta in the ladle and soma in the cup. Pray bear
and bring us rising prosperity with food, sustenance and
victory, wealth, noble progeny, and honour and glory
of the noblest order.


Mandala 10/Sukta 92






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Sharyata, Manava, Rshi, Yajnasya, Socanchuskasu]
Honour and adore Agni, leader of your life’s
yajna, ruler and sustainer of communities of the people,
pioneer and chief priest of the universe, useful giver of
the peace of night, and spectrum light of the world.
Generous and virile, brilliant illuminator, worthy of
honour and adoration, burning the dry woods and
vibrating in the greens it pervades every thing on earth
and reposes in the regions of light.








[Names: Imamanjaspamubhaye, Aktum]
Both humans and divines honour and adore this
Agni, by nature energising life constantly, sustainer of
the world and its dharma, accomplisher of yajna. They
love and adore it like the mighty sun, harbinger of the
dawn and child inviolable of the blazing cosmic energy.






[Names: Balasya, Yada]
Truly do we love and adore the various gifts of
this Agni. May the food, energy and sustenance, all with
light divine, blessed gifts, be good for consumption and
advancement. Indeed, when relentless devotees come
to realise the imperishable joy and freedom of
immortality, then are the gifts of this divine Agni truly
realised in actuality.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 887




[Names: Rtasya, Indro, Varunah, Varuna]
All this existence is an extension, a web, of
nature and her law under the ordinance of Agni: the
heavens of light, the vast skies, adorable earth,
expansive space, all are but fragrant manifestations of
Agni, the cosmic high priest. Mitra, the sun, Varuna,
the night, Bhaga, cosmic power, Savita, cosmic
creativity, all reveal the omnipotence of the generous
lord of light and purity that gives everything in plenty.
They all do homage to Agni.






[Names: Ward, Yebhih]
Showers of rain and floods of rivers which cover
the earth move by the tempestuous currents of cosmic
energy of the Maruts, and by the same currents the vast
ocean of vapours far traversing across the middle
regions roars in the womb of skies and showers and
fertilises the world of life.









[Names: Krana, Maruto, Rudra, Tebhiscaste]
Active currents of the cosmic energy of the
Maruts, dwelling all over the universe, move from the
regions of the sun as directed companions of the ocean
of vapours, and along with those dynamic currents are
seen the dynamic Varuna, Mitra, Aryama and Indra,
forces of nature’s catalysis, integration, direction and






[Names: Indre, Sasamanasa]
Indra, cosmic energy, is self-potent, creative and
immensely fertile. In Indra, in its splendid self-
manifestive power to be observed and pursued with the
mind, they find possibilities of human profit, and they,
creative and competent craftsmen in elite human
institutions, invent usable instruments of power,
prosperity and protection.






[Names: Surascida, Bhimasya]
Even the sun radiates its rays of light under the
power and law of Indra, supreme omnipotent. Every
powerful force obeys the law and power of Indra. Under
the power of fertile and potent Indra, the whistling winds


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 889


blow from its vault and the mighty cloud roars without
obstruction day by day.






[Names: Stomam, Rudraya]
Offer now a song of praise and adoration with
homage to Rudra, mighty lord of justice and
dispensation, leader, protector and ruler of the brave,
self-existent, self-glorious, lover of peace and well
being, commanding bright power and forces moving
on their ordered course by which he blesses loving
devotees with the fulfilment of their cherished desires.






[Names: Yajnairatharva, Somajamayah, Somajamaya]
They for sure hold and know the evolution of
life, birth of divinity’s children: Brhaspati, lord of Prakrti
and the Word of knowledge, Vrshabha, generator of the
seed of life in the form of Hiranyagarbha, and the Soma
currents of vitality which bear the seeds in life form.
These, first Atharvan holds in knowledge and
disseminates in form and word by processes of yajna,
and later, the divine Bhrgus, sages of knowledge and




austere discipline, acquire the knowledge by tradition
and their own expertise.






[Names: Devastvasta, Rbhu]
These for sure are the divinities which contribute
to the evolution and flow of life : the solar region and
the earth both replete with life and fertility, the middle
region which overflows with electric energy, air, vapour,
and elements of nourishment, evolutionary law in its
[Names: Tvashta]
which is the formative power immensely generous and
keen to structure the forms, pranic energy, wind energy,
and Vishnu, divine power of sustenance. These are
powers worthy of our gratitude, reverence and worship.






[Names: Suryamasa]
And may that Ahirbudhnya, omnipresent,
omniscient and all watching lord of expansive Prakrti,
listen to our profuse prayer and adoration offered in
our yajna with unbounded love and faith. And may the
sun and moon, both stationed in heaven and moving in


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 92 891


space, acknowledge our homage with their sensitive
natural perception, and may the heaven and earth too





[Names: Atmanam, Vayuristaye, Vayuristay, Srutam]
And may Pusha, divine spirit of nature’s
nourishment, protect and promote our living and moving
wealth. May the life-giving Vayu energy, sustainer of
life’s vitality, and all natural divinities protect and
promote us to achieve our cherished desires for well
being. O dedicated celebrants of divinity, honour and
adore the glorious spiritual energy within the soul, and
may the Ashvins, complementary currents of natural life
energy in yajnic touch with us, perceive our earnestness
on way and bring us blessings of divinity.






[Names: Visamasamabhayanamadhiksitam, Gnabhirvisvabhiraditi]
With songs of praise we celebrate Agni, ruling
people, the divinity glorious by its own actions. Along
with all the world’s divine powers of nature and




[Names: Aditi, Prakrti]
the moon, youthful ruler of the night, and the self-
existent, self-refulgent sun, gracious life giver of the






[Names: Rebhadatra, Yebhirvihaya]
By birth, the first and foremost sage Angira sings
the song of divinity, the soma makers look up and watch
the process of divine creation and all those powers by
which the all watching creator waxes great and his
omnipotence creates and provides the highest kind of
food for humanity for the journey ahead.


Mandala 10/Sukta 93






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Tanva, Parthya, Rshi, Mahi, Tebhirnah, Susani]
May the great earth and high heaven be vaster
and greater, and always waxing and rising for us, may
they like mothers help us rise and grow. May they,
stronger and more prosperous, promote us by those
heavenly gifts of light and rain. May they, ever stronger,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 93 893


amiable, procreative and productive, help us grow with
these gifts of rain and food.






[Names: Yajneyajne]
That mortal man serves and augments the
divinities who, risen in knowledge and wisdom by
reading and listening to the utmost, serves them in every
yajnic programme with holy works of cleansing and
replenishment to be creative and productive more and
more.


[Names: Visvesamirajyavo, Visve]
O masters of the world, great is the glory of the


divinities. All of them command universal majesty, all
of them are adorable in yajnic congregations.




[Names: Kadrudro, Varunah, Varuna, Marutah, Maruta, Pusano]
They are lights of immortality, happy and


joyous, harbingers of well being to humanity: Aryama,
spirit of justice and rectitude in conduct, Mitra, divine




love, friendship and unity, Varuna, spirit of judgement
and choice, Parijma, all moving air, Rudra, destroyer of
suffering, Maruts, cosmic currents of energy, Pushana,
energy and nourishment for growth, Bhaga, spirit of
divine glory and human power and prosperity. Everyone
of them is valued, loved and respected by humanity.






[Names: Suryamasa, Saca]
And those harbingers of rain and wealth, the
Ashvins, the sun and moon, auspicious givers of wealth
for the home, the clouds of vapour floating in the skies
and their auxiliaries which abide in nature, may all these
be friendly and bless us with wealth and joy day and




[Names: Mitra, Mahah]
veva durita.


And may the divine Ashvins, complementary
currents of natural energy, Mitra and Varuna, prana and
udana energies of the body system vibrating in nature,
protect and promote us. One whom they protect and
promote rises great in wealth, rules it as the master and
crosses over all evils with a single leap.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 93 895






[Names: Rudra, Rbhurvaja, Rbhuksanah, Rbhuksana]
And may the health giving Rudra pranas, the
Ashvins, prana and apana energies, all brilliant holy men
of the world, Bhaga, spirit of honour, power and
prosperity of life, the presiding power of the chariot of
human life for the individual and society, Rbhu, the wise
sage of creative expertise, Vaja, commander of strength
and progressive advancement, Rbhuksha, skilful
technician, all moving wind energy, and managers of
the world’s wealth be kind and good for our welfare.






[Names: Rbhurrbhuksa, Rbhurvidhato, Dustaram]
Great is Indra, cosmic energy, great is the joy of
the creator of cosmic energy. O mighty lord of cosmic
energy, great are the complementary currents of your
energy circuit. Grand, not easy, is the knowledge and
articulation of the divine energy of nature, and its
management too at the human level as yajnic process is








[Names: Krdhi, Saho]
Savita, O lord of light and life’s creativity,
admired and exalted by the strong and powerful, pray
make us bold and self-confident, let us never be
subjected to shame and ignominy. Indra, lord of power,
controls and directs the power and wisdom of these
people of the earth with psychic currents of pranic
energies as a driver controls and directs the movement
of the chariot by reins and the wheels.






[Names: Sravah, Prksam]
O earth and heaven, mother and father of
humanity, pray vest high honour and fame of universal
human order in these brave heroes. Exalt them with food
and energy, honour and enthusiasm, and wealth and
excellence for the achievement of victory and conquest
over evil forces.






[Names: Etam, Medatam]
Indra, lord omnipotent, you are our father,
mother, protector and all, pray accept this celebrant all


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 93 897


time wherever he be, protect him for his good, promote
him for his cherished happiness and well being. Pray
take on the seeker, enlighten the lover, save me, O shelter
home of the world.




[Names: Samvananam]
vanapacyutam.


May the singers of divinity and celebrants of
humanity exalt and extend this my song of divine
adoration and united human celebration like radiant rays
of the sun spreading light or a craftsman launching an






[Names: Vavarta, Nemadhita]
The prayer of devotees whose words are replete
with the wealth of conscience and sincerity naturally
and spontaneously bears the golden fruit of divine love
and salvation, just as the heroic exploits of warriors in
battle, united and directed to the same one end, lead to
victory and never go waste.








To the restless, celebrated, emotional, sensual,
exuberant and powerful, let me speak of that knowledge
and wisdom which is heard of these our well wishers of
humanity who control and direct five hundred
fluctuations of their mind by meditation to peace and
divinity. (That is the path of living, knowing and




[Names: Adhinnvatra, Sadyo]
mayavah.

Here in the matter of body and mind, divine
nature gives and simultaneously orders and controls


seventy seven nerves of the body, seventy seven bone
structures, and seventy seven articulatory functions.


Mandala 10/Sukta 94




[Names: Gravana, Devata, Arbuda, Sarpa, Kadraveya, Rshi, Praite, Yadadrayah]
sominah.


the Word from the sages who speak for us. You too, O
yajakas, speak the Word when the sages of eminent


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 94 899


standing, bearers of soma, together passionately offer
the words of divine praise to Indra.






[Names: Satavat, Vistvi]
The sages speak as they do to hundreds and
thousands, and proclaim the Word loud and bold with
resounding voice. Eloquent sages of long standing,
noble performers, sitting on the vedi, speak with noble
tongue in sacred language and partake of the yajnic
hospitality of the yajamana.




[Names: Vrksasya, Ssakhamarunasya]
They speak only when they know the subject
by experience, having tasted with relish the honey
sweets of the juice in the ripe fruit. Enjoying the fruit of
life on the bright branch of the tree of existence they,
mighty wise, bearing the knowledge by experience in
the mind, speak the word of wisdom and reveal the truth.








[Names: Brhadvadanti, Samrabhya]
They speak wide and bold, exalt Indra with joy
in words of ecstasy, tasting, knowing and proclaiming
sweets of honey by music of the tongue. Having
experienced and enjoyed the taste of sweetness
repeatedly, the veterans express the ecstasy in dance
with gestures, movements and expressions, the earth
resounding with the music of their joy.





[Names: Suparna, Nyanni, Suryasvlitah, Suryasvlita]
Birds of imagination fly up to the bounds of
heaven and raise their voice of adoration, vibrant clouds
dance in the deepest caverns of space and celebrate their
joy, the spirits distil the ecstasy of highest realisation
and, pure and radiant as sunlight, receive profuse
showers of immortal life.





[Names: Ugra, Yacchvasanto]
Like virile bulls yoked together bearing the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 94 901


chariot pole and drawing the chariot forward, they,
inspired and mighty enthusiastic, lead humanity
[Names: Breathing]
pleasure and pain of social experience, they go on
proclaiming their message, and the echoes of their
proclamation is heard like the breathing of victorious






[Names: Dasavanibhyo, Dasabhisubhyo]
Honour those who work at ten levels of earthly
life and create the soma joy of existence, ten equal
cooperators like the ten fingers, ten equal cooperative
faculties such as the senses, ten possible cooperatives
such as energies of passion and understanding, ten
partners such as the pranic energies, ten dynamic forces
such as will and determination, ten unaging ones such
as desires and ambitions, ten burden bearers joined to
carry on the tenfold business of living such as the rules
of personal and social discipline.









They are the sages and scholars strong as
with tenfold discipline and freedom of mind, fast and
instant workers and thinkers whose total energy and
attention is concentrated on the one central end and aim
of life: the creation of joy. And they alone share and
enjoy the first, original and immortal nectar sweet of
the blissful energy and ecstasy of life created and refined
by sages.






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Somado, Tebhirdugdham]
They, tasting of soma joy, attain to both
knowledge and action toward both secular and sacred
aims of life under divine dispensation and, distilling
the joy of life, abide confident in the state of yoga on
the earth and then on higher planes as well. Indra, the
soul, drinking of the honey sweet milk of divine ecstasy,
rises, expands and expresses itself in showers of creative
joy and positive activity.





[Names: Vrsa, Raivatyeva]
O lovers and creators of soma, strong, generous


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 94 903


and inexhaustible is your soma of joy. You would never
be hurt or violated. Blest with food, energy and
enlightenment, live ever satisfied and happy. O sages,
abide in life as great and brilliant as with the spirit of
the wealth, honour and excellence of life. The stalk of
your joy whose yajna you live by is deep, eternal and






[Names: Trdila, Anatura]
destroyers of evil, indefatigable, immortal, unafflicted,
unaging, steadfast and dynamic, strong and healthy,
uninhibited and unfrustrated, and free from greed.






[Names: Dhrva, Ajuryaso]
O veteran sages, parental lovers of humanity,
be all time strong and steadfast, well wishers of all as
members of one joint family. Untouched by age, lovers
of life’s greenery, inspirers of life’s joy, speak so that
your voice resounds and is heard across the earth and




ata: 123 1




[Names: Tadidvadantyadrayo, Vapanto, Somam, Soma]
Veteran sages on way to freedom from the bonds
of mortality speak of immortal Indra like bards in a state
of ecstasy. As the farmer, having sowed the corn, guards
it till ripeness, they, enjoying the soma experience, guard
and mature the nectar, they do not violate it, never
destroy the taste of immortality.






[Names: Sute]
Just as children in love vex the mother while
playing, so when the yajna is on and soma is extracted,
let the sages recite the hymns with love and a sense of
freedom and release in spontaneity and then let them
retire with love and reverence into rest and silence.


Mandala 10/Sukta 95


Devata: Urvashi (1, 3, 6, 8-10, 12, 14, 17), Pururava (2,
4, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 16, 18), Rshi: Pururava Aila (1, 3, 6, 8-
10, 12, 14, 17), Urvashi (2, 4, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 16, 18)


(This sukta is a dialogue between Pururava, the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 905
man, and Urvashi, the consort.)






[Names: Haye, Anuditasa]
awhile with mind at ease. Let us have a dialogue between
us, words of mutual interest, of love and sweetness.
These words and thoughts have remained unexpressed
between us. Will they not do some good to us some
later day?





[Names: Kimeta, Pururavah, Pururava]
What shall we do with these words of yours? I
am yours but I go like mist of the morning before dawn.
Go back to your abode, Pururava, I am unattainable,
elusive like the winds.






[Names: Isurna, Sriya, Avire]
I am not able to shoot the arrow from the quiver




for victory and glory, and though I am strong and brave,
I cannot win the hundreds of lands with the roar of
victory. O lady bereft of the brave, I shine not in the
rising battles of life, my own powerful forces forsake
me;


man in love with life and the search for inspiration,
purpose and consummation of living. The love is
intense, excessive and vociferous like the thundering
cloud’s and the inspiration is lovely and seductive like
the elusive lightning. It can be interpreted as a dialogue
between the ambitious ruler and the social power, and
ultimately, between the liver (man) and the possibilities
of life, the passion and the unattainable, the dawn and
the day, the night and the morrow.)


Note that Pururava is Aila, child of Ila, nature,
and Urvashi is infinite beauty, and their consummation
is joy and creativity.






[Names: Svasuraya, Astam, Ssnathita]
If Urvashi (electric energy or the dawn) bearing
light and nourishment for the coming day were to rise
from the depth of space or darkness of night, and
stricken with love as catalytic agent, were to visit the
lover’s chamber, the heart of the cloud or the sun on the
rise, then she would be struck with three way charge of
positive, negative and consummative ‘vaitasa’, process


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 907


of nature’s evolutionary activity. Day and night, all time?


(‘Vaitasa’ is the name of a process of movement,
consumption and evolution in the natural cycle. The
catalytic agent does not stay with the mode it causes to
change and move toward growth. The electric charge
causes the cloud thunder, breaks the cloud into rain,
and that causes the earth to produce vegetation. The
processes of catalysation, rain and growth are described
in the Brahmanas and quoted by Swami Dayananda in






[Names: Vedic, Trih, Pururavo]
O Pururava, cloud, day, thrice in a unit of time
you would move me with the energy of procreative
nature and thus achieve the fulfilment of nature’s
purpose. Come to your chamber thus for fulfilment, O
brave one, you would be the ruler of my body. (But stay

Mantras 4 and 5 are spoken by Urvashi like a







[Names: Sirye]
Waves of energy flow, exciting, wavy, soothing,
successive and cyclic, and move in circuit, beautiful,
shining red rays, harbingers of beauty and prosperity
like young loving cows of the family.






[Names: Samasminjayamana, Mahe]
When this roaring cloud is formed or when the
sun is risen for the day, then many forces like divine
consorts of nature join and, self-energised and fluent
like showers of rain and streams of water, exalt it. O
Pururava, then the devas too, brilliant divinities of nature
and humanity, prepare and exalt you for the mighty battle
against want and darkness to destroy evil from nature
and society.


(The metaphor of natural forces here may be
said to touch the field of human society. Many divine,
natural and human forces join in the wedding of the
young man and in the investiture of the ruler in his office.
Both are like the cloud formed for showers and like the
sun risen for the day, and the function of both is to dispel
want and darkness from nature and society.)






[Names: Saca]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 909


When Pururava, the mighty cloud, takes over
earthly form and joins the unearthly forms of nature
character, they, which earlier had feared him like the
game fearing the hunter, do not fear him as horses joined
to the chariot do not fear the master.


[Names: Yadasu]
When the mortal Puruava loving these immortal
beings joins them with loving words as well as with
noble actions, then they, like swans playing in water,


shine and show their bodies like horses playing with
the bridle in their teeth.




[Names: Vidyunna, Janosto]
Like lightning, falling and flashing, bringing me
cherished gifts of water showers, Urvashi who creates
blissful floods and streams for humanity blesses me with
long life and health.







[Names: Jajnisa]
Pururava, you are born and destined for the
protection of earth and promotion of life. Pray bear and
command the lustre of life for me. Educated and cultured
in the art of home life, I advised you day in and day out,
pray listen to me. What can you say if you do not serve
life and mother earth? Nothing.






[Names: Kada]
When would the progeny born, grown, knowing
and coming without tears and actively doing love and
favour the parents? And who would separate the couple
wedded in mutual love when the passion for life shines
among the brave? None.






[Names: Prati, Ssivayai]
And I say to you, Pururava, by way of warning:
if the untoward happens in case of separation, the child
would come to you crying, in tears, yearning for


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 95 911


consolation and comfort. I would send him to you who
is now ours and spurn you off: O fool, impetuous,
infructuous man, go off your way, I am not for you!





[Names: Sudevo, Adha]
Urvashi, if such a calamity befall, let the ardent
lover immediately fall to no redemption, go far to the
farthest distance, let him lie in the depth of denial and
adversity, and let voracious wolves devour him.





Pururava, let this never be: do not die, never
fall, never must cursed wolves devour you, such are
not the loves and friendships of women. It is only women
of wolfish heart that deceive and betray the covenant.






[Names: Yadvirupadcaram, Ghrtasya]
When I came down from the divine into this




different earthly form living happily for four years
among mortals, I have lived on one time little drop of
ghrta a day, and content with that alone I sojourn among
men.






[Names: Antarisapram, Siksamyur]
I, Vasishtha, closest ardent lover, speak to
Urvashi, spirit of boundless beauty, light and love, and
celebrate this ranger of the skies, controller of vapours
and breaker of the cloud. May the bounty of divine
generosity ever abide by you. My heart is burning, pray
turn, return and fulfil the divine purpose.






[Names: Praja]
Pururava Aila, child of nature, word of divinity,
this is what the divines have spoken: Kinsman of death
you would be, your children would serve the divinities
with homage and fragrant havi into the yajna fire, and
you too would abide in paradise and be happy.


(This sukta is a myth, a mystery, until it is


It is a myth of the love between man and woman,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 96 913


fickle as well as unbreakable and sacred. The flower
and fruit of it is the child, continuance of the race. And
it may be called the myth of Purusha and Prakrti and
the cycle of existence. It is a myth of the cloud, thunder
and lightning. The cloud is a mass of gases, then the
electric charge, thunder, lightning, rain and life on earth.
And it points to a wonder possibility:


The thunderous cloud, Pururava, is ineffective
without Urvashi, the lightning charge. Urvashi, the
heavenly nymph, lives on one drop of ghrta per day.
The children of the couple live and perform yajna, and
the parents abide in paradise. Can we say: One drop of
ghrta into the yajna fire per day feeds Urvashi which
causes the cloud to rain and the yajaka contributes to a
life of paradise on earth?


Mandala 10/Sukta 96






[Names: Hari, Devata, Baru, Angirasa, Sarvahari, Aindra, Rshi, Ghrtam]
O lord omnipotent, Hari, in your great cosmic
yajna, I adore your forces of Rtam and Satyam. Lord of
beauty, glory and bliss, I pray for the joy of your ecstatic
bliss, which, beautiful and beatific with showers of joy,
blesses life on earth as ghrta exalts the sacred fire. May
our words of adoration and prayer reach your blissful
presence immanent in the universe.








[Names: Harim, Susam, Indraya, Indra]
You, who in concert adore and exalt Hari,
omnipotent original cause of the universe as he pervades
the divine spatial home, whom hymns of Veda and rays
of the sun please and fulfil with their vibrations and
radiations as cows fulfil the yajna with ghrta and milk,
whose powers of Rtam and Satyam with their centrifugal
and centripetal forces you praise, please study and
honour that power of his which bears the burden of the
world of nature and humanity. Do so for the sake of the
honour and excellence of life on the way forward.






[Names: Dyumni]
That power of Hari, omnipotent Indra, is the
thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt is electric, magnetic,
unfailing in aim and desire and it is borne in the hands
of centrifugal and centripetal forces. It is bright and
blazing, mighty passionate, punitive and destructive for
the evil. Indeed in Indra as in the sun, all forms, all
colours and all beauties are integrated.


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 96 915


Rar: usu




[Names: Divi, Tudadahim]
The power of Indra, the Bajra, is held as the sun
blazing in heaven. It expands and pervades like the
[Names: Destroying]
breaking the clouds of darkness, glorious and mighty,
the adamantine Bajra of a thousand flames shines as
the symbol of the power of omnipotence.






[Names: Tvam, Tvam]
Indra, lord of light and knowledge, self-
manifested universal spirit of light, love and beauty,
loved and adored by the earliest celebrant sages, you
alone received, acknowledged and blest the adorations
of the past, and you alone are the sole, unique, beloved,
universally adorable giver of success and fulfilment who
love, receive, acknowledge and bless the gifts of
adoration and yajna offered to you.








[Names: Faring, Indram, Purunyasmai, Soma]
Those adorable carriers, centrifugal and
centripetal forces of divine nature, bear and sustain the
power and presence of the thunder armed, joyous,
adorable Indra in the divine blissful chariot as the
universe of existence. For this Indra, blissful lord, many
yajna sessions, soma oblations and beautiful gifts of
homage are prepared and offered.






[Names: Aram, Arvadbhiryo]
The dynamics of divine nature sustain the
refulgent Indra for its holy solar purpose. The same
powers energise the gravitational forces to hold the sun
in balanced orbit. By these energy forces does Indra’s
presence vibrate in the universe with love. And through


wed eu





[Names: Harismasarurharikesa]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 96 917


The world’s greenery is his hair, golden rays of
light, his locks. Wielding thunder and gravitation, his
radiation enters waters of the earth and vapours of space,
he expands in power and presence, and with powers of
instant radiation, he shines as lord of abundant earth
and overcomes all evils of disease and darkness with






[Names: Sruveva, Sipre]
His golden eyes, sun and moon, move and
radiate light as two ladles of ghrta feed and exalt the
fire, and the heaven and earth like his golden jaws move
for the food, energy and advancement of life. In his
created world, having tasted of the delicious and
inspiring food and drink, man refines and exalts his will
and understanding.






[Names: Utasma, Mahi]
Potent and charming Indra pervades the regions
of heaven and earth as his home and with his power
and presence roars like a hero going to war. With his




might he wields both the great earth and the refulgent
heaven, loves them and bears abundant food, strength
and joy for life there.






[Names: Suryaya, Surya]
Lord of love and beauty, loved and loving all,
you beautify and beatify the heaven and earth with new
and newer favours, you love and create fresh and rising
thoughts of admiration and adoration. O lord of vital
energy and inspiration, pray open the homely state of
earth and humanity to the illumination of the sun and






[Names: Piba]
Indra, may the radiations of your light bear and
bring you, glorious lord of golden visor, by your cosmic
chariot to the people so that you, loving the yajna, drink
of the honey sweet soma extracted and prepared with
utmost dexterity of hand and care in the hall of yajna.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 919






[Names: Apah, Mamaddhi, Somam]
Indra, lord of light divine and solar radiations,
you have drunk of the soma of the ancients of earliest
sessions. This yajna session and the soma extracted in
here is only for you. O lord of generous showers in this
session, pray, drink of the honey sweet soma of our love
and faith and let the showers of bliss flow and fill the
skies and space unto the depth of our heart.


Mandala 10/Sukta 97






[Names: Oshadhayah, Devata, Bhishag, Atharvana, Rshi, Manai]
Let me observe, investigate and know the herbs,
ancient and best for all the three seasons and ages, born
of the divine gifts of nature for people, herbs yellow,
ripe and brown, and hundred and seven of them with
places where they grow and where they work. (‘Shatam
hundred herbs and the places where they grow.)








[Names: Satarn, Adha]
O mother herb, hundreds are the places where
you arise and work, thousands your varieties and
extensions, and hundreds your gifts and efficacies. Pray
make this life free from affliction and disease.





[Names: Osadhih]
O herbs, plants and creepers ever growing, rise
and rejoice in response to life’s health, blossoming and
fragrant, procreative and fructifying, victorious like
and disease.





[Names: Osadhiriti, Saneyamasvam, Purusa]
“O herbs, mothers, divine gifts of nature,” thus
do I speak of you in confidence and say: O man, the
horse, the cow, the home, even your body, mind and
soul, I entrust for health to the herbs.”






[Names: Asvatthe, Gobhdqy, Purusam]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 921


Your seat is on the ashvattha tree, on the air and
the cloud, your residence is made on the leaf and on the
parna tree, you share your efficacy with the earth, sun
rays and the cow by which you bestow health and vitality
for life.






[Names: Yatrausadhih, Viprah]
Where herbs and medicines concentre as ruling
powers in consult, that sagely scholar is called
‘physician’, destroyer of evil, eliminator of disease and






[Names: Avitsi]
For the recovery and rehabilitation of the sick
and for his freedom from ailment in future, I know and
can provide all herbal medicines, for example,
Ashvavati, the herb for revival and energy, Somavati,
for soothing and energising, Urjayanti for strengthening,
and Udojas, exceedingly powerful for life saving, and








[Names: Ucchusma, Dhanam]
And the strength and vitality of herbs which, O
man, they bestow on you as the wealth of health for
your body, mind and soul, stream forth to you like cows
emerging from their stall or light rays radiating at dawn.


[Names: Iskrtirnama, Sirah]
O herbs, the name of your mother is Ishkrti, good
health, immunity and prevention, gifts of food, earth
and nature. And you are cleansers and protectors. Be


circulating in veins and arteries, throw out all that ails
the body’s health.





Just as a thief breaks into a cattle stall (and is
thrown out) so should all the herbals circulating all over
the body attack and throw out the ailments that afflict
the body.






[Names: Yadima, Atma]
When I take up these medicines in hand to
administer them against ailments, it is like a warning of
death for them and their very soul and root disappears,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 923


totally destroyed, even before the dose.






[Names: Yasyausadhth, Tato]
O herbals, cure the sick whose body you spread
over part by part, joint by joint, stop and throw out the
disease like a sharp and aggressive mediator.






[Names: Sakam, Sakam]
Consumptive disease is cured with increase in
appetite, administration of medicine by mouth and
cleansing by vomiting, with bitter medication, with
strong and deep breathing in clean air, and cleansing of
the system by eliminating the sputum and congestion.


[Names: Anya]
Let one medicine supplement and cover another,
and let the other follow another with the same effect,


and let them all thus accordant and cooperative justify
and prove this word of mine in effect.






[Names: Brhaspatiprasutasta]
Let those herbs which bear fruit, and those which
do not bear fruit, let those which bloom with flowers
and those which do not blossom, and all of those blest
by Brhaspati, ripened by the sun, and prepared and
energised by the physician deliver us from suffering.





[Names: Muncantu]
Let them deliver me from ailments caused by
curses and imprecations, dampness and stagnant waters,
stiffness of joints and the whole body, and those coming
from disturbance and depression of mind and senses.






[Names: Avapatantiravadan, Purusah]
Descending from heaven the herbs, by their
fragrance, energy and vitality, declare: the person whose
life we pervade and vitalise comes to no harm.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 97 925


[Names: Tasam]
Of all those herbs which shine with the soma
element from the moon, which are abundant and
instantly effective, you that fulfil the desire and are
blissful for the heart are the best. (That is soma.)





[Names: Brhaspatiprasuta]
You herbs which shine and abound in soma
element and overspread the earth, blest by Brhaspati
and energised by the sun, pray bless this ailing body
with life saving vitality.





[Names: Dvipacchatuspadasmakam]
Let not the man who digs you from earth violate
you, nor should he come to harm, nor should I come to
harm who dig you out. May all human beings, all our
animals, and all others be free from suffering and
disease.








[Names: Yascedamupasrnvanti, Sarvah]
Those herbs which hear this word close by, and
those which grow far away, may all these herbs join
together and give life’s vitality to this patient.





[Names: Osadhayah, Yasmai]
The herbs joined together with the ruling radiant
soma say: O ruling lord of health and life, for whosoever
the sagely physician makes use of us we save and pilot
him over suffering and disease.






[Names: Tvamuttamasyosadhe, Upastirastu]
O herb, O medicine, you are the best, most
efficacious. The trees such as peepal and banyan are
your auxiliaries, they are solid concentrations, next to
you, of medical properties diffused all over. May all
that helps us with health and comfort be our ally. May
all that harms us, such as disease, be under our control.


Mandala 10/Sukta 98




[Names: Devah, Devata, Devapi, Arshtishena, Rshi, Brhaspate, Adityairva, Parjanyam, Parjanya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 98 927


Brhaspati, lord of unbounded rain and thunder,
come and bless me as the epitome of divine powers,
whether you are Mitra or Varuna or Pusha or commander
of the Marut winds with Adityas and Vasus. Let the cloud
rain for the man of peace and lover of knowledge.


(This mantra is a prayer for physical as well as
for spiritual rain of water and peace for the lover of
knowledge and peace. Brhaspati, Mitra, Varuna and
other devas are physical powers of rain, and this process
of vapourisation, electric catalysis of gases and
condensation has been explained in his essays on the
composition of water and atmosphere by late Pandit
Gurudatta Viyarthi in his book Wisdom of the Rshis,
republished by Dr. Ravi Prakash Arya, Email :




[Names: Praticinah]
May the divine messenger, fast and brilliant,
harbinger of collected light of knowledge come to me.

Brhaspati, come to me constantly and continuously in


[Names: Word]
my mind and speech.








[Names: Asme, Yaya, Santanave]
Infinite lord of nature, knowledge and the divine
word, bring us for our mind and speech illuminant
shower of the divine voice, immaculate, unrestrained
and inspiringly energetic by which we may bring about
an earthly rain of peace and enlightenment for the lover
of knowledge and well being for all, and let a shower
of paradisal honey sweets bless the earth from heaven.






Let showers of honey bless us, Indra, give us a
thousandfold wealth of peace and prosperity of high
order. O harbinger of Devas, sit on the vedi, perform
the yajna according to the seasons and serve the
divinities with oblations of havi as required for the





[Names: Arstiseno]
Arshtishena Devapi, sagely seer knowing the
dynamics of yajnic creation and the qualities and
functioning of different divine facts of nature and life


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 98 929


in full knowledge of the moods of beneficent divinities,
may seat himself on the vedi of yajna, create clouds of
divine water in the vast sky above and bring down
showers from the ocean above to the earth for fields,
rivers and the seas.






[Names: Asmintsamudre]
In this upper oceanic sky water vapours stay held
up by divine forces of nature. Catalised by electric
charge caused by divine marut energies, they condense,
and, sent down into clouds, they shower, upon the earth
in torrents.






[Names: Yaddevapih, Devasrutam]
When Devapi, friend of divinities, the priest
appointed for the purpose of rain yajna, prays and shines
with adoration, Brhaspati, listening to his prayer to
divinity for rain, waxes with joy and grants him the gift
of thunderous Word and shower for the peace and
prosperity of humanity.








[Names: Visvebhirdevairan, Parjanyamiraya, Parjanyamira]
Agni, whom Devapi, priest and sagely scholar
of the science of rain, shining with ardent adoration
among men, lights and serves with sacred fire and
prayer, be pleased along with all the divine powers and
move the clouds laden with rain showers for humanity.






[Names: Tvam, Sahasranyadhirathanyasme, Puruhuta]
Agni, universally invoked and adored yajnic
power and showers of rain, saints and seers of the world
of all time approached you with songs of adoration and
prayer in yajna. O lord of red flames and thunderous
voice, pray visit our yajna and grant us a thousandfold
gifts overflowing our chariots of life.






[Names: Etanyagne, Tebhirvardhasva, Sura]
Agni, these ninety and nine chariots of life laden
with overfulls of a thousand gifts of homage are offered
to you. With these, O Lord Almighty, rise in flames of
glory and grace and, thus loved and adorned, pray move
the eternal showers of bliss for us from the light of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 98 931
heaven.






[Names: Vidvan, Indraya, Indra]
Agni, these ninety and nine thousand gifts of
homage, pray, send up to Indra, generous lord of
showers, for our share of his divine service and, knowing
the paths of the divine movements of nature according
to seasons, put the clusters of vapour in heaven among
the divinities, Maruts, Mitra, Varuna and others for
showers of rain.


(‘Aulana’ may also be interpreted as the devout
human soul and ‘showers’ as showers of divine bliss.)






[Names: Agne, Asmat]
Agni, drive away the violent, open up the
impassables, eliminate ill health and disease, repel and
destroy the evil, and from that infinite ocean of the
waters of life, release the showers of heavenly bliss on
earth for us.




Mandala 10/Sukta 99






[Names: Indra, Devata, Vamra, Vaikhanasa, Rshi, Savaso, Knowing, Indra]
comfort and well being, gifts wondrous and varied,
expansive and admirable, for our progress and
advancement. Great is his gift of bliss, the mighty one,
for our fulfilment. And what could be our gift in return
for his kindness? He creates and wields the thunder for
breaking the cloud and strikes the thunderbolt to destroy
the evil, and he gives us the showers that we may grow
and rise in life.






He, challenger of adversaries and destroyer of
suffering and violence, goes on with light and lightning,
pervades the vast space, and rules and breaks the mighty
clouds with his kindred Maruts. Such is the power and
splendour of the ruler and sustainer of the highest


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 99 933


UCU ॥



[Names: Anarva]
He goes on with the dynamics of existence by
straight unfailing paths of law and rectitude, giving
showers of joy, presiding over it all, keen to share it
with one and all, irresistible and unhurting, opening a
hundred doors of possibility for wealth and excellence,
and subduing the demons of lust and impiety with force,
the one supreme ruling power.






[Names: Apado]
That mighty Indra, moving, flowing and
advancing, showers torrents of rain over fertile lands
where fast and deep streams, cooperative friends of
Indra, receive and make the precious waters move of
themselves by gravity, without external aids such as legs
and chariots.


(In the third and fourth mantras, Indra may be
interpreted as human soul in the context of yoga
meditation and control over mind and senses. In this
context, the flow would mean the flow of consciousness.
In the physical sense Indra may be interpreted as Vayu,




the catalytic electric energy that breaks the clouds of
vapour into showers of rain. Indra as the supreme cosmic
power that rules and sustains the world of existence, of
course, is obvious throughout the hymn.)






[Names: Vamrasya]
That Indra, mighty energy, free from despicables
and undesirables, and possessed of indescribable wealth
of force, moves with Rudras, catalytic forces, in serial
motion leaving one place for another and, I believe, it
gets to the gaseous couple that produce and deliver the
waters, and having broken the cloud and taken away
the waters, food of life, leaves it roaring.






[Names: Asya]
That Indra, sustainer of life, attacking the six-
eyed three-headed cloud, subdues it, and Trita, threefold
Agni power, rising by the power and lustre of Indra,
with currents sharp as razor’s edge, breaks the cloud
and delivers the rain.


(The cloud is six eyed because it is active and
awake all the six seasons of the year. It is three headed


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 99 935


because it arises from three regions: from the solar
region as soma, from the middle regions as parjanya
and from the earthly region as water vapour.


Agni is threefold, Trita, because it has three
varieties of its form and function: terrestrial fire as agni,
middle region vayu or electric energy, and solar region
aditya or light, and all of them play their part in the
formation of the cloud in the form of water vapour on
earth, parjanya in the middle region and soma in the
solar region.)






[Names: Sasanaya, Sarum]
Indra, lord supreme, highest potent, best and
foremost leader among humanity committed to truth and
right and controller of the lawless and violent, strikes
the weapon of justice and punishment against the forces
of jealousy, enmity and destruction and, risen to nobility
and grandeur of personality in his own right, deserving
the highest position, destroys the strongholds of
negativity in our struggle against anti-social and anti-








[Names: Ssariraih, Syeno]
Just as the cloud waxing with water vapours
goes down in showers on earth for the nourishment of
fields and pastures, so does Indra, ruling soul,
overflowing with generosity, goes forward to the earth
for our peaceful home life and with the iron spur of his
heels strikes and drives away the evils around us, since
he, a tempestuous soul in body like the eagle, sits close
to the Indu, blissful source of the nectar of life.






[Names: Susnam, Kutsaya, Kutsa, Ayam]
He throws off the violent with his powerful
forces, he removes drought and adversity, and he thereby
gives strength and confidence to the supplicant devotee.
He leads that man of vision and imagination to the
heights of fame and admiration who, of all men, knows
his real form and nature and in his spirit realises his


He, generous giver of favours by the dynamics


of his divine powers, gracious and wondrous like
Varuna, cosmic spirit of justice and retribution, throws


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 99 937


off evil, violence and negativity. He is known as gentle
and kind, protector and ordainer of the seasons of the
world and, existent in four states of cosmic being,
overcomes jealousy and aggression.





[Names: Sutva]
When the simple, natural and ardent yajaka,
having prepared the soma of adoration, shines with his
words of praise, then, crossing the physical, pranic,
mental and intellectual covers of the soul’s existential
state, and breaking into the secret cave of the soul’s
divinity by the showers of the grace of the lord giver of
life and spiritual strength, he becomes established in
his essential nature and shines in his natural spiritual





Thus, O lord of life and pranic energy of the
universe, the humble devotee bursting forth in song and
adoration step by step moves on to you, great burden
bearer and ordainer of the universe. Thus does the lord




revealing the presence does good to this devotee giving
him all the world’s wealth of food, energy, peace and
shelter of divinity and shines to him in full glory.


Mandala 10/Sukta 100






[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Duvasyu, Vandana, Rshi, Indra, Devebhirnah, Srutama]
Indra, lord almighty of universal glory, pray
strengthen the soul akin to you so that it may be happy
and feel exalted with life. Pleased with our songs of
adoration here, accepting the soma of our love and faith,
pray let the Presence be revealed to us for our spiritual
growth. With our mind and senses and the Vishvedevas,
all divinities of nature and humanity, may the self-
refulgent spirit of light, life and energy, Savita. protect
and promote our knowledge already revealed to us and
bless us that we may by reason, faith and choice abide
by the eternal, divine, imperishable spirit of total







[Names: Bharaya, Bharata, Sucipe, Gaurasya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 100 939


For the divine sustainer, bear and bring your
part of homage and yajnic offerings for the vibrant winds
and roaring clouds of divinity, all purifying for our good.
They accept, taste and enjoy the nectar sweets of the
songs and homage of the enlightened devotees. By
reason, faith and choice of will, we wholly abide in and
by the divine imperishable mother spirit of total






[Names: Yatha]
May the self-refulgent generous Savita, divine
inspirer and light giver, bless the simple, natural and
creative yajamana with good health, long life and wealth
of maturity and discipline of performance, so that we
may serve and exalt the devas with homage and piety
of mind and soul. With total submission and faith, we
love and adore the universal mother Infinity.







[Names: Indro, Somah, Soma, Yathayatha, Mitradhitani]
May Indra, lord of cosmic energy, ever be good
and gracious to us, may the refulgent and inspiring soma,




spirit of universal peace, bless us with prosperity, may
all the divinities bear and bring all the good things of
divine value for friends and devotees according to time
and need. We honour and adore the universal spirit and
power of imperishable eternal mother Infinity.






[Names: Yajno]
With divine energy realisable by adoration,
Indra sustains every state and every stage of life and its
structure. O lord of Infinity, Brhaspati, you are the
harbinger of life and health of higher order for us.
Reflected in yajna, power of thought and meditation,
holiness of intelligence, you are our sustainer as father
giver of happiness. We honour and adore Aditi,
imperishable Infinity, the universal mother.






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Yajnasca]
Agni in the home is a version and reflection of
celebrant divinity, adorable in yajna, creator and giver
of light and poetic vision, which is yajna itself, closest
and most beautiful in the holiest creative and social acts.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 100 941


We honour and adore Aditi, mother Infinity of universal
and imperishable order of divine generosity.






[Names: Makirno]
O Devas, generous divinities of nature and
humanity, O Vasus, givers of peace and settlement at
heart, never must we do any act of sin and violence
open or covert toward you, never incur the displeasure
of divinity. Never must we put on the garb of untruth in
thought, word and deed. We honour and adore the
universal imperishable mother spirit of divine nature.






[Names: Apamivam, Grava]
May Savita, self-refulgent light of the world,
ward off and destroy all pollution and disease. May the
wise, like clouds and mountains, stall and wash off even
the tempting most irresistible sin and wrong wherever
abundant soma is extracted and the wise are highly
respected. We honour and adore the universal generosity
and imperishable wisdom and purity of divinity.








[Names: Urdhvo]
O Vasus, givers of peace and shelter, may the
learned be highly respected in the soma yajaka’s yajna.
Uproot and throw off all jealousies and enmities of the
world from afflicted hearts. May the self-refulgent
Savita be our saviour, protector and our adorable lord
and master. We honour and adore the all generous and






[Names: Infinity, Urjam, Tanureva]
O cows, knowledge, wisdom and culture, just
as cows feed on grass in the pasture, drink from the
water reservoir, grow and produce energy giving milk,
similarly, O holy words of wisdom and knowledge, feed
on whatever you find in the house of eternal truth on
the flow, and in the depth of the heart core of spirit,
grow abundant with light and energy, and let the body
of language be the medicinal corrective and sanative
for the body of knowledge and culture. We honour the
universal imperishable Mother Nature and mother Ila


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 100 943


and Sarasvati for our mother land, Mahi and Bharati,
for universal progress of knowledge and culture.


quis eeu




[Names: Kratuprava, Purnamudhardivyam]
Giver of success in actions, appraiser of the
permanent, protector and promoter of the makers of
soma, Indra is the giver of noble intelligence,
understanding and wisdom for all. Full is his treasure
of wealth like the mother cow’s stream of milk. We
honour and adore the universal generosity of divine






[Names: Mother, Nature, Citraste, Rajisthaya]
Wondrous is your light, adorable your gift of
success in action, irresistible your will and power which
gives fulfilment to the devotees. Just as a shepherd can
lead a cow forward by a simple rope, so may the devotee
realise your presence directly revealed before him by
simple prayer and adoration.




Mandala 10/Sukta 101






[Names: Vishvedevah, Rtvijah, Devatah, Budha, Saumya, Rshi, Udbudhyadhva, Dadhikramagni]
Awake, arise, O friends of equal mind, light the
fire together, more than many living and working
together under the same one roof of equal order, lovers
of energy, worshippers of Indra, one lord omnipotent
of nature and entire humanity. I call upon you and exhort
you for the sake of mutual defence and protection and
for common progress of all. Light and develop the fire
energy of the earth, atmospheric energy of thunder and
lightning of the sky, and the divine energy of the rising
dawn of the sun.






[Names: Mandra, Iskrnudhvam]
Create peace and joy, develop rational thought
and science and extend the field of action, design and
develop boats and ships to cross the seas with oars,
produce food for body, mind and soul, promote the arms


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 101 ०45


of peace and security, and take the yajnic programme
forward that faces you upfront, O my friends and friends
of humanity.






[Names: Yunakta, Gira, Srustih]
Take up the plough, yoke the bullocks and
extend the process, and when the soil is prepared sow
the seed. With songs of thanks and joy, let the crop grow
green and mature, and when the grain is ripe, let the
sickle approach to harvest the grain.






[Names: Sira, Dhira]
Intelligent and enlightened farmers use the
plough for production and develop the infrastructure
separately in each department, and the wise with peace
and vision direct their efforts for development to human
values and the divine gifts of nature and environment.








[Names: Nirahavan, Sincamaha]
Develop the sources of water, manage the
connections, and let us replenish and maintain the full
water sources inexhaustibly good for the purpose of
consumption and irrigation.






[Names: Iskrtahavamavatam, Udrinam]
Protect and maintain the water reservoir well
connected between the source and the outlet, keep it
full for drinking and irrigation purposes, let it be self-
abounding and inexhaustible, let me water plants and
orchards and also keep it replenished.



[Names: Prinitasvan, Dronahavamavatamasmacakra]
Keep the horses well fed. Realise your common
interests. Design, make and maintain the chariot that
brings you comfort, peace, prosperity and well being.
Protect and maintain the big water vessel. Maintain the


rain cycle and keep the supply line on by drinking water
tanks and wells for human consumption and irrigation.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 101 947




[Names: Vrjam, Purah]
Establish stalls for cattle, build roads, sew
corselets and build great walls, that would be the safety
and security measure for people. Build cities of steel
undaunted. May your ladle of yajna divine and human
never suffer leakage. Strengthen the ladle, raise and
expand the quality of life.






O saints and scholars, noble people all, I exhort
your spirit of self-sacrifice for thought and action, exalt
this holy yajnic spirit, will and intelligence. And may
this great spirit and divine will bring us a thousand
streams of nectar joy and prosperity like the cow fed on
grass which gives us milk for life and health.






[Names: Pari]
O yajaka, pour inspiring soma into the cask, fill
it to the brim, refine the cask with chiselled strokes of
adamantine will, season the soma and secure the cask
with ten sensitive fingers, and yoke the horse to the two


suspension poles of the chariot.






[Names: Ubhe, Vanaspatim]
Bearing two poles of life, the mind, like a chariot
horse, goes voluble flying like a bird over the sky. O
yajaka, place the fire amid the samits, dig into depths
of the soul and hold on there.





[Names: Kaprnnarah, Nistigryah, Indram, Indra, Somapitaye, Somapitay]
Noble yajakas, Divinity is kind. Hold the
gracious presence in the depths of the mind, move it for
grace, rejoice in the presence and pray for food, energy
and fulfilment of life. Adore and exalt the divine spirit
of Eternity, Indra, for freedom from bondage and for
the ecstasy of being here on earth itself.


Mandala 10/Sukta 102


[Names: Drughana, Indra, Devata, Mudgala, Bharmyashva, Rshi]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 102 949


[Names: Asminnajau, Puruhiuta]
no’va.


O ruler and commander, may Indra with his
irresistible might and weapon protect your chariot
designed and structured by the team of scientist and
technologist and working on double stream of energy.
O universally invoked leader, in this famous and terrible
battle of the nation against all-destroying forces, pray
protect us and lead us to victory.






[Names: Rathirabhunmudgalani]
The wind raises and unfurls the banner of this
force of Indra on the chariot which wins over thousands.
The mace of the waxing force of Indra rides the chariot
as commander in the heat of battle, the army moves and
extends its exploits (against malice, hate and enmity).






[Names: Anaryaccha, Dasasya]
Indra, lord of glory, ruling soul of the human
system, blunt, revert and recycle the weapons of hate
and enmity of the violent who destroy and enslave the
spirit of love and freedom. Whether the weapon of




negativity belongs to a destroyer or a dynamic person,
always turn it off from negativity and re-employ the
energy for positive good.






[Names: Udno]
Indra, exalted spirit of energy and joyous
generosity, overflows with the spirit of life and love
and enmity. Abundant and rapturous as a roaring cloud,
loving order and enlightenment, he wields the twin arms
of positive and negative power and, building and
breaking, breaking and building, he advances upon the
areas of conflict and darkness seeking to bring in light
and love.






[Names: Nykrandayannupayanta, Tena, Satavat]
In the battle between the positive and negative
forces of nature and humanity, the powers of evolution
strike this abundant cloud of concentrated wealth and
energy at the closest and make it roar as it breaks into
showers. Thus, by the evolutionary process of positive
catalysis, does Mudgala, Indra, joyous ruling power of
nature and humanity in the struggle for progress, win a
hundred-thousandfold sustaining wealth of lands, cows


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 102 951


and culture of enlightenment against darkness and






[Names: Kakardave, Dudheryuktasya]
Generous and joyous, lord of evolution and
progress is Indra, Vrshabha, Mudgala, terribly strong,
committed to positivity. Its chariot conductor like the
electric force in the firmament, magnetic force on earth
and socio-political forces in society, is vocal, thunderous
and far reaching like hair on the head and radiations of
the sun. Of this determined, committed, radiant lord in
state alongwith its conductive force, the allies are like
atoms of energy in nature and individuals in society.
These all join its consort power, Mudgalani, of their
own will, without any coercion or outside basis of
supportive and persuasive elements.




is Uta pradhimudahannasya vidvanupayuna-


And taking on to the steering wheel of the
system, the scholar leader should take to the leading
power, at the same time energising it. Thus does Indra
animate and drive the master power of the circuit of




currents, imperishable energies, and, more and more
powerful, moves on his mission by motions of the


(The mantra may be applied to the individual
human system and its spiritual advancement. Indra, the
soul, takes on the Buddhi, intelligential steering wheel,
controlling the master power of the senses, that is, the
mind, and using the senses of perception and will for
onward motion, lives a dynamic life of success and






[Names: Sunamastravyacarat, Nrmnani]
The dynamic disciplined soul, Indra, insulated
within the circuitous energies of the self by inviolable
control of the fluctuations of mind, moves on happily
on way to spiritual progress, and similarly the self-
disciplined leader and ruler, concentrating on social
positive gifts for all people, watching his personal
actions and movements of society, bears and commands
the strength and glory of the nation.




[Names: Imam, Yena]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 102 953


Watch this, the power and force of the might
and mace of Indra within the battle field of existence,
destroying hate and enmity and abiding at peace by
which Mudgala, generous lord of abundance in the
warlike contests of life forces, has won a hundred
thousandfold wealth of lands, cows and culture for the
enlightenment of people.




10. Are agha ko nvittha dadarsa yam yunjanti tamva


[Names: Nasmai]
Who has seen that which thus drives away sin
and crime, hate and enmity, poverty and adversity, the
power which they use and establish among themselves?
For this generous and virile power they bring no grass,
no water, the one that is higher and higher as you try to
know and see, that bears the centre hold of the world,
points out the paths of life and directs us on the way.






[Names: Parivrkteva, Esaisya]
Like a woman who has missed her husband for
long and on reunion waxes with joy, like a water wheel
that constantly moves and provides water for irrigation,
let us win happiness and well being for life by constant




endeavour and dynamic will and power, and let our
victory be the giver of prosperity and fulfilment.




[Names: Tvam, Vrsa]
yuja.

Indra, lord of power and energy, giver of
fulfilment, you are the real and ultimate eye of the vision
of the entire world of existence who, lord omnipotent,
joined with cosmic powers of nature, inspiring and
energising, win the battle of life’s evolution and rule
over the world.


Mandala 10/Sukta 103






[Names: Indra, Brhaspati, Apva, Maruts, Devatah, Apratiratha, Aindra, Rshi, Marut, Asuh, Sakrandano, Satam, Instantly]
like a bull, breaker of the darkest cloud, shaker of mighty
once.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 103 955






[Names: Samkrandanenanimisena, Tadindrena]
O warriors, leading lights of heroes, take up that
challenge of antilife forces, fight that war and win with
Indra, roaring and terrifying the enemy forces, relentless
fighter, ambitious for victory, expert tactician,
unshakable, irresistible, generous and brave, and armed
with unfailing missiles for victory.




[Names: Samsrstajit, Somapa]
Indra is the warrior with bow and arrows in
hand, conquers with joint armed forces, multiple enemy
hosts, and wins over concentrated forces. Protector and
promoter of soma peace and joy of life, strong of arms
wielding a terrible bow, he throws out the enemies with
the shots of his unfailing arrows.









[Names: Brhaspate, Prabhanjantsenah]
Fly by the chariot, Brhaspati, destroyer of
demons, repeller of enemies, breaking through and
routing their forces. Fighting and conquering by battle,
come, defend and save our chariots of the social order.






[Names: Balavijnayah, Abhiviro]
Indra, tactical organiser of deployable forces,
venerable, strong, undisturbed and invulnerable, stout
and brave, challenging, impetuous, blazing, steadfast,
commander of the brave, highly intelligent, valiant,
illustrious, pray ascend the chariot of victory over






[Names: Gotrabhidam, Imam, Anu, Anu]
O friends, unite, prepare and mount the assault
with Indra, our friend and comrade, breaker of enemy
strongholds, winner of lands, hero of thunder arms and
victorious breaker of dark mighty clouds by his valour.
Follow the brave and advance.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 103 957





[Names: Sata, Duscyavanah]
May Indra, breaker of clouds and enemy
strongholds, with his courage and valour, unmoved by
pity, hero of a hundredfold passion, shaker of the
strongest evils, destroyer of enemy forces, irresistible
watrior, protect our army in our assaults and advances.






[Names: Devasenanamabhibhanjatinam, Somah, Soma, Maruto]
Of these armies of the Devas, divine forces of
nature and humanity, men of noble intentions and far
sight, breaking through and conquering evil and
negative elements of life, Indra of lighting power is the
leader and commander, Brhaspati, commanding
knowledge, tactics and wide vision, is the guide with
yajna on his right, and Soma, lover of peace and felicity,
is the inspiration, while Maruts, warriors of passion and
enthusiasm, march in front.








[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Varunasya, Varunas, Adityanam, Adityana, Sardha, Mahamanasam]
Great is the valour and passion of victorious and
virile Indra, of the ruler Varuna, visionary Adityas and
impetuous Maruts, all great and magnanimous at heart
who shake the world with their vision and performance,
and so let these victorious divinities’ tumulluous uproar
of victory rise and reverberate in the skies.






[Names: Uddharsaya, Udvrtrahan]
Indra, Maghavan, lord of glory, ruler of the land,
raise, calibrate and sharpen your weapons, raise the mind
and morale of my brave warriors, O breaker of the clouds
and darkness of evil, raise the calibre and hitting
efficiency of the fast moving forces of cavalry, armour
and air force, and let the roar of the victorious warriors
rise and rumble in space.






[Names: Asmamamindrah, Asmakam]
In international gatherings, let Indra, our leader,
raise our flag high in the flag lines, may our shots of
arrows hit the targets and win the battles, let our brave


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 104 959


progeny and our brave warriors be higher than others
in excellence, and may the divinities protect us in the
call to action in the battle field.






[Names: Amisam, Sokairandhe]
Get off, schizophrenia, that torment the heart
and delude their mind, depart, ill health, that afflict and
disable the body system of those who are children of
light. Go forward, be there and burn with pain in the
heart of those who are negative souls and love to abide
with darkness of mind and sloth of body with suffering
and unfriendliness as their food of life.





[Names: Preta, Sarma, Ugrah]
and win your victories. May Indra, lord omnipotent of
honour and glory, bless you with peace and fulfilment.
Let your arms be strong and bold so that you may live
an active life of irresistible honour and joy without fear.


Mandala 10/Sukta 104







[Names: Indra, Devata, Ashtaka, Vaishvamitra, Rshi, Asavi, Somah, Soma, Puruhuta, Tubhyam, Indra]
Indra, omnipotent ruler of the world, lord
invoked by all people, our soma of love and adoration
is prepared and seasoned for you, come soon to our yajna
by the radiations of your refulgent presence. Vibrant
poets and sages have prepared songs of adoration for
you. Pray come, accept and enjoy our homage, and
protect and promote this world of your own creation
for us.






[Names: Apsu, Mimiksuryamasraya]
Indra, lord omnipotent, Hariva, saviour from
suffering and commander of nature’s forces, drink of
the ecstatic soma created and seasoned in the joyous
currents of our karma at heart in the soul by enlightened
sages. Pray accept, protect and promote this soma of
joy showered by clouds and seasoned by sages for you,
and feel exalted with them all to your full satisfaction
and ever increase the joy.





[Names: Program, Sacya]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 104 961


O lord of showers and nature’s radiant rays, I
move this prayer and offer this soma drink distilled so
true and exalting for your pleasure. Indra, adored and
exalted by all our songs, thoughts and holy actions here,
pray rejoice and exalt us too.






[Names: Sacivastava, Prajavadindra]
Indra, lord of holy actions of creation,
sustenance and finale, under your protection by your
power and generosity, ardent devotees bearing food,
good health and long age, knowing and pursuing the
laws of truth and yajnic living, blest with good progeny
and noble humanity, abide in their yajnic home, singing,
rejoicing and celebrating your generosity.






[Names: Pranitibhiste, Puru, Mamhisthamutim]
Indra, lord of radiant powers, adorable, gracious
and self-refulgent, noble people, your celebrants,
bearing the advantage of your generous protection, cross
the seas of existence by virtue of your divine directions
and the wisdom of your words of eternal truth.








[Names: Somasya, Somas]
Indra, lord of radiant powers, come by the
radiations of your divine presence to our songs and acts
of adoration to listen and to drink the soma of our love
and homage distilled from the heart. May our yajna reach
you, lord omnipotent, gracious and forgiving. You are
the generous giver, you know the yajna, and you award
the fruits of yajna.






[Names: Sahasravajamabhimatisaham]
Him, who is lord of a thousand powers, subduer
of challenging enmities, lover of soma and his own
songs of adoration exalt and salutations of celebrants







[Names: Saptapo, Navatim]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 105 963


Indra, lord breaker of the strongholds of
darkness, want and negativities, seven are the divine
streams which flow free and unobstructed, by which
you fill the sea and help us cross it, ninety are the streams
flowing, and nine the sources of the flow by which you
bless the divines and humans to find and follow the
paths of life to the destination.






The great streams of water which you released
from ignominious self-containment, i.e., from the
hoarding clouds and the adamantine mountains, and
over which you, the sole one divinity, keep relentless
watch, ever awake, Indra, those which you brought into
being by breaking the cloud and whatever else you did,
by the same streams, O life of life, nourish and promote
the body and health of all living beings of the world.







[Names: Virenyah, Ardayadvrtramakrnodu, Sakrah]
Indra is brave, noble doer, admirable, and so
does the Vedic voice adore him, universally loved and
invoked. He breaks the demons of darkness, want and




ignorance, brings in light, and, mighty protector as he







[Names: Srnvantamugram]
We invoke and adore Indra, lord of bliss,
glorious, best of men and leaders, in this our battle of
life for protection, victory and further progress. He is
the best listener, illustrious, blazing in battles, destroyer
of the demons of darkness and winner of wealth and


Mandala 10/Sukta 105





[Names: Indra, Devata, Sumitra, Durmitra, Kautsa, Rshi, Kada, Dirgham]
O Vasu, shelter home of life, when does the spirit
inspire, impel and create the joyous song of celebration
for Indra? When it controls the various flow of the mind,
then the lasting soma is prepared for the ecstatic soul.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 105 965




[Names: Hari, Sepa, Ubha]
The person whose senses of perception and
volition are properly under control, dedicated to the soul
in repose and illuminative like the sun and moon in
unison, is blest by the master with the gift of peace and
divine ecstasy in the state of grace.





[Names: Sasramano, Subhe]
Repeller is Indra for the man of sin, fearsome
like a person sitting in judgement for punishment, but
for the man dedicated to good and joined to the divine
spirit, he is the giver of light and power.





[Names: Sacayorindrascarkrsa, Nadayorvivratayoh, Indrah]
For the person dedicated to him, serving him
and faithfully depending on him as the master, Indra is
a friend and comrade and does every good thing for
him, but for the vociferous and the refractory, he is a
mighty awful punitive and corrective power.








[Names: Vanoti, Ssiprabhyam, Siprinivan]
Indra who, like the sun of radiant and expansive
light, abides and rules over the world of heaven and
earth with his potent and pervasive presence for the
evolution and progress of life, wins over the contraries
and provides everything for the pious and law abiding
by both his promotive and punitive powers.






[Names: Prastaudrsvauja, Savasa, Rbhurna]
Indra, glorious lord of omnipotence, is
universally adored and served by cosmic forces and he,
Matarishva, mighty presence active in universal nature,
as Rbhu, cosmic architect, creates and structures the
universe by his divine vision, intelligence and shaping






[Names: Vajram, Arutahanuradbhutam]
He, the lord who made the Vajra, cosmic force
of universal dynamics, for breaking and building,
consumption and creation through transformation of the
forms in evolutionary process, and for emergence of
light over darkness and positive over negative, is the
lord of golden glory. He commands golden blissful
powers and inviolable creative imagination, and is
mysterious and sublime like the expansive space and


MANDAL - 10 / ऽक - 105 967






[Names: Ssisthyrca, Nabrahma]
Reduce and remove our sin and crookedness.
Let us win over the negationists with hymns of positive
celebration of nature and divinity. Yajna, pursuit of
knowledge and joint action, without grateful celebration
of divinity with Vedic hymns does not at all win your
approval and blessing.






[Names: Urdhva, Sajurnavam]
Your Trinity of divine glory and power rising
with the flames of cosmic yajna, the Trinity of Purusha,
Prakrti and Jiva, the soul, which pervades the threefold
universe of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, matter, energy and
thought, which pervades the three worlds of heaven,
earth and the skies, which activates divine stuti,
prarthana and upasana (adoration, prayer and
meditation) rising in the hearts of yajakas, and which
perfumes the house of cosmic yajna in space, that is the
ark, friend of humanity, with its own divine glory, and
life companion of the human soul in the world of
existence: that ark of life and divinity may we embark
with the three-dimensional mantra of Rk, Sama and
Yajus and cross the seas of existence.








[Names: Sriye, Yaya]
Let the sun, the skies and the divine voice be
for your glory, expression of the showers of bliss. Let
the yajnic ladle of immaculate ghrta be for the
celebration of your glory without a trace of human
selfishness. By these you shower the grace of your light
and bliss with water on your own seat of humanity, the





[Names: Kutsaputram, Kutsaputra, Kutsavatsam, Kutsavatsa]
O lord of cosmic energy of pranic existence, thus
does the positive friend of divinity adore you a hundred
ways and more. Thus does the negative friend of
negativities adore you a hundred times and more, you
who save the child of the pious in the elimination of
evil, you who protect the darling child of the celebrant
in the struggle against negationists.


Mandala 10/Sukta 106




[Names: Ashvins, Devate, Bhutansha, Kashyapa, Rshi, Ashvin]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 106 ०69




[Names: Ubha, Sadhricinad]
O Ashvins, complementarities of nature’s energy
and human resources, you want just that medium and
opportunity for your operation by which you may extend
your field of action like the weavers extending the warp
and woof of their cloth. The yajamana has been waiting
and waking so that you come together and, as in happy
time, you may add beauty and comfort to life with joint
relations and corporate activity.






[Names: Ustareva, Srayethe, Duteva]
As the loving and shining twins of nature at the
beginning of creation, you take on work worth
completion. Like a perfect team of fast and united
experts, you move and work within the master’s order
and design. Stay within the community with honour and
fame like welcome prophets of good news, do not stay
away as veteran achievers do not go away from their
ideal station of self- fulfilment.







[Names: Sakamyuja, Sakunasyeva, Agniriva, Purutra]
Team of simultaneous workers like wings of a
bird, wondrous as visionaries, lovers of divinity bright
as fire, come and join our yajna together and, like the
winds blowing all time and seasons over spaces,
continue the programme abundantly.






[Names: Iryeva, Ssrusti]
Twin brothers of ours, protective as parents for
children, bright as blazing fire and the sun, instant
achievers like ruling twins, nourishing and
warmth of sun rays for comfort and joy, pray listen to
our call and come immediately as success itself.






[Names: Vamsageva, Simbata, Satara, Satapanta, Vajevocca]
Providers of food and nourishment like a team
of bullocks, givers of love and peace like friends,
omnipresent observers of truth and law, hundredfold
performers, saviours and protectors in a hundred ways,
high and great like the spirit of energy, harbingers of
good health and age, dedicated to Dharma, strong like
rams in raiment like the golden fleece, and worthy of
service and reverence, that’s what you are.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 106 971






[Names: Srnyeva, Udanyajeva]
Shining and supporting like the moon,
destroyers of hate and enmity, distributors of boons,
powers of punishment for evil, breakers of darkness,
pearls of the sea, victorious, joyous, may the Ashvins
give the aging mortal like me the gift of unaging health
and immortality.






[Names: Pajreva, Rbhu]
Ashvins, like mighty fast and illustrious pilots,
take the uncertain, transitory, aging mortal through the
objects of value and desire across the seas. Like artists
of perfect expertise and builders of the chariot, may the
Ashvins come like impetuous winds and bring us wealth
and life’s fulfilment.






[Names: Gharmeva, Patareva]
Like the warmth and cool of the sun and moon,




you make us share the honey sweets of life at the heart
of the nation. Protectors of the nation’s honour, well
equipped with power, force, and armaments for defence,
ever on the watch like birds on the move, blissful of
form like the moon, dynamic as mind in action,
perceptive and responsive as visionary wise sages and
tacticians: Such you are, rulers and warriors of the nation
of humanity.






[Names: Brhanteva, Karneva, Like]
of mind and action in the deeper situations of life. Like
the feet of the traveller fording a stream, you feel the
depth of the water. Like the ears, you listen to the ruler
and you remember and remind all others of their duty.
Pray, like rays of the sun, please share the wonders of






[Names: Arangareva, Kinareva]
In approval and appreciation of our performance
you excite and inspire us with the sweetness of life.
Like humming bees filling the honey comb hanging
down, you bring the milk and honey of nature from


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 107 973


above down to the earth and the cow. Like toiling
farmers sowing the seeds of their sweat in the field and
the earth yielding food from crops and herbs, you bring
life energy for the body, mind and soul.






[Names: Rdhvama, Yaso]
Let us realise and extend the meaning and
application of the mantric song of life and achieve
further progress. O Ashvins, come close by your car,
share and confirm our mantras and mantric success in
practice. And may the honour and excellence of the
nation as well as ripe grain, honey, and milk in the cow’s
udders and our knowledge of the physical essence of
the world fulfil the hopes and expectations of the
Ashvins and of the men and women of the world.


Mandala 10/Sukta 107






[Names: Dakshina, Devata, Divya, Angirasa, Dakshina, Prajapatya, Rshi, Avirabhunmahi, Mahi]
Revealed and manifest is the great light and
glory of these sun-rays, the entire life of the world is
revealed and released from darkness. Mighty light given
by parental radiations of the sun is come, yajna is
accomplished, and the broad flow of generosity is seen






[Names: Ucca, Hiranyada, Soma]
Generous givers of dakshina holy gift, abide on
high in the regions of light and bliss. Those who give
horse in charity ride with the sun. Givers of gold win
immortality. O Soma, friend of peace and joy, givers of
shelter and clothes cross the hurdles of life and live a




of Daivi purtirdaksina devayajya na kavaribhyo


Divine fulfilment and yajnic dakshina for the
holy Devas is not for the stingy, selfish and the mean,
because they give not for anyone, anything. And many
are those who give liberally for fear of ignominy and
shame, they give for the fulfilment of the deserving holy
ones.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 107 975




[Names: Satadharam, Vayumarkam, Vayumarka]
taram.


They know and give liberal dakshina for Vayu
blowing in a hundred streams, for the sun in heaven
and for many other Devas who love, watch and guard
humanity. And those who serve the devas and offer
homage and gifts in yajna wherein they join the
divinities themselves receive the fruits of yajna flowing
in by seven streams.






[Names: Daksinavan, Tameva]
The giver of dakshina is first invited and goes
about in advance of all, the giver of dakshina is chosen
as leader and head of the community and goes to occupy
the first place. I accept him as leader and ruler of the
people, who rises first and highest as the man of








He alone they call Rshi, the seer, Brahma,
presiding priest of yajna, Adhvaryu, prime organiser,
Samaga, singer of Saman hymns, and Ukthashasa,
scholar specialist of the Rks, and he alone is the knower
of immaculate divinity, who has first realised the three
mantras of Aum, three branches of Veda, Rk, Yajuh and
Sama, three orders of yajnic fire, Agni, Vayu and Aditya,
and who has first fulfilled the basic part and pre-requisite
of yajna, Dakshina.





[Names: Daksinasvam, Daksinannam]
He who gives a horse as dakshina, who gives a
cow, who gives silver, who gives gold, gives food and
food grains, that giver is our own, the very soul of yajna
and, knowing this secret of yajna, he creates a protective
cover for himself by dakshina.






[Names: Idam]
The givers of food die not, nor do they suffer


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 107 977


want and poverty, they are never hurt, never violated,
never suffer pain, because they give food in charity. And
all this that the world is, all this that is comfort, joy and
bliss, all this, Dakshina gives to those who give in






[Names: Bhoja, Bhoja]
The givers of food and relief first get a good
wife, generous givers reach the end sweetness of all
drinks, and they win over even those who assail them,






[Names: Bhojayasvam, Bhojasyedam]
For the generous giver they embellish and adorn
the fleet horse, for the generous groom the maiden waits
and sits on the wedding vedi in all her finery, and for
the generous man is this home, lovely as a rose bouquet
and decorated, wonder worked and sanctified as a
temple of divinities.








[Names: Bhojamasvah, Bhojam, Satruntsamanikesu]
Well trained horses bear the generous master
along in his travels, by dakshina gift to the craftsman a
comfortable chariot is obtained, the divinities protect
and advance the generous yajamana in all his yajnic
battles for life, and the generous giver alone is the winner
over oppositions in all conflicts.


Mandala 10/Sukta 108
Devata: Sarama (7, 3, 5, 7, 9), Panayah (2, 4, 6, 8, 10,

[Names: Rshi, Panayah, Asurah, Sarama, Devashuni]
This sukta is a dialogue between the Panis who
are also Asuras, and Sarama. At the physical level the
Panis are the dark clouds of vapours, and Sarama is
thunder and lightning. At the spiritual, the Panis are the
senses and pranas and Sarama is the energy of the spirit,
the soul’s urge for living, elan vital or Ashish.






[Names: Kimicchanti, Kasmehitih]
What does she want? Sarama, thunder voice of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 108 979


divinities, that is come here? The path which the higher
ones tread is far off, not here. And what is our interest
here in her coming? How deep is the darkness like the
unfathomable night! How has she crossed the floods of
the skies. (This is what the Panis say in response to






[Names: Indrasya, Indras, Atiskado]
Sarama: O clouds, O pranic energies, I am the
dynamic spirit of Indra, inspired by Indra, I sojourn here,
anxious to take on the treasures and pleasures of your
living possibilties. I wander from the boundless force
of Indra, and I wander with fear. May Indra protect us.
That’s how I have crossed the floods of water and the
golden greens of Indra’s court.






[Names: Kidrnnindrah]
Panis: O Sarama, voice of thunder and lightning,
O dynamic spirit of life, what sort is this Indra? What is
his strength and splendour whose messenger you come
travelling from far, whom we should receive as a friend




and bear as one that he may be our master and the master
of our cows, our powers and potentials for living?






[Names: Naham]
Sarama: O Panis, O clouds, O senses and pranic
powers of practical living, I do not comprehend that
power, Indra, which is undaunted, which is
overpowering, whose messenger I am, come from afar.
Mighty rolling oceans of unfathomable depth cannot
cover it, nor contain it. Indeed, struck by Indra, the
clouds fall in showers and lie on the ground.





[Names: Kasta]
Panis: O noble and glorious Sarama, these
streams of rain, these vibrations of senses, mind and
energies which you want, travelling unto the bounds of
heaven, who would release these for you without
struggle? And our weapons too are sharp and powerful.




[Names: Wears]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 108 981




[Names: Asenya, Adhrsto]
Sarama: O Panis, clouds of vapour, mind and
sense vibrations, your words are not worthy of fight,
your bodies are too tenuous for the arrows, your path of
motion too is not strong enough for any campaign. And
even Brhaspati, lord of speech and space, himself would
not be too indulgent toward you. You are too lost in the
dust around to be free from sin.






[Names: Ayam, Raksanti]
Panis: O Sarama, light of lightning, spirit of
life’s will, this treasure is locked in the cloud, it is vibrant
with sunlight within, lustre of nature and wealths of
life. And that treasure, practical possibilities guard.
Wonderful guards are they. In vain have you come to
this place, it is void of anything for you.







[Names: Somasita, Angiraso]
Sarama: O Panis, calculative clouds of small
gain, here come the sharpest shears of wind, stormy
gusts of winds, sudden whirl winds, which all will




shatter this concentration of waves and vapours of living
possibilities of the rains of life, (render them
meaningless and purposeless without the presence of
Indra, the soul). Mind therefore, and withdraw those






[Names: Svasaram]
Panis: O Sarama, thunderous voice and
lightning version of Indra, this way, then, you come
equipped with divine powers and forces. We then accept
you as our self-fluent and self-energised sister. O
glorious sister, pray do not go back, we share the waves
and vapours of life with you, and we give you what is






[Names: Gokama, Panis]
sisterhood. Indra and fiery winds and energies of
nature’s law know what is to be known. Those who want
to live by senses and pranas, the source whence I come,
would move and win you. Hence you go off far from
here,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 109 983






[Names: Duramita, Brhaspatirya]
O Panis, O clouds, go far away to the best place
you can. Let the vapours break the bonds and go up by
the law of nature, and Brhaspati, master of space and
rain, Soma, master of herbs, Gravana, scholar scientist
of vapours and condensation, the sages of vision and
hidden, however so deep. So will Indra, the soul, win
the senses and pranas to satisfy the will to live in the
world of existence.


Mandala 10/Sukta 109








[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Brahmajaya, Juhu, Brahmaputra, Urdhvanabha, Rshi, Viluharastapa]
In the beginning, to express and reveal the
joyous manifestation of the creativity of Supreme
Brahma, those first borns of the dynamics of divine law,
Akupara, the light principle or Aditya Rshi, Salila, the
liquid principle or Angira Rshi, Matarishva, the wind
energy principle or Vayu Rshi, Viduhara, the fiery




[Names: Agni]
burning and creative, illustrious, soothing, flowing,
divine souls and spirits express and reveal the divine
voice of the Veda. (This voice is the Ila.)






[Names: Anvartita, Mitra]
Soma, the ruling spirit of life, all at peace, having
first received the divine Word, the Vedic voice,
concomitant of omniscience, gives it again to Brahma
in the dynamic Sarasvati form. Varuna, Mitra and Agni
follow, and the yajaka Agni holds it by hand as in the
yajnic ladle and leads it on.






[Names: Hastenaiva]
The received form of this divine Vak is to be
practically received by hard discipline. “This is the child
of heaven,” this having been said, “This is not for
communication without practice,” this is the important
injunction. It does not wait for any one, it does not stand
still, it moves on. Its meaning is hidden like the state of
the dominion of a ruler.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 109 985






[Names: Deva, Bhima]
The divinities of eternal time and seven ancient
sages who sit down for tapas and cosmic yajna speak
and communicate this. It is the mighty companion of
the devotee of Brahman received through discipline of
celibacy and initiation. Brhaspati, lord of Infinity holds
this sublime Vak in infinite space and time.






[Names: Brahmacari, Tena]
The Brahmachari, dedicated to this sublime
subject, goes on pursuing the discpline of the divine
voice and, internalising it, becomes one of, and with,
the nature and presence of the Devas. And thereby, O
sages, the scholar obtains the Word and the wedded wife
escorted to him by the blissful somaic preceptor like
the ghrta ladle for yajnic offering and achievement.








[Names: Punarvai, Raja]
Noble teachers and scholars continuously go on
teaching the Vedic voice and noble people conduct the
yajnic programmes of education. Rulers and brilliant
men of knowledge and generous disposition serving the
divine truth carry on the propagation of the holy Word
and its extension in practice and application.






[Names: Purardaya, Urjam]
Thus do sages, scholars and noble people,
serving and spreading the light of divine knowledge
and the Vedic Word, sanctified and energised for life’s
purity, excellence and joy by Devas, serve Brahma, Lord
Supreme in order that they may enjoy and extend the
wealth and creativity of mother earth and the


Mandala 10/Sukta 110


[Names: Apriyaj, Idhama, Samiddhagni, Taru, Barhi, Davidvara, Ushasanakta, Daivyu, Hotarau, Prachetasau, Tisradevyah, Tvashta, Vanaspati, Svahakrtis, Devata, Jamadagni, Bhargava, Rama, Jamadagn, Rshi, Samiddho]
O Jataveda, life pervasive in all that is born,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 110 987


lighted fire of life, light of light, greatest friend, bearer
of the fragrance of life, all awareness, all intelligence,
you are the poetic seer and creator, and when you are
lighted faithfully in the human homes you invoke, bring
in and join the divinities. Pray bring in today for us all
that is divine in life and nature.






[Names: Tanunapat, Manmani]
O Tanu-napat, sustainer of your own existential
form and promoter of our health and mind, O divine
light of holy flames, enjoy and sprinkle with honey the
paths of yajna by which the fragrances rise and the
yajakas proceed to the divinities by observance of the
law of Truth, and, augmenting our thoughts with acts
of holiness and beatifying the yajna, take over our songs
and yajna of love and non-violence and establish it in
the heights of divinities.






[Names: Ajuhvana, Tvam]
Invoked and invoking, venerable and adorable
Agni, come with all the pervasive wealth and
excellences of life and join this yajna. Mighty great you
are among the divinities, presiding priest of divine




nature, sociable, loved, admired and cherished for
company, pray bring in the divinities to the yajna.






[Names: Pracinam]
In advance of the days and dawns for the
vestment of this earth as ever, holy grass is gathered
and spread out over the vedi by divine ordainment, and
the creative yajna proceeds and expands wide and high,
joyous and brilliant for mother earth and the divinities.


(This yajna may be interpreted either as the daily
morning yajna or the first creative yajna at the dawn of






[Names: Vyacasvatirurviya, Srayantam, Devirdvaro]
Let the doors of divine vision and wisdom open
wide and high, unbounded, unbarred, universal,
accommodative and blissful for the divinities of nature
and humanity, and sustain and promote the people as
gracious women with open arms inspire and exalt their


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 110 989






[Names: Divye, Sriyam, Sukrapisam]
Creative, generous and peaceable, companiona-
ble and adorable day and night, divine, youthful,
expansive, brilliant and beautiful, wearing and bearing
grace and grandeur of the purest powerful order may
abide together and join us in this yajna.





[Names: Daivya, Pracodayanta]
Divine Agni and Aditya, first and foremost
universal yajakas of noble expression, participants in
cosmic yajna, promoting all yajnic programmes of
nature and humanity and projecting the universal light
of existence, directing and showing it by various paths
of nature, may, we pray, inspire and promote us in order
to help us enact and accomplish all our human
programmes of yajnic nature and purpose.







[Names: Tisro]
May Ila, the spirit of transcendent divinity,
Sarasvati, dynamic spirit of universal immanent
omniscience, and Bharati, generous spirit of mother
nature and mother earth, all three divinities of holy light,
knowledge and love, noble doers of divine acts, come
at the earliest and seat themselves here on the lovely
sacred grass of our vedi like human mothers and bless
us with vision, wisdom and enlightenment.






[Names: Tamadya]
That shaping power of divinity which adorns
with beautiful forms these two creative motherly heaven
and earth and all other natural forms of existence, that
divine refulgent Tvashta, O learned yajaka, loved and
venerable, invoke, adore and worship in the yajna here
today.






[Names: Updvasrja, Vanaspatih, Agnih, Agni]
And sincerely with your heart and soul, offer
holy havis into the yajnic fire, having prepared the holy
materials, seasoning them with honey and ghrta for food
of the divinities according to the seasons, and let


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 111 991


Vanaspati, nature’s greenery, Shamita, breaker of the
clouds for showers of peace and prosperity, and the
refulgent sun taste and consume the offerings with






[Names: Sadyo, Asya]
Agni which is the first and pioneer of the
divinities enacts and lights up the yajna as soon as it
arises and accomplishes it to the end, so may the
divinities, under the action and direction of this yajaka,
share and consume the fragrant havis offered with Svaha
into the flames of yajnic fire with complete faith and
dedication.


Mandala 10/Sukta 111






[Names: Indra, Devata, Ashtadanshtra, Vairupa, Rshi, Manisinah, Indram, Indra]
O men of thought and wisdom, judgement and
reflection, bear your thoughts and offer your songs and
prayers to Indra according to whatever are the thoughts
and faith of the people. With our sincere thoughts, words
and actions, we praise and pray to Indra. He alone is




the lord omnipotent and generous, he alone knows all
that is, and he knows and accepts the thoughtful





[Names: Rtasya, Udatisthat]
Indra is the splendour and sustainer of the
regions of light and vapours of skies, he rises and shines,
playful like the youthful calf of a heifer or Prakrti at the
dawn and comes up in glory with attendant radiations.
He rises with the blaze of light and proclamation of its
might pervading wide and bold the great expansive
regions of space.






[Names: Indrah, Srutya, Anmenam, Suryaya, Surya]
Indra knows the course of existence in entirety
as 1s known by revelation of the Veda. He alone is the
ultimate victorious over all, he alone sets the orbit for
the sun, he alone reveals the sacred Word of divine
knowledge. He alone is the master of heaven and earth,


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 111 993


ata us




[Names: Indro, Puruni]
Indra is lord almighty by his own omnipotence,
ruling the spatial ocean of particles of matter and energy,
both manifesting and withdrawing them, homage being
done by vibrant sages and blazing stars of the universe.
He creates and extends the many many worlds of space
and he wields the law and the power that holds the entire
worlds of existence.






[Names: Susnam, Mahi]
Indra is the maker and measure of heaven and
earth, knows all operations of the world in existence,
and destroys drought and adversity by showers of rain
and divine grace. He enlightens the great heavens by
the sun and he himself is the pillar of the universe
holding it in dynamic balance by the law of divine Rtam
working in nature.








[Names: Vajrena]
O lord of glory, destroyer of darkness, negativity
and want, destroy the demon of evil by the Bajra,
unfailing catalytic power of nature you wield. O lord
indomitable, be the mighty hero of arms of adamant
and steel, destroy the violent forces of terror, frustrate
the wiles and designs of the uncreative forces of society
and be the saviour by unassailable power of Divinity.






[Names: Sacanta, Yadusasah, Yadusasa]
When the lights of the dawn join the sun, then
its rays assume wonderful beauty and glory. Then (in
the day) I see no (other) star of heaven nor any joining
the rising dawn again. Why? What is this mystery? Who
knows of this? (Only Indra).




[Names: Duram]
At the rise of the sun, the first rays and the first
mists of the morning move and go far far away. Who


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 111 995


knows what and where is their beginning, what is their
basic foundation, what is their middle, and what and
where their end? Who among you knows this mystery?






[Names: Only, Srjah]
Indra, when you release the showers of rain
engulfed by the cloud, then these flow down free and
rapidly. Thus those who want freedom and release from
bondage are released by Indra, and once released, they
do not stop on way involved in the bonds (they have






[Names: Sadhricth, Astama]
Together the streams released by Indra flow and
join the sea like loving women joining their husband,
the lord of time and breaker of the existential bonds
always since eternity is their inspirer and freedom giver.
O Indra, may all our earthly wealth and excellences of
sense and mind, all your gifts here, and all our songs of
adoration and voices of prayer ultimately reach you,
the destination from existence to the essence.




Mandala 10/Sukta 112






[Names: Indra, Devata, Nabha, Prabhedana, Vairupa, Rshi, Indra, Harsasva, Sura, Ssatrunu]
Indra, lord of glory, drink of the soma of love
and adoration prepared and offered you as you please
in response to our desire. This morning prayer, adoration
and yajnic homage is primarily and exclusively for you.
Pray be exalted and rise to destroy the enemies and
negativities of life. With our songs and praise we
celebrate your acts of omnipotence and generosity.






[Names: Yaste, Somape, Somap, Tuyama]
Indra, come by that chariot of yours which is
faster than the mind, come to taste the sweets of our
soma of adoration and prayer. May the horses of your
chariot instantly turn and speed hither, mighty horses
by which, all happy and blissful, you come and bless
the devotees.




[Names: Frat]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 112 997




[Names: Haritvata, Suryasya, Suryas, Asmabhirindra]
Let our body, mind and soul be touched by
golden glory of the sun and transmuted into the highest
forms of beauties and graces of life. Indra, thus invoked
and adored by us who yearn for company and
communion with you, pray come, be seated in the heart
and soul in union, joyous and exalted, and lead us to
the divine goal.






[Names: Yasya, Tadoka]
Indra, whose grandeur in the state of divine
ecstasy even the great heaven and earth do not
comprehend, exalted in that very halo and glory of
ecstasy, come by the dear golden radiations of divinity
harnessed to your chariot and well enjoy the
presentations of our homage, the food cherished by





[Names: Divinity, Sasvat, Somah, Soma]
Indra, that soma which you always enjoy, and




that yajamana whom you always protect and destroy
his enemies with inimitable and incomparable weapons,
that soma is distilled and ready for your drink and, and
that yajamana solicits your radiant attention and
generous favour of grace.






[Names: Idam, Somamena, Somam, Satakrato, Purna]
Indra, lord of infinite action, this heart and soul
is ever dedicated to you, pray accept and enjoy the love
and homage presented by the celebrant. Over flowing
is the heart and soul with ecstatic joy and honey sweets
of devotion which all divinities of heaven and earth love
and cherish.






[Names: Purudha, Asmakam]
Many many people with various kinds of
homage and prayer invoke you, lord of infinite power
and generosity. All these our presents of love, honour
and adoration of the sweetest order are for you only.
Pray accept these with love and favour.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 112 999




[Names: Satinamanyurasrathayo]
Indra, I celebrate and glorify your eternal
manifestations of might and the highest exploits you
have ever before accomplished. Lord of essential power
and passion, you break the cloud, open the mountains,
and you break the deep silence of the night of
annihilation and proclaim the Word for the men of vision
and wisdom.






O lord of the people, stay and abide with the
people, they celebrate you as the highest incomparable
of the poets of the world of existence. Nothing happens,
nothing is done without you far or near. O lord of glory,
I offer you the highest and most wonderful tribute and
homage and adoration.







[Names: Abhikhya, Ranam]
Pray turn to us, watch us with favour, lord of




glory, we beseech you. O lord of world’s wealth, honour
and excellence, O friend, know, acknowledge and accept
the friend of divinity. Fight out our enemies, lord of
battle, commander of imperishable power and force, lead
us on to achieve and share the wealth and honour so far
unshared and unknown.


Mandala 10/Sukta 113






[Names: Indra, Devata, Shataprabhedana, Vairupa, Rshi, Tamasya, Susmamavatam, Yadait, Somasya, Somas]
May heaven and earth along with all the
nobilities of nature and humanity, all of equal and
agreeable mind, follow, protect and promote the might
of Indra, this ruling power of the world, when he goes
forward to display that power and grandeur of his mind
and senses and, exalted by the happy and exhilarating
glory of his dominion in action, rises in greatness and




[Names: Devebhirindro]
Vishnu, pervasive power and presence of nature


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 113 1001


and humanity, holding, sharing and sustaining its own
part of the power and Dharma of Indra’s dominion by
virtue of its own might and lustre, exlalts the sweetness
and grace of his system, and Indra, ruler of the glorious
dominion, destroying the evil factors of darkness, want
and ignorance with the assistance of his supporters and
divine partners rises mightier, proves his greatness and
majesty and becomes the object of his devotees’ choice
all the more.






[Names: Vrtena, Samsamavide, Visve, Marutah, Maruta]
When against forces of darkness and serpentine
crookedness you bear weapons and stand firm to fight,
win all agreement, approval and admiration that all is
well, then, O blazing lord of might and glory, all the
Maruts, vibrant powers of nature and humanity in the
world, together with their heart and soul join and exalt
your greatness and the magnanimity of your majesty of
mind and soul.








[Names: Jajnana, Avrscadadrimava]
From the very rise and manifestation, repelling,
expelling and removing conflicts and confrontations of
jealous forces, watching, assessing and affirming his
fighting forces, breaking down clouds of pent up waters
and mountainous hoards of resources and releasing all
stagnant potentials, and sustaining the mighty vast world
of light and joy by his will, wisdom and active power,
Indra rules and reigns in glory.






[Names: Adindrah, Avabharaddhrsito, Sevam, Varunaya, Varuna, Mitraya, Mitra]
Indra keeps, rules and controls all the dynamic
forces of the world together in order, separates, holds,
energises and moves heaven and earth and maintains
the order of separate identity and togetherness in
balance, and, undaunted and invincible, he wields the
thunderbolt of justice and punishment as well as the
golden sceptre of peace and law for people of love,
justice, free choice and generosity.





[Names: Indrasyatra, Vrtram, Yadugro]
When the blazing Indra with his might breaks
the demonic cloud hoarding the waters of life covered


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 113 1003


in darkness, then in honour of the brave hero of
shattering thunder and his brilliant forces, poets sing
songs of adoration.






[Names: Dhvantam]
When two warriors, Indra and Vrtra, meet in
battle doing mighty acts of the first order of valour with
their respective valour and power, then, when the
covering darkness is destroyed, Indra with his might
rules the scene and dominates over the first invocation
and institution of yajna.






[Names: Raddham]
And then all saints and holy men of the world
celebrate and exalt your mighty deeds with voices full
of sweetness, love and adoration. And when Vrtra is
destroyed by the fatal blow of Indra and darkness is
dispelled, Indra like the sun waxes in glory as fire rises
in flames, having consumed fuel food with its jaws and






[Names: Bhuri, Indro]
taye.


O celebrants of Indra dedicated to yajnic union
and cooperation, celebrate your kinship with Indra
enthusiastically and proclaim with words of power,
praise, love and friendship: Indra listens with faith,
understanding and sympathy at heart to invocation and
prayer for relief of the oppressed and subdues the
vociferous ogres and terrorising destroyers of life and
values of good living. (Such a person is worthy of being
the ruler, Indra of the human nation.)






[Names: Tvam, Purunya, Purun, Sugebhirvisva]
Indra, omnipotent ruler of the world, bear and
bring us abundant wealth, honour and excellence
flowing in from all sides so that I may be able to think
and meditate with words of prayer, praise and
and undesirables of the world by simple, natural and
navigable paths of progress, and you now, today itself,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 114 1005


firmly seat and settle yourself over the wide world and
receive our homage and admiration as tribute of love at
heart in faith.


Mandala 10/Sukta 114








[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Sadhri, Vairupa, Gharma, Tapasa, Rshi, Gharma, Divaspayo]
Bright heat and light in conjunction pervade the
threefold universe of heaven, earth and the middle
regions. Matarishva, basic cosmic energy and pranic
vitality, joins these two in friendly alliance for love and
service. From the heaven of light and divine awareness
flow vibrations bearing the milk of life and the divine
message of knowledge for human awareness, and divine
souls receive the light of eternal illumination, the Vedic
message with the music of Samans in ecstasy.





[Names: Tisro, Tasam]
Sages who have heard the divine message for




long through discipline carry it on to pass it on to others.
They know, closely watch, internalise and worship the
trinity of eternal reality and its existential dynamics:
Brahma, Prakrti, and Jiva, three modes of Prakrti: sattva,
rajas and tamas, three phases of temporal existence:
creation, continuance and completion, three aspects of
the good life: knowledge, karma and worship, three
aspects of worship: adoration, prayer and meditation in
the triple world of earth, skies and heaven. Poetic vision
arises and creative souls know the original cause of all
these orders of existence and knowledge which operate
in all other open and covert, lowest and highest facts,
activities and disciplines of life. That cause is One,






[Names: Supreme, Unique, Catuskaparda, Vayu, Tasyam]
Fourfold is that reality of existence, knowledge
and the language of knowledge: Prakrti, jiva, immanent
ordainer and the transcendent; matter, energy,
intelligence and avyakta Prakrti; Rks, Samans, Yajus
and Chhandas; Para, pashyanti, madhyama and vaikhari,
in other words, nama, akhyata, upasarga and nipata. The
vedi of existence in which it abides is ever young,
beyond age and death, eternal. It is beautiful and
exciting, golden gracious, which covers all the rules
and laws of existence. In that abide two generous,
creative beautiful birds on the tree of life: the one that


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 114 1007


watches is the Supreme Spirit of the cosmos, and the
other that eats the fruit and tastes the sweet and the bitter
of it is the individual human soul. In that existence, that
knowledge and that Word of knowledge, noble souls
find, live and experience their share of existence and
the divine essence.






[Names: Ekah]
One and One only is the cosmic spirit which
pervades and manifests in the boundless ocean of space-
and-time. It watches, illuminates and inspires this entire
universe. I see it with pure and transparent mind
manifesting at the closest. Prakrti which is the mother
medium of its manifestation embraces it in love, and it
too loves and embraces the mother medium. So also,
divine Speech which is the mother medium of its
expression embraces it in love, and it too loves and
embraces the mother medium.






[Names: Suparnam, Chandamsi]
Vibrant self-realised sages and visionary poets
visualise and express the One immutable Spirit by words




of their experiential vision. Taking on to the poetic
compositions of Vedic mantras in yajnas and meditative
sessions they visualise and restructure twelve cyclic
manifestations and self-expressions of soma, the moon,
the sun and the light beyond the sun and moon, and the
spirit of life itself.






[Names: Sattrisamsca, Yajnam]
Visualising and re-structuring the modes and
manifestations of the Soma spirit through thirty-six and
four poetic structures bearing upto the twelfth of the
forms, having enacted the yajna with their thought and
imagination, the sages accomplish the yajnic cycle with
Rks and Samans.






[Names: Caturdasanye, Apnanam]
Fourteen are other majestic manifestations of
this soma spirit of the universe in dynamic yajnic form
which seven grand sages conduct with the voice divine.
And here, in this world of limited human imagination,
who can explain and reveal in human terms that all-
pervasive saviour spirit in its reality and that central


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 114 1009


path by which the sages move up to divinity and have a
drink of the soma ecstasy of divinity distilled through
experience?






[Names: Sahasradha, Sahasradha]
Thousandfold are the Vedic hymns, fifteen of
them the highest and best, all extended as far as the
heaven and earth. Thousandfold are the majesties and
glories of it, the Vedic Word and vision extending and
abiding as far as the vision and omniscience of divinity.






[Names: Kaschandasam, Kamrtvijam, Indrasya, Indras]
Who is the constant sage that knows the
structure, end and purpose of the hymns? Who attains
to the centre meaning of divine reality corresponding
to the word of divine voice? Who would say who is the
eighth veteran of the sagely yajakas? Who knows the
two mighty carriers of the cosmic chariot of Indra?








[Names: Bhumya, Sramasya]
Some of the horses of Indra, master of the solar
chariot, as rays of the sun, reach the ends of the solar
regions while they abide yoked to the poles of the
chariot. The divinities of nature provide them with food
to replenish the energy spent, when the sun rests inside


Mandala 10/Sukta 115






[Names: Agni, Devata, Upastuta, Varshtihavya, Rshi, Citra, Anudha]
Wondrous is the invigorating and sustaining
power of the newly risen youthful Agni which never
goes to its parental source for food and energy
replenishment. And if you say that the udderless creator
ambassadorial mission, it carries the fragrant message
of yajna to the divinities immediately on its birth.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 115 1011




[Names: Agnirha, Abhipramura]
Agni, ‘high priest’ is the name given to ‘fire’,
fiery leader of yajna, which, heroic of action, giving
generously, takes to the woods with blazing flames and
crackling jaws and, noble deity of yajna as it is, with
ladlefuls of havi joins us with gifts of life like a mighty
roaring cloud raining on pastures and fields of corn.






[Names: Socisa]
O celebrants of yajna, celebrate Agni, the leader,
watching every thing like a bird on the tree, abiding in
every thing dynamic, brilliant and generous, profuse
giver of food and joy, thundering as a cloud of living
showers and deep as the sea, consumer of havi by flames
of fire and giver of light by sun rays, mighty strong and
exalted, grand achiever of victories and pioneer path
maker and illuminator like the sun.







[Names: Sisanta]
Agni, power unaging and dynamic, inviolable
and imperishable are your forces like the radiations of
dazzling light and blazing fire which, like victorious
warriors, come to you, power indomitable and presence
pervasive in three worlds, and exhort you for their life’s






[Names: Agnih]
That Agni, lord and leader of life, wisest pioneer
and comrade of the warring wise, is the saviour giver
of success and fulfilment to devotees far and near across
difficulties within and outside. May Agni protect and
promote the celebrants and the brave and give us the
advantage of their protection and advancement.






[Names: Vajintamaya, Anu, Anudre, Anudr, Resplendent]
and earth, I, spontaneously inspired and exalted, offer
homage and pray for protection to the most powerful
pervasive and aware, ever true, highest and most


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 115 1013


glorious protector and promoter who provides succour
and sustenance of high order even in dry desert lands
of no water by his indomitable power and potential.






[Names: Evagnirmartaih, Mitraso]
Thus Agni, wealth, power and shelter of the
world, inspirer of strength, ambition and enthusiasm
for life, is adored and exalted by the brave along with
the leading lights of vision and action, though mortals
all, who, constantly disciplined in mind, dedicated to
truth and yajnic action for creativity and production of
good things for life, like friends of mankind in unison
and united action, excel and lead ordinary humanity by
virtue of their brilliance and shining achievements.






[Names: Urjo, Tvam]
“Child of energy, creator, sustainer and master
of strength, energy and victory, undaunted and
inviolable wielder of courage, patience and enthusiasm
for living”, thus does the celebrant’s profound vision
and word describe you as he closely watches and adores
you. We, holy, brave and grateful, praise you while we




enjoy your gift of good health, long life and the vision
and hope of ultimate success and fulfilment.






[Names: Tamsca]
Agni, lord omniscient, leading light of existence,
cosmic energy of nature, thus do visionary sages, close
watchful scholars, children of yajakas pursuing,
enacting and accomplishing yajnic acts for rain showers
and gifts of generous nature, describe and adore you.
Pray protect and promote them with success. Bless the
celebrants. Advance the veteran scholars. “Here is the
havi, pray accept the oblation”, saying this they raise
the hand for offering and rise. “Salutations to Agni and
honour to the generous giver for the achievement of
showers, food and energy,” saying this with surrender
and submission they rise and achieve their mission’s
success and fulfilment.


Mandala 10/Sukta 116









[Names: Indra, Devata, Agniyuta, Sthaura, Agniyupa, Sthaura, Rshi, Piba, Somam, Soma, Ssavistha, Piba, Savase]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 116 1015


Indra, lord omnipotent, light of life, ruler of the
world, harbinger of the showers of prosperity, drink of
the soma of our homage, and protect and promote the
honour of your own creation for the power and glory of
humanity on earth. Mightiest lord, take over and rule
the world for the elimination of evil and the promotion
of the positive values of life. Invoked and exalted,
inspire your own people for the sake of strength, high
morale and prosperity, honour and excellence. Promote
the sweetness and culture of life and, happy and
satisfied, bring us showers of all round progress and






[Names: Asya, Somasya, Somas, Svastida]
Indra, taste the best of beauty and sweetness of
this abundant and powerful soma of the social and
Spiritual system prepared and seasoned to purity and
sanctity of the highest order and presented in full faith.
O giver of good and all round welfare of life, come
straight to our vedi for the gift of wealth, honour and
excellence of prosperity, happy at heart, and let us all
rejoice.








[Names: Mamattu, Mamattu, Mamattu, Satrun]
Let the heavenly soma of the sun and moon
exhilarate you. Let the soma sweetness and beauty of
things earthly created here exhilarate you. Let the soma
of your own grandeur by which you do wonders
exhilarate you. And let the soma of your own valour by
which you destroy the enemies exhilarate you.






[Names: Gavya]
May generous Indra, mighty ruler of the powers
of heaven and earth, come with complementary powers
of centrifugal and centripetal forces of nature and society
and taste the sweet sustaining assets of food and energy
created on earth. O lord breaker of clouds and destroyer
of enemies, adversity and exhaustion, let there be
ceaseless showers of abundant honey sweets of distilled
and seasoned wealth, honour and excellence of life on






[Names: Ugraya]
Indra, lord of solar power, sharpening your
catalysis and shining your blazing radiations, reduce
and destroy the strong persistent life destroying forces
from nature and society. I offer you power and persistent


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 116 1017


forces of resistance to cooperate with your blazing fight
against the anti-life elements. Face the enemies and
uproot them in our battle for health and the good life.






[Names: Vyarya, Sravamsyojah, Asmadyragvavrdhanah]
Indra, lord of life and human society, expand
the resources of food, energy and sustenance, heighten
the power and prestige of life and extend the spatial
knowledge and power as on a permanent basis.
Unresisted and inviolable by virtue of your own
patience, persistence and power, rising in strength and
lustre of glory before us, raise the power and prestige
of the self and the total human organisation.






[Names: Idam, Tubhyam]
Indra, lord of glory, this homage and tribute is
offered to you. O ruler of self, humanity and all life,
pray take it freely without inhibition or hesitation. For
you is the soma distilled and offered, O lord of majesty.
For you is the food prepared and seasoned. Pray accept
it, taste of it and drink of it as it is prepared with faith
and love without reservation.








[Names: Addhidindra, Prayasvantah]
Indra, ruling lord of nature and human society,
pray accept these offers of homage as inputs in the
natural and human system of evolution and progress.
Take the food prepared and the soma distilled as our
share of contribution and generate and bring the divine
gifts of food and natural energy for health and joy.
Bearing food and tribute of homage we love and honour
you and pray may the cherished desires of the yajamana






[Names: Prendragnibhyam]
I send up this song of adoration to Indra, lord of
power, and to Agni, lord of light. It is infused with the
inspiration of mantras and [ launch these prayers like a
boat on the sea. Devas range around and move like
harbingers of good fortune, they are abundant givers of
wealth and they destroy misfortune and uproot evil.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 117 1019


Mandala 10/Sukta 117






[Names: Dana, Indra, Devata, Bhikshu, Angirasa, Rshi, Sitamupa]
The devas have ordained death for mortals, but
not for reasons of hunger alone, because death overtakes
the rich and well provided too. The wealth of the
generous giver of charity does not diminish while the
uncharitable finds no grace, none to comfort him.






The man of means in plenty who does not give
in charity to the poor, needy, hunger afflicted supplicant
that comes to his door but hardens his heart and, further,
himself enjoys the fruits of his riches in his very
presence, finds no grace, no comfort, none to console
him.








[Names: Aramasmai]
Bounteous blest is he who gives to the needy
seeker desirous of food and to the wanderer in search,
gone feeble. Amplitude comes to him at his call for his
purpose, and he creates friendly alliances even among
those who once opposed him.






[Names: Apasmat]
No friend is he who gives no help and
sustenance to the friend, the assistant and the associate.
Denied, the friend goes away from him. No home is
this house of the miser mean, if the friend in need has
to knock at another door, the house of a generous helpful






[Names: Prniyadinnadhamanaya]
The rich man should give for the poor seeker,
he should see the paths of life in the long run. Riches
move like wheels of the chariot: Now they are at one
place, now they move to another.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 117 1021






[Names: Moghamannam, Naryamanam]
The man of no knowledge and short vision gets
food in vain and prosperity for nothing. Verity I say
that prosperity is his ruin, his very death in life. He
prospers not who helps neither the friend nor the wise,
eating all by himself he eats nothing but sin.






[Names: Krsannit, Vadan]
The ploughman ploughing the land produces
food for the hungry, the traveller while moving crosses
the path to destination, the vocal sage is better than the
silent, and the giving friend and brother is better than
the non-giving.





[Names: Ekapadbhiuyo, Catuspadeti]
In the process of evolution and mutual
exhortation, the man of the first order of wealth looks




up to the man of double order of wealth and, if he be
active and generous, may even surpass the doubly rich
person. Similarly, the man of double order of wealth
looks up to the man of triple wealth and may even
surpass him. Later, the man of triple wealth looks up to
the man of fourfold wealth and may overtake and even
surpass him. Thus in evolution, competition,
cooperation and mutual exhortation, the generous man
of initiative goes on and on, watching and abiding in
the line of the progressive evolution of humanity.







[Names: Samau]
The two hands, howsoever alike, do not perform
equally well, two mother cows, alike and equal
otherwise, do not yield the same quality and quantity of
milk, the power and performance of even twins is not
equal and the same, and two persons may be closely
related, still they are not equal and exactly alike in


Mandala 10/Sukta 118




[Names: Agni, Rakshoha, Devata, Urukshaya, Amahiyava, Rshi, Agne, Sucivrata]
Agni, fire divine, you destroy the consumptive


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 118 1023


forces which damage life and, shining and blazing
immortal among mortals, wherever you abide in your
own form and place, you go on dedicated to your
Dharma of purification and sanctification.






[Names: Uttistai]
You rise in flames of glory and respond with
fragrant joy to the oblations of ghrta when ladlefuls are
brought close to the vedi and poured into the fire.


[Names: Sruca]
Venerable Agni, when it is invoked and adored
with Vedic mantras, rises and shines when it is served


and exalted with ladlefuls of ghrta as the prime power
of yajna.






[Names: Ghrtenagnih, Rocamano]
Agni, honoured and adored with ghrta, served
and adorned with honey sweets, invoked and exalted
with Vedic hymns, shines and illuminates us as the sun.







[Names: Jaramanah]
Invoked, celebrated and exalted, you rise and
shine, harbinger of fragrances for the divinities of nature
and noble humanity, and as such the mortals invoke and
adore you in their yajnic celebrations.




[Names: Adabhyam]
That immortal Agni, the mortals serve with


ghrta, Agni that is the redoubtable master protector of
the home and family.





[Names: Adabhyena, Socisagne, Gopa]
Agni, with your inviolable and irresistible light
and heat, burn the negative forces that damage life, and
shine and blaze as protector and promoter of the yajna
of life’s progress.






[Names: Uruksayesu]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 119 1025


Agni, with your heat and light rays burn and
destroy all forces of germs, viruses, insects and
impurities that damage life, shine as you do in vast vedis
of scientific programmes of yajna.


[Names: Yajistham]
Agni, carrier and harbinger of fragrant havis to
divinities and humanity, most adorable in human


communities, men of dignity and grand mansions invoke
and light you in vast vedis with holy songs of the Veda.


Mandala 10/Sukta 119






[Names: Atma, Devata, Laba, Aindra, Rshi, Kuvit, Somasyapamiti]
This and this alone is what I am at heart: Let me
win over the cow and the horse, wealth of the earth and
all possible progress onward, and wholly control my
senses and dynamics of the mind, for I have drunk the
soma of the divine spirit.








Like impetuous winds have the exhilarations of
the draughts of soma raised me to the state of ecstasy,
as I have drunk the soma of the divine spirit.






[Names: Unma]
The draughts of divine soma have raised me up
in ecstasy of body, mind and spirit like swift horses
carrying the chariot and the master, for I have drunk of
the soma of the divine spirit.






My heart, mind and intelligence is stable and
has stabilised me in the object of my divine love like
the loving mother cow having reached its darling calf,
for I have drunk of the soma of the divine spirit.






[Names: Aham]
Just as the maker makes and controls the well-
structured chariot so do I control my mind and intellect
at heart by soul, since I have drunk of the soma of the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 119 1027



[Names: Nahi]
Nor can all the five communities elude or blur
the vision of my eye and what I see, for I have drunk of
the soma of the divine spirit.

Nor can the physical earth and heaven both be
the other and opposite side of my divine personality,
for I have drunk of the soma of the divine spirit.



By the grandeur of my divine experience I
realise the greatness of the solar regions and the
greatness of this great earth, for I have drunk of the
soma of the divine spirit.








[Names: Hantaham]
And may be I shall hold the beauty and
generosity of this earthly existence here or, later, there,
for I have drunk of the soma of the spirit divine.

[Names: Osamit]
And I can heat up this earthly body to light and
take it here, there, anywhere, for I have drunk of the
soma of the spirit divine.



[Names: Divime]
I realise one mode of my existence high up in
heaven and the other down here on earth, for I have
drunk of the soma of the spirit divine.




[Names: Ahamasmi]
I am greatest of the greats, shining bright,
radiating upwards to the skies and spaces, for I have
drunk of the soma of the spirit divine.



MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 120 1029




Receiving the light and ecstasy of divinity,
beatified by grace, I have become the fire that carries
the fragrances of love and faith to the divinities and the
highest Divine, for Ihave drunk of the soma of the spirit
divine and I have become the divine ecstasy itself.


Mandala 10/Sukta 120






[Names: Indra, Devata, Brhaddiva, Atharvana, Rshi, Tadidasa, Sadyo, Satrunanu]
That Indra, Brahma, is the first and highest
among all the worlds in existence, of which, as the
original cause, is born the blazing, refulgent potent sun
which, always rising every moment, destroys the
negativities which damage life and by which all positive
and protective powers and people of the world rejoice
and celebrate life.





[Names: Vavrdhanah, Avyanacca]
Growing mighty in strength, immensely
lustrous, destroyer of negativities, it strikes fear into




the heart of forces causing damage to life and the
environment. Bountiful purifier and sustainer of the
breathing and non-breathing world, all the people and
powers which receive sustenance from you join to do
honour to you in their joy and celebration of life.






[Names: Svadoh]
And they all, celebrants of divinity, surrender
all actions and prayers to you when they join in couples
and grow to three in the family. O lord sweeter than
sweetness itself, join the sweets of life with honey and
with divine sweetness and bliss create life overflowing
with love and ecstasy.






[Names: Ojiyo, Anumadanti]
Thus with joy on every happy occasion of life,
grateful people and vibrant sages celebrate you, winner,
creator and giver of wealth and excellence. Illustrious
lord of shattering power, expand the commonwealth of
permanent values. Let not the crooked and fiendish
forces on the prowl suppress the creative gifts of divine


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 120 1031





[Names: Tvaya, Codayami]
With your divine inspiration, well knowing the
weapons of war, we fight out the enemies of life in the
battles of humanity. I strengthen and calibrate the arms
and ammunitions for battle by your divine words, and
by the same divine formula I sharpen the target efficacy
of the arrows and missiles of defence and offence.





[Names: Stuseyyam, Savasa]
We love and celebrate Indra in song, lord
adorable infinite in form, all pervasive, most glorious
and wisest of the self-realised wise. With his might he
breaks seven types of clouds and seven orders of sin
and evil, and he challenges and subdues the many
adversaries that arise in the world of nature and







[Names: Puruni]
You sustain this visible world of physical reality
and the other invisible world of meta-physical and
spiritual reality in which you maintain and protect
everything with your might in their very home. And
you hold and stabilise the revolving motherly earth and
heaven, inspire many great actions therein and see them






[Names: Maho]
The poet of boundless heavenly light speaks
these divine verses in honour of Indra for his own
spiritual peace and pleasure. First and foremost among
eminent poets, self-illuminant, self-refulgent and self-
controlled, he masters the mighty treasure of Vedic
wisdom and he opens the flood gates of his own vision
of universal light and wisdom.






[Names: Svasaro]
Thus does the sage of boundless light and vision
of wisdom with settled mind address his song of
adoration to Indra only, and the pure immaculate fluent
streams of speech like motherly creations inspire the


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 121 1033


world and exalt humanity with strength and enthusiasm.


Mandala 10/Sukta 121






[Names: Prajapati, Devata, Hiranyagarbha, Prajapat, Rshi, Hiranyagarbhah]
Hiranyagarbha, the golden Seed, one lord of
light and the sole creator of lights such as the sun, existed
before creation (as he ever exists). He alone was and is
the lord and sustainer of all forms of created being. He
holds and sustains the earth and heaven and supports
this whole universe. We worship the same one lord and
offer him homage with oblations of fragrant materials.






[Names: Yasya]
The lord who is the giver of birth to the soul
with its power and potential in body, whose glory all
the divinities of the world celebrate in song, whose shade
of protection is immortality and falling off is death, to
him we offer our homage and worship in hymns with
havi.








The sole one lord who, with his own might,
creates and rules over the world of those who breathe
and see, the lord who rules over both men and animals,
to that sovereign lord of bliss and majesty we offer
homage and worship with our heart and soul.






[Names: Yasyeme, Yasyemah, Whose]
proclaim, whose depth and grandeur the ocean with
rivers declares, whose arms these quarters of space
extend to infinity, that lord of light and sublimity let us
worship with offers of homage in havis.






[Names: Yena]
By him the suns blaze, by him the earth is firm,
by him the heaven of bliss is sustained, by him the
ecstasy of Moksha is constant, and he is the creator of
the worlds of space. Let us worship the lord refulgent
and omnipotent with offers of homage in havis.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 121 1035






[Names: Yatradhi]
Whom eloquent heaven and earth sustained in
balance by divine power, shining in splendour and
inspired at heart, manifest in glory and celebrate in song,
under whose law the sun rises, shines and illuminates
the world, that self-refulgent lord let us worship with
offers of havis.






[Names: Janayantiragnim, Tato]
When the boundless ocean of charged particles
of Vayu energy comes into existence bearing the implicit
blue print of the cosmos in seed form, creating the heat
mode of existence, then the one supreme of the
divinities, living breathing life itself, emerges in advance
of all cosmic forms, and that One all-comprehensive
divine lord let us worship with oblations of havi, who
else? That is Hiranyagarbha.







[Names: Yascidapo]
The one who with his might pervades, watches
and overall controls the ocean of charged particles of
Vayu energy bearing the heat mode producing the yajnic
process of life’s evolution, who is on top of all the
divinities of existence, that One supreme lord let us
worship with havis.






[Names: Yascapascandra]
May the one lord supreme never hurt us, the
lord that is creator of the earth, who also creates the
heavens and who also creates the vast oceans of energies
and waters, all beauteous, soothing and blissful, the
master, controller and ordainer of all the laws of
existence in operation in truth. Let us worship that one
lord supreme with offers of faith and havis.






[Names: Prajapate]
Prajapati, lord of life and your children, there is
none other than you who rules over life forms and
materials in existence, for yours are the laws of


[Names: Whatever]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 122 1037


you wish we should desire, all that we pray for, may all
that be fulfilled in life for us. May we be masters in
control of the wealths, honours and excellences of the
world within your laws of life.


Mandala 10/Sukta 122






[Names: Agni, Devata, Chitramaha, Vasishtha, Rshi, Vasum, Seva, Surudho, Agni]
wondrous generous and refulgent, lovely, comfortable,
welcome as a noble guest, all love free from jealousy.
Master protector of the home, yajamana as well as high
priest of life’s yajna, he blesses us with all protective,
universally nourishing and positive heroic powers and
creative energies of life.






[Names: Jusano, Ghrtanirnigbrahmane, Vayunani]
Loving and adorable Agni, universal knower of
the laws and ways of life, presiding power of all holy
works, pray listen to my words and accept my prayer :
Rising and refulgent with ghrta, inspire the sage and




open up the paths of progress for him. Divinities and
noble souls raising you in yajna adore you, join you
and raise themselves in pursuance of your laws of life.






[Names: Sapta, Suvirena]
Immortal Agni, pervading seven regions of the
universe, bhu, bhuva, sva, maha, jana, tapa and satyam,
advance and exalt the noble and generous yajamana of
holy action. Whoever brings and offers holy fuel and
fragrant havi to you, pray accept and bless him with
noble progeny and abundant wealth of life.






[Names: Yajnasya, Srnvantamagnirn]
Seven priests with seven pranas and seven
faculties of sense and mind offer havi and adore Agni,
first and original performer of creation yajna who bears
on the banner of creative yajna to its victorious
completion, and they go on serving the seven-rayed light
of life, listening, fed on and rising by ghrta, generous
lord refulgent who blesses the dedicated celebrant with
noble strength and happy progeny.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 122 1039




oF Tvam dutah prathamo varenyah sa huyamano


[Names: Tvam, Maruto]
Agni, you are the messenger and harbinger of
the breeze of fresh life. You are the first divinity of our
love and choice. As such, invoked and adored for the
sake of immortality, pray rejoice at yajna and let us
rejoice too. Vibrant celebrants and veteran sages, shining
and raising you in the house of generous yajamana,
honour and exalt you with holy songs of adoration.






[Names: Isam, Agne]
Agni, light and presiding power of yajnic action,
bringing plenty of food, energy, prosperity and the milk
of human generosity by the mother spirit of the universe
for the noble yajamana dedicated to yajna in love and
faith, rising in flames of glory by oblations of ghrta,
pervading the three dynamic regions of heaven, earth
and the skies with light and splendour, and suffusing
the yajnic home in life’s fragrance, you carry on the
divine purpose in the world of nature and humanity.






in Tvamidasya usaso vyustisu dutam krnvana


Agni, light of life, in the rising lights of this
morning’s dawn, thoughtful people adore you in yajna
as the harbinger of nature’s bounties and carrier of their
love and faith with fragrance to the divinities. Nobilities
adore you and divinities exalt you, great as you are, and
pray for their own rise in merit while they suffuse you
in ghrta in the yajna vedi.






[Names: Rayasposam]
Agni, men of light and vision established in
divine consciousness invoke and adore you, light and
spirit of cosmic power, and they celebrate your divine
supremacy over nature and humanity. O victorious lord
of universal knowledge, power and prosperity, pray bear
and bring us the wealth of life’s health and excellence
for the yajamanas. O sages and scholars of divinity and
science of yajna, pray protect and promote us always
with all round well being of life on earth.


Mandala 10/Sukta 123




[Names: Vena, Devata, Bhargava, Rshi]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 123 1041



[Names: Ayam, Imamapam, Suryasya, Suryas]
This loving and lovely light, glorious sun, womb
of light, shines in varied light and beauty in the ocean
of particles of mist in middle space, moves and energises
the clouds of vapour, and in the meeting of the sun rays
and the vapours sages celebrate and adore the sun with
songs of prayer and love with gratitude as a child of





[Names: Samudradurmimudiyarti, Rtasya]
Rising from the skies, the sun radiates its waves
of light, draws waves of mist from the ocean, energises
clouds of mist from the ocean of space, the vault of
glorious heaven across the skies is seen, the glory shines
on top of the high heaven of nature’s yajna, and the
sages celebrate both dawn and the vault of heaven







[Names: Samanam]
Equal and abundant, shining and thundering




currents of natural energy, mother generators of clouds
of rain, abiding together with vapours and sun rays in
the skies, also active on top of nature’s dynamics, inspire
the honey sweets of sage’s immortal songs of divine






[Names: Jananto, Rtena]
The sages, knowing the form, structure and
functioning of the cloud and the roaring thunder,
celebrate it and realise it in practice. Going by laws of
natural truth, waters, evaporation and cloud formation
and catalysis in the depth of spatial ocean, they realise
that it is really the sun which holds the earth and controls
the immortal waters for sure.






[Names: Apsara, Carat]
Like a youthful belle holding on to her lover,
the lightning with a brilliant smile holds on to and
sustains with the cloud in the highest skies, and the cloud
too, dear and lovely, moving about in the spatial home
of his lovely light and lightning, stays by the side of the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 123 1043








[Names: Nake, Hiranyapaksam, Varunasya, Varunas]
O Sun, wrapped in wondrous rays flying around
in the highest heaven, loving sages with their heart and
soul see and realise you at the closest as a messenger of
the supreme lord of love and justice and as a mighty
bird blazing and flying with golden wings in the vast
space of the lord ordainer of the universe.






[Names: Urdhvo, Vasano]
High up over there abides the sun in the region
of heavenly light. It bears wondrous weapons of divinity
such as thunder and lightning. It wears a beautiful,
fragrant form soothing for people to see, and like the
light and bliss of heaven creates divine waters and many
other dear divine gifts for life.








[Names: Drapsah, Bhanuh, Socisa]
When the sun in the third, highest, heaven,
shining on the oceans and vapours in the skies with the
light of its fervent rays reaches the clouds of vapour,
then the blazing heat with pure and powerful energy
catalyses the clouds and condenses the vapours into dear
valuable drops that shower in rain upon the earth.


Mandala 10/Sukta 124
Devata: Agni (1), Agni’s Atma (2-4), Varuna (5, 7-8),






[Names: Soma, Indra, Rshi, Agni, Varuna, Agni, Imam, Jyogeva]
Agni, yajnic light of life, come to this life yajna
of ours: which has five divisions, i1.e., Brahma-yajna,
Deva-yajna, Pitr-yajna, Atithi-yajna, and Balivaishva-
deva-yajna; conducted by five people, 1.6, four socio-
economic classes of Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas
and Shudras and others like chance visitors from other
groups there might be; which is threefold, i.e., paka
yajna, haviryajna and somayajna; and which has seven
[Names: Agnishtoma, Atyagnishtoma, Ukthya]
Shodashi, Vajapeya, Atiratra and Aptoyami. You are our
leader and pioneer, Agni, and you are the carrier of our
yajna to the divinities as well as harbinger of the fruits


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 124 1045


of yajna to us. Pray come and be our all time dispeller
of the cavern of deep darkness from life.


(Yajna is a creative process of development
in life from the individual to the social, national, global
and environmental level of life. The explanation above
is related to the social level. Swami Brahmamuni
explains the yajna at the individual level, and that is
also suggested in Rgveda 10, 7, 6: “Svayam yajasva’,
and yajurveda 4, 13: “Iyam te yajniya tanu”, which
means: Develop yourself by yajna according to the
seasons of your growth, and remember your life in body,
mind and soul is worthy of yajnic service for your
personal development, your body being the first
instrument of your wider yajna of life. This personal
yajna is fivefold, for the elemental balance of earth,
water, heat, air and ether; threefold for the balance of
vata, pitta and kaf, and also for balanced growth of body,
mind and soul; sevenfold for the growth of rasa, rakta,
mansa, meda, asthi, majja and virya. Thus yajna is the
process of growth beginning with the individual,
accomplished at the cosmic level.)






[Names: Adevaddevah, Sivam]
When I, the soul, transcending the mere
physical, non-divine, form, take on to the light of
divinity within the heart cave of the soul, I see the light
of divinity within and attain to it. Thus when I relinquish
my dark side of personality, attaining to the light and




peace of divinity, then by reason of my essential affinity
with divinity, I reach the life divine, sole centre of
existence, just like fire existing at peace in the arani
wood, its natural abode, rising into heat and light at





[Names: Pasyannanyasya, Samsami, Seva, Puruni]
Watching the traveller of another path of life
other than the physical, the bird on another branch of
the tree, and seeing the original home of the cosmic
yajna, I enact many vedis to follow the yajnic paths of
living. I sing songs of homage in honour of the
omnipotent father giver of life and take to my share of
yajnic living, away from the selfish ways of existence.






[Names: Bahvih, Agnih, Varunaste, Varunast]
Having lived in this body, vedi of living yajna,
and choosing Indra, omnipotent father, for worship, I
give up the vedi. Agni, vital heat, Varuna, mind and
senses and the water element, and Soma, living vitality,
depart, and moving ahead I come to the freedom of
existence which I cherish and protect for further life.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 124 1047




oF Nirmaya u tye asura abhuvan tvam ca ma varuna


[Names: Rtena]
When I get the freedom of my state of being, let
the demonic forces be void of their powers, and O
Varuna, lord of love, justice and fulfilment, pray bless
me with love and protection. O ruling lord of existence,
eliminating untruth by the rule of truth and divine law,
come and take over the ultimate sovereignty of my free






[Names: Idam, Hanava]
O Soma, spirit of life in the state of freedom,
this is the state of bliss, this is beauty, this is the light of
life, this is the expansive space to sojourn at will. Come
up out of all sense of bondage. We two shall eliminate
darkness and nescience. You are the havi and you the
object of love and adoration too. We powers of divine
law and truth of existence serve and bless you, our
darling, with your real self and blessings of total








[Names: Kavih, Ksemam]
The sovereign creator with his divine vision and
power created the light and placed it as the sun in
heaven. Varuna, the same lord omnipotent of the element
of waters, created and released the rivers aflow which,
pure and creative mothers, harbingers of peace and joy,
bear and manifest the generosity and majesty of the lord.






Those streams of living waters share and bear
the highest power and beneficence of this lord Varuna,
and the lord rules and abides in these streams which
sparkle and flow, enjoying the fragrance of oblations
offered in yajna. They, also, like people choosing and
abiding by the ruler, free from fear and keeping off from
darkness and evil, flow free from fear and obstruction.




[Names: Bibhatsunam, Anustubhamanu]
The sun, companion of the free and fearless
clouds, which sojourns in space as a comrade of the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 125 1049


holy waters, the poets call the ‘celestial bird’, and the
wind and electric energy blowing and radiating in
response to yajna with anushtup verses, they know with
their vision and imagination, and this they call ‘Indra’.


Mandala 10/Sukta 125






[Names: Atma, Devata, Vagambhrni, Rshi, Aham, Aham, Mitravarunobha]
I am Vak-ambhrni, voice of omniscience,
Universal Speech all bearing, all borne, co-existent with
eleven Rudras, pranic energies and the soul, eight Vasus,
earth, water, fire, air, space, moon, sun and stars, all
abodes and supports of life, twelve Adityas, year’s
twelve phases of the sun, and all the Vishvedevas,
divinities of nature and humanity. I pervade and support
both Mitra and Varuna, day and night, I pervade and
support Indra and Agni, wind and fire, and I bear and
support both the Ashvins, all complementarities of
nature and humanity such as positive and negative
currents of energy and science and technology.


(Language, Vak or Word, is a system
corresponding to and co-existent with existence as a
system and the awareness or knowledge of existence.
Hence language at the level of divine awareness is co-
existent and co-extensive with existence itself. In other
words, at the level of omniscience, existence is language
and language is existence. In our life, our language is




the seat of correspondence between our awareness and
knowledge of existence and its articulation in
experience, expression and communication.)






[Names: Somamahanasam, Somamahanasa, Pusanam, Pusana]
I bear the reception and expression of experience
in communication and the soma joy of corporate
existence. I bear the formative evolution, nourishment
and growth, and the power and glory of life and its
progress. I bear the wealth and prosperity of life for the
yajamana who creates beauty and sweetness for life and
bears liberal havis of corporate yajna for the common
welfare of humanity and indeed all life. (In other words,
the content of Language is Existence and the awareness
of Existence.)






[Names: Purutra]
I am the spirit and organisation of the social
system. I am the pioneer and harbinger of the wealth,
honours and excellences of the corporate system with
the people. I am the thought, awareness and determined
organisation of the basics of human life and its values.
Sages and scholars establish me in many socio-political


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 125 1051


forms with many permanent stabilities and many
evolving powers and possibilities of progress in various






[Names: Maya, Srnotyuktam, Amantavo, Srudhi, Sraddhivam]
O listener, listen, what I say to you is worth
listening and doing in faith: Whoever sees whatever he
hears what is said, he receives the food of life by me.
Those who do not listen, do not care, do not believe
what I say and neglect me, they waste away, they come
to ruin.


(We may realise here that Vagambhrni is not only
the voice of divinity, it is also the voice of the people
who think and speak truly, positively and jointly
whenever and wherever they happen to do so, whether
it be in parliaments or assemblies or in the press or in
the universities. And this voice must be invariably true
and authentic.)






[Names: Ahameva]
And all this that is loved, adored and spoken by




the sages and veteran scholars and even by average
mortals of honest mind, take it that I, voice of divinity,
speak it myself. Whosoever I love by virtue of his or
her merit of nature, character and performance, I raise
to brilliance, to piety worthy of a yajnic Brahma, to the
vision of a poetic sage and high intelligence of an






[Names: Rudraya, Rudra, Sarave]
I draw the bow for Rudra, powers of justice and
punishment, to eliminate the forces of hate and violence
against lovers and observers of piety and divinity. I fight
for the people and create felicity and joy for them, and
I reach and pervade the heaven and earth.






[Names: Tato]
I create the parental protector on top of this
human nation and this world in the form of the ruler
and the sun. My place is in the depth of waters and the
sea and in the particles of space. That same way I abide
in all worlds of the universe, and I reach that heaven of
light and touch the very top of it with my light and


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 126 1053






[Names: Paro]
Loving, embracing and pervading all regions
of the universe, I flow forward like the wind that blows
across the spaces. Beyond the heaven, beyond this world
I am, so much is my power and potential, immanent
and transcendent my presence.


Mandala 10/Sukta 126








[Names: Vishvedevah, Devata, Kulmala, Barhisha, Shailusha, Ahomuk, Vamadevya, Rshi, Sajosaso]
O devas, divinities of nature, noble scholars and
can touch the mortal whom Aryama, spirit of enlightened
guidance, Mitra, spirit of love and friendship, and
Varuna, spirit of judgement and justice, all together with
love and care without relent, lead across hate, jealousy
and enmity.








[Names: Taddhi, Varuna, Mitraryaman, Mitraryama, Yena]
O Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, divinities of love,
justice and rectitude within and without in society, nature
and beyond, that protection and guidance of yours we
seek of you, yourself all beyond sin and evil. Save the
mortals from sins and lead them to success and
fulfilment across and beyond hate, jealousy, enmity and






[Names: Nayistha]
This Varuna, this Mitra, this Aryama, surely they
are for our protection, guidance and success. O
protective and guiding divinities of rectitude, take us
and guide us on the path we ought to take, lead us to the
goal we ought to reach, take us across and beyond the
hate, jealousy and enmity we ought to avoid.






[Names: Yuyam, Yusmakam]
Mitra, Varuna and Aryama, you protect, guide
and lead the world to their goal of success and fulfilment.
We pray, under the loving care, security and felicity of


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 126 1055


your law and order, let us advance to our cherished goal,
pursuing noble ethics and policies beyond the wicked.






[Names: Adityaso, Ugram, Rudram, Rudra]
May the Adityas, brilliant scholars of the Aditya
order of forty eight years discipline, Varuna, Mitra and
Aryama, powers of justice, love and rectitude, protect
us and guide us across violence and enmity and lead us
to success. We invoke the blazing commander with his
of evil and suffering, Indra, mighty ruler, and Agni,
brilliant teacher and scholar, for all round protection
and well being so that we may overcome the forces of
hate, jealousy and enmity and reach our goals.






[Names: Netara]
May Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, leaders and
brilliant rulers of the people, judicious, loving and nobly
motivated, safely pilot us across all sin and evil of the
world and all forces of hate, jealousy and enmity of








[Names: Sunamasmabhyamiitaye, Sarma]
May Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, powers of
justice, and noble choice, love and friendship, and noble
ethics and policy, bring us peace and progress for our
protection and advancement. May the Adityas, brilliant
scholars, teachers and researchers give us lasting
comfort and well being of wide variety which we seek
and pray for, and may all these divine nobilities lead us
beyond the reach of the forces of hate and enmity.






[Names: Yatha]
O Vasus, world powers of peace and settlement,
scholars of the Vasu order, all loving and adorable in
cow at freedom to roam around at peace with joy, so
pray release us from the bonds of sin and evil. O Agni,
lord of light, give us a life of enlightenment, a long life
of good health and light of wisdom.


Mandala 10/Sukta 127






[Names: Ratri, Devata, Kushika, Saubhara, Bharadvaji, Rshi]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 127 1057
[Names: Purutra, Visva, Sriyo]
Look, there comes the night divine with many


many starry eyes, embracing the wide world, wearing
all her finery of the beauty and grandeur of the skies.






[Names: Orvapra, Jyotisa]
The immortal night divine comes filling vast
spaces high and low and arrests the darkness with the
light of her stars.





[Names: Niru, Apedu]
Coming and advancing, the night divine
prepares the way for its sister dawn which then dispels
the dark.


[Names: Sano, Vrkse]
That night divine, on whose arrival we rest in


the home like birds asleep in their nest, may, we pray,
be restful and auspicious for us now.


1058






People come back home and rest in sleep. So
do animals, so do birds, eagles too. They need rest and
sleep after the day’s toil.

[Names: Yavaya]
O peaceful night, keep away the wolf and the
wolfish deeds. Keep away the thief. Fold them in sleep.
Be peaceable, soothing and refreshing for us.

Enveloping darkness in all its intensity has come
and smothered me. O dawn, take it off and give me relief
like freedom from a heavy debt.



O night, daughter of heaven, I present this song


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 128 1059


of adoration like a gift of milch cows. Pray accept it as
homage for the sake of the supplicant who is keen for
victory of rest and light over the wolf and the darkness
of life.


Mandala 10/Sukta 128






[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Vihavya, Angirasa, Rshi, Mamagne, Mahyam, Scatasra]
Agni, light of life, leader and pioneer of men,
let there be vigour and lustre in me in the battles of life.
Let us shine and rise in body, mind and soul while we
kindle you in the yajnic development of human society.
Let the four directions of life and the people there be
favourable to me in love and faith, and let us win the
battles of life under your leadership and presiding power.






[Names: Mama, Indravanto, Maruto, Mamantariksamurulokam]
In the battle of life when the clarion call is given,
let all the Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity be for me. Let the Maruts, Vishnu and Agni,
all with Indra, stormy troops, all pervasive people power,




and the leading lights of humanity, all inspired with
passion and energy, all wielding weapons of fire, wind
and electric power, be with me. Let the sky and space
be the vast world for me. And let the winds blow for me
in this beautiful world for the fulfilment of this yajnic
ambition for personal and collective expansion.






[Names: Mayi, Daivya]
May the Devas bless me with power, wealth and
and self fulfilment for me at yajna. May the invocation
and homage to Devas bring me success. May veteran
and divine yajakas in nature and humanity join me in
our yajna for the general good. May we be blest with
health of body, mind and spirit, be inviolable and blest
with noble progeny.





May my havis that I offer in yajna bring me the
success I plan. May the thoughts and intentions of my
mind be true and fruitful. May I never take to sin or evil
whatsoever. O divinities of the world, bless us and say:


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 128 1061
May all be well with you!






[Names: Devih, Soma]
May six divinities, heaven and earth, day and
night, fire and water, through the six seasons of the year
do us great favour so that we may rise and progress in
power and achievement. O divinities of the world, be
brave and great and help us rise to bravery and grandeur.
Never deplete us either by loss of health and virility or
by loss of progeny. O ruling Soma, lord of peace, light
and glory, let us never fall a prey to the forces of hate,
jealousy and enmity.




[Names: Agne, Pratyanco]
nesat.


O Agni, sovereign ruling lord of light and fire,
ever awake and protective, warding off the anger and
attack of foreign and negative powers, defend, protect
and promote us without relent. Let our enemies
withdraw and go back, repulsed, frustrated and routed.
[Names: Howsoever]
are, destroy their mind, morale and intelligence








[Names: Dhata, Imam]
The one lord sustainer of all sustainers of the
world such as sun and earth, the one that is the supreme
lord creator, ruler and protector of the universe, the one
that subdues the proudest of the enemies of life and
humanity, the one that saves and gives fulfilment, that
One I worship and adore. May the Ashvins, twin divine
complementarities of nature and humanity, Brhaspati,
lord of Infinity and the sage dedicated to Infinity, and
the infinite divine voice and all other divinities of the
world, we pray, promote this yajna and save this
yajamana from sin and evil.






[Names: Uruvyaca, Sarma, Puruhiutah, Puruhiuta, Puruksuh, Puruksu]
Indra, all pervasive lord of the expansive
universe, infinitely potent, universally invoked and
adored, infinitely opulent and generous, may, we pray,
give us peace and fulfilment in this great war-like yajna
of life. O lord of the dynamics of existence, Indra, we


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 129 1063


pray give us the joy of fulfilment for our people and for
us.






[Names: Vasavo, Aditya, Adit, Rudra]
Those who are our adversaries, enemies and
hostile rivals, let them be off ! We keep them off, we
throw them out in conflict by Indra and Agni, divine air
and fire power. May the Vasus, shelter and support givers
of life and the general order of educated people, Rudras,
powers of justice and order and the middle order of
intellectuals, and Adityas, powers of light and the
highest order of scholars and sages raise me high, inspire
me with the brilliance of fire, enlighten me and anoint
me as the highest ruling authority.


Mandala 10/Sukta 129




[Names: Bhavavrttam, Devata, Prajapati, Parameshthi, Rshi, Nasadasinno, Kimavarivah]
It was neither a-sat nor sat, neither non-existence




particles nor sky nor space nor anything beyond. What
form? What content? None. Where? What purpose, for
whom? What mist? What deep darkness? None, nothing,
and yet not nothing.


(It was the zero state of existence after the
completion of one cycle and before the beginning of
the next cycle, like the zero hour between two dates. It
is a state intangible and inexplicable because thought
and language too terminate into the intangible and
inexplicable silence at the completion of the cycle. The
zero hour exists and yet it does not, it doesn’t exist and
yet it does, that’s the mystery of it. The state under
meditation in this sukta is the hour of Infinity in the
womb of Infinity self-brooding on the zero; the One
upon the zero.)






[Names: Anidavatam, There]
of immortality, neither night nor day as we know the
night and day. There is only That, the One self-existent
Brahma, breathing without breath, the sole One, one
with its potential. Any other apart or beyond That there
was none whatsoever.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 129 1065




[Names: Tama, Tucchyenabhvapihitam]
There is only dark, darker and deeper than
darkness itself before the world of existence comes into
being, something misty beyond knowledge and
experience, this all that now is. That living mystery,
which then exists, covered in something more
mysterious than mystery itself, self-manifests by the
exercise of Its own grandeur of power and potential
solely by Itself.






[Names: Kamastadagre, Sato]
There is love and desire before the creation at
the heart of Brahma which is the first, original and
ultimate seed of the world of existence that comes into
being. Sages blest with vision, by divine inspiration and
mind in meditation, realise the world of existence from
the tangible upto the intangible state implicit in the seed
state of Prakrti subsisting in the divine mind.







[Names: Tirascino, Retodha]
The waves and vibrations of these causal
potentials of divine Prakrti extend in time and space all
round, up, down and transverse. There are the individual
souls also, seedlings great and yearning for emergence
into life. In all this process of creation and evolution,
the divine will is supreme, and the divine potential,
Prakrti, the seeding souls, and potential evolutions, are
all subservient and subordinate to the divine will.






[Names: Arvagdeva]
Who for certain knows, who here would declare
whence this universe has come, whence this variety has
emerged? The visionary sages all come after the creation
and diversity of it. Who of them would then know
whence and why all this has come into existence? Only
He, the creator, would know, only He can reveal and
declare.




[Names: Iyam]
veda yadi va na veda.


O dear seeker, whence this multitudinous variety
of existence arises, who holds and sustains it, or whether
He doesn’t hold and sustain it while He terminates it,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 130 1067


only He knows who is the presiding power of it at the
highest heavenly level of mystery. Only He knows and
pervades it, and He only knows when he doesn’t pervade
it while it subsists in Him as in the state of Pralaya.


Mandala 10/Sukta 130






[Names: Bhavavrttam, Devata, Yajna, Prajapatya, Rshi]
The yajnic cosmos, the web of existence, which
is extended and expands all round by vibrations,
radiations, currents, flames, streams, fibres and filaments
spun out and woven by a hundred plus one divine actions
[Names: Vasus, Adityas, Rudras, Aditya, Rudra]
Vishvedevas, fortynine Maruts and ten Vishvasrj
creative processes) all this web of yajna, these divinities
universally prevailing weave up and down all round,
and all these divinities, actions and processes abide
therein, in the yajna itself.






[Names: Pumam]
The supreme cosmic Purusha weaves this web




of existence and the same Purusha winds it up on time.
He alone in this cosmos and beyond the heaven of time
and space extends it. These radiations, vibrations,
threads, filaments and creative processes abide and act
in this vast yajna of the cosmos, and they structure the
holy formulas and they spin the threads of the warp and
woof of this web.





[Names: Kasit, Chandah]
What is the central vision and comprehensive
blueprint of the design of cosmic yajna? What is the
measure of the progressive stages of the yajna upto
accomplishment? What is the basic cause and ultimate
purpose? What is the ghrta input of the yajna? What is
the ultimate bound? What is the chhanda, joyous
formula, from the inception and conception to
completion? What is the beginning, middle and the
hymnal close of the divine yajna? When the divinities
join the Supreme Divinity in the yajna of cosmic
creation, what are these constituents of the creative






[Names: Agnergayatryabhavat, Anustubha, Soma]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 130 1069


Gayatri is the companion of Agni, Savita
manifests with ushnik, Soma with anushtup, the sun
manifests with uktha hymns of celebration, and brhati
comes to express the voice of Brhaspati. (That is, the
mantras associated with these deities are composed in






[Names: Viranmitravarunayorabhisririndrasya, Visvan]
Virat is associated with Mitra and Varuna
together, trishtup is associated with Indra as share of
the mid-day session, jagati joins with the Vishvedevas
and by that the sages and ordinary people are joined
and receive their strength of being. (The Chhandas,
metres, of the Vedas, thus, are part of the process of
creation.)






[Names: Caklrpre, Pasyan]
When the creation yajna of all time is
accomplished, thereby our ancient forefathers, seers and
ordinary mortals receive their being and strength of
identity, and, visualising them with the eye of the mind
and imagination, I honour and adore those who in times


of yore enact this yajna of creation.






[Names: Sahastomah, Purvesam]
Well versed in Vedic hymns of yajna and the
cosmic process of evolution, the verse forms of
Chhandas associated with divinities, and the
evolutionary stages of the cosmos, seven divine sages
of vision and wisdom, self-established in peace of mind
and soul, having realised the holy path of the ancients
and following in their footsteps, realise the cosmic
process of divine evolution and live their life to
perfection like the driver holding reins of his chariot
and controlling his horses in the right direction.


Mandala 10/Sukta 131
Devata: Indra (1-3, 6, 7), Ashvins (4-5), Rshi: Sukirti




[Names: Kakshivata, Indra, Apodico, Sarman]
Indra, all powerful ruler of the world, subduer
of all enemies of the world, drive off all enemies that
stand in front, who attack from behind, who arise from


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 131 1011


below, and all those who descend from above so that
we may live in peace with joy without fear in your vast






[Names: Kuvidanga, Thehaisam]
Well then, just as master farmers of grain harvest
the crop in order and separate the grain from the chaff,
so, dear lord, here, there, everywhere, in order create
and provide food and sustenance for those who never
neglect yajnic offerings but bear the holy grass and bring
homage to the vedi.






[Names: Nahi, Sravo, Gavyanta, Indram]
A one horse cart never reaches the destination
on time according to season and purpose, nor, in battle,
supplies are received on time without the favour of
Indra. Therefore nobles and sages well desirous of cows
and horses, seeking success and victory, pray for the
favour and friendship of the generous and virile Indra.








[Names: Yuvam, Vipipana]
O Ashvins, complementary powers of humanity,
men and women, scholars and teachers, masters and
protectors of the good, valuable and auspicious, well
enjoying the soma taste of life together, help and assist
Indra, ruler of life in the world, in the struggles of life
and society against the demonic forces of want, violence
and meanness.






[Names: Putramiva, Sarasvati]
As parents support the child with all their power
and potential, so O lord of power and glory, Indra, let
the Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and
society, men and women, scholars and scientists, leaders
and followers, all support you with words of adoration
and actions of profuse generosity when you defend the
nation with bold actions and enjoy the peace, prosperity
and power of the order, and may Sarasvati, divine
intelligence, support and guide you.





[Names: Indrah, Badhatam]
May Indra, self-potent, saviour protector and


promoter, master of all wealth, power and glory of the
world, be gracious to us by his support and protection


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 132 1073


for peace and security. May he ward off and drive away
hate and enmity, grant freedom from fear, so that we
too may be masters and protectors of noble strength
and heroic splendour.






[Names: Tasya]
We pray may we ever abide in the good will
and loving kindness of adorable Indra. May he, self-
refulgent, self-potent, saviour protector, keep off and
drive away for all time elements of hate and enmity far
and near, all.


Mandala 10/Sukta 132


Mitra- Varuna (2-7) and others (1) Devata, Shakaputa






[Names: Narmedha, Rshi, Tjanamid, Ijanam]
May the Heaven of welcome treasures of
abundance bless and promote the man of love, non-
violence and yajna with peace, plenty and joy. May the
earth of abundant riches and beauty bless the man of
love, charity and yajna with plenty, progress and joy.
May the Ashvins, twin divines of nature and humanity,


1074


by their systemic complementarities bless and promote
the man of dynamic creativity and yajna with personal
success, social prestige and divine fulfilment.






[Names: Mitravaruna, Yuvoh]
O Mitra and Varuna, lord of light and love, and
lord of sovereign judgement and freedom, you are both
sustainers of the earth and givers of peace and comfort
to mankind. We serve and worship you with love for
the sake of cherished fulfilment. We pray, let us, with
your favour and friendship, win over the forces of evil
and negativity for the advancement of the lover and
performer of yajna and deeds of charity.






[Names: Adha, Dadvam]
And when we bear and bring liberal gifts of
homage to you, ourselves being masters of our favourite
wealth and property, or when the generous giver of gifts
and homage augments his wealth, then the wealth, power
and glory of such a person never diminishes, never
exhausts, in fact it increases manifold.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 132 1075




[Names: Asavanyo, Dyaustvam, Dyaustva, Murdha]
O Mitra, sun, life giving light and pranic energy,
that other, mother Infinity, has given you birth. O
Varuna, breath of life and cosmic air, you are the ruler
and life giver of the world. You, Mitra- Varuna, are the
head of the chariot of life, the cosmic yajna. You are the
antidote of death. Let not our yajna be vitiated even by
a remote touch of sin.





[Names: Asmintsvetacchakaputa, Avorva]
In this yajna instituted by the yajamana, who is
otherwise competent in his own right of strength, one
sin of omission would vitiate the performance if Mitra,
the sun, alone is invoked for oblations. The omission
vitiates the inner strength and others in the family unless
the other protector, Varuna, too is invoked. When this
other protector is invoked and served, no want or short
coming remains in the cherished body health of the
yajna, the yajaka and the yajaka’s family.








[Names: Yuvorhi]
Mitra and Varuna, givers of light and
intelligence, known with special effort of the mind, your
mother power is eternal Nature, the giver of knowledge
about you is eternal Veda which washes the cover of
ignorance as heaven and earth wash away the evils of
darkness and want. The sun illuminates with rays of
light, the earth gives cherished wealth of food.






[Names: Yuvam]
O Mitra and Varuna, givers of light and life
energy for positive action, be seated on the vedi of
cosmic yajna. Ascend the chariot strongly structured
and balanced, worthy of universal movement to fight
out those vociferous forces of the enemy poised against
us. You save the yajaka dedicated to the progress of
united humanity from sin. You save the yajamana of
intelligential and scientific yajna from going astray on
the path of evil and destructivity.


Mandala 10/Sukta 133







[Names: Indra, Devata, Sudah, Paijavana, Rshi, Abhike]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 133 1077


Offer a song of abundant praise in honour of
this ruling lord Indra for his mighty force and front rank
chariot. He, destroyer of darkness and evil, inspires us
in our battles of life at the closest and enlightens us in
our struggle for universal freedom. Let the strings of
the alien enemy bows be snapped by the strike of the
forces of Indra.






[Names: Tvam, Asatrurindra]
Indra, you release the floods of rivers to flow
down on the earth. You destroy the demon of darkness,
evil, want and ignorance. You are born without an equal,
adversary and enemy, and you promote the choicest
wealth and excellence of the world. Such as you are we
love and embrace you as our closest loving friend and
companion. Let the alien strings of the enemy bows snap









[Names: Astasi, Satrave]
Indra, may the facts and forces of enmity,
adversity and ungenerosity be eliminated from life and
the world. May all our thoughts and actions be inspired
by love and generosity. You strike the thunderbolt of
justice and punishment upon the enemy who wants to
destroy us or frustrate our love and generosity. May your
grace and generosity bring us wealth, honour and
excellence of life. Let the strings of enemy bows snap
by the tension of their own negativities.






[Names: Adhaspa, Indrabhito]
And the thief and the man wolf that designs
against us all round all time, pray crush down to naught.
You are the protector, Indra, the power to resist and
overthrow the danger. Let the strings of enemy bows
snap under their own fear and frustration.







[Names: Indrabhidasati]
Indra, whoever the man or power equal or lower
in rank, or strength that tries to suppress and enslave
us, overcome his force and crush him by your own


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 133 1079


strength and power which is great as the blazing sun.
Let the bow strings of the enemies snap under the heat
of your blaze.






[Names: Vayamindra, Rtasya]
Indra, we are yours, we love you and cherish
your friendship. Lead us forward by the path of truth
and rectitude across all sins and evils of the world. Save
us and let the alien strings and force of the bows of sin
and evil snap under their own tension.






[Names: Asmabhyam, Acchidrodhni]
Indra, lord of splendour, pray bless us with that
perennial cow, that speech, knowledge and vision which
gives the cherished milk of life for the celebrant so that
this great earth, this light of divinity, an infinite ocean
of living vitality, may shower us with abundance in a




Mandala 10/Sukta 134








[Names: Indra, Devata, Mandhata, Yauvanashva, Godha, Rshi, Ubhe, Maha, Janitryajijanadbhadra]
Indra, lord of light and glory, ruler of the world,
when you fill the earth and the environment with
splendour like the dawn, the divine Mother Nature raises
you and manifests you as the great ruler of the great
people of the world. The gracious mother elevates you
in refulgence and majesty as the mighty Indra. (Indra at
the cosmic level is the Lord Almighty; at the human
level, the world ruler; and at the individual level, Indra
is the soul, ruler of the body, senses, mind and






[Names: Adhaspadam, Devi]
Strike down the adamantine stubbornness of the
mortal enemy who wickedly injures the law and order
of the system. Crush him down to naught who
suppresses us and enslaves us. The divine mother create


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 134 1081


you, the gracious mother elevates you in glory as the






[Names: Sacibhih, Janitryajiyanadbhadra]
O mighty ruler, grand achiever, destroyer of
adversities, negativities and enmities, bring here those
vast, magnificent wealths, energies and excellences of
the world to the earth from the light of heaven by your
grand actions and victorious exploits. Shake up and
discover the resources of nature and humanity by
positive, protective and regenerative techniques possible
across the world. The divine mother creates you, the
gracious mother elevates you to eminence.






[Names: Satakratavindra, Rayim]
Indra, lord of a hundred powers, actions and
achievements, when you move and exploit the resources
of the world’s possibilities by thousands of protective
and regenerative techniques and grant the benefits of
wealth to the creative partners in the developmental
yajna, then the divine mother elevates you to honour,


the gracious mother exalts you to glory.






[Names: Durvaya]
Let the blazing warriors of the enemies and their
shining weapons fall down all round like particles of
mist. Let all hate, enmity and all malignant forces droop
and fall like blades of grass. The divine mother exhorts
you, the gracious mother exalts you.






[Names: Dirdham, Purvena, Jyanat]
Lord of intelligence, imagination and foresight,
as an elephant driver wields the hook to control the
strength and direction of the elephant, so you wield your
power of far-reaching potential to control the world
order, its forces and direction, and as the eternal ruler
and controller holds the reins of time, so do you, O lord
of might and magnanimity, hold the reins of the social
order steps ahead of possibility long before actuality.
The divine mother enlightens you, the gracious mother


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 135 1083






[Names: Nakirdeva, Paksebhirapikaksebhiratrabhi]
O devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of
humanity, we never transgress the law, never frustrate
any plan, never violate the order, never act surrep-
titiously. (We are an open minded people), we follow
the law, and act according to the divine mantra, tradition
and mantric declaration of the principles and policies
of the order. In matters of the social order we love and
cooperate with all parties of our view as well as with
others whether they are rivals or people on the periphery.


Mandala 10/Sukta 135






[Names: Yama, Devata, Kumara, Yamayana, Rshi, Yasmin, Atra, Anu]
On the leafy silken tree on which yama, the
human soul in control of its senses and mind, sits and
tastes the fruits of its own performance, on the same
tree, our father, ruler and controller of the universe, sits,
lives, loves, and watches the eternal human souls in
accordance with their performance.






[Names: Puranam, Anuvenantam, Anuvenanta, Asuyannabhyacakasam]
punah.


I see the father loving and watching the eternal
human souls. I see the human soul discontented,
displeased, protesting and still living with that same
sinful conduct. I see all this and yet I wish I would love
to live the same again.






[Names: Ekesam]
knowing, you ride a new chariot, of the body, which
you have yourself caused to have been created, by your
own mind. It goes round and round all round in various
forms of life and states of existence without wheels and
by only one pole of desire and energy.






O soul, that body which you move like a chariot
away from the sages, the wise man settled at peace in
the heart moves the same chariot all secure as if it is
safely placed in a boat to cross the seas.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 135 1085






Dear soul, who creates this chariot for the spirit?
Who completes and who dismantles it? Who at all would
speak of this to us now so that we could have a vision
of the future and knowledge of restitution? The Lord
alone can say.






[Names: Yathabhavadanudeyt, Purastadbudhna]
As this body, this other than the soul, is created,
similarly before this, mind and thought is created. Before
that Prakrti is all pervasive and expansive, and from
that all forms emerge and evolve.






[Names: Idam, Yaducyate, Yaducyat, Iyamasya]
This body is the abode of the spirit, it is also the
abode of death. It is said to be made of devas, divine
evolutes of nature such as earth, water and others. This
pulse of the body system beats, and as long as it beats
the soul and body is celebrated and exalted with songs
of adoration.




Mandala 10/Sukta 136
[Names: Keshina, Agni, Surya, Vayu, Devata, Vatarashanah]
Munayah Rshis. The Rshis’ details are: Juti (1), Vatajuti






[Names: Viprajuti, Vrshanaka, Karikrata, Etasha, Rshyashrnga, Kesyagnim]
Keshi, the sun of radiant rays, holds and sustains
the fire, the water, the heaven and earth and, indeed,
the world, and it is called the light that reveals the world,
illuminating it, so that we may see and enjoy the beauty
and bliss of it.


interpreted at the microcosmic level. In that case Keshi
is the soul which sustains the pranic energy and the
elements, processes and subsystems of the body system.
The soul is the inner light which itself is further
illuminated by the cosmic spirit precisely in the way
the sun itself is illuminated by the cosmic light of





[Names: Munayo, Vatasyanu]
Self-energised objects of space controlled by
cosmic energy wear a dull yellow vestment and they
follow the currents of cosmic energy when rays of the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 136 1087
sun touch and affect their behaviour.


(Sages harmoniously self-controlled in tune with
the currents of cosmic energy wear a soothing vestment
of yellow hue, and when their senses become totally
internalised, they identify their being with the cosmic
energy of divinity.)






[Names: Unmadita, Sriredasmakam]
Inspired by the sun we, space objects, abide in
orbital stability by the cosmic currents of universal
energy. O mortals, you may see our body on the surface,


(Pranic energies of the sage inspired by spiritual
energy, we abide in balance with the psychic currents
of the soul. O mortals, you can visualise and observe
our physical movements, but the inner reality, you can’t.)






[Names: Antariksena, Munirdevasyadevasya]
The sun which is an object of meditative
realisation flies through space, illuminating and
watching the forms of heavenly bodies in the solar
system. It itself is placed in orbit by the divine spiritual
energy of the cosmos for the sake of harmony among
the heavenly objects of the cosmic system.




(So does the soul vibrate in the microcosmic
system illuminating, the intelligence and energising the
mind and senses and the pranas to achieve the
individual’s harmony with himself and the totality of






[Names: Vatasyasvo, Ubhau]
The sun moves in orbit by the dynamics of
cosmic energy. It is a cooperative friend of cosmic
energy, inspired and energised by the supreme Divinity.
An object of realisation in meditation, it illuminates both
sides of its cosmic movement in space, the former and
the latter both in the cosmic orbit.


(The soul in meditation can illuminate both sides
of its orbit in time and space, the past and the future
both as revealed by the sage Patanjali in accordance
with the Veda.)




[Names: Apsarasam]
tamah.


Pervasive and radiating in the course of light
rays in the sky, over the earth and in the solar region
itself, the sun, treasure source of radiation, concomitant
with fire, warmth of life and light, is the highest inspirer
of joy, most soothing source of the sweetness of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 137 1089


(The soul itself is the reservoir of eternal joy in
the microcosmic existence of the human individual in
its spiritual journey on earth, in the sky, in the solar
region, in short, all over in its state of existence all time






[Names: Vayurasma]
When the sun drinks the soma fragrance of yajna
and the vapours of water arising from the earthly vedi
by the spatial cup along with the fire of the vedi, then
the wind churns the wealth of nature’s bounties and the
inviolable thunder grinds the grosser gifts of nature to
the refined particles of rain for the earth and the moral
and spiritual yajnic values for the soul of humanity.


Mandala 10/Sukta 137


[Names: Vishvedevah, Devatah, Saptarshis, Bharadvaja, Kashyapa, Gotama, Atri, Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha, Rshis, Utagascakrusam]
O Devas, sages and noble scholars, raise the
frustrated and the fallen. O divinities, save the despaired
and raise him again. O saints, redeem the man committed
to sin. O divines, give him the life again. Let the lost




live once again.






[Names: Dvavimau, Daksam]
Here are two winds of life that blow: one from
and upto the sea, the other beyond. May the one bring
you strength and vigour of freshness, let the other blow
out sin, evil and pollution far away.






[Names: Tvam]
O breeze of fresh life, bring in the healing balm,
blow out whatever is sinful and polluted. You blow as
the divine breath of life and freshness, and you alone
bring in the universal sanative.




[Names: Santatibhiratho]
suvami te.


I am come with all palliatives and protectives
for peace and tranquillity. I bring you auspicious,
resistant and regenerative vitality and root out all


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 137 1091






[Names: Trayantamiha, Marutam, Maruta, Trayantam]
May the divinities save us here in body and
mind. May the forces of Maruts, air, breeze, wind and
even storm protect us. May all forms of nature and living
beings protect and promote us so that this body system
may be fine, free and immaculate.






[Names: Apah]
All waters and other liquid energies are
sanatives. Waters are cleansers and destroyers of disease
and sickness. Waters are medicaments for all living
beings. O man, O sufferer, let the waters cure and wash
you clean as natural medicine.





[Names: Hastabhyam, Anamayitnubhyam]
The tongue is the leading articulator of the
physician’s speech. The two hands and ten fingers are
the physician’s magical touch. The soothing speech and
soft sympathetic touch of both hands and ten fingers,
with these two inspiring curatives, O suffering man, we




touch and retouch you and caress you back to health
and self-assurance.


Mandala 10/Sukta 138






[Names: Indra, Devata, Anga, Aurava, Rshi, Tava, Indra, Yatra, Kutsaya, Kutsa]
O lord of cosmic energy, Indra, in consonance
with your will and law, these flames of fire carrying
yajnic fragrance, and these currents of wind bearing
electrical energy, break the vaporous force of the mighty
cloud, and when the mantras are chanted and you radiate
the lights of the dawn, catalytic power is initiated and
showers of rain are released in response to the wishes
of the yajakas.




[Names: Avasrjah, Avardhayo, Susoca, Surya]
Indra, lord of cosmic winds and energy, creates
the vapours, breaks the clouds, initiates radiations of


light and energy, absorbs the honey sweets of fragrances,
augments the oceans of water in space, and by the order


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 138 1093


and power of its liberal potential, will and voice, the
winds blow and the sun shines in heaven.


SATUS




[Names: Drlhani]
The sun in the midst of the regions of light
releases the energy flood of its rays, creating thereby a
complementary adversary for the mighty cloud which
holds the wealth of vapours. Thus does Indra,
omnipotent performer, controller of cosmic dynamics,
break the formidable concentrations of the wondrous
mighty collector’s hoard of living showers by the strike
of the catalytic operation of its natural law.






[Names: Anadhrstani, Maseva, Sstrumrasrnadvirukmata]
Dauntless and valiant Indra, ruler of the world,
breaks down the formidable unimpaired selfish hoarders
of wealth and power and, just as the sun by seasonal
heat of its rays takes up the waters, so does he take out
the concealed wealth and power of the antisocial
elements, and, adored and celebrated, destroys the
enemies of humanity by the lustre of his justice and


power.






[Names: Ayuddhaseno, Indrasya, Indras]
Indra, heroic commander of irresistible force,
omnipresent and boundless, destroyer of evil and
darkness by his inviolable potential, is generous, reduces
the hurtful and promotes the progressive. The evil and
wicked fear the shattering thunderbolt of Indra who is
ever moving forward, illuminating and purifying, and
every day the morning moves his chariot for anew dawn
of light and progress for humanity.






[Names: Masam]
Indra, these are the celebrated deeds of yours,
lord absolute, who alone by yourself fix every selfish
uncreative power. You hold and sustain the sun in
heaven, and the sun, inspirer and promoter of life on
earth, regulates the months and seasons of the year and
abides by the path carved out by you in space.


MANDAL - 10/SUKTA - 139 1095


Mandala 10/Sukta 139








[Names: Savita, Vishvavasu, Atma, Devata, Devagandharva, Rshi, Suryarasmirharidesah, Tasya]
Savita, eternal light of life, wearing the rays of
the sun, golden haired, is risen there from the east. On
his rise in the world of his creation, Pusha, living energy
of divinity for life forms on earth, rises, seeing, blessing
and promoting all regions of the world as protector of
life and its activity.






[Names: Nrcaksa]
Watching and enlightening humanity, this light
divine of life abides in the midst of heaven, filling
heaven, earth and the middle region with its light and
glory. It illuminates all quarters of space with universal
light and bliss before and after and everywhere in
between over the planets and the node.








[Names: Rayo, Sacitbhih, Deva]
The very root and foundation of wealth, power
and excellence, giver of health, peace, comfort and
security of life, Savita watches, illuminates and inspires
every thing of life with its forms and powers of action.
Like omnificent divinity itself, the very essence and
spirit of truth and Dharma, Savita abides by us in our
battles for life’s wealth, beauty and excellence.






[Names: Visvavasum, Soma, Tadanvavaidindro, Suryasya, Suryas]
O Soma, blessed seeker, just as vapours of water
rise up by the heat of yajna and reach the sun, sustainer
of the earth and life giver of the world, similarly self-
realising souls by meditative yajna rise to the cosmic
soul, and just as dynamic wind energy moves in
consonance with the sun to the vaporous halo round
the sun, similarly self-realising souls watch the cosmic
halo round divinity, and the exceptional soul, having
stayed existential complexities, reaches the divine
presence at the centre of the halo.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 139 1097




[Names: Visvavasurabhi, Yadva]
May the spirit of the universe, shelter home of
the world and world’s wealth and knowledge, divine
sustainer of the universe and universal wisdom, maker
and measurer of the universe in space and time,
enlighten us of what is the truth of existence, what we
do not know. May he inspire our vision and intelligence,
and protect and promote our intelligence, will and






[Names: Sasnimavindaccarane, Prasam]
May Gandharva, eternal lord sustainer of the
universe, knowledge and speech, abiding deep at the
centre and on the circumference of the fluent streams
and rolling oceans of speech and knowledge, open up
for us the doors of knowledge locked in adamantine
mystery and release the nectar streams of these mysteries
in speech and vision. Indra, lord omnipotent and
omniscient, alone knows in full the depth and far
outreach of these mysteries.




Mandala 10/Sukta 140






[Names: Agni, Devata, Pavaka, Rshi, Agne, Brhadbhano]
Agni, leading light of life, great is your vigour,
power and felicity, shining, inspiring and incessantly
flowing. O refulgent lord, your flames rise high and
blaze fiercely. Light and fire of Infinity, omniscient poet
and creator, by your power, potential and abundance,
you bear and bring admirable food, energy and
fulfilment with the sense of victory for the generous
giver and selfless yajaka.






[Names: Pavakavarcah, Anunavarca, Putro]
Lord of flames of purity, master of immaculate
light and power absolutely free from want and weakness,
you rise with self-refulgence and, just as the son closely
abides by the parents, serves and protects them, so do
you pervade, sustain and protect the heaven and earth.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 140 1099




[Names: Urjo, Scitrotayo]
O divine light and fire of life, child as well as
protector and sustainer of energy pervasive in the entire
world of existence, rise and rejoice as well as exhilarate
us, with hymns and noble thoughts and actions as you
are invoked and kindled in the vedi and in the heart and
soul. Faithful celebrants bring you food in homage, and
in you they vest their desires and aspirations of various
forms and wondrous efficacy arisen from love of the
heart and soul.






[Names: Trajyannagne]
Immortal Agni, waxing and exalting with all
living beings, develop and expand the wealth and
excellence of life for us. Of noble and gracious form as
you are and shine and rule as you do, join us with yajnic
action and bless us with abundant fruit of success and






[Names: Iskartaramadhvarasya, Ratim]
Agni, lord, spirit, and power of the light and




fire of life, we celebrate and adore you, inspirer, impeller
and promoter of holy yajna of love and non-violence,
omniscient treasure giver and controller of the great
world’s wealth, who bear and bring us abundant gifts
of beauty and splendour and the good fortune of life,
high energy and food, plenty and prosperity, indeed all
wealth, honour and excellence of life.






[Names: Rtavanam, Srutkarnam]
Men, first of all since earliest times, worship,
adore and inculcate you, Agni, omniscient lord of life,
yajna and the law of life, great and glorious, most
gracious presence of the world, for the sake of peace,
pleasure and prosperity for the good life. O lord of life
and grace, mortals singly and in couples and family with
holy words celebrate and exalt you, divine, kind listener,


Mandala 10/Sukta 141




[Names: Vishvedeva, Devata, Agni, Tapasa, Rshi, Agne]
Agni, lord of light, knowledge and speech, speak


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 141 1101


to us here of the knowledge of science and divinity, be
good and gracious to us here and now, direct. O Vishpati,
protector and promoter of the people, you are the giver
of life’s wealth, knowledge and enlightenment, pray give
us the wealth, knowledge and enlightenment about life
and the art of living.




nah.


May Aryama, lord of justice and rectitude,
Bhaga, lord giver of wealth, power and glory, Brhaspati,
lord of expansive space, universal vision and speech,
Devas, all divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity,
and divine Sunrta, Vedic voice of truth and law of
existence, give us wealth, honour and prosperity of life,
wisdom and enlightenment.






[Names: Somam, Soma, Adityan, Suryam, Surya, Aditya]
We invoke brilliant Soma, exhilarating spirit of
peace for protection and progress, Agni, spirit of light
and warmth of life, with holy words and songs of
devotion. We invoke and adore the Adityas, brilliant
powers of enlightenment, Vishnu, lord omniscient and




source of light, Brahma, the sage of divinity, and
Brhaspati, the scholar visionary of divinity.






[Names: Indravayu, Yatha]
We invoke, adore and pray for the cosmic energy
of omnipotent Indra, Vayu, wind energy of cosmic Vayu,
Brhaspati, cosmic sustenance of the infinite wielder of
the universe, all worthies of love, invocation and
adoration so that our people, noble and happy at heart,
be united in cooperation for the peace and progress of
life on the earth.






[Names: Aryamanam, Vatam, Sarasvatim, Sarasvati]
For the gifts of wealth, honour and excellence
of life, invoke, adore and inculcate Aryaman, law of
life, Brhaspati, cosmic expansion and centrifugal energy,
[Names: Indra, Vata, Vishnu]
cosmic gravitation and centripetal energy, Sarasvati,
cosmic knowledge and speech of divinity, and Savita,
cosmic creative energy which is the overall and ultimate




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 142 1103




[Names: Tvam, Agnibhirbrahma, Tvam]
Agni, leading light of the world, by the gifts of
enlightenment increase and develop our knowledge and
corporate action, and inspire and enlighten us for the
service of the divinities to win their gifts of wealth,
honour and excellence.


Mandala 10/Sukta 142






[Names: Agni, Devata, Sharngah, Rshis, Jarita, Drona, Sarisrkva, Stambamitra, Ayamagne, Bhadram]
trivaruthamasti ta are himsanamapa didyuma


O self-refulgent light of life, Agni, this celebrant
is dedicated to you wholly in worship and service. O
creator and inspirer of strength, patience and fortitude,
there is none other than you worth attaining. Blissful is
your power of body, mind and soul. Pray cast away the
pain and sufferance caused by the burning oppression
of violent enemies.








[Names: Pravat]
Agni, your presence radiates, desiring to take
all regions of the world. And our thoughts and songs of
homage too, spontaneously flying vibrations of heart
and soul, reach on to you like eager servants of the divine






Agni, self-refulgent fire and power, when you
burn and devour heaps of grass, sometimes you spare
patches of green and sometimes vast areas of fertile
lands become wastelands. Let us understand this
mystery and the way so that we do not excite the
onslaught of your blazing power of destruction.






[Names: Yadudvato, Yada, Socirvapteva, Anuvati]
When you rise and spread, devouring both high
and low like a fierce army thirsting for victory, and
specially when the wind blows favourable to your blaze,


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 142 1105


then like a barber shaving off beard and moustache you
lay waste vast areas of land.






[Names: Pratyasya, Srenayo, Bahu, Anumarmrjano]
The flames of Agni in rising sequence are seen
like a row of chariots following one leader as engine
when, Agni, you raise your arms waxing and shining
and cover hills and valleys on the land.






[Names: Susma, Sasama, Ucchvancasva]
Agni, lord of light, illuminative and enlightening
power, may your bright flames rise higher, may the
radiations of your light and grandeur and your victories
over want and darkness rise high and elevate the body,
mind and soul of the celebrant. Yourself rising and
expanding, raise the high higher, condescend, save and
raise the low, and may all the soothing, sheltering powers
and personalities of the world sit by you on the vedi
and rehabilitate the uprooted here today and now.







[Names: Apamidam, Anyam, Anu]
This is the vast reservoir of waters, bottomless

bound of the sea. Agni, create some other higher path


from these here, so you may proceed to the fulfilment
of your heart’s desire.


[Names: Ayane, Hradasca]
Agni, may flowers and holy grass grow on your
arrival, may flowers and holy grass shower on your


departure. Let all these homes be homes close to the
infinite ocean, with reservoirs and flowers around.


(The seventh and eighth verses may be
addressed to the human soul as well as to Agni, leading
light and creative spirit of the cosmos.)


Mandala 10/Sukta 143


[Names: Ashvinau, Devate, Atri, Sankhya, Rshi, Tyam, Kaksivantam]
navam.


Hey Ashvins, complementary energies of nature
and complementary nobilities of humanity such as
physician and surgeon, teacher and preacher, father and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 143 1107


mother, men and women, the person who observes the
laws of nature and principles of truth and grows up in
the yajnic way of life, whether he or she loves to enjoy
the experience of living or has grown out of life’s
colourfulness and temptation, such a person you
strengthen like a strong force in harness with every side
of personality renewed to top condition of health and
body to reach the goal and realise the purpose and values
of life.



[Names: Drlham]
rajah.


And the person most youthful, dynamic, ever
in harness for winning the goal of life, but bound by the
web of life through senses, mind and pranas, all unsoiled
though by dust, pray release, undo the bondage like a
gordian knot of life so that the person may live free
from possible dust and pollution.






[Names: Nara]
pray release the worldly man in search of freedom from
bondage, bless him with holy thoughts and intelligence,
since the enlightened man’s song of prayer and adoration
in order to celebrate you reaches you, harbingers of light,


again and again.






[Names: Cite]
Ashvins, harbingers of wealth, competence and
success, that wealth of noble thoughts and intelligence,
that generous gift of yours, is for the enlightenment of
humanity which, O leading lights, you bring in showers
in this vast world of life, in this hall of yajna, in this
struggle of our life for happiness and freedom.






[Names: Yuvam, Yatamaccha]
Ashvins, bright like fire and the sun, inviolably
committed to truth and law, pray come with faultless
ark and oars to humanity beaten about in the depth of
dust and rolling seas, to help us swim to the shore to
freedom and victory.





[Names: Samasme]
Leading lights of the world, greatest and most


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 144 1109


liberal masters of universal wealth and knowledge, come
like benevolent harbingers of peace and freshness of
joy, bless us and refine us with your gracious favours
of peace, freedom and happiness as abundant showers
of rain fill the lake.


Mandala 10/Sukta 144








[Names: Indra, Devata, Suparna, Tarkshya, Urdhvakrshana, Yamayana, Rshi, Ayam, Dakso]
Indra, lord eternal and omnipotent, this immortal
soma rises to you like a flying courser. Versatile, living
vitality of the world, it rises in homage to the lord creator
of the world.




[Names: Ayamasmasu, Rbhurvajro]
madam.


Here among us it is inspiring and adorable,
brilliant, a very thunderbolt of protection for the
generous, and scourge of punishment for the destructive.
And it bears the exhilaration that elevates like rising
flames of fire just as the wise sage bears the passion for








[Names: Ghrsuh, Syenaya]
Effulgent, agile and exhilarating for the dynamic
creative personality, inspiring and vitalising among its
own people, it blesses them and their progeny with high
energy and enthusiasm.






[Names: Syenasya, Satacakram]
Soma, which Vayu, cosmic energy, child of all
pervasive space, bears and carries from far off solar
regions, is performer of a hundred divine acts of nature
and it is the very life of the cloud and indestructible
vitality of life.





[Names: Syenascarumavrkam]
The essence of life’s vitality, soma, lovely and
pleasing, unassailable and sunny bright, which nature’s
energy brings by its own spirit and power, is the vitality
by which health and fertility for life grows higher and
the kinship and continuity of humanity keeps living and
awake.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 145 1111






[Names: Kratva]
Thus does Indra, life of life, through soma life
energy, disseminate and bear the great creative vitality
in the divine forms of nature and humanity. O lord of
holy action, the health and age of distinct life forms is
extended and maintained by holy acts of soma activity,
and this vitality is created and distilled from us by us
through the holy discipline of yajnic living with


Mandala 10/Sukta 145


[Names: Sapatni, Devata, Indrani, Rshi]
The subject matter of this hymn at the surface
level is getting rid of a rival wife, and for that purpose
the speaker takes recourse to a herb also. Thus the hymn
reads like a spell cure and possibly with a magical herb.
But this approach would not do justice to the deeper
meaning of the hymn which is integration or re-
integration of personality with a single, undivided,
focussed interest in the pursuit of a definite goal of
positive value.


Split personality is a problem in modern times.
So is schizophrenia, a devastating disease. The cure can
be both herbal and psychological. The word ‘Upanishat’
helps us to read the hymn in this Vedic direction of
practical yoga in which sanative herbs, mental
concentration and spiritual faith all play an important



role (refer Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, 4, 1.).



[Names: Imam, Yaya]
I dig out this luxuriant and most powerful herb
by which one can annul a rival fascination and by which
the pursuant can recover a single, all absorbing love for






[Names: Uttanaparne, Sapatnim]
O soma plant growing up with luxuriant leaves
and branches, nobly effective, divinely energised, giver
of peace, patience and courageous vitality, transform
me to concentrate on my one and only love. Throw off
my evil fascination. Let me be with my master spirit of
life.





[Names: Uttarahamuttara]
O soma, you are higher, more efficacious. I also
am higher than the fascination, greater than all others
who are superior, generally speaking. May that which
is my rival be lower than the lowest fascinations.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 145 1113






[Names: Nahyasya, Parameva]
I do not even think of its name. No one entertains
this human distraction, no one is distracted by this
human fascination. We throw this remote fascination
far off at the farthest.






[Names: Ahamasmi, Ubhe]
I am patient, challenging and victorious. O
soma, you too are unassailable, you and I, both
challenging and victorious, we shall subdue the rival.






[Names: Mamanu]
O soma, O spirit of peace, O spiritual knowledge
of the Upanishad, I love you at heart and hold on to you
in faith, patient and victorious as you are. I hold on to
you with a determined mind. May your spirit radiate
and come to me like the mother cow hastening to the
calf and water rushing straight down to the lake.




Mandala 10/Sukta 146





[Names: Aranyani, Devata, Devamuni, Airammada, Rshi, Aranyanyaranyanyasau, Katha]
Tarry, O spirit of the forest, who disappear like
a phantom in no time. Why not stay for a moment by
the village? And you don’t fear even fear itself, which
fears to touch your presence.




[Names: Vrsaravaya, Yadupavati, Aghatibhiriva]
In response to howls and noises of the forest,
birds chirp and crickets sing, all appears like temple
bells and thereby the forest presence gets exalted.





Forest animals graze like cows, clusters of
flowers give a homely look, and the forest spirit appears
to say good bye to the carts that leave for village homes.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 146 1115




[Names: Gamangaisa, Vasannaranyanyam]
Dear spirit and forest presence, someone calls
upon his cow to come home, this one cuts the tree, and
in the evening someone staying in the forest shrieks,
someone howls, someone bursts in song also.






[Names: Svadoh]
The forest does not hurt anyone. Whoever goes
to the forest without the intent to damage eats the
delicious fruit and roams around as he wishes at will.






[Names: Anjanagandhim, Praham]
I revere and celebrate the forest and the spirit
of the forest not subjected to human encroachment by
farming, abounding in wild fruit, fragrant, flowery
beautiful, mother of wild life and sustaining friend of




Mandala 10/Sukta 147






[Names: Indra, Devata, Suveda, Shairishi, Rshi, Sratte, Ubhe, Anu]
Indra, potent ruler of nature and humanity, lord
of thunder and clouds, mover of mountains, I am all
faith, reverence and admiration in truth of commitment
for your first and foremost power and passion by which
you break the clouds and release the showers of rain
for humanity, by virtue of which both heaven and earth
abide by your law, the power and force by which the
firmament shakes with awe.






[Names: Tvam, Tvaminnaro]
Irreproachable power, with your mind and desire
to produce more food and energy, by your mighty forces
you break open the treasure-holds of mysterious hidden
energies of nature. Leading lights of humanity take to
you in their search for rays of light, and in all their
cherished programmes of common good they honour
you as the source of success.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 147 1117






[Names: Aisu, Puruhita, Arcanti]
O lord universally invoked and celebrated, be
gracious and bring the light of knowledge to these noble
leaders of humanity. O lord of power and glory,
progressive men of wisdom who have achieved power
and prosperity in life honour and adore you in their
congregations as the chief power of success and victory
for the attainment of irreproachable wealth and other
values for themselves, their children and grand children.






[Names: Tvavrdho]
He alone values and obtains wealth worthy of
achievement who knows and realises in life the inspiring
power and ecstasy of Indra. O lord of power and
prosperity, the man inspired and empowered by you,
who is dedicated to positive giving and yajnic
programmes with leading lights of scientific yajna,
achieves wealth and victory at the earliest because he
knows the secret of success.








[Names: Sardhaya]
Indra, lord giver and creator of glory, pray let
us rise and expand in the field of knowledge and action.
Give us wealth and power of a high order of nobility.
You are Mitra and Varuna for us, friend and just guide,
giver and commander of wondrous capability, noble and
blissful, and one with us, you give us food for body,
mind and soul for the individual and the human


Mandala 10/Sukta 148






[Names: Indra, Devata, Prthu, Vainya, Rshi, Susvanasa, Indra]
Indra, lord of abundant wealth and power,
creative and expressive devotees with divine gifts of
heavenly food and energy, we celebrate and adore you.
Pray bless us with that wealth and well being which
you please is for our good, so that, under your gracious
protection, we may win the power and prosperity of
life to live well and enjoy the beauty and goodness of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 148 1119


life to the fulfilment of our heart and soul.






[Names: Rsvastvamindra, Sura, Guha, Somam, Soma]
Indra, you are the mighty maker and terrible
breaker both at the same time in the creative process of
nature and life, great and brave at the very manifestation
of your power, who challenge and break open the
negative forces of dark clouds by the sun, so that, on
showers of the divine grace of rains, we receive and
enjoy the soma nectar hidden in the mystery held at the
heart of the vapours and water showers.


(In the spiritual sense, Indra is present deep in
the self, and when by grace it breaks the darkness, we
receive the light and the divine nectar.)






[Names: Somai]
O lord of the cosmic chariot, ruler protector of
the universe, vibrant and omniscient Indra, lover of the
sages’ songs of adoration, pray accept and honour our
words of prayer so that, serving and celebrating you
with delicious homage of soma and ourselves exulting,
we may ever abide in your gracious favour and presence.








[Names: Savah, Tebhirbhava]
of adoration are offered in homage to your honour. Be
pleased to accept these. Pray bless us with strength and
power worthy of the brave. Bless these leading lights
with love and sure fulfilment in their holy acts of yajna.
Save the celebrants and upraise the fallen who depend
on you and look up for help.






[Names: Srudhi]
Indra, leading light of the world, omnipotent
lord, brave all-presence, listen to the invocation and
prayer of humanity at large. Adored and exalted you
are by the celebrative songs of the wise, who sit in your
hall of prayer round the vedi lighted and sprinkled with
ghrta and attend to you, while the singer celebrants run
to you like streams rushing down to sea, by paths of

Mandala 10/Sukta 149






[Names: Savita, Devata, Archan, Hairanyastupa, Rshi]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 149 1121




Savita, lord creator, places the earth in orbit, and
Savita places the region of light, in columnless space
by the forces of cosmic gravitation. Savita moves the
thundering cloud like a horse in skies and brings the
showers, and Savita places the middle regions and the
vast expanse of vapours and waters bound in boundless






[Names: Yatra]
Where the ocean of vapours and water is
sustained and whence it sprinkles the earth with
showers, only Savita, eternal sustainer of waters, knows
that mystery. Thence, from Savita, arises the earth,
thence arises the sky and thence only the heaven and
earth arise in mutual relation and expand.






[Names: Pascedamanyadabhavadyajatramamartyasya, Suparno]
Later all this other world arises in mutual
relationship by the omnipotence of eternal lord Savita.




Dear seeker, from Savita only first arises the grand flying
bird of fire, the sun, in conformity with the laws of
Savita, and then the others.


ak: uw




[Names: Gava, Patiriva]
Just as cows hasten to the village, the warrior
takes to the horse, loving mother cow anxious at heart
runs to the calf for milk, the husband goes to the wife
for love, so may Savita, sustainer of the heavenly world,
love of all humanity, come and bless us as his children.





[Names: Hiranyastupah, Somasye, Somasy]
O Savita, just as Angirasa, yogi with controlled
pranic energy, established in the golden beauty of the
spirit, invokes you in this yajna for the essence through
existence, so do I, dedicated to worship and prayer with
adoration, keep awake waiting for the revelation of
divinity as my share of soma, divine ecstasy of ultimate


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 150 1123


Mandala10/Sukta 150




[Names: Agni, Mrdika, Vasishtha, Samiddhascit, Adityai]
kaya na 4 gahi.


Agni, fire of the vedi, heat and light of life,
carrier of fragrance and freshness to nobilities and divine
forces of nature, kindled, burning and ever awake, you
are still kindled and raised to burn and shine for the
renewal of life and life energy by yajna. Pray come to
us with Aditya, radiations of the sun, with Rudras,
electric catalysis of natural energy, and with Vasus, gifts
of earth and pranic energies. Come to us for peace,
prosperity and all round well being of life.



[Names: Imam, Martasastva]
havamahe.

Loving, accepting and appreciating this yajna,
this word of prayer and divine adoration, pray come
close to join us. Shining, burning and blazing fire divine,
we mortals invoke you, we kindle and adore you for
peace, prosperity and all round well being of life.







[Names: Tvamu, Agne]
Agni, with sincerity of thought, word and action,
I adore you, eternal knower of all that is born, universal
lover and saviour of all by their own choice. O light
and fire of universal life, bring hither the nobilities of
humanity to join us, bring hither the divinities of nature
to bless us, they are all lovers of the laws and discipline
of life. Pray bring hither the lovers of law and discipline
of life for peace, progress and all round well being of






[Names: Agnirdevo, Agnim]
Agni, lord omniscient and self-refulgent, Agni,
universal spirit of life, was and is the high priest of all
divine forces of nature and all nobilities of humanity.
The same Agni, leading light and life of existence,
ordinary people and enlightened sages invoke and light
in the heart and home. I invoke and light the great Agni
in the soul and in the home vedi for the achievement of
wealth, honour and excellence of life. I pray to the spirit
of divine peace for victory over all wealth and excellence
of life.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 151 1125




[Names: Agniratrim, Agniratri, Bharadvajam, Bharadvaja, Trasadasyumahave, Trasadasyumahav]
Agni, self-refulgent fire and spirit of life,
protects Atri, winner over the weaknesses of body, mind
and soul, Bharadvaja, harbinger of food and energy with
enlightenment for people, Gavishthira, victor over sense
and mind, Kanva, enlightened visionary, and
Trasadasyu, controller of the wicked negativists, and
indeed all of us in our battle of life for peace and
progress. Vasishtha, brilliant high priest and leader
settled at heart, invokes and adores Agni at yajna, the
leader adores and prays to Agni for the achievement of
all round well being in life.


Mandalal10/Sukta 151




[Names: Shraddha, Kamayani, Sraddhayagnih, Sraddham]
vedayamasi.


Agni is kindled with Shraddha, faith in truth
pursued with commitment in thought, word and deed.
Oblations into fire are offered with complete faith and
commitment to truth and sincerity of conviction. And
we, on top of life’s highest glory, celebrate and exalt
faith with the sacred Word of the Veda and declare it as
commitment to truth and reason.








[Names: Priyam, Priyam]
O Shraddha, faith committed to truth, reason and
more, do good to the faithful who give. Shraddha, do
good to the faithful disposed to give. Do good to those
who give and those who receive. Do good to the
performers as well as to the beneficiaries of yajna. Pray
do this and justify what I have said of faith and truth.






[Names: Yatha, Evam]
Just as noble and creative powers have faith in
how they must deal with the cruel and the evil doers, so
let my word of faith and truth be justified in relation to
the generous and the yajnics for their success and






[Names: Vayugopa, Sraddha]
Divinities of nature and humanity, performers
of yajna, all protected by the universal energy of Vayu
in meditation, love and value Shraddha without
compromise. Shraddha, unshakable faith, which is
heartfelt and unquestionable in conviction, deserves and
earns wealth, honour and excellence in life. This is
possible only by Shraddha.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 152 1127






[Names: Sraddh, Suryasya, Suryas]
We invoke, love and worship divine faith in
truth, at dawn. We love and worship faith in truth at the
mid-day session of yajna. We love and worship
Shraddha at the time of sun-set. O Shraddha, faith in
truth and divinity, pray establish us all in faith in truth,
charity and service of both divinity and humanity.


Mandalal10/Sukta 152


[Names: Indra, Shasa, Savasa]
Indra, you are truly the great ruler and controller
of the world, wondrous unique, destroyer of unfriendly
and negative forces, supreme power whose friend and
devotee is never destroyed, never hurt, never overcome.





[Names: Svastida, Vrsendrah, Somapa]
Generous and virile Indra, giver of happiness
and all round well being, ruler and protector of the




people, destroyer of darkness, sin and evil, who destroys
enemies and rules and controls the world, may, we pray,
ever be with us as protector and promoter of the soma
joy of his creation and give us freedom from fear and






Destroyer of the demon and the destroyer, break
the jaws of evil. O Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness,
shatter the mind and morale of the enemy who tries to
suppress, subdue and enslave us.





Indra, throw off those powers and tendencies
which seek to destroy us. Subdue those who seek to
fight and subdue us. Take those down to deep darkness
who seek to subdue and enslave us.






[Names: Apendra, Sarma]
Indra, beat off and eliminate the mind and
intention of the jealous, blunt off the weapon of the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 153 1129


powers that wish to destroy. Let anger be calmed down,
give us peace and comfort of higher order, and remove
the killer death.


Mandalal0/Sukta 153



[Names: Indramatara, Devajamaya, Rshis, Inkhayantirapasyuva, Indram, Bhejanasah]
Active, expressive and eloquent people,
conscious of their rights and duties, serve and abide by
the ruling power of the system, Indra, as it arises and
advances, and while they do so they enjoy good health,
honour and prosperity of life for themselves and their



[Names: Tvamindra, Tvam]
Ruling power, Indra, you have risen high by
virtue of your strength, patient courage, and grandeur
of personality. Generous as showers of blissful rain, you
are mighty, excellent and refulgent as the sun.








[Names: Tvamindrasi]
You, Indra, are destroyer of evil and demonic
darkness of the system, breaker of the clouds for rain,
you cross the skies and, like the sun sustaining the
regions of light by its self-refulgence, you sustain the
rule of light and law by your own charismatic grandeur
of character and personality.








[Names: Vajram]
You, Indra, bear a united and participative
refulgence of personal dignity and social brilliance,
keeping the force of your arms and blaze of justice and
rectitude fresh and shining by the constant manifestation
of your dynamic vigour of personality.





[Names: Tvamindrabhibhurasi]
You, Indra, are the supreme ruler over all things
come into existence by your self-refulgence which
indeed is the light and life of all the worlds. O ruler,
you too be that all over the world.


Mandalal0/Sukta 154




[Names: Bhava, Yami, Vaivasvati]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 154 1131


[Names: Soma, Yebhyo]
tat.

Soma flows for many, they chant the Samans.

Many love ghrta for the yajna fire, they chant the Yajus.

Honey flows for those who chant the Atharva verses,

and knowledge for the lovers of Rks. The spirit of life

flows for all them, universally.


[Names: Tapasa, Tapo]
There are those who by tapas rise undaunted,
those who by tapas rise to the heaven of bliss, and those
who perform tapas of high order. The spirit of life flows
for all of them, universally.


[Names: Surdaso]
There are the brave who fight to the end in
battles, who give up the body, and those who give in
charity a thousand ways. The spirit of life flows to them








[Names: Pitrn]
And those ancients eternally committed to the
truth of law, committed to the law of truth by yajna,
promoters of truth and yajna, parents and forefathers
established in tapas, O soul on travel in existence, the
spirit of life flows to them and through them too,






[Names: Sahasranithah, Suryam, Surya, Rsin]
Poets, seers and sages of hundredfold vision and
virtue who adhere to the light of eternity at heart, and
the Rshis established in tapas, O soul on the sojourn of
existence, the spirit of life flows to them all and through


Mandalal0/Sukta 155








[Names: Alakshmighnam, Brahmanaspati, Vishvedevah, Devatah, Shirimbishtha, Arayi, Sirimbithasya]
O Stingy deprivation, famine and misfortune,
distorted in vision, crooked of character, always whining
and protesting, get away to naught. We scare you away
by those superior forces of profuse rains of the cloud
on mountains where you too may go.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 155 1133




[Names: Catto, Arayyam]
Gone from here, be gone from there also, away


from the mountain and the cloud. O lord of cosmic force,
sharp with catalytic energy, come here, destroying this
presence of deprivation, famine and indigence.




[Names: Tada]
ram.


O man destroyer of want and deprivation, see


that unmanned wooden boat that floats on water to cross
the flood, take to that and sail to the other side (to fight
out this want through enterprise and initiative).






[Names: Yaddha, Hata, Satravah, Indrasya, Indras]
When floods of water flow forth bearing iron


ore, rejoicing as if with croaking frogs, all adversities,
enemies of humanity, disappear like bubbles, at once.








[Names: Parime, Devesvakrata]
These farmers lead the bullocks to the fields.
They light the fires all round to cook and for yajna.
They offer libations to the fire for natural forces. Who
can push them down to the state of poverty and


[Names: None]
Mandala10/Sukta 156






[Names: Ketu, Agneya, Tena]
Let our thought, will and actions research and
develop fire energy like a fleet or horse spurred to battle
for victory so that thereby we may achieve the real
wealth of wealths.






[Names: Yaya]
O leading light of life, energy of fire, with your
powers and means of protection by which we acquire
our lands and develop our fields and cattle wealth, pray
enhance and accelerate that same power for us for
acquisition of wealth, power and honour.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 156 1135






[Names: Angdhi]
O light and fire of life, bring us solid, vast and
lasting wealth rich in lands, cows and culture, horses,
transport and achievement, fill the firmament with
profuse rain and vapour, and turn poverty and indigence
into plenty and generosity.






[Names: Dadhajjyotirjanebhyah]
Agni, light of life, ruler of existence, let the
unaging sun, star of good fortune, rise high in heaven
so that it may bring light and energy for humanity and






[Names: Bodha]
Agni, light and fire of life, you are the essential
brilliant definition and identity of humanity, blazing
ensign of human culture, dearest, best, closest, freest,
bearing food, energy and enlightenment for the
celebrant. Pray listen, enlighten, and bless.




Mandalal0/Sukta 157






[Names: Vishvedeva, Bhuvana, Aptya, Sadhana, Bhauvana]
devah.


Let us proceed, study and win our goals,
successfully and peacefully, across these regions of the
world, study and harness electric energy, and let all
divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity be
favourable to us.






[Names: Yajnam]
Indra, the sun, the wind, electric energy of the
firmament with all year’s phases of the sun, supports,
strengthens and promotes our yajna, our body’s health
and our people and future generations.




[Names: Adityairindrah, Adityairindra]
May Indra, ruling power of the world with all
its natural and human forces, winds and stormy troops
across the sun’s phases over the year, be the protector
and promoter of our health of body and social




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 158 1137




[Names: Hatvaya]
Divine forces of nature and nobilities of
humanity attain to their status of divine positivity when
they come together to preserve, protect and promote
the positive forces and destroy the demonic forces of
negativity and destruction.






[Names: Pratyancamarkamanayanchacibhiradit]
When the Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and
human nobilities, offer their songs of adoration in their
best of yajnic homage higher and higher forward, then
only they see and experience divine inspiration and
invigoration descending to them step by step from
divinity through nature to humanity.


Mandalal10/Sukta 158






[Names: Chakshu, Saurya, Suryo, Agnirnah, Agnirna]
May Surya, the sun, protect and promote us from
the regions of light, may Vayu, the winds, protect and
promote us from the middle regions of the sky, and may
Agni, fire and vital heat, protect and promote us from
the earthly regions.








[Names: Josa, Pahi]
O Savita, lord creator and giver of light and life,
O sun, whose receptive and radiative refulgence is
worthy of a hundred yajnic activities on earth and other
planets by human and natural forces, pray accept our
homage and prayer and protect and save us from the
flying and falling strikes of light and lightning.






[Names: Caksurno, Caksurdhata]
of the eye, may the cloud and mountain give us light of
the eye, and may Dhata, lord controller and sustainer of
life on earth, bless us with light of the eye.






Give us the light for vision outer and inner, give
us the light to see the past and future for ourselves and
our children, give us the vision to see this life and the
world as a whole as well as in parts integrated in the


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 159 1139




[Names: Susamdrsam]
O refulgent Sun of blissful light, may we always
see you, and again and again see you as high and higher


divinity, and in your divine light see things worthy of
being seen by humanity for our guidance.


Mandalal10/Sukta 159






[Names: Shachi, Paulomi, Udasau, Aham]
There rises the sun. It is also my good fortune
thus arisen. I know this for certain. I have found my
protection and sustenance and I shall overcome all my
rivals and adversaries.






[Names: Mamedanu]
I am my own refulgence, I am the one on top, I
am the passion and the fire. I speak and I must have the
response. I am the challenger, my master would surely
know my acts and intentions positively and would







[Names: Mama, Utahamasmi, Sloka]
My sons are destroyers of enmity. My daughter
is refulgent. I am the victor all round, so my song of
adoration rises to my master who is the light and life of
the world.






[Names: Yenendro, Idam]
The means and holy materials by which Indra,
master and ruler, rises to honour and glory in action, I
create and follow, and thereby I become free from rivals
and adversaries.





[Names: Asapatna, Avrksamanyasam]
I have no rivals, I throw off the adversaries, I
emerge the victor, greater than the challengers, I turn to
naught the power and valour of others who are no better
than passing gusts of mild winds.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 160 1141




[Names: Samajaisamima, Yathahamasya]
so that I might shine 111 the eyes of my master and shine
and rule over this people.


Mandalal10/Sukta 160






[Names: Purana, Vaishvamitra, Tivrasyabhivayaso]
O ruler of the world, Indra, take on, protect and
promote this vibrant youthful social order, release all
the versatile and abundant resources of development
here for this purpose, let no other programme or
programmers distract your attention. For you and your
purpose all these natural and human resources are ready,
trained and matured to the full.







[Names: Tubhyam, Indredamadya, Somam]
To you are these resources dedicated, those that
are ripe and ready and those that are being prepared.




Voices of sincere devotion call on you. Indra, knowing
well, loving and fully dedicated to this world programme
of development, take it on here and now, protect,
promote and raise the world to the heights of attainment.




of Ya uSata manasa somamasmai sarvahrda


[Names: Indrastasya, Indrastas]
Whoever is loyal and dedicated with
enthusiastic mind and total devotion of heart and soul,
and creates and matures the soma of universal value for
Indra and the social order, the lord never ignores his
words of prayer, never alienates his property and
possessions, in fact he recognises his services with
honour and makes him feel proud and blest.






[Names: Anuspasto, Niraratnau]
The lord keeps in close and direct vicinity the
and offers the soma of sincere dedication to him. He,
lord of all power and glory, protects him in full security
without the shackles, and even without prayer, destroys
the enemies of positivity and divinity in the social order.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 161 1143




[Names: Asvayanto, Abhiusantaste, Sunam]
Enthusiastic and advancing for progress,
prosperity and pride of achievement, we call upon you,
Indra, ruling lord of the world, to come close to us and
be with us. Winning the graces of life and doing glory
to divinity, we pray, let us abide in your favour and
adorable good will. We pray for peace and well being,
we ask for divine grace.


Mandalal10/Sukta 161








[Names: Rajayakshmanashanam, Yakshmanashana, Prajapatya, Muncami, Gravirjagraha, Indragni]
I cure you and release you from the consumptive
killer disease even of the highest severity and immunize
you against such disease, known or unknown, with the
administration of medicine and tonics by homa so that
you may live a full and happy life. And if stroke, atrophy
or paralysis has seized this patient, then let Indra,
penetrative beams of nature’s energy, and Agni, vital
heat of life in the body, light of the sun and magnetic
force of the earth cure and release the patient.






[Names: Yadi, Tama]
menam Satasaradaya.


If the patient is extremely debilitated, sunk
beyond hope, almost gone to the brink of death, I touch
and bring him back from the depth of despair to live his
full hundred years of life. (The word ‘asparsham’
suggests the efficacy of touch therapy.)






[Names: Sahasraksena, Satayusa, Satam]
With medicines, herbs and tonics of a
thousandfold efficacy of light power, a hundred year’s
vitality capable of sustaining a hundred year span of
life, I have brought this patient back to life and health
just as Indra, lord of life and his physician version, the
doctor, takes this patient across all evils and maladies
of the world to a full life of hundred years.








[Names: Satan, Sarado, Satarh, Satamindragni]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 162 1145


winter and spring seasons, rising, growing and
advancing. May Indra, lord of strength, power and glory,
Agni, lord of light and fire in the fore front, Savita, lord
of life’s generation and sustenance, and Brhaspati, lord
of space and radiant knowledge, bless you with
hundredfold joy and vest you with hundredfold span of
life again with herbs and medications of high order for




[Names: Aharsam, Sarvanga]
vidam.


I have delivered you from death and disease,
brought you back to life. Live life again, renewed,
refreshed again, healthy over all in all limbs, organs
and systems function. I have brought back your vision
and understanding in full, your life and age in full.


Mandalal0/Sukta 162




[Names: Garbha, Samsrave, Prayashchittam, Rakshoha, Brahma, Brahmanagnih, Amiva, Saye]
May Agni, ‘chitraka’, with Brahma, ‘udumbara’,
combined according to the formula in medical literature,




destroy the infection and viral pain that has entered,
infects and afflicts your foetus, ovary and uterus in the






[Names: Yaste, Agnistam, Agnista]
The acute infection that has entered your womb
in the reproductive system and consumes your foetus,
let Agni, ‘chitraka’, in combination with Brahma,
‘udumbara’, according to the specific formula, destroy
and eliminate.






[Names: Jatam]
Whatever afflicts the insemination and
fertilisation process or the moving foetus or whatever
hurts and damages your new born baby, we destroy from
here,






[Names: Yasta, Yonim]
Whatever disturbs your thighs, interferes with
the conjugal relation of the wife and husband, disturbs
the couple in sleep or destroys the seed and the embryo


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 163 1147
in the womb, we destroy and eliminate from here.


[Names: Yastva, Prajam]
Whatever evil and afflication comes as brother,
relationship, or otherwise through love and passion, and
and eliminate from here.
Whoever or whatever approaches you either by
creating dreams of reality or in the state of sleep or under


veil of darkness or by hypnosis, and hurts or destroys
your progeny, that we eliminate from here.


Mandala10/Sukta 163






[Names: Yakshma, Nashanam, Vivrha, Kashyapa, Aksitbhyam, Yaksmam, Sirsanyam]
I eliminate the consumptive disease from your


eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth, head, fore head and tongue.


[Names: Grivabhyasta, Anukyadt]
I remove the consumption, cancerous disease,


from your throat, sinews, bones, spine, shoulders, arms
and hands.







[Names: Antrebhyaste]
I banish consumptive cancer from your
intestines, rectum, colon, heart, kidneys, liver, and the
lower and other parts of the digestive system.



[Names: Urubhyam]
I uproot the cancerous disease from your thighs,
knees, heels, forefeet, hips, lower back and groin.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 164 1149




[Names: Mehanadvanamkarandallomabhyaste]
I uproot the cancerous disease from your
prostate and urinary system, hair, nails and indeed I
eliminate whatever wastes and consumes the vitality of




[Names: Angadangallomnolomno]
te.


I eliminate the cancer, consumption and canker
from every limb, every hair, every joint, wherever this
wasting negativity takes root, from your entire living
system, I throw it out for your life.


Mandalal0/Sukta 164






[Names: Pracheta, Angirasa, Apehi, Paro]
Off with you, hypnosis of the mind, disturb not,
get away and wander far around with death and
adversity, and there proclaim that I am not for you, Iam
alive, awake and alert, my mind is wakeful and versatile.








[Names: Bhadram, Bhadram, Jivato]
People prefer to choose what is good and
auspicious. They apply their mind to win the good and
blissful. The eye is for the holy vision of the lord of
refulgence. My mind is live and awake, alert and






[Names: Yadasasa, Sasabhisasoparima, Agnirvisvanyapa]
Whatever ill and undesirable we might have
committed either in hope and expectation, or for fear
and despair, or hate and calumny, while sleeping,
dreaming or awake, may Agni, lord of light, giver of
enlightenment, cast off all those alien evils and
undesirables far away from us (leaving us only with the
good and auspicious).






[Names: Yadindra, Praceta, Angiraso]
giver of enlightenment, Brahmanaspati, whatever


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 165 1151


in thought and behaviour, may the divine spirit of
knowledge, wisdom and love ever awake protect and
save us from the sin and wrath of the enemies.






[Names: Ajaismadyasanama, Jagratsvapnah]
(By the grace of Indra, Brahmanaspati, wakeful
Pracheta and ever vibrant and loving Angirasa) we have
won over sin and evil today, we have obtained love and
freedom, and we have become pure and immaculate.
Let the residue of sin and undesirable thought in the
mind, if any, retire into that negativity hates us and which
we reject.


Mandalal10/Sukta 165


[Names: Nairrta, Kapota]
This is a hymn of the Vishvedeva’s, i.e., the
leading lights’, response to the arrival of a ‘pigeon’,
bird of mysterious message, something like a
premonition of destiny, and the human response with
honour, acknowledgement and self-preparation. Any
such message can be a message of love, friendship and
cooperation, or it can be a message of disaster. In either
case humanity must respond and make proper
preparations to face the consequences. In modern terms,
it is an ambassadorial hymn.








[Names: Devah, Tasma]
O Devas, leading lights of the nation, here is
the pigeon, bird of message, ambassador from the land
of destiny, come to deliver some message of deep intent.
We honour the messenger and prepare for the response.
May there be peace and well being for us, for our birds,
animals and our people.






[Names: Sivah, Sakuno, Agnirhi]
May this bird sent from the land of destiny be
good and auspicious for us. May the bird and its message
be free from blame and violence in and for our homes.
Let this vibrant messenger accept and enjoy our
hospitality offered with faith and let there be no strike
of the winged force of arms to disturb and uproot us
from our settled land.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 165 1153




[Names: Hetih, Agnidhane, Agnidhan, Puruse, Purus]
Let not the winged force of the messenger attack,
destroy or deceive us. Let it create a place for itself in
our space and in the yajnic hall. Let there be peace for
our lands, cows and culture and for our people. O leading
lights, this messenger must not hurt us here.






[Names: Yaduluko, Yasya]
If the messenger is politic and speaks misleading
and ambiguous language, that effort must be frustrated.
If he thus risks his foot in the fire, then for his sender
and controller let there be our thunderbolt for his death.






[Names: Samyopayanto]
All the same, honour the messenger of the
distant land with words of praise and courteous
appreciation, and exhilarating him with choice
hospitality, control your interpretaion positively and
happily advance your message in response. Thus
effacing all weaknesses and negativities of the message




and the response, send him back without having touched
and compromised our power and force of the nation.


Mandalal0/Sukta 166


[Names: Sapatnaghnam, Rshabha, Vairaja, Shakvara, Rsabham, Hantaram]
gavam.

Make me brave and generous among equals,
challenger of rivals and adversaries, subduer of enemies,
and brilliant leader, protector and promoter of lands,
cows and culture of the peoples of the earth.





[Names: Ahamasmi, Adhah]
I am like Indra, destroyer of adversaries, unhurt,
uninjured, and unbroken. All these rivals, adversaries
and enemies ranged against me are under my foot.






[Names: Atraiva, Vaca]
Here itself, both of you, rival parties, I bind and


MANDAL - 10 / ऽ <^ - 166 1155


hold you together in balance like the bow string holding
both ends of the bow in tension. O Vachaspati, speaker
and master of the Word of order and law of judgement,
control these so that they speak under my discipline
and control.






[Names: Abhibhurahamagamam]
I am the controller and disciplinarian over all,
come with the light and power over the entire activity
here. I take over, accept and honour your mind and
speech, your law, discipline and behaviour, and your
assembly under my power and control.






[Names: Yogaksemam, Adhaspadanma]
Having taken over the power and responsibility
of the defence, protection and security of public
achievements and the progress and advancement of the
nation further, and having become the highest and best
of equals, I strive to lead you up to your highest and
farthest possibility, and then under the law and discipline
of the highest office of government, you would raise
your voice of choice and freedom as free and vocal
citizens in a state of transparent clarity, as a celebrant




society in a joyous state of advancement upward.


Mandalal0/Sukta 167


Indra and others Devata, Vishvamitra and






[Names: Jamadagni, Tubhyedamindra]
Indra, ruler of the human nation, this exciting
sweet soma state of society is matured and perfected
for you to govern and enjoy your office. You rule and
administer the state of law and order in perfect form.
Pray create for us now the wealth and honour of an
abundant youthful nation worthy of the brave. You have
achieved this happy and heavenly state of the
commonwealth through an arduous discipline of life
and work.




[Names: Svarjitam, Sakram]
mahe.

Mighty winner of high renown, creator of a high


state of freedom and happiness, lover and giver of the
joy of achievement, we invite and adore you. Pray


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 167 1157


acknowledge this yajnic success of our corporate
creative struggle for social development, come and take
it over. We invoke, exhort and exalt the mighty victor
over rivals, adversaries and fighting forces of the
enemies of life and humanity.






[Names: Somasya, Somas, Varunasya, Varunas, Tavahamadya]
O Maghavan, lord of power and glory, Dhata,
ruler, Vidhata, controller of the state and its
administration, this day I invite you to the holy
investiture and to take over the various departments and
institutions of the state in the ruling order of the law of
Soma, peace, and Varuna, justice, in the house of
Brhaspati, supreme presiding power, and Anumati, will
of the nation.




[Names: Prasuto, Sute]
dame.

O Vishvamitra, holy spirit of universal love and


friendship, Jamadagni, blazing fire and radiant light of
yajna, as I come up to you duty bound in this ruling




order enacted by the people, with the authority vested
in me by the social will, now I, invested and anointed,
take over the office of the state ruler, accept and honour
this holy order, and first of all, with the best of
knowledge, will and confidence, I would maintain the
purity and glory of the order, I promise.


Mandalal10/Sukta 168






[Names: Vayu, Anila, Vatayana, Vatasya, Divisprgaydatyarunani]
Let us describe the greatness of the impetuous
chariot of the wind: the storm goes roaring, thundering,
crashing, shattering as it blows, touching the heights of
heaven, raising a storm of dust over earth, and turning
the skies red in all directions.






[Names: Anu, Tabhih]
Plants, creepers and solid structures on earth,
like trees, wave and shake in deference to Vayu, wind
energy, just as youthful maidens go to their love and


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 168 1159


flashes of lighting go with the sky. And one with all
these, goes the ruling energy of this whole universe,
divine wind on the chariot of its currents.






[Names: Antarikse, Apam]
Ever on the move by its own paths in the sky,
the wind energy does not relent even for an instant.
Friend and comrade of the waters, first born of nature
after space, observing the divine laws of existence,
where was it born? Where and whence emerged?






[Names: Atma, Ghosa]
Energy and identity of the divine forces of
nature, sustainer of the universe, this divine wind roams
around at will freely. We have heard the roar of it but
we have not seen its form. To that divine Vayu, we offer
homage and adoration with oblations of havi to develop




Mandalal10/Sukta 169






[Names: Gavah, Shabara, Kakshivata, Mayobhurvato, Pivasvatirjivadhanyah, Rudra]
May the wind blow fresh, delightful, exciting
and blissful. Let cows feed on nourishing and energising
herbs and grasses and drink abundant life giving waters.
O Rudra, divine spirit of peace, joy and compassion, be
kind and generous to the animals to provide them with
ample food and water.






[Names: Angirasastapaseha, Parjanya, Parjan]
O Parjanya, generous powers of life and liquid
and felicity to cows and other animals of similar species,
different forms but the same one genus, whose names
and qualities, Agni, the scientist, knows through
developmental study, and which the Angirasas,
dedicated research and experimentation.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 169 1161






Indra, ruler and controller of life’s development
and progress, bring to our dairy farms those cows which
produce and yield abundant quality milk for noble and
brilliant people, all forms, breeds and qualities, of which
creative experts know, which yield more and more milk
for our health and growth, and which produce better
and better breed of calves.






[Names: Prajapatirmahyameta]
Prajapati, lord protector, sustainer and promoter
of the people with all divine energies of nature’s
brilliance and nourishment, and the nation’s food
minister with active consultation and advice of all
brilliant scholars and nutrition experts of the land, give
us these cows with joyous enthusiasm and bring to our
cow Stall such cows as are the best and most abundant
in nourishing milk. May we continue to benefit from
the cow’s progeny of excellent breed.




Mandalal10/Sukta 170






[Names: Vibhrat, Vibhrad, Vatajuto, Purudha]
May the mighty refulgent sun hold, shower,
protect and promote the honey sweets of life’s soma
nourishment, and bear and bring untainted health and
long life for the performer and promoter of yajna, the
sun which, energised by Vayu energy of divine nature
protects and sustains all forms of life by its very essence,
shines and rules life in many ways.






[Names: Amitraha]
The mighty refulgent sun, destroyer of
unfriendly forces, darkness and evil, anti-life elements,
adversaries and enemies, rises, bearing the light that is
the highest giver of food, energy and growing
advancement. Truly vested in the established order of
nature in the solar region, blissfully sustained, it is the
highest killer of negative and destructive forces
prevailing in life and nature.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 171 1163







[Names: Ssrestham, Visvabhrad]
This mighty best and highest light of lights is


exalted as universally pervasive winner and giver of
wealth. This world illuminant light, great sun, is the
light for the world’s vision. It expands far and wide,
undaunted lustre and majesty that it is, imperishable and






[Names: Vibhrajanjyotisa, Yenema]
Blazing with self-refulgence, light of heaven,


you pervade all regions from earth to heaven. By you
are all these world regions sustained, omnipotent divine
lord of universal action and universal glory: Vishvadeva.


Mandalal10/Sukta 171






[Names: Bhargava, Asrnoh]
Indra, lord omnipotent, you hear the invocation
and prayer of soma yajna, and you honour, protect and
sustain the cherished desire of the celebrant who moves
on way to divinity through meditation and yajna and
distils the Soma for offering.






[Names: Agacchah]
You forsake the body and mind of the dissolute
scoffer of yajna, and you reach and bless the house of
the devotee who performs yajna and offers you the
homage of exalted devotion, joyous divine soma.






[Names: Muhuh, Ssrathna]
Indra, for the man of meditative thought and
vision on way to freedom of the spirit over body, pray
slacken and cast off the bonds of mortal love, hate and





[Names: Devanam]
Indra, let the sun, now gone out of sight in the
west, arise upfront in the east, mystery otherwise beyond


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 172 1165
the reach of the devas, the senses.
Mandalal10/Sukta 172




[Names: Usha, Samvarta, Yadudhabhih, Yadudhabhi]
Come, O Dawn, with holy light, with rays of
blissful radiance on the chariot. The cows are on the
move with the wealth of milk.



Come with blessed intelligence and holy action.
The most generous yajamana is on way to completion
of the yajna with most liberal gifts of homage.

[Names: Pitubhrto]
yajamasi.

Like generous performers of yajna bearing
homage of havi and food, we carry on the thread of life
and yajna from dawn to dawn.

sujatata.

The dawn continuously removes the darkness
of its sister night, by circular motion of its rise every




morning through the succession of day and night.


Mandalal10/Sukta 173






[Names: Raja, Dhruva, Visastva]
I, high priest of the nation, take you, O Ruler, to
the high seat of governance and pray take it in our midst.
Be firm, stay undisturbed. All the people have chosen
and welcome you. Let not the state suffer embarrassment
because of you, nor must the state fall foul of you.






[Names: Thaivaidhi]
Here only, on this seat, Indra, be firm as a rock,
never vascillate. Here as the one supreme, pole star of
the nation, stay, rule and sustain the Rashtra, one






[Names: Imamindro, Tasmai]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 173 1167


This common wealth, Indra, lord all potent, is
committed to you. And this common wealth, the ruler
holds and maintains steady, firm, inviolable, with the
homage gift of steady, unshaken and unshakable rule
and governance. O Ruler, to you and for this Rashtra,
Soma Brahmanaspati, the divine, peaceable Advisor
who knows, observes and communicates the wisdom
of universal vision and conscience, speaks, and to this





[Names: Dhruvam]
Firm is heaven, firm is the earth, firm are these
mountains. Firm is this universe which is ever on the
move, steadily and balanced at the optimum. Firm is
this ruler of the people, steady, dynamic with optimum
balance of constant movement.






[Names: Indrascagnisca]
For you, the brilliant ruling Varuna, head of law
and justice, firmly maintains the state of law and order.
Brilliant and generous Brhaspati, chief advisor, with
supreme vision and knowledge of the nation’s genius,
firmly maintains the character and culture of the nation.




For you, the commander of the nation’s forces, Indra,
firmly maintains the peace and protection of the state.
For you does Agni, enlightened leader of education and
research, maintain the system of education and
the Rashtra firm, dynamic, steady and inviolable.






[Names: Atho, Indrah]
With steady and undisturbed will and homage
we accept, honour and support the firm, steady and
unshakable Soma Ruler dedicated to peace and progress.
May Indra, omnipotent ruler of the universe, enlighten
and commit the people solely to the nation and the ruler
so that they pay their due share of homage and gifts of
havi for the yajnic governance of the common-wealth.
(Let no one neglect the payment of taxes.)


Mandalal10/Sukta 174




[Names: Abhivarta, Abhivartena, Tenasman]
O Brahmanaspati, lord of knowledge,
governance and statecraft, enlighten us for dedication
to the Rashtra, commonwealth of the people, with those
means and methods of advancement and victory by


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 174 1169


which Indra, ruler, advances to planned and time bound
goals of progress and victory.






[Names: Abhivrtya]
O ruler commander of the nation, having
surrounded and cornered the adversaries, our selfish
exploiters, whoever want to wage war against us, or
who hate and envy to down us, break down their force
and rule over them.






May the self-refulgent Savita, creative sun,
Soma, nature’s spirit of peace and joy, and all the forms
of matter, energy, thought and life of the universe, ever
advance you so that you may rule over the world.






That input of vision, knowledge and action, that
homage of faith and havi into Rashtra yajna by which
Indra becomes a great performer, glorious, best and
highest, that homage, O devas, brilliancies of nature




and humanity, I have done so that I may become free
from rivals, adversaries and enemies.


[Names: Asapatnah, Yathahamesam]
Destroyer of enemies, free from enemy forces,
I must still be a challenger and subduer of rivals,
adversaries, oppositions and contradictions so that as
ruler of the state I may control and rule over these
citizens and a host of other forms of life.


Mandala10/Sukta 175




[Names: Gravanah, Urdhvagrava, Sarpa, Arbudi, Pravo, Dhursu]
O Gravana, veteran wise scholars and sages,
may Savita, self-refulgent creator, the sun and the noble
ruler inspire you with the sense of Dharma and noble
performance so that you may be appointed to high
positions and you play a positive and valuable part in






[Names: Gravano, Usrah]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 176 1171


O Gravana, yajnic participants in state affairs,
remove the evils of ignorance, injustice and poverty,
stop and cast away nonsense, negativity and cynicism,
and being generous and brilliant like rays of the sun,
cure the ailments and distresses of society.




[Names: Gravana, Vrsne]
Sages and scholars in high positions, while they
contribute generously to the power performance of the
mighty generous ruler, they rise in honour and esteem
among the people around since they love, respect and
cooperate with them all.





[Names: Yajamanaya]
O Gravana, sagely participants in national rule
and development with the ruler and the people, may
Savita, lord creator, the Ruler and the cooperative
people, all generous and brilliant, inspire you with
Dharma by Dharma for the generous creative yajamana,
the ruler in council with the people in the Rashtra yajna.


Mandala10/Sukta 176




[Names: Rbhavah, Sunu, Arbhava, Rbhunam, Rbhuna, Ksama]
ram.


The children and disciples of Rbhus, expert
makers, celebrate their mighty achievements of science
and technology and, sustainers of world community,
children of mother earth, they reach and explore the
earth for service and resources like calves rushing to






[Names: Bharata, Havya]
O scholars and experts, with your divine and
brilliant intelligence and actions, serve Agni, spirit of
the light and life of all that exists, which instantly bears
our oblations abroad as well as brings us the creative
rewards of yajna without fail.






[Names: Ayamu, Ratho]
This Agni is the same lover of brilliant divines
dedicated to life and nature which is the leading light
and power of yajna and which is invoked and honoured
for the completion and success of any creative project,
the same which is radiant and dynamic like the solar
chariot and, surrounded by celebrants, gives light,
knowledge and showers of the joy of achievement.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 177 1173






[Names: Ayamagnirurusyatyamrtadiva, Sahasascit]
This Agni, self-refulgent power manifest in
existence, saves and protects us as mortals born or
reborn of immortal existence. Mightier than the
mightiest, this divine power is kindled, honoured and
adored for the victory of life over suffering and death.


Mandalal10/Sukta 177






[Names: Mayabheda, Patanga, Patangamaktamasurasya, Samudre]
Men of wisdom with dedicated mind and heart
see the ‘patanga’, bird-like soul, wrapped in golden hues
of mysterious Maya, wondrous potential of the Lord’s
Prakrti, in the boundless ocean of the world of existence.
Men of vision and imagination see it existing within
the oceanic presence of the infinite spirit of the Lord
and, inspired by the lord’s love and presence, love to
reach nothing but the ultimate reality at the centre of
the radiating rays of existence.








[Names: Patango]
Patanga, the soul flying in various forms, bears
the eternal Vak, divine Word, at the depth of its mind.
Vak is the voice which Parameshvara, sustainer of the
voice and the universe, speaks to the soul at the heart of
existence. That same resonant and refulgent voice and
its awareness, wise visionaries retain, hear and enjoy in
the state of samadhi communion at the centre of the
ultimate truth of existence.






[Names: Apasyam]
I see this retainer of the divine Voice and its
senses and mind, the soul ranging over different paths
around here and far off. Shining, wearing different
forms, moving in the right central as well as various
directions, it goes round and round in the worlds of


(This verse can also be interpreted in
continuation of the second verse: I see this eternal
infallible master of the eternal Voice, existential and
transcendental both, the Spirit that vibrates and
manifests constantly in all directions, in all worlds of
the universe.)


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 178 1175


Mandalal10/Sukta 178






[Names: Tarkshya, Arishtanemi, Tarksh, Tyamu, Aristanemim]
For the sake of good and all round well being
of life, we invoke and study that wind and electric energy
of the middle regions which is fast and victorious,
moved by divine nature, powerful, shaker of the clouds
and energiser of sound waves, inviolable, war-like
heroic and most dynamic, moving at the speed of energy.




[Names: Indrasyeva, Urvina]
tau ma paretau risama.


Invoking Tarkshya, wind and electric energy,
studying and exploring the power for all round well
being as the gift of Indra, divine lord of energy, we wish
to use it like a boat across the seas to overcome the
problems we face. O earth, O sky, both vast and deep as
well as abundant, may we never be hurt while this energy
travels hither and back far off in circuit over and across








[Names: Sadyascidyah, Jyotisapastatana, Sahasrah, Saryam]
Instantly does this wind-electric energy reach
all five peoples of the earth with its force, power and
speed like the sun which spreads its light and brings
vapours and showers of rain over earth for humanity.
Hundredfold and thousandfold is its power that travels,
and just as none can stop the arrow fixed on the bow
and shot, so no one can stop the flowing current of this
energy once it is initiated for use.


Mandalal0/Sukta 179
[Names: Shivi, Aushinara, Pratardana]
Kashiraja (2), and Rauhidashva Vasumana (3) Rshis




[Names: Uttisthatava, Srato]
Citizens, friends, arise, see whether the seasonal
yajnic share of Indra, the ruler, is ripe and ready. If so,
offer it by way of yajnic oblation as tax duty. If not, do
not remiss, accelerate the ripening process and give.





[Names: Sratam]
MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 180 1177


The havi is ripe and ready for the offering. O
Ruler, Indra, come, the sun has reached the middle of
its course. Friends sit with their treasure offering and
wait like family heads for the chief commander of hosts
out on the sojourn on the borders and around.






[Names: Madhyamdinasya, Purukrjju]
I believe the milk is ripe in the cow’s udders. I
know the grain is ripe in the heat of the sun. I am sure
every thing is ripe and ready for the yajna, ripe and fresh
truly. O lord of versatile action, wielder of the
thunderbolt of justice, law and order, loving, kind and
cooperative, come and taste the milky sweets of the mid
day’s session of yajna. Receive, taste, protect and
promote the milk of cows and harvests of the field.


Mandalal10/Sukta 180


[Names: Jaya, Aindra, Satrunjyesthaste, Susma, Puruhuta]
O Ruler, Indra, invoked by all, you challenge
and subdue the enemies. Highest is your power and force




here which may, we pray, be a positive boon for us.
Indra, with your efficiency and perfection of governance
and administration, bring us wealth, honour and
excellence for the nation. You are the master and
controller of the abundant and opulent rivers of the land,
and equally well you manage the flow of the economy
and social advancement of the nation.






[Names: Mrgo, Srkam, Satrun, Terrible]
pray come from the farthest of far off places and, having
sharpened the lazer fiery thunderbolt, destroy the
enemies and throw out the violent adversaries.






[Names: Apanudo]
Indra, glorious ruler, virile and generous leader
of the people, arise and create a beautiful, grand and
powerful social order. Throw out the people who are
unfriendly to the nation and create a vast, beautiful
mighty world of peace and progress for the noble,
brilliant and generous people dedicated to divine values.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 181 1179


Mandalal10/Sukta 181








[Names: Pratha, Sapratha, Gharma, Prathasca, Dhaturdyutandat]
Vasishtha, the most brilliant seeker and teacher,
aman of versatile mind and boundless possibilities who
was gifted with a radiative spirit and passion for
enlightenment, received the pure, applied, beatific and
life giving Word of the Veda, the first, original and
eternal gift of the lord of omniscience into his yajna of
cosmic creation, from Agni, sustainer of the light of
knowledge, Vayu, vibrant sage with passion and strong
will, Savita, i.e., Aditya, brilliant and inspiring like the
sun, and Angiras, the sage inspiring as omnipresent
Vishnu and breath of life.


(This Vasishtha, the brilliant disciple of the four
sages, Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira, who then became
the teacher of the Vedas, was Brahma. Swami
Brahmamuni explains this interpretation of this mantra
in his commentary on Rgveda and cites authoritative
evidence from the Brahmana works. Swami Dayanand
explains the cosmic process of creative evolution and
Vedic revelation in his Introduction to his Commentary
on the Vedas, Rgvedadi Bhashya Bhumika, saying on
Vedic and ancient authority that the Vedas were first
revealed to four sages: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to




Vayu, Samaveda to Aditya, and Atharva veda to Angira.
Brahma, the brilliant disciple and later the inspired
teacher, learnt the Veda from these four sages and passed
on this knowledge to his disciples.)






[Names: Avindante, Dhaturdyutanat]
Those sages, i.e., Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira,
received this knowledge, which was deeply hidden and
perfectly preserved in the bottomless depths of
omniscience of creative Divinity, and which is, still,
deeply preserved in the depths of the human mind at
the frequency of the cosmic mind, from the Lord
Supreme that is all sustainer, self-refulgent, giver of light
and life, immanent and omnipresent. From them and
from the lord self-refulgent Agni, then, the disciple
inspired with will and passion, Bharadvaja, receives and
practically extends the knowledge which has, after all,






[Names: Dhdaturdyutandat, Suryadabharan, Suryadabhara]
They, brilliant in mind and vision, vibrant at
heart and burning with passion, received the knowledge
for life and living, revealed and released in incessant


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 182 1181


flow, first and final for men on the path to divinity. And
all these, Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira, Brahma,
Bharadvaja and others that follow ultimately receive
the knowledge, light and warmth of life, from the
Supreme Sun, self-refulgent sustainer, giver of light,
giver of life, omniscient, omnipresent Divinity.


Mandala10/Sukta 182






[Names: Brhaspati, Tapurmurdha, Barhaspatya, Brhaspatirnayatu, Ksipadasastimapa]
May Brhaspati, lord of expansive universe, lead
us across insufferable suffering and turn the thunderous
strike of punishment to the supporter of wickedness,
cast away malignity, destroy evil intention, and do good
to the yajamana, free him from fear and disease and
bestow good health and prosperity on him.






[Names: Narasamso]
May Agni, adorable favourite of humanity,
protect and promote us in Prayaja yajna, the
preliminaries of the performance. May Agni support and
bless us with success and prosperity at our performance




of Anuyaja yajna, the great finale. May Agni cast away
malignity, destroy evil intention, and do good to the
yajamana, free him from fear and disease, and bestow
on him good health and prosperity.






[Names: Sarave]
In order that hate and violence may be
eliminated from the world, may the lord of blazing light
and refulgent intellect put to the crucibles of trial and
punishment those who are wicked destroyers of the good
and who malign and oppose the divine sages. May the
and do good to the yajamana, free him from fear and
disease and bless him with good health and prosperity.


Mandala10/Sukta 183
[Names: Yajamana, Yajamanapatni, Hotrashisha, Prajavan]
I see you born of austere discipline and


education with the lustre of discipline shining on your
face and expressing your heart’s desire. Desirous of


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 183 1183


progeny and prosperity here in the household, pray be
reborn through your own child and fulfil your desire
for progeny and continuity in life.


(This verse may be taken as spoken by the wife
to husband.)






[Names: Apasam]
I see you moved at heart with desire, earnestly
praying that you be fulfilled in life with the timely gift
of progeny. Come, rise to me, be fulfilled as a youthful
woman, reborn in your child as a mother.


(This verse may be taken as spoken by the
husband to the wife.)






I plant the seed in herbs and plants. I plant the
seed of life in all regions of the world. I engender the
forms of life on the earth, and I would generate progeny
for all others, women who love to be mothers for




Mandalal0/Sukta 184








[Names: Lingokta, Garbhakarta, Tvashta, Vishnu, Visnuryonim]
May Vishnu, omnipresent lord of life energy,
nature’s formative intelligence of divinity, create the
body form of the foetus in all details. May Prajapati,
father spirit of divinity in nature, provide the life
nutrients for the foetus. May Dhata, mother power of
nature, hold and mature your foetus in the womb.





[Names: Garbham, Sarasvati, Garbham]
O Sinivali, spirit of fecundity, sustain the foetus.

O Sarasvati, universal spirit of intelligence, sustain the
foetus. O fair expectant mother, may the Ashvins, sun
and moon, nature’s complementary currents of creative
and generative energy active in the firmament and on
earth sustain and mature the foetus to fullness of its life
and form.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 185 1185




[Names: Hiranyayi]
Just as two golden arani woods produce the fire
by friction, so do the Ashvins, by their dynamics of
complementarity through nature’s nourishment and
formative intelligence, nourish and mature your foetus.
That baby in your womb we adore and welcome to
emerge into full life in the tenth month of pregnancy.


Mandalal10/Sukta 185






[Names: Aditya, Satyadhrti, Varuni, Adit, Mahi, Mitrasyaryamnah, Mitrasyaryamna, Duradharsam]
May the great, refulgent and inviolable
protection and promotion of the three, Mitra, Varuna
and Aryaman bless the life of nature and humanity.
(Mitra, Varuna and Aryaman are explained as prana,
apana and heart energy, and as the sun of the summer,
winter and spring seasons round the year.)





[Names: Nahi]
Neither in home nor on the roads under their
scandaliser dare to intrude and disturb a dedicated
person. (Their rule and protection is complete and










[Names: Yasmai, Jyotiryacchantyajasram]
No power can disturb or violate that mortal in
life for whom the children of Aditi project their eternal
light and protection for the life of man.


Mandalal0/Sukta 186






[Names: Vata]
~ —-wis,— -s


May the wind of life energy blow for us as
harbinger of sanatives, good health and peace for our
heart and help us to live a full life beyond all suffering
and ailment.





[Names: Sano]
O wind of life energy, you are our fatherly
protector and promoter, our brother, our friend. Pray
strengthen and inspire us to live a full life.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 187 1187






[Names: Yadado, Tato]
In your treasure home of immortal, inviolable
energy, O breath of life energy, Vayu, there is
immeasurable wealth hidden for us. Of that, from that,
give us some, our share, so that we may live a full life
of good health and joy.


Mandalal0/Sukta 187






[Names: Vatsa, Pragnaye]
O celebrant, sing your song of adoration in
honour of Agni, virile, generous and refulgent leader
and light giver of humanity. It casts away all our hate,
jealousy and all enemies, and thus it washes us clean
and immaculate.






Agni who pervades and shines beatific from far
and farther, over the deserts and across the spaces, casts
away all our jealous, malignant and enemy forces, and


washes us clean and immaculate.






[Names: Sukrena, Socisa]
Who, generous and potent as he is, destroys the
evil, wicked, demonic force with his blazing purity and
power, may, we pray, eliminate our hate, jealousy and
enmities, and wash us clean and immaculate.






Who watches all the regions of the universe in
their formal diversity as well as in their essential unity
and integrity may, we pray, cast off our hate, jealousy
and enmity and make us clean and immaculate.






[Names: Agnirajayata]
That Agni, self-refulgent supreme power that
exists and manifests in and over and above this
firmament and the oceanic depth of immeasurable space
may, we pray, cast off our enemies and render us clean
and free at peace.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 188 1189


Mandalal10/Sukta 188






[Names: Jataveda, Shyena]
Invoke, kindle and delightfully feed Agni, all
known, all knowing and all pervasive power and energy,
sure achiever, all reacher and winner of victory. May
this Agni grace the vedi of our yajna and lead our
endeavour to success.



[Names: Asya, Mahimiyarmi]
I raise my holy song of high adoration in honour
of this Jataveda Agni, generous, virile and creative
favourite of the brave and pioneering leading spirits of



[Names: Tabhirno]
May Agni bless and promote our yajna with
those beatific flames of fire and light of omniscience
which carry our homage to the divine power of nature
for the gift of creativity.




Mandalal10/Sukta 189






[Names: Sarparajni, Ayam, Pitaram]
This earth moves round and round eastward
abiding in its mother waters of the firmament and
revolves round and round its father sustainer, the sun in
heaven.






[Names: Antascarati, Vyakhyanmahiso]
The light of this sun radiates from morning till
evening like the prana and apana of the cosmic body
illuminating the mighty heaven and filling the space
between heaven and earth.


[Names: Trimsaddhama, Prati]
Thirty stages of the day from every morning to
evening does the sun rule with the rays of its light while


songs of adoration are raised and offered to the mighty
‘Bird’ of heavenly space.


MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 190 1191


Mandalal0/Sukta 190








[Names: Aghamarshana, Madhucchandasa, Rtam]
By the arduous will of Divinity, Prakrti
manifested in existence in its simultaneous modes of
Satyam and Rtam, constant and mutable, under the
Eternal Law. Then arose the night and darkness of no
positive name. Then arose the spatial ocean of
indeterminate particles of existence.






[Names: Samudradarnavadadhisamvatsaro, Ahoratrani]
From the spatial ocean arose the time parameter
of existence, and from there the master creator of the
universe with his will created the conceptual days and






[Names: Suryacandramasau, Divam]
The supreme master creator and controller
planned the sun and moon, heaven and earth, the middle




regions and the regions of bliss as ever before since


Mandalal10/Sukta 191








[Names: Sanjnanam, Samvanana, Samsamidyuvase, Ilaspade]
of the showers of Infinity, you bring together and
integrate all the elements and constituents of the
universe of existence and shine in the earth-vedi fire
and in the eloquence of the Voice divine of Veda. Pray
bless us with the wealth, honour and excellence of life
in the world.





[Names: Deva]
Move together forward in unison, speak
together, and with equal mind all in accord, know you
all together as the sages of old, knowing and doing
together, play their part in life and fulfill their duty
according to Dharma.




MANDAL - 10 / SUKTA - 191 1193




[Names: Samano, Samanam]
Let your guiding mantra be one and equal, your
assembly, one and equal, your mind, one in accord in
thinking and purpose for all of you. I commit you all to
the same one mantra for thought, goals and policy, and
I vest you all with equal and common means and
methods for living and working.






[Names: Samani, Samanamastu]
Let your discussion and resolve be equal and
common, your heart, feelings and passions equal and
common. Let your thought and will be equal and
common so that you may realise and enjoy a common-
wealth of peace, progress and all round well being for
all in commonalty.





